A Faithful admonition made by John^ Knox, unto the professors of Gods truth
in England, where by thou may learn how God will have his Church exercised
with troubles, and how he defends it in the same.

Esaie. ix.

After all this shall not the Lords wrath cease, but yet shall his hand be
stretched out still.

Ibidem.

Take heed that the Lord root thee not out both head and tail in one day.

THE EPISTLE OF A BAnyshed manne out of Leycester Shire sometime one of the
Preachers of Gods word there, to the Christen reader wysheth health,
delyueraunce, and felicity.
THere has been no time sith the first fashionynge of man which has not had
her manyfold myseries and great troubles by which God chaistened and punished
all men for their euel life and vnthanckfulnes to him, continually refusyng his
calling and warnyng, whereof the ryghteous and just had their parts, although
it was for their commodity and profit, (but to the utter destruction of the
wicked and ungodly) for judgment begins at the faithful, which are called
the household of God in the Scripture, 1. Petri. 4.
and the punishment whereby God chasteneth them comes always to them for the
best, either to the bringyng of patience, or the acknowlegyng of their sins,
or for the auoidynge of the eternal condempnatio^: And their fashion is, when
they perceive the hand of the Lord to be upon them, or upon others, by any
manner of trouble, as poverty, sycknes, banishment, falling away of faithful
friends, encreasyng of foes, or any other like trouble. Immediately they turn
to God, are hertely sorye for their sins and unthankful nes, confesses them
selves guilty, and calls earnestly for mercy, which God for, and in Jesus
Christ grau^teth unto the^, of his great goodness according to his promise. So
as in ye myddest of their troubles he has used al ways to comfort them, yea,
help and deliver them, as it appears by Noe, Abraham, Loath, and the
patriarchs, David and Ezechia kynhes: Helye, Hieremy, and Daniel, prophets,
Susanna, a woman. Peter, Paul, and the rest of the Apostles together with all
good persons, in all times and ages, who in their great troubles, chaunges of
estates and kingdoms, and destruction of their common wealths, after they had
turned to God. from whence those plagues came, found relief, help, comfort
and deliverance in these and the like miserable necessities. This was the
only remedy and defense for all good men: thither has been their chef
refuge, there fastened they their hope, and rested not continually calling upon
him, until they obreyned their requests: or else yt which made most for
Gods glory and their commodity and profyt, but contrary wise it is with
the peruers and ungodly. For so sone as they are plaged or punyshed they grudge
against God, they hate him, and speak dispitefully against him, they ascribe
their plagues to euel luck or to misfortune, they are nothing moved by them to
acknowledge their great sins, therefore they call not upon him, but either
they do run in despair or in contempt of God, and therefore it can not be
thought yt their punyshmentes are tokens of the rest and quietness that they
may have after this life, but rather to be the beginning of their torments
which they shall Genes. 4
the^ suffer. The examples whereof are likewise set out to us in ye holy Scri
ptures, as of Cain, of the Jews as well before the coming of Christ as after
his ascension, of wicked Iesabel, of Judas the traitor, and of the thief which
was hanged upon the left side of our Lord Jesus Christ, with diverse and many
mo who in all their troubles, either grudged against God, forsook him, or
spoke words of despite against him, and his prophets, or else fell into
despair, or in contempt of him, any of which are causes of gods further
displeasure, and of sendyng of his greater plages to haist their destruction,
yet the order of the punyshme^tes of God (wherein he declares his merciful
nature) is to be observed of us, which is, he plageth not commonly al offenders
with one manner plages and in one time, although they be all a like gyltie, but
he stryketh some sorer the^ others, and begins in some one country, or city
that ye residue might be moved by the example of their punishments and have
time, and place to turn to him, who seeks not the death of a sinner but his
amendment and life, as it appears by the storye of Achab after his wife
Iesabel Ezechie. 18.
had caused Naboth to be put to death: howbeit where he threatens 3. Reg. 21.
to punyshe the earth with some one Ezebie. 14.
plague, as honger, noisome beasts, the sword, or pestilence, he threateneth
all. iiij. at once upon Jerusalem which bear the name of his people, but were
disobedient unto him, which may worthily make us fear the more because we
(the people of England) are in the like case: among whom he has sent already
the devouring sword, and a great sort of slow bellyed hot and cruel
beasts to destroy. But let us follow the examples of all good men: in doing
as the Lord our God commaundeh Psalm. 50.
us yet in these our plages which is, to turn to him with all our hearts,
and call upon him, it is he only that may, can and will deliver us: let yt
vain trust of ma^s help be forgotten, leave of to seek sweet water in filthy
puddels, what comfort can the sick man have of one that is much sycker then
him self: and looks for nothing else but for death, let the noble men of
England leave inconstancy, lust, and covetousness and turn to God a right,
and let the people do the same, like as there is no man that feleth not, or
fears not, some great plague to come upon him because of his sin, even so
let every man repent, turn to God and call for help betyme, for there has
been no time sense the ascencion of our Lord Jesus Christ wherein there has been
greater plages, then there is now in our time, for beside bloody war, soden
death, great untruth, open perjury, division, strange co^sumyng fyres,
change of great estates, and common wealths, ouerflowyng of great cities and
lands by water, honger, and poverty without petie, so as it should appear yt
God causes the very elements to fight against the world: which sometime he
caused to Exodi. 14.
defend his people, he has suffered al so yt truth of his word and the true
manner of worshipping of him accordig to the scriptures, to be clean taken away
as it was by Christ threatened to the Jews in ye gospel of S. Math. and in
token of his further indignation: Mathei. 21.
the honger and thirst after him and his kingdom is taken from the most part
of ye whole realm, that it may be altogether void of that good blessyng which
Jesus Christ our Lord speaks of in ye gospel of S. Math. saying: Blessed are
they which honger and thrust after ryghteousnes etc. Ho suffers for thy
unthankfulness (O England) false teachers to be a burden unto thee, which if
thou do receive and allow their doctrine be thou well assured his great
wrath comes shortly after to thy distructio^ this is the accustomed order of
God when he is minded to destroy. First he sends lyeng spirits in the
mouths of their prestes or prophets which delyted in lies: then suffered he
them to be disceaued by the same, to their destruction as he did with Achab. Be
warned yet, by this and other such good and true books, gentel reader so shall
thou be sure to be kept in sauegarde in ye time of the plague to come, wherein
you shall also find much comfort. It will move ye to styck fast to ye truth
of gods word, and to flee from the wicked ydolatrie of the abominable mass
which does no more save thee from hurt then did the painting of deuelysh
Iesabel save 4. Reg. 9.
her from death when she was head long hurled out at a wyndow, at the
commandment of Iehu.

Grace mercy and peace from God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ / with
the perpetual comfort of the holy Ghost, be with you for ever and ever. So be
it.
Having no less desire to comfort such as now be in trouble within the
realm of England, (and spe cially you for many cause^ most dear to me) then
has the natural father to ease the grief and pain of his dearest child, I
have conside red with my self, what argument or parcel of Gods Scriptures,
was most conueuient and mete to be en treated for your consolation in these
most darck and dolorous days. And so, as for the same purpose I was turnyng
my book, I chaunsed to se a note in the Margin written thus in Latin: Videat
Anglia. Let England beware. Which note when I had considered, I found that
the matter written in my book in Latin was this:

Seldom it is that God works A note ma de upon the sendyng of Christ's
disciples to the Sea, the miraculous fedinge of the people.
any notable work to the comfort of his Church, but that trouble, fear, and
labor comes upon such as God has used for his servants and workmen.
And also tribulation most co^monlye follows that Church where Christ Jesus
is most truly preached.

This note was made upon a place of Scripture written in the fourtenth Chapter
of S. Mathewes gos pel. Which place declares: that after Christ Jesus had used
the Apost les as ministers and servants, to feed (as it had been by their
hands) five thousand men beside women and children, with five Barley ^ues and
two fisshes. He sent them to the sea, what chau^ sed to Christ's disciples
after the feding of the people in the desert.
commanding them to pass over before him to the other side. Which thing as
they attempted to obey, and for the same purpose did trauail and row forth in
the Sea, the night approached, the wind was contrary, the vehement and raging
storm arose, and was like to overthrow their poor Bote and them. When I had
considered (as doloure and my simplicity would suffer) the circumstances of
the text. I began to reken and ask account of my self (and as god knows,
not without sorrow and sobbes) whether at any time I had been so plain by my
tunge, as God had opened his holy will and wisdom in y^ matter unto me, as
mine own pen and note did bear witness to my conscience. And shortly it
came to my mind that the same place of Scripture I had entreated in your
presences, what time God gave opportunity and space, that you should hear, and
Gods messenger should speak the words of eternal life. Wherefore I thought
nothing more expedient, then shortly to call to mind again such things as
the^ I trust were touched. Albeit peradventure neither of me so plainly
uttered, neither of you so plainly perceived, as these most dolorouse days
declare the same to us.

It shall not be necessary to entreat the text word by word, but of the hole
sum to gather certain notes and observations (which shall not far disagre
from the estate of these days) it shall be sufficient.

And first it is to be observed, that after this ^reat miracle that Christ The
first note.
had wrought, he neither would retain with him self the multitude of people
whom he had fed, neither Joan. vi.
yet his disciples. But the one he sent Math. 14.
away every man to return to his place of accustomed residence: and the other
he sent to the danger of the Seas, not as he that was ignorant what should
chance unto them, but knowinge and forseing the tempest, yea and appointinge
the same so to trouble them.

It is not to be judged that the Christ suffe reth not his sheep and pa stoures
to be disparsed and troubled but for causes reasonable.
only and true pastoure would remove and send away from him the wandering and
weak sheep, nether yet that the only proui^e^ governor and guide would set
out his rude warriors to so great a ieopardye without sufficient and most
just cause.

Why Christ removed and sent away from him the people, the Evangelist S. John^
declares, saying: when Jesus knew that they were John. vi.
come and to take him up, that they might make him King, he passed secretly (or
alone) to the mountain Whereof it is plain* what chieflye moved Christ to
send away the people. from him: why Christ sent awaythe people from him.
because that by him they sought a carnal and worldly liberty, regarding
nothing his heavenly doctrine of the kingdom of god his father, which before
he had taught and declared unto the^ plainly, showing them, that such as should
Math. 10
follow him must suffer for his names sake persecution, must be hated of al
men^, must deny them selues^, must be sent forth as sheep among wolves. But no
part of this doctrine pleased them, or could enter into their hertes, but
their hole mind Ioh. 6.
was upon their bellies, for suffising whereof they devised and imagined, that
they would appoint and chose Christ Jesus to be their worldly King. For he
had power to multiply bread at his pleasure. Which vain opinion and
imagination perceived by Christ Jesus, he withdrew him self from their
company, to avoid al such suspicion. And to let them understand that no
such honors Math. 20,
did agree with his vocacion, who came to serve, and not to be served. And when
this same people sought him again, hy sharply rebuked them because they sought
him Ioh. 6.
more to have their bellies fed with corruptible meat, then to have their
souls nourished with ye lively bread that came down from heaven. And thus in
ye people there was just causes why Christ should withdraw him self from them
for a time.

Why the disciples should suffer that great danger, fear and anguishe. S.
Mark in his Gospel. plainly shows, saying: that their hertes were Mark. 6.
blinded, and therefore ^dyd nether remember nor consider the miracle of the
looues. That is, albeit with their hands they had touched that bread, by which
so great a multitude The disciples did not rightly consider Christ's work.
was fed. And albeit also they had gathered up twelfe baskets full of that
which remained of a few loo ues, which before the miracle a boy was able to
have borne, yet did they not rightly consider the infinite power of Christ
Jesus by this his wonderful miracle. And therefore of necessity Nota.
it was, that in their own bo dies they should suffer trouble for their better
instruccion.

When I depely consider (dearly beloved in our Savior Christ) how aboundauntly
and how miraculouslye the poor and small flock of Christ Jesus was fed
within the realm of England under that elect and chosen vessel of God to
glory and honor Edward the sixte: and now again be hold not only the
dispersion and scattering abroad, but also the apperinge destruction of the
same, under these cursed, cruel and abominable Idolatrers, me think I se the
same causes to have moved God, not only to withdraw his presence from the
multitude, but also to have sent his well-beloved servants to the travels of
the Seas, wherein they are sore tossed and turmoylled, and appearantly most
like to perish.

What were the affeccions of the greatest multitude that followed the Gospel in
this former rest and abundaunce, is easy to be judged, if the life and
conversation of every man should have been throughlye examined. Nota.
For who lived (in that rest) as that he had refused him self? Who lived in
that rest, as that he had been crucified with Christ? Who lived in that
rest, as that he had certainly looked for trouble to come upon him? Yea who
lived not rather in delicacye and joy, sekyng the world and pleasures thereof,
caryng for the flesh and carnal appetites, as though death and sin had
clean ben devoured? And what was this else, then to make of Christ an earrhlye
King? The word that we professed John, 18^
daily cried in our ears: that our kingdom, our joy, our rest and felicity,
neither was, is, nor should be in the earth, neither in any transitory thing
thereof, but in heaven, in to which we must enter by many tribulations. But
(Alas) we sleped Actu^. 14.
in such security, that the sound of this trompet could of many never be
parfytly understood, but always es we persuaded our selves of a cer tain
tra^quillitie, as though the troubles whereof mention is made with in the
Scriptures of God appertai ned nothing at al to this age, but unto such, as of
long time are pas sed before us. And therefore was our heavenly father
compelled to withdraw from us the presence of his verite (whose voice in those
days we could not believe) to ye end that more earnestly we may thrist for the
same, and with more obedience embrace and receive it^, if ever it shall please
his infinite goodness in such abundaunce to restore the same again.

I mean nothing of those ye followed Hypocrites are made manifest in the day
of trouble.
Christ only for their bellies, for such perceiving yt they could not optaine
their hertes desire of Christ, have grudged and left him in body and heart,
which thing their blasphemouse voices spoken against his eternal verity
does witness and declare. For such (brother) be ye not i. John. 2.
moved, for in the time of their profession they were not of us, but were very
dissemblers and hypocrites.

And therefore God justly permits that they blaspheme the truth, which they
never loved. I mean not that ever such dissemblinge hypocrites shall embrace
the verity, but I mean of such as by infirmity of the flesh and by natural
blyndnesse (which in this life is never al together expelled) then could not
give the very obedience, which Gods word required, neither now by weakness
of faith dare openly and bold ly confess that, which their hertes know to be
most true, and yet lamenteth and mourns both for the imperfection by passed
and present. From such shall not the amiable pre sense of Christ Jesus for
ever be ^ota,
withdrawn. But yet again shall the eyes of their sore troubled hertes be hold
and se that light of Christ's Gospel, wherein they most delight.

The Ministers who were the distributours of this bread (the true word of God)
wherewith the multi tude within England was fed, lacked not their offenses,
which also moved God to send us to the sea.

And because the offenses of no man are so manifest unto me as are mine own,
only of my self I will be thac cusoure.

It is not unknown unto many, that I (the most wretched) was one of that
nombre, whom God appointed to receive that bread (as it was broken by Christ
Jesus) to distribute and give the same to such as he had called to this
banquet, in that part of his table where he appointed me to serve. It is not in
my knowledge nor judgment to define nor determine what portion or quantity
every man received of this bread, neither yet how that which they received
agreed with their stomachs. But of this I am assured, that the benediccio^ of
Christ Jesus so multiplied the portion that I received of his hands, that
during that banquet (this I writ to the praise of his name, and to the
accusacion of mine own unthankfulness) the bread never failed, when the hongry
soul craved or cry ed for food, and at the end of the banquet, mine own
conscicnce bears witness, that my hands gathered up the crummes that were
left in such abundaunce, that my basket was full among the rest.

To be plain, mine own consci ence bears record to my self, how To deny
or conceil the gifts of God which we have received, is vnthanckfulnes.
small was my learning, and how weak I was of judgment, when Christ Jesus
called me to be his steward, and how mightily day by day, and time by time
he multiplied his graces with me, if I should concele, I were most wicked and
unthankful.

But alas, how blinded was my heart, and how little I did consider the
dignity of that office; and the power of God that the^ multiplied and blessed
the bread which the people received of my hands, this day mine own
conscience bears witness to my self. God I take to record in my
conscience, that I delivered the same bread that I received of Christ's hands,
and that I mixed no poison with the same, that is: I teached Christ's Gospel
without any mixture of me^nes dreams, devises, or fantasies. But Alas I did
it not with such feruencie, with such indifferency, and with such diligence,
as this day I know my duty was to have done.

Some complained in those days, that ye preachers were indiscreet persons
(yea and some called them raylers and worse) because they spoke against the
manifest iniquity of men, and especially of those that the^ were placed in
authority as well in the court, as in other offices universally throughout the
realm both in cities, towns and villages. And among other paraduenture my
rude plainness displeased some, who did complain, that rasshly I did speak
of men's fautes, so that al men might know and perceive of who^ I meant. But
alas, this day my conscience accuses me, that I spoke not so plainly as my
duty was to have done. For I ought to have said to the wicked man expressedlye
by his name: Thou shall dye the death.

For I find Ieremye the prophet Ezech. 3. 33
to have done to Pashur the high Iere. 20. 34.
Priest, and to Zedechias the King. 3. Reg. 18. 21 22.
And not only him, but also ^elias, Eliseus, Micheas, Amos, Daniel, 4. Reg. 3.
Christ Jesus him self, and after him Amos. 7.
his Apostles expressedly to have na Dani. 5.
med the blood thristy tyrants, abominable Math. 23.
Idolatrers, and dissembling Actu^. 13.
ypocrites of their days. If that we the preachers within the realm The
preachers are named the salt of the earth.
of England were appointed by God to be the salt of the earth (as his other
messengers were before us.) Alas, why held we back the salt, where manifest
corrupcion did The confess fion of the Author.
appear? (I accuse none but my self) The blind love that I did bear to this
my wicked carcass, was ye chief cause that I was not fervent and faith full
enoughe in that behalf. For I had no will to (...) the hatred of al men against
me. And therefore so touched I the vices of me^ in the pre sense of the
greatest, that they might se themselves to be offenders (I dare not say that I
was the greatest flatterer) but yet nevertheless I would not be seen to proclaim
manifest war against the manifest wicked. Whereof unfeignedly I ask my God
mercy.

As I was not so fervent in rebu Preachers ought to feed Christ's flock.
king manifest iniquity as it became me to have been, so was I not so
indifferent a feeder as is required of Christ's steward. For in preaching
Christ's ^ospel albeit mine Eye (as knows God) was not much upon worldly
promocion, yet the love of friends and carnal affeccio^ of some men with whom I
was most familiar, allured me to make more re sidence in one place then in
another, having more respect to the pleasure of a few, the^ to the necessity
of many. (...) day I thought I had not sinned, if I had not been idle, but
this day I know it was my duty to have had consideracion how long I had
remained in one place, and how many hongry souls were in other places, to
whom alasse^, none took pain to break and distribute the bread of life.

(...), remaining in one pla ce I was not so diligent as mine office required,
but sometime by coun sell of carnal friends I spared the bo dye: some time I
spent in worldly business of particular friends, and sometime in taking
recreacion and pastyme by exercise of the body.

And albeit men may judge these The lack of feruency of reprouyng, of
indifferency, in feeding, and diligen ce in executynge are great sins
to be light and small offenses, yet I knowledge and confess, that onles par
don should to me be granted in Chri stes blood, that every one of these three
offenses aforenamed, that is to say: the lack of feruencye in reproving
sin, the lack of indifferency in fedyng those that were hongrye, and the
lack of diligence in the execucion of mine office deserved damnacion.

And beside these I was assaulted, yea infected and corrupted with more gross
sins. That is, my wic ked nature desired the favors, the estimacion and
praise of me^, against which albeit that sometime the spirit of God did move
me to fight, and earnestly did stir me (God know eth I lie not) to sobbe and
lament for those imperfeccio^s, yet never ceased Spiritual temptacions are
not sone espied.
they to trouble me, when any occasion was offered. And so privily and craftily
did they enter into my breast, that I could not perceive my self to be wounded,
till vainglo^ie had almost gotten the vpperhande.

O Lord be merciful to my great The prayer of the Au thor.
offense, and deal not with me according to my great iniquity, but according
to the multitude of thy mercyes, remove from me the burden of my sin: for of
purpose and mind to have avoided the vain displeasure of man: I spared little
to offend thy Godly majesty.

Think not beloved of the Lord, that thus I accuse my self without just
cause, as though in so doing I might appear more holy, or that yet I do it of
purpose and intent by occasion thereof to accuse other of my brethren the true
preachers of Christ of like or of greater offenses. ^o, God is judge to my
conscience, that ^do it even from an unfeigned and sore troubled heart, as I
that know my self grievously to have offended the majesty of my God, during
the time that Christ's Gospel had free passage in England. And this I do to
let you understand, that the ta king away of the heavenly bread, The troue
bles of these days comes to the profyt of Gods elect.
and this great rempest that now blows against the poor disciples of
Christ within the realm of England (as touching our part) comes from the
great mercy of our heavenly father, to provoke us to un fained repentance,
for that, that neither preacher no^p^ofessoure did rightly consider the time of
our mer ciful visitacio^. But altogether so we spent the time, as though
Gods word had been preached rather to satisfy our fantasies, the^ to
reform our euel manners: which thing if we earnestlye repent, then shall Jesus
Christ appear to our comfort be the storm never so great. Haste O Lord for
thy names sake.

The second thing, that I synd The second^(...).
to be noted, is the vehemencye of the fear, which the disciples endured The
great fear off the disciples.
in that great danger, being of longer continuau^ce then ever they had at any
time before.

In saint Mathewes Gospel it Math. 8.
appears: that an other time there arose The disciples also before this ty me
were. troubled in the sea.
a great stormy tempest, and sore toffed the boat, wherein Christ's disciples
were laboring: but that was upon the day light, and then they had Christ
with them in the boat, whom they awated, and cried for help unto him (for at
that time he slept in the boat) and so were shortly delivered from their sudden
fear. Nota.
But now were they in the midst of the raging sea, and it was night, and
Christ their comfortour absent from them, and comes not to them neither in
the first, second, nor third watch, What fear trow you were they in then?
And what thoughts arose up out of their so troubled hertes, duringe that
storm? Such as this day be in (...) danger within the realm* of England,
does by this storm better understand, then my pen can express. But of one
thing I am well assured, that Christ's presence would in that great perplexity
have been to them more comfortable then ever it was before, and that patiently
they would have suffe red their incredulity to have been re buked, so that they
might have escaped the present death.

But profitable it shall be, and somewhat to our comfort to consider every parcel
of their danger. And first ye shall understand, that when what time the
tempeste did arryse.
the disciples passed to the sea to obey Christ's commandment, it was fair
wether and no such tempest seen. But suddenly the storm arose with a
contrarious flawe of wind, when they were in ye midst of their iour ney. For
if the tempest had been as great in the beginning of their entrau^ce to ye
sea, as it was after when they were about the midst of their journey, neither
would they have auentured such a great danger, neither yet had it ben in
their power to The seawas calm when the dilciples took their (...) te.
have attained to the midst of the Sea. And so it may be euydently gathered,
that the sea was calm when they entered into their journey

Secondly, it is to be marked, by what means and instruments was this great
storm moved. Was the plunging of their oores and force of their small bote
such as might ^tir re the waves of that great sea? (...) doutlesse. But the
holy ghost declares that the Seas were moved by a that moved the sea.
vehement and contrary wind, which blewe against their bote in the time of
darkness. But seeing the wind is neither the commander nor mouer of it
self, some other cause is to be inquired, which hereafter we shall touch.

And last, it is to be noted and considered what the disciples did in all this
vehement tempest. Truly they turned not back to be driven on forlande or shore
by the vehemence of that contrary wind, for so it might be thought, that they
could not have escaped shipwreck and death. But they continuallye labored in
rowyng against the wind, abiding the The tossed bote is a fie gure of chri stes
church.
ceassing of that horrible tempeste.

Consider and mark beloved in the Lord, what we read here to have chaunsed to
Christ's disciples, and to their poor bote. And you shall well perceive, that
the same thing has chaunsed, does and shall chaunse to the true church and
congregation of Christ (which is nothing else in this miserable life but a
poor bote) trauelyng in the Seas of this vnsta ble and troublesome world,
toward the heavenly port and haven of eternal felicity. Which Christ Jesus
to his elect has appointed.

This might I prove by the posterite of Jacob in Egipte, by the Is raelites in
their captivity, and by the church during the time that Christ him self did
preach (and somryme after his Resurreccion and Ascension) against whom the
vehement storm did not rage immediately after they entered into the boat of
their Exodus (...).
trauail and tribulacion. For the blou die sentence of Pharao was not pronounced
against the seed of Jacob, what time he first did enter into Egipte. Neither
was the cruel counsel Esdr. 3.
and deuelish devise of proud Ha man invented by and by after Israel and Judah
were translated from their possessions, Neither yet in the time of Christ Jesus
being conversant with his Apostles in the flesh, was there used any such
tyranny against the saints of God, as shortly after followed in the persecucion
of Act. 7. and (...)
S. Steven and other disciples. But (...) these in the beginning of their
tra^ail with a contrary wind had always some calm, that is, albeit they had
some trouble, yet had they not extreme persecution.

Even so most dearly beloved is happened now to the afflicted chur che of God
within the realm of En glande. At al times the true word of God suffered
contradiccion and repugnau^cie. And so the wind blewe against us even from the
beginning of the late vpspryng of the Gospel in England, but yet it could not
stop our course till now of late days, that the ragynge wind blows
without briddel upon the unstable Seas, in the myddest whereof we are in this
hour of darcknesse. The malice of the de uel compared to the ^ynde.


To wryt my mind plainly unto you beloved brethren. This wind that always
has blown against the Church of God, is the malice and hatred of the deuel
which rightly in this case is compared to the wind.

For as the wind is invisible and 1. Simile.
yet ye poor disciples feel that it trou bleth and lets their bote: so is
the pestilent envy of the deuel workynge always in the hearts of the
reprobate, so subtle and craftye that it can not be espied by gods elect,
nor by his messengers til first they feel the blastes thereof to blow their
bote backward. And as the vehement wind causes the waves of the sea The sea
ca^ not be quiet wha^ the wind blows outra giously.
to rage, and yet the dead water neither knows what it does, neither yet can
it cease nor refrain: so that both it is troubled by the wynd, and also it
self does trouble Christ's disciples and their poor bote: So by the envy and
malice of the deuel, ar wicked and cruel as well subjects as princes (whose
hertes are like the ra ginge Sea) compelled to persecute and trouble the true
church of Christ, and yet so blinded are they, and so thral under the bondage
of the deuel, that neither can they see their many fest iniquity, neither yet
can they The wind that blewe in King Henry the eyghtdayes
cease to run to their own destruc cion. And hereof England have thou
manifest experience. For in the time of King Henry the eight, how the Wolf
that wicked Wynchester and other by the vehement wind of six bloudye articles
(by the deuell devised) intended to have overthrown the poor bote and
Christ's disciples, is to evidently known already. But then had we Christ Jesus
with us sleping in the boat, who did not despise the faithful criyng of such
as then were in trouble: but by his mighty power, gracious goodness, and
invincible force of his holy word, he compelled those wicked wyndes to cease,
and the ragyng of those Seas to be stilled and calmed. So that all A quiet call
me was under King Edwardthe sext.
the hertes of Gods elect within the realm of England did wondre at that
soddeyn change, while that under a lamb the fearful edge of that devouring
sword was taken from the necks of the faithful. And the tyranny of those
rauenynge and blood thristye wolves (I mean of wyly Wynchester and of some
other his brethren the sons of the dyuel) was repressed for a time. But yet
The first secret pesti lent wind that blewe in the ty me of good
ceased not the deuell to blow his wind, but by his wicked instruments
found the means, how against nature the one brother should assent to the death
of the other, but y^could not hinder the course of the trauelyng King Edward
the sext.
bote, but forth she goes in despyte of the deuel, who the^ more cruelly
raged, perceyuyng his own ho nour and service, that is, his detesta ble Mass
to be disclosed and opened before the people to be dampnable Idolatrye, and
assured damnation The Deuel raged when the. Mass mischef was disclosed.
to such as put their trust in it. And therefore began he more craftelye to
work, and fynding the same instruments apt enough, whose labors he had used
before, he blewe such mortal hatred between two, which appeared to have been
the chief pillars under the king. For that wretched (^as) and miserable
Northum berlande could not be satisfied, till such time as simple Somerset most
unjustly was bereft of his life.

What the deuel and his members. the pestilent Papists meant by his a way
taking, God compelled my tongue to speak in mo places then one. And specially
before you, and in the new Castle, as sir Robert Brad linge did not forget of
long time af ter. God grant that he may under stand al other matters spoken
before him the^ and at other times, as right ly as he did that mine
interpretacio^ of the vyneyarde, whose bedges, dit ches, toures and wynepresse
God destroyed, Esa. 5.
because it would bring forth no good fruit. And that he may remember, that
what ever was spoken by my mouth that day, is now complete and come to pass,
except that Marcke well.
the final destruction and vengeance of God is not yet fallen upon the greatest
offendoures, as assuredlye shortly it shall, unless that he and such other of
his sort that then were ene mies to Gods truth will spedelye repent and that
earnestly their stubburne disobedience. God compelled This was affirmed bo th
before the King and also be fore Northumberland afte^er than o^ce.
my tongue (I say) openly to declare, that the deuel and his ministers intended
only the subuercion of Gods true religion, by that mortal hatred among those
which ought to have been most assuredly knyt toge there by christian charity,
and by benefits received. And especially that the wicked and envious Papists
by that ungodly breach of charity diligently minded the overthrow of him,
that to his own destruction procured the death of his innocent friend. Thus I
say I was compel led of conscience oftener the^ once to affirm: that such as
saw and i^cted the mean how the one should be taken away, saw and should
find the means also to take away the other, and that all that trouble was
devised by the devil and his instruments to stop and let Christ's di sciples
and their poor bote. But that was not able, because she was not yet come to
the myddest of the Sea.

Transubstanciation (the bird that the deuel hatched by Pope Nicolas, and
sithe that time fostered and nurryshed by all his children, Prestes, Freres,
Monks, and other his con iured and sworn soldiers, and in this last days
chiefly by Stephen Gardener and his black brood in England.)
Transubstanciacion (I say) was not then clearly confuted and myghtely
overthrown. And there fore God put wisdom in the town ges of his ministers
and messengers to utter that vain vanity. And specially gave such strength to
the pe^ne Transubstanciacyo^ ouert hrowe^ by Thomas Cranmer Archebysshop of
Canterbury.
of that reverend father in God, Tho mas Cranmer Archebysshop of Ca^ terbury to
cut the knottes of deuelyshe Sophistry lyncked and knyt by the deuels Gardener
and his blind bussardes, to hold the verity of god under bondage, that rather
I think they shall conde^pne his works (whi che notwithstanding shall continue
and remain to their confusion) then they shall enterprise to answer the same.

And also God gave boldness and The round God was ta ken away by act of
Parlyament.
knowledge to the court of Parliament to take away the round clipped God,
wherein stands all the holiness of Papists, and to command common bread to
be used at the lords table, and also to take away the most part of
supersticious (kneling at the Lords supper excepted) which before profaned
Christ's true religion.

Then dear brethren was the boat in the mids of the sea, and suddenly When
all the papisti call abomi nations we re reveled, than was the boat in midst
of the sea.
arises the horrible tempeste most fearful and dolorouse: Our King is taken
away from us, and the deuel blows in such organes as always he had found
obedient to his precepts, and by them he enflameth the heart of that wretched
and unhappy man, (whom I judge more to be la mented, then hated) to covet the
imperial Crown of England to be establyshed to his posterity, and what
thereupon has succeeded, it is not now necessary to be written, Two special
notes of this discour se..


Of this short discourse beloved in the Lord, you may consider and perceive
two special notes.

The first, that the hole malice of The first note.
the deuel has always this end: to vere and overthrow Christ's afflicted
church. For what else intended the deuel and his servants the pestilent
Papists by all these their craf tie policies, during the time that Christ's
gospel was preached in En glande, the^ the subuerciou of the same Gospel, and
that they might recover power to persecute the saints of God, as this day in
the hour of darcknes they have obtained for a ty me to their own utter
destruction.

Let no man wonder though I say that the crasty policies of pestilent
Papists wrought al mischief, for who could better work mischief, then such
as bore authority and rule. And who I pray you ruled the roste in the court
all this time by stout courage and proudnes of stomach but Northumberland? But
who I pray you under king Edward ruled al by counsel and wit? Shall I name
Who ruled all by ^ytt under king Edward the sexte.
the man? I will write no more plain ly now, the^ my toun^e spoke the last
Sermon, that it pleased God that I should make before that Innocent and most
Godly King Edward the syxte and before his Counsel at Westminster, and even
to the faces of such as of whom I meant. Entreatynge Ioh. 13.
this place of Scripture: Qui edit Psalm. 40.
mecum panem sustulit aduersus me calcaneum suum. That is, Be that eats bread
with me has lyfteth up his heel against me. I made this affirmacion: Godly
Prices commonly has most ungod ly Counsel lers.
that co^monlye it was seen, that the most godly princes had officers and
chief counseilours most ungodly, coniured enemies to gods true religion,
and traitors to their princes not that their wickedness and ungodliness was
spedely perceived and espied out of the said princes and godly men, but that
for a time those crafty colourers could so cloak their malice against God and
his truth, and their holowe hertes toward their louinge masters, that by
worldly wisdom and policy at length they attained to high promocions. 2.
Reg. 17.
And for the proof of this mine Esa. 22
affirmacio^, I recited the histories of Math. 26.
A chitophel, Sobna, and Judas: Of whom Joan. 12
the two former had high offices and promocions with great authority under
the most godly princes, David and Ezechias. And Judas was purse master with
Christ Jesus. And when I had made some discourse in that matter. I moved this
question:

Why permitted so godly princes Qvestio.
so wicked men to be upon their coun sell, and to bear office and authorite
under them? Responsio.


To the which I answered: that The enemies of the veritye many times appear
to be most profi table for a common wealhe.
either they so abounded in worldly wisdom, forsight and experience
touching the government of a Common wealth, that their counsel appeared to
be so necessary, that the co^ mon wealth could not lack them, and so by the
color to preserve the tran quilitie and quietness in realms, they were
maintained in authority: Or else they kept their malice which they bare toward
their masters and God des true religion so secret in their breasts, that no
man could epsy it, Myschefe at the light will so utter it self that men may
epsy it.
til by Gods permission they waited for such occasion and opportunite, that
they uttered all their myschiefe so plainlye, that all the world might perceive
it. And that was most evident by Achitophel and Sobna.. For of 2. Reg. 15. 16.
Achitophel it is written: that he was David's most secret counsailour, and
that, because his counsel in those days was like the Oracle of God.

And Sobna was unto good king Esa. 22 36.
(...) sometime Co^ptroller, sometime Secretary, and last of al Treasurer. To the
which offices he had never been promoted under so godly a prince, if the
treason and malice which he bare against the king and against gods true
religion had been manyfestly known. No quod I. Sobna was a crafty (...), and
could show such a fair countenance to the king, that neither he nor his
cou^ sail could epsy his malicious treason. Esa. 22.
But ye prophet Esaias was commanded If David and Ezechi as were disceaued by
traytorouse Cou^saylers bow much more ayo^ge and innoc^t King.
by God to go to his presence and to declare his traitorouse her^e and
miserable end.

Was Sauid (said I) and Ezechias princes of great and godly gif tes and
experience, abused by crafty counsailers and dissemblyng hypocrites? what
wonder is it then: that a young and innocent king be decei ued by craftye,
couetouse, wicked and ungodly counselours? I am greatly afraid, that
Achitophel, be cou^sailer yt Judas bear the purse, and yt Sobna The author
might fear this in deed.
be Scribe, Co^ptroller and Treasurer.

This and somewhat more I spoke that day, not in a corner (as many yet can
witness) but even before those whom my conscience judged worthy of
accusacion. And this day no more do I write (albeit I may justly because they
have declared the^ selves more manifestly) but yet do I affirm; that under
that innocent King, pestilent Papists had greatest Paulett is painted.
authority. Oh, who was judged to be the soul and life to the counsel in
every matter of weaghty importance? who but Sobna? who could best dispatche
busynesses that ye rest of the counsel might hawk and hunt and take their
pleasure? None like unto Sobna. Who was most fra^ke The Treasurers words
against the authority of Mary.
and ready to destroy Somerset, and set up Northumberlande? was it not Sobna?
Who was most bold to cry Bastard, Bastard? Incestuus bastard Mary shall
never reign over us. And who I pray you was Caiphas prophesied.
most busy to say: fear not to subscribe with my lords of the Kings
Majesty's most honorable p^euy counseil. Agree to his graces last will and
parfit testament. And let never that obstinate woman come to authorite. She is
an erraunt papist. She will subvert the true religion. And will bring in
strangers to the destruction of this common wealth. Which of the counsel (I
say) had these and greater persuasions against Marye to whom now he crouches
and kneleth? Sobna the Treasurer. And what in tended such traiterous and
dissebling ypocrites by all these and such like crafty sleightes and
conterfait conueau^ce? Soutles the overthrow of Christ's true religion, which
the^ began to florishe in England. The liberty whereof fretted the guts of
such pestilent papists, who now has got ten the days, which they long
looked for, but yet to their own destruction and shame. For in ye spyt of their
heads the plages of God shall stryke them. They shall be comprehended in the
s^are which they prepare for other. For their own counsels shall make them
selves slaves to a proud, mischeuous, unfaithful and vile nation. Judge at the
end.
But now to the second note of our discourse, which is this: The second note.


Albeit the tyrau^tes of this earth have learned by long experience, yt they
are never able to prevail against gods truth, yet because they are bound
slaves to their master y^deuel, they ca^ not cease to persecute the members
of Christ, when ye deuel Tirauntes can not cease to persecute Christ's members.
blows his wind in the darkness of the night, that is: when the light of
Christ's Gospel is taken away, and the deuel reigns by Idolatry, supersticion
and tyranny. This most evidently may be seen, from the beginning of this
world to the time of Christ, and from thence til this day. Ismael might have
perceived, that Genesis 21.
he could not prevail against Isaac, Genesis 28.
because God had made his promise unto him, as no doubt Abraham their father
teached to his hole household. Esau likewise understood the same of Jacob.
Pharao might plainly have Exodus 5. 6. 7. 8. etc.
seen by many miracles, that Israel was Gods people whom he Ioh. 5. and 12.
could not utterly destroy. And also the Scribes and Phariseis and chief
prestes were utterly convict in their conscience, that Christ's hole doctrine
was of God, and that to the profit and co^modite of man his miracles and
works were wrought by the power of God, and therefore that they could never
prevail against him. And yet as ye deuel sty^red the^, none of those could
refrain to persecute him, whom they knew most certainly to be an innocent.
The power of Gods word put Papists to silence with in England except it had
ben^to brag in corners.


This I wryt that you shall not wonder, albeit now ye se the poisoned papists
wic^ed Wynchester, and dreaming Duresme with the rest of their faction (who
somtymes were so confounded, that neither they durst nor could spea^e nor write
in the defense of their heresies) now so to ra ge and triumph against the
eternal truth of God, as though they had ne uer assayed the power of God
spea^ing by his true messengers.

Wonder not here at (I say) belo Princes are ready to perse cute as the
maliciouse Papists will command.
ued brethren, that y^tyrantes of this world are so obedieut and redye to
follow the cruel counsels of such disguysed monsters. For neither ca^ the one
nor the other refrain, because both sorts are as subject to obey ye deuel
their prince and father, as the un stable sea is to lift up ye waves when the
vehement wind blowethvpon it.

It is fearful to be herd, that the deuel has such power over any man, but
yet the word of God has so instructed Ioh. 12.
us. And therefore albeit it be 2. Cor. 4.
contrary to our pha^tasie, yet we must believe it. For the deuel is called the
prince and god of this world, because he reigns and is honored by tyranny
and ydolatry in it.

^e is called the prince of darkness, that has power in the air. It Ephesians, 2
is said: that he works in the children of unbelief, because he styrreth them
to trouble gods elect. As he invaded 1. Reg. 16. 18.
Saul and compelled him to per secute David. And likewise he entered Ioh. 13.
into the heart of Judas, and moved Ioh. 8.
him to betray his master. ^e is called prince over y^ sons of pride, and
father of al those that are liars and ene myes to Gods truth. Over who^ he
has no less power this day, the^ somtymes he had over Annas and Cai phas,
whom no man denies to have been led and moved by the deuel to persecute Christ
Jesus and his most true doctrine. And therefore wonder not (I Vvili Vvin cester.
say) that now the deuel rages in his obedient servants, wyly Wynchester
Dreamyg^ Durysme.
dreaming Duresme, and bloody Bonner with y^ rest of their bloody, butcherly
Bloudye Bonner.
brood, for this is their hour and power granted to them. They can not
cease nor aswage their furious fumes, for the deuel their sire stirs,
moves and carries them even at his will. But in this y^ I declare the power of
the deuell workinge in This is the cause before omitted, whi the wind blew to
trou ble Christ's Disciples.
cruel (...), think you that I at tribute or give to him, or to them po were at
their pleasure? No, not so bro there, not so. For as the deuel has no power to
trouble the Eleme^tes, but as God shall suffer, so has worldly tyrauntes
(albeit the deuel has fully possessed their hertes) no power at al to trouble
the saints of God, but as their bridle shall be lowsed by gods hands.

And herein dear brethren stands my singular comfort this day, when. I hear
that those bloody tyrauntes within the realm of England does kyl, murder,
destroy and devour man and woman as rauynous. ^yons now loused from bonds. I
lift up therefore the eyes of mine heart (as my iniquity and pre sent doloure
will suffer) and to my heavenly father will I say:

O Lord, those cruel tyrauntes The prayer of the Author.
are loused by thy hand, to punysh our former ingratitude, whom we trust thou will not suffer to preuail for ever, but when thou haste corrected us a little,
and have declared unto the world the tyranny that lurked in their (...)
breasts, then will thou break their I awe bones, and wilt shut them up in
their caves again, that the generation and posterity following may praise
thine holy name before thy cogregacion. Amen.

When I feel any taste or mocion of these promyses, then think I my self
most happy, and that I have received a just compensacion, albe^t I and all that to me in earth belongs, should suffer the present death, know ynge that
God shall yet show mercy to his afflicted church within Eng land, and that he
shall repress the pride of these present tyrauntes, like as he has done of
those that were before our days.

And therefore beloved brother in Exhortacion.
our savior Jesus Christ, hold up to God your hands that are fainted
through fear^, and let your hertes that have in these dolourouse days ^cped in
sorrow, awake, and hear the voice of your God, who swereth by Esa. 48. 5^. 54.
62.
him self, that he will not suffer his church to be oppressed for ever. Nei
there that he will despise our sobbes to the end, if we will row and strive
against this vehement wind, I The coming of Christ to his Disciples upon the
seas, is opened.
mean, if that we will not ru^ne back headlinges to Idolatry, then shall this
storm be aswaged in despite of the deuel. Christ Jesus shall come with speed
to your delyueraunce, he shall pearce through the wind, and the ragyng seas
shall obey, and bear his feet and body as the massy, stable and dry land. Be
not moved from the sure foundation of your faith.

For albeit that Christ Jesus be absent from you (as he was from his disciples
in that great storm) by his Christ is su re upon the mountain.
bodily presence, yet is he present by his myghtie power and grace. Be stands
upon ye mountain in security and rest, that is, his flesh and hole humanity
is now in heaven, and ca^ suffer no such trouble as somtymes he did. And yet
he is full of petie and co^passio^, and does consider al our trauail, anguish
and labors, wherefore, it is not to be douted, but that he will suddenly
appear to our great comfort. The tyra^tes of this world can not keep back
his coming, more the^ might the blu stering wind and raging seas let Christ to
come to his disciples, when they lo ked for nothing but for present death. And
therefore yet again I say beloved in the Lord. Let your herts attend to the
promises that God has made unto true repentaunte sinners, and be fullye
persuaded with a constant faith, that God is always true and just in his
perfourma^s of his promeses. You have heard these days spoken of very
plainly, when your hertes could fear no danger, because you were nyghe the
land, and the storm was not yet risen, that is, ye were young scolers of
Christ when no persecucion was seen or felt. But now ye are come into the
mids of the sea (for what part of England herd not of your profession?)
And the vehement storm, whereof we than almost in every exhortacion spoke of,
is God never brought his people into trouble to thentent that they should
peryssh therein.
now suddenly risen up. But what? ^ath God brought you so far forth, that
you shall both in souls and bodies every one perish? Nay. My hole trust in
Gods mercy and truth is to the contrary. For God brought not his people
into Egypt and from thense through the red Sea to thentent they should therein
perish, but that he of the^ should show a most gloriouse delyuerance Neither,
sent Christ his Apostles into the midst of the sea, and suffered the
blusteringe storm to assault them and their bote, to thente^t they should there
perish, but becanse he would the more have his great good nes toward the^ felt
and perceived in so mightily delivering them o^t of the fear of peryshinge,
giving us thereby an example that he would do the like to us, if we abide
constant in owr profession and faith, withdrawinge owr selves from supersti
cion and Idolatry. We gave you warning of these days long a goo, for the
reverence of Christ's blood let these words be marked: The same truth that
spoke before of these most dolorouse days, forspake Mark these words.
also the everlasting joy prepared for such as should continue to the end.
The trouble is comme. O dear brethern, look for the comfort, and (after the
example of the Appostles) Abyd in resistinge this vehement storm a litte space.

The third watch is not yet ended, Christ came not to his Disciples til the
fowrth watch.
Remember that Christ Jesus came not to his disciples till it was the fourth
watch, and they were then in no less danger than you be now, for their faith
faynted, and their bodies were in danger. But Christ Jesus came, when they
looked not for him. And so shall he do to you, if you will continue in the
profession that you have made.

This darre I be bold to promese in the name of him, whose eternal verity and
gloriouse gospel ye have hard and received. Who also puts in to mine heart an
earnest thrist (God knows. I lie not) of your sal uacion, and some care also
for you re bodies, which now I will not express.

Thus shortly have I passed through the outrages tempest, wherein the disciples
of Christ were tempted, after that the great multitude were by Christ fed
in the deserte. Omit tinge many profitable notes, which might well have been
marcked in the terte, because my purpose is at this present not to be tediouse
nor yet curiouse, but only to note such things, as be aggreable to these most
dolorouse days.

And so let us now speak of the end of this storm and trouble, in which I
find four things cheflye to be noted.

1. First, that the disciples at the pre sense of Christ were more affrayed
then they were before. 2. Secondlye, that Christ uses no other instrument but
his word to pacify their hertes. 3. Thyrdlye, that Peter in a feruencie
first left his bote, and yet after feared. 4. Last, that Christ permitted
neither Peter nor the rest of his disciples to perish in that fear, but
gloriously delivered al, and pacified the tempeste.
Their great fear and the cause thereof are expressed in the text in these
words: When the disciples saw him walking upon the sea, they were afraid
saying* that he was a spirit. And they cried through fear.

It is not my purpose in this treaties to speak of spirits, nor yet to
dispute, whether spirits good or bad may appear and trouble men: neither yet
to inquire, why man's nature is affrayed for spirits, and so vehemently
abhors their presen ce and company. But my purpose is only to speak of
things necessary for this time. Three causes why Christ's Disciples mysknew
him.


And first let us consider, that there was three causes, why the disciples knew
not Christ, but judged him to be a spirit.

The first cause was the darkness

The second was the unaccustomed

The darkness (I say) of the night let their eyes to see him: And it was
above nature, that a massye, heavy and weyghtie body of a man (such as they
understood their master Christ to have) should walk, go upon, or be borne up
of the water of the ragynge sea, and not sincke. And finally the horroure of
the tempest and great danger that they were in persuaded them to look for
none other but certainly to be drouned.

And so al these three things concur ring together confirmed in them this
imaginacio^, that Christ Jesus, who came to their great comfort and
deliuerau^ce, was a fearful and wicked spirit appearyng to their What cha
unsed to Christ, that also in all ages chaunseth to his holy word.
destruccyon.

What here chaunsed to Christ Jesus him self, that I might prove to have
chaunsed and daily to chance to the verity of his blessed word in all ages
from the beginning.

For as Christ him self in this their trouble, was judged and esteemed by his
disciples at the first sight a spirit or fantastical body: so is the truth
and sincere preachinge of his gloriouse gospel sent by God for man's most
comfort, delyueraunce from synn, and quietness of conscience, wha^ it is
first offered and truly preached, it is (I say) no less but judged to be
heresye and disceauable doctrine, sent by the deuel to man's destruction.

The cause hereof is the dark ignorance of God, which in every ag^ sith the
beginning so over whelmed the world, that sometimes Gods very elect were
in like blyndnes and error with the reprobate: As Abraham was an idolatrare
Ios. 24
Moses was instructed (...) all the arts of the Egypcianes, Paul a proud
Pharisey coniured against Christ and his doctrine. And many in this same our
age, when the truth of God was offered unto them, were sore affrayed and cried
against it, only because the dark clouds of ignorance had troubled them befo
re. But this matter I omit and let pass, til more opportunity.

The chief note that I would have Not^.
you well obscrue* and marcke in this preposterous fear of the disciples, is
this:

The more nyghe deliverance and The fear is greatest when deliverance is most
nyg^.
salvation approaches, the more strong and vehement is the temptacyon of the
Church of God. And the more nyghe that Gods vengeance approaches to the
reprobate, the more proud, cruel and arroga^t are they. Whereby it commonly
comes to pass, that the very mes syngers of life are judged and demed to be
the authors of al mischefe* And this in many histories is eui dent. When God
had appointed to deliver the afflicted Israelites by the hand of Moses from the
Tyranny of the Egypcians, and Moses was sent to the presence of Pharao for the
same purpose, such was their affliccion and anguyshe by the cruelty which
newly was exercysed over them, that with open mouths they cursed Moses (and no
Exodus 5. 6. etc.
doubt in their hertes they hated god who sent him) alledgyng that Moses and
Aaron was the hole cause of their last extreme trouble.

The life is to be seen in the bofe of Kings, both under Eliseus and Esaias
the Prophets. For in the days of Iora^ son of Achab was Samaria beseged by
the king of Sy 4. Reg. 5.
ria. In which Samaria no doubt (albeit the King and the most mul titude were
wicked) there was yet some members of Gods elect church which were brought to
such extreme famine, that not only things of small price were sold beyond al
measure: but also women against nature were compelled to eat their own
children. In this same city Eliseus the Prophet most commonly was conversant
and dwelt, by whose counsel and commandment no doubt the city was kept, for
it appears the ^ynge to lay y^ to his charge, when he hearing the piteous
complaint of the woman (who for honger had ea ten her own son) rent his
clothes with a solemn oath and vow, that the head of Elizeus should not stand
upon his body that day. If Elizeus had not ben of counsel that the cy tie
should have been kept, why should the king more have fumed against him, then
against other? But whether he was the author of the defendinge the city, or
not, al is one to my purpose, for before the delyueraunce, was the church in
such extremity, that the chief pastore of that time was sought to be killed
by such as should have defended him.

The like is read of Ezechias, who defending his city Jerusalem, and
resisting proud Sennacheryb. No doubt obeying the counsel of Esaias, at length
was so oppressed with sorrow and shame, by the blasphemouse Esa. 36. 37.
words of (...), that he had no other refuge, but in the Temple of the ^orde
(as a man desperate and without comfort) to open the disdaynfull letters sent
unto him by that hautye and proud ty: aunte.

By these and many histories mo, it is most evident, that ye more nigh
salvation and deliverance approaches, the more vehement is the tem tacion and
trouble.

This I writ to admonish you, that albeit yet you shall se tribulacion so
abound, that nothing shall appear but extreme misery without al hope of
comfort: that yet ye declyne not from God. And that albeit somtymes ye be
moved to hate the messengers of life, that therefore you shall not judge that God
will never show mercy after. No dear brethren, as he has entreated other
before you, so will he do you.

God will suffer tribulacion and dolor abound, that no manner of co^ why God /
suffers tri bulation to abound and continue.
forte shall be seen in man to thentent, that when delyueraunce comes, the
glory may be his, whose only word may pacify the tempests most vehement.

^e drowned Pharao and his ar Exo. 14.
mye. ^e scatered the great multitud of ^enedab: And by his Aungel killed the
host of Sennacherib. And so delivered his afflicted when nothing appeared to
them but utter destruction. So shall he do to you beloved brethren, if patiently
ye will abide his consolation and counsel. God open your eyes that ryghtly ye
may understand the meaning of my wrytinge. Amen.

But yet peradventure you wonder not a little why God permits such blood
thristye tyrauntes to mo lest and grieve his chosen Church: I have recited some
causes before, and yet mo I could recite, but at this time I will hold me
content with one.

The justice of God is such, that Nota.
he will not pow^e forth his extreme vengeance upon the reprobate, unto such
time as their iniquity be so manifest, that their very flatterer^ ca^ Exo.
Exo^o.
not excuse it. Pharao was not destroyed till his own household servants and
subjects abho^red and condemned his stubburne disobedience.

Iesabel and Athalia were not Iezabel, Athalia, and I^as.
thrust from this Iyfe into hell, till all ^ael and Judah were witnesses of
their cruelty and abhominacions. Judas was not hanged til the princes of the
prestes bare witness of his traitorouse act and iniquity. And to pass over
the tyrauntes of old time whom God has plaged, let us come to the tyrauntes,
which now are within the realm of Eng land, whom God will not long spare.

If Steven Gardener, Cuthbert Gardener Tunstal Butcherly Bonar.
Tunstal and butcherly Bonnar false bishops of Wynchester, ^uresme and of
London had for their false doctrine and traito^ous acts suffered death when
they justly deserved the same, then would errant Papists have alleged (as I
and other have herd them do) that they were men reformable, that they were mete
instruments for a commonwealth The prayfe of Vvi^chest er Durysme and of Lady
Mary before these days.
yt they were not so obstinate and malicious as they were judged, neither that
they thristed for the blood of any man. And of Lady Marye who has not herd?
that she was sober, mercyful and one that loved the common wealth of England.
Bad she (I say) and such as now be of her pestilent counsel ben sent to hell
before these days, the^ should not their iniquity and cruelty so manifestlye
have appeared to ye world. For who could have thought, that such cru eltie
could have entered into the heart of a woman? and into the heart of her that is
called a virgin? yt she would thirst the blood of innoce^tes and of such as
by just laws and faithful witnesses can never be proved to have offended by
them selves.

I find that Athalia through appetite to reign murdered the seed of the
kings of Judah. 4. Reg. 11.
And that Berodias daughter at the desire of an hooryshe mother obtained the
head of John the Baptiser. Math. 14.
But that ever a woman that suffered her self to be called the most blessed
virgin, caused so much blood to be spilt for establishyng of an usurped
authority, I thynte is rare to be found in Scripture or history.

I find that Iesabel that cursed Idolatres caused the blood of the 3. Reg. 18.
prophets of God to be shed. And 3. Reg. 21
Naboth to be murdered unjustly for his own vineyard, but yet I think she
never erected half so many gallows in all Israel, as myscheuous Marye has
done within London alone.

But you Papists will excuse your Marye the virgin, well, let her be A
digressio^ to the Papists Queen Maryce chastes dearlynges.
your virgin, and a gods mere to maintain such Idolatrers, yet shall I
ryghtlye lay to her charge that, which I thyncke no Papist within England will
justify nor defend. And therefore (O ye Papists) here I will a little turn my
pen unto you. Answer unto this question. O sede of the Serpent. Would any of
A liuelye picture of Mary the utter myschefe of England.
you have confessed two years ago, that Mary your mirror had been false,
dissembling, vnco^stant, proud, and a breaker of promyses (Except such
promyses as she made to your god the Pope, to the great shame and dishonor of
her noble father.) I am sure you would full little have thought it in her. And
now does she not manifestlye show her self to be an open traitoresse to the
Imperial crown of England, contrary to the just laws of the realm, to
bring in a stranger, and make a proud Spaniarde king, to the shame
dishonor and destruction of the nobility, to the spoil from them and theirs
of their honors, lands possessions, chief offices and promocions, to the
utter decay of the treasures, commodities, ^auie and fortifi What com
modities the Spanysshe King shall bring to the Realm off England.
catio^s of the realm, to the abasyng of the yomanry, to the slavery of the
communaltie, to the overthrow of Christianity and Gods true religion, and
finally to the utter subuercion of the hole public estate and common wealth
of England? Let (...) and ^uffolke, let her own promise and proclamacion, let
her fathers testament, let the city of Lo^ don, let the ancient laws and
Acts of parliamentes before establyshed in England be judges betwixt mine
accusacion and her most tray tourus iniquity.

First her (...) and proclama cion did signify and declare, that neither she
would (...) in, neither yet mar^ any stranger, (...) and ^uffolke and the
city of London does testify and witness the same. The ancient laws and
acts of par liament pronounces it treason to transfer the crown of
England into the hands of a forreyn nation. And the oath made to observe the
said statutes cries out, that al they are perjured that consent to that her
traitorous fact, ^peake now (O ye Papists) and defend your monstrous
maistres, and deny if ye can for shame, that she has not uttered her self to
be borne (Alas therefore) to the ru yne and destruction of noble England. Oh
who would ever have be leued (I wryt now in bytternesse of heart) that such
unnatural cruelty should have had dominion over any reasonable creature? But
the saying A true saying.
is to true: that the usurped government of an affeccionate woman is a rage
without reason.

Who would ever have thought, that the love of that realm, which has brought
forth, which has nurryshed and so noblye mayntayned that wicked woman, should
not (...) have moved her heart with (...).

Who sees not now, that she in all Under an Englys he name she bears a
Spaniardes heart.
her doings declares most manyfestlye, that under an English name she
bears a Spaniardes heart. If God (I say) had not for our scour ge suffered her
and her cruel counsel to have come to authority, than could never these
their abhominacions, cruelty and treason against God, against his saynctes,
and against the Realm, whose liberties they are sworn to defend, so
manifestly have been declared.

And who ever could have believed that gloriouse Gardener and trecherouse
Tunstal (whom al papists praised: for the love they bare to their country)
could have become so manifest traytoures, that not only against their solemn
oaths, that they should never consent nor agree unto: that a foren stranger
should raygne over England, but also that they would adiudge ye Imperial croune
of the same to appertayn to a Spaniarde by Enheritaunce and lyneal dissent? O
traitors traitors, how can you for very (...) show your faces?

It comes to my mind upon Christemas day in the year of our lord. 1552.
preachinge in new Castle upon tyne, and speakinge against the obstinacy of
the papists, I made this affirmacio^. That who so over in his heart was enemy
to Christ's gospel and doctrine, which then was preached within the realm of
England, was enemy also to God, and secret traitors to the croune and common
wealth of England. For as they thristed nothing more than the Kings death,
which their iniquity would procure, so they regarded not who should reign over
them, so that their idolatry might be erec ted again. How these my words at
that time pleased me^, the crimes Against (...) were written articles and I
compelled to answer, as unto an accyon of treason.
and accion intended against me did declare: But let my very enemies now
say their conscience, if those my words are not proved true. And what is the
cause that wynchester, and the rest of his pestilent sect so gredely would
have a spaniarde to raygn over England? The cause is manifest. For as that hell
nacyon surmounteth al other in Spaniardes sons of pride and supersticio^.
pride and whordome, so for idolatry and vain papistical and deuellysh
Ceremonies, they may rightly be called the very sons of supersticion.

And therefore as they found and judged by the progeny of Antichriste, most
apt instruments to maynteyn establysh and defend, the Kingdom Why wynchester
would have spaniardes to reign over England.
of that cruel beast, whose head and wound is lately cured within England,
Which (alas for pity) must now be brought into bondage and thraldom, that
pestilent papists may raygne without punishment.

But O thou beast, I speak to y^ To wynchester.
Wynchester more cruel than any tygre: Shall neither shame, neither fear,
neither benefytes received, brydel thy tyrannouse cruelty. Asshamest thou not
bloudi beast to betraye thy natyue cuntray? and the liberties of ye same?
Fear thou not to open such a door to al iniquity, that hole England shall
be made a commen Steues to Spanyardes? Will thou recompense the benefittes,
which thou have received of that noble Realm with that ingratitude? Remembrest
thou not that England has brought the forth? that England has nurrisshed
the? that England has promoted the to Riches, honor and high promocio^s?
And will thou now O wretched caytyue for all these manifold benefittes
received, be the cause that England, shall not be England? Yea verily. For so
will thou gratify thy father the deuel, and his lyeftenaunt the pope. Who^
with all his bagage thou labourest now with tothe and nail to florysh again in
England. Albeyt like a dissemblyng hypochryte and dubble faced wretch, thou Thy
book of true obedience both in latin and in Eng lissh shall remayn to thy
perpetual shame and conde^p nacyon of thy cancrede conscience.
being thereto compelled by the invincible verity of gods holy word,
wrotest long a goo thy book entitled True obedience. Against that monstrouse
whore of Babylon, and her falsely usurped power and autho ritie. But now (to
thy perpetual sha me) thou returnest to thy vomitte, and art become an open
archpapist again. Furthermore, why sekest thou the blood of Thomas
Archbisshoppe off caunterbury? Of good fa there Hugh Latimere? and of that most
learned and discrete man Doc tor Ridlaye true bisshoppe of London? Do thou
not consider? that the lenity, the sincere doctrine, pure life, godly
conversation, and discrete counsel of these three is notably known in mo
realms than England? Shamest thou not to seek the destruction of those, who
labored for the sauegard of thy life, and obtained the same, when thou justly
de seruest death? But O thou son of Satan well declarest thou yt nothing can
mollify the cruel malice, nor pur ge the deadly veno^ of him in whose heart te
deuel bearyth the dominion.

Thou art brother to Cayn, and fellow to Judas the traitor, and therefore can
thou do nothing, but thrist the blood of Abel, and betraye Christ Jesus and
his eternal verity.

But thus dear brether must the sons of the deuel declare their The wicked
must declare their selves.
own impiety and ungodliness, that when Gods vengeance (which shall not
sleep) shall be poured forth upon them, al tunges shall confess, acknowledge
and say: that God is righteouse in all his Judgments. And to this end are
cruel tyrauntes permitted and suffered for a spa ce and time not only to live
in wealth and prosperity, but also to prevail Apocalip. 13.
and obteyn victory as touchin ge the flesh over the very saynctes of God,
and over such as enterpriseth to resist their fury at Gods commandment.
But now to the subsequente, and that that follows.

The instrume^te and mean wherewith Christ Jesus used to remove and put away
ye horrible fear and Anguysshe of his disciples, is his only word. For so is
it written: But by and by Jesus spoke unto them saying: Be of good comfort.
It is I. Benot affrayed.

The natural man (that can not understand the pouer of God) would have desired
sum other present comfort in so great a daungere: As either to have had
the heavens to have opened, and to have showed un to them such light in that
darkness, that Christ might have been fully known by his own facc: or else yt
the wyndes and ragyng waves of the scas soddenly should have ceased: or some
other miracle, that had been subject to al their senses, whereby they might
have perfitly known, that, they were delivered from al danger. And truly,
equal it had been to Christ. Jesus to have done any of these (or any work
greatter) as to have said: It is I. Be not affrayed. But willing to teach us
the dignity and effectual power of his most holy word he uses no other in
strume^t to pacify y^ great and horrible fear of his disciples but y^ same
his comfortable word and lively voice. And this is not do^e only at one time,
but when so ever his church is in such strait perplexite y^ nothing appears
Nota.
but extreme calamytie desolation and ruin: then the first comfort that
ever it receives is by the means of his word and promise. As in the troubles
and temptacions of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David and Paul may appear.

To Abraham was given no other Abraham.
defense, after that he had disco^fited four Kings, (whose posterity and
lynage no doubt he being a stranger greatly feared) but onlythis promise Genesis
15.
of god, made to him by his holy worcester de: Fear not Abraham I am thy buc kler.
That is: thy proteccio^ and defense.

The same we find of Isaac, who fliynge from the place of his accusto Isaac.
med habitacion, compelled thereto Genesis 16.
by hungre, gat none other comfort nor conducte but this promise only: I shall
be with the.

In all the iorneyes and temptacions of Jacob, the same is to be espied: Jacob.
As when he fledd from his fathers Genesis 28. 31. 32. 35.
house for fear of his brother Esau, when he returned from Laban: And when he
feared the inhabitauntes of the Region of the Cananites and Pheresites. For the
slaughter of the Sichemites committed by his sons. He receaneth no other
defense, but only Gods word and promise. And this in Moses and in the afflic
Moses.
ted church under him is most euidente. Exodus 5.
For when Moses him self was in such desperacyo^, that he was bold to chyde
with God, saying. Why have thou sent me? for sith that time that I have comme
to Pharao to speak in thy name, he has oppressed this people. Neither yet
have thou delivered thy people.

This same expostulacion of Moses declares how sore he was tempted, yea and
what opinion he had conceived of God, that is: that God was either impotente
and could not deliver his people from such a tyrauntes hands, or else, that he
was mutable and unjust of his promyses. And this same and sorer temptacions
assaulted the people. For in Anguisshe of heart they both refused God and Moses
(as we before have partly touched) And what mea nes used God, to comfort them
in that great extremity? Did he straight way soddenly kill Pharao, the great
tyraunte? No. Did he send them a legion of Angels te defend and deliver them?
No such thing. But he only recyteth and beats in to their ears his former
promises to them, which oftentimes they had before. And yet the rehearsal of the
same wrought so mightily in the heart of Moses, that not only was bitterness and
desperacio^ removed away, but also he was inflamed with such boldness, that
without fear he went again to the presence of the king, after he had been
threatened and repulsed by him.

This I writ, beloved in the lor de, that ye knowing the word of Romans 1.
God not only to be that, whereby Psalm. 119.
were created heaven and earth, but The power and effectual operation of Gods
word.
also to be the power of God to salua cion to all that believe: the bright
la^tarne to the fete of these that by nature walk in darkenes^e: the life to
those, that by sin are dead: A com forte of such as be in tribulation: the
tower of defense to such as be most feeble: the wisdom and great felicity
of such as delyteth in the same: and to be short, you know Gods word to
be of such efficacy and strength, that thereby is sin purged, death
vanquyshed, tyrauntes suppressed, and finally, the deuell the (...): of all
myserie overthrown and consounded. This (I say) I write, that ye knowing
this of the holy word and most blessed gospel and voice of God (which once
you have herd, I trust to your comfort) may now in this hour of darkness
and most ragynge te^peste, thriste and pray, that ye may hear yet once
again this amiable voice of your savior Christ: be of good comfort, it is
I, fear not. And also that ye may receive some consolacion by that blessed
Gospel, which before you have professed, assuredly knowing, that God shall be no
less merciful unto you, then he has been to other afflicted for his names
sake before you. And albeit that god by and by remove not this horrible
darkness, neither yet that he soddenly pacifieth this tempeste, yet shall he
not suffer his tossed bote to be drowned. Exodus 14.


Remember brethren, that Gods 4. Reg. 9.
vengeance plaged not Pharao the first year of his tyranny. Neither did the
dogs de^oure and co^ sum both the flesh and bones of wicked Iezabel when
she first erected and set up her Idolatry. And yet, as none of them escaped
due pu nishment. So did God preserve his afflicted church, in despite of
Satan and of his blind and most wretched servants. As he shall not fail to
do in this great tempest and darkness within the realm of En glande. And
therefore, yet again be loved in the Lord, let the comfort of Gods promises
somewhat quyc ken your dulled spirits. Erercise your selves now secretly i
reuoluing that, which somtymes you have herd openly proclaimed in your ears.
And be every man now a faithful preacher unto his brother. If your Lucae. 24.
cammunicacion be of Christ, assured ly he will come before you be ware. His
word is like unto sweet smelling oyntme^t or fragrant flowers, Simile.
which ^eue* can be moved nor ha^d^, but forth goes the odoure to the comfort
of those that stands by, which is nothing so delectable if the ointment
remain within the box, and the flowers stand or lie without touching or
mocion.

Mark well dear brethren, before that Christ spoke, his disciples judged him
to have been some wicked spirit, which was to them no delectable sauoure: But
when he speaks, the sweet odoure of his voice pearseth their hearts. For
what comfort was in the hearts of the disciples, when they herd these
words: Be of good comfort, it is I. That is: Judge not that I am a spirit
come to your destruction, ^o. I am come for your delyuerau^ce. It is I. Your
master, yea your master most familiar. It is I, whose voice and doctrine you
know, for ye are my sheep. It is I, whose works you have seen, although
perfytly ye considered not the same. It is I, who commanded you to enter into
this journey, Math. and Ioh. supra.
and therefore am I come to you now in the hour of your trouble, and therefore:
be not affrayed. This storm shall ^casse, and you shall be delivered

What comfort (I say) dear bre thren, was in the hertes of the disciples,
hearing Christ's voice, and ^ ynge him by the same, can neither the tongue nor
pen of man express, but only such as aster long conflicte and strife
(which is betwixt the flesh and the spirit, in the time of extreme
troubles, when Christ appears to be absent) feleth at last the consolation of
the holy ghost, can witness and declare.

And Peter gives some external sign, what Christ's words wrought inwardly in
his heart. For immediately after he heard his masters voice, he says: Lord,
if it be thou, Command me to come unto the upon the waters. Here may be
seen, what Christ's voice had wrought in Peter's heart, truly not only a
forgetting and contempt of the great tempeste, but also such bold nesse and
love, that he could fear no danger following, but assuredly did believe, that
his master Christ's puissaunce, power and might was such, that nothing might
resist his word and co^man^dement, and therefore he says: Commau^de me to
come. As though he would Note, that Peter considered not hi^ own weakness.
say: I desire no more but the assurance of thy commandment. If thou will
command, I am determined to obey. For assuredlye I know that the waters can
not prevail against me. If thou speak the word. So that what so ever is
possible unto thee, by thy will and word may be possible unto me.

Thus Christ to instruct Peter further, and us by his example condescended
unto his petition. And co^ maunded him to come. And Peter quickly leauyng ye
bote, came down from it and walked upon the waters, to come to Christ. Thus
far of Pe ters fact, in which lies great abundance of doctrine, but I
will pass over all that especially appertai neth not to the quality of this
time within the realm of England.

Before it is said well-beloved bre thre^, that somtymes the messengers of life
are judged to be very messengers of death, and that not only with the
reprobate, but also with gods elect. As was Moses with the Israelites.
Jeremy with the city of Jerusalem, and Christ him self with his apostles.
But that is not a sin permane^t and that abides for ever The sheep at lenght
know the voice of their own Pastoure.
with gods elect, but it vanysheth away in such sort, that not only they
know ye voice of their pastor, but also they earnestly study to obey and
follow it with the danger of their own lives. For this is the spe cial
difference betwixt the children of God and the reprobate:

The one obeys God speaking The ^cte.
by his messengers, whom they embrace with unfeigned love. And that they do:
somtymes not only against al worldly appearaunce, but also against civil
statutes and ordinances of men. And therefore in their great extremity receive
they comfort beyond expectacion. The reprobate.


The other always resysteth god des messengers, and hates his word. And
therefore in their great adversity God either takes from them the presence of
his word, or else they fall into so deadly desperacion, that although gods
messengers be sent unto them, yet neither can they receive comfort by Gods
promyses, neither follow the counsel of god des true messengers, be it never so
perfect and frutful. Hereof have we many evident testimonies within the
scriptures of God.

Of Saul it is plain that God 1. Reg. 28. Saul.
so left him, that neither would he give him answer by prophet, by 2. Reg.
16. Ahas.
dream, nor by vision.

To Ahas king of Judah in his great anguyshe and fear, which he had concey^ed
by the multitude of those that were con^ured against him, was sent Esaias the
Prophet to Esa. 7.
assure him by Gods promise, that his enemies should not prevail against
him, and to confirm him in the same, the prophet required him to desire a
sign of God, either from the heaven, or beneth in the deep, but such was the
deadly desperacion of him that always had despised Gods prophets, and had
most abhominably defiled him self with Idolatrye, that no consolation could
enter into his heart, but desperatlye and with a dissemblyng and fained excuse,
he refused all the offers of God.

And albeit God kept touch with that hipocrite for that time (which God somty
me shows mercy to an hypocryte for the cause of his Church.
was not done for his cause, but for the saftie of his afflicted Church) yet
after escaped he not the vengeance of God.

The like we read of Zedechias the wretched and last king of Judah, before the
destruction of the city of Jerusalem, who in his great fear and extreme
anguyshe sent for Iere mie the prophet, and secretly demau^ ded of him how he
might escape Iere. 37. 38.
the great danger that appearedwha^ the Caldees beseged the city. And the
prophet boldly spoke and commanded the king, if he would save his life and
the city, to render and give up him self into the hands of the king of
Babylon. But the miserable king had no grace to follow the prophets counsel,
because he ne uer delyted in ye said prophets doctrine, neither yet had showed
unto him any friendly favor. But even as the enemies of God the chief pre stes
and false prophets required of the king, so was the good prophet ^uel
entreated, somtymes cast into prison, and somtymes judged and condemned to
dye. The most evident testimony of the wilful blyndynge of wicked Idolatrers
is written and recited in the same prophet Ieremye, as follows.

After that the city of Jerusalem Ierem. 42.
was burnt and destroyed, the king led away prisoner, his sons and
chief nobles slain, and the hole vengeance of God powered out upon the
disobedient: Yet there was left a remnaunt in the land to occupy and possess
the same, who called upon the prophet Ieremye to know con cernyng them the
will and pleasure of God: whether they should remain still in the land ^f Judea
as was ap pointed and permitted by the Caldees, or if they should depart and
fly into Egypt. To certify them of this their doubt, they desire the pro
phete to pray for them unto God. Who condescendynge and grauntyng their
peticion, promised to keep back nothing from them, which the Reads the text
Iere. 42.
Lord God should open unto him. And they in like manner taking God to record
and witness, made a solemn vow, to obey what so ever the Lord should
answer by him. But when the prophet by the inspi ration of the spirit of
God and assured reuelacion and knowledge of his will, commanded them to remain
still in the land that they were in, pro mysyng them if they so would do, that
God would there plant them, and that he would repent of all the plages that he
had brought upon them. And that he would be with them, to deliver them from
the hands of the king of Babylon. But contrarywyse if they would not obey
the voice of the Lord, but would against his commandment go to Egypt,
thynkinge that there they should live in rest and abundance, without any
fear of war and penurye of vic^ualles, then the very plagues which they
feared should come upon them and take them. For (says the prophet) it shall
come to pass: that all men that obstinatlye will go to Egypt there to
remain, shall dye either by sword, by honger, or pestilence. But when the
Prophet of God had declared unto them this plain sentence and will of God, I
pray you what was their answer? the text decla reth it, saying:

Thou speak a lie, neither has the Lord our God sent thee unto us,
commaundyng that we Ierem. 43.
should not go into Egypt, but Baruch the son of Neriah provoke thee
against us, that he may give us into the power of ^aldeys, that they might
kill kill us, and lead us prisoners unto Babylon. And thus they refused the
counsel of God and followed their own fantasies.

^ere may be espied in this peo Great blin dnes.
ple great obstinacy and blyndnes. For nothing which the Lord had be fore
spoken by this godly Prophet Jeremy, had fallen in vain. Their own eyes
had seen the plages and myseries which he had threatened, take effect in every
point, as he had spoken before, yea they were yet grene and fresh both in
mind and pre sense (for the fla^me and fire wherewith Jerusalem was consumed
and brent was then scantly quenched) and yet could they not b^leue his threate
ninges then spoken, neither yet could they follow his fruteful counsel ge uen
for their great wealth and sauegarde. And why so* Because they ne uer delyted
in Gods truth, neither had they repented their former Ido latrie, but still
continued and rejoiced Iere. 44.
in the same, as manifestly appears As Papists ^olde have leage with the
Emperor.
in the. xliii^. chapter of the same prophet. And therefore would they and
their wives have been in Egypt where all kind of Idolatry and su perstition
^bounded, that they with out reproach or rebuke, they might have their bellies
full thereof in despite of Gods holy laws and prophets.

In wrytinge hereof it came to mind, that after the death of that in nocent
and most godly king Edward the sixte, while that great tu multe was in
England for the esta blysshyng of that most unhappy and wicked woman's
authority (I mean of her that now reigns in Gods wrath) entreatinge the
same argument in a town in Buckingham shyre named ^ammershame before a great
congregation with sorrowful What was said in Ha^mershame when vprou re was for
establysshi^g of Marye in Authority.
heart and weeping eyes, I fell into this exelamacio^: D Onglande. ^ow is Boddes
wrath kyndled against thee. ^owe has he begone to punyshe as he has
threatened^ a long while by his true Prophets and messengers. ^e has taken
from thee the crown of thy glory, and has left thee without honor as a
body without a head. And this appears to be only the beginning of sorrows
which appears to increase. For I perceive that the heart the tongue and
hand of one English man is bente against another, and division to be in the
hole realm, which is an assured sign of de A common wealth compared to a
ship sailing on the sea.
solacion to come. O England ^uglande, do thou not consider that thy common
wealth is like a ship sailyng on the Sea, if thy maryners and gouernour^s
shall one consume another, shalt thou not suffer shipwreck in short process
of time? O England England (^lasse) these plages are powered upon thee, for
that thou would not know the most happy time of thy gentle visitacion. But
will thou yet obey the voice of thy God, and submit thy self to his holy
words? truly if thou will, thou shalt find mercy in his sight, and the
estate of thy common wealth shall be preserved. But O England England, If
thou obstina^ly wilt return into Egypt: that is, if thou contracte marriage,
co^federacy, or leage with such princes, as do maintain and ad^uaunce
ydolatrye (such as the Emperor, which is no less enemy un to Christ, then
ever was ^ero) If for the pleasure and frendshippe (I say) of such princes
thou return to thyue old abhominacions before used under the papist^, then
assuredly (O England) thou shalt be plaged and brought to desolation by the
means of those, whose fauou res thou sekest, and by whom thou art procured
to fall from Christ and to serve christ.

This and much more in the doloure of mine heart that day in audience of
such as yet may bear re cord, God would that I should pro nounce. The
thing that I the^ most feared, and which also my tongue spoke (that is: the
subuercion of the true religion, and bringing in of strangers to reign over
that realm) this day I se come to pass in men's counsels and
determinacions. Which if they proceed and take effect as by men is concluded,
then so assuredlye as my God lives, and as those Israelites that obstinatlye
returned into Egypt again were plaged to the death: so shall England taiste
what the Lord has threatened by his pro The end shall declare
phetes before. God grant us true and unfeigned repentance of our former
offenses.

God for his great mercies sake stir up some Phinees, Helias, or Iehu, that
the blood of abominable Idolaters may pacify gods wrath, that it consume
not the hole multitude. Amen.

But to return to our matter: Of the premises it is plain, that Enemies
to the truth receaueth no comsorte of Gods messengers.
such as contemns Gods eternal verity and grace, can neither in their
troubles receive comfort by gods messengers, neither yet can they follow the
counsel of God be it never so profitable, but God gives them over and
suffers them to wa^ der in their own vanities to their own perdition. Where
as contrary The godly and chosen of God.
wise: such as bears a reverence to Gods most holy word, are drawn by
the power and virtue of the same (as before is said) tobeleue, follow and obey
that which God commands be it never so hard, so vnapparent or contrary to
their affeccions. And therefore, as God al way keeps appointment with the^, so
are they wonderouslye preserved when gods vengeaunces are poured forth upon
the disobedient. And this is most evident in Abraham at Genesis 1^
Gods commandment leaving his countreye and going forth he knew not
whyther. Which was a thing not so easy to be done, as it Genesis 15.
is to be spoken or read. It appears Genesis 22.
also in Abraham beleuyng Gods promyses against all appearaunce: and in
Abraham offering his child Isaac against al fatherly love Exodi. 5. 7. 10.
and affeccion natural. The same is to be said: In Moses, Samuel, Helias 1.
Reg. 15.
, Micheas, and other of the prophets, 3. Keg. 21.
which at the commandment of Gods word boldly passed to the presence of
tyrauntes, and there to them did their message as charge was given unto them.

But lest that some should allege Objection.
that these examples appertains nothing to a multitude, because they were
done in singular men.

To answer to this obieccion: we Answer.
will consider what the power of Gods word has wrought in ma^ny at one
instaunte.

After that the Israelites had Exodi. 32.
made the golden caulfe and so fallen Gods worcester de sometime mou^th and draws
great multitudes.
to Idolatry, Moses coming down from the mountain, and beholding their
abhominacions, (the honor that they gave to an Idol) and the peo ple spoiled
of their earerynges and jewels to their great rebuke and shame was inflamed
with such zeal, indignacion and wrath: that first, he brafe the tables of
the command mentes. Then he bette their caulf to powder, and gave it them to
drink to cause them understand, that their Why Moses caused the Israelyts to
drink the powder of their gol d^n ca^lje.
filthy guts should receive yt which they worshipped for God. And final ly,
he commanded that every man that was of God should approach and come nygh unto
him. And all the sons of Leui (says the text) came to him, To whom he said.
^yus says the Lord God of Israel. Let every man Exodi. 32.
put his sword upon his thygh, and A sharp se^ te^ce against Idolatrers.
go in and out from port to port in the tents. And let every man kyl his
brother, his neighbor, and every man his nigh kynsman. And the son nes of Leui
did according to the word of Moses. And there fell the same day of the
people nyghe three thousand. It is evident by this history, that the power of
Gods word, pronounced by the mouth of a man, prevailed at one time in a
great nombre against nature, and compelled them to be executores of Gods
vengeance, regarding nothing the affinity nor nyghnes of blood. And also
that their doing so well pleased Moses the ambassadoure of God, that he said
unto them: Lonsecrate your hands this day every man in his own son, and
in his own brother, that a fortunate benediccio^ may be given to you this
day. As though Moses should say: Your father Le ^i profaned and defiled his
hands Genes. 34.
kyllyng the Sichemites in his blind rage, which moved his father Jacob in his
last testament, to dan^ pne, execrate and curse that his most Genes. 49.
vehement and ungodly zeal. But Because in this work you have preferred
Gods commandment before blood, nature and also asfeccion, in place of that
rebuke and curse, you have obtained blessyng and praise.

The like puissaunce and virtue of Gods word workynge in a Ierem. 21, 38
multitude is to be read in the prophet Ieremye. Who perceiving the time of
Gods vengeance to draw nygh, and the city of Ierusa lem to be beseged,
boldly cried out in his open sermon, saying: He that ^eremiae. 21.
remains in this city shall dye, (...) there by sword, by honger, or by pe
Ieremiae. 38.
stilence. But he that shall go for the to the Laldeys, shall live, and shall
find his soul for a pray. This might have appeared a disceyuable sedicious
and ungodly sermon, to co^ maunde subjects to depart from the obedience and
defense of their native prince, rich cytizens and valiaunte souldeours from
their possessions and strong holds, and to will them to render them selves
without al manner of resistaunce into the hands of strangers being their
enemies. What carnal man would not have judged these persuasions of the
prophet most foolys^e and false* And yet in ye hertes of such as God had
elected and appointed to life, so effe^ually wrought this sermon, that a great
number of Jerusalem left their ^ynge, their city, riches and fren des, and
obeyed the prophets coun sail. For so may be espied by ye ^swere of
Zedechias the ^inge, when Jeremy counsayled, that he should also render him
self into the hands Ieremiae. 38
of ^abuchodonozer he says: I fea re these Jews, that are fled to the
Laldi^s, lest perchance they give me into their hands.

^ereoff it is plain that many were departed from him, whom he feared more than
he did his enemies.

Many mo testimonies might be brought, to declare how myghtelye Gods word
spo^en by man, has wrought in the hertes of great multitudes. ^s in the hertes
of the ^iniuites, who at Jonas preachinge Ion. 3.
damned their former religion, conversation and life. And in the hertes of
those. 3000. who at Peter's first sermon openly made after Christ's Act. 2.
^scension ac^nowledged their offen ces, repented, and were by and by baptized.
But these premises are sufficient to prove, as well that Gods word draws
his elect after it, against worldly appearaunce, against natural affeccions,
and against cyuil statutes and constitucions: as also, that such as obey
gods spea ^yng by his messengers, never lacfeth just reward and
recompensacion. For only such as obeyed the voice of the prophet found
favor Ierem. 39.
and grace, to the praise and glory of Gods name, when his just iud
gementes to^ venge^ce upon the disobedient. But now shortly by no tes we will
touch the rest of Peter's act, and Christ's merciful delyueraunce of them,
which is the end of all troubles sustained by Gods elect.

And first, that Peter seeing a mighty wind was afraid, and so, when he
began to sync^, he cried: Lord save me: are three things principally to be
noted. The first,

And first, it is plain: that so long as Peter had his eyes fixed upon that
the wind was visible, but the vehe meant storm and waves of the sea that were
styrred up and carried by the wind were seen) then began he to fear, and to
reason (no doubt) in his heart, that better it had been for him to have
remained in his bote, for so might Christ have come to him, but now the storm
and rage of wind was so vehement, that he could never come to Christ, and so
he greatly feared. Whereof it is plain that the only cause of our fear that
have left our bote, and through the The cause of ^eare.
storms of the sea would go to Christ with Peter, is: that we more consider
the dangers and lettes that are in our journey, the^ we do the almygh tie power
of him that has co^^aun ded us to come to him self. And this is a sin common
to all the elect and cho sen children of God, that when so ever they se a
veh^ment trouble appearing to let them and dry^e them (...) from the obedience
of God, then begin they to fear and to doubt of Gods power and good will.

With this fear was Abraham Give. (...).
stryc^n when he denied his wife. Exodus 3. 4.
This storm saw Moses when he refused to be Gods messenger. And Ezechias
sore complaint declares, Esa. 36. 37.
that more he believed, considered and looked upon the proud voices and great
power of Sennacherib, then he did the promises of the prophet.

This I note for this purpose, that albeit this late and mos^e ragyng storm
within the realm of England have taken from you the presence of Christ for a
time, so that you have douted whether it was Christ which you saw before, or
not. And albeit that the vehemencye of this contrary wind, that would drive
you from Christ have so occupied your ears, that almost you have forgotten
what he was that commanded you to come to himself, when that he cried: Come
unto me all ye that labor and are burdened, and I Math. 11.
shall refreshe you. Pass from Babylon O my people. etc. Albeit (I Apoca. 18.
say) that this ragyng tempest have strycken such fear in your heart, that
almost all is forgotten, yet dear brethren despair not, such offenses have
chaunsed to Gods elect before you. If obstinatly ye shall not continue, yet
shall you find mercy and grace. It h^d ben your duty in deed and agreeable to
your profession to have looked to Christ alone, and to have contemned all
impedimentes, but such perfeccion is not always with man, but happy is he that
feleth him self to syncke.

The cause that Gods elect be Lively faith makes man bold.
and fear, so sonc began he to syncke. To instruct us, that lyuelye faith
makes man bold, and is able to carye us through such parelles as be
vnscapable to nature. Butwhe^ faith begins to faint, then begin neth man to
syncke down in every danger, as in the histories before re hersed it may
appear. And in the 3. Reg. 18.
prophets it is plain. For ^elias at Gods commandment passing to the
presence of king Achab, in the feruency of his faith, obtained the fire to
come from heaven, and to consume his sacrifice, by which also he was made so
bold, that in the presence of the king he feared nothing to kyl his false
prophets. But the 3. Reg. 19.
same ^elias hearing of the mana^yng and threateninges of cursed Iezabel, and
consydering yt the wrat he of a wicked woman could by no rea The creatu re can
never dispute with God without sin.
sonable means be appeased, he saw a storm, and feared the same, and so he
prepares to fly, which he does not without some syncking down, for he began
to reason and to dispute with God, which never can be done by the creature
without foolyshnes and offense. The same we find in Jeremy and diverse mo.

But the question may be asked: Question.
Seeing Christ knew before what should happen to Peter, why, did he not
eithenlet him from coming from his bote? Or else, why did he not so confirm
him in faith, that he should not have douted? To the which may be thus
answered:

Albeit that we could render no Answer.
reason of this work of Christ, yet were the work it self a sufficient rea
son. And it were enough to answer: that so it pleased him, who is not bound to
render a reason of all his Gods worcester kes by them felfe are a sufficient reason.
works. But yet if we shall mark with diligence to what office Peter was to
be called, and what offenses long rested with him, we shall find most just
and necessary causes of this work of Christ, and down synckyng Peter's
virtues.
of Peter. It is plain that Peter had many notable virtues. As: a zeal and
feruencye toward Christ's glory: and a redynesse and forwardness to obey
his commandments. The vice that long rested with Peter,
But it is like plain that of long continuau^ce there rested with Peter a
desire of honor and worldly rest (and that moved him to persuade Math. xvi.
Christ that he should not dye.) There rested with him pride, presumpcion and
a trust in him self, which presumpcio^ and vain trust in his own strength
unless it had been corrected, and partly removed, he had never been apt nor
me^e to Nota,
have fed Christ's flock. And such sins can never be fullye corrected and
reformed till they be felt, known, and confessed.

And doutles so arrogant is our nature, that neither will it know, neither
confess the infirmity of ye self, unto such time as it have a trial by
experience of ye self. And yt is most plain by Peter long after this
te^peste. For when Christ said to his disciples: This night shall ye all be
staa^dered in me. Peter boldly brag ged and said: Albeit that all should Math.
26.
be slaundered and should fly from thee, yet shall I not be slaundered, but I
am redye to go to prison and to dye with thee.

This was a bold presumpcion and an arrogant promise spoken in contempt of all
his brethren, from which he could not be reduced by Christ's admonicion, But
the more that Christ showed him, yt he should deny him, the more bold was he
to affirm the contrary, as though his master Christ the author of all
truth, yea rather the truth it self, should make a loud lie. And therefore of
necessity it was, that he should prove in experience, what was the frailty of
man's nature. And what was the imbecillitie and weakness of faith even of
those, that were his chief Apostles, which had continually herd his heavenly
doctrine, seen daily his wonderful miracles, which had heard the^ selves so
many ad monicions and exhortacio^s of him, which also had followed and obeyed
him in many things. That imbecil litie and weakness of faith if Peter had not
proved and felt it in him self, neither could he ryghtlye have praised gods
infinite goodness and ^brased his free mercy: Neither had he been apt and mete
to have been a pastoure to the weak sheep and ^ender la^bes of Christ, but he
should have been as presumptuouse a boaster of his own strength, as the Pa
pistes are of their free will. And he should have been as proud a conte^pner
and dispiser of his weak brethren, as the errogant Papists, that contempne
and despise all godly and great learned men though they be a thousand parts
more excellent the^ the^.

But to correct and reform both why Pete^ was suffered to syucke and fall.
presumptuouse arrogance and frail imbecillitie and weakness of faith, Peter
was permitted once to sincke, and thryse most shamefully to refuse and deny
his master, to the intent, that by the knowledge of his own weakness, he might
be the more able to instruct other of the same, and al so that he might more
largely magnify gods free grace and mighty delyuerau^ce. And that Christ
taught him before his fall saying: When Luce. 22.
thou art converted, strength thy brethron. As though Christ should have
said: Peter, yet art thou to proud to be a pastoure, thou ca^te not s^oupe
nor bow thy back down to take up thewcake sh^pe, thou do nor yet know
thinc own infirmity and weakness, and therefore can thou do nothing but
despise the weak ones, but when thou shall be instruc ted by experience of
thine own self what hid iniquity lurketh within the nature of man, then
shall thou learn to be humble and to stoop among other sinners. And also
thou shall be an example to other, which after shall offend as thou dyddest,
so that if they repent as thou dyddest, they need not despair of mercy but
may trust most assuredly of Christ to obtain grace, mercy and forgeuens of
their sins, as y^ dyddest

This fruit have we to g^ther (...) of Peter's downsynckynge in y^ sea, (which
was a secret know lege and privy admonicion that he after should deny
Christ) That we are assured by the voice of Christ, yt if in the time of our
trouble and extreme danger, we cry with Peter, we shall be delivered as he
was. And if we mourn for our denial of christ as he did, we shall find ye same
gra ce and favor at Christ's hand, that he found. But now let us touch the
third note, which is this.

That with gods elect in their greatest fear and danger there rests what
rests with Gods sparcke te in their gretest da^ ger.
some small sparcke of faith, which by one means or other declares it self
albeit the afflicted person in fear or danger does not presently perceive the
same. As herein Peter is most clear and manifest. For, percey^g him self to
synck down, he cried, saying Lord save me, which words were a declaracio^ of
a lively and quick faith, which lay hyd within his afflicted and sore affrayed
heart, whose nature is (I mean of faith) to hope against hope, yt is: against
al appearau^ce or The nature of faith.
lycklyhode to look for help and delyuerau^ce, as ye words of Peter
witnesses yt he did. ^e saw nothing but the ragyng sea ready to swalow hi up
He felt nothing but himself sync^yng down in body, and sore troubled in
heart, and yet he cried: Lord save me. Which words first declare, Peter knew
the power and good will of God
that he knew the power of Christ able to deliver him. For folyshnesse it had
been, to have called for ye help of him, whom he had known to be impotent
and unable to help.

The calling for Christ's help by prayer in this extreme danger declared
also that Peter had some hope through his gracious goodness to obtain
delyuerannce. For in extrea me perils impossible it is, that the heart of man
can cry for Gods help without some hope of his mercy.

It is also to be noted, that in his great ieopardye Peter murmureth not
against Christ. Neither does he impute or lay any crime or blame upon
Christ, albeit, at his commandment he had left his bote. He says not: why
let thou me synke, seeing that I have obeyed thy commandment. Moreover
Peter as ked help at Christ alone, of whom he was persuaded both could and
would help at a pynche. He cried not upon Abraham, Jacob, Moses, Samuel,
David, neither upon any other of the Patriarchs, Prophets, or saints
departed: neither yet upon his own fellows in the boat, but upon Christ, at
whose commandment he had left the boat. All these things together
considered, decla re, that Peter in this his extreme fear and danger had yet
some spark of faith (albeit in that present ieopar die he neither felt
consolacion nor co^ forte.) For these premises are undoubted tokens that he
had faith. But now to the end, which is this:

And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and said unto
him: O thou of little faith, wherefore dyddest thou dout. And when they were come
into the ship, the wynd ceased. And they that were in the ship came and
worshipped him, sayng: Of a truth thou art the son of God. And immediately
the ship was at the land whyther they went.

Hereof first is to be noted, that Psalm. 144.
God is always nyghe to those that How nygh God is in extreme petill to
deliver his elect that faithfully call up on him.
calls upon him faithfully: and so willing is he to deliver them, that
neither can fear nor extreme danger hinder his Godly hand. Peter was
synckyng down, and looked for no other thing but present death, and yet the
hand of Christ prevented him. That y^ was visibly and openly done to Peter in
y^ his great peril is inuisibly and secretly done to Christ's holy church, and
to y^ chosen me^bres of Chri Exodus 14.
stes mystical body in all ages. How Hester. 7. 8. 9.
nygh and ready was the hand of God to deliver his people Israel, when they
were almost overwhelmed with desperation in the days of Moses and Hester, the
history does witness: Daniel. 6.
How nygh was God to Daniel amongst Ion. 3.
the Lions, To Jonas in the Act. 12.
whales bellye, to Peter in prison, is likewise most evidently declared in the
holy Scriptures.

How soddenly and beyond all expectation was Sauid many times delivered from
Saul's tyranny, his own heart confessed, and compelled Psalm. 18.
his pen to write, and tongue to sing, saying: He has sent from above, and
has delivered me, he has drawn me forth of many waters. Erecte your ears
dear (...) thren, and let your hertes understand That as our God is
unchangeable, so is not his gracious hand shor tened this day. Our fear and
trou ble is great, the storm that blows against us is sore and vehement, and
we appear to be drowned in the deep. But if we unfeignedly know the danger,
and will call for delyueraunce the Lords hand is nygher, then is the sword of
our enemies. God flattereth not his elect.


The sharp rebuke that Christ Ie sus gave to Peter, teaches us that God does
not flatter nor conseale the faults of his elect, but makes them manifest to
the end that the of fendours may repent, and that others may avoid the like
offenses. Peter was not faythlesse.


That Christ called Peter of little faith, argues and declares (as we before
have noted) that Peter was not altogether faytheles, but that he faynted, or
was uncertain in his faith, for so sounds the Break term (...) whereof we
ought to be admonished: that in passing to Christ through the storms of
this world, is not only required a fervent faith in the beginning, but also a
constancy to the end. As Christ says: he that continues to the end Math.
10.
shall be saved. And Paul: onles a man 2. Tim. (...)
shall strive lawfullye he shall not be Such as have stand long may yet fall.
crowned. The remembrance of this ought to put us in mind that the most
fervent man, and such as have long continued in profession of Christ, is not
yet sure to stand at al hours, but that he is subject to many dangers, and
that he ought to fear his own frailty, as the Apostle teaches us, saying: he
that stands let him beware that he fall not. For if Peter that began so
fervently yet faynted or he came to Christ, what ought we to fear, in whom
such feruencye was never found? No doubt we ought to tremble and fear the
worst, and by the knowledge of our own weakness with the Apostles
inceassauntly to pray: O Lord Lucae 17.
increase our faith. Christ's demand and question askyng of Peter why doutest
thou? contains in it self a vehemencye. As Chiste would say, Nota.
whether doutedst thou of my power? or of my presence? or of my promyses? or of
my good will? If my power had not ben sufficient to have saved thee, then could
I neither have come to the through the stormy sea, neither have made the waters
obey thee, when thou bega^nest to come to me. And if my good will had not ben to
have delivered thee, and thy brethren, then had I not appeared unto you,
neither had I called upon the, bu^ had permitted the tempest to de uoure and
swalowe you up. But co^syderyng that your eyes saw me pre sent, your ears
herd my voice, and we have less pretense of excuse the^ peter had.
thou Peter especially knew the sa me, and obeyedst my commandment, why
the^ doutedst thou? Beloved bre thren, if this same demand and que stion ware
laid to our charge, we should have less pretense of excuse, then had Peter.
For he might have alleged that he was not advertised that any great storm
should have risen betwixt him and Christ, which justly we can not allege.
For sith Nota.
that time that Christ Jesus has ap peared unto us by the bryghines of his
word, and called upon us by his lively voice, he has continually blo wen in
our ears that persecution and trouble should follow the word that we
professed, which days are now present, Alas then, why doubt we through this
storm to go to Christ? Support O Lord and let us syncke no further.

Albeit that Peter fainted in faith Consolation
and therefore was worthy most sharplye to be rebuked, yet does not Christ
leave him in the sea, neither long permitted he that fear and tempest to
continue, but first they entered both into the boat, and thereafter the wind
ceased, and last their bote arrived without longer delay at the place for
which they long had labored.

O blessed and happy are those that patiently abydes this delyueraunce of the
Lord. The ragynge sea shall not devour them. Albeit they have fainted, yet
shall not Christ Jesus leave them, behind in the stormye sea, but soddenly he
shall stretch forth his mighty hand, and shall place them in the boat among
their brethren, that is: he shall conducte them to the nombre of his elect and
afflic Math. 28.
ted church, with whom he will continue to the end of the world.

The majesty of his presence shall put to silence this boisteous wind, worldly
princes are coniured against god
the malice, and envy of the deuell, which so blows in the hertes of
Princes, Prelates, Kings and of earthly tyrauntes yt altogether they Psalm. 2.
are coniured against the Lord and against his anointed Christ, in dis pite
of whom he sauely shall conduct, convey, and carye his sore troubled flock to
the life and rest for which they travel.

Albeit (I say) that somtymes The scheap of Christ can not bere^t from his
hand.
they have faynted in their journey, albeit that weakness in faith permit ted
them to sincke, yet from the hand of Christ ca^ they not be rent, he may not
suffer them to drown, nor the Io. 10.
deape to devour them. But for the glory of his own name he must de liver,
for they are committed to his charge, proteccion, and keeping, and Ioar. 7.
therefore must he keep and defend such as he has received from his father,
from sin, from death, from deuell and hell.

The remembrance of these promises is to mine own heart such occasion of
comfort, as neither can any tongue nor pen express, but yet paraduenture
some there is of Gods elect that can not be conforted in this tempest by any
meditacions of Gods eleccion or defense, but rather beholding such as
somtymes boldly have professed Christ's verity, now to be returned to The
temptations of Gods elec te now in England.
their accustomed abominations: And also themselves to be ouercommed with
fear, that against their knowledge and conscience they stoop to an Idol, and
with their presence mainteineth the same. And being at this point, they begin
to reason whether it be possible that the mem bres of Christ's body may be
permitted so horribly to fall to the denial of their head? and in the same to
remain of long continuance. And from this reasoning they enter in dolor,
and from dolor, they begin to syncke to the gates of hell, and ports of
desperation.

The doloure and fear of such I grant to be most just. For oh how fearful
is it, for the love of this tran sitorie life in presence of man to deny
Christ Jesus and his known and undoubted verity?

But yet to such as be not obstinate contempners of God, and of al godlynes: I
would give this my weak counsa^e, yt rather they should appeal to mercy,
then by the seueire judgments of God, to pronounce against themselves the
fearful sentence of condempnacion. And to con Good consa ill to the infayth.
sider that God concludes all under unbelief that he may have mercy upon
all. That the Lord kylleth and Romans ^.
gives life, he leads down to hell and yet lyfteth up again. But I will not
that any man think. That by this my counsel I either iusti^ie such 1. Reg.
2.
as horriblye are returned back to their vomete. Either yet that I flatter
such as maintains that abominable Idol with their daily presence. God
forbid, for then were I but a blind guide leadyng yt blind headlinges to
perdicion. Only God Nota.
knows the doloure and sobbes of my her^e for such as I hear daily to turn
back. But the cause of my counsel is. That I know the consei ence of some to
be so tender, that when soever they feel themselves troubled with fear,
wounded with anguyshe, or to have slydde^ back in any point: that then they
judge their faith to be quenched, and them selves to be unworthy of Gods
mercies for ever. To whom aparteineth the formar counsel.
To such direct I my counsel. To those I mean, that rather offendes by
weakness and infirmity then of malice and set purpose. And I would that such
should understand and c^ sider that all Christ's Apostles fled from him: and
denied him in their hearts. And also I would they should Math. 28.
consider, that no man ever from the beginning stood in greater fear, greater
danger, nor greater doubt: then Peter did when Christ's presence Nota.
was taken from him. Yea no man felt less comfort, nor saw less appearaunce
of delyueraunce and yet neither were the disciples rejected for ever, neither
was Peter permitted to drown in that deep. Obieccion.


But some shall obiecte: faith was not utterly quenched in them, and there fore
they got delyueraunce, and were restored to comfort.

Answer. That is it which I would Answer.
that the afflicted and troubled consci ences in this age should consider, that
neither fear, neither danger, neither yet doutyng, nor backslyding The root
of faith remains with gods ^lect in grea test danger
may utterly destroy and quench the faith of Gods elect, but that always
there remaiueth with them some root, and spark of faith. How beit in their
anguyshe they neither feel nor can decerne the same. Yet some shall demand:
how shall it be known in whom the spark and root of faith remains, and in
whom not? seeing that al flees from Christ, and boweth down to (...). Hard it
is, and in a manner impossible, that one man shall wittyngly judge of an other
(for that could not 3. Keg. 19.
Helias do of the Israelites of his days) but every man may easelye judge of
himself. For the root of faith is of that nature, that long it The root^ of
faith is not (...).
will not be ydel, but of necessity by process of (...) it will send forth
some branches that may be seen and felt by the outward man: if it remain
lively in the heart. As you have herd it did in Peter, compellynge him to cry
upon Christ, when that he was in greatest necessity. Will thou have a trial
whether the root of faith remains with the A trial of ^yth in trouble.
or not? I speak to such as are weak, and not to proud contempners of God.

Fealest thou thy soul fayntynge

Art thou as sore affrayed that thy soul should drown in hell, if you Peter
was that his body should drown in the waters?

Desyrest thou as earnestly the de

Beleuest thou that Christ is able

Do thou call upon him without

Do thou thrist for his presence,

Mournest thou for the great abhominacions

If these premises (I say) remain yet in thy heart, the^ art thou not
altogether destitute of faith, neither shall thou descend to perdition for
ever. But mercifullye shall the Lord stretche forth his myghtie hand, and It
aparteyneth not to man to know nor to inquire how god will deliver.
shall deliver the from the very throat and bottom of hell. But by what means
that he shall perform that his merciful work it neither apperteyneth to thee
to demand, nor to me to defyne. But this is requisite and our bounden deutie,
that such Nota.
means as the hand of our Bod shall offer (to avoid Idolatry) we refuse
not but that willyngly we embrace the same albeit partly disagree Diverse way es
of deliverance.
to our affeccions. Neither yet think I that soddenly: and by one means shall
all the faithful in England be delivered from Idolatry. No, it may be that
God so strengthen the hertes of some of those that have fainted be fore: that
they will resist Idolatry to the death, and that were a glorious and triumphant
delyueraunce. Of others God may so touch the hertes, that they will rather
chose to walcke: and go as pilgremes from realm to realm, sufferyng honger,
cold, heat, thrist, wearines, and po uertie, then that they will abide (having
al haboundaunce) in subieccio^ of Idolatry. To some may God offer Nota.
such occasion that in despite of idolaters (be they princess or prelalates)
they may remain within their own dominions, and yet neither bow their knees
to Baal, neither yet lack the lively food of god des most holy word. If God
offer unto us any such means, let us as suredlye know that Christ Jesus The
means offered by God to avoid Idolatry are not to be re fused.
stretched forth his had^e unto us willing to deliver us from that danger
wherein many are like to perish, and therefore let us not refuse it, but with
gladness let us take hold of it, knowing that God has a thousand means (very
vnapperyng to man's judgment) whereby he will deliver, supporte, and conforte,
his afflicted church. And therefore most Repetition.
dearly beloved in our savior Jesus Christ, considering that the remem
braunce of Christ's banquet (whereof I doubt not some of you taisted with
comfort and joy) is not yet utterly taken from your mind. And that we have
entered in this journey at Christ's commandments. Consi dering that we feale
the sea wyndes blow contrary and against us, as before was prophesied unto
us. And that we se the same tempest rage against us that ever has raged
against Christ's elect Church. And considering also that we feale our selves
ready to fainte, and like to be oppressed by these stormye seas, let us
prostrate our selves before the throne of grace: in the presence of our
heavenly father, and in the bytternes of our hertes let us confess our
offenses and for Christ Jesus sake let us ask delyueraunce and mercy,
saying with sobbes and gro nes from our troubled hertes.

O God the heathen are entered Complaynt.
into thine enheritaunce. They have defiled thy holy Tempel and have Psalm. 79.
profaned thy blessed ordinance, in place of thy joyful signs, they have
erected their abominable ydo les. The deadly cup of al blasphe Psalm. 74.
my is restored again to their harlottes hand. Thy prophets are per Apocal.
17.
secuted, and none are permitted to speak thy word frelye. The poor sheep of
thy poor pasture are commanded to drink the venemouse waters of men's
tradicions.

But O Lord thou know how sore they grieve us. But such is Psalm. 74. and
83.
the tyranny of these most cruel beasts that plainly they say: They shall
root us out at ones, so that no remembrance shall remain of us in earth.

O Lord thou know that we are but flesh, and that we have no power of our
selves to withstand their tyranny, and therefore O father open the eyes of thy
mercy upon us, and Prayer and confession.
confirm thou in us the work which thine own mercy has begone. We
acknowledge and confess o Lord that we are punished most iustlye, because we
lightly regarded the time of our merciful visitarion. Thy blessed Gospel was
in our ears like a lovers song, it pleased us for the ryme, but Alas, our
lines did nothing agree with thy statutes and holy commandments. And thus
we acknowledge that our own iniquity has compelled thy justice to take the
light of thy word from the hole realm of England. But be Appealing to mercy.
thou myndful O Lord that it is thy truth which we have professed, and that
thy enemies blasphemeth thy holy name, and our possession with out cause. Thy
holy Gospel is called heresye, and we are accused as traitors for professyng
the same. Be merciful therefore O Lord, and be Esaias. 33.
salvation unto us in this time of our anguyshe. Albeit our sins accuse and
condemn us, yet do thou according to thine own name. We have offended
against thee. Our sins and iniquities are without nombre, and yet art thou
in the mid Ieremiae. ^4.
des of us O Lord, albeit that tyrau^tes bear rule over our bodies, yet
thrusts our souls for the comfort of thy word. Correct us therefore but not
in thy hot displeasure, spare thy people and permit not thyn enheritaunce to
be in rebuke for ever.

Let such O Lord as now are most Psalm. 74.
afflicted yet ones again praise thy holy name before thy congregation.
Repress the pride of these blood thristye tyrauntes, consume them in Psalm. 59.
thine anger according to ye reproach which they have laid against thy ho Psalm.
79.
ly name. Power forth thy vengeance Ierm. 10. 11. 12.
upon them, and let our eyes behold the blood of thy saints required of their
hands. Delay not thy venge aunce O Lord, but let death devour them in
haist, let the earth swallowe Psalm. 55.
them up, and let them go down quick to the helles. For there is no Against
the enemies of God.
hope of their amendment, the fear and reverence of thy holy name is quite
banished from their hertes, and therefore yet again O Lord consume them,
consume them in thine anger, and let them never bring their wic ked counselles
to effect. But according to the godly powers, let them be taken in the snare
which they he ue prepared for thine elect: Look upon us O Lord with the eyes
of thy mercy, and show petie upon us thy weak and sore oppressed flock
gather us yet ones again to the wholesome treasures of thy most holy word,
that openly we may confess thy blessed gospel within y^ realm of England.
Grant this O heavenly father for Christ Jesus thy sons sake. Amen.

If on this manner or otherwyfe (as god shall put in our hertes) with out
hypocrisy in the presence of our God (respecting more his glory the^ our
private wealth) continuallye we power forth our complaint, confession, and
prayers. Then so assuredlye as our God lives, and as we feall these present
troubles, shall our God himself rise to our defense, he shall confound the
counseilles of our ene myes and trouble the wits of such as most wrongfully
troubles us. Be shall send Iehu to execute his just iudg^nentes against
ydolatours and against such as obstinatly defends them. Iesabel her self
shall not escape the vengeance and plages that are prepared for her por cion.
The flatterers and the mainteners of her abhominacio^s shall drink the cup of
gods wrath with her And in despite of the deuell shall yet the glory of
Christ Jesus, and the bryghtnesse of his countenance so shine in our hertes
by the presence of his grace, and before our eyes by the true preaching of his
gospel that altogether we shall fall before him and say:

O Lord thou art our God, we Esaiae. 25.
shall extol thee, and shall confess thy name, for thou haste brought wonde
rous things to pass according to thy counseilles which albeit appear to be
far of, yet are they true and most assured. Thou haste brought to ruin the
palaces of tyrauntes, and therefore shall the afflicted magnify thee, and the
city of tyranfull nations shall fear thee. Thou haste been O Lord a strong
defense to the poor, a sure place of refuge to the afflicted in the time of
his anguis^he.

This no dout dear brethren shall one Of gods elect.
day be the song of gods elect with in the realm of England, after that God
have poured forth his vengeance upon these inobedie^t, and blood thrusty
tyrauntes: which now trium pheth in all abominations, and therefore yet again
beloved in the Lord, abide patientlye the Lords deliuerau^ce, Exhortation.
avoiding and flyeng such offenses as may separate and deuyde you from the
blessed fellowship of the Lord Jesus at his second coming. Watch and pray,
resist the deuel, and row against this vehement te^ pest and shortly. shall the
Lord come, to the comfort of your hertes which now are oppressed with
anguyshe and care, but then shall ye so rejoice, that through gladness you shall
say. Behold this our God, we have way Isai. 26.
ted upon him, and he has saved us. This is our Lord, we have long thristed
for his coming, now shall we rejoice and be glad in his salvation. So be it.
The great Bishop of our souls Jesus our Lord so strengthen and assist your
troubled hertes with the myghtie comfort of his holy Ghost, that earthlye
tyrauntes nor worldly torments have no power to drive you from the hope and
expe ^tracion of that kingdom which for the elect was prepared from the
beginning by our heavenly father to whom be all praise and honor now and
ever. Amen.

Remember me dear brethren in your daily prayers. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all. Amen.

Yours with sorrowful heart, John Knox.

Imprynted at Kalykow the 20. day of Iulij. 1554.

Cum gratia and priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.


