The copy of a letter / sent to the lady Mary dowagire, Regent of Scotland,
by John Knox in the year. 1556.

Here is also a notable sermon, made by the said John Knox, wherein is
euydentlye proved that the mass is and (...) ben abominable before God and
Idoelatrye.

Scrutamini Scripturas

coat of arms or blazon

To the excellent lady Mary Dougiare Regent of Scotland her humble subject John
Knox wishes grace, mercy and peace from god y^ father of our lord Jesus
Christ with the spirit of perfect judgment.
THe eternal providence of the euerlyuynge god has appointed his chosen
children, to fight in this wretched and transitory life a battle difficil, and
the manner of their preservation in y^ Gene. ^. Math. 10* Acts. 1^* (...)
sa^e battle to be more marvelous. Their victory stands not in resisting, but
in suffering. And how* they c^be preserved and not brogh^ (...). 1^ (...)* 40.
^l. 51. ^^90. ^.
to vttermoste confusion the eye of man perceyueth not: but whose power is
infinite by secret and hid motions touches the hearts of such as to man's
judgment have power to destroy them, of very pity and compassion to save his
people. As he did the hearts of y^ egyptian mydwyues to preserve the men
children of y^ Israelites, when precept was given by Pharao of their
destruction. The heart of Pharaos doghter to pity Morses, in his young infancy
exponed to the danger of waters. The heart of Mabuchodonasat ^. Reg. 25. Iere.
52. Daniel. 1.
to preserve the captyues alive, and liberally to norishe the children that
were found apt to lettres. And finally y^ heart of Cyrus to sert at liberty
y^ people of god after long bondage and thral^on: and thus does the invisible
power, and love of god, manifest it self toward his elect from time to time
for two causes: first to comfort his weate warryors, in their manifold
temptations: letting them to understand, that he is able to compel such, as
some time were eneme is to his people, to fight in their cause. And also (as by
his prophet Esaie he does Esai. ^.
promise) to promote their delyuerau^ce. And secondarily to give a testimony of
his favor to the^ that by all apperance did live before (as Gaint Paul
speateth) Ephe. 2.
wanting god in y^ world, strangers from the common wealth of Israel, and
without the legue of his mercy full promise, and free grace made to his church,
for who could have affirmed that one of these persons a fore named, or yet
Rahab Joshua. 2.
had been so loving, faithful and gentle before that occasion was offered unto
them to manifest them nature and clemency^ But the wortes of mercy, showed
to the afflicted, have l^s^ to us assurances, that God used them as vessels of
his honor. For pity and mercy shewed^* to his afflicted flock, as they never
lacked reward temporal, ^o if they be conty^ew^d and be not changed into
crueltye, are assured signs and sealles of everlasting mercy to be received
from God Who by his holy spirit moves their hearts, to sheme mercy to the
people of God oppressed and afflicted. Your grace perchance does wonder to
what purpose these thiges berecyted: and I in very deed ca^ not wonder enough
that occasion is offered to me (a worm most wretched) too recyte the same at
this present. For I have looked rather for the sentence of death, then to have
written to your grac in these last and manifest wicked days, in which Satan
so blyndeth the hearts of many. I doubt not, but the, rumors which came to
your g^eares of me, have been such: ^^if all reports were true, I were
unworthy to live on the earth. And wonder it is, that the voices of the
multitude should not so have enflammed your g. heart with just hatered of
such a one, as I am accused to be: that al access to pity should have been
shut up. I am traduced as an heretyke, accused as a falls teacher and seducer of
the people, besides other opprobries, which affirmed by men of wordly honor and
estymation may easily fyndle the wrath of magistrates, when innocency is not
known. But blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who by the
dew of his heavenly grace has so quenched the fire of displeasure in your
graces heart (which of late days I have understand) that Satan is frustrate
of his enterprise and purpose: Which is to my heart no ^inall comfort, not so
much (God is witness) for any benefit that I can receive in this miserable
life* by protection of any earthely creature (for y^ cup, which it behooves
me to drink, is appointed, by the wisdom of him, whose coun^^^^es are not
cha^geable as that I am for that benefit, which I am assured your grace shall
receive, if that ye contine we in like moderation and clemency toward others,
that most unjustly are and shall be accused, as that your grace has begone
toward me and my most desperate matter. That is, if by godly wisdom, ye
shall study to bridle the fury and rage of them, who for maintenance of their
worldly pomp, regard nothing the cruel murdering of simple innocents. Math.
5. Math. 10.
Than shall he, who pronunceth mercy to apperteyn to the merciful, and
promises that a cup of cold water given for his names sake, shall not lack
reward, first cause your happy government to be praised in this present age*
and in posterities to come, and last recompens your godly pains and study,
with that joy and glory, which y^ eye has not seen, nor yet can enter into
the heart of mortal creature. Superfluous and foolish it shall appear to
many, that I, a man of base estate and condition, dare enterprise to admonish
a princes so honorable, endewed with wisdom and graces singulerly. But when I
consider the honor that God commands to be given to magistrates, which no
doubt* if it be true honor, co^teyneth ^^^. 20. Rom* 1. ^. Pet. 2.
in it self, in lawful things obedience, and in all things love and
reu^r^ce: When further I consider the troublesome estate of Christ Jesus true
religion, this day oppressed by blyndnes of men: ^ last the multitude of
flatterers, and the rare number of the^ that bolde^^^ and playnelye dare The
state.
speak y^ naked ^^rit^^ in presence of their princes, and principally in the
cause of Christ Jesus: These things, I say, considered, whatsoever any man
shall judge of my enterprise, I am compelled to say, ^neles in your regiment
and using of power your g. be found differe^^ from the multitude of princes
and head rulers, that this preemine^ce, wherein ye are placed, shall be your
deiectio^ to torment and pain everlasting. This proposition i^ sore, but alas,
it is so true, that i^ I should concele and hyde it from your grace, I
committed no less treason against your g. then I did if I saw you by
imprudency take a cup, which I knew to de poisoned or enuenomed, and yet
would ^ot admonish you to absteyn from Apo. 14. 1^
drincking of the same The religion which this day men defend by fire and
swearde, is a cup enue nomed, of which whosoever dricketh (except by true
repentance, he after drink of the water of life) drincketh there with
damnation and death. How and by whom it has be^ enuenomed, if it were no more
tediouse to your grace to read and hear, then it is paynfull to me to write
or rehearse, I would not spare the labor. But for this present I have thought it
so^e discharge of a part of my duty, If I of very love admonish your g. of y^
danger: which I do (as God one day ^^all declare) preferring your g.
salvation, and the salvation of the people now committed to your care, before
any corporal benefyt, that can ^^ dounde to my self. Ye think peradventure
that the care of religion is not committed to magistrates, but to the
bisshoppes and estate ecclesiastical as they term it: no no, the negligence of
bisshoppes shall no less be required of ye hands of magistrates (because they
foster and maintein them in ^y^anny, them shall the oppression of falls judges,
which kings mainteyn and defend. I doubt not, but your grace does wonder,
how that the religion, that is vniuersal^^ received, can be so damnable and so
corrupted. But if your grace shall consider that ever from the beginning the
multitude has declined from God: yea, cue^ in the people, to whom he spoke by
his law and prophets: if ye shall consider the complaynte of ye holy Ghost
complayninge that nations, people, princes and kings Psalm. ^; Acto. 4.
of the earth have raged, made conspiracies, and holden counsels against the
Lord, and against his anointed Christ Jesus. Further, if ye shall consider the
question, which Christ Jesus him Luc. 16.
self does move in these words: when the son of man shall come, shall he
find faith in the earth? And last, if your g. shall consider the manifest
contempt of God, and of all his holy precepts, which this day raygneth
without punishment upon the face of ye hole earth. For as O seas complayneth O
se. 4* ^*
there is ^overitie, there is no mercy, there is no knowledge of God in the
earth, but lies perjury, mur there, theft and adultery ouerflow al, and blood
has touched blood that is, every iniquity is joined to an other. If depely I
say your grace shall consider, and conte^plate the universal corruption, that
this day reygneth in all estates: then shall your g. cease to wonder that many
are called and few are chosen. And ye shall begin to tremble to Math. 20. Math.
^. ^. These. ^,
follow the multitude to perdition. The uniuersall defection, whereof saint
Paul did prophesy, is easy to be ^s^^ed as well in religion as in manners. The
corrupcio^ of life is evident. ^ religion is not measured with the plain word
of God, but by custom, co^s^etude, will, consent and determinations of men But
shall he, who has pro^^nced all cogitations of man's ha^^ to be vayn at all
time, accept the counsaylles and consentes of men for a religion pleas^nge and
acceptable before him? Let not your grace be disceaued: God Deu. 4. 12.
can not deny him self, he has witnessed from the beginning, that no
religion pleases him, except that, which he by his own word has commanded
and established. The verity it ^elf pronunceth this sentence: In vain do
Math. 15.
they worship me, teaching doctrines, the precepts of men. And also all
plantation, that my heavenly father has not planted, shall be routed out.
Before the cumming of his well-beloved son in the flesh, seuerallye he
punished al such as durst entreprise to alter or change his ceremonies or
statutes, as in Saul, Vzias, Nadab, and ^e. 13. 1^ Leut. 10. Math. 7 Ac. 1.
13. 14. 1. Cor. 11.
Abihu is to be read. And will he now after that he has opened his hole
cou^sail to ye world, by his only son, who^ he has comanded to be heard:
And after yt he, by his holy spirit speakig in his apostles has established
the religion, ^^ which he wills his true worshippers to abide to the end,
will he now I say admit men's inue^tions, in the matter of religion, which
before he re^^ted, for damnable Idolatry? If man oraungels would affirm that
he will or may do it, his own verity shall convict them of a lie: for this
sentence, which he once pronunced, shall abide immutable to ye end: Not that
which appears good in thine eyes, shall thou do to the Lord thy God* but
what ye Lord thy God has commanded the, that do thou: add nothing to it,
dyminishe nothing from it: The which thing (sealinge up his new testament)
he repeteth in these words: I will lay none other but Apoca. ^.
then upon you, but that which ye have hold till I come. And therefore yet
again it repents me not to say, that in this point, which is chief and
principale, your grace must dissent from the multitude of rulers, or else ye
can possess no portion with Christ Jesus in his kingdom and glory. An orator
and Gods messinger also iustlye might require of you, now by Gods hand
promoted to hye dignity, a motherly pity upon your subjects, a justice
inflexible to be used against murderers and common oppressors, a heart void of
avarice and partiality, a mind studiouse and careful, for maintenance of that
realm and common wealth, above which God has placed you, and by it has made
you honorable, with the rest of ye virtues, which not only Gods scriptures,
but also writers illuminated only with the light of nature requires in
godly rulers. But ^ayn it is to crave reformation in manners, where the
religion is corrupt. For like as a man Nota.
can not do the office of a man, except first he have a being or a life: So to
work wo^tes pleasante in the sight of God the father, ca^ no man do without
the spirit of the Lord Jesus, which does not abide in ye hearts of
Idolatrers. And therefore ye most godly princes Josias, (...), and Iosaphat, ^.
Re. 15. a. Pa. 17. 4. Re. 22 2. Pa. 29 ^9. ^^
se^ing gods fa^^or to rest upon them and upon their people, before all
things began to reform the religion. For it is as the stomach within ye body,
which if it be corrupted, of necessity it infecteth ye hole mass. And
therefore (often I repete that which is most necessary) if your grace pretend to
reign with Christ Jesus, then it behooves you to take care over his true
religion: the which this day within your realm is so deformed, that no part
of Christ's ordinances remayn in their first strength and original No part of
religion remains vncorrupt*
purity, the which, I praise god is less difficil to me to prove then
dangerous to speak. And yet neither the one, nor ye other I fear partly
because the love of life eternal quenches the terror of temporal death. And
partly because I would with saint Paul wish my self accursed from Christ,
as touching earthely pleasure, for ye salvation of my brethern and illuminatio^
A peticion
of your grace. Which thing work and very deed and not bare word and writing
shall witness and declare, if I may purchase the liberty of tunge but fortye
days only. I am not ignorant how dangerous a thi^ it appears to ye natural
man to in n^^ate any thing in matters of religion. An objection of the flesh
And partli I co^sidet yt your gr. power is not so fre as a publik reformation
perchance would require.

But if your grace shall consider An answer
the danger and damnation perpetual, which ineurtably ha^geth upon all
mainteyners of a falls religion: Then shall the greatest danger easily devour
and swallow up the smaller. If your grace Matthew. 6. ^^^ 6. ^. ^^^. 1^.
shall consiver, that either ye must serve God to life everlasting, or else
serve the world to death and (...): Then albeit man and a^^gel (...) diss^ade
you, ye will (...) life and refuse death. And (...) further ye shall consider,
the the very life co^siste^h in the knowledge of the only true God and of
his son Christ Jesus: And that true knowledge John. 17. John 4.
has ^^^^red with it gods true (...) and honor, which requires a testimony
of his own will, expressed by his word that ^^ he honor does please him.

If your grace, I say, shall earnestly meditate these thigs before said: Then
albeit suddenly ye may not do all things y^ ye would, yet shall ye not cease to
do what ye may. Your grace can not hasetely abolishe all superstition, neither
yet remove from offices unprofitable pastors, which only feed them selfs: the
which to public reformation, are requisite and necessary. But yet, if the
zele of gods glory be fervent in your graces heart* by wicked laws ye will
not mainteyn manifest Idolatrye, neither yet will ye suffer y^ fury of
bisshoppes, to murder and devour the poor members of Christ's body. But
withal cares full diligence, ye will study how that the true worshippinge of
God may be promoted, and the tyranny of ungodly men repressed within the
bounds of your dominion, to the uttermost of your power.

And if the contrary hereof, either by ignorance, or for pleasure of others, ye
do or permit to be do^: then except your spedy repe^ta^ce) shall ye and your
(...) suddenly f^^ll the depressing hand of him, who has exalted you. Ye
shall be compelled *(...), will ye) to know that he is eternal, against whom ye
add^^sse your battle. And that ^a^^. 2. Iere. (...). ^. (...). 2.
he is alone* that ^^de^a^eth ye times, and (...) kingdoms. (...) ^^ is he,
that glorifieth them, that glorify him. And yt he by his own power pours
forth co^te^pt upon all (...), yt ^^bell against his graces ^^^er. And
therefore how dangerous soever it shall appear to the flesh and natural man ^o
obey God in promoting his religion, and to make war against the devil in
^emeuinge darkness, pride and superstition: Yet if your Cou^saill
grace look to have your self, or yet your sede after you to continue in a
worldely honor, and after to possess the life everlasting, submit your self
by time, under the hand of him, that is omnipote^t, embrace his will, despise
not his testament, refuse not his graces offerre.

Now when he calls you, withdraw not your care, be not led away with that
vayn opinion that your church and prelates can not e^re: but lay the ^ooke
of God before your eyes, and let it be judge to their lives, doctrine, and
ma^ners: as also to that doctrine, which by fire and swearde most cruelly
they persecute.

I confess that I desire your grace, to enter into a strange and grievous
battle: nevertheless yet assured I am by the promise of him, by whom kings do
raygn, that if with reverence and fear ye obey his precepts, as did Josias
the admonitsons of the prophets, 3 Par. ^4.
that then with doble benediction shall your bauell be rewarded: that is
wisdom, riches, glory, he ^or and long life shall accompany you in this your
regiment temporal: and unmortalitie w^^h ^oy inestimable shall be your portion,
when the king of all kings* the Lord Jesus, shall appear to judgment, before
whom ye shall make account of this your Matthew. 24 O^^. 10. ^^^^. 9*
regyment* when the proud and disobedient shall cry mountains ^^ll upon us,
and hyde us from the face of the Lord. But then it shall be too late, because
they desp^sed the voice of him that lo^^ngly calls.

GOd the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the power of his holy spirit,
so illumi^ate your senses and understanding, that the things, that rudely be
here spoken, by your grace so may be accepted, that they be not a testimony of
your just damnation in that great day of the Lord Jesus, to whose mighty
protection I unfeignedly commit your grace now and ever.

Amen.
The fourth of April / In the year. 1550. was appointed to Ihon Knor to give
his confession, why he affirmed the mass idolatrye: which day in presence of
the counsel and congregation, amongst whom was also present the bishop of
Dureham and his doctors, on this manner he begins.
THis day I do appear in your pres^ce honorable audience ^o give a reason,
why so constantly I do affirm, the mass to be and all times to have been
Idolatry and abominatio^ before God. And because men of great erudition in
your audience affirmed the contrary: most gladly would I that here th^^ were
present, either in proper person, or else by their learned me^, to po^der and
^ey the causes moving me thereto. For oneles I euydently prove mine intent by
gods scriptures, I will recant it as (...) doctrine, and confess myself most
worthy of grievous punishment.

How difficillitis to pull forth of the haries of the people y^ thing wherein
opinion of holiness stands, declares the great tumult and ^pro^^ moved
against Paul by (...) and his fellows who by Idolatry ^^t great adua^ta^^e, ^^
(...) priests have done by the mass, in times past. The people I say, hearing
that the honor of their great gods Diana stood in i^o^ardy, with furious
^^yces cried, great is Diana of y^ ^phesians: as they would say, ^e will not
have the magnifice^ce ^^ our great gods Diana, who^ not only Asia, but the
hole world worshippeth, called in doubt, cu^in question, or co^trauersy. Away
with all men intendinge that impiety. And hereunto were the^ moved by long
custom and falls opinion.

I know that in the mass has not only ben esteemed great holiness and
honoringe of God, but also the ground and foundation of our religion: so that
in opinion of many the mass taken away there rests no true worshippi^g nor
honoring of God in ye earth. The deper has it persed the hearts of men, that
it occupies the place of the last and mistical supper of our Lord Jesus. But
if I ^^all by play^ and evident scriptures prove, the mass in her most honest
garment to have been Idolatrye before God, and blasphemous to the death and
passion of Christ, and contrary to the supper of Jesus Christ: the^ good hope
have I* honorable audience and beloved brethren, that the fear, love and
obedience of God, who in his scriptures has spoken all verity, necessary for
our saluato^, shall move you to (...) place unto the same.

O Lord eternal, move and govern my tung to speak ye (...), and the hearts
of the people to understand and to obey the same.

That ye may the better perceive and understand ye man^^^ of my doctrine in
this my confession, first will I collect and gather the same thereof in a brief
and (...) sy^logis^^^, and here after explayn the same more largely.

The mass is Idolatry.

I worshipping, honoring, or service inverted by ye brain of man in ye ligio^
of God without his own express co^man^deme^t, is Idolatry: The mass is
inverted by ye brain of man, without any co^me^deme^t of god Therefore it is
Idolatry. For probation of the first part, I will adduce none of the ge^^iles
sacrifices in which not withstandinge was les abou^inatio^, then has been i^^
our mass. But forth of gods scrip 1. Reg. 1^^
tures, will I bring ye witnesses of my words. And first let us hear Samuel
speking unto Saul after ^he had made sacrisice unto the lord upon mount Silgal,
what time his enmies approached against hi. Thou art become folish (says
Samuel) you have not observed ye precepts of ye lord, which he has comanded
ye. Truly ye lord had prepared to have stablished thy kingdom above Israel
for ever: but now thy kingdom shall not be sure.

Let us consider what was the offense committed by Saul: his enemies
approaching, and he considering that the people declined from him, and that he
had not co^sulted with the Lord, nor offered sacrifice for pacificacion of ye
Lords wrath, by reason that Sa (...) the principal prophet and (...) it was
not present, offers himself bur^t and peace offeringe* (...) is the ground
of all h^^ (...): and of this proceeds the cause of his election from the
(...), that he would honor God (...), then was commanded by his express word.
(...) none of the trybe of (...) by gods commandment to make sacrifice,
(...)he office not dew too (...) which was most hye abho (...) before God: as
by the punishment appears. Consider well that no exc^usations are admitted by
enemies approached, and his own people departed from him. He could not have a
lawful minister, and gladly would have been reconciled to God, and co^sulted
with him of the end and chance of that journey. And therefore he the king
(anointed by gods commandment) makes sacrifice. But none of all these
were admitted by God: but Saul was pronunced foolish and vayn. For no
honoring knows God, nor will accept: without it have ye express commandment
of his own word, to be done in all points. And no commandment was given unto
the king, to make or offerre unto God any manner sacrifice: which because he
took upon him to do, he and his posterity was depryued from all honors in
Israel. Neither auayled his preemine^cethe necessity wherein he stood, (...)
good (...). But let ^s hear more. When commaun(...) was (...) unto Saul by ^
(...). 1^
(...) name to destroy (...) some time (...) the people of Israel, (...) Egypt,
(Aduerte (...)cute y^ people of God* albe^t your pains ^^ differred, yet are
they allredy (...) of God this people of (...) not immediately after the (...),
done against Is(...)* but long after they (...)e to be destroyed (...), woman,
infant, (...)ll, camels, and (...)lly all that lived in that (...).

(...)de the remem(...) be, to all such as tro(...) such as would folows the
commandment and vocation of God, leauinge spiritual Egipte, the kyngedome
of the Antichriste and y^ abominations thereof. But Saul saves the Fynge
named Agag, and permits the people to save the best and fattest of the
bestiall, to the intent sacrifice should be made thereof unto God. But let
us hear, how this is accepted.

Samuel before admonished of his inobedie^ce, coming unto Saul a^feth what
voice was it which he heard. The king answers the people has saved the
fattest and best beasts, thereof to make sacrifice, unto thy God: Here may be
marked, that Saul had ^^ sure confidence in God: for he speaks as though
God apperteyned nothing unto him. Samuel ^^s^ereth, suffer and I shall declare
unto y^, what y^ Lord has spoken unto the this night.

And shortly he rebukes him most sharpele, that he had not obeyed the voice
of the Lord. But Saul standinge in opinion that he had not offended: because
he did all of good intent, says, I have obeyed the Lords voice, I have
destroyed the sinners of A male of, and only I have saved the king, and the
people have preserved certain be s^^^ll to be offerred unto God. And so
defends h^ his own work to be just and righteous. But thereto answers
Samuel, delyteth God in burnte offering, and not rather that his voice be
obeyed? The sin of w^tche^ ^^t is not to obei his voice and to be stubborn
is the syn of Idolatry. As Samuel would say, there is nothing that God more
^eq^^^eth of man, then obedience to his commandment: yea, he ^referreth
obedience to the self same sacrifice ordained by him self. And no syn is more
odious in gods presence, then to disobey his voice: For yt estemeth God so
odiouse, yt he does compare them to the two sins most abominable,
incantation and Idolatrye. So that disobedience to his voice is very Idolatry.
Disobedience to gods voice is not only when man does wickedly contrary to
y^ precepts of God: but also when of good zeal or good entente, as we
commonly speak, man does any thing to yt honor or service of god, not
commanded by the express word of God. As in this matter plainly may be
espied. For Saul transgresses not wickedly in mu^ there, adultery, or like
external syn nes: but save than aged and impotent king (which thing who would
not call a good deed of mercy) and permits the people, as said is, ^o save
certain be friall to be offered unto the Lord: thinking that God should
therewith stand content and appleased: because he and the people did it of good
intent. But both these called Samuel Idolatry* First, because they were Nota.
done without any commandment of God: and secondly, because in doing thereof
he thought him self not to have offended. And y^ is principal Idolatry, when
our own inventions we defend too be righteous in the sight of God: because
we think them good, laudable and pleasant. We may not think us so free nor
wise, that we may do unto God and unto his honor, what we think expedient.
No, the contrary is commanded Them. 4.
by God, saying: unto my word shall ye add nothing, nothing shalye diminish
therefro^, that ye might observe yt precepts of your lord God. Which words are
not to be understand of the decalogue and law moral only: but of statutes,
rytes and ceremonies: for equal obedience of all his laws requires God. 3.
And Leui. 10.
in witness thereof Nadab and Abihu offeringe strange fire, whereof God had
given unto them no charge, were instantly as they offered punished to death by
fire. Strange fire, which they offered unto God, was a common fire, and not of
that fire which God had commanded to burn day and night upon the altar of
burnt sacrifice, which only ought to have been offered unto God.

O bishops, ye should have kept this fire, at morn and at even ought ye
to have laid faggottes thereupon, your selfs ought to have clenged and carried
away the ashes: but God shall be hold.

In the punishment of these two aforesaid, is to be observed, that Nadab and
Abihu were the principal priests next to Aaron their father, and that they
were comprehended, neither in aduoutry, couetonsnes, nor desire of worldly
honor, but of a good zeal and simple intent were making sacrifice, desyring
no profit of the people thereby, but to honor God and to mitigate his wrath.
And yet in ye doing of this self same act and sacrifice were they consumed
away with fire. Whereof it is plain that neither the preemmence of yt person or
man, that makes or sets up any religion, without the express
commandment of God, nor yet the (...), whereof he does the same, is accepted
before God. For nothing in his religion will he admit without his own word:
but all that is added thereto does he abhor, and punishes the inuentors and
doers thereof, as ye have heard in Nadab and Abihu, by Gedeon and diverse other
Israelites, setting up some thing to honor God, whereof they had no express
commandment.

4. A story, which is recited in the popes cronicles, will I recite, which
differs nothing from this punishment of Nadab etc. Gregorius magnus in the
time of the most contagious pestilence, wherewith God punished the iniquity
of Rome (for now was y^ wicked horn, that Antichrist, spronge up, and set in
authority) in this time, I say, Gregory the pope devised a new honpringe of
God, the invocation of saints, called the Latinie. Whereof in the scriptures
neither is there authority nor commandment: upon which sacrilege and
Idolatrye God declared his wrath, even as he did upon Nadab and Abihu. For in
the instante hour, when first this ^etanye was recyted in open procession (as
they call it) four score of the principal men, that recyted the same,
horriblye were stricken by ye plague of God, to death all in an hour. The
papists attribute this to the contagious air and vehemence of the plague. But
it was none other thing but a manifest declaration of gods wrath, for
inuentinge and bringinge in into the church a false and diabolical religion.
For while we desire saints too make intercession and to pray for us, what
other thing do werthen e^^eme the aduocation of Jesus Christ not to be
sufficient for us. And what can be more deuelish? Of these precedents, it is
plain, y^ no man in earth has power nor authority to statute any thing to
the honor of God, not commanded by his own word

5. It profits nothing to say, Objection.
the church has power to set up, devise or invent honoring of god, as it
thinks most expedient for the glory of God. This is the continual cryeng of
the papists: the church, the church has al power, it can not err, for
Christ says: I will be with you to the end of the world: wheresoever is two
or three gadered in my name, there am I in y^ mids of them. Of this falsely
conclude they, the church may do all that seems good for the glory of God,
and whatsoever the church does, that accepts and approves God.

6. I could evidently prove that, which they call yt church, not to be yt church
and ima^^late spouse of Jesus Christ, which does not err. But presently
Iaske* if the church of God be bound to this perpetual precept: Not that
thing, which appears righteous in thine own eyes, that shall thou do, but
what God has commanded, that observe and keep. And if they ^i^deny: I desire
to be certified, who has abrogated and made the same of none effect. In my
judgment Jesus Christ confirms the same, saying my sheep hear my voice,
and a stranger they will not hear, but fly from him. To hear his voice
(which is also the voice of God the father is to understand and obey (...)nd
to fly from a stranger, is to admit^e none other doctrine, wors^^ppinge, nor
honoringe of God, then has proceeded forth of his own mouth. As he him self
testifies, saying* all that is of the ^er^^^e hear my voice.

And Paul says, the church (...) founded upon the foundation of (...)e
prophets and apostles, which foundation no doubt is the law, and the
Euangile, so that it may command nothing that is not co^^eyned in one of the
two: for if so ^^t does, it is removed from y^ only foundation, and so
ceasseth to be the church of Christ. 7. Secondly I would ask, if that Jesus
Christ be not king and head of his church? This will no man deny. If he be
king, then must he do the office of a king, which is not only to guide, rule
and defend his subjects, but also to make and statute laws, which laws only
are his subjects bound to obey, and not the laws of any foreign princes.
Then it becomes the church of Jesus Christ to aduert what he speaks, to
receive and embrace his laws, and where he makes end of speaking or law
giving. So y^ al y^ power of y^ church is subject to gods word. And that is
most evident by the commandment* given of God unto Joshua his chosen
c^p^^ayn, and leader of his people, in these words: be strong and valyant, that
thou maid^ according to the holy law, which ^^ se^uant ^^oses commanded unto
the: decline not from it, neither to the right hand nor to the left ^c. Let
not the book of the law^ depart from thy mouth, but (...) in it both day and
night^ that then may keep and do in all things according to that which is
written therein etc.

Here was ^^ not permitted to Iosu^ to alt^r one jot, ceremony, or (...) in
all the law of God: not yet for to ^^ ^e thereunto, but dilige^^l^ for to
obseru^ that, which was commanded. No less obedience requires God of us,
then ^e did of Iosue his servant. For ^e will have the religion, ordained by
his only son Jesus Christ, most straitlye observed, and not to be violated
in any part. 8. For that I find given in charge to y^ Apoca. ^.
congregation of Thiatira in these words: I say unto you and unto the rest
that are in Thiatira. Who that has not the doctrine (meaning of the
diabolical doctrine before rehearsed) and who y^ knows not the depene^ of
Satan: I will put upon you none other burden, but y^ which ye have: hold
till I come. Mark well y^ y^ spirit of God calls al, which is added to
Christ's religion, the doctrine of the deuel and deep invention of y^
aduersarye Satan: as also did Paul writing to Timothy. And Jesus Christ
says: I will lay upon you none other burden then I have already, and that,
which ye have, observe diligently.

O God eternal, have thou laid none other burdens upon our backs, then
Jesus Christ laid by his word? Than who has burdened us with all these
ceremonies, prescribed fasting, compelled chastity, unlawful voues, invocation
of saints, and with y^ Idolatry of the mass? The devil, the devil,
brethren, invented all these burdens to depresse imprudent men to perdition.
9. Paul writing of y^ lords supper says: Ego accepi a Domino, quod and
tradidi vobis, I have received and learned of the Lord, that which I have
taught you. And consider if one ceremony he adds or permits too be used
other, then Christ did use him self: But commands them to use with
reverence the Lords institution, until his returninge too judgment.

10. Albeit Moses was replenished with the sprite of wisedo^, ^^ was more
familiar with God then ever was any mortal man: yet was there ^ot of all the
ceremonies referred to his wisdom one jot: but all was commanded to him to
be made, according to the similitude shown unto him, and according as y^
word expressed. Of the which precedentes I think it is plain, that al, which
is added to the religion of God, without his own express word, is Idolatry.
11. Yet must I au^swer to an objection objected by the papists: for never may
they abide to be subject unto gods word. The apostles (say they) in
Objection
the counsel holden at Jerusalem, set up a religion and made laws, whereof no
jot was contained in gods word: therefore y^ church now may do the same.

That there was any religion (that is honoring of god, whereby they might merit,
as ye call it, any thing before God) invented in ye cou^sal^ye never are able
to prove. Precepts were given, but neither Precepts were given.
such, nor to that intent that ye allege. All precepts given in that
counsel had the commandment of God: as after shall be heard.

First let us hear the cause of the The cause of the counsel at Jerusalem.
counsel. Paul and Barnabas had taught amongst the gentiles, y^ only says
in Christ's blood justifies: and a great multitude of gentiles by their
doctrine embraced Jesus Christ, and by him truly worshipped God. Unto
Antiochia from Judea came certain falls teachers, affirmyng: that oneles they
were circumcysed, according to Moses law, they could not be saved: as our
papists say this da^t, that true faith in Christ's blood is not sufficient
pu^^atio^ for our e sins: oneles also ^e bye their mombled masses.

This contrauersitrobled the har^es and co^scie^ces of the brethern: in so
much that Paul and Barnabas were compelled too go unto Jerusalem unto Peter
and James, and others, I think, of the apostles. Where a co^uention had: the
question was proponed, whether the gentiles should be subject to observation
of Moses law, or nor? That is whether only faith in Jesus Christ did
justify, or ne cessarye was also to justification the law observed. After
great contention: Peter expounded: how yt the house of Cornelius, being all
Cornelius.
gentiles, had by his preachinge received Jesus Christ, and were decia red in
his presence just and righteouse before God: for they did receive the holy
Ghost visiblye, not only without obseruacion of Moses law, but also before
they had received any sacrame^tal sign of Christ's religion. Peter concludes,
that to p^^^^e a yoke upon the brethre^s neck^s, which yoke might none of the
Jews bear themselves, was nothing but to tempte god, that is, to prove if god
would be pleased with such laws and ordinances as they would lay upon the
necks of men without his Conclusion of the con^sayll.
own word, which were most extreme impretie: and so concludes he that the
gentiles ought not to be burdened with the law. Hereafter declared Paul and
Barnabas what wonderouse works God had shown by them amongst the gentiles,
who never observed Moses law* and last James, who appears unto me principal
in that counseil, for he collecteth the scrip tures and pronounces the fynall
sentence, as ye shall hear plainly) declares that the vocation of the
gentiles was prophesied before. And that they should be accepted and accounted
to be the people of God, without observation of Moses law: Adding that no man
ought to inquire a cause of gods works. And so pronu^ceth he the sentence,
that their liberty should not be diminished. Aduert now ye cause, the process
and determination of this counsayl. The cause was to inquire the verity of
certain doctrine. That is, whether the gentiles should be charged with the
observation of Moses law, as was affirmed and taught by some. In this matter
they proceeded by example of gods works, findinge that he had accepted the
gentiles without any thraldom or ceremony observed. Last are produced
scriptures, declaringe so to before spoken. And according to all this, it is
concluded and desyned that the gentilles shall not be burdened with the law.
What congruence, I pray you, have the Question.
Antichrists counsails, with this counsail^ of the apostles? The apostles
gathered to consult upon the verity. The papistical counsails are gathered for
pryuate commodity, vpsetting of Idolatry and all abomination: as their
determinatio^s manifestly prove. The apostles proceeded in their counsails, by
consideration of gods works, and applienge of the^ to the present cause,
whe^upo^ deliberatio^ was to be ^^^^ and determined as ^^^^ (...) commanded.
But the (...) ^^ their cou^sails proceed, according as their wisedo^, and
foolish b^^^^ thinks good and expedient. And concludinge not only without
authority of gods scriptures, but also manifestly contrary ^o the same. And
that I offer me most clearly for to prove, if any would deny or alledg y^ so
it is not. Objection


But yet say they, the apostles commanded the gentiles to absteyn from certain
things, whereof they had no commandment of God. Let us hear the things*
inhibited. Ye shall absteyne, says the epistle sent to Antiochia, from
fornication. This is the commandment of God. So although y^ ge^tils esteemed
it to be no syn, yet is it expressly forbidden in gods law. But it follows
from things offerred unto Idols, from strangeled and from bloudde, shall ye
absteyn. If the causes moving the apostles to forbid these things be well
considered: it shall be found that they had the express commandment of Jesus
Christ so to do,

The sprete of truth and knowledge, workinge in the apostles with all
abundance, showed unto them y^ nothing was more profitable and more might
auaunce the glory of God, and encreace the church of Christ, than that the
Jews and gentiles should use together in familiarity and daily conversation,
that by mutual company love might encreace. One thing was easy to be espied,
that the Jews could not hastily be persuaded, that the eating of meats
forbidden in Moses law was no syn before God. For difficill it is to pull
forth of the heart that, which is planted by gods own word, So that the Jews
would have abhorred the company of the gentiles, i^ they had eaten in their
presence such meats, as were forbidden in the law. The apostles considered
that the absteyning from such things, was nothing pre^udiciall too the
liberty of Christians. For with the time, and as the Jews grew more strong,
and were better instructed, they would be nothing offended for such matters.
And therefore commanded they the gentiles too absteyn for a time. For that it
was not a perpetual precept, declares this day, when no man holds eatinge
of such things sin. But what precept had they so to do? The last and new
precept given by Jesus Christ to his disciples: that every one love other as he
has loved us. May not Christian love command that none of us do in the
sight of other, that which may offend or trouble the conscience of the infirm
and weak? So witnesses Paul, affirming that if a man eat with offense, he
synneth. And by virtue of this same precepte the apostles forbid that the
gentiles shall eat things offerred unto Idols etc: that bearig some part with
the infirmity of the Jews, they might grow together in mutual amity and
Christian love. And these are the traditions of the* Seniours, which Paul
commanded to be observed. I pray you what similitude have our papisticall
laws with this precept of the apostles?

But greatly it is to be maruayled that men do not aduerte: that Nota.
the bo^e of the Lords law, that is of all his ordinances, testament, promise
and exhibition thereof was sealed and confirmed in the days of the apostles,
the effect and contents thereof promulgate and published, so that most
extreme unpietie it is, too make any alteration therein. Yea, and the wrath and
fearful maledictio^ of God is denunced to fall upon all them, that dare
attempt to add or diminishe any thing in his religion, confirmed and
proclaimed by his own voice.

O papists, where shall ye hyde you from the presence of the Lord? ye have
perverted his law, ye have taken away his ordinances, ye have placed up iour
own statutes in stead of his. Woe and damnation abides you. Albeit that ye
apostles had made Laws, other then the express word commanded, what apper
teyneth that to you? have ye the spirit of truth and knowledge in
abundance, as they had? was the church of Christ left imperfect, after
the Apostles days?

Bring your selfs to mind, and be ashamed of your vanity. For all men
whose eyes Satan has not blinded, may espy that neither wisdom nor
authority of man may change or set up any thing in y^ religion of God,
without his own express commandment and word. And thus I think the first
part of my argument sufficiently proved: which is that all worshipping,
honoring or service of God invented by the brain of man, in the religion of
God without his own express commandment, is Idolatry.

But in vayn will some think that all this labor have I tak^: for no man of
hole judgment any part of this would have denied: nor yet does it prove any
thing of m^ne intent. For the mass is not the invention of man, but the very
ordinance of God. Then descend I to prove the mass to be the mere invention
of man, setvp without all commandment of God.

And first of this name, Missa, which we call the mas^e, would I ask at such
as would defend that papisticall abomination, of what spirit is it invented?
That missa shall signifye a sacrifice for y^ sins of the quick and the dead?
Of the spirit of God? or of y^ spirit of man? or of what original is it
descended? Some will answer from the Hebrew dictio^, Missah, which after some
does signifye an oblation or a gift. Like as tribute, which the inferior
offers or pays to the superior. In the Hebrew tunge I confess my self
ignorant, but have (as God knows) fervent thirst to have some entrance
therein, and so of the Hebrew dic^ion can not contend. But men of great
judgment in the same ^u^ge say: y^ no where in scriptures Missah, betokens
an oblation. But admitting that so it did, what shall they be able to prove
there by? My question is if the spirit of god has invented and pronounced
this dictio^ Missa, to signify a sacrifice for the sins of the quick and
the dead: which if they be not able to preue, than must they needs confess
that it is of man's inuencion, and not of gods impositio^. I cold give unto them
a more apperante cause and der^^acion of that diction Missa: but of y^ name I
am not greatly sol^^. Secondly I desire to be certified what they call their
mass: Whether the hole actyon with all ceremonies, used now of old, or a part
thereof?

It will not satisfy the hearts of all godly to say S. James and S. Peter
celebrated the first Mass in Jerusalem or Antioche. If it so were, one of y^
two celebrated first and the other after: but neither of ^ two can be proved by
scripture. Great meruayl it is, that so manifestly men shame not to lie. Peter
and James (say the papists) celebrated the first mass. But I shall prove
that pope Sixtus was ^he first, that did institute y^ Aulters. ^elix the first
of that name did consecrate them, and the temples both. Bonifacius commanded
Pape qu^ missam instituerunt.
ye aulters to be covered with clean clothes. Gregorius Magnus commanded the
candels to be lighted at the Euangile: and did institute certain clothes.
Pontianus commanded Co^fiteor to be said. And wherefore should I troble you
and myself both, in reciting what every Pope added? ye may for two pe^ce have
the knowledge what every pope added, until at last was co^pact and set up the
hole bodi of y^ blasphemous Idoland yete shame they not to say S. Peter said
the first mass, although that many hundredth years after him, no such
abominable ceremonies were invented. Evasion.
But they say: all thie ceremonies are not of the substance of ye mass but are
added for good causes. What commandment have they received to add any thing
to the ordinance of God, for any cause appearing to them? But let them certifye
me what is the mass. The Cano^, will they answer, with the words of
consecration. Who is a(...) or of the Canon, can they precysely tell? Be well
advised before ye answer, lest by neglecting yourself, ye be proved liars.
Will ye say that ye apostles used your Canon* so ye have affirmed in times
past. Impro^^tion of the Canon.


I^ the Canon descended from the apostles to y^ popes, bold and maleparte
impiety it had been to have added any thing thereto. For a Canon is a full
and sufficient rule: which in all parts and points is perfyte. But I will
prove diverse Popes to have added their portions too this holy Canon. If they
will deny, advise what added Sergius, what Leo, and what added Leo, and what
added the two Alexanders? for I (...)ay not abide presently to recite all. But
if they doubt their own law shall certefye them.

Secondly, the remembrance of the names of such men, who were not borne many
hundredth years after the days of y^ Apostles, declares the Canon not to have been invented many years after the apostles. For who used to make mention of a
man in his prayers before he be borne? And masters memory is made in the Canon
of such men and women, of whose holiness and godly life credible histories make
little mention, which is an evident testimony that your holy Canon is vain and
of none effect. And if any will take upon him to defend the same: I will prove
that therein is indigest, barbarous, foolish co^gestio^ of words: imperfection
of sentence, ungodly inuocations and diabolical co^inrations. And this is that
holy Canon, whose authority ^ecelled all scriptures. O it was ^holy, it might
not be spoken ^^ynly as the rest but secretly it ^hou^th i^ to be whispered.
That ^as not evil devised, for if all me^ ^^d heard it, some would have es^^ed
the vanity thereof. But too the words of consecration, by whom have they
that name, I Would sire to know? By Jesus Christ will they say. But no where are
they able to prove that the words, which he pronunced in his last supper,
called he or any of his apostles after him words of consecration. And so have
they received ye name by authority of man. Which are the words let us
hear. Accipite et manducate ex hoc omnes. Hoc est enim corpus meum: su^iliter
et calice^ post qua^ coenauit dicens. etc. Let us inquire, if any thing be here
added to Christ's words, or if any this be changed or altered therein. First
in which of the Evangelists are these words, Ex hoc omnes, spoken of the
bread* Jesus Christ did speak them of the cup: but not of the bread.

O papists, ye have made Nota.
alteration, not so much in words as in deed: and of the self action
commanded to be used by him. Ye permitted all to eat of ye bred, but of the
cup ye reserved too you clypped in ye crounes and anoin ^ed upon the
fyngers. And in pain of your great anathematization, of your great cursing, ye
forbad that any laid presumed too drink thereof. But tell me papists were the
apostles be clypped and sinered as you be? Or will ye then say that the
congregation of the Corinthia^^ were papist priests? I think ye will not. And
yet they all drancke of the cup, like as they eat of the bread. Mark
brethren, that of Christ's own words they make alteration. But let us
proceed. They say: Hoc est enim corpus meum. I pray them New where find they,
enim. Is not this their own invention, and added of their own brayn? O, here
make they a great matter, and here lies asecrete misterye and hid
operation. For in five words conceived the virgyn Mary, say they, when she
conceived the son of God. What if she had spoken seven, ten, twenty
words? Or what if she had not spoken three: should thereby the determinate
cou^sail been impeded? But o papisies, is God a ^^glar? uses he certain number
of words, in performinge his intent? But whereto are ye ascended* too be
exalted in knowledge and wisdom above Jesus Christ. He says only: Hoc est
corpus meu^. But ye, as though there lacked some thing necessary requisyte,
have added enim: saying, Hoc est enim corpus meum. So that your affirmation
makes all perfyte. Consider I exhort you, beloved bret^hren, if they have not
added here of their own invention too Christ's words. And as they add, so
steal they from them* Christ sareth: ^oc est corpus meum quod pro vobis
datur, or fra^gitur: This is my body, which is given for you, or which is
broken for you. These last woo^des, wherein stand our hole comfort, omit
they, and make no mention of them. And what can be judged more beld or wicked,
then to alter Christ's words? To add unto them, and to dyminishe from them?
had it not ben convenient, that after they had introduced Jesus Christ
speakinge, that his own words had been recyted, nothing interchaunged, added
nor dimynished: Which saying they have not done, but have done ye express
contrary, as before is proved: In vain I think it is further to labor to
prove the rest of this abominable action, to be invented and devised by the
foolish brain of man, and so can it not be denied to be Idolatry. It shall not
profit them to say the Epistle si Euangely is in the mass: where unto is
nothing added. What shall they prove thereby? For the Epistle and Euangely, as
them selfs do confess are not of the substance of y^ mass. And although they
were, it did nothing excuse the rest of that Idolatrye. For the devil may
speak ye words of God and his false prophets also: and yet thereby are they
neither better nor more holy. The Epistle and Euangely are gods words, I
confess, but there are they spoken for no edificatio^ of the people: but for
to be a cloak unto ye body of y^ mische nous Idolatry. All the action is
abominable, because it is the inue^tion of man, and so a few or certain good
words ca^ not sanctify that hole mass and body of abominatio^.

But what if I shall admit to the papis^es: that the hole action of the mass
were the institution and very ordinounce of God, and never one jot of man's
invention therein? I admit it be the ordinance of God as it is not) yet will
I prove it abomination before God.

The second syllogism.
All honouringe or service of God, whereunto is added a wicked opinion: is
abomination. Unto the mass is added a wicked opinion. Therefore it is
abomination.

The (...) part, I think, no godly man (...). And if any would, I as ^e what
made the self same sacrifice, institute and ordained to be used by gods
express commandment, odi^use and abominable in his sight. As it is written,
bring unto me no more your vain sacrifices, your burnt offeringes is
abomination, your new moons, sabboths and conuentio^s, I may not abide your
solemn feasts, I hate the^ from ye heart. And Esaias. 66.
also, who s^eyeth an ox in sacrifice, kylleth a man: that is, does me no
less dishonor, than if he killed a man. Who slays a sheep says he,
choketh a dog. Who brought meat offringes unto me, does offer swynes blood.
These two beasts, the dog and swyne, were abominable to be offered in
sacrifice, the one for the cruelty, the other for fylthines. But o priests,
your sacrifices are mixed with the bloudde of dogs and swyne: while that on the
one part most cruelly ye do persecute the professors of Christ's word: upon
the other part your selfs live most filthily. The prophet proceeds: who
makes a memorial of ence^se prayseth the thing that is vain. Amos. 5.
Amos. I hate and detest your solemn feasts, I will not accept your
encense: your burnt offringes and meat offeringes are not thankful before
me. And why all this: because says ye prophet Esaye, they have chosen these
in Esai. 66.
their own ways, and their hearts have delyted in their abominations. And
plain it is that theirfore said sacrifices were commanded to be done by God*
and were not invented, no not one jot thereof, by man's wysedom. Read the books
of Moses, Exodus and Leuiticus, and thou shalt perceive them to be very
commandments of God, and yet says y^ Prophet, they have chosen them in
their own ways. Whereby ye prophet meant and understood, yt they had added unto
them an opinion, which made them to be abominable before God. This opinion was
as in the same prophet and diverse others may be espied: That by workinge of
the external work, they might purchase the favor of God, and make
satisfaction for their sins by the same sacrifices. And that I collecte of
Ieremye saying: ye believe false words, Iere. 7.
which shall not profit you. For when ye have stolen, murdered, committed
adultery, and perjury etc. Then ye come and stand before me in this house,
which has my name given unto it, and ye say: we are delivered or absolved,
albeit we have done all these abominations. They thought and verily believed
their sins to have been remitted by virtue of their sacrifice offered. But
Esaias asks of Esaias. 55.
them, why spend ye silver for that, which is not sure: and consume labor, for
that, which does not sacyat? Ye do hyde your self with leasinges (but they
esteemed them to have been verites) and ye make a ba^d or covenant with death,
but it shall not stand, for when destruction comes, it shall ouerwhelme you.
Their falls prophets had taught Esai. 18.
them to cry peace peace, when yet there was no peace in their conscience: for
they which did eat ye sin of the people (as our peruers priests have long
done) for Ose. 7. Iere. 2.
the more wicked men were, the more desire they had of ye mass: thinking by
virtue thereof all was purged. The pestilent priests of Moses law, as
witnessed ye prophets, caused ye people to believe, that by oblation of the
sacrifice they were just and innocente, and durst desire, for such offerings,
plague and the furor of God to be removed. But it is answered unto them by y^
prophet Micheas: shall I come in his presence with burnt offeringes, and year
old ^ambes? or does a thousand rams please him? or ten thousand boyt of
oil? Shall I give my first son for expiation of mine iniquity? Or ye fruit
of my womb a sin offeringe for my soul? Here the prophet plainly
witnesses that no external work, how excellent that ever it be, does purge
or make satisfaction for syn. And so of the precedentes it is plain, that a
wicked opinion, added too the very work, sacrifice or ceremony, commanded to
be done and used by God, makes it abomination and Idolatry. For Idolatry Nota.
is not only too worship ye thing, which is not God, but also too trust or
lean unto that thing, which is not God, and has not in hytselfe all
sufficiencye: and therefore Paul calls couetouse men Idolatrors: because
their confidence and trust is in their rydyes. Much more would he call him an
Idolatror, whose heart believes remission of sins by a vain work, done by
him self or by an other in his name. But now let us hear, if unto the mass
be joined a wicked opinion.

It has been holden in common Opinion holden of the mass.
opinion. It plainlye has been taught, by law it is decreed, and in the words
of the mass it is expressed: that the mass is a sacrifice and oblation for
the sins of the quick and the dead. So yt remission of sins undoubtedly
was believed by that same action and work, presentlye done by the priest.
Sufficient it were for me, by the plain words of the foresaid prophets here
for to conclude it abominatio^: seeing they plainly show y^ remission of sins
comes only of the mere mercy of God, without all deserving of us or of our
work, proceeding of our selfs ^s Esaye writteth saying, I am ^e, which
remoueth thine iniquity, and that for mine own sake. But if I shall prove this
foresaid opinion, which has been holden of the mass to be falls, deceyuable
and vain, and that it is no sacrifice for sin, shall then either co^suetude,
long process of time, or multitude of papisticall patrons defend that it is
not abominatio^ and Idolatrye? And first I ask who offers this sacrifice,
and what is offered? The priest (says ye papists) offreth Jesus Christ unto
the father. Than demand I, if a man can offer unto God a more precious thing
than him self? And it appears that not.

For Paul commands that we offer unto God a holy, lively and reasonable
sacrifice, which he calls our own bodies. And Jesus Christ, having nothing
more preciouse then him self, did offer up him self. If Paul had known any
other sacrifice, after the death of Jesus Christ (that is, in all the time of
the new testamente) more acceptable unto God, then ye mortification of our
own bodies, would he not advertised vstherof? Nota.
If there was any other sacrifice, and he did not know thereof: then led not ye
spirit hi^ in to all verity, which to say were blasphemy. If he knew it, and
yet did not aduertyse us thereof: than did he not the duty and office of a true
preacher: and that to affirm were like imp^^tie. If any might have offered
Jesus Christ, but him self only: In vayn it had been to him to have suffered
so cruel torment in his own person, by oblatio^ of him self. And so to
affirm that a mortal man may offer him, who is immortal God: In mine opinion
is malepart proudnes. But let us hear more: Paul says by Hebre. 10.
one oblation has he made perfyt for ever them, which are sanctified. And
also remission of sins once gotten there rests no more sacrifice. They will
not avoid Paul's words, althought they say Paul speaks of the Leuiticall
sacrifice. No papists, he exciudeth all manner of sacrifice, saying: Nulla
amplius rest at oblatio, no more sacrifice rests.

And that testifies Jesus Christ him self upon the Cross: saying, Consu^^a^um
est: that is, what ever is required, for pacifyenge my fathers wrath, justly
moved against sin: what ever is necessary for reconciliacio^ of mankind to
the favor of my eternal father: and what ever the purgation of the sins of
the hole world required, is now complete and ended: so that no further
sacrifice rests for sin. Hear ye papists, two witness speak against you.
How can ye deny the opinion of your mass to be falls and vayn? Ye say it is a
sacrifice for syn: but Paul and Jesus Christ say the only death of Christ
was sacrifice sufficient for sin, and after it rests none other sacrifice
speak, or else ye are like to be condemned. I know ye will say: Answer of
papists.
it is none other sacrifice, but the self same, save that it is iterated and
renewed.

But the words of Paul bynd Contra.
you more strayte, then that so ye may escape, for in his hole disputation
contendeth he not only, that there is none other sacrifice Nota.
for sin, but also that the self same sacrifice once offered is sufficient,
and never may be offerred again. For otherwise of no greater price, value
nor estimation, should the death of Christ be, then ye death of those
beasts, which were offered under the law: which are proved to be of none
effect, nor strength, because it behooved them often times to be iterate.

The apostle by comparing Jesus Christ to the Leuitical priests, and his
sacrifice unto theirs makes the matter plain, that Christ might be offered
but once. First the Leuitical priests were mortal, and therefore it behooved
them to have successors.

But Christ is an eternal priest, and therefore is alone, and needs no
successor. The Leuiticall priests offered the blood of beasts: but Jesus
Christ offered his own body and blood. The Leuiticall priests, for impotency
of their sacrifice, did iterate the same. But the sacrifice of Jesus Christ,
having in itself all perfecti^ needs not to be iterate. Yea, to affirm that
it ought (or may) be iterate, is extreme blasphemy. For that were too impute
imperfection thereupo^, contrary to ye hole religion, and the plain words of
Paul, saying: such is our Hebre. 7.
hye priest, holy, just, ipolute, sepera^^ from sinners, and hyer then the
heavens: to whom it is not necessary every day to offer, as did th^^^
^^^^stes, first offer for their o^^^ sins, and then for ye sins of the
people. For y^ he has done once, when he offered him self.

What words ca^ be more plain* Here Paul shows all causes, wherefore it
needs not Christ to be offered again. And would conclude that he may not be
offered again.

Yet say they, it repugneth nothing Papists.
that we offerre Christ: so that he offerre nothym self.

The text says plainly as before Answer*
is showed, that Christ only might offerre him self: which sacrifice is
sufficient, and never may be offered again. For if it had behooved him to have been oftener offered then once, he should have suffered often times, from the
beginning of the world. But once has Heb. 9.
he appeared for the away taking of sin, offering him self. That Hebr. 10.
is, of his own body once slain, now living, and may suffer death no more. For
by his only one sacrifice has he made us perfyte and sanctified for ever.
Here is answered to that objection, that some obiecte: Men every day fyn,
therefore it is necessary, that every day be sacrifice made for sin. Paul Nota.
says by one sacrifice has he co^su^mat us for ever. For other wais his
death were not the only and sufficient sacrifice for our sins: which to
affirm, were blasphemation.

And so there rests of our hole redemption nothing but his second cu^ming,
which shall be to judgment. Where we, depending upon him, shall receive glory
and honor: but his enemies shall be made a footestoole too his fete. Not that I
mean, that his death ought not to be preached, and the remembrance thereof
extolled, and praised in the right ministration of his supper: but none of
these two be sacrifice for sin.

What will ye answer to this, Question.
which Paul produces against your mass? He plainly says, there is no
sacrifice for sin, but Christ's death only etc. And that neither may ye
offer him, nor Papists aduerte. Evasion.
yet that he may offer him self any more.

Ye will say it is a memorial sacrifice, under the which Jesus Christ is
offered unto the presence of God the father by thee church, under the
apperaunce of breadde and wine for remission of sins.

I answer with Paul: Apparet nunc in conspectu Dei pro nobis, he appears
now in the presence of God for us: so that it is not requisyte that any manne
offerre or represente him too the father.

For that he does him self, making continual intercession for us. But let us
consider this doctrine more depely. The church, say they, offered Jesus Christ
unto God y^ father for a memorial sacrifice, or in a memorial sacrifice. Is
there any obliuio^ or forgetfulness fallen in God the father? Has he forgotten
the death and passion of Jesus Christ, so that he needs to be brought in
memory thereof, by any mortal man: Behold brethern, how that imp^etie
discloseth and declares it self. Can there be any greater blasphemye, than
for too say God the father has forgotten y^ benefits, which he gave to
mankind in his only son Jesus? And who that ever will say, that they offer
any memorial sacrifice or remembrance thereof unto God: Does plainly say that
God has forgotten the^.

For otherwise, what needs a representation or remembrance? Aduerte papists,
and consider how Satan has blinded you. Ye do manifestlye lie, and do not
espy the same, ye do blasphem God at every word, and can ye not repent. They
say it is sacrificium. Papists.
Speak more: for a memorial sacrifice it can not be.

They say, it is sacrificiu^ applicatorium. A sacrifice, whereby they may and
do apply the merits of Christ's passion unto sinners. They will be layars too
of plasters, but I fear the wound be not well ryped, and therefore y^ the
plaster be unprofitable. Ye say^, ye may apply the merytes of Christ's
passion, to whom ye list* This is proudly spoken. Then may ye make peace with
God at your pleasure. But the contrary speaks he in these words: who Esai.
27.
may make. Here God says ye, as none may move his wrath against his chose^
(and here of ought ye to rejoice brethren, the Pope nor his priests, nor
bishops, what soever may not cause God to be angry against you, albeit they
curse you, with cross, belle and candel) so may no man compelle him too love
nor receive in favor, but whom it pleases his infynyte goodness. Moses, I
confess, prayed for the people, when God was displeased with them. But he
speaks not so proudly as you do. But either desires God to remit ye offense
of ye people, or else to destroi him to gether With the^, I fear yt your love be
not so fervent, he obtained his petition of God. But will ye say so it was
determinate before in the counsayll of God? Advise you well. The nature of God
is to be fre and thrall unto nothing. For although he is bound and obliged to
fulfill all yt his word promitteth to ye faithful beleuers, yet is yt neither
subjection nor thral dome: for frelye he made his promis, and freely he does
fulfill the same. I desire to be certified, where God made his promise unto
you papiste priests: that ye should have power to appli (as ye speak) the
merits of Christ's passion, to all and sundry, who told or nu^bred money to
you for yt purpose. Takes God any part of the profitte that ye receive? Alas,
I have compassion upon your vanity: but more upon ye simple people, yt has been deceived by you and your falls doctrine. Are ye better heard with god then
Samuel was? He prayed for king Saul, and that most ferue^tly, and yet
obtained not his petition, nor might not apply any merits or holiness unto
him.

And it is said to Jeremy, pray thou not for this people, for my heart is not
to wards it: ne though Moses and Helyas should pray Iere. 14.
for them, yet would I not hear them: for they love to go wrong, and do not
absteyn fro iniquity: albeit they fast and cry, yet will I not hear them. And
although they offer burnte sacrifice, I take no pleasure in it: and therefore
pray not for this people, nor yet make any intercession for them, for I will
not hear the. What say ye to this words papists: the prophet is forbidden
too pray. For God says: he neither will hear him nor yet the people, he
will accept none of their sacrifices, and that because the people manifestly
rebelled against God, rejoiced in iniquity, committed Idolatrye and
abomination. And he manifestly shows yt nothing may appease him, but true
repentance and conuet sion again unto God.

O priests, haeth there not as great iniquity abounded in your days, as ever
did from ye beginning: Have ye not ben entysars and leaders of the people too
all Idolatrye: Yea, has not the mischeuous example of your abominable lives,
provoked thousands unto iniquity: And yet do ye say that ye may apply the
merits of Christ's passion, to whom ye list. Hear ye not that God never will
accept prayers nor sacrifice, whylest true repentance were found? Of that ye
were dumme, and always kept silence. Your clamor and crye^g was, come, come to
the mass, bye with money, substance and possessions, remission of your sins.
We have the merits of Christ's passion, we may offer Jesus Christ unto the
father, whom he must needs receive for an acceptable sacrifice and
satisfaction of all your sins. Think not brethren that I allege any thing
upon them, which they them selfs do not speak: as their own law and mass
shall testifye in the beginning of the Cano^. The proud priest lifting up his
eyes, as that he had God even always bound to his commandment says: we
beseech the most merciful father, by Jesus Christ our Lord: that thou receive
and bless this vnt^^sted sacrifice (unsavory sacrifice truly he might have
said) which we offer to the for thine universal church.

O proud and peruersse papist prelates and priests, who gave you that
authority? Is it not expressly forbidden by the apostle Paul, yt any man
should usurp the honor too make sacrifice: except he be called by God as was
Aaron? Have ye the same commandment, which was given unto Aaron* his
sacrifices are abrogated by Christ. Let us hear where ye are commanded to
make sacrifice? Search the scriptures, but search them with judgment. It will
not be, hoc facite, for that is spoken of eatinge, drinkinge, and
thankesgeuing, and not of sacrifice making. Nor yet will the order of Melchi
sedeck, nor the text of Malachias prove you priests to make sacrifice. Advise
with other that have more appearaunce, to prove your intent. For if these be
well pondered, the weight of them will depresse the proudnes of your papisticall
priesthode.

Now will I collect shortly all that is said for probation that ye mass is no
sacrifice for sin.

Aduert.
The new testament is eternal: Esai. 9. Iere. 31.
that is once made, ca^ never be dissolved, and therefore the cloudde wherewith
this testament is confirmed is eternal: for it is the blood of the eternal
son of God: only the blood of Christ takes away our sins. For it is he
alone yt takes away ye sins of ye world. And who by his own bloudde,
Collos. 1. Nota.
has reconcyled all. For if otherwise sin might have been taken away, then
Christ had dyed in vain. And if full remission stood not in him alone, then
they yt eat him yet hungered, and they that drank him yet thirsted. And yt
were contrary too his own words.

The bloudde of Christ is once Joan. 6.
offered, and is sufficient. For it is the eternal blood of the eternal
son of God, and by his own blood has he once entered in too the holy place.

Therefore the blood of Christ once offered remains for ever, for purgation
of all sins, and so rests then no sacrifice in the mass.

Aduert these reasons precede^t and give place to the verity. For while ye
scriptures of God shall be holden of authority: never are ye able to resolve
these arguments.

Consider now brethren, if the opinion of the mass be not vayn, false and
deceyuable. Caused the^ not you to believe yt it was a sacrifice, whereby
remission of sins was obtained? And ye may plainly perceive that no
sacrifice there is, nor at any time was for sins: but the death of Jesus
Christ only. For the sacrifices of the old law were only figures of that
very and true sacrifice, once offered by Jesus Christ: and in them was
commemoration of sins made: but neither was remission obtained, nor purgation
made by any such sacrifice. What will ye do r^^i^te priests? there ^esteth no
sacrifice to be offered for synn by you, nor by any mortal man.

These are dolorouse tydinges unto your hearts: and no meruel, for by that vayn
opinion, that the mass was a sacrifice for sin, have ye mosre quietly rested
into that floude Euphrates, that is in all worldly felicity, which flowed unto
you as a continual floude. But the mass known not only to be no sacrifice
but also too be Idolatrye, the waters appear to dry up. And it is li^e that
he lack some lyquor, to refresh your tu^gs, being cruciat with drougthe and
heat intolerable.

Would ye hear glad tidinges? what, if that I should permytte unto you (as
one willing to play the good fellow, and not too be s^ifnecked) that the
mass were a sacrifice for sin, and that ye did offer Jesus Christ for syn,
would ye be content that this were permitted unto you? I think ye would for
therefore have ye long contended. Then let us consider what should
subsequently follow thereupon.

A sacrifice for sin was never perfyte, until that the beast offered was
killed. If in your mass ye offer Jesus Christ for sin: then necessarelye
in your mass must ye needs kill Jesus Christ.

Do not esteem beloved brethren these words shortly spoken to be vain or of
no small effect.

They are collected of the very ground of scriptures. For they plainly testify
that Christ to be offered, Christ to suffer, and Christ to shed his bloudde
or dye, are all one thing. Paul in the epistle to the Hebrews says: he
appears now in the presence of God for us, not to offer him self often times
for us, for otherwise it behooved him to have suffered oftentimes, from the
beginning of the world. Mark well that Paul makes, to offer and suffer,
both one thing. And therefore pro^eth he that Christ made but one sacrifice,
because he once did suffer the death. Jesus Christ says, as is written in
Matthew, this is my blood of the new testament, which shall be shed for you
and for many in remission of sins. Mark that remission of synne^ is
attributed too the sheddinge of Christ's bloudde. And Paul says, Christ is
dead for our sins. And in an other place, by one oblation or sacrifice has
he made us persyte forever.

Consider diligently, that remission of sins is attributed, some time to the
sheddyng of Christ's bloudde, some time to his death, and some time too the
hole sacrifice, which he made in suffering all pain. And why this? whether if
there be diverse manners to obteyn remission of sins? ^o: but because euer^
one of these three necessarily follows other: remission of sins is commonly
ascribed to any of them. For where so that ever Christ is offered, there is his
blood shed, and his death subsequently follows. And so papists, if ye
offer Christ in sacrifice for sin, ye shed his blood, and thus newly
kylhym.

Aduerte, too what fine your own desire shall bring you, even to be kyllers of
Jesus Christ.

Ye will say, ye never pretended such abomination. I dispute not what ye
intended: but only I show what absurdite does follow upon your own
doctrine.

For necessarelye, if ye do offer Christ for sin, as ye confess, and your
law does teach, ye cruelly shed his bloudde, and finally do kill him. But
now will I releaue you of this anguish: dolorouse it were daily to commit man
slaughter, and often times to crucify the king of glory: be not affrayed, ye do
it not. For Jesus Christ may suffer no more, shed his blod no more, nor dye no
more. For y^ he has dyed, he so dyed for syn, and that once; and now he
lives, and death may not prevail against him. And so do ye not kyl Christ,
for no power ye have too do the same. Only ye have deceived the people:
causinge them believe, that ye offered Jesus Christ in sacrifice for syn in your
mass: which is fryuole and falls. For Christ may not be offerred, because
he may not dye.

I most gentellye exhort all desyringe too obiecte against these
precedentes: ripely too consider the ground thereof, which stands not upon
the opinion of man, but upon the infallible word of God. And to resume every
part of these arguments, and ley them too the hole body of gods scriptures.

And then I doubt not, but all men, whose senses the princes of darc^enes, and
of this world has not execated, shall confess with me, that in the mass can
be no sacrifice for sin. And yet too the great blasphemye of Christ's death
and open denial of his passion, has it ben affirmed, taught and believed,
that the mass was a sacrifice for the sins of the quick and the dead.
Which opinion is most false, vayn and wicked. And so I think, the mass too
be abomination and Idolatrye, no man of indifferente judgment will deny.


Let no man entend to excuse the mass with the pretext of the Lords supper.
For now shortly will I prove that therewith it has no congruence, but is
express contrary to it: and has taken the remembrance of the some out of
mind. And further it is blasphemous to y^ death of Jesus Christ. First they
are contrary in institution, for the Lords supper was institute too be a
perpetual memory of those benefits, which we have received by Jesus Christ
and by his death. And first we should call to mind in what estate we stood in
the loins of Ada^: when that we all blasphemed the majesty of God in his face.

Secondly that his own inco^prehensible goodness moved him to love us most
wretched and miserable, yea, most wicked and blasphemous: and love most
perfyte compelled him to show mercy. And mercy pronunced the sentence which
was that his only son should pay the price of our redemption. Which
thing, being righteously called to memory in the present action of the
soupper, could not but move us to unfeigned thankesgeuinge unto God ye father,
and to his only son Jesus, who had restored us again to liberty and life.
And this is it which Paul commands, saying: as often, as ye shall eat of
this bread and drink af this cup, ye shall declare the Lords death till he
come: that is, ye shall laud, magnify and extolle the lyberall fyndnes of God
the father, and the infinite benefytes, which ye have received by Christ's
death.

But the mass is instituted, as ye plain words thereof, and their own laws
do witness, too be a sacrifice for the sins of ye quick and the dead. For
doing of the which sacrifice, God is bound not only to remitte our sins,
but also to give unto us what ever we will ask, and that shall testifye diverse
masses, celebrated for diverse causes. Some for peace, some in time of war,
some for rain, some for fair wether, yea, and (alas my heart abhors such
abomination) some for syckenesse of bestyall.

They will say, they severally take prayers for obteyning such things. And
that is all, which I desire they say: for the obtaining of such vain
tryfles, destinate they their hole purpose, and so profane the sacrament of
Christ's body and bloudde (if that were any sacrament, which they abused so)
which should never be used, but in memory of Christ's death.

Then should it not be used to pray, that the touthe ache be taken away
from us, that our Oxen should not take the lowing ill, our Horse the spauen
or farsye, and of all manner diseases for our cattle. Yea what was it wherefore
ye would not say mass, peruersed priests? But let us hear more.

The supper of the Lord is the ^yfte of Jesus Christ, in which we should
laud the infinite mercy of God.

The mass is a sacrifice, which we offer unto God: for doing whereof we
allege God should love and commend us.

In the supper of the Lord, confess we our selfs redeemed from sin, by the
death and blood of Jesus Christ only.

In the mass crave we remission of sins: yea, and whatsoever thing we lift,
by working of that same work, which we presently do our self.

And here in is the mass blasphemous unto Christ and his passion. For in so
far as it offreth or promitteth remission of sins: it imputes
imperfection, upon Christ and his sacrifice: affyrminge that all sins were
not remitted by his death: but that a great part are reserved to be purged by
virtue and the value of ye mass. And also it is iniurius unto Christ: and not
only speakinge most falsely of him, but also vsur pynge too itself, that
which is proper to him alone.

For he affirms that he alone has, by his own death, purged the sins of
the hole world: and that no part rests to be cleansed by any other means.
But ye mass syngeth an other song, which is, that every day by that oblatio^
offered by the priests is sin purged, and remission obtained. Consider
papists, what honor your mass gives unto Christ.

Last, in the supper of y^ Lord *
we grant our selfs eternal debtours to God, and unable any way to make
satisfaction for his infinite benifits, which we have received.

But in the mass allege we, God too be a debtour unto us for oblation of that
sacrifice, which we there presently offer, and dare affirm y^ we there make
satisfaction by doing thereof, for the sins of our self and of others.

If these precedentes be not contrary, let men judge with indifferency. They
differ in use, for in the Lords soupper the minister and the congregation
sat both at one table, no difference betwixt them in pre^minence nor habyte,
as witnesses Jesus Christ with his disciples, and the practyse of the
apostles after his death.

But in the papisticall mass, y^ priests (so will they be styled) are placed
by them self at an altar, and I would ask of the authority thereof, and
what scripture co^maunderh so to be done? They must be cladde in a several
habyt, whereof no mention is made in the new testament. It will not exeuse
them to say, Paul comma^deth Question.
all too be done with order, and decently. Dare they be so bold, as to affirm
that the soupper of Jesus Christ was done without order and indecently,
wherein were seen no such disaguysed vestimentes?

Or will they set up too us again the Leuiticall priesthode? Should not all
be taught by the plain word?

Prelates or Priests, I ask one question, ye would be like too the
vestymentes of Aaron in all things.

Aharon had affixed unto his garments certain belles, which were commanded
too ring and to make sound, as often as he was cladde therewith.

But priests, your belles lack ^unges, they ring not, they soa^d of
nothing but of the earth* Nothing understands the people of all your
ceremonies. Fear ye not the wrath of God? it was commanded Aharon, that the
sound of his belles should be heard: that he dyed not.

Advise herewith, for this matter apperteyneth unto you.

IN the supper of the Lord all were equally participante: the bread being
broken, and the cup being distributed amongst all, according to his
commandment. In the papisticall mass, the congregation ^etteth nothing,
except the beholdinge of your duckings, noddinges, crossinges, turninge,
rplistinge, which all are nothing but a diabolical prophanatio^ of Christ's
supper.

Now ducke, cross, and nodde, ^s ye list: they are but your own inuentio^s.
And finally brether, ye got nothing, but gased and beheld while that one did
eat and drink all.

It shall not excuse you to say the congregation is participante spiritually.
O wicked antichrists, says not Jesus Christ: Eat of this, and drink of this
all, do this in remembrance of me? Christ commands not that one should gase
upon it, bow, ducke, and beck thereto: but that we should eat, and drink
thereof our selfs: and not that we should behold others do the same. Oneles we
would confess the death of Jesus Christ to apperteyn nothing to us.

For when I eat and drink at that table, I openly confess the fruit and
virtue of Christ's body, of his blood and passion too apperteyn to my self:
and that I am a membre of his mystical body, and that God the father is
appeased with me, not withstandinge my first corruption and present infirmity.

Judge brethren what comfort has this taken from us, which will that the sight
thereof shall be sufficient? I would ask first, if y^ sight of corporal meat or
drink does feed and norish the body? I think they will say nay. And I
affirm y^ no more profit receives the soul in beholding an other eat and
drink the Lords very soupper (as for their Idolatry, it is always damnable)
tha^ ye body does in beholdig an other eat and drink, and thou receyuinge
no part thereof.

But now briefly let this co^tra^^tie be collected. In the Lords soupper are
offerred thanks for the benefits, which we have received of God. In the
mass will the papist compel God to grant* all that he asks of him, by
virtue of that sacrifice. And so alleges that God should refer thanks unto
him, that does mass.

In the soupper of the Lord, ye actors humbly did confess the^ self redeemed
only by Christ's blood, which once was shed.

In the mass the priest vanted him self to make a sacrifice for ye sins of
the quick and the dead.

In the Lords soupper, all ye partakers of that table granted and confessed
them selfs debtours unto God, unable to refer thanks for the benefits,
which we had received of his liberality.

In ye papistical mass alleges the priest ye God is a debtour too him, and
unto all the^, for whom he makes ye sacrifice. For he does affirm remission
of sins to be obtained thereby: and in that ye mass is blasphemous to
Christ's death*

In the Lords supper, all sat at one table, no difference in habyt nor
vestiment between the minister and the congregation.

In the papistical mass the priests are placed by them selfs at an aultare
(as they call it) and are clad in disaguysed garments.

In the Lords supper finally all did eat of one bread, and drink of one
cup.

But in the mischeuous mass one (...) did eat and drink all.

Consider now beloved brethren, what has the fruytes of ye mass ben, even in
her greatest purity: the mass is nothing but the inue^tion of man, set up
without al authority of gods word, for honoringe of God: and therefore it is
Idolatry. Unto it is added a vain false, deceyuable and most wicked opinion:
that is, that by it is obtained remission of sins, and therefore it is
abomination before God. It is contrarious unto the supper of Jesus Christ, and
has taken away both the right use and remembrance thereof: and therefore it
is blasphemous to Christ's death.

Maynteyn or defend the papisticall mass who so lift: this honor and service
unto God did all, which used the same. And here I speak no^ of the most
abominable abuses, as of byeng and sellinge used now of late by the mischeuous
priests: but of the mass in her most hye degree, and most ho^est (...)* yea,
even of ye great Gaudeamus song or said by Gregory the great, as papists do
call him.

Let no man think, that because I am in the realm of England, that therefore
so boldly I speak against this abomination: nay, God has taken that
suspicio^ from me. For the body lyenge in most pa^^full bond^^ amongst y^
mids of cruel tyran^es, his mercy and good^es provided that y^ hand should
write and bear witness to the confession of the heart, more abound antly than
ever yet the tu^g spoke.

And here I call my God to record, that neither profitte too my self, haued of
any person or persons, nor affection or favor, that
I bear toward any pryuate man, causes me this dai to speak as ye have
heard: but only the obedience which I owe unto god in ministration, shewinge
of his word, and the common love, which I bear to your salvation. For so
odious and abominable I know ^he mass to be in gods presece, that onles ye
decline from the same: to life can ye never atteyn.

And therefore brethren, fly from
that Idolatry rather, then from the present death.

Here would I have spoken of the diversity of sacrifice, but neither does
time, nor the wickedness of mine own flesh, permit that so I do: I will ye
observe y^ where I say there rests no sacrifice, nor yet is there any
priests, that I mean that there rests no sacrifice too be offered for sin,
nor yet is there any priests having power to offer such oblations. Otherwise I
do know that all true Christians are kings and priests, and do daily offer
unto God a sacrifice most acceptable, the mortification of their affections:
as Paul commanded the Romans. But here of may not I remain too speak
presently.

Such doctrine, as was taught in your audience upon Sunday before noon: I will
prove, as opportunity shall permit, by gods scriptures, not only
unprofitable: but also erroneous and deceyuable.

But first, according too my promise, I will seude unto the teacher the
extracte thereof, to add or diminishe, as by his wisdom shall be thought most
expediente* For God knows, my mind is not capt^oush too tryppe men in
words. But my only desire, being that ye my audience be instruct in the
verity: where from dissenteth some doctrine taught you (if truly I have
collected) moves me to speak against al, that may have appearaunce of lies
and superstition.

And pray with me brethren, that the spirit may be ministered unto me in
abundance, to speak at all times, as becomes a true messenger.

And I will likewise pray, that ye might hear, understand and obey with all
reverence, the good will of God, declared unto the world by Jesus Christ,
whose omnipotente spirit remayn with you for ever* Amen.

Here is briefly declared in a sumine, according to the holy scriptures, what
opinion we Christians have of the Lords supper, called the Sacrament of the
body and bloudde of our sauyoure Jesus Christ.
First we confess that it is an holy action, ordained of God, in the which
the Lord Jesus, by earthely and visible things set before us, lifts us up
unto heavenly and invisible things. And that when he had prepared his
spiritual ban^^et, he witnessed ye he him self was the lively bread, wherewith
our souls be fed unto everlasting life.

And therefore in settinge forth bread and wine to eat and drynk, he
confirms and seals up too us his promise and communion (that is, that we
shall be partakers with him in his kyngedome) and represents unto us, and
makes plain to our senses his heavenly gifts, and alsoo gives unto us
himself, to be received with faith and not with mouth, nor yet by transfusion
of substance: but so throw the virtue of ye holy Ghost that we, being fed
with his flesh, and refreshed with his blood may be renewed, both unto true
godliness and to immortality.

And also that here with the Lord Jesus gathers us into one visible body (so
that we be me^bres one of an other, and make altogether one body, where of
Jesus Chrste is head) And finally that by the same Sacrament, the Lord calls
us to remembrance of his death and passion, too stir up our hearts to
praise his most holy name. Sarthermore we acknowledge that this Sacrament
ought to become unto reuere^tly, considering there is exhibited and given a
te(...) of the wonderful soc^^tie and ^uyttinge together of the lord Jesus and
of the receyuers, and also that there is included and contained in this
sacrament, that he will preserve his church: for herein we be commanded to
show the Lords death until he come.

Also we believe that it is a confession, wherein we sheroe what kind of
doctrine we profess, and what congregation we toyne our selfs unto. And
likewise that it is a bo^de of mutual love amongst us. And finally we believe
that, all the comers unto this holy supper must bring with them their
conversion unto the LORD, by unfeigned repentance in faith and in this
Sacrament, receive thee seals and confirmation of their faith, and yet must
in nowise think, that for this works sake, their syns be forgeuen. And as
concerning these words, Hoc est corpus meu^, this is my body, on which the
papists depend so much, saying: that we must needs believe that the bread and
wine be transubstanciated intoo Christ's body and blood: We acknowledge ye it
is no artikel of our faith, which ca^saue us, nor which we are bound to believe
upon pain of eternal damnation: For if we should believe y^ his very natural
body, both flesh and blood, were naturally in the bred and wine, that should
not save us, saying many believe that, and yet receive it to their damnation.
For it is not his presence in the bread, that can save us: but his presence in
our hearts through faith in his blood, which has washed out our sins, and
pacified the fathers wrath toward us. And again if we do not believe his
bodielye presence in the bread and wine, that shall not damn us: but the
abse^ce out of our heart through unbelief. Now if they would here obiecte,
Objection
that though it be truth that ye absence out of the bread could not damn
us, yet are we bound to believe it, because of gods word, saying: this is my
body, which who believes not, as much as in him lies, makes God a liar,
and therefore of an obstinat mind not to believe his word, may be our
damnation. To this we answer Answer.
that we believe gods word, and confess that it is true, bu^t not so too be
understand as the papists grossly affirm: form the Sacrament we receive
Christ spiritually, 1. Cor. 11.
as did the fathers of the old testament, according to S. Paul's saying. And
if men would well wey, how that Christ, ordeyning this holy sacrament of his
body and blood, spoke these words sacramentally, doubtless they would never so
grossly and foolishely understand them, contrary to all the scriptures, and to
the exposition of saynct Augustyn, sayncte Hierome, Fulgentius, Digilius,
Origenes, and many other godly writers.


