SERMONS With some Religious and Divine Meditations.

BY The Right Reverend Father in God, ARTHVRE LAKE, late Lord Bishop of Bath
and Wells.

Whereunto is prefixed by way of Preface, a short view of the Life and Virtues
of the AVTHOR.

LONDON, Printed by W. STANSBY for Nathaniel Butter.

1629.



VENERABILI VIRO DOMINO IOHANNI YOUNG SS. THEOL. DOCT. DIGNISSIMO ECCLESIAE
WINTONIENSIS DECANO.

HAS REVERENDI IN CHRISTO PATRIS ARTHVRI LAKE, BATHONIENSIS ET WELLENSIS OLIM
EPISCOPI PIAS ET DOCTAS CONCIONES.

Obseruantiae ergo

L. M. D. D. D. PHILIPPUS MAHAT. JOHANNES COOTH. THOMAS WOODYATES.


A SHORT VIEW OF THE LIFE AND VERTVES OF THE AUTHOR.
Christian Reader:
THou have here a taste of the doctrine of that Reverend Prelate, whom if thou
knew not in his life time, I suppose it concerns thee to be acquainted
with now, as with a man rare and eminent for all kind of virtue, natural,
moral, theological, personal, pastoral; and indeed one of the examples of
his time. If the laws of a Preface did permit so much, I suppose it would be a
labor worth thy acceptance, to give thee a just story of his life, whereof
there is no part but would yield thee good matter of imitation: But leaving
that to the pen of some able Historian, whom God may stir up to write a
special Volume of the Worthies of our age; I hold it my duty to impart to
thee, some few of those obseruable passages concerning him, which returned to
my mind upon the publishing of this work, not doubting but that by the
attentive reading thereof, thou may be as well edified, as by the Work it
self.

First, then be thou pleased to take notice, that this holy man having been
noursed up from his tender age in the exercises of true Piety, and in the
studies of various and exquisite Learning (first, in the famous School of
Winchester, where he was placed a child, and after in New College in Oxford,
whether he was elected to be a fellow) was in his riper years advanced to
diverse eminent places of dignity in the Church, not by any ambitious suit or
seeking of his own; but by the special, and J had almost said; immediate
providence of Almighty God, who beyond his expectation or desire, raised him
by insensible degrees to the height of Episcopal dignity: thereby giving us
one proof among many, that notwithstanding our great and manifold sins he
has not altogether abandoned the care of his Church. For while this man by the
natural inclination and bent of his own mind, affected rather the Judges
9.11.
fruitfulness of the Vine, and the fatness of the Olive, in a more private
and retired life then to be a Governor over the trees; as appeared by his
willing acceptance of a Fellowship in the College near Winchester, where for
a time he lived, and could have been contented to have ended his days there
in sweet contemplation if he had been let alone. Yet God, that rules all
things, so disposed of him, that one while by the conspiring votes of a
numerous Society he was, even before he thought of it, recalled to the
Wardenship of that (...) Marie (...).
College whereof he had been formerly fellow: another while by the special
grace and favor of his Majesty, without any suite of his own likewise,
preferred first to the Prefecture of the Hospital of Saint Crosses near
Winchester, then to the Deanerie of the Cathedral Church of Worcester, and
lastly to the Bishopric of Bath and Wels, where he died.

Jn all which places of honor and employment, first, he forgate not the
practice of those virtues, whereof he had made show in his more private life,
but continued the same in his Rotchet, which he had been in his Scholars
gown; thereby showing that his virtues were virtues indeed, and that he used
them not as Stage Players do their vizards, only to act a part in, which being
done, they pull them off, and cast them into a corner.

Jnstances of this kind may be, First, his Humility, the Basis, as it is well
called, of all virtue, which being a fruit of true Christian mortification, and
consisting in a low-prising of a man's self, and his gifts, he had studied so
well in his younger years, that in the whole course of his life, afterward
there was no tumor of pride appeared, but as well in his actions as in his
speeches, he ever Romans (...)
made himself equal with those of the lowest sort. and that notwithstanding
the many temptations which he had both from the eminency of his place, and
excellency of his parts to do and speak otherwise.

Secondly, From this, and not from the goodness of his nature only, though
that were very good, did proceed that singular Affability, and easiness of
Access which he ever retained to all sorts of men, and to those of his own
Coat especially. There was no place nor time almost, except it were his times
of devotion, wherein he might not be spoken with by the meanest person; and
in his speech so far as lawfully he might, he ever studied to give the
party content; so that although it were not in his power to grant every man's
suite, (for who can do that?) yet I think no man can say, he was ever
slighted or superciliously used by him.

3. Add hereunto his rare Tranquillity and Contentedness of mind: which
though a man would think should agree best with an honorable and plentiful
estate, yet experience teaches, that it is far otherwise. Access of
fortunes in most men, rather enlarges then satisfies desire, and new honors
breed new ambitions: besides the very employment of great men occasioneth many
troublesome and disquieting thoughts which a private life is naturally free
from. Vide Arist. de hist, animal. lib 4. cap 17. Item Plutarch. de Oraeulorum
desectu, vbi hoc idem refert de Cl^one (...) and Thrasymede.
dream.

4. But a special cause of that also may have been his great Temperancie or
rather Austeritie in diet, which was another virtue that he retained from the
time he first tasted University Commons unto his dying day. For as at the
greatest and best furnished meals whereat the condition of his place required
his presence, his feeding was commonly upon one dish, and that none of the
daintiest; so it is well known, that when he was not hindered by the
extraordinary resort of strangers unto him, he fasted commonly four times in
the week from his supper, and spent that time until eight or nine of the
clock at night in framing some Meditation or other upon a piece of holy
Scripture, the copies of diverse whereof remained in his Study at his
departure; some few of which thou shall find annexed to this work for thy use
and benefit.

5. As he was in his diet, so in his apparel, recreations, and all other
outward things belonging to this life a most sparing and temperate vser of Gods
blessings, and that as well in his richer as in his meaner fortunes: so that
unless it were in the company of scholars, and in such ingenious and
pleasant discourses, as are incident thereto, (wherein he would sometimes
express much freedom of innocent mirth) a man could not observe that he took
much delight in any wordly thing whatsoever; an evident argument, that his
intellectual part had the predominancy over his sensual, or rather indeed
that grace ruled them both; and that the Man in him was subordinate to the
Christian.

With these virtues did this good man come furnished to the Episcopal Chair;
and being there he kept them: like as he did also his firm purpose of single
life, which though it be not of it self a virtue (...) part. 3 de (...).
but a State; yet he that could live in that state, free not only from the act,
but from all suspicion of uncleanness, as J think no man in this age lived
more free; had certainly attained that excellent gift, which our Savior
commends, and wishes them that have it to make use of as of a great advantage,
and help to godliness, Matthew. 19.12.

Now as the variety of his preferments in the world, did no way hinder him in
the practice of these his private and personal virtues; (as has been said:)
so did they yield him a greater furtherance or opportunity at least of acting
some others, which J may call public or Pastoral.

For first, as he had been always liberal, from the time he had any thing to
give; so upon the increase of his fortunes he improued that virtue even to a
kind of Magnificence. I am verily persuaded, if he had attained to that wealth
which some of our English Prelates heretofore have done: he would have built
Churches and Colleges. But his forwardness in this kind, could never stay
till his purse were full: therefore he never attained to the doing of any
pompous work. But if it were possible to lay together his ordinary largess
to the poor at his gates, and in the streets; his contributions to pious
works of all sorts upon his own and others motions: his Exhibitions to poor
Scholars both abroad and in the University, of all which he kept no Calendar.
J assure my self they would arise to as great a sum as the works of one of
the greatest Benefactours of our time. Besides his increasing of the allowance
of the poor Brethren of Saint Cross, both in diet and otherwise, (which was
worthily continued by his Sir Peter Young.
Successor) his maintayning of two Lectures in New College in Oxford, one for
the Hebrew Tongue, another for the Mathematickes: his leading the way to the
setting up of the great Organ in the Church of Worcester, and to the founding
of a Library there, as also of another in Wells, might well be reckoned as
particular instances of his far extended bounty in this kind.

2. Next his Magnanimity and Courage appeared well in the government of the
University, that one year wherein he bare the office of Vicechancellour; For
as they well know that have had experience of that place, the animosity of some
spirits there, being like Plutarch, in Alexanaro.
Alexanders horse, generous indeed, and fit for great services, but yet fierce
and intractable for the time, requires no less then an Alexander to curb
them, and to bring them to their due temper and pace. And such an Alexander was
he. For, notwithstanding all opposition that is usually made in that kind, he
revived much of the ancient Discipline there: and indeed wrought such a
sensible reformation upon the more distempered parts of the University, that as
J have credibly heard, it was deliberated by those that had the highest care of
that place to have continued him longer therein, though a consecrated Bishop:
had not he of his own mind desirous to attend his greatest charge, showed
himself auerse from receiving any such dispensation.

3. Next to his Magnanimity, if not a part of it, I may reckon his Contempt of
wealth, and especially of that manner of getting wealth which is too commonly
in use among them which seek Horat. Epist. 1
-- quocunque modo rem. Had he made that his rule, he might have been a rich
man. But J dare say, that in all Elections of Scholars, Collations of Orders,
and Benefices, Dispositions of Offices, and Grants of College and
Church-leases that passed through his hands, as there passed in his time very
many, he never fouled them with the least touch of a Gehazi's reward; which
Integrity of his, together with his open-handednesse and housekeeping, were
the only causes that he left no greater estate behind him.

But to come yet more nearely to the discharge of his Episcopal Function. His
Ability to teach, (which Saint Paul makes one of the principal virtues of a
1. Tim. 3 2.
Bishop) as it was very great, so did it never appear more, then after he came
to speak ex cathedra, for although the acts of government alone may seem
sufficient to take up a man in that place: yet he knowing that there is a
double honor which Saint Paul allows to such as do not only rule well, but
also labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1. Tim. 5.17. did after the example of
Saint Chrysostom, Saint Augustine, Saint Gregory the Great, and other ancient
Bishops, whose Homilies we enjoy and read at this day, and never ceast after
he was a Bishop to adorn the Pulpit with his no less frequent and assiduous,
then learned and pious labors. Witness his ordinary preaching in the
Cathedral Church of Wells, his frequent excursions into the Parishes
adjoining; and indeed his leaving of no place where he came, if it were a sit
time of preaching vnsupplied. Besides all which, his ordinary Discourses were
in one kind or other as good as Lectures to those that heard them: for indeed,
he was a man of rare sufficiency in all parts of Learning; and for any doubts
that were proposed to him, whether historical, textuall, practical or
controuersall; as his readiness was singular to take notice of them; so was
his dexterity no less happy in resolving them: So that to conclude for this
point, J may say he was a 1. Kin^ 1 10.
Solomon to his household Servants; to the City where he lived an Or^^alum Ci
(...).
Oracle: to any Scholar that resorted to him a (...).
living library: and to the whole Church such a Priest as God himself
describes by his Prophet Malachie, one whose Ma. ^ 7.
lips did preserve knowledge: and men did seek the law at his mouth.

But it is required of a Bishop, that he should pascere cibo too as well as
verbo: and therefore Saint Paul among other things says he should be ^. Tim
3.
given to hospitality. So was this man in a very extraordinary and remarkable
degree. For to omit his housekeeping, first at Saint Cross, (where he made it
his study and profession to refresh the bowels of the poor not with dry
Pensions as his Predecessors for the most part had done, either for the saving
of trouble or charges, or both: but as became the honor of that place, with
constant, solid, and substantial meals:) and then afterward at his Deanerie
of Worcester, (where he entertained the better sort with that splen, dour, and
the meaner with that bounty and munificence, that the whole Country rings of
it to this day:) to omit these, J say; the list of his ordinary Family which
he kept in diet after he came to the Bishopric of Bath and Wells did
commonly consist of at least fifty persons; a great part whereof he kept not
so much for any state or attendance upon his person, as out of pure charity in
regard of their own private needs. Besides all which, his gates were the daily
refectorie of his poor neighbors; and for superuenient strangers be was
another 1 Gen 18 5.
Abraham, a Gen 19.3.
Lot, never suffering any man of fashion, Scholars especially, that came to
him upon business or otherwise to depart empty away.

Now in this rankenesse of housekeeping, I know it is a disease that commonly
falls upon great Families, that they grow disorderly and riotous, abusing
oftentimes the bounty of a good Lord or Master to their own hurt and the
scandal of others. Which fault lest any man should suspect to have been in
his house, I cannot but remember another virtue of his (which Saint Paul
commends also in a Bishop) and that is the 1 Timothy 3.4
ruling of his house well: and having those that are under him in subjection
with all gravity. Surely this man had so. For notwithstanding his large
allowances of all things fit for the entertainment of strangers, you should see
no footsteps of riot or excess in his house: No tippling or carowsing of
healths; no casting of the childrens bread unto dogs; not so much as any hawks
or hounds kept, unless it were Hi sunt catu^ quibus venor regnum Coeloru
those wherewith he hunted after the Kingdom of Heaven. And the reason of all
this J take to have been first his own example, who was indeed a pattern of
sobriety, and of all good conversation, as Saint Paul wishes 1. Tim 4.12.
Timothy to be: then the choice of his servants wherein he imitated David,
Psalm. 101.8. and lastly his training them up whom he entertained in true piety
and devotion. For besides his ordinary Chapel hours which he saw duly and
by all frequented: he caused many of his household to assist every morning at
the six a clock Prayers in the Cathedral Church adjoining: He never sat
down to his meals, but he had according to the ancient fashion of Bishops a
Chapter of the holy Bible, read by one whom he kept for that purpose; and
lastly, at the close of the night, he called his whole Family into his ordinary
dining room, and there in his own person most devoutly commended them by his
prayers unto Almighty God. Which thing though it be no more then every
Christian housekeeper in his particular charge does or should do; yet I
account it the more memorable in a man of his place, because the multitude and
different quality of their attendants seems ordinarily unto such a sufficient
pretense to remit that duty to their Chaplains, if not to lay it quite aside.

Now as the Philosopher says, that each private Family is the model of a
Commonwealth: so may I say that each Christian Family is the model of a
Church: and therefore no wonder if he that was so good at the ordering of the
one, proved no less excellent in the administration of the other. The care of
his Diocese as it was of all other his greatest, and that which most took him
up; so did it bring forth in him fruits of exemplary diligence, and such as
deserve not to be concealed from the World.

For first, whereas the foundation of all good order in a Church, is the
planting of an able and learned Ministry, which thing appertains to the care
of the Bishop, and has ever been accounted a chief (...) this Cau^ ^ut I the
(...) creete, that thou should ordam. Fliers, etc. Trus 1.5. (...) (...) 75.
Q^id facit excep^d erdination^ (...) non ^aciat; Hic^^^: ad ^^utgr^um
branch of his supereminent power: in the discharge hereof he was so careful
and precise, that he never conferred holy Orders upon any person, whom he did
not first examine strictly according to the Canons of the Church; neither did
he trust herein any Chaplain or other Deputy; but himself personally
performed the office for the satisfaction of his own conscience, as one that
meant to give an account to God for what he did. A worthy example doubtless,
which if it were imitated by all the rest of that Venerable rank, neither on
the one side would they be troubled with so many clamours of the Laity
against the insufficiency of their Clergy: nor on the other would they have
such cause as oftentimes they have to Ma^^ianies Bishop of the No^tatians at
Constant^^^^^, hamm^ ordained ^abbatius a (...) Priest, and (...) him afterward
to he a turbulent man wished he had laid his hands on the briars rather then
on such a ma^^ ^^ad See Secrat. lib (...) 1.20
beshrew their own fingers for ordaining them, who are no sooner put into the
Ministry, but they become the ringleaders of faction and schism against
that very authority which ordained them.

As he was thus provident to plant a good Ministry in his Diocese, so was
he no less careful to cherish those who were already planted. His care of
them all in general was most tender and fatherlike. The most eminent among
them for Piety and Learning he did not only use most familiarly; but studied
to draw them nearest to himself by providing them of Prebends in his Church,
wherein it was his want of opportunity rather then of desire and forwardness
that he did no more. And lastly, to the weaker sort of them he spared not to
give his advice and direction upon all occasions how they might enable
themselves for the better discharge of their calling; to which purpose he had
both intended and begun a plain and familiar explanation of the Doctrine of
the Church of England, contained in the Catechism and thirty nine Articles
which he meant to have communicated to them for their proper use and
instruction; but the interruption of Parliaments and other great affairs
toward his later time, and at last his untimely and much lamented death, as it
seems, put an end to that worthy and religious design.

In the exercise of the Discipline of the Church he carried himself so, that
by his own practice he wrought a great reverence thereof, even in those who
were otherwise not well affected thereunto. For when any ennormous offender was
censured in his Consistory, whose punishment and penance was fit should be
performed in the Cathedral Church as incestuous persons, notorious Adulterers,
notorious Schismatickes, or the like; himself was usually the Preacher at such
times: and this he did often and upon diverse occasions: and in such his
Sermons, (sundry of which thou shall find in this Work) did so open the
grieuousnesse of those offenses, and the authority of the censures and
discipline of the Church, as for the most part wrought great contrition in the
parties punished; and after Sermon before the the whole Congregation himself
gave them absolution. All which he performed with that gravity, learning, and
power, as gave great comfort to all, and bred, no doubt, a general reverence
and awe of the censures and authority of the Church.

And here by the way I cannot but acknowledge (as himself often did) what a
help he found toward the ordering of his jurisdiction in the assistance of a
wise, honest, learned, and discreet Doctor D^^k.
Chancellor, whom as it was his happiness to find there, so it was his virtue
ever to make much of his person, and to use his counsel as occasion served. By
means whereof he not only was never crossed, nor contested with in any cause
wherein he thought fit to inter-medle, but also for the legal and orderly
carriage of such things as came before him, no man could ever take just
exception to the formalitie of his proceedings.

His trienniall Visitations, he always kept in his own person, and kept them
so; that to say no more, he was ever welcome where he came; for indeed his
coming was like Saint Paul's to the Corinthians, not 2 Cor. 12.14.
burdensome but beneficial to those he came too: for he sought not theirs,
but them: yea, as occasion served, he did gladly spend, and was spent for them:
though I cannot add as it is in the same place, that Ibid. v. 15.
the more he loved, the less he was loved again: for surely it was a great
argument of their love, that they resorted and flockt to him in every place
Senec. de Clem. Lib. 1 Chap. 3.
tanquam ad salutare and beneficum sidus, as Seneca speaks of good Princes
going their Progresses; yea, they brought their children and whole Families to
receive his blessing, and to be confirmed by him; which act being one of those
that Vide Hieronym. aduers. Luciferianos vbi tamen affirmat hoc factum esse ad
honorem sacerdotij potius quam ad leg is necessitatem.
antiquity has ever reserved to the Episcopal power, he performed not in a
tumultuarie manner, or as we use to say, hand over head; but with advised
deliberation and choice, admitting only those, whom either by the certificate
of their Minister, or the examination of his own Chaplains, he found to be
sufficiently instructed in the Principles of Religion, and so by the intention
of our Church See the Common Prayer Book, in the. Order for Confirmation.
capable of the benefit of that sacred action.

Of his care of the Clergy in general I have already spoken: yet it is not
to be omitted here, how in those Visitations of his he particularly expressed
it. Wherein his fashion was to examine strictly all those of whose sufficiency
he any way doubted, as well touching their course of study, as of their
preaching: and as he would restrain those from preaching for a time, whom he
found weak and ignorant: so would he with all direct them both for the Books
they should read, and the method they should use for the better enabling of
themselves to that exercise: and thereof would he take account as occasion
served: by which means he always quickened their industry, and drew many of
them to such a commendable improuement of their talent, that the Country was
much edified thereby.

J will add but one thing more of the carriage of this man in his Episcopal
Function; which though it were a thing small in it self, yet J know not how,
it served to increase much as well the peoples devotion to God, as their
reverence to his person. In the Cathedral Church of Wells, whether it were so
that himself preached or no, (as indeed very often he did; but though he did
not) after the Sermon done, and the Psalm sung as the manner is, himself
standing up in his Episcopal seat, gave the benediction to the people, after
the example of the High Priest in the Old Testament, Numb. 6.23. which thing as
he performed like himself, that is to say, in a most grave and fatherlike
manner; so any man that had but seen with what attentive and devout gestures
all the people received it, what apparent comfort they took in it, and how
careful every particular man was not to depart the Church without it; could
not but conclude, that there is a secret (...) o obserua^ (...) quod
sa^erdotalis benedic^^a, non tant^m est simplex ena precatio, sed etiam v^l^ti
pig^us ac^^^timonium sauo is Dei, and omnino habet quandam v^m ac efficacia
clauis soluentis and absoluentis. ^lly^^^. Clau. Script. in verbo Benedicere.
virtue in the Prayers and blessings as of natural so of spiritual Parents,
which as they are never the worse for giving, so those that have the relation
of sons unto them, are much the better for the receiving; and it is not for
nothing that the Apostle says: Heb. 7.7.
The lesser uses to be blessed of the greater.

By these few things which J have set down (Christian Reader) thou may
easily perceive what an eminent pattern of all virtue as well personal as
pastoral God has bestowed on our Church in the person of this one man, whom
as often as J reflect on considering the rare integrity and synceritie of his
life, together with his singular piety and Devotion, whereof no man that knew
him but was a witness; me thinks J may well balance him with any of those
whom the Church of Rome boasts of, and whom she daily canonizeth among the
Saints. Neither do J doubt but those of that Church that either knew him or
shall read of these things, are by this time ready to say, Talis quum fuerit,
vtinam noster fuisset. Yea, who knows whether they may not by some forged plea
go about to claim him after his death, who lived in a Church opposite to
theirs all his life time? For such tricks have they practiced of late upon
some of our most eminent Prelates; and it is no new art; but that which they
may have learned from that old Cacu^ apud Liuium lib. 1.
Italian Thief, who was wont to draw all the fair Oxen he could lay hands on,
though it were obtorto collo, and auersis vestigijs unto his own Den. But to
prevent all such practices in this particular, I hold it not amiss to acquaint
thee somewhat more particularly with his resolutions touching matter of
Religion, and how he stood affected to the controversies of our times. It is
true that of his own disposition (whether framed so by nature or by grace or
both) he was (...), of a most peaceable and mild temper, apter to reconcile
differences then to make them, and to interpret the sayings even of the
Adversaries where they were ambiguous in the better part: in regard whereof if
there be yet any hope left of sowing up those innumerable rents which Faction
has wrought in the seamelesse coat of Christ, and of drawing the distracted
parts of his Church to some tolerable unity, J think he had been such a man
as is hardly found amongst many to be employed in that service. Howbeit as
Saint James says of the wisdom which is from above, that it is James 3.17.
first pure, and then peaceable: so J may be bold to say, that this man's desire
of peace came ever in the second place, and that his first care was to
maintain the purity of Religion, as it is now taught in the Church of
England. For proof whereof, though I might think it enough to refer thee to
these and other of his Sermons, wherein he has as his matter led him confuted
and cut the throat of most of the errors current at this day in the Church of
Rome: yet because it may be excepted that a man's opinions are in some sort (as
the Lawyers say of ones Will) ambulatorie while he lives: and that no man is
bound to stand to any Religion but what he dies in: I will rather impart to
thee a late profession of his made in his last Will and Testament, which is the
most authentike Record of a man's mind, and such, as when he is once dead, Gal
3.15
no man disanulleth or adds thereunto, as the Apostle speaks. Jn this last
Testament of his, amongst other pious recommendations of his soul to God, he
has these words:

I Desire to end my life in that faith, which is now established in the Church
of England, whereof I am a member, and have been by Gods blessing well nigh
thirty years a Preacher: and my souls unfeigned desire is, that it may ever
flourish, and fructify in this Kingdom, and in all his Majesty's Dominions,
and from thence be propagated to other Countries which sit in darkness and in
the shadow of death, whether Jnfidels or Heretics. Amen.

Behold here not only a sound but a zealous Professor of the Religion
established: and I would to God every man of learning and conscience whether of
the one, or other side, would but make the like declaration of himself in his
last Will: perhaps it would be as good a Legacy as any he could bequeath to
Gods Church. For by it would it appear what every man thinks of the sum of
Religion truly and indeed, when all worldly hopes, fears, preiudices,
dependances, and engagements being set aside, he has none but God, and his
own conscience to satisfy: And then I doubt not but as an eminent Prelate of
the Church of Rome said of the doctrine of Justification by faith only, that it
was a good Supper-doctrine, though not so good to break fast on: so it would
be acknowledged of our reformed Religion in general, that although it be not
so plausible and pleasant a religion to live in, as some other may be, yet it
is the only comfortable Religion to die in; as being that which settles a man
upon the true rock, and gives a sure footing to his faith, when all the
superstitious devises of man's brain, do like sand, fail and moulder away.

But to return to this Reverend Prelate of whom we are speaking, being fallen
upon the mention of his last Will and Testament, it may happily be expected that
I should here relate what Legacies he gave therein to the Church, what sums
of money he bequeathed ad pios vsus, etc. for that is the pomp of Wills in
these days. But for that J have said enough already. He that gave all whilst
he lived (even his very Books a great part of which I think to the value of
four hundred pounds worth, be disposed to the Library of New College in
Oxford, by a Deed of Gift diverse years before his death, reserving the use of
them only for his life time:) could not have much left to bestow at his death.
Only a name he has left behind him, and that more precious then any ointment
a name that fills the Church for the present, with the sweet savor thereof,
and I trust that even Posterity also shall be refreshed by it. For Wisd. 4 1,
2.
the memorial of virtue, (as he says) is immortal; because it is approved
both with God, and Men. When it is present men take example at it, and when it
is gone they desire it: it wears a Crown and triumphs for ever, having
gotten the victory, and striving for everlasting rewards.

As touching the manner of his death, though any man might guess at it that
has been acquainted thus far with the passages of his life, (for seldom
do a man's life and his end vary) yet it will not be amiss to acquaint thee
with thus much, that having some few hours before his departure made a zealous
and devout confession both of his faith and sins, to the Bishop of Elie there
present, from whom also he received absolution according to the order of our
Church: and being assisted to the last gasp with the comfortable and heavenly
prayers of that divine Prelate; after he had taken particular leave of all
about him, and given them respectively both his counsel and benediction: he
speedily yielded up his soul to God.

There passed not many months before that Reverend Bishop, whom J last
mentioned, followed him to his grave: with whom as he had lived many years in
a most entire league of friendship, not unlike that which Saint Chrysostom
describes to have been betwixt himself and Saint Basil (Lib. 1. de
Sacerdotio) so J doubt not but they are now united and incorporated together in
a far more firm and undivided society, even that of the firstborn which
are written in Heaven, (Heb. 12.23.) and as they were here geminum sidus, a
pair of Lights of our Church, comparable even to those Primitive ones, whose
luster and influence remains with this day: so they have by this time received
the reward of such as turn many to righteousness, even to be Stars in the
Firmament for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3.

Now although an (...). Homer.
Epitaph be a good man's due after his departure, J should have thought it
needless to set any upon him, who as yet lives so freshly in the mouths and
hearts of all that knew him, did I not find himself had meditated somewhat
that way in his life time, not for the perpetuating of his Name, for he does
not so much as name himself in it; but only for the expressing of his firm
hope in the Resurrection, and his charitable desire of their good that should
survive him: for whose sake he wrote this, and desired it should be graven only
upon a stone, where he should lie without any further cost or ambition.

Viator consiste, paucis te volo; Me Vide.
EXuviae hic reponuntur hominis, sed Christiani
Quibus nihil vilius propter peceatum hominis;
Nihil pretiosius propter spem Christiani.
Non eas deseruit anima, sed hic deposuit.
Custos bonae fidei Spiritus Sanctus,
Qui cauet ne quis in vacuum veniat
Dum legatione pro ijs apud Redemptorem
Defungitur Anima: cui reduci cum Christo
Eas reddet gloriosas gloriose induendas,
Et cum beata beandas in aeternum.
Libenter mortalis sum, qui sim futurus immortalis.
Ne tantuli in me contemplando te poeniteat
Laboris, non dimitteris sine praemio,
Voueo haec historia Mei, prophetia sit Tui.
Perge.
Jf all this be not enough to continue the memory of so worthy a Prelate;
behold another Monument of his own making too. A Monument of his wit shall I
say, and of his Learning? or rather of his Piety and Devotion? Surely, if thou
take the pains to read attentively the Sermons here published to thy view,
thou shall find in them a more then ordinary expression of both. For howsoever
they are not set forth according to the ordinary fashion of these times,
wherein ornaments of speech, variety of illustrations, allegations, allusions,
and the like, are affected and used even to an excess (you must not expect too
much of them, from a man that never took more time for the preuiding of any
sermon then some part of the week preceding that day whereon he was to preach;
and then also betook not himself to the help of his pen, but out of his
strength of memory, and natural readiness of speech, in both which he
excelled, delivered those things which he had first exactly digested in his
mind, and afterward dictated to his Amanuensis in such sort as they are here
published:) yet J dare be bold to say, that to an attentive, and judicious
Reader they will appear to contain not only matter of excellent observation
for the increase of knowledge and piety in our Christian profession: but also
an exact Idea of the true form of a Sermon, so far as concerns the
essential parts of of it composed according to those rules of art which all
men acknowledge to be of most use in Ecclesiastical Oratorie. For whereas
speech is fitly compared by the ancients to a picture, Plutarch. de audi^ndis
poeti^ and alibi.
in the framing whereof the chief thing that requires the Artisans skill, is
to draw his lines in their just number and proportion, so as may express all
the parts of the thing described, and the postures of them: which when it is
done, it is no hard matter to add the colors thereunto: it follows that the
principal point of art likewise in making of a Speech or Sermon is the
delineation of the parts of it, and the apt connecting of them together, or
opposing them one to the other: whereupon the several exornation of them with
words and sentences, does either Verbaque praeuisam rem non muita sequetur.
Horat de art. P^^^.
of it self follow or is without any great difficulty put too. Now in that
was our Author always so elaborate and exact that J think there was no point
or circumstance in any Text that ever he handled, so closely concealed, which
he did not both fetch out, and propose, and handle, in such order and method,
as might best give illustration to the whole. Wherein what singular use he made
both of his Logic, and skill in the Tongues, which are the two Spectacles,
that I may not say eyes, that enable a man to look exactly and distinctly into
a Text: I think there is no man of judgment that does not easily discover. In
this respect then (as I said before) he has left unto younger men a pattern of
preaching: And for the rest, though his fashion were not to lay on much color:
yet that which he did lay on will appear to him that marks it, to be very
proper. His illustrations so natural, his allegations so pregnant, his words
where the emphasis and weight of the sentence lies, so choice and significant;
that if he had uttered plura, far more in lines, he could hardly have said
plus, more in substance and effect to any point that he has handled.

But J had rather thou should discover these things (Christian Reader) by
thy own judgment and observation, then by my advertisement: therefore J will
detain thee no longer at this time from the reading of so useful and precious
a work. Only thus much J will promise thee for thine encouragement before thou
begin; that if thou take the pains to go thorough with attention, these or
other Sermons of this Author, that are genuine (and I hope no other will be
published) First, thou shall gain thereby an exact knowledge of the meaning of
the Text he handles, and of every particular word and phrase in it: Secondly,
thou shall meet with as great variety of choice observations both theological
and moral, aptly deduced, and methodically laid down, as thou art like to
find any where in so few leaves again; lastly, if thou be endued (as J hope
thou art) with the same spirit of grace and regeneration, that the Author was,
thou shall find thine affections kinaled and stirred up thereby to a real
practice of Piety and good Works, more then by a great many more flourishing
Discourses, then these at first sight seem to be. And these things when thou
have found by thine own experience: J doubt not but thou will be moved
together with me and all others that have received beneht by the godly example
and pious labors of this holy, and learned man, to glorify that great God and
Father of Lights, who out of his abundant mercy has done, and does daily
raise such excellent Instruments as he was, for the advancement of his own
glory in the propagation of his Gospel, and aedification of his Church.

Soli Deo Gloria.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
Jn the first and second Alphabet.
7. SErmons upon the first Psalm, page 1. etc. 20. Sermons upon Psaline 51. p.
53. etc. 9. Sermons upon Matthew 22. Verses 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40 But when
the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadduces to silence, etc. page
243. etc. A Sermon for the conclusion of the former Argument, Mark 12.32, 33,
34. Well Master thou have said the truth, etc. p. 358. 10. Sermons on the 19.
Chapter of Exodus, p. 367. etc. 5. Sermons preached at Saint Mary's in Oxford.
Luke 3. v. 7, 8, 9. Then said he to the people that came to be baptized of
him, O Generation of vipers, etc. p. 473. A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross,
Luke 18. v. 7, 8. And shall not God avenge his own elect, etc. p. 531.
Jn the third Alphabet.
8. SErmons preached at the Feast of the Nativity of our Savior, Esaias 9. v.
6, 7. For unto us a child is borne, etc. p. 1. 6. Sermons preached at the Feast
of the Nativity of our Savior, Haggai 2. v. 6, 7, 8, 9. For thus says the
Lord of Hosts, yet once, it is a little while and I will shake the Heavens and
the Earth, etc. p. 57. A Sermon preached at New College in Oxford, upon the
Annuntiation Day, Luke 2.28. Hail thou that art highly favored, etc. p. 113.
A Sermon on Palm Sunday, Matthew 26.40, 41. What could ye not watch with me
one hour? p. 127. A Sermon on Good Friday, Mark 14. v. 35, 36. And he went
forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed, etc. p. 136. A Sermon
preached at Saint Peter's in Oxford, on Easter day, 1. Corinthians. 15.20. Christ is
risen from the dead, etc. p. 151. A Sermon preached in Wells on Easter Day,
Matthew 26. v. 26, 27, 28. And as they were eating Jesus took bread and
blessed it, etc. p. 161. 3. Sermons preached in Wells at the Feast of
Whitsontide, Ephesians. 4. v. 7, 8. etc. ad 17. But unto every one of us is given
grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ, etc. p. 177. A Sermon
preached in Westminster before his Majesty, and the upper House of Parliament,
at the opening of the Fast. July 2 1625. 1. Kings 8. v. 37, 38, 39. 40. If
there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, etc. p. 200. 2. Sermons
preached at Wells at an Ordination of Ministers, Matthew 28. v. 18, 19, 20. All
power is given to me in Heaven and Earth, etc. p 221. A Sermon preached at a
Visitation in Bathe, Zachary 11 v. 7. And I took unto me two staves, the one
I called Beauty, etc. p. 249. Another Sermon preached at a Visitation in
Bathe, 1. Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God, I am that I am, etc. p. 261. A
Sermon preached at an Assize in Winchester, Esra 7. v. 26. And whosoever will
not do the law of thy God, and the law of the King, etc. p. 273. A Sermon
preached at an Assize in Oxford, Psalm. 75. v. 2 3. When I shall receive the
Congregation, I will judge uprightly, etc. p. 282. A Sermon preached in Wells
at the Inauguration of King James, Psalm. 118. v. 24, 25. This is the day which
the Lord has made, etc. p. 299. A Sermon preached at Saint Mary's in Oxford,
Nouemb. 5. Luke 9. v. 53, 54, 55, 56 But they would not receive him, because
his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem, etc, p. 307.
Jn the fourth Alphabet.
A Sermon preached in Wells, a man doing Penance for Incest, Psalm. 50. v. 21.
These things have thou done, etc. p. 1. A Sermon preached in Wells, a woman
doing Penance for Incest, Gal. 6. v. 1. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a
fault, etc. p. 10. A Sermon preached in Wells, a man doing Penance for Incest
with his wives daughter, 1. Cor. 5. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. It is reported commonly
that there is fornication among you, etc. p. 18. A Sermon preached in Wells,
two doing Penance for Incest, a man and his wifes daughter, Leuit. 20. v. 14.
Likewise if a man takes a wife, and her mother, this is wickedness, etc. p.
32. A Sermon preached in Wells, four doing Penance for Incest committed by
one with his wifes daughter, by the other with his wises sister. Deuteronomy. 27. v.
22, 23. Cursed is he that lies with his Sister, the daughter of his father, or
the daughter of his mother etc. p 42. A Sermon preached in Wells, one doing
Penance for having two wives, Mal. 2. v. 15. And did he not make one yet, had
he abundance of spirit, etc. p. 53. A Sermon preached in Wells, certain
persons doing Penance for being at Conuenticles, where a woman Preached, 1.
Tim. 2. v. 11, 12, 13, 14. Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection.
But I suffer not a woman to teach, etc. p. 67. A Sermon preached at Wells, one
doing Penance for Blasphemy, Leuit. 24. v. 15, 16. And thou shall speak unto
the children of Israel saying, Whosoever curses his God, shall bear his
sin, etc. p. 79. A Sermon preached in Wells, a Schismatic doing Penance, 1.
Cor. 3.18. Let no man deceive himself. If any among you seem to be, wise,
etc. p 94. A Sermon preached at Farnham on Saint James his Day, being the day
of King James his Coronation, James 1.12. Blessed is the man that indureth
tentation, etc. p. 107. A Sermon preached at White Hall, John 2.16. Make not my
Fathers House an House of Merchandise, p. 122. A Sermon preached at Greenwich,
Psalm. 32. v. 5. I said, I will confess my sins, etc. p. 132. A Sermon
preached at White Hall, Luke 22. v. 60, 61, 62. And immediately, while he yet
spoke, the Cock crew, etc. p. 143. A Sermon preached at Greenwich, Matthew.
3.16, 17. And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straight way, etc. p. 159. A
Sermon preached at White Hall, 1. John 3. v. 20, 21. For if our heart condemn
us, God is greater then our heart, etc. p. 176. Meditations upon diverse Texts
of Scripture.


AN EXPOSITION OF THE FIRST PSALM.
VERSE. 1. 1. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the
ungodly, nor stands in the way of Sinners, nor sits in the seat of the
scornful.


THis Psalm stands first in order, and for the matter, it well deserves to
stand first. Venerable Bede gives the reason, Hic Psalmus fine titulo, quia
ipse est titulus; this Psalm has no inscription, because it self is an
inscription, it contains the argument of all the other Psalms, and if of all
the Psalms, then of all the Bible, know them and know all: yea know all in the
best manner, Non Theoretice sed Practice: we may behold therein Man as a living
Bible, the Man Christ exactly, of whom not a few of the Psalms entreat, and
other men proportionably, whose affections are here limmed and described, be
they good or bad.

The division then of this Psalm, is the same with that of the whole Bible: in
both we must observe a Covenant, and Parties thereunto: the Parties are God
and Man, Man is remembered in the entrance, Blessed is the man, God in the close
of the Psalm, The Lord knows the way of the righteous, etc.

The Covenant stands in their mutual stipulation: Man vows, a Duty: God
promises a Reward.

Touching the first party to the Covenant, and his Vow, we must more
distinctly observe, Who this party is, and what he vows. The Party is
Ha^ish, Vir ille, That man, each word will yield his note. First, that the
Party to the Covenant is man; and secondly, that he is more than an ordinary
man.

As for his vow, it consists of two parts, an Abrenunciation of that corrupt
state, wherein he lives by nature, and a dedication of himself to a better
state, whereunto he is called by Grace.

But these parts must be considered first jointly, in regard of their number
and order: we must see, why they are in number two, and then how those two are
digested: having thus considered them jointly, we must look into them
severally, we must look into the nature of each of them apart; and then in the
Abrenunciation we shall find From what, and How far we must be severed: will
you know From what? the text will tell you, that whereas there are Sinners, and
Sins, we must be severed not from the Sinners, but the Sins; not from the
ungodly, sinners, and scorners, but from their counsel, way, and chair.

Secondly of sin, you shall find here the seed and the fruit, from which you
must be severed: the seed is the counsel of the ungodly; that is it, which is
sown in our inward man, and comprehends the solicitation unto sin, from
which spring two evil fruits, which shoot forth in our outward man; The way of
sinners is the first, which is our falling to an ill course of life: the
second, which is worst, is the Chair of the Scorner, our becoming
ringleaders unto others, both to do ill, and also to vilify what is good.
This is that from which we must be severed.

But how far? our first care must be to withstand the first offer of sin; we
must not meddle with the seed thereof; Not walk in the counsel of the wicked.
We should estrange our selves so far; but if happily we have not been so
watchful, as to avoid the seed, yet we must be careful not to bring forth the
fruit thereof: not the first fruit, we may not apply our selves to a wicked
course, stand in the way of sinners; at least take heed of the second Fruit, of
professing the art of sinning, to the reproach of virtue, which is, a sitting
in the seat of the scorners: this is the Serpents method to draw us to the
height of sin, from whence we must take the measure of our care in
preserving our selves therefrom. And this is the first branch of that Vow,
which we made in Baptism, and I called it Abrenunciation, according to the
ancient phrase of the Church.

The second part of our Vow is our Dedication; when we have really shaken off
this corrupt course, we must betake our selves unto a better. We are taught
here, what it is, and How long it must continue: It stands in two points, the
first of which is the entertainment, that we must give unto Gods Law; that must
be acceptable to our inward man, Our delight must be in the Law of the Lord:
the second is our employment answerable thereunto; the benefit thereof must
redound to the whole man, the whole must meditate upon that Law.

But how long? surely God will not be served by fits, we must persevere in this
devotion Day and Night, that must be the term of our Meditation; neither only
of our Meditation, but of our Delight also; yea, this continuance of time,
though annexed unto the last, must be understood in all the former clauses; for
the latter does always presuppose the former: we cannot meditate, except we
delight, neither can we delight, as we ought in the Law, except we sever our
selves so far as is required from Communion with sinners; therefore we must
be constant in all.

To begin then, we are first to see the first Party to the Covenant, which is
set down in two words, Vir ille, That man: it is a Man, and, yet such an one,
as is more than ordinary.

Man is a term, which though it properly note one sex, yet usually it includes
both: and why? Man is the Head of the woman, therefore usually where he is
mentioned, she is included; the Cinilians observe it in the Law, and so do
the Divines on the Scripture. Certainly the Fathers thought it worth their
noting upon this place: And it is well they did note it, for some School
Divines have been so ill catechized, A^u^en^^s in c. p 5. Mattha^
as that they have questioned the woman's interest in this Covenant, forgetting
the Text of Saint Paul, that In Jesus Christ there is neither male nor female:
Gal. 3.28.
what therefore is spoken to man, the woman also must take unto her self.

Secondly, as there is no sex excluded, no more is there any kindred; for in
Christ there is neither Jew, nor Greek; therefore is the Party set down in a
name, that signifies all mankind; to signify, that all mankind are included
in this Covenant. And indeed it was entered into with Adam in Paradise;
therefore it concerns all his posterity: As the Sun in the firmament, so the
Son of righteousness is common unto all: I say has made a whole Chapter of
it, Cap. 56. Let not the son of the stranger, that has joined himself unto
the Lord, speak, saying, The Lord has utterly separated me from his people:
Neither let the Eunuch say, behold I am a dry tree; the Prophet goes on, and
reports the interest which God gives to each of them in his Covenant. Saint
Peter, Acts 10. Vos. 3^.
having first received it in a vision, delivers it afterward in a Maxim, Of a
truth I perceive, that there is no respect of persons with God: wherefore then,
if any man be excluded, it is because he excludes himself.

And indeed, there are too many which exclude themselves, and though all may,
yet few do partake of this Covenant: and therefore the Psalmist does not only
name a Man, but that Man is Ish, which usually notes some great man, especially
with this Emphasis Ha-ish; if the person be so noted, sure it is some
extraordinary Man. And verily whereas all the world lies drowned as it were
in wickedness, Psalm. 14.2, 3*
so that The Lord looks down from heaven and cannot see any one that does
good, no not one; Genesis 6.17. Psalm. 12. Mi^. 7.2.
and all flesh has corrupted his way, so that the Psalmist cries out, Help
Lord, for there is not one godly man left; there must needs be somewhat more
than ordinary in him, which is not led away with the error of the wicked,
seeing they are so many, but strives to enter in at the straight gate, and to
go a way that is so narrow: to be as Noah in the old world, as Lot in Sodom,
as Eliah in Israel, is a rare thing, and therefore deserves a mark of raritie;
the Person deserves not only to be called a Man, but That man by an
Excellency, and we must hold this rule, that though it may be, yet it is not
a common thing to be a Party to this Covenant: therefore we must think it
worth our pains to affect it, seeing we receive so honorable a title, for
our right in it.

The Fathers go one step farther, and apprehend in this title Hominem Dominicum
(as Saint Austin speaks) our Savior Jesus Christ. And no marvel; for though
the first Covenant were entered into immediately with a mere man, yet because
he forfeited, and failed to perform his part of the contract, God in the
renewing of it provided better for us, and entered into the second Covenant
immediately with him, that is both God and Man, and so, that by him, as the
Head, it should be communicated to the Church, which is his body: and who dare
assume to be a Party to this Covenant but Christ, and those whom he will
enable thereunto? we may not presume of this honor, except we derive it from
him; for though it be a point of great dignity, yet is it a point of great
difficulty also, as you will perceive when we have unfolded the Vow. Let us
come then unto it.

I told you it consists of two parts, which we must consider, first, jointly,
and then severally: in the joint consideration of them, we must consider, first
their number; they are two, they must needs be so many, since the Fall, before,
one was enough. While we had the Image of God, we had nothing to do, but to
dedicate our selves to him, but now that Image is lost, we have more to do,
we must not only put on the new, but also put off the old man: Genesis 3.15.
those words of God, I will set enmity between the Serpent and the Woman, her
seed, and his, imply, that there must be a separation between His, and those
that are not His: and this he discovered immediately after Adam had children,
in the separation of Abel from Cain; in whom Saint Austin lays the foundation
of the two Cities, the City of God, and the City of the Devil; which is true
concerning so much of it, as has a foundation in man, although it began
before, in regard of the Angels, which before the fall of Adam were ranged into
good and bad: After Abel, and Cain, God continued the separation in the
posterity of Seth, and Cain, in the posterity of Noah, of Abraham, 2. Cor.
6.14.
of Isaac, of Jacob, etc. Saint Paul gives the rule, No communion between
light, and darkness, righteousness, and unrighteousness, etc.

As this number of parts is required, so must we take them in their order: and
the natural order is here set down in my Text; we must begin at the
Abrenuntiation. The Law for the most part is delivered in negative
Commandments, which speak to us, as we are in the state of corruption, from
which we must be cleansed, before we can make any use of the affirmative, and
have our part in sanctification. Learn of our bodies, how we must deal with
our souls; corrupt humors must be purged, before good nourishment be
administered, otherwise, the peccant humors will corrupt good nourishment: Cap.
10. verse. 12.
Hosea teaches it by another Similie, bidding us to plow up the fallow grounds
of our hearts, and not sow amongst thorns: good husbands know, that except the
plow do first weed the ground, the weeds will choke the good seed that is
sown therein: and surely the reason, why men profit so little at the Church
is, because they are not by Abrenuntiation prepared for their dedication.

But enough of the parts of our Vow, as they are considered jointly; let us now
come to take them asunder, and look into the nature of each of them apart; and
first of our Abrenunciation; wherein we shall learn, From what, and How far
we must be severed. There are Sins and Sinners, both expressed in my Text; the
Sinners in three several names, whereof the learned give diverse
significations, wherein they do rather follow the translations, than the
original words; but the best exposition of these names is, that which we sinde
in the description of their Sins: The first is Rashang, which is a
tumultuous, or an unquiet person, whose Sin is; Ambulare in consilio: who is
more unquiet than he that is unresolved? The second is Chataim, from Chata,
which signifies one that shoots, but clean besides the mark; and his Sin
is, Stare in via, look where his arrow pitcheth, there to take up his stand,
and to resolve upon that course. The third is Letz, a crafty Scorner; and the
definition of his Sin is, to sit down in a chair, to be a public professor
of sin, with the disgrace of godliness.

As we must mark this distinction of the Sinners, so must we also the specious
titles that are given to their Sins, Counsel, Way, Chair; good names, but
ill applied: Counsel is necessary to guide us in our course; but not the
Counsel of the ungodly: we are all commanded to go a Way, but it must not be
the way of Sinners; and a Chair is a seat of honor, but not if it be the seat
of the Scorner: That we be not abused by the outside, we must look into the
inside of a temptation; add Ungodly unto Counsel, Sinner unto Way, Scorner to
the Chair, and then we shall see, that there is reason, why we should be
separated from these; and we shall not be ouer-reached by wolves in sheep
clothing.

But mark; whereas you have heard of Sinners and Sin, the persons and their ill
qualities, we are not willed to be separated from their persons, but from their
ill qualities, not from the Ungodly, but from his counsel, not from the Sinner,
but from his Way, not from the Scorner, but from his Chair; we must go out of
the world, if we will be separated from their persons; but from their qualities
we may be separated, and yet converse with them: only when public
authority commands, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, we must separate our
selves from the persons also, not only from the sins of men. The children of
God are compared to light, and during the time of their spiritual warfare,
they must show themselves like unto light: Light shines in the air, and on the
earth, and yet contracts no contagious quality from the one, or the other: so
should the children of God do; and as Christ tells them, they must be, though
in the world, yet not of the world: yea, as the light does discover, John 17.
and correct the malignant qualities of the air, and the earth, remaining it
self unalterable: so must not we be the worse for the world, rather, the world
should be the better for us.

But let us look a little farther into these things, from which we must be
separated, and then we shall find here the seed, and the fruit of Sin; the
seed, that is, the Counsel of the wicked, by that they seek to work upon our
inward man, and frame that, and work it unto sin, by questioning the truth
wherein it is settled. Eccles. 7.20.
God (says the Preacher) made man right, that is, set him in the right way,
and set him upright in his way, But man sought out many inventions: what those
inventions were, Solomon in that Book expresses in his own person, where he
shows, that he was Ambulans in Consilio, he took a taste of all courses, but
could rest upon none of them: Cap. 5^. verse. 20.
the Prophet Esaias compares wicked men to the restless seas, Cap. 1^. c. 8.
Saint James says, that they are (...), men that can no where take sure
footing: And how should they, that have left a rock to walk upon the sands?
Verse. 13.
Saint Jude calls them wandering stars, and indeed nothing can better
resemble them then a Planet, who is sometime in conjunction with one star, and
sometime with another, and varieth according to his conjunction: and the world
is at this day full of these walkers in Counsel, 2. Tim. 4.3. 2. Tim. 3.7.
persons having itching ears, who are ever learning, and never come to the
knowledge of the truth: And this breeds so many Sects in the world, wherewith
our Church, as others, has been, and is not a little disquieted.

And yet mistake not, I favor not the blind obedience, or implicit faith,
where unto the Church of Rome enthrals the consciences of her followers, and
makes them seal their Vow of obstinacy, with the most sacred obligations of
Oaths and Sacraments: whereupon our Recusants are become like deaf Adders,
Psalm. 58.4, 5.
that stop their ears, and will not hear the Charmer, charm he never so
wisely: did we teach any other doctrine then that which God first delivered in
Paradise, and has since unfolded by his Prophets and Apostles, from whence the
world degenerated, and whereunto we recall it, they did well to stop their
ears, as our people shall do well to stop their ears against them; because
they draw not unto God, but from him: but it is one thing to forbid
irresolutenesse, when a man is assured of Gods will warranted by his Word, such
as was in Eve, Genesis 3. Genesis 6.
when she conferred with the Serpent; and the Sons of God, when they would
needs be acquainted with the daughters of men: and in the Israelites, when they
would learn the manners of other nations: another thing to forbid that
irresolutenesse which was in Nicodemus, Nathaniel, in Gamaliel, when they began
to stagger, and could not presently resolve, whither that they were with others
to oppose Christ, or else leave their former course, and become the Disciples
of Christ; neither of those courses being at the first assured to their
consciences. The Papists forbid this latter irresolutenesse, when neither way
is known to be right, which irresolutenesse causes a man to enquire, and
find out that which is right; we forbid the former irresolutenesse, where one
way is known to be right, the other to be wrong; which will bring a man from a
sound resolution, to an irresolution: Certainly, if we do so walk in
Counsel, we have received the seed of sin.

Our lesson then must be this: When God has set us in a right way, never to
advise, whether it be good to take another way: if we do, then this ill seed
of bad counsel sown in the inward man, will fructify and shoot forth in the
outward man, Corrumpunt bonos mores colloquia praua, Ill counsel will corrupt
good manners; He that takes this kind of counsel, when he comes to resolve,
resolves commonly upon the worse, he will not stand in the right way, though
he will stand in a way: so it befell Rehoboam; he heard the Ancients, and he
heard the Youths, 1. Kings 12
he that had so little wit, as to hear both, had so bad a will as to follow
the worse, the like befell Ahab, 1. Kings 2^.
who was contented to hear as well the true Prophet as the false, concerning
his journey to Ramoth Gilead; but when he came to resolve, he gave more credit
to the false, than to the true; the very same befell the Jews, deliberating
what way to take, Ierem. 42.
whether to go into Egypt, or abide in Judea; they asked Jeremy, he advised
them to abide in Judea, and that it was Gods will they should do so: they ask
others, they advise them to go into Egypt, Ierem. 43.
and with contempt of Gods pleasure they obstinately did so.

But why do I seek for proof to these stories? Look to the first
deliberation, that is of record, that of Eve with the Serpent, and judge thereby
how dangerous it is at all to deliberate in such a case: that first
deliberation has given us a woeful proof, that he that does, Ambulare in
Consilio improborum, will stare in via peccatorum: Saint Paul has a rule, Romans
1.21.
Romans 1. that it is too natural for men to be vain in these Dialogismes: our
foolish heart will be darkened, and when we strive to be most wise, we shall
prove most sottish; well may we stand in a Way, to make some trial of the
Counsel that is given us, but it is more then likely, that our Way will be the
way of sinners.

And it were well, if we bore only this fruit; there is yet a much worse, which
is the Sitting down in the seat of the scorners: When the heart becomes so
corrupt, that it depraueth the principles of Conscience, and our judgment is
so perverted, that we speak good of evil, and evil of good, call darkness
light, and light darkness, then we are come so far, as to bear this second
ill fruit.

But the phrase imports two things: By Sitting in the Chair, it is meant, that
men proceed so sarre in Sin, that they become Doctors of it, and the Chair
of scorners shows, that they scoff all that are opposite to it: Touching the
first, we must note, that a sinner desires not to be single, but as good
things have semen in speciem suam, a seed for the multiplication of their
kind; so have evil also: The Serpent drew into his company Eve, and Eve Adam,
the daughters of men corrupted the sons of God, yea whatsoever sin a man is
given unto, he desires company, A These, Prou. 1. an Adultresse, Prou. 7.
Idolaters, Number. 25. The same may be observed in others: Sinners are ambitious
to be teachers of their Sin; neither only teachers of sin, but also
mockers of godliness, so Ismael dealt with Isaac, the Israelites with the
Prophets, Genesis 21. 2. Chron. 36
the Scribes and Pharisees with Christ: Saint Jude by a general name calls
wicked men Mockers, and hardly will he forbear to scoff at godliness, Verse.
18.
that undertakes to be an Advocate of Sin; for whereas they are not able to
resist the strength of the apparent grounds of piety and truth, they find,
that the best way to entertain the favorable opinion of ignorant people,
toward them that are bad, is to vilify those that undertake the defense of
that which is good: This has been always the practice of the enemies of the
Church, whether Infidels or Heretics, as appears by the Ecclesiastical
Story; and at this day the Romanists use the very same method, who spend more
Books in reproaching their Adversaries persons, then in refuting of their
Arguments, and thrive better by this indirect course, then they could by any
that is direct.

You have heard from what we must be separated, It remains that now in few
words you hear, How far. This it set down in three verbes, 1 Walking, 2
Standing, 3 Sitting; wherein there is a gradation, for standing is more then
walking, and sitting more then standing: but this gradation is somewhat
strange; for though in Exhortations we do rise from the lowest degree to the
highest, yet in dehortations we use to fall from the highest degree to the
lowest: As for example, when we exhort to liberality, we tell men, that it is
not enough for them to have a charitable heart, they must also have a good eye,
neither will a good eye suffice, except they have a liberal hand; so do we by
degrees draw them to the height of virtue: but when we dehort (as for example)
from murder, we tell men that they must be so far from shedding blood, that
they must not utter so much as an unkind word, yea they must be so far from
letting loose their tongue, that they must set a bridle upon their hearts, so
do we endeavor to hold in the very first motions of sin.

Strange then may it seem, that these words being a Dehortation should follow
the course of an Exhortation, and in marshalling of sins should begin at the
least: but the reason is: The Psalmist sets down the method, by which sin
first entered upon man, and ever since does work it self into man, to the end,
that we may observe, how we must preserve our selves from it, and take heed,
that it prevail not so far, as to bring us to a desperate case.

There are three degrees here specified, which ascend one above the other.
First, the Serpent tries, whether he can work in us an vnresoluednesse of
heart, and tries whether we be steadfast in our faith: and here must we begin to
withstand him, and not be brought to any parley; such deliberation must be
avoided, for it is no better then the receiving the Serpents poison into our
understanding, which must be the guide of our life, but if we have been so
foolish, as to walk in his counsel, we must take heed, that we bring not
forth the fruit of that we have conceived, and let not our life witness, that
we have been inueighled by his Counsel, we must not stand in his way.

But it is too usual with men to be overtaken with this second degree of
sin, wherein, the Serpent will not suffer them to rest; He will carry them
forward to the consummation of gracelesnesse, he will make them his seedsmen,
like unto himself; he is not contented to have poison, except he also poison
others; and whom he cannot work to be a Serpent, on him he will roar like a
Lion: even so do wicked men, when they are come to the height of sin, they
never cease till they have corrupted, or oppressed those that are good:
answerable to this contagious disposition of theirs, the Septuagint, and the
Vulgar call their Chair, the Chair of Pestilence: for it is observed, as a
malignancie that does attend the pestilence, that they who are infected, take
great delight to infect others also.

But when men come so far, they are even past hope, nothing remains, but
that judgment overtake such Miscreants: the flood must drown these Giants,
fire and brimstone from Heaven consume such Sodomites, and such Israelites must
be corrected with the Babylonian captivity.

But I conclude; You see how far a man may go in sin, if we will be as
thoroughly separated from it, as we ought, we must have these three degrees
always before our eyes; for we can never know certainly, how to keep our
selves in the way, that do not know, how far we may go out of the way:
wherefore let us take heed unto these degrees, that we slip not, if it may be,
into any of them; or if we slip in, yet that we go not so far, as to be past
recovery: this is required in the first part of our Vow, that Vow, which we
made unto God in Baptism.

PSALM. 1. VERSE. 2. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law
does he meditate day and night.


THe Article that is required on our part in the Covenant, whereinto we are
entered with God, or the Vow which we have made in Baptism, does (as I have
told you) consist of two parts; an Abrenunciation of the state, wherein we
stand by Nature; and a Dedication of our selves unto a better state, whereunto
we are called by Grace. You have heard of the first of these two parts, of the
Abrenunciation; but you have not heard of the best, that is, the Dedication.
The Abrenunciation is required, Non per se, sed propter aliud, not that we
should rest in it, but that we should tend unto a farther end by it. The
reason is plain; it is but Remouens impedimentum, non efficiens communionem,
Heb. 12.1^
it is but the laying aside of the weight, and sin which does easily beset us,
and clog us in our race, we have not by it a Communion with God. Men plow their
ground, but it is, that it may be the fitter to receive good seed; and they
purge their bodies, but it is that they may be the better able to digest good
meat; even so the first part of our Vow serves to make way unto the second;
true Piety is like Jacobs Ladder, which has one foot upon the Earth, and the
other in Heaven: it is not enough to ascend from the earth, we must also climb
up into Heaven; when we have really shaken off our corrupt course, we must then
betake our selves unto a better. And that is expressed in the second part of
our Vow.

Wherein we must observe two points; First, Whereunto, then in What sort we
must dedicate our selves; that whereunto, is the Law of the Lord; and the Text
tells us How, and How long we must dedicate our selves thereunto; How, we must
first receive it into our Inward man, our delight, or Will with a Delight, must
be in the Law, from thence it must spread it self over the whole Man, we must
meditate thereon. You see How.

The Text also tells us How long, even Day and Night; this Dedication must never
be given over; These be the particulars whereof now briefly, and in their order.

First, we must see, Whereto we must be dedicated; and we find, that it is
The Law of the Lord. When we find, that we have freed our selves from our
serpentine guides, then must we be advised in our choice, that we pitch upon
a good guide: wherein the Scripture bids us take heed of two Rocks; the one
is, (...), the other is, (...), we must neither our selves forge a Religion,
neither receive any that is forged by others; for guiding of our conscience, as
we must not be without Law, so must we take heed what Law we use.

And indeed we may use none safely, but The Law of God; in such cases, Lanes
4.12.
that of the Apostle is true, There is but one Lawgiuer, no Law but his binds
unto that, for performance whereof we may securely expect, that he will
perform, what in the Covenant for his part he has promised unto us. Many
commendations we read in profane Writers, of the the Laws of Solon,
Lycurgus, Zaleuchus, and others; but these must all be as imperfect, as the
Law-giuers, whether we respect the Precepts, or the Sanctions; none
comprehending exactly the Duty of Man, and therefore not being able to set Man
in the way to the attaining of his Sovereign Good. This is peculiar to the Law
of God.

But what is meant by the Law of God? Surely the Law delivered by Moses,
whereof the Prophets were but Interpreters, and their Interpretation shows the
largeness of the Text; namely, That the Gospel is included in the Law; for
the Decalogue clothed with the Ceremonies, what is it but Implicitum
Euangelium? The substance of the Gospel, which is Salvation by Repentance, and
Faith in Christ. And so must we understand not only Moses his commendations of
the Law, Deuteronomy. 4. but King David's also, Psalm. 19. and 119 the truth whereof
cannot be acknowledged, if the Law and the Gospel be taken Opposite, and not
Composite; if we oppose the one to the other, and do not by the one put
comfort into the other; Certainly, in this place we must so understand the
Law, because it is made the Way to Bliss.

And mark, that here One Law of God, is opposed unto the three degrees of
Sin; The Counsel of the wicked, The way of Sinners, and The Seat of the
Scorners; one to three, to give us to understand, that what those three
promise, is performed in this One: no true Counsel, but in this Law, no good
Course, but that whereinto we are set by this Law; and if we will be Doctors,
and despise the folly of others, we must sit in Moses Chair, we must profess
no other, but the Law of God. And thus much of that Whereunto we must be
dedicated.

Let us uow see How. We must first receive it in the Inward Man; the word used
by the Psalmist is Chephetz, which signifies Voluntatem, and Voluptatem, and
notes where, and what entertainment we must first give unto The Law. Where, in
our Will; so we find in the tenor of the Covenant, This shall be my Covenant,
Iere. 31.33.
which I will make with the House of Israel (says the Lord:) I will write my
Laws in their Hearts, etc. God will not have a servile Dedication, he will
not be served by compulsion; and therefore those that serve him are called,
Psalm. 110. A willing People: Neither can the service be reasonable, wherein the
Will is wanting; for the Actions are not counted ours, wherein the Will has no
part; seeing it is by virtue of the Will, that a Man is Dominus actionum
suarum, a free Agent; neither is any Action free, but that which is done
willingly: though we cannot partake of the Law, but by our Understanding, yet
is the principal object of the Law, our Will, for Theologia is Scientia, not
Theoretica, but Practica, we learn not the Law for to know it, but to do it.
Add hereunto, that Inclinatio voluntatis, is Inclinatio totius suppositi, it
is not without cause, that God requires the Will, seeing the Will has power to
sway the whole Man, especially if the Will be Chephetz, joined with Delight,
for so God does require the Heart, he will have it seasoned with Love, Deuteronomy.
6.5.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and Love is the
fulfilling of the Law; King David opens this Delight, 1. Tim. 1.5. Psalm. 19.
when he tells us, that the Law was sweeter than Honey, and the Honey-combe; the
meaning of it is, we must not be mercenarie, but the pleasure we take in it,
must-be the cause why we entertain it.

And mark the phrase, His delight is in the Law; Multi habent Legem in Cord,
sed non Cor in Lege (says Hugo de S. Victore.) Many treasure up the Law in
their hearts, that do not solace their hearts in the Law; they only know it,
these also delight in it. Saint Austin observes a Distinction between In Lege,
and Sub Lege; Qui est in Lege, secundum Legem agit; He whose heart is in the
Law, follows the direction of the Law; Qui est sub Lege, a Lege agitur, he
whose heart is under the Law, Romans 7.22.
entertaines it rather of constraint, then with a willing mind; but we must
Delight in the Law of God, in the Inward man, as the Apostle speaks. For as
ground is fruitful, not by receiving, but by liking of the seed: Even so man
becomes not Religious, by knowing, but by affecting of the Law; Amor est virtus
Vniens, by Love does a man become one with the Law, yea, himself is turned
into a living Law; for men are always busy about that wherein they take
Delight, and the Law being received into the inwa^d man will ouer-spread the
whole man; which is employed in the next branch, He meditates on that Law.

To Meditate on the Law is, First, to ruminate on the Scripture, and sound the
depth of it; for the Law is delivered in few words, wherein there are contained
great Riches of sense, which by Meditation we must work out: Christ has given
us a pattern, Mat. 5. Where he vnwraps the sense of several Commandments, of
Murder, of Adultery, of Divorce. In the sixth of Saint John, how much matter
does he draw out of the Story of Manna? And what mysteries does Saint Paul in
the Epistle to the Hebrews find in the Ceremonies of Moses? This is the first
branch of Meditating, the unfolding of the Riches of that sense, which God has
treasured up in his Law. This is the work of our understanding.

But the understanding does but prepare matter for the Affections; There is a
second branch therefore of Meditating, which is, the seasoning of our
Affections with that which we know; And as the understanding prepares matter
for the Affections, so what use of our Affections, but to quicken our Actions?
Therefore, as a man which takes into his mouth a morsel of good meat, chewes
it, and by chewing does discover the sweetness, and kindly nourishment that is
in it, and having rellisht it, swallows it down, and by mean conueiances
disperseth it into every part of his body, that every part may be made more
vigorous, and Active thereby: So a man which takes into his thoughts the Law of
God; must by his Meditation chew upon it, and when he has found out the
sweet matter that is in it, his Affections must swallow it greedily, and he
must not cease to work upon it, till he has made the power thereof appear,
in his liberal hands, in his godly lips, and in a word, even in his whole
outward man; for the Law is given to the whole man, Mat. 5. the Commandment,
Thou shall not kill, by the Gloss of the Pharisees was restrained to the hand,
as if, Thou, were nothing but thy Hand, and, to Kill, were nothing but to shed
blood. It is true that what a man does by a part, the whole becomes guilty of
it, but then he must know, that there i^ no part, but may contract his guilt; a
man may commit Murder with his tongue, and he may commit it with his
Affections; this the Pharisee knew not, and because he knew not, he taught not,
and his Disciples practiced not, and so both of them for want of Meditation,
scanted the entertainment which they were to give unto the Law. And so shall
we if we tread in their steps, and learn not how to Dedicate our selves to
God; whose Law we must Delight in, Meditate upon, and Affect, that so we may
occasionally set on work the tongue, and the hand, and may utter, and Act with
the outward man, those things which we conceive, and love in the inward man.
Thus you see How we must be Dedicated.

But how long? Day and Night, says the Psalm. For first we must Meditate Day
and Night; Which words some take properly, some improperly, improperly the Day
notes Prosperity, and the Night Adversity, these significations are frequent
in the Scripture, and then the meaning is; that be we as happy as Solomon, or
brought as low as Job, neither condition must make us forget our Meditation,
this is a work for all times; for, hereunto shall we be beholding for our
temperate using of Prosperity, and resolute bearing of Adversity.

But take the words properly; and then because the Proposition is Affirmative,
some think that it holds Semper, but not Ad semper, that though habitual
Meditation must never be wanting in us, yet the Actual need not be
exercised, but as occasion is offered unto us; but if we take Meditation
together with the fore mentioned Actions which must go with it, we need not
doubt, but the Proposition will hold semper, and Adsemper; for when are we not
doing, speaking, or thinking, and which of these can be perfect without
Meditation? And how then should not our life be a perpetual Meditation; and
why may it not be said, that we should Meditate on Gods Law, Day and Night?
Sure I am, Deuteronomy. 6.
that Moses speaks thus unto Israel, These words which I command thee this
Day, shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy
Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou
walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, and
thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as
Frontlets between thine eyes, and thou shall write them upon the posts of
thine House, and on thy Gates. And the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. Whether ye eat,
or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. The envious man
will always be sowing Tares, therefore we must never sleep; the enemy will
be always giving an assault, therefore we must always stand upon our guard,
No man putting his hand to the Plow, and looking back is fit for the Kingdom
of God. Luke 9
Secondly, as we must Meditate upon the Law, so we must Delight in it Day and
Night; This circumstance of time must not be restrained only unto Meditation,
but enlarged also unto Delight; neither must it only belong to our Dedication,
but to our Abrenuntiation also. For Meditation when it goes so far, as to
season the Affections with that which is known (as I expounded it)
presupposes Delight in the will, and the Dedication presupposes the
Abrenunciation; it is impossible the later should subsist without the former:
therefore as long as we are bound to observe this last, we must continue all
the rest, which must needs go before it. Whereupon it follows, that except
this Text be understood of our Savior Jesus Christ, who only has performed
this Vow which is undertaken by us; it rather shows us, what we should, then
what we can do, and sets us up a mark, whereat all our endeauours must be
aiming in this world, in hope that we shall hit it in the world to come.

I conclulde. The sum of the Christian man's Vow is. Psalm. 37.27.
We must Decline from evil, and do good; from all evil must we decline,
whereunto we are prone by nature, and we must do all good which is recommended
unto us in Gods Law; That, must relish pleasantly unto us, and therein must we
continually exercise our selves, our inward, our outward man, fully,
constantly, fare we well, or fare we ill.

PSALM. 1. VERSE. 2. Blessed is the man.


THis Psalm contains the Covenant between God and Man; so that we are
therein to observe, the Parties to the Covenant, and Articles whereon they are
agreed; the Parties are God and Man; the Articles, man vows his Duty, God
promises a Reward; of the first Party, and his Article, I have already
spoken; It follows that I now come on to the second Party, and his Article.

The second Party is God; God is a party to a Covenant with man. A Mercy to
be wondered at; for God is a Creator, man his creature; therefore God may
require whatsoever man can do; a man is bound to do it, were there no other
inducement but this, that he is Gods creature; for he cannot owe his being,
but he must with all owe his service, and to whom he owes the one, to him he
owes the other also. And yet see how gracious God is unto man, he will not
have man serve him for naught. This is signified in that he vouchsafes to
enter into a Covenant.

If a man have a bond-seruant, and make him his Farmer, the Law says, of bond
he makes him free, and inables him as well to implead his Master, as to be
impleaded by him. And does not God in a manner do us the like favor, when he
does contract to give a Reward unto our service, whereby he becomes bound to
perform, and we may be bold to challenge it? It were honor enough done unto
our Nature, if only it were vouchsafed some near attendance unto God, and it
caries with it a great Reward to have our person so employed: how much more
honor then is done unto us, when God not only yields that, but a much higher
advancement also for that? It is a question; whether a man may serve God for a
Reward? The nature of a Covenant does clear this doubt; For seeing God puts on
the person of a Contracter, it is plain that we may not neglect the Regard,
which we must have unto the Articles of his Contract; especially, seeing the
Contract is founded in Christ, whose Merit over and above Gods word, does
embolden us to rely thereon.

But yet this Rule we must hold; We must obey, Quia bona Lex, prius quam quod
Nobis commoda; our first respect must be unto the Precept of the Law, and then
to the Sanction; and we must observe the Precept absolutely and for it self,
but the Sanction only conditionally, and because God is pleased to add it;
and being conscious to our selves of our own defect, we must presume, not upon
our own performances, but upon Christ's, and claim, not for our own Merits,
but for His, in whom we are vouchsafed an interest.

But to leave the Party, and come to his Article. The Article is in effect
this; If a man be dutiful in performing his Vow, God will be gracious in
giving a Reward. Touching this Reward we are here taught, what it is, and what
is the evidence of it; It is set down in one word, Blessed; And indeed
Blessedness contains the whole substance of our Reward.

But how shall it be known who is Blessed? Surely here are evidences by which
it may be proved; and the evidences are as many, as there are degrees of
Blessedness; thereof there are two degrees, for men are Blessed, either in
this life, or that which is to come.

How it may be known whether a man is Blessed in this life, we are taught in
the third and fourth Verses; where we are taught the difference between Good
and Bad men in this world. Good men are compared to a Tree, whereof we have
here set down the Kind, and the Virtue; the Kind; it is not a Native, but a
Satiue Tree; Planted by the Rivers of Waters. And the virtue thereof is double,
it is profitable, and it is acceptable; profitable, for it brings forth its
fruit in due season, and his Leaf never fails, acceptable, Look whatsoever
he does it prospers. As for the Wicked, Non sic, we must remove all this from
them, the Kind, and the Virtue of the Plant. And what are they then? Nothing
else but winnowed Chafe, Chafe which the wind drives too and fro. This is the
first evidence, the evidence of Blessedness in this world.

The second is the evidence of Blessedness in the world to come. In the world
to come two special times are obseruable, the beginning, and the continuance
thereof. The Godly differ from the wicked in both; in the beginning, that is,
the time of the general Judgment; for then the Righteous shall stand, the
wicked fly; in the continuance; the Righteous shall be of a Congregation,
whereunto the wicked shall not come.

Now this double difference proceeds from a double Act of Gods Providence, an
Act of his wisdom which does distinguish these persons, He knows the ways
of the righteous, and an Act of his power, The way of the wicked shall perish;
but we must mark, that the first of these Verbes, that expresses Wisdom,
includes Power, and the second that expresses Power, includes Wisdom.

These be the particulars which are to be observed concerning the Reward, the
Nature and the Evidence of it, whereof I shall now only unfold that word which
expresses the Nature; and that word is Blessed, Ashre.

This word in the Original respects our steps; and touching them observes two
things, their praise, and their Comfort; their praise is, to be straight, and
that the word signifies primarily; their comfort is, to be happy, and that
the word signifies secondarily. Heb. 13.14.
We have here no abiding place, but are wayfaring men, we may not, we cannot
stand still, we shall be ever in our way, only our care must be what steps we
tread; and this word implies the two Characters whereby we may discern such
steps as we should choose; they must be straight, and happy; first straight,
then happy.

What a straight step is we may learn of the Harbinger of Christ, who does not
only call upon the people to prepare the way of the Lord, Esaias 40 3, ^.
and make his path straight; but also shows what is opposite to straight: if
there be any Hills they must be taken down; if there be any Valleys they must
be filled up, if there be any crookedness declining to the one side or the
other, it must be set even. These are shadows of better things. That which
makes a man go out of the ways of God, is either Presumption, which makes
him to swell like a Hill, or Desperation, that makes him to sink like a
Vallie; or else he is too much besotted with Prosperity, which is leaning to
the right hand, or else murmureth in Adversity, which is leaning to the left
hand. So many ways, to say nothing of the particulars contained under these
several ways, may we decline from straight steps. There is both a Variation,
and Declination of the compass of our life.

A second thing that we must mark is; That whereas the ways of God lie
straight, and Recta linea est breuissima inter eosdem terminos, that God does
not toil us out, but sets us in the next way to Heaven; if we fetch a
compass, and travel by the crooked line, the fault is our own, that will go
aside when we might keep forth right: as the Prodigal Child, Luke 15.
that might have stayed at home with his Father, who would needs try the world,
and come after a long time home to that Father from whom he went.

The third thing that we must mark is; that Rectum is index sui and obliqui,
we must guess how far we are out of the way, by comparing our course to the
straight way; Look how far we are distant from that, so far we are out.
Here Praeter and Contra, which the Church of Rome distinguishes, concur in
one, that which is Praeter viam, is Contra viam, because we should keep in the
right way; and what more usual in the Scripture, then to charge us not to
decline either to the right hand, or to the left? as if so to decline were a
sin, and a violation of the Law, and a doing contrary to that which the Law
commands; for the Law commands us not to decline. The patronage of Venial
sin then, which it borrows from the preposition Praeter, is but weak; for
to go Praeter viam, is to do Contra Legem.

As our steps must be straight: so if they be straight, they will be happy;
for Holiness and Happiness concur in God, and by his Ordinance they
concur in man. Genesis 1.
When God made his Creatures, he beheld them, and saw they were all good, and
because good, therefore he blessed them, and ever since has Blessing been an
inseparable companion from Good. In the Law, God by Moses tells the Jews,
Deuteronomy. 28. that if they hearken to his voice, and keep his laws, they shall be
blessed; the like does God pronounce by Esaias; Chap 3.
Say unto the righteous man, it shall go well with him; so true is this, that
this word Ashre does therefore signify Happiness, because Happiness is
annexed to Holiness.

Moreover, we must note, that this word is plural, so is it ever read in the
Original; the Holy Ghost intimating thereby, that as a man is compounded of
soul and body, a body of many parts, a soul of many faculties; that which
must make happy, must contain a manifold Blessing, which must give content to
every Part and Power: and withal, checking the vain, either definitions of
Philosophers, or elections of Men, which have recommended unto us, or have
addicted themselves unto a maimed Blessedness. But more of that anon, when I
shall open the nature of Blessedness.

By the way I may not omit to observe, how in this Reward the Holy Ghost does
refute the vulgar opinion. For vulgarly men are of their opinion, (...). 3.14.
whom Malachi speaks of, who account it a vain thing to serve God, and say,
what profit is there in walking humbly before Him? we account the proud
blessed, and they that set light by God, are lifted up: and in the Book of
Wisdom the ungodly say, Chap. 5 4.
They accounted the righteous man's life madness, and his end without honor;
the Apostle tells us, that Christians seem in this life, (...). 15.15
to be of all men most miserable; the unthrifty servant did not stick to
challenge his Lord to his face, that he was a hard man, and gathered where he
has not scattered, reaped where he had not sown. Matthew. 25.24.
So far are worldly men from thinking, that the Children of God are
encouraged by any Reward to be constant in performing of their Vow, that they
hold them most miserable, because they keep the same. Read Esaias 53. verse. 1,
2. etc. But in the afore-cited places, you shall find an Answer to their
Exceptions, and they are sufficiently answered, where they are brought in so
blaspheming.

But you will not wonder at their error, if I open unto you the ground
thereof. We must observe then, that they frame unto themselves false Notions
of Blessedness, and according unto them do they judge of every man's state:
For Example, he that places Happiness in Riches, what wonder if he hold all
poor men to be wretches? and if any make his Belly his God, will he not
think basely of Daniel, Dan. 1.
and the three children that live with water and pulse? Mark the forecited
places, and you shall find, that every one of these made his own choice the
measure of his Judgment, and contemned all others, that were not like unto
himself.

Wherefore, that we be not lead away with their error, and that we may be, as
we ought, affected toward our Reward; it is behoofefull, that we better
understand the nature of Blessedness. All men naturally desire to be blessed,
and he were a monster, and not a man, that were contented to be a wretch: but
that which in common we all desire, when we come to determine, most do
mistake. Not to tire you with the enumeration of mistakes in this kind, De
Ciuit Dei lib. 19. c. 1
whereof Varro (as Saint Austin reports) made a long Catalogue, In few words,
Blessedness is the enjoying of the Sovereign Good.

What the Sovereign Good is, we must judge by these two Characters, it must
be Optimum, and Maximum, it must be the best that can be, and the most
complete; if it be not the best, it will not sistere appetitum, we shall not
leave shifting of it; it will never give us content, we will ever be longing,
until we light upon that, beyond which there is nothing that we may long
for: And if it be not Maximum, the most complete, it will not implere
appetitum, we shall not be satisfied therewith, we shall be hungring and
thirsting still; though we desire no other thing, yet of that thing wherein we
take content, we shall still desire more and more, until our vessel is
filled, until we have as much as we are capable of.

Now these two Characters of the Sovereign Good, belong only unto God; He, by
the very Heathen, is styled, Optimus Maximus, and the Scripture that tells us;
There is none good but God only, and that He only is Almighty, does confirm
unto him these attributes, as also does that title of his, Shaddai,
All-sufficient, and therefore as the Apostle speaks, 2. Timoth. ^ 15.
only Blessed. Whereupon we may conclude, that he only is our Sovereign
Good; for if by enjoying of himself, he make himself blessed, he must needs
be the Fountain of Blessedness to all others. And indeed Saint Austin
expresses this religiously unto God, Confess. lib. 2.5.1
Fecistinos Domine ad te, and inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat inte;
Whom have I in heaven, O Lord, but thee, and there is nothing on Earth which I
desire with thee, my flesh, and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever, Psalm. 73. Blessed are they that dwell in thy
house, they will be still praising thee, Psalm. 84.

But God is Essentia simplex, of an uncompounded nature, the nature of man is
many ways compounded; how then can this single nature satisfy our compound?
Especially, seeing before you heard, that it is a manifold good that must make
a happy man? We must help our selves with a School distinction. A good may
be manifold either Formaliter, or Eminenter; in Kind, or in Virtue; As for
Example, there is a vegetable Soul in a Plant, there is a sensitive Soul in a
Beast, the Soul of Man has not these in their kind, yet has he them in
Virtue; for the reasonable Soul is endued with faculties, which in his Body
perform both vegetation, and Sense; a man has an Eye, and an Ear, a Hand,
and a Foot, to see, to hear, to work, to go, an Angel has none of these
Formaliter, according to their kind, yet has he them all Eminenter, his nature
is such as has the Virtue of seeing, hearing, moving, and doing, and that in a
more excellent sort then man is capable of: Even so the single nature of God
may give full content to the manifold capacities of man, seeing no created good
proceeds from God, which is not eminently in him; for there is no Effect that
is not an Image of the Efficient; though created Effects are Images of the
uncreated Efficient, no otherwise, then if we consider them defecated, or
purged from those imperfections, whereunto the condition of a Creature, a
mortal Creature does subject them; sever them, and then whatsoever good they
have is an Image of that which is in God. Whereupon it follows, that if any
sense of our Body, or power of our Soul find any good in the creature, it
shall enjoy the same though in a more eminent sort, if it enjoy the Creator.

Having found the Sovereign Good; It follows that we now see how we become
Blessed.

We become Blessed then, not by having but by enjoying; for if having were
enough every creature should be Blessed, for all creatures have him, because
they cannot be without him, yea they live, move, and have their being in Him;
Acts 17.28.
But only reasonable creatures are capable of happiness, for they only can
see God, and take their Delight in God. The understanding, and the will are
those immediate faculties whereby we partake the Sovereign Good; each by a
double Act; First, the Eye of the understanding being illightned does discover
it; then does the will sanctified fall in love, and make to wards it; when they
are both met, then falls the understanding a work again, and does incessantly
contemplate it, wherewith the will is stirred to a second work, it takes
inexplicable pleasure in it. And this is the true enjoying of the Sovereign
Good which makes a happy man.

Where hence, we may also gather the cause of the Angels, and Adams fall, both
of them were made after the Image of God, and thereby made partakers of the
Divine nature, they fixed their Eyes, and settled their Affection upon
themselves, that model of Divine being, which they had in themselves, and so
fell in love with themselves, and ouer-valuing their own worth, deemed
themselves meet to be their own Sovereign Good, and so lost the true, while
they sought an imaginary Happiness. But we must know, that the abilities that
we have, be they never so divinely qualified, are but Vessels whereinto we must
receive, they are not the Happiness it self, which we must enjoy: the glory
of being the Sovereign Good, is the incommunicable prerogative of God.

But God is in Heaven, and Man on Earth; and of Man on Earth the rule is true,
He cannot see God and live; how then should he enjoy him, Exodus 33.20.
and so become Blessed? We must understand, that there is a presence of God in
his Word, which is apprehended by faith, of which Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 3.13.
We with open face behold the glory of our God, and are changed into the same
Image; this sight is Aenigmaticall, as the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 13. and
like the beholding of our face in a glass; but yet is it a true sight, and the
pledge of a clear. It is true, for whether we respect the Object, God, as he
is described in his Word, or our faith, whereby we apprehend God so described,
neither can deceive us, if they be sincere, if there be no mixture of humane
invention, with Gods Revealed Will, and our faith be not allayed with our
corrupt affections.

As this dark enjoying of God is true, so is it the pledge of a clear; Men
come not to Heaven per saltum, men leap not out of the dregs of nature, into
the glory of Saints, neither can they be Blessed in the Church Triumphant,
that are not Blessed in the Militant; but if we be Blessed on Earth by
believing God in his Word, we shall be Blessed in Heaven, and there our faith
shall be turned into sight, and God will show himself unto us as He is, we
shall see him face to face.

Now because the state in Grace is Blessed, as well as the state in Glory, and
these two Blessednesses are inseparable, as we may gather by the two Titles
that the Scripture gives unto the Spirit, which are, Romans 8.23. 2. Cor. 1.22.
First fruits, and a Seal or Pledge, the Psalmist pronounces them Blessed
that perform their Vow; two ways Blessed, Re and Spe, Blessed, in that they
are in the Kingdom of Grace, and Blessed, in that they shall be of the
Kingdom of Glory; both these Blessednesses are included in this Word: and more
Blessed a man cannot desire to be; As hereafter you will be more fully
persuaded (if this persuade not enough) when you shall hear of the Evidences,
that are annexed to either of these Blessednesses.

But for this time I conclude. The sum of all that you have heard, and
whereof I pray God we may all make use, is, we must not hold our labor vain
which we take in serving God; and that we contemn not the true, Let us not
fancy a false Reward of our pains: God vouchsafes to be our Reward, and we
shall want nothing if we enjoy him; and enjoy him we must by knowing, and
loving, truly and sincerely, though darkly, and imperfectly, in the state of
Grace; that we may clearly and fully know, and enjoy him in the state of Glory.

God-grant that his Word may dwell richly in us, in keeping whereof there is so
great a Reward. PSALM. 1. VERSE. 3. And he shall be like a tree planted by the
rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in his season, his leaf also
shall not wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper.


THis Psalm breaks it self into as many parts, as are contained in the
Covenant of God; therefore have you more then once been told, that we may
consider therein the Parties to the Covenant, and their mutual Stipulation:
the Parties are Man and God; Man is to vow his Duty, God does promise a
Reward. Of the first Party, Man, and his Vow, you have heard at large, and I
have begun to speak of the second, I have showed you, what is obseruable in
the second Party, in God.

And whereas touching the Reward, the Psalm teaches, What it is, and what
Evidence there is for it; I have showed you, What it is, unfolding the riches
that are contained in the first word, Blessed. It follows, that I now go on,
and with the Psalm let you see, what Evidence there is of this Blessedness.

And here we find a double Evidence, as there are two degrees of Happiness:
Men are happy in this life, and happy in the life to come, of each the Psalm
expresses a distinct Evidence: the Evidence of Happiness in this world,
stands in the apparent difference, that in this life appears between the
good, and bad. Good men are compared unto a Tree; and touching this Tree, we
are taught, what good is done for it, and what good comes of it.

The Good done for it, stands in the Husbandmans care, and choice: Care, in
setting the Tree; for the Tree is not wild, but planted: Choice, in setting it
in a fruitful ground; For the Tree is planted by the rivers of waters: this
double Good is done for the Tree.

But what good comes of it? Surely, as manifold a Good; for it proves well, and
is well approved: it proves well, whether you look to the Principal, or the
Accessorie Good expected from a Tree: the principal good is Fruit, and this
Tree brings forth Fruit; Fruit that is good, it has the two marks of good
Fruit stamped upon it; for it is kindly and timely fruit: Kindly, the Tree
brings forth fructum suum, such fruit as well beseemes such a Tree, and so well
husbanded: neither is it only kindly, but timely also; for the Tree brings
it forth, tempore suo, in his season, when it is fittest to serve the planters
use. A tree that bears such fruit, answers the desire of the Husbandman, in
regard of the Principal Good: but what does it in regard of the Accessorie? It
fails not there neither; for it bears leaves, which are Ornamenta arboris,
and Munimenta fructus, that grace the Tree, and defend the Fruit; and this
Accessorie good is lasting, for the leaves do never fail.

It is plain that the Tree proves well; neither is it less plain, that it is
well approved, for what it does prospers, the Fruit prospers, the Leaves
prosper: yea, it is as far Approved, as it proves good; whatsoever it does
prospers; it does, and receives as much, as you can require of a Tree. A happy
conjunction, when doing well, and faring well meet so lovingly together.

But all this while I have been talking only of a Tree; the Holy Ghost means
more then a Tree in this place: what Saint Paul said, Gal. 4. Gal. 4 24.
of Abraham, his Wives and Children, the same may I say of this Tree, (...),
these things are spoken by an Allegory; and so much is intimated by the first
words of this Text, He shall be like a tree: so that what you have heard, is
but the outside, we must also look into the inside of this Allegory. And
there we shall find, that by the Tree is meant a Christian, whom God the
Father as a careful Husbandman has planted in our Savior Christ, as a soil
well watered with the Grace of God; and that this Tree proves accordingly,
abounding in good Works, clothed with their due Circumstances; so that they
are acceptable unto God, and profitable unto Man. This is the inside of the
Allegory.

Having laid it open before you in gross, and given you a taste of the
contents therein; it follows that I now resume the particulars, and lead you
by the outside, more fully and profitably to understand the inside of this
Allegory.

First then, the Holy Ghost resembles a Christian man to a Tree. It may be,
that you would expect that he should propose Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, or some of
the Patriarchs, they may seem fitter patterns and better looking-glasses: but
the Holy Ghost passing by them, pitcheth on this. And why? to make the deeper
impression in us, if we will profit, and if we will not, to work in us the
greater confusion. Those Worthies are dead, well may we hear of them, we
cannot now see them, Et segnius irritant animos demissa per aures, Quam quae
sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus; things heard do less affect, then those that
are seen: therefore does the Holy Ghost bring every man home, and presents him
with a visible Sermon in his own Orchard, whereof he should never behold the
trees, but he should behold an Image of himself; in every good Tree, an Image
(I say) of that, which he should strive to be.

But a little more distinctly to show how reasonable this Choice is; We must
observe, that (as the Philosopher says) Homo est arbor inuersa, a man is a
tree turned vpside-downe; for a tree has his root in the ground, and his
branches spread above ground; but a man's root is his head, therein is the
fountain of Sense and Motion, and there does he take in nourishment: but the
arms and legs, as branches of this tree, they spread downward. And there is a
mystery shadowed in this; for the root of a Christian man it is in Heaven;
Our life is hid in Christ, Col. 3*
and we spread downward, fructifying in good works in the sight of the world;
whereas before we were in Christ, our root was downward, It was in old Adam,
and it bare fruit answerable to that Root: This Saint Paul sets down
excellently. 1. Cor. 15. The first man was of the earth, earthly, the second
was the Lord from heaven, as is the earthly, so are they that are earthly, and
as is the heavenly, so are they that are heavenly. This is the first reason of
the Holy Ghosts choice.

A second reason is, Mat. 1^.33.
because a tree is the best pattern of Synceritie, make the tree good (says
our Savior) and the fruit will be good, Mat. 7.18.
make the tree evil and the fruit will be evil, for, a good tree cannot bear
evil fruit, nor an evil tree good fruit. There is no dissimulation in a Tree,
neither should there be in Men; but it falls out too often, that men's outside
and there inside are not like, they are plain Stage Players, and very
Hypocrites.

A third reason, why the Holy Ghost delights in this Similie is; because a
Tree is a pattern of true Gloriation, it makes show of nothing, but its own
Fruit, its own Leaves, by them does it commend it self unto the Husbandman:
and men should not stand upon their Pedigrees, but upon their own Virtues, and
think themselves best graced by that, which testifies their own worth.

But enough of the reasonableness of the Holy Ghosts Choice; especially,
seeing the Analogy that is between the particular parts of this resemblance
will more and more confirm the same.

Some inquire what Tree is here meant; whether the Olive, Psalm. 52. or the
Palm Tree, Psalm. 92. because these are perpetually flourishing, and green:
but I suppose, that the whole contexture of this Verse alludes to the Garden of
Eden, or rather, the Vision Ezech. 47. where we find flourishing Trees planted
by the waters of the Sanctuary; that place and this have the same Mystical
sense.

But let us come to the branches of the Similie. And first we are to see, What
Good is done for the Tree; and that appears in the Care and the Choice of the
Husbandman; we have here first his Care, He plants the tree. The Tree is not
Native, but Satiue, not a wild Tree, but a Tree of the Orchard, and there is
great ods between such trees, and the ods is worth the marking; for this
observed in the outside of the Parable, gives light unto that, which we must
principally observe in the inside. In the first of Genesis God bids the Earth,
bring forth trees, but Genesis the second, it is said, that God planted a
Garden, and there does God first show himself to be an Husbandman, as Christ
calls him, John 15.1. The Holy Ghost does often frequent that Similie, to give
us to understand, that Gods care of Man is more then ordinary: we see in the
Creation with what circumstances the framing of Man is described, Let us make
man after our own Image; and when Man forfeited, the newmaking cost more Care,
the second planting, then the first.

Saint Hierome out of Aquila reads transplanted; and indeed so it is. we grew
upon a wild Olive, and we are grafted into a true, we were branches of a
degenerated Vine, and are now set into a generous: to speak it plainly, we
were Children of wrath, and are made Children of God; besides our birth in our
Mothers womb, we have a new birth in the womb of the Church: This Saint
Paul, Romans 6. speaking of Baptism expresses by Planting, and he calls a Man
newly baptized (...), newly planted, which word is frequent in the Councels.

Our note is. We must acknowledge the prerogative of a Christian above other
men, which must carry with it an acknowledgement of Gods special care
vouchsafed the faithful; whereof Infidels have no proof: they continue Wild,
whereas we are Planted trees, they lie in the dregs of Nature, whereas we are
brought to the state of Grace.

The second Good that is done to the Tree, appears in the Choice that is made
of the Soil. It is no small benefit for a Tree to be planted, but that is not
enough, it must also be fitted with convenient ground, otherwise much care
might be ill spent: here we have choice ground, it is locus irriguus, well
watered ground, and such is commended for the growth of Trees, especially, if
the waters be artificially divided, and carried round about the Trees, that
they may yield nourishment to the root, which way soever they spread: and such
is the site of our Tree; it is not only planted by the waters, but also by the
divisions of waters, it has juice enough, and that well disposed.

This is the outside of the resemblance, but the inside teaches us; that as we
Christians are beholding to God the Father, by whose care we are planted; so
are we to God the Son, by whose Spirit we are watered. For indeed by
Baptism we are incorporated into Christ; He is the soil that bears the
spiritual Trees; Cap. 13.
He is the Fountain opened to the house of Israel for cleansing, mentioned in
Zachary; Cap. 4.
He is a Well of living waters springing unto eternal life, whereof we read in
Saint John; He is the waters, that streaming from the Sanctuary, ran into the
Dead Sea, Ezekiel. 47.
and were both Sanantes and Viuificantes, healed the Trees that grew on the
banks thereof, and made them bear fruit abundantly; both which properties are
necessarily required for a transplanted Tree, that it may cease to be what it
was, and become, what it should be: And we do find a mortifying and a
quickening grace in Christ, abolishing our Old Man, and reviving the New.

Finally, there are in Christ, Riui aquarum, Ioh. 7.
He that believes in me (says Christ) out of his belly shall flow rivers of
waters of life; yea, as we have manifold diseases and wants, so may we find
manifold remedies and supplies in Christ: His grace does compass us on every
side, and is at hand every where to steed us. So good choice has God made of
the Soil wherein to plant the Trees: and so well are Christians provided for,
that are made members of Christ. And so have I opened unto you the good, that
is done for this Tree; let us now go on, and see what good comes of it. And
we shall find, that as it received, so it yields a double good; for it proves
welll, and is well approved: it proves well, whether you look to the
Principal, or to the Accessorie Good, which is expected of a Tree.

The Principal Good is to bear good Fruit; and so does this, it brings
forth fruit. Fructus comes from fruor; it must be such a thing as is useful,
not briers, or thorns, that scratch and spoil: of which kind there is more
then enough, appearing as well in men's lives, as growing upon Trees. Whereupon
it comes to pass, that the Proverb is changed, and in stead of Homo homini
Deus, we may now say, Homo homini Demon; Men live not for their mutual good,
but ruin.

As that which a Tree bears must be Fruit, so must he bring it forth. Those
that are planted in the Church, must not conceal the grace they have received,
no more then a Tree does his sap. We glory in the discovery of rich metals,
and precious stones, that nature has buried in the earth, and the sea; we
suffer nothing of this great world to lie hid, we love to bring it forth, to
behold, to show it: so should we deal with the gifts and graces, which God
has treasured up in this our little world. No Tree should strive more to send
forth fruits, then we to bring forth works.

But we must look that the Works be good, as the Fruit of this Tree is. It
has the two marks of good Fruit set upon it, it is kindly, it is timely.
Lignum rationale (says Hilarie) dat fructum non confuse, non importune, As the
natural, so the spiritual Tree brings forth fruit, neither confusedly, nor
unseasonably. Let us behold these two properties, first in the Natural, then
in the Spiritual Tree.

First, let us see how kind it is. Profert fructum suum. Suum is a Relative,
and looks back unto the good, that is done for the Tree: the first appears
in the care of him, that of a wild Tree mad^ it a planted Tree; and it must
not degenerate again, and bear Fruit answerable to his former stock; being a
generous Vine, it must not bear wild Grapes, nor sower Olives, being made
partaker of the Sweetness of the true Olive Tree. The Children of God must not
live like the Sons of men, neither must the members of the second Adam live,
as if they were members of the first. We are offended when we see such
degenerating in the Trees of our Orchard; it were to be wished, we d^d not
approve it in our selves, that are of the garden of God. The ouerflowing of
Atheismes, Heresies, and impurities, do testify to the world, that we bear
unkindly fruit.

But Suum, His fruit, refers not only to the Husbandmans care, but also to the
fruitfulness of the soil; and so requires not only a good nature, but a good
measure also. For a Tree to bear scant fruit, where there is good store of
juice, must needs be unkindly: and it is not kindly for men to be sparing in
doing well, who are rooted so near unto the Fountain of grace. For him that
has five talents, to yield but two, or him that has ten, to yield but five,
will make but a bad account; seeing God expects, that men shall render
according to that, which they do receive.

Moreover, Suum does import a respect to the doer, and also unto others, as it
is joined with Profert. Look upon it, and you shall find, that grace g^ue^
ability to do well, but the Faculties of our soul seasoned with grace, are
they that are exercised in well doing: therefore is the work reputed ours, as
the Fruit is reputed to be borne by the branch of the wild Olive, though it be
beholding to the new stock (of whose fatness and sweetness it does partake)
for that it is able to bear such Fruit: It is no small honor that God does
us, in that he makes his gifts so become ours.

But as Suum gives us (...), a Possession, and Propriety of the work, so
Prefert calls for a (...), or a Communicating of the work unto others, we must
be good dispencers of the grace of God, and edify others with our gifts. And
here we see a difference between Rational, and Irrational Trees: of
Irrational Trees, as of other Creatures the rule is true, Vos non vobis, they
yield much good for which themselves are never a whit the better; but Rational
Trees reap good of that, where with they do good; they do good, because they
bring forth fruit; and from this themselves also reap good, because the Fruit
continues their own, and shall be reckoned unto them in the day of the Lord.

Finally, by His fruit we may understand such Works, as belong to every man's
Vocation. For as in an Orchard there is variety of fruit, Apple Trees,
Peare-trees, Plum trees, etc. and every tree endeauours to suck juice
answerable to his kind, that it may bear such fruit; and an Apple Tree does
not turn a Plum tree, nor a Plum-tree, a Cherrie-tree, etc. but every tree
contents it self to be of its own kind: So in the Church are there varieties
of Callings, Pastors, People, Magistrates, Subjects, Every one is to walk as
he is called of God, 1. Cor. 1.20.
and learn what belongs thereto, and not incroach upon, or entermedle with
that, which belongs to others. Except men heed this, whatsoever good they seem
to do, it is not accepted; the Saying of the Roman General to the Soldier
that kept the tents, when he should have been fighting in the field, Non amo
nimium diligentes, will be used of God, if he call us to one profession, and we
busy our selves about another; God will not like such busy bodies.

As the Fruit is kindly; so is it also Timely, the Tree brings forth fruit in
his Season. As there are diverse seasons in the year, so are there fruits for
every season; the health of our body does require it should be so, for whose
sustenance these fruits were provided; that is unkind to be taken in Winter
which was fit in Summer, neither will that serve at Autumn, which was made for
the Spring: Even so the qualities of men have their seasons, and (as the
Preacher says) There is a time for every thing, Cap. 3.
a time for weeping, and a time for laughing, a time for peace, and a time for
war. Nehemiah does blame the people that Wept, Cap. ^.
and bids them go and Feast; God reproves the people that did Feast,
because it was then a time to Fast; Rehoboam was stared by the Prophet, Esaias
22. 1. K^ays 12. 2. Co^^^^, 19.
when he would have warred upon Israel; Iehosaphat is rebuked by a Prophet, for
that he would have society with the King of Israel. The ground of this
variety, is; We may not rebuke, when we should comfort, nor comfort when we
should rebuke; the Habits of virtues must be always in us, but the Acts must
be exercised upon their just occasions.

You see by this time, that the Tree proves well in regard of the Principal
Good, that is expected from a Tree: neither is it less true in regard of the
Accessorie Good: The Accessorie good are Leaves; and indeed the Accessorie are
a great good of the Tree, for they are Ornamentum arboris, and Oper^mentum
fructuum, they make the Tree more pleasant to behold, and serve for to defend
the Fruit from the injury of the weather: therefore are they compared to the
hair of a man's head, which if it should be missing, every man sees, how much
deformity and discommoditie would come unto our head.

But this is but the out side of the Parable. Good Works have their
Circumstances, which in doing them must be observed, and are as behoofefull to
the Work, as Leaves to the Tree, both to recommend it, and also to defend it:
for Example, He that gives, must give with cheerfulness; he that obeyes,
must do it with willingness; he that reproues, must do it with
charitablenesse, etc. take away these Circumstances, and a churlish gift is not
worth thanks, stubborn service cannot content, neither will a man be
reclaimed by a malicious reproof: put these Circumstances to it; and if ever a
man will be thankful, it will be to him that gives unto him cheerfully; if
any servant will please, it is he that does his duty willingly, and if ever
an untoward nature will be altered, Charity must season the reproof: Due
circumstances give a sweet influence unto a good work; and they are the best
Apology to stop the mouths of slanderers. Such Leaves a good Tree bears, and
a good Man observes such Circumstances.

And he observes them Constantly; for his Leaf Never fades. The reason, why
the Leaves fade, and fall, is the disproportion between the heat and the
moisture; when the heat is too weak, and so the moisture falls back to the
root, or else is too strong, and consumes it faster, then it can be supplied
by the root; so that, if the Leaf never fade, there must needs ever be a
good proportion between them. The Grace of God is compared sometimes to Fire,
sometimes to Water; because it has a warming and cooling property, a drying,
and a moystning: It warmeth us when we are over cold; as we are too often in
doing good; and when through indiscreete zeal, we are over hot, then does
Grace cool us, and keep us in a good temper: Sometimes we are over dry, and
spating in doing well, Grace then serves to moysten us, and make us more
friuitfull; and when we grow luxuriant, it dries up our superfluities, and
brings us to a mean: from the due proportion of these qualities ruling our
Actions, it comes to pass; that as a Tree casts not his Leaves, so we fail
not in the Circumstances which must order our good works. Fruit without
Leaves, or Leaves without Fruit, make but an imperfect good Tree: So good
Works without due Circumstances, and Circumstances without good Works make
but an imperfect Man. As then the Trees of Paradise were all good for food and
pleasant to behold; Gane. 2.
good for food, in regard of their Fruit, and beautiful to behold in regard
of their Leaves: even so should the Spiritual Trees be (I mean Christian
men;) their works should be both useful and graceful, otherwise, they are
not answerable to this Tree; neither do they attain the perfection of
Christian men. And let this suffice to show that the Tree proves well.

As it Proves well: so it is well Approved; for what it does, Prospers; yea, it
is as well Approved, as it Proves well, for Whatsoever it does prospers. The
Prospering of the Tree may well be expounded, out of the Parable of Trees,
Judge. 9. where the Olives fatness is said to be that, wherewith they honor
God and man, and the Vines Wine, that, wherewith they Cheer both; That is, the
good use that is made of them, is their Prosperity. And what is the
Prosperity of a Rational Tree, but that our Works set forth Gods Honor, and
edify men? Only the Rational Tree has one advantage above the Irrational,
that it yields the doer a good Testimony of his good Conscience; It is a great
blessing, when a man does labor to be assured of this, that he labors not in
vain.

Neither does the Tree only Prosper well, but the Prosperity of it is
universal, Whatsoever he does prospers. As he brings forth good Leaves, and
good Fruit: So there comes a Blessing upon them both. It is the unhappiness of
the wicked, that nothing goes well with them, Their very Table (as it is in
the Psalm) is made their snare, and that, which should be for their comfort,
is made unto them an occasion of falling; Psalm. 69. ver. 22.
but all things work for the best to them that Love God (as the Apostle
tells us, Romans 8. their very afflictions are matter of exceeding Joy, Iam. 1.
And this is. Mysterium Crucis, wherewith none are acquainted, but those that
are truly initiated into Christ.

Bid goes a step farther, and shows, that their very sins do Prosper: He
instanceth in Saint Peter's fall, by which he profited in Humility, and
Compassion; we may instance also in David, and others, and this is Miraculum
miraculorum, that God turns both sorts of Evils, as well Culpae, as Paene, as
well of Sin, as Woe into the profit of a good Man: God turns it (I say),
for his hand it is, that works so strange effects, and his Hand is employed in
Iaztliack, which though it be vulgarly Translated, shall Prosper, yet according
to the Conjugation it may signify shall make to prosper; and then must there
be some Efficient, which most fitly must be accounted God. And God will
bless in making all things to Prosper that a good man takes in hand: as in the
Creation, when he saw all things that himself had made, That it was good, then
he Blessed it.

Or if you will refer it to the Tree, or the Christian noted by the Tree,
then the meaning is; that the work Prospers for the persons sake. And indeed,
if we be in ill terms with God, that which we do will succeed but ill, as
all will succeed well, if we be in good terms: but the Prosperity here
meant, must be understood not Corporally, but Spiritually; for Corporally they
often are distressed, though that distress in the end turns to their greater
good.

Finally, Saint Chrysostom understands Christ by this Tree, and indeed, what
you have heard can fully agree to none, but unto Him: He is the Tree of life,
and the best of us is but a Branch in that Tree, yea a diseased Branch;
therefore we must acknowledge the perfection of this Resemblance in Him, and
beg, that according to our proportion, it may be communicated unto us.

GOd our Father, which is the Spiritual Husbandman, so continue, and cheerish
our Plantation in Christ, that we may by the Holy Ghost become more and more
fruitful and graceful Spiritual Trees, abounding in good Works, and doing
them as we ought, that the world may be the better for them, and we finding
grace in Gods eyes, may ever enjoy the Comfort of them. AMEN. PSALM. 1. VERSE. 4.
The ungodly are not so: but are like the chafe which the wind drineth away.


THe Reward which God bestows upon them, which perform their Vow made unto
him in Baptism, is (as you have heard in the first word of this Psalm)
Blessedness; Blessedness in this life, and Blessedness in the life to come.

As this Blessedness consists of two degrees: so does this Psalm yield unto
us of either degree a special Evidence; A special Evidence of the
Blessedness which is in this world; and that stands in the difference, which
even during this life, may be observed between the good and bad; we have that
difference expressed here in the third and fourth verses. Of the Good I have
already spoken; on the third verse I have showed you, how fitly they are
compared unto a Tree; a Tree, for which much good is done, whether you respect
the Husbandmans Care in planting it, or Choice of the Soil wherein it is set.

And as there is good done to it: so comes there good of it; for it proves
well, and is as well approved: i^ proves well, in Fruit, and Leaves; good
Fruit, for it is kindly, and timely; never fading Leaves, which are a
perpetual Ornament of a Tree, and Muniment of the Fruits. And as it proves
well: so is it well approved; Whatsoever it does is acceptable to God,
profitable to Men, and comfortable to the Tree. These things you heard
enlarged, and applied to a good Man; It follows that now I come on, and you
hear what this Scripture says of a bad Man.

Wherein you must consider these two points; first, whom the Holy Ghost means
by the Ungodly; secondly, What misery even in this life is heaped upon them.
First, they are not what they seem to be; Non sic improbi; It is not so with
the wicked, they have no part in the resemblance of the blessed Tree; Secondly,
what they seem not to be that they are, a worse resemblance fits them; for
they are no better then winnowed chafe. I begin with the first, they are here
called ungodly.

Venerable Bede obsernes well; that by the Ungodly, you must understand not
only Incredulos; but also falsos Christianos; not only the godless Infidel
which is without the Church; but also the counterfeit Believer that lives
within the Church. And indeed S. Paul, Romans 3. out of the Psalms, and other
passages of Scripture, making an Anatomy of a wicked man, gives a good Rule;
those things which the Law speaks, it speaks to them that are under the
Law; so that all they must take this Title to themselves, that profess they
know God, but deny him in their works, that have a form of Godliness, but
deny the power thereof; are called Christians, but yield no odor of that sweet
Ointment, which being powered upon Christ the Head, Runs down to the very
skirts of his Garments. And therefore whosoever they are, that are any parts of
his Coat, they should all of them smell of Mirrhe, Aloes, and Cassia, Psalm.
45.8. 1. Pet. 2.9.
and show forth the virtues of him that has called them out of darkness into
his marvelous light. All should, but more then a good many do not; and
therefore they come under this name of Ungodly.

But enough of the Persons, of whom I have spoken at large upon the first
Verse; Let us come on to their state; remembering this, that all come under the
state, that come under the name; if they be Ungodly, they partake of the
misery. And what is their misery? surely, they are not what they seem to be,
and what they seem not to be that they are.

They are not what they seem to be; for in this world, of all men the Ungodly
seem to be in best state; but my Text denies it, Non sic improbi, it is not
so well with them, they are not that Blessed Tree. What then? Surely, what they
seem not to be that they are, they are in a much worse state, and therefore
are set forth in a baser resemblance; they are but like chafe that is driven
by the wind. Strange doctrine; the whole Text is a very Paradox.

A Paradox is a truth which crosses the common opinion; of the truth of this
Saying there can be no question, seeing it is Gods Word: but sure I am, that
the state of the Ungodly is commonly taken to be much better; if any, surely
they in this life seem to be that Blessed Tree; I have seen (says David) the
ungodly in great prosperity, Psalm. 89.
and flourishing like a green Bay tree; In the second of Esaias they are
compared to the Cedars of Lebanon, and the Oaks of Basan; and what a goodly
Tree was Nebuchadnezzar? so he is compared, Dan. 4. where we read, that his
top reached up to Heaven, his Branches spread to the ends of the Earth; he was
full laden with fruit, and all the birds of the air did harbor in his
boughs; and yet the Holy Ghost says, Non sic impij, the Ungodly are no Trees,
no Blessed Trees.

How then shall we prove this truth? We must help our selves out of another
Psalm; The sons of men of low degree, are but vanity, Psalm. 62.
and men of high degree are but a lie; All is not gold that glisters, neither
may we mistake a painted face for Native Beauty: He that goes to a Play,
shall see on the stage Kings, and Queens, and other Personages of worth in
outward show, whereas indeed the persons that acted them, are base, and
mercenarie fellows. And this world is but a great stage, and the wicked are
but personated Actors, or Players, not one appears as he is; Or to follow the
Similie of Trees, which God himself is pleased to use Deuteronomy. 32. the wicked are
compared unto the Vines of Sodom, and Gomorrah, that bear grapes in show, but
the juice of them is nothing but gall and bitterness; yea, it is deadly
poison. They that write the History of that Country observe, that the fruit
thereof makes great show, but when men come near it, and touch it, it resolves
altogether into Cinders, which hapily the Wise Man means, when he says, that
there grow Plants bearing fruit which never come to ripeness: Wisd. 10.7.
Even such is the prosperity of the wicked, fair in show, nothing in
substance. The reason is plain.

For, seeing God only is good, and nothing good farther then it partakes of
him; Ungodliness, that separates from God, must needs deprive of Good, and he
is but a very wretch, that has whatsoever else is called good, if he have it
without God: yea he is more wretched, by so having what he desires, then by
wanting it. It is Saint Austins note; and there is good reason for it, even
that Aphorism in Physic, Corpora corrupta quo magis nutris, eo magis laedis;
He that gives a sick man whatsoever he calls for, may hapily please his
taste, but he will surely increase his disease: Honor, pleasure, wealth, make
ungodly men unhappily happy; so, that if you look upon them with the eyes of
faith, and not with the eyes of flesh and blood, you will acknowledge this to
be true, though strange; The ungodly are not what they seem to be, they seem
to be happy, but indeed they are unhappy.

Two ways unhappy. For first, you must strip them of true Bliss; Non sic,
they are not like the Blessed Tree; then must you cloth them with their
contempt; they are like the chafe. I need but touch at the former. You will
easily conceive that Branch of their Misery, by measuring the Privation by the
Habit; and you must judge of the want, by the desireablenesse of that which
they do want.

1. God takes care of the blessed Tree; Of a Tree of the field, a wild Tree, he
makes it a Tree of the Orchard, a planted Tree. Non sic impij; No such care
taken for the ungodly, they are as Out-lawes left to themselves to grow on in
the corruption of their Natures.

2. The blessed Tree is planted by the Rivers of Waters, it is set where it
cannot want, John 4. 2. Cor. 12.9.
on every side it is supplied with abundance of juice. If God as the Husbandman
take care of any, Christ will be unto him a Fountain of living Waters, his
Grace will be sufficient for him: Non sic impij; they drink little of Christ's
spirit; as they are little husbanded by Gods care.

3. The blessed Tree, as it receives Good: so it yields good again. For first,
it proves well, it yields kindly Fruit. Non sic impij; their Fruit is not
theirs, but it is the fruit of him that sets them on work, that is, of the
Devil. For mark; The natural fruit that our Understanding should bear, is
Truth, and that our Will should bear, is Good: The very Philosophers have
taught us, that Truth is the natural Object of the Understanding, and Good of
the Will; but our Understanding brings forth Lies to deceive us, and our Will
Sins to give mortal wounds unto us, John 8.44.
if we be Ungodly. And what are these but the fruits of the Devil who is a
Liar; and a Murderer from the beginning?

4. The blessed Tree brings forth not only kindly, but timely Fruit also; His
good deeds are as seasonable, as they are Virtuous; Non sic impij. The
Scripture, especially the Proverbs teaches us, that the wicked are perverse;
they are perverse, in that they do not only what they should not; but also
when they should not: they will feast, and be frolic, Esaias 22.
when they should humble themselves before God; and when they should be
joyful, and cheerfully serve God, then will they be discontent, and fall to
their tears; as the Jews, when after their return from Babylon they laid
the foundation of the Temple: In the Book of Numbers you shall find, Ezra. 3.
that when God would have had the Israelites enter into Canaan, then they would
back again into Egypt, and when God would not have them go, then they would
needs hasten into Canaan.

5. The blessed Tree bears not only Fruit, but Leaves. A good man cloatheth
his good deeds with good Circumstances; Non sic impij. If happily an ungodly
man undertake a good matter, he will mar it in the manner of doing of it; if
he give, he will do it churlishly; if he reprove, he will do it
uncharitably; if he Pray he will do it hypocritically; finally, whatsoever
he does he will do it untowardly, and so his Good does no good, and so proves
no Good at all.

6. Finally, the blessed Tree is as well approved, as it proves well. When a
good man does good, it pleases God, and it profits men, and they have Comfort
of it themselves. Non sic impij, God abhors them, as being unlike unto him,
and to men they are as odious, as they are mischievous; Finally, they can take
little true content in themselves, because in themselves they can find little
true good.

And so have you seen the Ungodly stripped of all that is desirable in the
Blessed Tree: So, that although with the Church of Laodicea, they say, that
they are rich, and increast with goods, and have need of nothing; Revel. 3.17.
yet by by this time you see, that they are wretched, miserable, poor, blind,
and naked.

And a man would think this were misery enough so to be stripped. The Holy
Ghost does not leave them so; but as it tells us, that they are not what they
seem to be: so does it also tell us, that what they would not seem to be,
that indeed they are; and this it teaches in another Similie. He resembles
them to Dust; or to Chafe driven with the wind; he does not resemble them to
Nothing; for manet in ijs materia poenalis. Sin, as the School teach, is
Nothing, but not simply Nothing; it were happy for the wicked, if as they were
made at first of Nothing: so sin would bring them to nothing again; but
sin is such a nothing as ever cleaues unto that which continues Something;
it destroys the Well-being, but not the Being of a Creature. For example; by
sin our Understanding does not cease to be, but to be furnished with the
true Light, whereby we may see the way of Life; and our Will loses not her
being, but her holy power of choice; as likewise our Affections are deprived of
their true taste. This which so remaynes being depraved with sin, does Saint
Hilarie fitly call Materiam paenalem; it remaynes unto our greater woe.

But to come to the Similie. The Ungodly do not think so well of themselves,
but the Holy Ghost thinks as meanly; it appears by the Resemblance, Dust, or
Chafe, things that are next to Nothing. And indeed to set forth their
vileness, the Holy Ghost does vary such kind of Resemblances; sometimes by
representing them by Scumme, sometimes by Froth, sometimes by Dross, sometimes
calling them Vanity; yea, Psalm. 62. casting them below Vanity; in the Scales
if they be both put, they will ascend lighter then Vanity. The reason is;
because all imperfection that is in unreasonable Creatures is but Malum Poenae;
and therefore must needs come short of Malum Culpae: seeing the least Sin is
worse then the greatest Woe; therefore the greatest Woe does not sufficiently
set forth the Evil of the least Sin. We need not therefore wonder, that the
Holy Ghost does use so mean resemblances to set forth the Ungodly, in whom
there is so little worth.

But to come closer to it. They are like Dust or Chafe. Puluis licet terra
sit, tamen terra esse desijt, quia nihil habet solidi, destitutus humore; that
which is Dust was Earth, but by loosing his moisture, it is no longer a part of
the Earth; and Chafe was a part of the Ear of Corn, though being thresht it
continues no longer a part of the Ear: take which Resemblance you will, though
the latter is thought best to express the Original, This you may gather; That
all the Ungodly have their Original in the Church, though they do not show
themselves to be of the Church. The Husbandman carries out clean Seed, but
when it grows into an Ear, that Ear that bears the good grain, bears also
Chafe. Matti. 13.
Our Savior Christ uses this Similie; comparing the World to Gods Field, his
Word unto Seed, and himself unto the Sower; and surely God never sowed any of
his heavenly Seed, but the Ears did spring accompanied with Chafe: God sowed
it in Adam, of whom sprang Cain, and Abel; Cain, plain Chafe, Abel good
Corn: He sowed it in Noah, of whom sprange Sem, Cham, and Iapheth; Sem and
Iapheth good Corn, but Cham very Chafe: He sowed it in Abraham, of whom
sprang Ishmael, and Isaac; in Isaac, of whom sprang Jacob and Esau, from both
came Chafe as well as good Corn. And this Resemblance of Chafe does add
much to the Ungodliness of the Ungodly, that being vouchsafed to be in the
Church, they have so little Grace, as not to be of the Church; which agrees
well unto those persons which I told you before were meant here by Ungodly,
namely, Counterfeit Christians.

But Chafe has two remarkable things in it, Ariditatem, and Sterilitatem;
which you may very fitly oppose to the double good of the blessed Tree; the
Dryness, is opposite to the Good that is done for the Tree, and the
Barrenness to the good that comes of it. Touching the Dryness, it is plain
to any one that beholds Chafe; for though while it was growing it had some
sap, yet being cut down from the Root which did feed it, and thresht from the
Grain which might yield some moisture to it, it must needs be dry. And such
is the condition of the Ungodly: if they let go their hold-fast which they
have on Christ by a true faith, and lose themselves from that blessed
Communion, which they have with Saints, what sap of Grace can there be in them?
seeing these two are the only means of Grace, and without these we may not
expect any sap of Life. Therefore Jeremy compares the Wicked unto the Heath
in the Desert, Ier. 17.6.
and parched places in the Wilderness, in a Salt Land.

And if they be subject to Dryness, they must needs be subject to
Barrenness; for who can expect fruit where there is no sap, seeing sap is the
cause of fruit? and who can expect good works where there is no Grace, seeing
it comes of Grace, that man does any thing that is good?

But the Ungodly are not only compared unto Chafe, but unto winnowed Chafe.
The state of the Ungodly is but mean, if they be no better then Chafe; but
their state is meaner, if that Chafe be winnowed. It is some honor to the
Chafe, that it cleaues to the Ear of Corn growing in the Field, and in the
threshing Floor lies mingled with the grains; but it loses much, though not
of its substance, which it never had, yet of the countenance, which it seemed
to have, if once it come to be winnowed. Those that are not of the Church
acquire some estimation by being in the Church; which they utterly lose when
they leave that Communion.

But what is this Winnowing? The Fathers observe a double Wind that turmoyles
the Ungodly: There is ventus Vanitatis, and Ventus Iudicij, they are exposed to
an Inward, and to an Outward Wind; the Inward Wind is the Wind of Vanity, that
takes them sometimes in the Head; and as Saint Paul speaks Ephesians. 4. They
are carried about with every Wind of Doctrine, by the slight of man; and as
Saint James, Iam. 1.
they wave about, and are unstable in all their ways. Let a Theudas, or a
Judas of Galilie come amongst the Jews; Let a Montanus, or a Mahomet come
amongst the Christians, what a company will they draw after them? unlearned,
and unstable souls how are they besotted with Novelties? how are they with
their own Heads winnowed like Chafe?

Neither with their Heads only; but also with their Hearts. There is not a
Passion which like a strong Gale of Wind does not transport them; Anger
raises storms within them; Vain Glory as wings carries them beyond
themselves; Covetousness makes them base; Envy makes them unsociable; Pride
makes them Tyrants; Luxury makes them Beasts: the Ungodly are as pliable, as
a Weathercocke, neither need they any other wind to shift their situation, but
only their own Passions.

But as if this Inward Wind did not turmoile them enough, they are subject to
an Outward, the wind of Gods Judgment, which the Chaldee Paraphrase calls
Ventum furentem, and the Prophets very commonly call it a Whirlewind. Saint
John Baptist tells us, Matthew. 3.12.
that Christ shall come with his fan in his hand, and therewith shall
thoroughly purge his floor. Where mark, that Gods Judgment is compared to
Wind, of which our Savior Christ tells Nicodemus, the wind blows where it
lists, John 3.8.
thou know not whence it comes, nor whether it goes: so do Gods
Judgments surprise men; when the ungodly cry Peace, Peace, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
then comes sudden destruction upon them. You shall find this fully and
excellently described, Job 21.

But mark the Opposition of Chafe unto the Wind, the weakness of (...) to
the irrisistiblensse of the Wind; especially, if it be a Whirlewind, whither
you respect the Impotencie of their own Affections, under which they sink, or
Gods Vengeance which must needs ouer-beare them. Who would set the Briars, and
Thorns against me in Battle? (says God; Esaias 27) I will go through them, I
will burn them together: It must needs make much to the Misery of the
Ungodly, that being so little able they must abide so violent an encounter:
violent it is; but yet such as is meet for them; for the Ungodly are called
Reshagnim, turbulent, and tumultuous people; and what Judgment is so fit for
them, as to be harrowed, and hurled with the Wind? They that give rest to
none, it is pity they should have any rest. The Vulgar adds to the Text
Exegetice, from the Earth; The wind drives the Chafe from the Earth. Saint
Hierome makes a good Note upon it; Tam infoelix erit impius, vt ne terrenus sit
puluis; most miserable is the case of the Ungodly, when the Earth that bare
them, (...).
will not endure them. God in Deuteronomie threatens such a Judgment to the
Jews, and we see that at this day they endure it: their case may be any man's
case, and if we be Ungodly, the Whirlewind may drive us out of the good Land
which God bestows upon us. Russinus goes a step higher, Si facies terrae
species patriae Coele^lis accipitur, recre puluis a facie terrae proijci
dicitur, quia a Visione Calestis Gloriae impius remouetur. Adam in Paradise
below, forfeited Paradise above, and the Jews had little hope of Heaven, the
Truth, that were cast out of Canaan, the Type thereof: Neither may we presume
of the Kingdom of Glory, if we be unworthy of the Kingdom of Grace. And no
wonder; for, Chafe that is winnowed from the threshing Hoore is reserved for
the fire, (...). 3.
as Saint John Baptist tells us; neither are the wicked separated from the
good, but for their greater Woe.

But I must conclude. Three things we learn in this Text; First, that the
Ungodly are subject to a double Punishment, Poena Damni, and Poena Sensus; they
are deprived of great Good, and the Evil is great whereunto they are exposed.
Secondly, the Non Sic, and the Sicut advise us to compare the Happiness of the
Blessed Tree, with the Misery of this winnowed Chafe, that the Contraries
being set one against the other we may the better discern them, and resolve
which of them to choose. Last of all; We may see, that there is no reason, why
we should envy the pompes and vanities of this wicked World; seeing they have
neither Substance, nor Continuance. Job teaches it more then once, and so does
David, Psalm. 37. and 73. When we go to a Play, we do with the Eyes of our
Reason, correct the Eyes of our Body, and our Reason judges them but Varlots,
whom our Sense beholds as Kings: It were to be wished that when we come to the
Stage of this World, we would bring thither, as well the Eyes of Faith, as of
Reason; our Judgment would not be so often perplexed, nor our Resolution
staggered as they are with the seeming prosperity, and Glory of the World; we
would with Moses, (...).
esteem the rebuke of Christ better then the Treasures of Egypt, and endeavor
to be happy, rather in deed, then show.

To shut up all. Blessed we would all be in this World; but few take Notice of
the Evidence of true Blessedness; That Evidence, is in the first Resemblance,
the Resemblance to the Tree; Let us observe it, and desire to partake it;
otherwise, we may be deluded with a seeming Evidence, which you have heard of
in the latter Resemblance, the Resemblance of winnowed Chafe: the double
Misery that is in it should make us abhor it; as the double good of the
former, should make us affect it.

God give Us a true Judgment to distinguish them, and Grace to make that
discreet choice, that we may partake the former of them. Amen. PSALM. 1. VERSE.
5. Therefore the Ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment, nor Sinners in the
Congregation of the Righteous.


THe words contain the second of those Evidences whereby it may be known, who
are Blessed. Men are Blessed in this Life, and that which is to come, and God
has set marks upon either degree of Blessedness. The marks of the first
degree, you heard unfolded, when I last spoke unto you upon this Psalm: It
follows then, that I now open unto you the marks of the second degree, so
far as I find them expressed in this Verse.

For the better understanding whereof, we must observe; First, what matter is
contained in these words; and then, whereupon these words are inferred. In the
World to come there are two remarkable things; the Entrance into, and the State
of it, in either of these, there is some thing Common, and something Proper,
both to the good, and the bad. In the Entrance, that which is Common, is,
Judgment, both must come to the Bar; that which is Proper, is, That in the
Judgment the Righteous can, the Ungodly cannot stand. In the state, it is
Common to good, and bad, to be Societies, or Congregations; but it is Proper
to the Righteous, to be of such a Congregation, whereinto the Ungodly shall not
come; neither shall the Righteous come into the Congregation whereof the
Ungodly shall be. So much must be supplied a Pari; the ground is the same for
both, the reason of the latter difference is contained in the former; for they
that differ in the Judgment, must differ in the Society also; seeing God is
pleased, that that shall be the ordinary passage unto this. These are the
Contents of the words.

But you must take notice of the Inference also remembered by the first word,
Therefore. That, will inform us; that the Evidence of Blessedness in the Life
to come, depends upon the Evidence of Blessedness in this present Life. He
that is Blessed here, shall be Blessed hereafter; and he shall never be
Blessed hereafter, that is not Blessed here. And so have I showed you whereof
you shall hear: Come we then to the Text, and first to the Contents thereof;
wherein we must first see, what is Common to the good and the bad at their
Entrance into the World to come; and that is, Judgment.

By Judgment, the Chaldee Paraphrast understands the General Assizes, that
shall be kept at the end of this World; and he is in his Interpretation
followed by most Divines, Ancient, and Modern. This being the meaning of this
Word; the Persons here mentioned, Righteous and Ungodly, must be understood to
appear as well in their Bodies, as their Souls. There is a Judgment, that
passes before upon them, wherein their Bodies are severed from their Souls;
but that Judgment is private and particular, whereas this is public, and
general; and though they agree for the most part, in the Substance, yet in the
Solemnity they differ much, and the latter does much improve the former,
whether you respect the Glory of the Judge, or the Doom of the Judged.

This being resolved; that the Judgment is that, which shall be at the last
day: We must here observe; how the Holy Ghost speaks very accurately in these
words. He says not, the Ungodly, and Sinners shall not be Judged, but the
Ungodly shall not Stand in the Judgment, nor Sinners in the Congregation of
the Righteous. And so the words have in them Aliquid Commune, which they imply,
and Aliquid Proprium, which they express: It is Common to all the persons here
mentioned, Good and Bad, to be Judged, but Proper to the Bad, not to Stand in
Judgment.

It is Common to Good and Bad, to come unto Judgment; as commom, as to rise
from the dead. Saint Paul who, Acts 24. says, there shall be a Resurrection of
the just and unjust, says distinctly. 2. Cor. 5. that we shall all appear
before the Judgment seat of Christ, to receive according to that which every
man has done in his Body, be it good or ill. Daniel in the twelfth of his
Prophecy teaches the very same, (...) 2.
Many of those that sleep in the dust shall rise, some to everlasting Life,
and some to everlasting shame. The very same also we learn of the Preacher
in his twelfth Chapter, (...) 14.
God shall bring every work into Judgment, and every secret thing, whether
it be good, or whether it be evil. The point is so clear, that it is made an
Article of our Faith; so that I shall not need, to add any more proof.

Here note; That whereas God is an absolute Lord, most wise, most holy, most
mighty; so that he knows all, and detests all sin, and may deal with
Sinners at his pleasure; yet, he will have all the World see; that he receives
none into Heaven, nor sends any unto Hell, but the ground of his doing is just:
for he sentenceth both in Judgment; so that there can be no exception taken,
(not by malice it self) unto his proceeding. Both good and bad pass by
Judgment to their state. And let this suffice concerning that which is Common
unto Good and Bad, in the Entrance into the World to come.

I come now to that which is Proper. And here I must begin with Venerable Bedes
Rule, Intellectus est per Opposita. We must conceive; that what is denied to
the Ungodly is granted to the Righteous: so that these concise words must be
resolved into more, and so some not unfitly supply in the first Branch of this
sentence a word that is found in the last, to make it clear; wherefore they
read thus, The Ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment of the Righteous, that
is, the Ungodly shall not stand in that Judgment wherein the Righteous shall
stand. Let us then consider these Propositions asunder; first, that which is
expressed; then, that which is employed. The expressed Proposition is, The Ungodly
shall not stand in Judgment. Standing in, is opposed to both Shrinking from,
and Sinking under Judgment: so that if the Ungodly shall not stand, it
follows they will Shrink from, and Sink under it. And indeed the Holy Ghost
observes both: when God arises unto Judgment, the wicked will first try
their heels; but when they will not serve, then they grow heartlesse, and
despair of Help.

But to open these Branches a little more fully. Flight is the first attempt of
the Ungodly at the Day of Judgment; they are forced unto it from within, and
from without, from the horror of their own conscience, and from the terror
of the Judge. Touching Conscience, it is an undeniable truth; that where there
is sense of Guilt, there is distress of Fear: see it in our Grandfather
Adam; no sooner had he eaten of the forbidden fruit, and his eyes were opened
thereby; but he took covert, and when he was questioned, he gave God this
reason for his flying. I saw that I was naked. Neither was it his case only,
Genesis 3.
it is hereditarie to all his offspring; Solomon has put it in a Proverb;
Poou. 28.
The wicked fly when no man pursues them; God has put it into his Law, where
the Israelites are threatened, that if they break Gods Covenant, one part of
their punishment shall be, amazedness of Heart, Leu. 26.
and such a fearfulness, as that they shall fly at the shaking of a Leaf.
An Example we have in Foelix, Acts 24.
who trembled when Saint Paul did but preach of Righteousness, and Judgment
to come.

As the Guilt of Conscience: so likewise the terror of the Judge will make the
wicked to fly. When God gave his Law, he gave it with that terror, that the
people gave back, and stood afar off; yea, Moses himself confesses, as
Saint Paul reports, that he was greatly afraid. Heb. 12.
And how much more think you shall the wicked be afraid, when Christ shall
come in the Glory of his Father, with all his Angels? with the dreadful sound
of the Trumpet? and all the World burning round about him? certainly it cannot
but strike such a terror, as shall make the wicked betake themselves to their
heels. Christ in the Gospel describing the Last Day, says, Luke 21.26.
That Men shall be at their wits ends for fear and expectation of the evils to
come; they shall call to the Rocks to hide them, to the Mountains to fall
upon them. Saint John repeates the very same, reckoning, Kings, great men, rich
men, mighty men, bond, free; the voice of every one of them shall be this; The
great Day of the Lambs wrath is come, and who shall be able for to stand?
Revel. 6.

Put these Causes of flight together; and then learn from Saint John; John
1.3, 20.
If our conscience do accuse us, God is greater then our Conscience; and
knows all things. And yet Saint Basil makes such a lively Description of the
work of Conscience in Judgment, that a man would think nothing could be
added to the terror thereof; (...)
(...), etc. The Conscience will so limme out our Lives, and be such a Looking
Glass of all our deeds; that by an unspeakable power, in a moment of time as
we would think, nothing can better represent our selves to our selves.

But for all that; the Heart of a man is an intricate Labyrinth, none knows
it but God only (as God himself teaches in Jeremy. (...) 17 1^. (...) 4.
(...) 4.
) As all things are naked before his eyes: so will he then bring many things to
light which are hid in darkness. When then both these terrors concur,
whereof the one so much increases the other, you will not wonder, that the
wicked upon the apprehension thereof betake themselves to flight.

Flying is their shift; but it is a vain one; for whether should they fly,
when every creature, which at the Creation was made a Soldier in Gods Host
shall at the last Day become a Iaylour to arrest prisoners, and present them at
his Assizes? What remains then, but that they that cannot shrink from the
Judgment, ^isdome 17.
sink under it? For wickedness condemned by her own witness is very
timorous, and being pressed with Conscience always forecasteth terrible things:
The man that was but questioned for wanting his Wedding Garment at the
Marriage, Matthew. 2^.
grew presently speechless: Our Savior Luke 21. says; that their Judgment
shall come like a snare; and indeed in the Psalm we read, that God shall
rain upon the wicked, Psalm. 11.
Snares, Fire, and Brimstone, Storm, and Tempest, this is their partion to
drink. Now we know, that a Snare does not only take, but ouer-turne the wild
beast that is taken therein.

But if the terror of the Judge do not, (...) 19.12.
Under whom the mightiest Helps do stoop (as it is in Job) nor the
inextricable suddaines of his Judgment; yet the weight of sin will crush,
and bear a Sinner to the ground.

David in his own person, and conflicts with a guilty Conscience, out of
which notwithstanding, by Gods mercy he did finally rise, yet confesses; that
the sense of guilt is like a drowning Flood, like a crushing Burden, a Burden
too Heavy for man to bear; and if the righteous, that Man after Gods own
Heart, when he sell as a man, were scarcely saved, where shall the Ungodly, 1.
(...) ^
and the unrighteous appear? You see then, how true it is; that, The Ungodly
shall not stand in Judgment; Causa cadent, and cadent persond, themselves with
their Cause shall fall to the ground, they shall both sink as low as the
Chambers of death.

But Bon^ concessum quod impijs negatum, (as Bede notes), though They shall
not, yet shall The Righteous stand. And no marvel; for they shall be free
both from the guilt of Conscience, and the terror of the Judge. And why? Their
hearts are purified by Faith, yea, purified from dead works; whatsoever is
mortal is taken from them; for, Christ Jesus of God is made unto them Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; (...)
the Law of Life which is in Jesus Christ freeth them from sin, and death: so
that, Romans 8. Matthew. 24.
there is no condemnation unto them which are so in Christ: And if there be no
Condemnation; then may they Lift up their heads with joy when Christ comes;
1. John 3. Luke 21
knowing that their Redemption draws near; If their Conscience do not
accuse them, they may have boldness in the Day of Judgment, they shall stand
before the Son of Man; and his Throne shall be unto them, a Throne of Grace.

But more distinctly. The Standing of the Righteous is opposed to the Flying
from, and Sinking under Judgment; if Adam did fly only because he was Naked,
that which remedieth the Nakedness stays the flight: now Nakedness stood in
Sin, and Mortality; both these are remedied in the Resurrection of the Just.
The Sin is all taken away, by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and
Sanctification of his Spirit. The Mortality, because as they are quickened by
Grace in their Souls: so their Bodies of Natural become Spiritual, 1. Cor.
15.
and their Corruptible puts on Incorruption, their Mortal, Immortality: so
then, there being no part of Nakedness left, there can remain no cause of
Flying.

And if not of Flying from, then not of Sinking under Judgment; for that which
is the Cause of Flying is the cause of Sinking also: but the state of their
Person does deny al possibility of Sinking; the Spiritin their Soul is the
Pledge of their Inheritance in Heaven, and their Bodies which they shall then
receive, are not only Houses from Heaven; 2. Cor. 5.
but such as are fitted for Heaven; both carry upward, and not downward.

But mark more particularly, 1. These. 4.16.
what the Scripture says of the Resurrection of the just. The Dead in Christ
shall Rise first: Yea, they only shall Rise from death; for the Resurrection
of the wicked is not from, but unto Death, from one Death unto another. And
therefore in Saint Luke only the Righteous are called Filij Resurrectionis;
Luke 20.36.
because their Resurrection is unto Life, which is properly a Standing; the
wicked do but Rise to take a greater fall, they fall from a Temporal, to an
Eternal Death.

Secondly, As the Righteous shall Rife first: so being raised, 1. These. 4.17.
Rapientur in occursum, They shall be taken up into the air to meet Christ,
and so shall ever be with him: So that except He fall, they shall never fall;
they shall be removed from the Earth which is the place of falling.

Thirdly, they shall be placed at the right Hand of Christ: to be taken up unto
him is to be admitted to a Beatificall Vision; Psalm. 16.
for what is our happiness but to see Him as He is? For, in his presence there
is fullness of joy; and if we be placed at His right Hand, there is pleasure
for ever more, secure Honor, and endless Life: if that support us, no fear
of falling, we shall certainly stand.

But to put it out of all doubt. When we come to the right Hand, Matthew, 9.
we shall be set upon Thrones, and shall with Christ judge the twelve Tribes of
Israel, 1. Cor. 6
yea the Angels also; so far shall we be from being woefully Passive, that we
shall be gloriously Active in that Judgment. How we shall Judge is a curious
question: I will not now undertake to resolve it, it suffices to my purpose,
that howsoever we shall Judge; as many as are honored with that function, may
well be held Standers; they shall neither Shrink nor Sink.

But we may not forget; that the Sinews by which we are supported in this
Standing are derived from Christ; if out of Him, we look upon our selves,
Psalm. 113.
we may well say, Enter not into Judgment with thy servants, O Lord, for in
thy sight, shall no flesh living be justified; Or, to keep to the word of my
Text; Psalm. 130.
If thou Lord mark iniquities, who shall be able for to Stand? We cannot
Stand without Corruption, except his Grace do cleanse us, neither can we Stand
against Condemnation, except his Merits do secure us.

Some here work upon the difference, which they suppose to be, betwixt Ungodly
and Sinners; understanding by ungodly, those wicked men who are open, and
professed Enemies to God, Malefactors Deprehensi in flagranti Crimine, taken in
the manner of doing: by Sinners understanding other wicked men, which seem to
be in the Church, and are as it were but Probabiliter suspecti, Challenged upon
suspicion. And they tell us; The first sort of wicked men, Shall not stand in
Judgment, that is, shall not be graced with any formal Arraignment, before
their Condemnation: The second sort, howsoever they may stand in Judgment, so
far as to be legally tried; yet they shall never come, to stand in the
Congregation of the Righteous, In Job. c. 36.
never partake with them in Happiness. Princes (says Gregory) deal
otherwise with their Subjects, then they do with their Enemies, in point of
Judgment; for if they take an Enemy, they use Martial Law, and command
Execution without any judicial Process; but if a Subject be called in
question, he has the benefit of the Law, he is suffered to plead for
himself, neither is he doomed, before he is tried. The meaning is, that, of
the wicked which shall be arraigned at the Day of Judgment, such as are
without the Church, shall without all plea, as professed Enemies of Christ, be
proceeded against; for their Infidelity shall be undeniable: But those that
are within the Church, God condescends farther unto them; they shall have a
trial, they shall be heard what they can say; though it will steed them little,
because it shall be showed them, how vain it is And indeed such a form of
proceeding is expressed, Matthew. 25. and Luke 13.

Where, by the way, It is good for us to take notice; That though it be a
Privilege to be of the Church Militant in this world; yea, and it gives us
also a Privilege above Infidels at the entrance into the World to come; Yet,
except we so show our faith in our works on Earth, that we may have the
benefit of it, at the Day of Judgment, there is little comfort in such a
Privilege. For in regard of Death, a Citizen is no freer, then an Enemy, if
both come to it; though one come to it by Martial Law, the other by Process
in a Civil Court: So if both meet in Hell, it skils not, whether one come as
an Infidel, and the other as a wicked Christian; except happily the Christians
case be the worse; because he neglected the good means, which the Infidel had
not.

I have showed you, wherein the Ungodly, and the Righteous agree, and differ,
at the entrance into the world to come; we must now following the Text, see the
very same points in the state of both, which follows upon that entrance. And
here first, we do find something Common; for both are Socteties, or
Congregations. They have been so from the very beginning of the World, there
has been the Serpent and his Seed, the Woman and her Seed, the Sons of
God, and the Daughters of men; Michaell and his Angels, the Dragon and His,
Babel, and Jerusalem. Saint Austen in his learned Books De Ciuitate Dei, has
enlarged this point; it is so clear, I need not dwell longer upon it.

But we must mark; that these Societies may be distinguished ^ither only
Habitu, or also Actu; only in Quality, or also in Place: In this World they
are in place confounded, though they are distinguished in quality; the
Righteous though they are not of the World, John 17
yet they are in it, and many false Christians are in the Church, which are not
of it; the World is as Gods Field wherein grow both Wheat and Tares; in his
earthly Barn there is both Grain and Chafe; his House has Servants
Thriftie, and Unthrifty; and in his Flock, are as well Goats as Sheep. But
this confusion shall not hold on always, they that differ in Quality, shall
also be sundred in Place, the Goats from the Sheep, the Tares from the
Wheat, the foolish Virgins from the Wise, the Unthrifty servant from the
Thriftie. This is the first point of Difference.

But it is not the only point; but as they are separated: Luke 16.
so this separation shall continue for ever; so does Abraham assure Dives,
Between you and us there is a great Gulf, no passage from one to the other.
The same God that separated the Egyptians from the Israelites by the Pillar of
fire, when they came out of Egypt, will never suffer them to come together,
will so part the Saints of Heaven, from the Feinds of Hell, that they shall
never grow into one Society again. Not that absolutely it cannot be
otherwise, but God will have it to be so, 2. Cor. 6.14.
he will have it clearly to appear, that there is no Communion between Light
and Darkness, Christ and Belial, the Temple of God, and the Synagogue of
Satan. Eay 66.14.
It is true that the Godly shall go out, and see the wicked tormented, Luke 16.
and Dives in Hell shall see Abraham in Heaven, and Lazarus in his bosom, to
the greater Comfort of the one, and terror of the other. But they shall never
come together, neither shall they change their Place or State.

This latter Difference is grounded upon the former, for they that differ at
the entrance into the World to come, must needs differ in the state thereof;
for Judgment is the Gate that does as it were lead unto that State; therefore,
if the unchangeableness of the State do move us, we must not be careless
of the Judgment. Let this suffice touching the Contents of these words; a word
of the Inference, and so an end.

Therefore; the first word of this Verse looks back upon that which goes
before, and out of that truth collects this. You have heard that the Ungodly
shall not stand in Judgment; wonder not at it. The Ungodly are but Winnowed
Chafe, and how should that Stand, that is so light as Chafe; or rest, which
is so restless as Chafe, which is winnowed? The Righteous shall stand; and
wonder not at it, They are Trees, well planted Trees, Trees laden with Fruit,
with Leaves, Trees wel-liking, well liked; every point adds weight unto them,
makes them firm, and standing. If a man be disenabled to stand, it is
because he is Chafe; and if he be a Tree, he shall be well able to stand.
You see what you should fear, what you should desire; fear, to be like this
winnowed Chafe, desire, to be like the happy Tree, that you may have a
blessed Entrance into the World to come.

Neither a blessed Entrance only; but a blessed State also must you affect to
have therein: and how shall you have it? Learn of, Therefore. It looks back
to the beginning of the Psalm; you see there the disposition of good Men in
this World, they will have nothing to do with Wickedness; they will not walk
in the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor stand in the way of Sinners, nor set in the
Seat of Scorners; they will have no communion with wickedness on Earth, and
the wicked shall have no Communion with them in Heaven. It is a Poetical
Fiction; that what every Man affected here in Earth, with that he shall be
solaced in the Elysian Fields. Certain it is, that look in what men delighted
while they lived on Earth, with their Companions in that shall they be ranged
in the Life to come: they shall not there be the Servants of God, who here
were the Slaves of Satan; spiritual Eunuchs that bring forth no good works;
Bastards that are not the Seed of God; the incestuous brood of Ammonites, and
Moabites that are borne of worldly lust, and concupiscence, shall more
certainly be excluded the Congregation of Heaven, then were the Corporal,
from the Congregation of Israel on Earth. Dent. 23.


Seeing then, Psa^. 5.
God is a God that has no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall Evil dwell
with him, The foolish shall not stand in his sight, He hates all workers of
Iniquity; Ecclesiast. 18.18
Let us provide Physic before we are sick; and get Righteousness before we
come to Judgment: so shall the Tribunal of Christ be unto us as Mount Sion,
when to others it is Mount Sinai; when they fly and fall, we shall approach
and stand upright; And if we live the Life of Christ, tread the steps of the
Faith of our Father Abraham, Philip. 32 ^.
have our Conversation in Heaven; we shall not only be as Angels, but with
Angels we shall be refreshed in Abraham's Bosom; we shall sit down with
him, with all the Patriarchs, and Prophets, with all the Saints and Angels at
Christ's Table, eternally Blessed in the Kingdom of Heaven.

God grant us such Grace in this Life, as may bring us to such Bliss in the
Life to come. AMEN. PSALM. 1. VERSE. 6. The Lord knows the way of the
Righteous: and the way of the wicked shall perish.


Upon former words of this Psalm, I have observed a double difference between
the Righteous, and the Ungodly; a difference in this life, and a difference in
the life to come: In this Life, the Righteous are like unto a Blessed Tree, to
which there is much good done, and of which there comes much good; but the
Wicked are like winnowed Chafe, that has small worth, and takes as little
rest: in the Life to come they differ also, whether you look on the Entrance
thereinto, or the state therein; at the Entrance, the Wicked shall not endure
the Judgment, wherein the Righteous shall stand upright; and the Righteous
shall be of a Society, whereinto the wicked shall not come.

I have opened both these differences so far, as I was occasioned by words of
this Psalm; It remaynes, that now we see the Cause thereof, which is the
Argument of this Verse. It will teach us; that of so notable a difference,
there is some remarkable Cause; the Cause then is, Gods Judicial Providence:
Gods Providence is very large; but there is a special Branch thereof, that
calls Men to an account for their Lives. In this Branch which I call Judicial
Providence, there are two things which we must observe, Sapientia, and
Potentia, it is a true Discerner and a powerful Rewarder of all men, be they
Good or Bad; so much shall we find in these words, The Lord knows the way of
the Righteous; but the way of the wicked shall perish. For the words are
Synecdochicall, there is more employed, then is expressed in them; the word that
notes Sapientiam, Gods discerning of the Ways, implies Potentiam, his
answerable dealing with them; and the word that notes Potentiam, his reuengfull
Hand on the Ways, implies Sapientiam, his discerning thereof also. And why?
this Judicial Providence is Operosa Cognitio, therein the Power of God attends
his Wisdom, and his Wisdom guides his Power.

This being observed in General upon the words of my Text, we must more
distinctly therein see; first, Whereupon, then How, this Judicial Providence
works; that whereon it works has something Common, and something Proper;
that which is Common is Via; be men what they will be, they have a course of
Life; but all take not the same course: there is something Proper, which stands
in their several courses; therefore the Text does distinguish of Ways,
saying, that there is Via Iustorum, the Just man's way, which is all one with a
just way, and there is Via peccatorum, the wicked man's way, which is all one
with a wicked way; this is that whereon Gods Judicial Providence does work.

Now his work Thereon has also Aliquid Commune, and Aliquid Proprium; both the
Ways are wrought upon by Gods wise Power, or Powerful Wisdom; for God is a
Discerner, and Rewarder of both, as I told you, when I opened the Synecdochie
of the Verse.

But there is something Proper in either Word; the Wisdom, and Power
Judicial, works one way upon the way of the Righteous, and an other way upon
the way of the wicked; Nouit Viam Iustorum, he takes a special Notice of, and
bestows a gracious Reward upon the way of the Righteous; but Via peccatorum
peribit, the way of the wicked shall feel another kind of Reward, because it
is excluded from this special kind of Notice. And these be the Contents of
this Scripture, which I will now unfold briefly, and in their Order.

First then, of that Whereon the Judicial Providence works; therein (as I
told you) there is something Common, and that is a Way. Praesens vita (says
Saint Basil) nihil aliud est quam perpetua Via; this our mortal life is
nothing else but a passage, and this World a Through fair: therefore the
Schools distinguishing between those that are departed, and those that Live,
call the Living Viatores, way faring men; and those that are dead
Comprehensores, such as are at their Iournies end; the Patriarchs acknowledge
as much when they call themselves Pilgrims, Strangers, Soiourners, and their
Life a Pilgrimage.

And indeed, (...) 13 ^4.
neither Good nor Bad have here any Abiding place, they do in purpose or in
practice seek one to come. It is true that worldly men think of no other
World; ^uke 11.
but the 49. Psalm confutes their folly; so does the Gospel in the Parable of
the Rich man; and how should that be stable, 1. Cor 7 ^1.
that rests upon a thing most unstable? Praeterit figura huius secult, the
fashion of this World passes away, and All these things must be dissolved: and
how should the little World ever come to a stand, when the Great World makes
away? so that we must provide for another place.

We must, nay, every man does, will he nill he, he does; for his Life is but a
Way; he is every day, every hour, every moment onward, somewhat toward Heaven,
or Hell.

But the Way notes not only a Course, but a settled Course. There are many
startings aside both of Good and Bad; the best many times slep aside into
bypath, but that is not Via eorum, the Just man's way: for he comes to
himself again, and with greater alacrity returns to his Religious Course:
And the wicked out of fashion, or fancy, do oftentimes try the right way,
but that is not Via eorum, it is not the wicked man's way; for he quickly
distastes it, and takes again his former Road; therefore the Scripture does
not by the Way understand, that which we do by sits, but that which we do
constantly, and wherein we persevere.

So then, it is Common to all men to go a Way, and hold a settled Course, but
yet the Course which all take is not the same: the Text will tell you, that
though a Way be Common, yet not the same Way. Here are two mentioned, The
Righteous man's Way, which I told you, is a righteous way; and the Way of the
wicked, which I told you, is a wicked Way. The Scripture does mention a
Straight, and a Crooked, a Narrow, and a Broad Way; the way of the Eagle, and
the way of the Serpent, a way upward, and a way downward, a way to Life, and a
way to Death, the way of God, and the way of the Devil; the Straight, Narrow,
Eagles Way, the way upward to Life, which is Gods way, that, is the way of the
Righteous, or the righteous Way; the Crooked, Broad, Serpentine Way, the way
downward to Death, which is the way of the Devil, that, is the Way of the
wicked, or the wicked Way. I need say no more of these Ways, that heretofore
have said so much of the difference between Good, and Bad men; It shall suffice
to have added thus much upon occasion of this word, Way, and the ^arietie
thereof, specified in this Verse.

Let us come on then to the Judicial Providence, that works upon these
Ways. And here I told you there is also some thing Common, and some thing
Proper; both these Ways are wrought upon by the provident Wisdom, and Power
of God; he Discernes them, he Rewards them both; were there no other proof,
the triuiall Verse confirms it.

Enter, Praesenter Deus est, and vbique Potenter. His Eyes behold all the ways
of Men, and his Eye lids try them all; that which is applied to Baltazzar,
Mean, Mean, Tekel, Vpharsin, Dan 5.
concerns every one more or less. David has made the 139. Psalm in
describing this General Eye, and Hand of God; and the Son of Syrach has
excellently expressed it. Chap. 23. and we shall really deny God, and be plain
Manichees, if we did exempt any thing from him, and not subject all things to
his Judicial Power. It Is true; that some things he permits unto the Creatures,
but it is neither an ignorant, nor an negligent Permission; he knows
whereabout they go, and holds the bridle in his own hand: most maiestically
does God in Esaias, let Zenacharib understand as much, Chap. 37
in an answer that he gives unto that insolent Message. I know thine abode, and
thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me; because thy rage
against me, and thy tumult is come up into mine ears, therefore will I put my
hook in thy Nose; and my bridle in thy Lips, and turn thee back the way by
which thou came.

But I need not enlarge this point of Gods General Judicial Providence, for
it will be farther confirmed by the particular branches thereof; If these
particulars be true, the General cannot be denied, because the General is
included in the Particular.

Though then it be Common to both Ways, that they come under Gods Judicial
Providence; yet come they not under it both alike; it works upon either after
a special manner; first, upon the way of the Just, Nouit Deus, The Lord
knows that Way; The Knowledge of God here meant, being not General but
Special, we must enquire what manner of Knowledge this is. I cannot better
inform you then by paralleling Gods special Knowledge of Man, with Man's
special Knowledge of God; for He which knows God, is also known of him, 1.
Cor. 8. Et qui ignorant ignorabitur, 1. Cor. 14.38. Now the special Knowledge
that Man must have of God, stands in two points, in Distinguendo, and Colendo:
he must first learn to distinguish God from all others; and that Contra, and
and Supra; he must oppose him to all that seems, but is not God; he must not
think him like unto Idols that have eyes and see not, ears and hear not,
hands and handle not, etc. For he must believe, that God is privy to the
Ways of men, and disposes all things at his Pleasure.

As we must thus oppose God to those which seem, but are not Gods: so must we
prefer him also before all to whom that name is communicable, be they Angels
or Men; for though there be some thing like in both, yet does God infinitely
exceed in that wherein he is like. This is the first branch of our knowledge,
which stands in Deo Distinguendo, in distinguishing God from all others.

The second branch stands in Deo Colendo, in our Carriage toward God, and that
also consists of two branches, Contemplation, and Dilection, our Eye must ever
be on him, our Heart must ever be toward him; Psalm 27 4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, says King David, and that will I still
require, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord, all the days of my life,
to behold the fair Beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy Temple; and how
busy is the Eye of the Spouse in the Canticles in viewing her Beloved from top
to toe?

As the Beauty of God draws the Eye of Man continually to behold it: so being
beheld, (...), a man cannot behold it, but he must fall in love with it. It was
wittily replied by an Ancient Father, (Saint Basil as it is thought) unto
Julian the Apostata, when he wrote upon an Apology of Christian Religion
presented unto him, (...).
(...). Certainly it is impossible for him that knows God as a Christian
ought, not to think he is bound to love him in the highest degree, with all
his Mind, with all his Soul, with all his Heart, with all his Strength, as the
Law speaks.

This being the special Knowledge that we must have of God; we must observe,
that Gods special Knowledge of Us is answerable hereunto. He Knows His,
first, Distinguendo; as in the departure out of Egypt, the blood of the
Paschall Lamb was sprinkled upon the door posts, to direct the punishing
Angel, not to mistake an Israelite for an Egyptian: And before the Babilonian
Captivity, God sent a Man with a Pen and Inkehorne to mark in the forehead
those that should escape the Destruction wrought by the Caldeans: and in the
Revelation, the Seal of God is set upon his Chosen, that they be not wrapped in
the General desolation. So must we assure our selves, Chap. 3.16.
that God Knows all His by name, and there is a Book of Remembrance of them
before him (as Malachie speaks); he will never misdeeme Wheat for Chafe,
nor mistake a Sheep for a Goat.

But the Scripture does branch this Distinction, and God does distinguish His
Contra and Supra Alios; (...). 2.1^.
Contra, he does oppose them unto others. We learn it of the Apostle, Others
are without God, without Christ, without Hope, Strangers from Gods Covenant,
Aliens from His Commonweal; but they that are His, have God for their Father,
Christ for their Savior, the Holy Ghost for their Comforter, eternal Life for
their Hope, 2. Pet. 1.4. (...). 2.1^.
they have precious promises made unto them, and they are of the Household of
God, and Fellow Citizens with the Saints.

Neither does God only thus oppose them to others, but prefer them before
others. We learn this of Moses, Exodus 19. though all the World be His, yet
they are His peculiar, His treasure; elsewhere they are called his Inheritance,
his First borne, his Image, Kings, Priests, all terms of pre-eminence, and
note their prerogative above all others. So does God Distinguish His.

And as he does distinguish them: so does he also regard them; and that in two
points, Contemplatione, and Dilectione. First, Contemplatione. His Eye is upon
his Canaan from the beginning of the year to the end thereof; Deuteronomy. 11.
The walls of Jerusalem are ever in his sight, his Eyes are upon the Righteous,
his ears are open to their Prayers, they find grace in his eyes, and his
delight is to be with them, they are a Seal upon His right Hand, and a Signet
upon His Arm; finally, they are the very Apple of his Eye.

If you read the Song of Solomon, you shall see this gracious Contemplation of
God set forth at large; where the Beloved does confess, that he receives a
Loue-wound from this Contemplation.

And indeed, the Righteous Lord loves righteousness, Psalm. 11.7.
as his eyes do behold the thing that is right, and God does therefore take
delight to behold his Church, that he may use that as a means for to draw
from him the Arguments of his Love, Love being the end of his Contemplation.
King David does excellently set this forth, Psalm. 132. Where bringing in God
testifying that he has chosen Sion for his resting place for ever, and that
there he delights to dwell, he goes on reckoning up the Blessings that he will
power upon the King, and his Subjects, the Priests and the People, the poor
and the rich; and Deuteronomy. 11. where God professes, that his Eye is always upon
the Land, the End is expressed, to give them seasonable rain, and make their
Land fruit full; for, his Love is Beneuolentia non latens, he delights in the
prosperity of His Servants. The very same is meant by those Titles which God
gives himself of Father, Savior, Husband; the Fathers eye is upon his Child
to provide that is fit for it; the Husbands eye upon his Wife to communicate
both his Honor, and his Wealth unto her; the Savior looks upon his Charge,
that he may look to it, and not suffer any thing to annoy it, and that he may
procure the welfare of it. This real Love makes good that which before I
observed, that Gods Power concurres with his Wisdom, and this special
Knowledge is not Speculatiue, but Practicke; Gods Children feel most gracious
effects thereof, and never more lively effects then at the Day of Judgment,
whereof this Text especially is meant.

Well then; The wicked in this World have no Wisdom to discern the Godly, at
least their Ways, though they observe their Persons; and the Power that they
have, they bend against them in regard of their ways; you may see this
excellently set forth in the Book of Wisdom, Cap. 2. But what need the
righteous care? They may say with the Apostle, that they are though unknown,
yet known; they are known to God, 2. Cor. 6.^
and God; Power is their support; and this makes a full amends for their
worldly ignoblenesse, that they are so Heavenly Noble, and shall appear such
at the General Judgment.

And so have I opened the first special Act of Gods Judicial Providence,
which works upon the ways of the Godly.

Let us now see the second; How the same special Providence works upon the
ways of the wicked; The way of the wicked shall perish; here you must supply
the word Lord; for he is the Person that does destroy them.

And mark what he does destroy. Not the Person, but the Way. Quam clementer?
(says Saint Hierome,) He seems to gather Gods Mercy out of it, in that Non
perit impius, sed impietas: And indeed were it meant of this Life, it were a
great Mercy; because, that Sin is not abolisht here, but Grace succeeds; and
that is a Blessed Destruction.

But the Connection of this Verse to the former shows, that this is meant of
the life to come; and then you shall find that the Destruction is woeful; and
it stands in two points, as their Ways do import two things, the Act of
Sin, and the Fruit of that Act. The Act of sin shall cease wherein they
take pleasure, for in Hell though there be Sinners, yet is there no Sinning;
the Corruption remaynes in their Persons, the Guilt in their Consciences, the
one, to make them fuel for the flames of Hell, that they may never go out,
the other, to feed the Worm, that shall never die; but the terror of the
Judge shall be so great, whose hand they shall feel in the fire, and the
Evidence of the evil of sin shall be so apparent in the Worm of their
Conscience, that they shall not dare any more to fall to the act of sin, and
so they shall be utterly deprived of the pleasure they took therein; That
shall perish.

A second thing that shall perish is, the worldly Fruit of their sinning, which
is, Honor, Wealth, Friends, and such like. Saint James calls it (...), James
1.11.
Esaias chap. 5. speaks it plainly, Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her
mouth without measure, and their Glory, and their multitude, and their pomp,
and he that rejoices shall descend into it; That, for which they take all
their wicked pains, and wherein they took their wicked delight, That shall
Fail. Fail, Totally, and Finally; Totally, the Glution shall not have so much
as a drop of water left to comfort him. In this Life there is a kind of Mixture
in the heauiest Judgment of God, and some thing left to mitigate the
extremity of their pain: not so in the Life to come; of that time we may use
those words of the 68. Psalm. Let God arise and his Enemies be scattered, Let
them also that hate him, fly before him, like as smoke vanishes, so shall he
drive them away, as Wax melts before the fire, so shall the wicked perish at
the presence of God. In the Book of Wisdom Chap. 5. this is amplified; What
has Pride profited us? What good has Riches with our vaunting brought us? All
these things are passed away like a shadow, and as a Post that hastes by; he
goes on resembling it to the way of a Ship, of a Bird, of an Arrow, and
concludes, The Hope of the Ungodly is like Dust, that is blown away with the
wind, like a thin froth that is driven away with the storm, like Smoke that
is dispersed with a Tempest; the same we may read, Job 18.

As these wicked ways perish Totally: so do they Finally also; for,
destruction, Nahum 1.^.
as Nahum speaks, shall not arise the second time; their perishing is
eternal, like that of the Devil and his Angels, who go into ever lasting
fire. And indeed these ways are in this point opposed unto the Righteous
ways; Wisdom 3.4 Isal. 139.24.
for Righteousness (as the Wiseman speaks) is full of immortality, and the
Psalmist calls it, A way everlasting: each Body shall continue his state
answerable to his Head; as Christ so Christians, as the Devil so the wicked,
both shall be lasting, the one in Bliss, the other in Pain.

But the word here used, shall perish, is worth the noting; for Abad signifies
Perdere, and Perire, and what is fitter for a destroying way, then to be a way
that shall be destroyed? During this Life the ways of the wicked are Viae
Perdentes; for they do nothing but destroy either Gods good Creatures, as the
Epicure, and Voluptuous; or other men, as the Covetous, and the Oppressors; yea
their own selves, for they waste Gods Image in them, and fight with their
Lusts against their own Soul, they show themselves to be the children of
their Father, which in the Revelation is called Abaddon, or (...): Revel. 9.11.
and what is fitter for him that is a Destroyer then to be Destroyed? and so
to be destroyed as they do destroy; not quoad Esse, but quoad Been esse;
Their Persons still continuing, all their Comforts fail, as they endeavored
to make all good Persons, and things to be uncomfortable.

But as this Destruction is Opus Potentiae, proceeds immediately from Gods
Power: so is it guided per Sapientiam, his wisdom has a hand in it; for as he
does bless those whom he does specially know: so if he destroy any, it is
because they are not within the compass of his special knowledge. And indeed
so shall Christ say at the last Day, Luke 13.23.
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not: How can God be
ignorant, and yet Judge? It is not meant simply of knowledge, but of that
special knowledge whereof you heard before; and if you will have it more
plainly, conceive it in these four Degrees.

First, God knows not the ways of the wicked, In se, He finds no such thing
in Himself; and yet is his Nature the Exemplar of all good things. Secondly,
He knows them not, A^se; No such Effects ever proceeded from his Spirit; and
yet Every good and perfect gift comes from above, James 1.17.
from the Father of Lights. Thirdly, He does not know them, Secundum Se, as an
Image of himself, as all his Creatures are; not only the little World was made
after his Image, Psalm. 19.
but also The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handy work; and the Visible Creatures make known the Invisible Creator. Romans
1 4. And lastly, He does not know them, Secum; He has no such in his
Retinue; Psalm 93.5.
Holiness beseemes his House for ever, and they must be sanctified that come
near him, and be Holy as He is Holy, and the wicked shall not stand in his
sight. Exodus 11, 44.


Well then, When we behold the wicked on Earth, prospering in their wicked
ways, we see that every one takes notice of them, and every body is ready to
do service to them; and happily this may bleere our eyes, and we may think
better of their state, then it deserves. But as Christ when his Disciples
showed Him the goodly Fabric of the Temple said unto them, Are these the
things that you wonder at? I tell you; Luke 21.
not a stone of these shall be left upon a stone which shall not be destroyed:
So I tell you, gaze not upon such ways, dote not upon them; for God knows
them but afar off, Psalm. 138. They are strangers unto him, and therefore
tollentur impij ne videant Gloriam Dei; they shall have as little part in Gods
Blessing, as they have in his special knowledge.

Lay both these works of providence together, and then see the Truth of
Maran-Atha in Saint Paul, the Lord comes, 1. Cor. ^6 22.
as Saint Jude translates it, yea, and Christ himself in Saint John, Revel.
22. Behold I come quickly, and my Reward is with me to give to every man
according to his works.

What shall I then say to you, but even remember you of those words in the
Prophet Jeremy, chap. 6. Stand ye in the ways, and see and ask (...)

AN EXPOSITION Of the one and fiftieth PSALM.
THE TITLE. To the chief Musician. A Psalm of DAVID, when NATHAN the Prophet
came to him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba.


I Have ended the first PSALM, wherein I opened unto you the Covenant of God;
the Parts of it, the Parties to it; the Parts, are a Vow, and a Reward, the
Parties, God and Man; Man voweth his Service, God promises a Reward, an
everlasting Reward for a momentainie Service.

Behold a gracious, an undoubted Truth; and yet does it prognosticate little
good to us, neither may we presume of any interest therein, if we try our
Case by our Lives. For who is there amongst us that tollerably performs his
Vow? And therefore which of us can hopefully expect the Reward? Surely, all
assuredness of the latter is clean taken away, except we be provided of some
remedy for our failing in the former.

Now (God be thanked) there is one, and you shall find it in this Psalm. The
Remedy is Repentance, and this is (...), so Saint Irenie calls it, a
Penitential Psalm. Lib. 4. c. 45.


There are seven which we vulgarly call Deadly Sins, we may call them also (if
not more fitly, yet as truly) Cardinal or Mother Sins; for they are the
nurseries of others. For the recovery out of these Sins, Secund. Vsum Sarum.
the old Liturgies have prescribed the use of seven special Psalms, they call
them Penitentials, amongst them this is the chiefest, and to be used Contra
Luxuriam, which is not the least of those seven Deaths Heads.

When we look upon the Deluge of Sin, we find that all the fountains of
the deep, the bottomless Pit, are broken open, and the streams thereof
drown many Souls in perdition, yet amongst them there is none more
universal, none more preualent, then is this Sin of Luxury. Desire you a
proof? You shall have a short but yet a pregnant one; Men are turned into
Women, and Women into Men. Anatomize that Carrion, well may you find more,
certainly you can find nothing worse therein. There is nothing worse then this
preposterous Unreasonableness, and unreasonable Preposterousnesse.

Well; what then is the Remedy? Surely, I know none better then that old one,
practiced by the Church: and therefore have I chosen to recommend unto the
World this Penitential, and shall be glad, if any that is bewitch with that
pleasing poison may be cured hereby. This Psalm was occasioned by a wanton
Man and Woman, and therefore the better fitting to our Wantons of both Sexes;
and I doubt not, but the most monstrous Changeling, if he meditate sadly
hereon, may be brought to change again; but for, and to, the better; I mean,
he may resolve to turn from his Sin, and turn unto God; To work this,
shall be my endeavor, and to this end will I bend the Exposition of this
Psalm. Let us come then to it.

There are two means of Instruction, Rules and Examples, a Rule is more apt to
make a man wise, but to make a man good there is much more power in an Example;
an Example is not only a quicker, but also a more quickening course. Of
Examples some are only reported, some are represented also; the force of a
Report is very great, yet comes it far short of that which proceeds from a
Representation; for we are much more affected with that which we see, then
that which we hear; this was the ground of instituting Tragedies, and
Commedies, or (to speak more to our purpose) of those severe Penitential
Forms practiced in the Primitive Church.

Now the Doctrine of Repentance is in this Penitential delivered not in a
Rule, but in an Example, in an Example not reported, but represented; Ambrose.
therefore a Latin Father calls it Monumentum, A living Portraiture of a
Penitent; Chrysosome.
a Greek Father calls it (...), A speaking Image, it does so eye us, that it
cannot but affect us; affect us not Sensually, as dead Pictures do, but
Morally as a reflecting Example, that transformes into it self all those that
do discreetly behold it. Certainly, if any, this kind of Instruction will
work us, and work Repentance into us. Touching then this Virtue of
Repentance, we may learn hear, Whence it springs, and What it is; The
Fountain of it is opened in the Title, but the Nature of it is unfolded in the
whole Body of the Psalm.

The Title does set before us a Person, and his State, the Person is David, for
this is a Psalm of David. But the words must be resolved into more then
appear; for, Dauidis, is as much as, a Dauide, and de Dauide, David was the
Author, and David is the Argument of it, with his own Pensil does he draw this
Picture of himself. He represents Himself two ways, Cadentem, and
Resurgentem, in the State of a Sinner, and the state of a Penitent; In the
state of a Sinner; he confesses that he went went into Bath sheba, in the
state of a Penitent in the other words. Where you have the Means by which he
was brought to Repentance, and the Success of those Means.

The Means are, Nathan the Prophet; Nathan, King David's subject, but as a
Prophet he was the Ambassador of God; the King of Heaven had his Leidger, with
that King on Earth. Neither does the holy Ghost only mention the Means, but
gives us also to understand the needefulnesse, and the powerfulness thereof;
the needefulnesse in the word Venit; Nathan came to David, David never sought
to Nathan; we are as careless to return; as we are graceless to go from
God; it is needful therefore that God seek us, that we may seek to him;
otherwise we will not, nay, we cannot. The Means is no less powerful, then
needful; that is intimated by After that, that is, after he had committed his
Sin. Sin does not only wound to death, but disenable also to rise there
from; for, the holy Spirit of Discipline will fly deceit; Wisd. 1.5.
and will not abide when unrighteousness comes. That which we cannot do
lying in the dregs of sin, God does supply by the Ministry of his Word, the
Ministry of his Word is the Means to work Repentance; Read this truth in
the Success of those Means.

The Success was King David's speedy and sollemne Conversion; speedy, no
sooner did Nathan reprove him, but he gave glory unto God, he acknowledged his
sin, and penned this Psalm. Neither was his Conversion only speedy, but
solemn also, he delivered this Psalm to the chief Musician, he would have
it published in the Church, and the Church to be a witness unto his Conversion.

I have broken up the Title, and poynted out the Particulars; to the fuller
unfolding whereof, let us now so listen, that we may by Gods grace be led
onward some steps in our own Repentance.

The first thing that offers it self is the Person. One Person is both Author
and Argument of this Psalm; and when we consider the Argument, we may wounder
at the Author; wounder, that there should be found a man so humble, as to
record his own so notable defects. But yet such Ingenuitie (though never so
distasteful to flesh and blood) has been found in many worthy Children of
God; especially, in those that have been chosen to be Penmen of the Scripture;
they report as sincerely their own faults, as their virtues, and no less Gods
Reproof of them, then his Favors toward them; such Ingenuity we find here
in King David: But it was not only in King David, Moses went herein before him,
and so did Samuel also; Saint Matthew follows them, and so did Saint Paul,
none of these spared themselves, neither were they ashamed to record the errors
of their life; to record them, I say, which is much more then only to
acknowledge them, though the acknowledgement be public.

They observe not amiss who herehence gather; That the Scriptures are divine,
because the Penmen thereof are so impartial; such dealing is unlikely to come
from flesh and blood; whereupon it follows well, that they wrote as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost. 1. Pet. 1.22.


Our lesson is, the Humility of a Publican sauoureth much more of Gods Spirit,
then the Pride of a Pharisee, and if we desire either to resemble these
worthies in our Persons, or that our words should be conformable to the Holy
Canon, we must indite no less Penetentials, then Panegyricks, and make
Remembrances of our Sins, as well as of our Virtues. Certainly, King David
did so, witness this Title, wherein he sets forth himself Cadentem and
Resurgentem; first, taking a grievous Fall, and then recovering himself by
Grace.

First, Let us see his Fall; that is noted in these words, He went in to
Bathsheba. Few words, but they sum up a large Story; you may read it 2.
Sam. 11. That Chapter is a full Commentary upon this short Text; and if we
scanne it, we shall find, that King David's Fall was Complicatissimum Peccatum,
a sin of many roots.

There are three Heads whereunto all sin is reduced. 1. Impuritie. 2.
Iniquity; 3. Impiety; and they met all in this Fall of David; first,
Impuritie, for the first degree of his sin was Incontinencie, he defiled his
Soul with unchaste lust, and his Body with an unlawful Copulation; a foul
sin so to abuse a Member of Christ, 2. Cor. 6.
and to polute a Temple of the Holy Ghost.

To cover this Sin, he fell into another, he fell into Iniquity. It is
Iniquity for a man to take his Neighbors Wife; but for a man that has many,
to take his Neighbors Wife that is contented with one; for a King to take his
Subjects Wife; a Master the Wife of his Servant; a Master, and a King, living
at home, and lying at case, to take a Wife of that Subject and Servant, who is
aduenturing his Life, and spending his Blood, in the defense, and for the
Honor of his Master, and Sovereign; Certainly this is heinous Iniquity.
But what an Accession is there made unto it, if it be covered with a
treacherous Murder of that person to whom such wrong is done? and David so
covered his Iniquity: First, he assayed the Murder of Vriahs Soul, by making
him drunk; when that would not do what he intended, then does he plot the
Murder of his Body, he makes him carry Belerophons letters, treacheorous
letters against his own life, yea, Letters that added treason upon treason;
for they made Ioab the General, to betray the life of Vriah his resolute
soldier, and for his sake the lives of many others; fearful Iniquity.

But we have not yet sounded the bottom of this Fall, these two Roots of
bitterness, have a third wrapped about them. Impuritie, and Iniquity are
accompanied with Impiety; So we learn from the mouth of the Prophet, God was
despised in his Commandment; and the Enemies of God were occasioned thereby to
Blaspheme; for the reproach of an ill life redounds upon the God whom we serve,
who is by Infidels supposed to be an Abetter of such Courses. 1. Sam. 4.4. 2.
Sam. 11.11.
But there is a special reason of Impiety in this Fall. You must observe,
that the Ark of the Lord was often carried forth in the Wars of Israel, and
God so present as he was now gave them Victory in Battle; if the Israelite
was foiled, the Enemies grew insolent, not only against those whom they
foiled, but also against the Lord whom they thought to be foiled by their
Gods, in them; Thereupon they did magnify their Idols, and villisie the Lord
of Hosts. This may you observe in the Philistines; 1. Sam. 4. and in the story
of Balthazar, Dan. 4. So that the treacherous advantage that was given to the
Enemy, must needs open their mouths to Blasphemy, and so make King David
guilty of Impiety, Impiety against God, that so often, so many ways, had
deserved better of King David.

Put all these together, and you will confess, that Saint Chrysostom says
truly; that this was Flendum Naufragium, a woeful wrack of so goodly a
Vessel. The more shameful are the Talmudists, that would free the King in
this fact from Sin, flatly against King David's own Confession, and the Prophet
Nathans challenge; yea, so far was this from being no Sin, that all his
other Sins are as none in comparison of this: You may gather it from the
Testimony of the Holy Ghost, 1. Kings 1^
David turned not aside from any thing that God commanded him all the days of
his life; saving only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite.

You have heard of a foul Fall, wherein many enormous Sins go chained
together: There is one thing more in the Story which I may not omit, and that
is, How David fell into this Sin. Surely, by ease and Prosperity; whi^^ he
was persecuted by Saul, while he fought the Battles of the Lord, he walked
uprightly toward God, and Men; no sooner had God given him rest, but you see
what comes of it. The Naturalists observe well, that the Northwind is more
healthful, though the South be more pleasant: the South with his warmth
raises vapors, which breed putrefaction, and cause diseases; the North with
his cold, dries those Vapors up, purging the blood, and quickening the
Spirits: Adversity is unpleasant, but it keeps us watchful against Sin,
and careful to do our duties, whereas Prosperity does flatteringly lull us a
sleep, that the envious Man may have opportunity to sow tares, and choke the
good Seed of Gods Grace; In pace amaritudo amarissima, Esaias. 38.17.
it never goes worse with men spiritually, then when they find themselves
corporally best at ease, Iesurun waxed fat, and kicked, Deu. 32.1^.
he for sooke God which made him, and light lie esteemed the Rock of his
Salvation. How wicked the Sodomites were we read Genesis 18. but Eze. Chap. 16.
tells us, the cause thereof was fullness of Bread, and Idleness. Tunc cum
maesta fuit defensa est Ilion armis; Militibus grauidum laeta recepit Equum.
Most surprises of Cities have fallen out upon the secure riot of the beseiged;
our souls are never freed from the seige of the Compassing Lion, but he never
gets so great an Advantage against us, as when he makes the least show of an
Assault; Solomon in greatest glory, was in his greatest danger, the woeful
event proved it too true. It was a wise policy of Epaminondas, then, to be
Sentinel, when the Citizens were at their Bacchanalls; and when we have the
world at will, it is good providence, then, to look most to our ways.

And why? King David's Fall is a good Reason; It may seem strange that a man,
such as David was, so endowed, so blessed that he was a Man after Gods own
Heart, and the Penman of the Holy Ghost, that such a man, so good a man, should
take so great, so dangerous a Fall. But the best men are men, and their falls
do testify of what Tree they are Branches; by nature they spring from old
Adam, he is their Root, and all though by Grace they are grafted into Christ,
yet during this life, all the sour juice derived from the former stock is not
clean dried up in them, it yields forth many shootes, and those laden with
many Clusters of bitter Fruit. And what does this preach unto us, but that
Admonition of Saint Paul, Let him that stands take heed least he fall, 1 Cor.
10.11.
for if the greatest Worthies have been Spectacles of human frailty, who
may presume of his own strength? Happy shall we be, if other men's Harms make
us beware.

And indeed, To beware, is the true use that we must make of their Harms;
They grossly abuse such Histories, which by them countenance, and excuse their
sin; David fecit, cur non ego? the Drunkard, the Adulterer, the Murderer
Atheistically pretendes, though he has not a good Rule, yet he has a good
Example for his doing; some Patriarch did that which he does; Non est hoc
tollere, sed geminare Peccatum, this does not mend, but mar the matter; such
Apologies are worse then the Sin. Saint Austin, and others, have at large
replied unto them, I will only give two Animaduersions, and so dismiss them.

The first is, As in good deeds he that follows another deserves less
praise, because he does but exemplify an other man's fact: so of ill doers, the
latter deserves more blame then the former, because he is so desperate as to
venture where he sees a likelier man then himself has taken a fall. This
first Animaduersion we learn from Reason.

And from Religion we must learn a second Animaduersion; It is gross
Blasphemy so to pervert the meaning of the Scripture, and make the Holy Ghost
an Advocate for sin; what need such fuel for lust, which has the whole
world continually to feed it? and Self-love will not want an Apology, though
the Holy Ghost do not pen one; Certainly, this fall was never penned for so
wicked a purpose; That will appear in the next Branch of the Text, or in the
second state wherein King David does set forth himself. There, you shall
find, that the former state was not set forth Propter se, but Propter aliud,
he took no pleasure to blaze his state, as a sinner, but that we may thereby
perceive his other state, as he was a Penitent.

Let us look now into that, and we shall find, that these few words do sum
up a good part of a whole Chapter, the 12. of the 2. of Sam. wherein we are to
observe, the Means that brought him to Repentance, and the Success of those
Means. The Means are, Nathan the Prophet, one Man, but sustayning two
Persons, the person of a Subject unto King David, as he was Nathan, the person
of an Ambassador from God, as he was a Prophet.

And indeed, Though a Sovereign have a Command over all his Subjects, yet is
He himself a Subject unto God; and therefore has God his Lidgers resident
about him, to let him from time to time know his Sacred pleasure, whose office
it is to hold their Master in, or call him back when he forgets, or neglects
the King of Kings that is in Heaven.

But this present The Ordination of Ministers.
Occasion calls upon me to enlarge this point, and I may do it fitly to the
Occasion, and not stray a whit from my Text, not from the Story of Nathan the
Prophet, intimated in this place.

You then that are to take Sacred Orders must observe, that in the Function of
a Prophet there was some thing Common, and something Proper; it was Proper to
them to foretell things to come, the divine determination of Events which in
humane judgment were contingent. But Morrall instructions, and Corrections,
were Common to them with the Priests; And indeed God did but supply the
negligence of the Priest, by this Ministry of the Prophets. The Ministry of
Nathan here touched, though it has something of that which is Proper unto a
Prophet, yet the most part of it is Common, and so concerns you.

You then must learn of the Prophet Nathan what Furniture a Minister must
have, and How he must use his furniture. His furniture must be Lex et
Euangelium, both these appear in Nathans Message; the Law, by that he laid
open King David's Sin; the Gospel, by that he absolved him from the Guilt
thereof: There is no Censure of Sin but from the Law, and only from the
Gospel is the Propitiation thereof; therefore must you be well studied in both
of them, and hold your selves to be but imperfect Ministers, if you be ignorant
of either.

As you must learn of Nathan the Prophet to have this Furniture: so from him
also must you learn How to use it; as you have a Tallent, so must you employ
it, The steward of the Lord must bring forth to his Family things both old and
new; We are called Builders, and the Scripture is called a Canon, or a Rule,
all the spiritual Stones which be laid in the Temple of God, must be squared
by this spiritual Rule, neither without this Rule must we work any.

Neither is it enough, to know that we must use our Furniture; we must know
also When it must be used, and How; and you shall learn both of the Prophet
Nathan. When; Praeuenienter, and Subuenienter; if we can, we must prevent the
Sins of our flock. Magister Historiae Ecclesiasticae observes out of
Epiphanius, that Nathan would so have prevented David's Fall; for hearing that
the Kings affection was bending toward Bathsheba, he made have toward him,
but was hindered by Belial. Whatsoever is to be thought of that Narration, of
this we may be sure, that the Prophet would not have been wanting to the King
with a Ghostly preservative, if he had seen his pronenes to that Fall; and a
Minister if he see the signs of an imminent spiritual danger, must arm his
people against Temptation, and as much as in him lies prevent their Falls. But
if he cannot be so timely, he must not leave them when they are down, Qui non
potuit praeuenire, debet subuenire; we must lend him a Hand to rise, whom we
could not keep from Falling; so did Nathan the Prophet raise King David.

But as you must learn of him When: so must you also learn of him How; he did
it (...), and (...), Impartially, but Discreetly. Impartially; he was the
Ambassador of God; and therefore he spoke with the liberty of an
Ambassador: And we must not derogate from the Authority of our Master, to
whose Tribunal all persons are Subject, even the greatest Monarchs of the
World; as a great Monarch Nebuchadnezzar confessed in a Proclamation registered
Dan. 4.

But there is an Vnpartialnesse Divine which is enjoined of God, and there is
an Humane one, which is but a fiction of Man's brain. The Humane, dreams of
faults which are not, and takes up rumors upon trust, and rashly vents them to
the disgrace of the innocent; headie and fiery Spirits offend too often this
way, and in stead of Preachers turn Libellers, under pretense of freedom of
Spirit, and impartial Reprehension. But we must not reprove That which is not
a fault, nor Those which are not faulty.

Secondly, Humane Vnpartialnesse does season Reproof with unmannerly language,
whereas Saint Paul has taught Ministers, in reproving to give every man his
due respect; Rebuke the elder men as Fathers, the younger as Brethren, 1 Timothy 5.
the elder women as Mothers, the younger as Sisters; the higher Persons are in
degree, with the more respect must we temper our Reproof. This is the
general Rule that we must follow; particular instances of some Prophets who
brought special Messages from God, must not be drawn by us into Example; God
will not have Theology to confound Policy.

Add hereunto, that Nathan told his Message to David in private, because David
committed the Sin privately; personal and private Sins must not have a
public Reproof, except they have undergone first a judicial Censure; where
public Authority has not gone before, the Reproof of Personal faults must
be private.

These Rocks being heeded, our Vnpartialnes will be Divine, we may freely
deliver what difference there is between men's lives, and Gods Laws, and set
the Peoples danger before their eyes; yea, touching Sin we may tell them, that,
Omne animi vitium tanto, conspectius in se Crimen habet, quanto mayor, qui
peccat, habetur; answerable to the Dignity which God vouchsafes us, are the
Sins improued, by which we offend him. Secondly, (...).
Touching danger we may let them know, that Potentes potenter punientur,
Mercy will soon pardon the meanest, but mighty men, shall be mightily
tormented. This we may tell them, and tell them, that they must expect this
from God. From God (I say) and not from Us, for we have only (...), we are only
Referendaries of Gods Will, we acknowledge (...) to be the peculiar of God; if
any corporal chastisement be to be laid upon a Sovereign, a Subject must
not draw the sword, God only has power to use it; and they into whose hands
he is pleased to put it; which certainly is not the Pope, nor his Assign;
whether he claim it Directly, or Indirectly, he does it Contra Ius, and sine
Exemplo, he has no good either Rule, or Example for it, either in Gods word,
or in the writings of the Primitive Church; neither is it the People, who must
take Law from, not give Law to their Sovereign, both in Precept and in
Sanction.

As Nathan did use his Ministry Impartially: so did he use it Discreetly
also; (...) de (...)
(...), he handled the King so artificially, that he made him give sentence
against himself, before he was aware. That seems a Beam in our Brothers eye,
Mat 7.
which in our own seems scarce a Moate, (as Christ teaches in the Gospel)
therefore our judgment is best tried in another Man's Case; for therein we
will see with the most, if it be a fault; and if it be a good deed, we will
see with the least; Therefore he that will handle a Man's Conscience, with
spiritual Wisdom, must first work upon (...), see what good Rules he has
to guide Conscience withal, and exercise them with some abstracted Case, and
if he find that it passes an upright judgment, then come on to (...), His
Conscience; and if ever, you shall then make him sensible of his own Case;
Certainly, he must either condemn himself, which is a sign of Grace, or
else contradict himself, which will argue him to be void of Reason.

Neither is this the only point of spiritual wisdom which a Pastor must
have, he must also use a good method in dispensing the parts of his Ministry;
Nathan will teach him as much, who coming to David furnished with the Law, and
the Gospel, first, humbled him with the Law, then raised him with the Gospel,
first, told him, Thou art the Man, and then when David acknowledged it, Nathan
added, The Lord has removed thy sin, thou shall not die. And you may not
pervert this Order, you may not apply a Salve before you have vented the
Corruption of a wound, you may not power Oil into it before you have scoured
it with Wine; finally, You may not absolve a sinner, before you have made him
penitent.

Having sufficiently unfolded the Means, I must now let you see that these
Means are Needful, and Powerful; Needful; that, is intimated in this word,
Venit, Nathan came to David; Of himself David sinned, but when he was left
unto himself, there appeared in him no disposition to repent; To manifest
this, God did let him alone by the space of a whole year, and during that
time, he seems to have been senseless of his state; Mortifera securitas,
Austin Sermon de Temp. 51.
he seemed to be (as it were) dead in that sin: It was a strange thing that
such a Man should take such a Fall, but more stange that in so many Months he
should not recover out of it. What was the Cause? was it because he did not
know the difference between good and evil? it were absurd so to think; but
it was because he did not make use of his knowledge in weighing his own
Actions, whether they were good, or evil; wherefore, had not Nathan come to
David, it is to be doubted, David would never have returned unto God. It is to
be doubted; the rather, because if you look to the first sin of Man, you
shall find that after he had eaten of the forbidden Fruit, he hid himself
from God; no mention of his return, until God sought and found him out. And
who may hope to be better then our Father Adam? surely the continual story
of the Church shows, that we are herein all too like unto him; look upon all
the restitutions that are recorded, and you shall find in them all, the
preventing Grace of God, and that saying of God is of a perpetual truth, I am
found of them that sought me not, and made manifest to them that inquired not
after me.

But what shall I need Examples of that Truth, which every man that has grace
may read in himself? The Conclusion is: Repentance springs not Naturally from
us, it is an effect of Gods word reclayming us; of our selves we are as unapt
to Rise; as we are apt to Fall. Wherefore, we cannot too much magnify the
goodness of God, that vouchsafes unto us the Ministry of his Word; it is a
great Grace that God is not wanting unto us when we are wanting unto our
selves; wanting, not only to instruct our selves, but also to make use of our
knowledge; for the Scripture is useful not only to inform, but also to
remember us.

Needful then the Ministry is: It is not only so, but Powerful also; The
word of God is sharper then any two-edged sword, Heb. 4.
it is lively, it is mighty in operation, it enters through even to the
dividing asunder of the soul, spirit, joints, and marrow, and is a discerner
of the thoughts, and intents of the Heart; The weapons of the Ministers warfare
are mighty, through God, to cast down Holds, 2 Cor. 10.
to cast down Imaginations, and every high thing which is exalted against the
knowledge of God, and to bring into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ. And it had need be so, it has to do with so senseless a subject.
Lib. 22. Moral: Cap. 13.
Gregory the Great parallels David in his Sin, with Lazarus in his Grave;
Christ cried with a loud voice Lazarus come forth; and it was not a weak
voice that could rouse David out of his so dead a Sleep; and it is the common
disease of all sinners; nothing less then Gods Spirit can work a spiritual
remorse in them: But the power of the Ministry will appear better in the
success, wherefore I come unto that.

The Success was a speedy and a Sollemne Conversion; a Speedy, he did not
outface the Prophet, he did neither deny, nor extenuate his fault, but
presently acknowledged it, and desired to be unburdened of it, In Psalm 37.
gustauit tantum peccatum (says Saint Ambrose) vt ostenderet quomodo posset
aboleri, he tasted of the poison, but did not digest it, he did not so take in
sin, Dedoct. Christian. Iab. 3. Cap. 21.
but he could vomit it up again. Saint Austin wittily observes the word Hospes
in Nathans Parable, and shows, that sin in the Children of God is but a
stranger, well may it be entertained, it cannot have in them any perpetual
abode, because it is not of the Household; yea, seeing they account this
stranger to be an enemy, they make have to be rid of him: we see this in
David, and we must learn by him, when we are roused, to see that we are out of
the way, to make have, and not defer the time to turn our feet into the way
of Gods Commandments. Psalm. 119.


As David's Conversion is Speedy: so it is Solemn; it appears in two points;
in that he penned this Psalm; and that he committed it unto the Chief
Musician. James 5.13.
First he penned the Psalm. Saint James his Rule, If any man be merry let him
sing, holds not backward; therefore every man that singes is merry; There are
mournful, as well as there are joyful songs. Graceless persons when they
have sinned are so shameless as to make joyful songs thereof, witness the
impure Sonets whereof every Age has vented some, none, more then this our
sinful Age, and they are accounted the fittest Music for their most riotous
Feasts. But David's Song made of his sin is (...), adolefull Elegy, a very
Lamentation.

But what needed this after Nathan had absolved him? yes, there was great need
of it; first, His Confession to Nathan was very succinct, and though praematura
venia arguebat profundam Poenitentiam, God knew he repented heartily, whom he
forgave so speeedily; yet, so short a Text, needed a larger Commentary, least
men should conceive too shallowly of Repentance, and perform it perfunctorily.
Secondly, the Conscience is not so soon quieted, as it is pardoned; though our
Faith do rest upon Gods Truth, yet desire we to have it confirmed by a lively
sense; therefore a godly man newly recovered, though he be safe, is not secure,
which makes him plie God with his prayers, until he have recovered again his
former Peace. Finally, God released all the punishment of sin unto David, but
not all the Chastisement, as it appears by Nathans Absolution; David might
desire to be eased of that also, and to that end he might importune God with
his passionate Prayer: And it beseemes us well when we are free from the
Flames of Hell, to deprecate the calamities wherewith God may justly visit us
in this life.

I come to the last note. This Psalm when David had penned it was delivered to
the chief Musician, or Master of the Quire, not only to be kept, but also to
be sung; he would have the Church to witness to his Conversion, and take a
good Pattern from him, yea, so it was made a part of the Cation, and is to go
for a Rule amongst us; The Septuagint intimate as much when they translate
(...); they intimate thereby, that not only David's Case must be remembered
therein, but others also must be conformed thereto.

But I must end. 1. As Nathan was sent to David, says Saint Austin; so is
David sent unto us, we may, nay we do, go in to our Bath-sheba, commit
spiritual, corporal fornication, and God knows we have little sense of our
sin. As we tread David's steps in sinninge: so in David's senselesnes, let us
read our own. 2. God does not forsake us, when we will not, we cannot help
our selves; we have many Nathans, that are neither unlearned, nor idle, they
deal as discreetly, as impartially; it were to be wished, that as they are
Needful, and Powerful, so they might speed with us, as Nathan did with
David, and work in us a Speedy, and a Solemn Repentance. 3. If King David
were not ashamed so to humble, so to afflict his Soul, which of us should be
ashamed? we should not: but as Saint Ambrose in his days, Apolog. David. 1,
c. 2.
we so may we complain in ours, there are few men, be they but of mean
substance, that do not think themselves too good to be so abased, and yet he
that will not submit himself to this painful impression of the Law, shall
never feel that more comfortable that springs from the Gospel.

GOd grant, that seeing the best of us shall ever carry about us, a Body of
sin, we may never want Nathans, if it may be, to prevent, at least, to make
us see our slips; and that we may be as tractable as King David, submitting
our selves to the voice of the Law, that we may have the benefit of the
Gospel; so may Pastors and People have mutual Comfort in the Church Militant,
and in the Triumphant be jointly blessed for Evermore. Amen. PSALM. 51. VERSE. 1.2.
1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness; according unto
the multitude of thy tender Mercies blot out my transgressions.

2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.


THis Penetentiall does teach us touching Repentance, whence it springs, and
what it is; Whence, in the Title, and What, in the Psalm. Of the Title I have
already spoken; It follows that I now come on to the Psalm; which when I
have ripped up, and laid open before you, you will have just Cause to say, that
it is the goodliest Picture of true Repentance, that ever was drawn by the pen
of the Holy Ghost.

The whole is a Prayer, but of that kind which we call a, Vow; And as King
David did sustain a double Person, so is his Vow double; He was a Child of
God, a dear one, He was a Member of the kingdom, the chiefest one, he was a
man after Gods own Heart, and he was the King of Israel; therefore he vows
not only for himself, but his Kingdom also.

But in setting down his Vows, he observes a good Order, the first is for
Himself, the second for the Kingdom. And why? The Kingdom was wounded by his
Fall, and the Cure thereof depended upon his Recovery; therefore does he first
take care of the Head, from whom the same health was to stream afterward into
all the Body. For though the Vows be two, yet are they both resolved into the
same parts, and there are in effect the same Contents in either votiue Prayer.
Let us take them asunder, and see it.

In that either is a vow, you must find in either the parts of a vow, they are,
a Desire, and a Promise; you may see them evidently in either Vow. First, in
the Vow that King David makes for Himself, he does express a desire to be
restored unto, and preserved in the state of Grace, and if he speed, he does
Promise a religious Service unto God. These two Points are enlarged in the
seauenteene first verses, in the personal Case of King David; and being
contracted, are repeated again with a special Application to his kingdom, in
the two last.

You see the breife of the whole Psalm; but it is too scant, it will not yield
you a full view; let us then go back again, and unwrap these particulars,
that we may take more feeling notice of the spiritual riches, that are
contained therein.

The first Vow is made for King David, the first branch of that Vow is his
Desire, and the first Petition in that Desire, is, That he may be restored unto
Grace. In this Petition there are two remarkable things, the Matter which he
presents unto God, and the Manner wherewith he does ingeminate the same
Matter, and press God with it. The Matter is contained in these two first
verses, which in effect sound only this; Miserable King David desires relief,
from the effectual Mercy of God in Jesus Christ.

Where there is Sin, there is Misery; behold here variety of Sin,
Transgressions, Iniquities, Distortions, all cleaving to David, (for Me, and
Mine, confirm as much) and make him a Wretch, though he were a King. Now what
is the Remedy of such Misery but effectual Mercy? and this we find here,
Mercy by Name, in the entrance of the Prayer, Have Mercy.

But whereas there is Mercy in Affectu, or in Effectu, Mercy in God, or Mercy
from God, King David does desire not only that God would be graciously
affected toward him, but also that he would work powerfully upon him; 1.
Upon the Guilt of his Sin, Dele, quit me thereof. 2. upon the Corruption of
his Sin, Laua, wash me therefrom. Yea, because Guilt is sooner removed, then
Corruption cleansed, keeping correspondencie with Gods Course in working
therein, he adds Multum laua, Munda, never give over washing until thou have
made me thoroughly clean; thus does Misery seek unto Mercy.

But where is Mercy to be found? surely in God, to Him he directs his Prayer,
Have Mercy upon me O God. There is no remedy for a sinful Man, but in God,
whom he has offended with his sin, and therefore he says, Secundum Tuam
Misericordiam, according to Thy Mercy; It is Gods property to have Mercy, but
it is Gods in Christ; so much is meant by the next words, according to thy
loving kindness, according to thy tender Mercies: God shines Graciously to
none but in the Face of Jesus Christ, and in him is God become a tender hearted
Father to all penitent Sinners.

To all (I say) for he has not only tender Mercies, but there is also in
them to be considered the Measure. Rob is the Hebrew word, (...)
we translate it Multitude, but it signifies also Magnitude, and gives us to
understand, that be our sinful Misery never so great, never so diverse, we
shall not want releife in Mercy, which is more great, and manifold.

Finally, the Text does tell us, that as our Misery must seek for Mercy in
God only, in whom it may be found: so we must not dream, that any thing
without God, can obtain this at Gods hands; therefore we must pray, Secundum,
according to thy loving kindness; O Lord let that be not only the Measure of
the Mercy which I seek, but the inducement thereto also.

And so have you the Contents of that portion of King David's Desire, which I
have read unto you; I will now resume them, and to your, and my farther
edification enlarge the exposition of them.

First then; though Mercy stand foremost in the Text, yet I will begin with the
Misery; for Misery is first in Nature, and were it not for that, there were
no need of Mercy: add hereunto, that the sense of Misery sets the best edge
upon the desire of Mercy, and he will more eagerly long after it, that
perceives thoroughly in what need he stands of it. I told you, that David was
miserable though he were a King, were there no other proof, there is enough
employed in the first word; he that cries Miserere, have mercy, does plainly
confess, that he is in Misery; for one Correlatiue cannot subsist without the
other. But to put it out of al doubt, here is enough expressed to prove him a
Wretch, Pro. 14.
Peccatum facit populos miseros; wheresoever there is Sin, there is Misery,
yea, and there only; for sin only is simply Evil: Malum Paenae, Calamity,
and Woe, though we call them Evils, yet indeed they are not so simply, but
only (...), as the Person is, and as God intends; for that otherwise they are
good, it is plain by two undoubted grounds, the Efficient, and the Final
Cause. That which is Properly Evil, has only Causam deficientem, it springs
from the failing of a reasonable Creature, but Woe has Causam Efficientem, it
springs from the almighty Hand of God; He is the Creator of this Darkness,
as well as the opposite Light. As it has an Efficient. so has it a Final
Cause, and that is, the Recovery of a sinner; God judges us temporally, that
he may not judge us eternally: therefore David says, Pal. 119.71.
Bonum est Domine quod humiliasti me, it is good for me Lord, that I have bin
in trouble: but that which is truly Evil is destitute of a Final cause, as well
as it was of an Efficient, as it comes from weak enes; so it ends in vanity.
It is true that God does often times draw light out of darkness, and Good out
of that which is simply Evil, but that is don by his Transcendent Providence;
it will never prove, that that which is truly Good, and truly Evil, can have
any natural habitude the one to the other, or that they have any Cognation
between themselves: Wherefore, only Sin being simply Evil, is that which
properly makes a Wretch.

And verily, we that beholding Beggars, Lazars, men any ways afflicted
confess them miserable; si adspici possint lanitatus, if we had eyes to see
the spiritual wounds and sores, the wantes and the Woes of Adulterers,
Murderers, Blasphemers, any other wicked livers, we would confess them to be
much more miserable.

My Text does occasion me to give you a taste thereof by opening the three words
wherewith David does express his sin.

The first is Peshang, (...)
which is well rendered a Transgression, that is, a passing of our bounds. Our
lusts are apt to range, and exceed, God sets bounds unto them, by his Law he
would hold them in, but it will not be, we are Sons of Belial, we will bear
no yoke, we break Gods bands, and cast his cords from us. Psalm. 2.
The first evil of sin is, it makes a lawles man: and who does not know
that lives in a society, what an unhappy liberty the lawles have?

But why will man be lawles? forsooth he thinks, that the more he has his
will, the more he shall compass his own ends: he thinks so; but it proves
not so, that appears in the next name of sin, that is Chata, (...)
and notes a shooting clean besides the Mark. When we become Masterles, the
vpshot of our endeavor is, to mistake evil for good, and reap woe, where we
looked for rest: The wicked, Wisd. 5. confess this truth, and all Histories
are but Chronicles of it; they testify that lawless men have finally missed
of that whereat they aimed, yea, that they have therein bin deceived most,
wherein they seemed unto themselves to have succeeded best. And does not this
Name of Sin then argue a sinner to be a Wretch?

But that which is the height of Evil in Sin, is noted in the third word
Gnaon, Perverseness. (...)
And indeed Sin is nothing but the perverting of a Creature; God made the
Great, and the little World, to set forth his own Glory, but sin turns
both to his dishonor; God made the little World to be Lord over the great, and
Sin turns the Lord into the Servant, and the Servant into the Lord; God
made Man a Consort for Angels, Sin does range Man with the Feinds of Hell;
Finally, God made Man after his own Image, Sin does change him into the Image
of the Devil; most wretched perverseness. Now seeing this threefold Evil is
found in sin, as the Names thereof give us to understand, we cannot doubt but
Sin does make a Miserable Man; he that is infected with it, will confess
it, though he be a King.

Certainly King David does; He was at this time a King, a victorious, a
glorious King, obeyed by many Nations, abounding in all kind of worldly
prosperity; Add thereunto that same gracious Entaile of his Crown sent unto
him from God, 2. Sam. 7. the very crown of blessings. But see, being stung
with the Conscience of Sin he is sensible of none of these, neither does he
find Comfort in any of them; notwithstanding all these, he confesses himself
a Wretch. Wherein we may observe by the way the difference between the
judgment of flesh and blood, and of a Child of God, concerning that which
makes Happy; the one places it in the Things of this life, the other in the
Peace of God. And indeed so long as it is not well between God, and us, all
the World can give us no Content; the consciousnes of sin, if we have as
feeling hearts as King David had, feeling the mischievous nature of sin, we
will account our selves but Wretches, and we will with him fall to our
Miserere mei, Have Mercy upon me, etc. which is the second part of my Text.

The Correlatiue of Misery is Mercy, and as there were no need of Mercy, were
there no Misery, so because there is Misery there is a remedy provided for
it, and that is Mercy. The Verb does properly signify, Be gracious to me.
Grace is free love, so teaches Saint Austin, Non est gratia vllo modo, si non
sit omni modo gratuita; that favor deserves not the name of Grace, that can
be either merited, or requited.

But yet there are two sorts of this Grace, one, Quae datur non merenti,
another, Quae datur immerenti; The first was the Grace of Creation, it
proceeded from the free Goodness of God; for there was no possibility of Man's
Deserving, before he had his Being, therefore was his Being a gift of Grace.
The second is the Grace of Redemption, this proceeds also from Gods free
Goodness; this was vouchsafed to Man, when he deserved the contrary, he
deserved eternal Death, but God vouchsafed him eternal Life, This special
kind of Grace is called Mercy; Therefore, considering the Argument, the
Translator did not amiss in restrayning the amplitude of the words, and
rendering it, Have Mercy; for Evangelical Grace is Mercy, and it is such Grace
that is meant in this place.

But this Mercy is considered either in Affectu, or Effectu, as it is in God,
or as it manifests it self upon Man. The Remedy of Misery is Mercy, but that
Mercy must contain, not only a Gracious disposition toward man, but a
powerful operation upon him; God must be well affected so, as that Man's state
also may be altered. In Miseries plea for Mercy, these two cannot be severed
without Impiety, or Blasphemy; 1. Blasphemy; for Sin and Compassion are
inco^patible, if the one be not conceived as the remouer of the other, but he
does not so conceive them, that looks only to the Affection, and looks not
also for the Action of Mercy; therefore he blasphemes the Author thereof.
Secondly, there is Impiety in it; for it argues that a Man would be free from
Gods displeasure, but he would not part with that, which offends his pure eyes,
He loves to be a sinner. And this is plain Impiety.

But what are the effects of Mercy? even as many as are the evils of Sin. In
sin then there are two Evils, the Guilt, and the Corruption thereof; the Guilt
is resembled to a Debt; (...) 1^.
and indeed it is a plain Debt, a double Debt; for in every sin that we
commit, we grow in arrerages unto God, in regard of the duty which we owe him;
and God grows in Arrerages unto us, in regard of the punishment that is due
unto us. Now of these debts God keeps a Book, all our misdeeds are recorded
before him, (...) 5.
and of these Books there is mention made in the Revel: where the Soon of Man
is represented upon his Tribunal, judging all the World according to those
things, that are found in the Books that are open before him.

As in regard of the Guilt, Sins are compared to Debt; so in regard of the
Corruption they are compared unto Stains; Stains of all sorts, to Froth, to
Foame, to Scumme, to Dross, to Mire, to all sorts of diseases, and impurities
of the flesh; And indeed how can they be other, seeing they are the insection
that we receive from the unclean Spirit?

This being briefly observed; Let us now consider of David's Prayer, his Prayer
for the Affection, and Operation of Mercy. First, for the Affection, in these
Words, Miserere, Have Mercy. The Affection is the Root from whence springs the
Operation; we learn it in another Psalm, Psalm. 80.
Cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved, therefore he does well to make
sure of that first, because no hope of the other, if he speed not of that. No
hope that the Beams will ever warm our Land, if the Sun have no aspect unto
our Horizon, neither is there any Hope, that we shall ever seele Gods
comforts, if Gods countenance be not propitious: yea, the influe^ce is too
scant to support our drooping souls, did not they first lay hold upon the
abundance, that they believe to be in the Fountain of Grace.

But what our Faith is assured of in God, we must desire to feel in our
Souls; our desire that first craves Gods good Affection, must go on, and
desire Gods good Action also; certainly David did so; it appears in Dele, and
Laua, blot out, wash clean. Two Petitions, made for two Blessings, Innocence,
and Sanctity.

Innocence, for he desires to be acquitted of his Debt; he would have his name
blotted out of the Obligation that God had against him. And no wonder; We know
the perplexities of Debtors, if the Debt be only pecuniary, and may be redeemed
by a Friend, how much more if it be Capital, and can be answered by none but
our own Person? in such a Case, how does fear haunt us, and anguish distress
us? neither night nor day, at board or in bed, alone or with Friends, can we be
quiet, until we are free from such an Obligation. And can a Man privy unto
himself in what danger he stands to Godward, find any rest until he have
made his peace? can he choose but be overwhelmed with sorrow, except he can
put off the storm that hangs over him? Can he forbear to importune God for
a pardon, knowing how obnoxious he is to the stroke of his vengance? doubtless
he cannot; be he as great, as good as King David, he will fall to Dele, Lord
do away mine offenses; for there is no security but only in Innocence.

Innocence is not enough; it is enough to free us from fear, but it is not
enough to cure our Misery; without Sanctity it is not fully cured; for though
when we look without us, being innocent, we have nothing to dismay us; yet
when we look into our selves, if we be without Sanctity, how ougly shall we
appear? Grego: Mag.
Quid prodest malorum quae feci impunitas, nisi etiam been agendi sequatur
facultas? as good have no Innocence, as not to have it joined with Sanctity.
We naturally delight in neatness, in our persons, our clothes, our diet, and
what not? and how much cost do we bestow in Cookerie, Taylerie, Cosmetrie, to
remove any uncomeliness or vndecencie that may offend, though it be but the
eye of vanity? We that so care to have a fair outside, what a foul inside
do we endure, if we endure the Corruption of sin? No sluttishnes in diet
comparable hereunto; 2. Pet. 2.
the Scripture resembles it to a dogs feeding upon his vomit. Revel. 3.
No slouenrie in Apparel to be matched herewith; the Scripture calls it
Nakedness, such Nakedness as discouers our Filthiness. Finally, no sores
come near the spiritual ones in ouglinesse; the Scripture does parallel the
deformity thereof, with the disease of Leaprosie. Can a man, being such,
endure himself? can he choose but fall unto, Laua? be earnest with God, to wash
him from his filthiness? Certainly he cannot; a sensible sinner cannot; and
such a one was King David: he Prays, Laua, wash me O Lord.

Neither Laua only, but Multum Laua; the Original has, multiply to wash:
When he prayed for Innocence it was only Dele, put a way my sins, but when
he comes to pray for Sanctity, he is not contented with Laua, wash me, he
will have his washing renewed again and again. What is the reason? Surely
there are many Reasons for it. The first is, the difference that God puts
between Justification and Sanctification; it is his pleasure that the one
should be Actio indiuisibilis, the other diuisibilis (as the Divines speak)
the first he consummates at once, in the other he proceeds by degrees; he is
pleased that our whole life should be an exercise of mortifying the Old Man,
and quickening the New. As when a Garment has taken a deep stain, it must
have more scouring, and spungings then one, before we can get it out: even so
the Corruption of sin sinks so deep, that it asks a great deal of pains to
work it out; therefore Multum laua is very necessary in regard of
Mortification: And it is as necessary also in regard of Viuisication. Saint
Ambrose represents it in a fine Similie: He that will die a purple in grain,
does give his cloth inferior colors first, and after many dippings in many
preparatiue liquours, he does at length perfect the color, and give it its
full luster: even so the splendor of Sanctity is not attained in the first
moment of our Conversion, many a line must be drawn in our Souls by the
Spirit of God, before we can fully recover his Image. Not, that there is any
inability in God, so that he cannot in a moment make us both innocent, and
holy, as he did in the Creation: but he is pleased in the difficulty of the
recovery on our part, to make us mindful of our former vnthristinesse, and
careful to husband Grace better when God does vouchsafe it.

Besides these Reasons, there is a special one which concerns King David's
Case. You have heard that he committed more Sins then one, whereof every one
was very heinous, now a single cleansing does not suffice for many enormous
sins; though for our secret sins it is enough to say, Psalm. 1^.
Munda me Domine, cleanse me O Lord from my secret faults, and for ordinary
slips, Austin.
Dimitte nobis debita, our daily Prayer, forgine us our trespasses, may
suffice; yet when we multiply sins, heinous sins, we must have Washing upon
Washing, many Washings, for many sins: It is a perfunctorie Repentance that
wraps all such sins in one, and thinks that one washing will cleanse a sinner
from them all. And yet God knows there is two much of this kind of Repentance
in the World; but to such Penetentiaries I will use the words of Solomon, There
is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, Pro. 30.
and yet is not washed from their filthiness; they will unhappily be found in
the state of Coruption at that day, when there will be no comfort but for
thorough, or perfect Sanctification.

Thorough, or perfect Sanctification was it that King David sought, as you may
perceive by the next word, Munda; This notes the end for which David desires
the multiplied washing, he would so be washed, that he might be clean; he
would not have God Laterem lauare, take much pains, and leave him never a whit
the better. It is true that God complains of some, Ierem. 13.
that they are washed in vain, can a Leopard change his spots, or a
Blackamoore his skin? if they can, then there is hope that you will be the
better, but little hope of the one, and as little of the other. But King David
would not have Gods pains so wasted upon him, he would have it sort a good
effect, and make him to be, as without blame, in regard of Innocence, so
without spot, in regard of Sanctity; and we must desire that we may be
renewed, as well as discharged, as thoroughly renewed, as fully discharged, that
we may be acceptable in Gods eyes, and comfortable in our own.

Put now these two together, the description of Misery, and the Petition for
Mercy, and you shall find diverse rem^akable things therein. First, that
Misery presenting it self unto Mercy, does take a right course. Nathan did
charge David with sin, and threatened him many plagues, you find not here
that he does mention Gods plagues, but his own sins; he spends his desire,
not in deprecating the Plagues, but in ridding himself of his Sins. And this
is good spiritual wisdom; for seeing plagues come for sins, we are sure
that we shall never eat of that Fruit, if we pluck this Tree up by the roots;
if sin cleave not to us, we need not fear Gods wrath, either we shall not
feel it, or we shall be the better for it. Pharaoh, and Pharoah-like Men have
an eye to their plagues, not to their sins; and therefore as he, so they, are
eased of one plague to fall under another: if Gods Mercy hear our Prayers, and
ease us of any Affliction, and do not rid us of our sin; let us assure our
selves that we are but like a Prisoner reprieued that may be hanged when he
least fears death.

Secondly, Misery must learn of King David to lay it self fully open, that
it may be fully cured; Ambros:
Quis nostrum qui peccatum confitetur non perstringendum potius quam repetendum
putet? When we repent, happily we can be contented to glance at our sins, but
we will be loath to look far into them, and search our wounds to the
quick; But King David does not so, he does as well amplify Sin, the Cause
of his Misery, as he does distinctly sue for the branches of Gods Mercy.

Gods Mercy, And indeed God is the Person to whom he sueth for Mercy; he
directs his Prayer unto him, and from him, he does expect this Mercy. But
here is a Paradox; for he that is ougly in his own eyes, how can he but be
odious in Gods? and how dares a guilty Prisoner offer himself at the Bar of
his Judge? Gods face is against those that do evil, Psalm. 34.15.
to root out their remembrance from the earth. This is true, and yet David
goes to him. and no marvel, there is no flying from him, but to him, he
only can restore a sinner, restore him to his own favor, and rid him of that
that intercepteth the influence of the comfortable beams of grace; the Church
confesses it, in the Collect, it is Gods property to have mercy; and it says
it according to the Scripture; Daniel confesses it, 2. Cor. 1.3.
To thee O Lord God belongs Mercy and forgiveness; Saint Paul makes God,
the Father of Mercies; Moses, or God rather speaking to Moses, sheweeh us that
it is an especial branch of Gods glory, in that Proclamation which he makes,
Exodus 34. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful, and gracious, long suffering, etc.

But as Mercy is Natural unto God: so it is not comfortable unto us but as it
is derived through Christ; therefore we must mark the Words Chesed and Racham,
words wherein King David does express Gods Mercy; for they note (...), the
Affection* the bowels of a Father toward his Children. Now God is not a
Father unto us but by Adoption, and we are not adopted but in Christ, which is
the only Son; God does except us in his Beloved, in him it is that he has
Mercy upon us; Therefore these very Words, loving kindness, are in the New
Testament applied to Christ coming in the flesh; Christ also in the Old
Testament is noted by the Propitiatory, or Mercy-seate, and in the New
Testament he is called our Propitiation, 1. John 2.2. Heb. 2.17.
and Merciful high Priest. The nature of sinful men without Christ, and God,
that is judge of all the World, are Infestissimi inimici, they will never agree
together; our infirmity will be overwhelmed by the divine Majesty, but it is
Christ that turns the dreadful Tribunal into a Throne of Grace.

Neither must we seek only for Gods kind affection in Christ, but his
gracious Actions also, no hope of Dele, nor Laua, but in him, and by him. It is
true that God by the Prophet tells us, that it is he that blots out our sins
for his own sake, Esaias. 43, 44.59. and 27.
and blo^teth them out like a cloud, and casts our sins into the Sea: But he
does not this immediately, he does it by Christ; Daniel teaches, Chap. 9.
Coloss. 2.14.
that He was to finish wickedness, seal up sins, and reconcile iniquity;
Saint Paul teaches it, saying, that Christ fastened and cancelled the
Obligation that was against us on his Cross; Finally, the Father sent him, and
he sent his Apostles, with power to remit, and to retain sins, which must
needs implie, that Dele, blot out, belongs to Him.

And as Dele, so Laua. Zachary foretold it; In that day, (meaning the days of
the Gospel) there shall be a fountain opened to the House of David, Z^ch. 13.
and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness; Saint Paul
shows the accomplishment of it, Ephe. 5
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it,
and cleanse it by the washing of water through the Word, that he might make it
unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such
thing, but that it should be holy, and without blame.

Neither must we be beholding to Christ only for these gracious Actions,
but for their measure also. The Text tells us, that there is not only Mercy
in God, but that Mercy is of a large size, it is called here Rob; we translate
it Multitude, it signifies also Magnitude. The Conscience of a Sinner is
afflicted some times with the Number, sometimes with the excess of sin;
least we should sink under either burden, this word must specially be heeded,
which does assure a distressed Conscience, that there comes not only Mercy
from God, but Great Mercy also; so Great, as that his Mercy rejoices over his
Judgment, and there lies an Appeal from God unto God; from God the
Righteous, to God the Gracious: and God in regard of his Mercy is in a manner
Greater then himself; with this Moses presses God significantly, Number. 14.
Now I beseech thee let the power of my Lord be Great, according as thou have
spoken, saying; The Lord is slow to anger, and of Great Mercy, etc. in the
whole period he importuneth him to show, that his Mercy exceeds his Justice.
The Scripture does amplify this point by setting down the dimensions of his
Mercy, telling us sometimes, (...). 3. (...). 11 33. Psalm 145. Psalm. 25.
of the hight of it, it reaches unto Heaven; sometimes of the depth of it, it
fetches men from Hell; sometimes of the width of it, it is over all his
works; sometimes of the length of it, it has bin ever of old; His tender
Compassions fail not, they are renewed every Morning. Lamen. 3.
But all this is to be understood in Christ; his Incarnation, his passion, the
whole Redemption that he wrought is indeed Magna Misericordia, a wonderful
Mercy; Saint Paul mentioning the breadth, the length, the depth, and the hight
of it, teaches us that it passes all knowledge. Ephe. 3.


Neither is it Great only, but in this Greatness we must observe Magnitudinem
and Multitudinem. Saint Chrysostom does excellently amplify this point in
regard of both branches; Ores nouas and inauditas! Behold and wonder, the first
fruits of those that come to Christ, are those which were most desperately
enthrauled to Satan, Magi, Publicani, Meretrices, latro, blasphemus; the
Conversion of such persons, is an undoubted Argument of the Magnitude of his
Mercy. And touching the Multitude believe his answer to Saint Peter, Mat. 18.^^.
who asking Christ Whether he should forgive his Brother seven times,
replied, Not only seven times, but seauentie times seven; Eze. 18.21.
At what time soever a Sinner does repent from the bottom of his heart, I will
put all his wickedness out of my remembrance (says the Lord.)

And verily, were it not for this double Greatness that is in Gods Mercy, few
should be saved; for, Psalm. 130.
If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who were
able to stand? but with thee there is Mercy; we would despair of our cure, if
there were not such physic; of our great sores, if there were not such a
sovereign medicine; but this is our comfort, Where sin abounds, Grace
abounds much more. Romans 3.20.
There is no sin either so great or manifold which cannot be remedied by the
Merciful bowels of Christ. It was Cains voice, Genesis 4.
my sin is greater then can be forgiven; but a Father, (Saint Austin I
think) replieth to him, Mentiris Cain; this thy complaint is a blasphemous
derogation from the unmeasurable bowels of Christ; and the Nouatians were long
since condemned by the Church, which straightned the power of the Remission of
sins which Christ has left unto the Pastors.

Mark now the Correspondencie of the branches of this Text. We found
Magnitude, and Multitude in the Misery of David, and they did need a Magnitude
and Multitude in the gracious operations of Mercy, and here we do find in
the third place, that Mercy is so well stored, that it can do as much as is
required by Misery. Whereupon two things follow. It is unbeseeming divine
Mercy to be scant in giving, and humane Misery is foolishly modest, that is
spare in asking. But this Divinity must not be abused, it was never intended
to encourage Presumption, but God would have it published to keep men from
Desperation. It is wholesome Doctrine for them that are Miserabiles, which
labor and are heavy laden with the burden of their sin; but it is dangerous
to them that are only Miseri, such as are grievous sinners, but have no sense
of their wretched state.

The last point in the Text is, Secundum Misericordiam, Have mercy upon me,
according to that which is in Thee, not that which is in Me. Nothing to move
God, but only the free goodness of God, certainly to move Mercy, nothing
else can be pleaded by Misery; David had done many good things, Omnes
voluntates Dei, as Saint Paul says Acts 13. he had restored Church and Common
Weal, and made many sweet Songs to the honor, and praise of God; But he
remembers none of all these in his Prayer, he does not desire to speed for
any of those. And why? Bona Opera Deo placere possunt, Deum placare non
possunt, while we do them, though imperfect, yet are they well pleasing unto
God thorough Christ, but if we do contrary unto them, we may not plead them
for Satisfactions for our sin. No, Gods Rule is, Eze. 18. When a righteous
man turns away from his righteousness and commits iniquity, all his
righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned; therefore David
prays discreetly, when he refers God to his own Goodness, and pleades
nothing of his own Worth: and we must in the like Case lay before God only our
beggary, and commend that unto Gods Mercy; the less we have, the more we
shall find in him, if we are not ashamed to confess our own baseness, and his
Goodness.

But it is time to draw to an end. Audi peccator orantem peccatorem, whosoever
thou art, that art a sinner, learn from King David the argument of penitent
Prayer; It must represent a feeling Misery, and a tender Mercy; and the
feeling of Misery, must make us seek unto tender Mercy. It was a strange
error in Saint Peter, that when he had seen a glimpse of Christ's Glory, Luke
5.^.
brake out into these words, Go from me Lord, for I am a sinful Man; he
should rather have desired that Christ would approach him; for with whom should
a Patient desire rather to be, then with his Physician, or a Sinner then with
his Savior? Surely Saint Peter at another time, John. 13.2.
though at first he made dainty, that Christ should wash his feet; yet when
Christ told him, except I wash thee, thou can have no part in me, replied,
Wash Lord, and not my feet only, but my hands and my head also. There is none
of us that does not daily run in arrerages to God, that does not stain that
garment of Innocence which he received in his Baptism; and what should we do
then being in such a case, but, that our selves may be written in the book of
life, desire that our sins may be blotted out of the Book of death, and that
we be not cast out of heavenly Jerusalem, ^euel. 7.14.
as an vnclea^e thing, wash our garments white in the blood of the Lamb.

No doubt, but as King David, so we shall have Paroxismes, sharp sits of
despair, when our Conscience curiously suruaieth our Misery. But the eyes of
our soul must not dwell there, we must lift them up unto the Mercy-seate, et
abyssus abyssum inuocet, let the depth of our Misery, seek a relief in the
depth of Gods Mercy; be our sins never so many, be they never so great, we
shall find more bowels of tender Mercy, greater love and kindness there, then
our Sins can need. Yea, not only find them there in God, but seele them
also streaming from thence to the full relief of our distressed souls; We
shall feel them so acquitting, so cleansing us, that we shall be assured, that
we are vessels of Mercy, though we deserve for our sins to be Vessels of
Wrath.

I Shut up all with this Prayer. O Lord Righteousness belongs unto thee, but
unto us confusion of faces; to our God also belong Mercies and forgiveness,
though we be plunged deep in Miserte and Sins. Cause thy face O Lord to
shine upon us thy servants, and let not our sins separate between thee and
us; remit the Guilt, purge the Corruption of us miserable sinners, which do
not present our supplications before thee, for our own Righteousness, but for
thy great Mercies; though our sins witness against us, yet deal with us
according to thy Name, for great are thy Mercies. AMEN. PSALM. 51. ver. 3. For I
acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.


THis Psalm (as heretofore you have heard) consists of two Vows, both were
made by King David, one for himself, another for his Kingdom; the first does
express his Desire, and his Promise; his Desire to be restored unto, and
preserved in the state of Grace: his Promise, if he speed hereof, to perform
religious service unto God. In the former Petition, of his Desire there are two
remarkable things; the Matter contained in it, and the Manner of King David's
redoubling it; of the Matter I have already spoken, wherefore I now come on
unto the Manner.

And herein we must observe; first, the Inference, then the Amplification; that
is, how that which follows is brought in upon that which goes before, and
how King David enlarges himself in unfolding the Confession of his own
Misery, and Petition for Gods Mercy: In the Inference we shall learn, that as
God has Mercy, so it is for such as are sensible of their Misery; in the
Amplification we shall learn, that he which is sensible, must show himself
not only ingenious in displaying his own wretchedness, but be assured also
of the Remedy which is provided by Gods Goodness.

But to look more particularly into the former branch of the Amplification;
behold therein how King David does rip up his sins, the Branches, the Root
thereof, the sin which himself has committed, and the sin which he has
derived from his Parents, he lays open both, both the Debt and the Usury, so
Saint Chrysostom calls them. Homil. ad Neophytos.
He begins at the sin which himself has committed, he uses not the
querulous Proverb of the Jews, the fathers have eaten sour Grapes, Ier. 34.29
and the Childrens teeth are set onedge, the remembrance of his woeful
Inheritance, does not make him forget his own graceles Purchase; no, he
minds this first, he first amplifieth the Debt which himself has contracted.

In laying open this, he observes two things; the natural Properties thereof,
and the supernatural Event which follows thereupon; the natural Properties
are two, a Malignity, and an Impiety, he handles the Impiety in the next
verse, the Malignitie in this that I have now read unto you.

Malignity is a vexing evil; first, there is evil in his sin, he touches
a double evil, evil of the Heart, and evil of the Head, of the Heart, noted
by the word Peshang, which signifies a rebellious inordinatnes of the will; of
the Head, noted by Chata, which notes an erring Judgment, or misleading
advise; these two evils are in sin, enormous sin, and where they are,
there they vex; for, they are Coram, or Contra, before us, or Against us, the
word bears both significations, and therefore it is translated both ways;
and if we couple them (as well we may) then you shall find, that enormous
sin committed does haunt our thoughts, and afflict our wills.

Neither only do they so, but they do so incessantly, so says the Text,
they are Semper Coram, and Semper Contra, Always before us, and Against us,
always vexing both our Head, and our Heart. Of this King David is ingeniously
feeling, and testifies the truth of it in his own Case; in his own Case, I
say, for the sin which he remembers is his own, My transgressions, My
sins, the disease of mine own Head, and mine own Heart; therefore says
King David, I am feeling, feeling in my Head, and feeling in my Heart, for,
Agnosco, I Acknowledge it, Acknowledging imports a work of the Head, which
is Noscere, to know, and a work of the Heart, which is, Agnoscere, to
Acknowledge, the use of knowledge, the applying of it to our Lives.

Neither is King David only feeling hereof, but ingenious also in publishing
the same, for he did Acknowledge it in this Psalm. These be the particulars
which offer themselves in this Text, and whereunto (God willing) I shall now
speak more fully, and answerably unto this The (...) of (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) of Wells.
Occasion.

But I must first touch at the Inference, and show you, how these and the
following words are brought in upon those that go before: Have mercy upon me O
Lord, etc. says King David, for I acknowledge my transgressions, etc. Observe
then; Man's devotion must follow Gods direction, neither may we hope otherwise
to speed, then we are waranted by his Promise. Now, God does not promise Mercy
but to those that are feeling of their Misery: in the beginning of the
Leiturgie we hear daily out of Ezekiel. E^c. 18.21.22.
At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin, from the bottom of
his Heart, I will put al His wickedness out of my remembrance says the Lord;
Joel. 2.13.
and therefore out of Joel we are called upon, to Rent our Hearts, and not our
Garments, and turn unto the Lord our God, because he is gentle, and
merciful, patient, and of much mercy, and such an one as is sorric for our
Afflictions: M^t. 5.6.
to this purpose does our Savior Christ in the Gospel pronounce them Blessed,
that hunger and thirst after righteousness, saying, M^^. 11.^.
they shall be satisfied; and inuiteth those that Labor and are heavy laden,
saying, he will refresh them.

Although then we do yield, that the Mercy of God is infinite, and that it is
ready to releive all wretches; yet we may not forget, that in obtaining it
there are Parts nostrae (as Chrysostom speaks) there is some thing that God
requires on our part; he requires that we approve unto him our Repentance.
Saint Austin sets it forth in a pretty Dialogue between God, and King David;
Quidergo? quaeris miserecordiam, and pecatum impunitum remanebit? what (says
God unto King David) do thou seek for mercy, so that thy sin may remain
unpunished? Respondet David, respondeant Lapsi. King David replied, and all
sinners must join in this answer with King David; Non Domine, Nay Lord, my
sin shall not be unpunished, I know his Justice whose mercy I implore, my
sin shall not pass unpunished, but therefore would not I have thee punish
it, because I do punish it my self: and so Chrysostom. I see my sin O
Lord, therefore do not thou see it, I register it in this Psalm, therefore
do thou blot it out of thy Book, Agnosco, ignoscas, therefore pardon, because
I am penitent; 1. Cor. 11.
And indeed it is the Apostles Rule, That if we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged of the Lord.

Yet may we not corrupt this Doctrine as the Church of Rome does, by
ouer-valewing man's Penetencie, and esteeming it to be Satisfactorie;
Satisfactorie (I say) Dignitatesua, for any worth that is in it, though it may
go for Satisfactorie Dignatione Diuina, because God is pleased to rest
contented with it. Paululum supplicij satis est Patri, to the Indulgence of a
Father small sparkles of Grace make a good satisfaction, for a great fault
committed by a Child, but he were a graceless Child, that would so mis-conster
his Fathers good nature, as to deem a few sorrowing tears, a full ransom of
his offense: Our condition of being Gods children by faith in Christ, and the
affection of God respecting us in Christ as his Children, are the true ground
why God requires no more of us; and he that instead of this Relation, plods
upon a proportion between his Repentance and Gods vengeance, does not only
corrupt a comfortable Doctrine by his error, but for his pride deserves to
forfeit Gods gracious Pardon. Let us keep the right path, neither
ouer-valewing Godly sorrow, neither yet neglecting it, seeing God has
vouchsafed it so comfortable an effect; Let us all, especially you that are the
Penitents, be feeling of our Misery that God may relieve us with his Mercy.

And let this suffice concerning the Inference; I come now to the
Amplification, to consider so much of it as is contained in this Verse; here, I
told you, King David does display the malignitie of his Sin. Malignitie is a
vexing Evil, therefore in the Sin here specified, we must observe, first, the
Evil, and then the Vexation thereof; and we find a double Evil, noted by the
two Names that are given to the Sin; I have on former Verses spoken of these
words, but the present occasion has made me look farther into them, and
observe moreover, that which is not unworthy of our knowledge.

These words then will teach us, that Sins, especially, if they be enormous,
have plain Characters of the Devil; He is resembled to a Serpent, and to a
Lion; in regard of the first Christ calls him a Lier, John 8.44
in regard of the last, a Murderer, and where he instills Sin, he leaves the
steps of either of these; of his Lying, in the error of Men's Judgments; of
his Murdering, in the Rebelliousnesse of their Affections; the second of these
is noted by Peshang, Lawlesnesse, the first by Chata, aberration from the scope
where at we aim: he desires not to have men to halfes, he endeavors to
venom both the fountains of the reasonable Soul; and soldome shall you find
a man misled in his Judgment, whose Affections are not violent. See the truth
of this, first, in Morality, then, in Divinity. Let a man be given to
Drunkenness; if the Serpent have taken him by the Head, and made him conceive,
that that beastly quality does well beseem a man, the Lion will take him by
the Heart, and he will grow mad against those that will not be as mad as
himself; the blood that is shed in quarrels of this nature, are too daily
proofs of this Truth: For unchastity, you need no better evidence, then the
story of the Sodomites: (...) 1.
it is no great matter to gather proofs, touching other Moral defects, but
the occasion remembers me especially to instance in matters of Divinity; here
you shall see, if ever, that the enemy of mankind has left the marks of
either of his Persons.

How the Serpent prevailed against the Pharisees, he knows not the Gospel,
that does not know; Christ does therein discover manifold errors of their
Judgment: and that the Roaring Lion had entered their Hearts, is witnessed by
their persecuting of Christ and his Apostles: how foully the Arians were
deceived concerning the Deity of Christ, we read in the story of the first
Nicene Council; and in the Ecclesiastical story we read, how barbarous, how
bloody they were; as the Serpent had bit them, so the Lion raged in them: come
on to the Papists; is not their erroneous Judgment accompanied with most
furious Affections? As they are not ashamed to put the Devils properties into
their Creed, teaching an Art of periurious Lying, and Meritorious Murdering;
so do they act them both, publishing Lies by their tongues and pens, and
practicing Murders by their enchanted Assasinates; the Gunpowder-treason is a
Monument hereof to their eternal infamy. The Anabaptists came fairly after
them, whose opinions were not more gross, then their dealing seditious; not so
few as a hundred thousand persons perished, while with their Rebellious sword,
they labored to make good the forgerie of their brain; they made it plain,
that as well the Lion as the Serpent had taken possession of them: This the
German stories relate at large; And our own stories will tell us, that we
have not wanted some that have been kin unto them, Hackets, Coppingers, and
others, that though they have not gone so far, yet had gone farther, then
beseemes those whose profession is truth, and practice should be obedience;
they have received, nay they have vented some thing of the Serpent, and some
thing of the Lion.

I think you see by this time, what I mean; I mean to lance the sores of
these Penitents, to let it appear, that the Serpent has got into their Head,
and the Lion into their Hearts: They have had a false light that deluded their
Judgment, and an unkind heat, that has warmed their Affections, they have
scanted Gods bounty in permitting unto us the use of his creatures, and
entertained a Jewish conceit of the unlawfulness of eating blood.

And as their opinions have been erroneous, in regard of Christian liberty:
so have they been also, concerning Ecclesiastical society; thinking, they
may separate themselves from the Church, if those whom they esteem irreligious
livers, be not excommunicated by Ecclesiastical censures: yea, so far has
the Serpent prevailed, as to make them (if not deny) at least, to doubt of the
Lawfulness of the Leiturgie, the Ministry, yea, to question the very Root of
all the Ecclesiastical Authority both of Prince and Pastors. So far has
the Serpent been with them.

And if He get in before, the Lion will follow after; and indeed he has
followed in them: for what Authority have they not set at naught?
Ecclesiastical, Civil, either of them, more then once, and trod upon them
more ways then one; and how Lyon-like they would have been, if they had had
power answerable to their will, God knows; the proof we have had of others,
may make us justly suspect the worst.

This only I wish them to take to themselves; that in their Sin there was
this double Evil; and if they do not therein discern this dou, ble Evil,
they do not as they ought look into their Sin; which not withstanding they
should do, because so to do, is the first step of Repentance.

The second step does consider the vexation that does accompany this Evil. As
it seiseth upon the Head, and upon the Heart; so does it vex them both, for it
is Coram Nobis, and Contra Nos, both before us, and Against us. The word Neged
does contain both Praepositions, and therefore the Interpreters have differed
in their Translations; but because sin cannot be before a Penitent, but it will
be Against him, therefore will I conioyne them both, I will show you, that it
does haunt our Thoughts, and afflict our Hearts.

Sin then is fitly resembled unto a Harlot painted, that her countenance may
by art work, what by nature it could not do; while she does woo her Lovers,
that which she offers to their view, is the paynting, but when she has
drawn them into her snare, she gives the^ leave then to see her native hue*
she reuealeth then what before she concealed: Even so sin has a fair
outside, but the inside thereof is foul, it puts on the one, to allure, but
when men are allured, then it shows them the other; we are easily tempted to
the Act of sin, for pleasure makes us swallow the bait; when the Act is
determined, the sight of the pleasure vanishes, but the sight of the guilty
corruption abides by us, the painting is quickly wiped off, and the ugliness
thereof appears, and the Angel of light is quickly turned into an Angel of
darkness; though we strive to cast our sins behind us, will we, nill we,
they will thrust themselves before us. And why? Hom 3i. in Cap. 12. ad Hebraeo^^
they are graven in Memoria Conscientiae (as Chrysostom calls it) they are
registered in the Book of Conscience, which we are forced to read, even when we
would be most glad to be rid of it; but the relation thereof cannot be
suppressed, our thoughts cannot be freed from it. And this is the first vexing
property of sin; it does vex our Thoughts.

But not our Thoughts only, it vexes our Hearts also; it is not only Coram,
but Contra, not only Before us, we cannot but think of it, but also Contra
Nos, In Psalm. 35.
we cannot but be tormented with it. Saint Ambrose says, it is Vltrix Imago, a
very Fury, it is a Hell going before Hell, and rackes us before we are put
upon the rack, the Harlot suddenly turns into a soldier, and gives us as
many deadly wounds, as she gave us counterfeit kisses. Chap. 20. verse 12.
Chap. 1.
Job expresses it in a very fine Similie, Wickedness is sweet in the mouth,
and the wicked hides it under his tongue, but this meat in his bowels is
turned, it is the gall of Aspes; the Wiseman speaks it plainly, Men
entertain sin as a friend, and make a Covenant with it; but what is the
issue? it consumes them, and brings them unto naught, and as Saint Peter
speaks, 1. Pet. 2.
it fights against their Souls.

Neither is this vexing momentanie, it vexes Semper, Always; Always Before,
Always Against a Sinner, is the double Evil of sin, in the night, in the
day, in prosperity, in adversity; while he is alone, while he is in
company; a sinner that is rowsed to see his sin cannot but be vexed with the
Evil thereof.

Nec prius hi stimuli mentem quam vita relinquent.
Quique dolet citius, quam dolor ipse Cadet.
The torments will not end before death, and in the Reprobate after death, this
Vexation shall be much increased.

But of this Vexation more anon, when I come to couple the first part of the
Text with this latter; Let us come on then to King David's ingeneous feeling of
this Malignitie, Malignitie of his own sin.

And indeed it is his own Sin, that he is feeling of. Many study sin, and
they can see evil enough in it, but it is other men's sin: in other men's eyes
Moates seem Beams, Mat. 7.3.
but Beams in our own eyes seem not so much as Moates; most men are like the
Laodiceans, think themselves Rich, increased in goods, that they want nothing,
even then, when they are poor, blind, naked, and miserable, as Christ tells
that Church Revel. 3. Hereupon it is, Luke 18.
that they come to God like Pharisees with I thank God I am not like unto
other men; but King David choose rather to play the Publican, to look into his
own sores, his errors, his rebellions, to amplify his own sins, and fit
them with their proper names, to note the diseases of his own Head, and of his
own Heart.

It were to be wished, that you that are Penetents had taken the same course.
You have traduced your Pastors, for the Diseases of their Head, and reproached
them by the names of Baals Priests, you have traduced your Brethren for the
Diseases of their Hearts, and doomed them as unworthy of the Communion of
Saints; and see how God has rewarded your Pride; he has suffered the Devil
to wound you both in Head, and Heart, he has made you spectacles of those
diseases which you condemned in others; Romans 7.
they may press you with that question of Saint Paul, Thou that make thy
boast of the Law, by breaking the Law dishounerest thou God? And vpbraid you
with the Proverb, Luke. 4.24.
Physician heal thy self.

And it is a good warning that may be taken by us all, not to study others,
before we have studied our selves, and not to let our censure pass against
any, more severely then against our selves; so did King David in his practice
of Repentance, and so must we; we must look into our own Case; not only so,
we must be feeling thereof also; so much is meant by the word, Acknowledging.

Acknowledge does implie knowledge, and add thereunto the use thereof. To
understand this we must observe; that, for the ordering of our life God does
furnish us with two helps, the one is called (...), the other (...) does
signify, or note, the Principles whereby we do distinguish good and evil;
(...) notes the Application of these Principles to our Actions; the first you
may call Moral knowledge, the second Moral Acknowledgement, the latter cannot
be without the former, and the former should not be without the latter.

But to touch at either of these for our present occasion. God has set down
those Principles which he thought expedient to guide a Christian Resolution,
but two Evils have ouer-taken the Church: The Papists they breed up the people
in an ignorant Devotion, and care not how little they know the true grounds of
Conscience, but bid them rest contented with an Implicit Faith, and rest their
Souls upon the Authority of the Church; they offend in Parum, in
ouer-scanting of the peoples knowledge: But the Separatists run into the
other extreme, they offend in Nimium, attribute too little to the Church, and
exceed in knowledge, or fancies which they suppose to be Divine knowledge. And
what marvel? When leaving the guides of their own Church, then whom, since
the Apostles days, God has not raised up in any Kingdom so many, and so
worthy, they commit themselves unto obscure Guides, that either lurk in
corners, or fly their Country. No Books are for their eyes, but those which
are of their penning, and they that scorn our Apocryphalls, what Apocryphal
writings do they dote upon?

And as no writings please them but such, so no men's Sermons but theirs can
edify them; and indeed they do edify; but it is a Babel; their sancies are
no better then that Tower of confusion, and yet to dwell in that, they will
forsake Jerusalem it self.

I will not amplify your fault that are Penitents, but a man may guess at the
model of your knowledge by your Library, by the Books any may guess what
Principles you follow; not of your own Church, but of Conuenticles, and this
is that that has made you Schismatickes; hence forward you shall do well, to
take your light from those Stars whom God has placed in this Church;
especially, seeing they refuse not to let those who with modesty desire to be
resolved, see, that their Light is derived from the Sun of Righteousness;
and that as Faithful Stewards they press nothing to the Consciences of their
fellow servants, but that, for which they have warrant from their Master
Christ, wherein they differ from the Popish Pastors.

But Knowledge is not enough, Acknowledgement is required also; unto (...) we
must add (...), and the Principles that we have, we must put in ure. As our
Knowledge must not be Headless, so must it not be Heartlesse; when we have
gone so far, as that the Light of our understanding can discern between
Good and Evil, we must then take care of our Affections, that the heat of
Grace give them a good temper, that they take a true taste of their Objects,
that Love and Hatred, Desire and Fear, Hope and Despair, arise out of that
which was designed to work them.

But to amplify this a little farther. We should use knowledge in guiding of
our Actions before hand, and try what that is which offers it self to be
done, before we go about to do it: If a man were so advised, as timely to
move unto his soul this question, quid ago? where about go I? such
providence, if it would not prevent all sin, because of the manifold
temptations, and man's too natural infirmity, either in neglecting Grace,
which he has, or forgetting to pray for Grace, which he has not; yet would it
put off many a sin, and make us take less content in the sins which we
do not put off; yea, this would be a good inducement to the thorough feeling
of our slips, which is the after use we must make of our knowledge, and is
usually meant by Acknowledgment: for what is that, but only, that if sin have
prevented our aduisednesse, upon a reuiewe we retract what rashness has
committed? This is a profitable use of Knowledge. But sinful souls are now
become like corrupt Bodies; corrupt bodies have often times great appetites,
when they have but small digestion; so, many desire much knowledge, whereof
they put but a little in practice; yea, as meat that is not digested in the
Body does incumber it, and breeds in it many disquieting diseases; so if our
life be not the better for our knowledge, by our care to express it, it will
be much the worse, by our quarrels that we will raise about it.

Socrates the Ecclesiastical Historiographer reports a story of one Pambo,
Lib. 4. c. 18.
a plain ignorant man (such as you the Penitents are) who came to a learned
Man, and desired him to teach him some Psalm, he began to read unto him the
39. Psalm, when he had past the first verse, I said I will look to my ways,
that I offend not with my tongue, Pambo shut the Book, and took his leave,
saying that he would go learn that point; when he had absented himself
certain months, he was demanded by his Reader, when he would go forward, he
answered, that he had not yet learned his old lesson, and he gave the very same
answer to one that many years after moved the same question. I do not
desire, that our people should have so few Sermons, the Canons of the Church
have provided for the people better then so; but this I desire, that the people
would make more use of that which they learn, and let their lives show that
they are the better for the Ministers pains; for sure I am, that it is their
negligence, that makes the Ministers diligence the more needful; and though
knowledge be wanting in too many places of the Land, yet is Acknowledgement
wanting much more: the fruit of our pains is so far from preventing sin in
the people, that we cannot speed so well, as to work a feeling thereof in
them, when they have committed it; we find not that tenderness in their
souls, which Nathan found in the soul of King David, and which King David
implies in his Acknowledgment.

But feeling is not enough; that is not all that is meant by Acknowledgement,
though the feeling be no less in the Heart, then it is in the Head;
Therefore, I told you, that King David's was an ingenious feeling, he published
what he felt. If sins be only secret, then the humiliation of the inward
man may suffice in the sight of God, it is enough to confess his faults, or in
a generality to acknowledge them in the public confession of the Church,
without specification, except the burden of his conscience give him just cause
to reveal it, that he may be relieved by Ghostly counsel; but if what he
conceived inwardly, he has vented outwardly, in word, or deed, to the
offense not of God only, but also of the Church, then, unto the Confession
made unto God in private, must be added a public also in the face of the
Church: such was King David's sin, and such is King David's Confession; he
testified publicly to the Church, the Religious feeling that he had of his
sins; and this is thereason why I called his dealing ingenious.

And indeed, herein stands the great conflict, that Grace has with flesh and
blood; hardly are we contented to be privy to our selves of our own
sinfulness; for though we delight to commit sin, yet do we not delight to
behold our selves as we are sinners; the more natural the desire is in every
man to be reputed good, the more unsavory is that search that sindeth him to
be nothing so; And if we are so unwilling to know our selves to be sinners,
much less will we endure, that others should be of our Counsel therein.
Stultorum incurata pudor malus vlcera celat. Many will rather die, then be
known, that they are sick of some shameful disease; but men are less
willing to have their sins published, then their sores.

The more remarkable is King David's ingenuitie, and rather to be wished, then
hoped for, in this Age, wherein men sin without shame, but shame to
Acknowledge their known sin: outfacing of such challenge as was made to King
David, and excusing, sometimes of the fact, most usually of themselves, are the
best pleas which are stood upon by offenders; though many exceed King David in
the infirmities which appeared in this fall, yet where is the man that comes
near the least degree of his ingenuiti^ in confessing of his fault? Where such
stupiditie is, and men hide their sins like Adam, it is a sign, that the
Principles of Conscience are dull, and dead; as it is a sign, that they live
and are quick where contrary ingenuitie does appear.

Which, you the Penitents should consider well, and let the Church see in your
humble confession, what true Contrition there is in your soul; whether your
Conscience be senseless, or feeling of that state whereinto you are brought by
sin: to work this degree of penitencie in you, I will somewhat enlarge a
point which I did but glance at before. Know then, that there are two sorts of
the laying open of the malignity of sin; the one is Voluntary, the other is
Compulsorie; the Voluntary is that whereof I have spoken, which is medicinal,
and prepares Misery to receive Mercy: for therefore does God put a distance
between our ill dealing, and faring ill, that Grace husbanding that distance
thriftily, and we judging our selves, before we are judged, might prevent that
faring ill which is due unto our ill deserving.

Add hereunto, that if we willingly ser forth the Malignitie of our sin, the
Object will be proportionable to our sight, and we shall so be confounded
therewith, that we shall not be confounded; our Godly sorrow shall have an
happy issue: But if we will not do this willingly, we shall be constrained to
do it; happily in this world, certainly in the world to come; but whether now
or then, the object will be too strong for our sight, and our souls will be
overwhelmed therewith. In this world it falls out very often, that Satan which
tempts many unto sin, does tempt them afterward to despair; and how does
he do it, but by representing unto them the malignity of their sin? the
evil whereof, proves so vexing, that it makes some as restless as Cain, and
some as unnatural to themselves as Judas; and both of them that spared to let
their tongues confess penitently, did not spare desperately to publish their
own shame: but if happily God do not permit so much power unto Satan in this
world; yet in the world to come he will force all the wicked unto this
Confession; the worm then will so bite, and the Books of their Consciences
will be so legible; God will so set their sins before them, that they shall
power forth a full Confession, and give Glory unto God, though little to their
own comfort, as it is excellently set forth Wisd. 5.

Wherefore, this penitential Confession enjoined by the Church, should not
seem irksome unto you, seeing it is so behoofefull for you; for you do by
this prevent a worse; prevent an uncomfortable one that will be forced upon
you, by this Medicinal one, if you perform it Voluntarily, out of a godly
sorrow for your sin.

But I conclude. ipartit. Hist. b. 9 c. 15.
Non peccare vltra humanam naturam cognoscitur; it is not to be hoped, that
we should run the race that is set before us, and not take any fall before
we die; least therefore we should so fall, as not to rise again, God has
provided a remedy; he will spare us, if we do not spare our selves; if we
take notice of our sin, God will not enquire into it; if it be grievous unto
us, God will neur greiue us for it; neither shall we ever be forced to confess
to our Confusion, if we be willing to confess it to our Salvation: seeing
then God has given us our choice, whether our confession shall be a Medicine,
or a Torment, let us not reserve our selves for the Torment, by despising of
the Medicine. But let us not be Like unto those that behold their natural face
in a glass, Nes 1.23.
and going away, presently forget what manner of persons they were; that will
make out Repentance but like a Morning cloud which quickly passes away: And no
wonder, if men often relapse into sin, if they so quickly forget their former
sins; he that will hold himself in, must imitate King David; his
humiliation must be as lasting, as his Life; we should never forget, what
wretches we have been, least withal we forget, how much we are bound to God;
the presence of our sin forgiven, will make us more sensible of the
forgiveness of our sin.

Wherefore, if at any time we find grace in Gods eyes, as which of us does not
often find it in this life? let it not greiue us to say with Saint Paul that,
we are chief of sinners, 1. Tim. 1.15.
though God should do us the like honor he did to him, and make us chief
Apostles; in a word, though we have sped of our pardon, as David did from the
mouth of Nathan, let this be our constant Confession unto death; I do know
mine own wickedness, and my sin is ever before me.

LOrd, I have proved, that Satan is a Serpent, and that he is a Lion; he has
besotted my wits, he has enraged mine Affections; when he did this, he
transformed an Angel of darkness into an Angel of Light, and clothed a foe,
under the habit of a friend; th^s was I deluded, and he entertained; but now
he appears in his own likeness, the light is gone, the darkness
remains, and my counterfeit friend, is an apparent foe; these frauds disquiet
my thoughts, and how is my Heart afflicted by this unexpected danger? I find
no Remedy, but to make known my Case to thee, to lay open these diseases of
my Head, of my Heart before thee; Grant that I may so feel them, that thou
may vouchsafe to cure them; that thou may vouchsafe to cover them also, let
me never be ashamed to discover them; let me whet the dull sense that I have of
thy Mercy, by the quick sense of mine own Misery; Let this never die, that
that may live ever; So shall I by a godly sorrow, speed of a heavenly joy, and
by a Medicinal Confusion in the Church Militant, make my self Capable of
eternal Salvation in the Church Triumphant. AMEN. PSALM. 51. The first part of
the 4. VERSE. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
sight.


KIng David in this Penitential, confessing that sin, which himself had
contracted, observes the Natural properties, and Supernatural event thereof.
The Natural properties are two; a Malignitie, and an Impiety which are in
Sin; Of the Malignitie I spoke last, I come now to the Impiety.

We must then observe; That in all sin, besides the offense, there is a
party offended, and the party offended sets the Measure to the offense; as
he is, so is that; he makes it to be greater, or less: therefore, in a full
Confession, the party offended must not be omitted; certainly King David in
his Exemplarie Confession does not omit him; he does not forget to express
whom he had wronged; Against thee only have I sinned: and which is more, whom
he had contemned; I have done this evil in thy sight.

But more distinctly. In the Confession that concerns the party wronged, you
shall find something that is common to all sinners. Tibi peccaui, I have sinned
against thee, must every one say; for whosoever sins, sins Against God;
but here is some thing also proper; Tibi solj peccauj, Against thee only have
I sinned, can none say, but a King; because there is none above him, but only
God; and therefore none but God can challenge him. As this must be observed in
the Confession of the party wronged: So in the Confession of the same party
contemned we must observe; first, what contempt is in general; it is, Malum
facere coram oculis, not only to wrong a party, but to wrong him to his face.
Secondly, how this contempt in special is aggrauated two ways, 1. by the eye
of the party offended, Oculis tuis; for Gods is no ordinary eye, 2. by the
sin, wherewith that eye was provoked, Malum hoc, the sin committed was no
ordinary sin. These are the particulars which I mean to handle on this
Text, wherefore I resume them, that I may run them over briefly, and in their
order.

First then, the whole Text is an amplification of sin, in regard of the
party offended; and the party offended makes it plain, that there is
Impiety in the sin. Persons with whom we converse are, some our equals,
some our superiors; if equals, and we offend them, the offense is properly
called Iniquity, as taxing the unequal dealing of equal persons: But if the
persons be superiors, and be offended, then, the offense is properly called
Impiety; because all superiors are instar parentum, either they are, or they
are unto us instead of our Parents: Now, the virtue which must moderate our
carriage toward our Parents, is called Piety; and therefore is our
misbehauiour toward them, no less then Impiety. And if they deserve this
Censure that offend the Fathers of their flesh, how much more is it due to them
that offend the Father of their Spirits? H^b. 1^.
Seeing, the fathers of our flesh, challenge our Piety, in regard that they
represent unto us the Father of our Spirits, therefore it belongs much more
unto him whom they represent; whereupon it follows, that to offend him can be
no less then Impiety, and Impiety will prove a natural property of sin.

But let us come to the Branches of the Confession. The first is that which
touches the Person as he is wronged; and here, I told you, we find some
thing that is common to all sinners, Tibi peccaui: all sinners must say, that
when they sin, against whomsoever they do sin, they sin against God. I
will make it plain by four evident Reasons. The first is taken from that
which we abuse in sin. All Creatures as they are made by God; so do they
still belong unto him, so that we cannot abuse them, but in them we abuse him:
Every man may perceive this in his one family: he that wrongeth a wife, in the
wife wrongeth the husband; the abuse offered to a child, redoundeth to his
Father; yea, and a Master, an owner, is feeling of whatsoever hurt is done,
either to the Servant, or else to his goods; And shall we think then, that any
creature can be violated, and the Creator not touched therewith? all
Adulterers, Murderers, whatsoever Malefactors must remember, they abuse the
Creator, while they use his Creature amiss.

A second Reason is this, that we cannot abuse, nor wong others, but withal
we abuse our selves much more; that which we do to them, is but Injury, but
that which we do to our selves, is Deprauation, we corrupt our selves with
sin, when we do unto them only a wrong; Now, the reference which our
selves have unto God, makes the deprauing of our selves an offense against
him; we are not our own, 1. Cor. 6. Psalm. 100. 1. Cor. 6. 1. Pet. 1. 1. Cor.
6. Psalm. 132.14.
God has made us, and not we our selves, yea, we are bought with a price,
even, the precious blood of our Savior Christ; yea, the Holy Ghost by Christ
has made us a Temple unto himself, and we are vouchsafed to be his resting
place for ever. Look how many references we have unto God; so many ways do
we offend him, when we employ our selves in sin: By Creation we should
bear the image of God; and what an abuse is it of his Image, by sin to
transform it into the Image of the Devil? By Redemption we become the members
of Christ, and how do we vilify him, when we make them members of an Harlot?
we are vouchsafed to be temples of the Holy Ghost, was Christ so offended with
the abuse of the material Temple, when the House of Prayer, was made a Denn of
Theenes, Mat. 21.13.
and think you that the abuse of the Spiritual, does nothing concern him?
Certainly, his Spirit must needs be grieved therewith.

A third Reason is this. The natural duties that we owe man to man, and
Creature unto Creature, are imposed upon us by a Law, and that Law is Gods; we
swerve not from our duties, but we break his law. And if we break his Law,
how can we but offend him? especially, seeing his Law is the Image of himself,
of his Being, and of his Doing; in it we have a taste of his Holy Nature, and
of that which is remarkable in his own works: Now, what Lawmaker will endure
that his Law shall be broken? especially, whereas he imposes no other Law on
his Subjects, then on himself, and that Law requires nothing, but an outward
Resplendencie of an inward Glory, that we should let our light shine before
men, Mot. 5
that they may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven;
the breaking of such a Law must needs offend the Sacred Lawmaker.

A fourth Reason is, the Blasphemy of the wicked occasioned by sin. They that
know not the true God, measure him by that which they see in his Servants, and
think, that as they are, so is he, impotent in Affections, impure in
Conversation; and hereupon do they open their mouths against Heaven. Nathan
touches this in his reproof of David, and the Jews are often by the Prophets
taxed for giving this occasion of Blasphemy, and the Christians had woeful
proof of it in the Primitive Church; witness the strange imputatio^s; that the
Heathen did cast upon the Christian Religion, whereof a man may find more then
enough, in the Heathenish writings of those times. Neither do we want proof in
these days; the barbarous cruelty of the first Inuaders of the Indies, how
did it cause those Infidels to blaspheme the name of Christ? and what infamy
is daily cast upon the Reformed Religion, by the adverse party, whose chief
proof is, the vnreformedliues of the Professors thereof? It cannot then be
denied, but that, though in the eye of flesh and blood, when we sin, we
satisfy our lusts upon the creatures, and mandoth injury unto man, as David
to Vriah, to Bathsheba; yet, the offense redounds unto God, and God is a party
Against whom we Sin, whenever we sin. Tibi peccaui, I have sinned against
thee, must be put in the Confession of every sinner.

Besides this Confession, that is common to all sinners, here is added another
Confession which is proper unto Kings: Tibi Soli peccaui, against thee only
have I sinned, could no man say, but he that is a Sovereign. But to open these
words more fully; we must observe, that some understand them Absolutely, some
Comparatively; and of those that understand them Absolutely, some understand
them only de Facto, some de Iure; some consider only, what was done, some,
what ought to be done: these different senses agree all well with the Text, and
because the knowledge of them is useful I will touch at them all. First, at
the sense which conceiueth in these words that which was usually done.

Great Men, especially Kings, are beset with flatterers, that will rather
blanch sin, then set it forth in its own color, plead for it, rather then
against it, they turn Princes vices into virtues, and adore their
imperfections, as if they were heavenly perfections; and so, if they begin to
be bad, they never leave until they have made them stark naught, to glory
in their shame, (...) 10.^4.
which they see others magnify. But God has no respect of persons, he sows
no such Pillowes under the elbowes of Kings; neither will he cover their
ruins, with such distempered mortar; when their subjects do sooth them, (...)
3.5.
he will speak home, and be a swift witness against them; when all others
hold their peace, he fears not the faces of the mighty, neither will he
spare to strike the greatest Monarch: Job touches this more then once, and the
Author of the Book of Wisdom does evidently amplify it; never a Book
Historical in the Bible, that has not some examples of it. And this may be
the first thing, that King David means in these words: he might have slept,
and died in his sin, for ought was said, or done unto him by men; but he
found one that rowsed him, that searched his wounds to the quick, and that was
only God; when the Prophet, when the Priest, the Counselors of State, all
were silent, none made any Remonstrance to the King of his sin, God put forth
His voice, (...)
yea and that a mighty voice, that shiuered both the soul and body of King
David, and made him acknowledge the difference between his Sovereign in
Heaven, and his Subjects on Earth, saying, Against thee only have I sinned.

As these words are true de facto, and note what is usually don; so are they
true de Iure also, and note what lawfully may be done. In sinning there is a
double difference between a Subject, and a Sovereign; the one is, ratione
Praecepit, Commandments, and Laws; the other is, ratione Paenae, mulcts, and
Chastisements The subject has two obligations upon him, the Law of God, and of
the King, he is bound to yield his Obedience to them both, neither can he
dispense with his Obedience unto either of them; the King is absolutely bound
only to Gods Law, over his own Laws he has power, and although he should
use them as Directions for the good of his people, yet, when there is just
cause he may dispense, not only with himself, but with others also; and in
this respect do the Lawiers affirm, that a Monarch is Solutus Legibus, that a
King in regard of his own Laws cannot deal unjustly; because in foro Soli,
he only is to judge, when it is expedient for him to dispense with his Laws;
So then, when a Subject offends, he offends against the Law of his
Sovereign, and of God; but when a King offends, against the Laws of a
Sovereign he cannot offend, he offends only against the Laws of God. And
so in that sense it is true, Tibi Soli peccaui.

Besides the Precepts of Laws, there are Sanctions; these contain the
Penalties which they incur, that break the Laws; as manifold as the Laws
are, so manifold are the Sanctions. And here comes in a second difference
between a Subject, and a Sovereign. A Subject is liable to both Sanctions, to
the Sanction of his Sovereigns Laws, and the Sanction of Gods Laws; if he
offend, he is punishable by both: But a Sovereign is subject but unto one Law,
and so but unto one Sanction, that Sanction which is annexed unto the Law of
God; to the Sanction of his own Law, he is not subject. Nature abhors
progressum in infinitum, as in Philosophy, so in Policy; therefore,
subordination of Persons, that arises by degrees, must rest when it comes to
the Sovereign; all within his Territories are subject to his chastisement, but
he to the chastisement of none; In Apolog. David. Cap. ^.
tutus est Imperij potestate (says Saint Ambrose) it is the principal of his
Royal prerogatives; and upon this point do most of the Fathers insist, that
have occasion to speak of these words; even from the very days of the
Apostles, have they made these words, a Sanctuary unto Kings, and a sacred
plea for their exemption, from the censure of any under God.

This Doctrine is the rather to be urged in this Age, because the two extremes
that impugn the truth, Papists on one side, and Schismatics on the other, are
both usurpers upon the Crown, and Scepters of Kings, both will give them
Laws, and both will correct the errors of their Lives, and Government, one by
the Pope, the other by the People. But both their usurpations are condemned in
this Text: Tibi Solipeccaui; Against thee only have I sinned, confuteth them
both, and subjects that will not pass for Rebels must be contented to take,
not to give Laws, to suffer from, not to inflict Punishments upon their
Sovereigns.

Yet, though this be the duty of Subjects, Princes are not lawless, neither is
this a Doctrine of Impunity; for though it be, peccaui Soli Tibi; yet, it is,
Peccaui, and Tibi; God is their Lawginer, and will call them to an account for
breaking of his law, Et potentes potenter, Wisd. 6.
the greater they are, the greater shall their punishment be; Lactant. Lib. ^.
de Iustitia c. 24
though they be exempted from the power of man, they are reserved unto a
greater power, the power of God. This may stop all mutinous mouths, and hold
in all treacherous hands, that declame against the unbridled power of
Sovereigns, and think it long before Justice is done upon them.

But enough of the absolute sense of these words. Some observe besides this a
Comparatiue sense: King David offended God and Men; though the offense were
great against both, yet was the former infinitely greater then the latter; the
Men against whom he offended were his Vassalls, God was his Sovereign;
unequal Objects make unequal sins, and as is the sin, so must our
apprehension be, greater, of greater sin. The apprehension then of the
greater, did clean take away the apprehension of the lesser; as when a man is
afflicted with two pains, the sharper drownes all sense of the duller: so
that, though King David were not without feeling of the wrong done to his
Subjects, yet was he more feeling of the wrong done unto God; especially,
considering the amplification of the many favors which God had vouchsafed him;
the more he was indebted to God, the more reason he had to be sensible of the
offense, which he had given to him; and so in comparison to greiue only for
that. And so should we in our Repentance, make the measure of Gods favors to
us, the measure of that Repentance, which the sins against our Neighbors, do
at any time draw from us. And thus much for the first branche of the
Confession, I come now to the second.

We have heard Whom King David offended, we must now hear, How far; that
appears in these words, I have done this evil in thy sight. To offend God,
is to do him wrong, but to offend him in his sight, is to improve that wrong
unto Contempt, and that is to do wrong in the highest degree.

But more distinctly. As before you heard, there was some thing common in the
wrong, and something proper: so must you observe the like, in the contempt
also. To offend a man before his eyes, is not only to wrong, but also to
contemn him; take an example from your selves, he that abuses a man's wife
does him great wrong, but if it be done before the husbands face, how much
does that scorn multiply the wrong? there is much odds between a Servants
abusing his Master, and abusing him to his face; for this is not only to
displease, but also to despise him: If it be so between man and man, how much
more between Man and God? That which is common to all wrong, we may not deny
unto that wrong which we do unto God.

Especially, if you consider the inequality of the eyes; for as the eyes are,
so is the eyesore: Let a drunkard see one drunk, and an adulterer one
committing of adultery, though in cold blood, out of some relics of
Conscience, he will be moved, yet nothing so much as he ought, because the
Objects of his eyes are such as himself is. But the eyes of a sober, a chaste
man, are affected with such spectacles, answerably to their sobriety, and
chastity; the more virtuous they are, the greater impression of grief do
these vices make in them. And this leads us to that which is proper unto God
in this Contempt, and does aggrauate the same; For there is an (...) in Coram
oculis tuis, before thy Eyes; And, thy eyes, implie three properties that are
peculiar unto God. For, His eyes are. 1. most piercing. 2. most pure, 3. most
powerful.

Most piercing. A man that breaks wedlock (says the Son of Sirach) says
thus in his Heart, chap 23.
who sees me? I am compassed about with darkness, the walls cover me, what
need I fear? such a man only fears the eyes of men, and knows not that
the eyes of the Lord, are ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, beholding
all the ways of Men, and considering the most secret parts; He knew all things
or ere they were Created, so also after they were perfected he looked upon them
all; Psalm. 139.
David has made a whole Psalm concerning this peircing Eye of God: Saint Paul
comprehends it in few words, All things are naked before his eyes. Heb. 4.
1. Sam. 16.
And herein stands the prerogative of Gods Eye above man's; Man can see only
the Face, God looks on the Heart, Man beholds the Operation, Ruffinus.
God the very Intention of the work. So that though David committed this
sin in secret, and carried the matter (as he thought) very cunningly, yet was
God too sharp sighted for him, and by Nathan brought to light what he thought
was hid in darkness: and in vain shall we affect these couerts; we can never
be out of Gods Sight.

The second prerogative of Gods Eye is, that it is most pure, Such as be
wicked cannot stand in his sight. The best of men are compast with infirmities,
and though they be not as bad as others, yet it is possible they may be, and
this possibility may hold them in from being so censorious as otherwise they
would: they that brought the Adulteress to Christ, John 8
when Christ bid Him of them which was without sin, to cast the first stone at
her, slunke away one by one, and their own guilt, checked the forwardness of
their Judgment; But God is as far from the possibility, as from the Act of
sin, and therefore may his Holiness make him more free, in the abhorring of
sinners.

The last prerogative is the Powerfulness of Gods Eye, eye of a Judge, the
Judge of all the world, a Judge which is armed as well with power, as right, to
take vengeance even of the greatest Monarchs in the world: put the Case that
all King David's Subjects, had been privy to his fall, yet had they no right
to call him to an Account; but God could do what they could not, his eye was
(...), an eye that could take vengeance, and chastise the King according to his
deserts.

Lay now together all these prerogatives of Gods Eyes, and see how they
exaggerate King David's contempt. It was great immodestie to sin before the eye,
in that it was so piercing an eye, not to fear a witness, that was so through a
witness, from whom he could not conceal any part of his fact, nor the least
circumstance that did cloth his fact; greater immodestie to sin before so
pure an eye, from which he could expect no extenuation of his fault; because it
was free from all communion in corruption, it must needs as fully abhor, as
it did thoroughly discern the fault but the greatest immodestie was, the
sinning before so powerful an eye, the eye of his Lawgiuer, before whom he was
to appear, and from whom he was to expect his doom; to be careless of such
an Eye, must needs be the hight of Contempt: for whom will he regard, that
regards not his Judge, such a Judge, that has so Piercing, so Pure, so
Powerful eyes?

The Eyes of the Judge do exaggerate the contempt: so does the enormitie of
the sin also; for it is not only Malum, but Hoc Malum. Sins are of diverse
degrees, some of Ignorance, some of Infirmity; these, men daily commit before
the eyes of God, and they ought daily to repent of them, because they testify
their neglect of Gods Eyes: but there are sins of a higher strain, which men
commit with a high hand, the Divines call them, Peccata Vastantia Conscientiam,
they argue, that, (...) is fallen asleep, and so is (...) too, when we use
neither the directive Principles before hand, nor the correctiue after hand;
but as we showed our selves graceless in committing sin; so show we our
selves senseless in not judging our selves for sin. King David seemed not to
be far from such a case, and therefore he had good reason to exaggerate his
contempt, by calling his sin, not only Malum, but Hoc Malum, not only Evil,
but this Evil, so exasperating Evil, before so sacred Eyes.

And indeed, the less excuse we have for sin, the more we should deplore
it; deplore, that we make that the Object of Gods Eyes, which he so much
detesteth; especially, seeing he has vouchsafed to be so gracious unto us,
as to make us the delightsome Object of his Eyes: for his Children are as the
Apple of his Eye: (...) 2. ^.
though all the World be before him, yet his contenting Object is his Church;
the walls of Jerusalem are ever in his sight, and he beholds his Israel, as
the Seal on his Arm, and Signet on his right Hand. Certainly, the delight
that God desires to take in beholding us, when we do well, does much
aggrauate our contempt, when we are not respective of his priuitie to our
couersation, whenever we offend him.

But I conclude. Out of all that which you have heard, the Lesson that we must
learn, is, Religiously to amplify our sins, from the circumstance of the
person against whom they are bent. Secondly, we must observe how many ways
the Evil done on Earth, reflecteth upon Heaven. Thirdly, how much the presence
of Heaven on Earth, adds unto sin; especially, if it be a crying sin.
Fourthly, we must learn, that our sins offend the more, the more near we
are joined unto God. Finally, none should more insist upon these points, then
they that taste deeply of the Mercy of God; the more they are indebted for his
favors, the more should they be afflicted with Godly Sorrow, when wittingly
and willingly they offend before his Eyes.

GOd grant, that the reference that we, and those with whom we live have to
God, and the presence that God has continually with us both, may make us as
sensible as we ought to be, of the impiety that is so natural to all sin,
making it reach as high, as from Earth to Heaven; and arguing the small regard
that sinful man has of his Righteous God: So may this sense work in us such
Repentance, as may find Mercy with him, who only can forgive sin; and
withold that stroke of Justice, which for the wrong done to him, and the
contempt of him, whom we offend (besides, and above our Neighbors) may justly
be feared by us, and may woefully destroy us. AMEN. PSALM. 51. The latter part
of the 4. VERSE. That thou might be justified when thou speak, and be
clear when thou iudgest.


KIng David confessing the sin which himself committed, opens unto us the
natural Properties that are therein, and the supernatural Event that followed
thereupon. Of the natural Properties you have heard heretofore. I come now
unto the supernatural Event.

The supernatural Event then is, the Praise of the Justice of God. The Justice
of God here touched is twofold; Fidelity, and Integrity. Fidelity is Iustitia
in verbo, a persons being as good as his word. Integrity is Iustitia in facto,
the vprightnes of his doom; God has the praise of both; of Fidelity, for he
is justified when he speaks; of Integrity, for he is clear when he judges.
This is the praise of Gods Justice; and this praise in reference to King David's
sin, I call a supernatural Event. An Event, because it flows not from, and
yet it follows upon the sin; but this Event is supernatural, because it
must be a Divine Providence, that must make these figs, to grow from those
thistles, and so clear light, to shine out of so gross darkness.

These are the Contents whereof I shall now entreat; wherefore I will now
resume them, that I may open them more fully, and you more profitably hear
them.

Justice then is the Argument of these words. God that is Sovereign above all,
deals with all according to an even Rule, the Rule is well squared, and being
well squared, is applied well also: Fortune, or Chance, have no place in his
Government, whether he contract with, or take an account of the sons of men;
upright reason, and evenness, are the properties of his Actions, and all
things serve to commend them; they are the vpshot of all his Providence, as
will appear in the more distinct unfolding of these words.

The first Branch then of Justice here remembered is Fidelity. Fidelity, (as I
told you) is Iustitia in verbo, Gods being as good as his word; we must then
find out first, what Word is here meant: And you shall read it 2. Sam. 7.
where God sends by Nathan a comfortable Message, a Message that contains
manifold, and those gracious promises; for it concerns a Crown, and the
entaile thereof: read it at your leisure; but in your reading mark, that the
Message is Verbum Mysticum, and Mixtum. It is a Mystical Word; for it
consists of a Type, and a Truth; the Type was David and his posterity; the
Truth, was Christ and his Church; Saint Paul has taught us so to understand
it, Heb. 1. where he applies the very words of Nathan unto our Savior Christ.

As it is Verbum Mysticum; so is it Verbum Mixtum also; the Message is a temper
of the Law, and the Gospel; yet so, that the Gospel has the upper hand of the
Law: God will not have his presume, and therefore he uses the Law as a Curb
to hold them in; but he will less have them to despair, the Gospel serves
to keep them in heart. This is the Word; and God will ever be as good as his
Word, his Fidelity warranteth as much.

Fidelity is a compound Virtue, it consists of Verity, and Constancy:
First, there is Verity in it, no word in the Tongue that comes not from the
Heart, and the Tongue is a true looking Glass of the Heart; for God speaks
in Veritate Mentis, without all simulation or dissimulation, without all
equivocation, or mental reservation; whenever God speaks, his speech is
true. And as he speaks in Veritate Mentis; so does he in certitudine
Veritatis also; 2. Cor. 1.22. Numb. 23.19.
his Word is as stable, as it is true; his Promises are not Nay, and Amen, all
are Amen that come from him; God is not like Man that he should lie, Romans 11.
Math. 24.35. Psalm. 89.
nor the Son of Man that he should repent; but his Promises are without
repentance; Heaven and Earth shall pass, but his Word shall never pass; he
will never lie against his own Truth, and therefore is he in the Revelation
styled, Cap. 3.
the faithful and true witness. Fidelity then there is in Gods Word, which
is the first Branch of Justice.

The second is Integrity; Integrity (I told you) is Iustitia in facto, when
just deeds are squared by just words. The Deed here is Judging; and this word
must lead us to another Chapter, the 12. of the 2. of Sam. Where the same
Nathan comes unto David with a second Message, a Message that contains a
performance of that which God promised in the former Message: he promised that
if he did sin, he should smart, and there he makes him smart; he
promised, that he should not so smart, but he should have good proof of Gods
greater Mercy, and there he feels it in the Absolution from his sin. So
that Gods Deeds in Judging, keep good correspondencie with his Words;
therefore is Integrity ascribed unto them; for what is the integrity of a
Judge, but the true temper of Severity, and Mercy; if God be Judge, the
gracious mixture of the Law and the Gospel? where both these are put in
practice, and put in practice as they ought, there is Integrity, and so much is
wanting of Integrity as is wanting of these: if Severity be administered
without Mercy, or if Mercy have not the upper hand of Severity, there wants
Integrity in the government of the Commonweal, because he is commanded of God
so to temper his Judgment. And God may seem to come short of his Integrity,
if he did not mix, and mix so his Law with his Gospel, as he himself
(being otherwise free) has by promise laid a tie upon himself. He couenanted
with David to administer the Law unto him, and chastise his sins, but citra
condignum, with the rod of a Man, and not of God; He couenanted with him to
administer unto him the Gospel, but vltra condignum, not after the manner of
Men, but after the manner of God. Thus to administer both Law and Gospel, so
to dispense Mercy, and Severity, is Gods clearing himself in Judgment, I
called it his Integrity.

Join these now together, Promissionem, et Praestationem, the 7. and the 12.
of the 2. of Sam. whereof one contains the promising Word, the other the
performing Judgment, and couple the Integrity of the Performance, with the
Fidelity of the Promise, and you have an excellent Picture, or Representation,
of the Justice wherewith God does govern his Church.

Now this Justice must have its Praise. As God is Just in speaking; so must he
be Justified, and as he is clear in Judging; so must he be clarified (that
I may so say) that is, glorified. These two Verbes do not import, that the
Creature can infuse any perfection into the Creator, will we, nill we, these
things are in him; Fidelity is inseparable from his words, and Integrity from
his Judgments; all that can be done by us is, Cognitio, and Recognitio, we are
bound to take notice of them, and not to smother our knowledge, but yield God
the glory that is due unto them. To this end does God manifest his perfections
unto the reasonable Creature, and in their own Cases do they feel, and see
in other Men's Cases, the experience of them.

Saint Paul seems to read the latter part of the Text otherwise then here is
expressed; for he has, Romans 3.4.
that thou might overcome when thou art judged, whereas here it is, that
thou might be clear when thou iudgest. They are not words of a contrary
meaning; but Saint Paul's Text which follows the Septuagint, does add an
observation over and above that which you have heard, that is, Though God be
Judge of all the world, yet worldly men stick not to take upon them to judge
God; yea, and God is pleased to put his Justice upon trial, as we read, Esaias
1. Micah 6. and elsewhere; so careful is he, that not only his proceedings
be just, but his Justice evident also; so evident, as that whosoever shall
contend with him in Judgment, shall be driven to yield. The best have
oftentimes doubts and disputes, they question Gods Integrity, how the Gospel
and the Law can stand together, and God at the same time condemn and absolve,
and yet be just; God would settle their consciences: Unbelievers not only
quarrel with, but deny also Gods Integrity, but the Mouths of all gainsayers
shall be stopped, they shall be forced to subscribe, to confess, that God is
clear in Judging, free from all dross of contradiction; that Mercy and Truth
may kiss each other, and the Law go hand in hand with the Gospel, as after
appears. And so have I declared unto you the praise of Gods Justice.

I come now to show you the reference that it has unto K. David's sin, which
that I may the better do, you must observe, that the former words Against thee,
against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, may be
understood either Materialiter, or Formaliter, as a Description of sin, or a
Supplication of a sinner. Some understand them after the latter fashion, and so
King David, Non not at finem peccati, sed precationis, he notes not the end
of his Sinning, but the end of his Praying, Non dicit quo fine fecerit Malum,
sed quo fine nunc faciat bonum, he does not show us whereat he aimed when he
sinned, but what he desires now heeprayeth. He desires, that as in
amplifying of his sin, he does by a Comparison amplify Gods Justice, (for
Contraria iuxta posita magis elucescunt, Virtue never shines more gloriously,
then when vice is made a foil unto it) so his recovery may be a Monument of
Gods Mercy. And we may well propose unto our selves in our confession, the
setting forth of Gods glory, and this may be the end of it, yea, comfortles
were our Confession, if it were not for this end, God would not accept it,
neither should we have good of it, the more we humble our selves to magnify
God, the more we do our duty, and the more we shall taste of his Mercy. To
make good this sense, some take in some of the former words, I acknowledge my
sins, yea, go back as far as the beginning of the Psalm, Have Mercy upon
me O Lord. And indeed those two must concur, the humble Repentance of a
sinner and the gracious Indulgence of a good God, that God may be justified in
his sayings, and clear when he his judged; O Lord (says Gregory) if thou do
not forgive the Penitent, thou will have none to whom thon may perform thy
Covenant: Ruffinus, and diverse other Fathers do amplify this sense, and
restrain it to the particular Case of King Danid, as if the gracious promise
in the 7th of the the 2. of Sam: must needs fall to the ground, if the
indulgence specified in the 12th of the 2. of Sam. had not released the
forfeiture, which God might have taken for King David's sin.

Though this be a religious and a true sense of the word, yet has Saint Paul
taught us another that does better fit the Contexture; Romans 3.4.
wherefore Saint Chrysostom, and other Fathers tell us, that the particle vt
notes not Causam, but Consecutionem, not the end, but the event of sin; I
called it a supernatural Event.

An Event is that which follows upon a former thing Accidentally, though
naturally it cannot flow from it. Sin is destructive of good, and therefore
cannot advance the Praise of God, we see it in every particular; for what are
they but breaches of that Law, in the performance where of stands Gods
honor? But what need I use any proof? I the last Sabbath day showed you,
that Impiety is one of the Natural properties of sin; It cannot be expected
then, that so great a good, should naturally spring therfrom, as is the the
Praise of God. Therefore (though old impure Heretics, and the latter
Familists, that turn the grace of God into wantonness, that use Christian
Liberty as a cloak of their Maliciousness, that hold let us do ill that good
may come thereof, blaspheme Gods holy Truth, Row. 3.8.
and their Condemnation is just; no man may pretend a good intent for his doing
ill, nor compass a good end, by ill means, except he mean to go for a
Libertine.

But though Gods Praise do not naturally flow from sin, and so be the proper
end thereof, yet an Event it may be, and follow thereupon. But this Event
cannot be Natural, for the Creature that is mutable may ruin it self of it
self, and of it self dishonor God; but having ruined it self, and dishonored
him, it cannot of it self repair either its own state, or His honor, it is
only God can do this; this is a work of divine providence, it does exercise
all the Branches thereof, Gods Wisdom to contriue it, Gods Goodness, to affect
it, and finally it cannot be effected without his power. The mixture of the
Law, and the Gospel, is such a secret of Gods wisdom, as could never have
entered into the heart of a creature; that the fall of man should be foelix
culpa, and produce a more glorious raising of him, who could ever have dreamd?
or to keep my self to my text, may not we all stand amazed, when we read,
that such a son as Solomon, should be born of Bathsheba with whom K. David had
committed so foul an offense? But as we must admire Gods wisdom in such
works; so must we much more his goodness, that testifies his love to sinful
man, in being willing that his wisdom shall yield such remedy to man's
distress. But God is pleased to let the world see in the freedom of his love,
quod dare non dignis, res mage digna Deo; such goodness can be found no where
out of God. Finally, the power of God shined herein, which was to encounter
with so many difficulties; we hold God omnipote^t, because he made heaven and
earth of nothing; but the Fathers hold that the restitution is a greater work
then the creation; if the former need an omnipotent power, much more the later.
The reason is, because as there was nothing to help; so there was nothing to
hinder, in the creation; but in the restitution God was encountered ab intra,
and ab extra, from within, and from without. From within, by his own Justice;
he was feign to ouermaster it with his Mercy; from without, by the powers of
darkness, who strove to keep possession of man, yea, by man's own peruersenes,
who is too willingly a slave to sin, and Satan; Gene. 50.
but of Satan's Temptation we may use the words of Joseph to his Brethren, Vos
cogitastis male, Deus autem been. Ye thought evil against us, but God meant it
unto good; and concerning our own peruersenes, we may use the words of the
Psalm, As a Father pitieth his Children: Psalm. 103.
so the Lord pitieth us; mark the reason, for he knows our frailty, he
remembers that we are but dust. It is God, only God, that can cause such
Events.

And miserable were the state of the world, if he did not cause them; for else
the Church had long since come to nothing. How quickly had Adam dissolved the
Covenant? and when God had restored it by such a supernatural Event, the
Sons of God dissolved it again; God was feign to redouble the Euentin Noah;
in his posterity it failed the third time, and a third time was God feign to
renew the Event in Abraham. And thus has it gone on in all ages of the world;
God has bin feign to show, that the Infidelity of Man, cannot euacuate the
fidelity of God; that he will be true though all the world be liars, Romans 3.4.
2. Cor. 4.6.
that he can draw light out of darkness, when darkness has extinguished
Light. Such is his Omniscient Wisdom, and Omnipotent Goodness. The ground of
all which proceeding is the freedom of Gods love; that had no Cause without
him when it first began, and it is continued by no Cause besides himself; for
those duties, the performance whereof do seem to entertain Gods Love, what
are they but the influences of his free Grace?

Wherefore, I conclude with Saint Bernard, Mayor est Dei pietas, quam quaeuis
iniquitas, or rather with Gods own words, Ego Deus et non mutor, I am the Lord
which change not, Malac. 3.6.
therefore you Sons of Jacob are not consumed: it is of the Lords morcy that
we are not consumed, Iament. 3.2^.
because his Compassions fail not, they are renewed every morning; great is
thy faithfulness; the same God that told Noah, Genesis 8.
I will not again curse the ground for Man's sake, and gives this for a
reason, for, the Imagination of Man's Heart is evil from his youth, does
implie, that we must seek for the cause of this strange Event, not on Earth,
but in Heaven, we must hold it to be not an Earthly, but an Heavenly Event,
and so to be not Natural, but Supernatural, as at first I told you. And this
refutes all Manichees who dream of two Gods, a Good, and a Bad; and will have
the Good, only to intermeddle with things that are good, and the Bad with the
things that are bad; but here we may learn, that there is but one God, and
that one God is good, and though good, yet intermedling with that which is bad;
intermedling with it, out of bad to draw that which is good, and so to make it
matter of his Glory; for Malum, non qua malum, sed qua ordinatum, (as Saint
Austin teaches) cedit in Gloriam Dei. In Enchyr.


And so have I opened unto you the meaning of this Text, so far as I find it
in this Psalm, that is in Hypothesi applied to King David's Case. And there is
no doubt, but King David in speaking of them had an Eye to himself, and in
reference to himself, did penitentially utter them. But Saint Paul has taught
us in the Epistle to the Romans to turn this Hypothesis into a Thesis, Chap. 3.
and apply this Text to the whole Church. And indeed, if you remember, that I
told you that the speaking here meant, is Verbum Mysticum (though the letter
immediately note David and his Posterity, yet in them the Holy Ghost
represents Christ, and his Church) here can be no question, but the promise
that in Christ is made to the Church, has a temper of the Law and the Gospel,
and the Church in all Ages does experience the truth thereof.

Wherefore we must take the Text unto our selves, and make use of it in our
own Case: we have no more promised then David had, nor shall we feel less
then he did; as his, so ours, both Verbum, and Iudicium, Promise and
Performance, are mixed of the Law, and the Gospel; but so, that the Gospel
has the upper hand of the Law: Deus vincit malum bono, God does ever over come
evil with Good. Non ex merito Peccati, sed ex beneficio Misericordiae; Non ex
dignitate nostra, sed dignatione sua; Not, that sin deserves this at his
hands, but God is pleased to show the goodness of his Nature, and to be
gracious unto us, when we carry our selves gracelesly toward him. And indeed,
it argues wonderful Goodness, when it is vouchsafed to such as are so unworthy
thereof.

The use of all that you have heard serves first, to direct our faith unto its
true object, which (I told you) is Verbum mixtum; we must so apprehend a
Merciful God, as that we forget not, that he is Just; and so remember, that
he is just, that we forget not, that he is Merciful, we cannot omit either of
these, but we shall either presume, or despair, if we forget him to be just
we will be apt to presume; and be apt to despair, if we forget him to be
Merciful.

But we must add a Cautionarie Rule, in this limitation of the Object of our
Faith, and that is, we must not apprehend Gods Mercy, and his Justice, as
Coordinata, but as Subordinata; I speak not of them, as these things are in
God; for so they are more then Coordinata, they are in his simple nature all
one; but as they shine in the effects which are produced by him; for so they
are always Subordinate. In those that are Vasaira we may perceive, that Mercy
is subordinate to Justice; for the favors that they receive out of Gods Mercy,
through their abuse of them, serve but to set a sharper edge upon the sword of
Gods Justice. But in those, that are Vasa Misericordiae, the Justice of God is
subordinate unto his Mercy, and his strokes on them, work such a godly sorrow,
and good amendment, that Gods mercies are thereby redoubled upon them. Thus
must we learn to conceive of the true Object of our Faith.

And our Faith so informed, will add sinnewes to our Hope; For what better
support can our Hope have, then Verbu^ Mixtum, to conceive that God will not
suffer us to run wild, though our Nature be luxuriant, but will timely use
the Law, and repress the breaking forth of sin, and correct what is awrie
within us. And when we smart, is it not a comfortable support of Hope, that
God cannot forget to be merciful, nor shut up his loving kindness for ever
in displeasure? He will supple that wound with Oil, which he scoureth with
wine, and the sweetness of the Gospel, timely administered, shall make us forget
all the sowernes that we felt in the Law.

Finally, as this Text serves to direct our Faith, and support our Hope; so
does it, to inflame our Love, for can there be a greater motive unto love then
this Mixtum Verbum? for, therein we have real proof of Gods Love, therein we
find, that he loves us Vere, though severe, though with Correction, yet to
Salvation; And can we do less then requite love with love? love him
dutifully, that loves us so mercifully?

Neither are we only taught, that we must love God, but how we must love our
Neighbor also; our Charity to our Brother, must imitate Gods Charity toward
us, we must join therein the Law, with the Gospel, first humble, then
comfort them that go astray, so shall we neither cherish sin, nor yet
destroy a sinner.

And if we have the like proof of this Verbum Mixtum, as King Danid had, we
must give glory unto God, as David did. There is none of us but sins, and
expects favor, let us not be Libertines, and make Gods favor the end of
our sin (as it is to be feared over many do) but let us repent, and when we
repent, let us admire, and adore that Divine Providence, that with a spiritual
indignation does break the Serpents Head, that bruised our Heel, and tread
Satan under our feet, that made us tread awry, let us consider the reason why
the heinousness of our sin does not deprive us of Heaven, which is only
this, that God will be good unto us for his own Name sake, 1. Sam. 12.
because he has chosen us to be his Children; and therefore let us say, Not
unto us O Lord, not unto us, Psalm. 115.2.
but unto thy Name give the praise.

In a word; Let Gods dealing with us, teach us, how we should deal with
others; we must do them good, notwithstanding they deserve evil; Let us not
suffer our selves to be overcome with evil, Romans 12.2^.
but overcome evil with good.

PSALM. 51. VERSE. 5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity: and in sin did my
mother conceive me.


THe sin which King David confesses in this Psalm, is partly that which
himself Committed, and partly that which he Inherited from his parents; of
that which himself Committed, I have already spoken, whrefore I must now come
on, and open unto you, that which he Inherited. It is expressed in these words
which now I have read unto you; here, King David does Acknowledge, and Plead
it; he acknowledges, 1. what this sin is, and 2. that himself is taynted
with it; he pleades it in great humility, the strongest motive to work Gods
pity. These points offer themselves in this Text, and of these will I now
speak briefly, and in their order. I begin at his Acknowledgement, whereof
the first branch teaches us, what Sin inherited is.

But before I open it unto you, I may not omit a good Observation of Gregory
the Great, which shows us, how this point of confessing Sin inherited, In
Psalm. 5.
springs from the confession of other sins which our selves have
Contracted; Saepe dum quaedam male gesta plangimus ipsa vi amaritudinis ad
discutiendos nos excitati, alia nobis plangenda inuenimus, etc. He that is
seriously penitent for one sin, is rowsed by godly sorrow to make a farther
inquiry into himself, which leads him to a discovery of many other sins,
which his memory, or his Conscience passed by unregarded; but whereof he then
becomes so sensible, that he thinks the^ worthy to be repented of heartily;
Certainly David did so; he is not only pressed, and burdened with the
conscience of Adultery, and of his Murder, but he is pained also with an old
disease, a disease which he brought from his Parents loins, and cannot be
quiet except he be eased of that, except that be healed also. And our evil
Deeds, when we bethink our selves of them, will discover their fountain,
which is our evil nature; neither have we sufficiently searched into our
selves, until we find the evil Tree that bears evil fruit, the root of
bitterness that fructifieth in all our evil Deeds. This we must observe by the
way, as a fit preface, showing the reason of this branch of King David's
Confession. Let us now come closer to the Text, and see, what this sin is
which he acknowledged; and that is, a Native Corruption, Iniquity wherein man
is shapen, Sin wherein his Mother conceiues him.

That you may the better conceive this, I must first remember you of certain
grounded truths which give light hereunto, and without which it cannot be
easily conceived. The first is, that in the Creation God put this difference
between Angels and Men, that Angels had their several Creations, not so Men;
but as Saint Paul teaches Acts 17.26. God of one blood made all the nations of
men, that were upon all the face of the whole earth; he would have them all
propagated from one. Secondly, as all mankind is derived from One; so with that
One God was pleased to enter into a covenant for All, and All were liable unto,
and to communicate in, that which befell that One; this is clear in the
Comparison which Saint Paul makes between the First and Second Adam. Romans 5.
Thirdly, the first Adam failed in his obedience, and so forfeited that which
was couenanted on Gods part, and was subject unto that which was deserved on
his own; no man can doubt of this, that reads the third of Genesis. Fourthly,
by the tenor of the Covenant, man failing wrapped all his Posterity in his
transgression; and condemnation; Romans 5.12
the Apostle is clear for this also, By one man Sin entered into the world, and
death by Sin; so that by the Fall all mankind becomes first guilty, and then
punishable; both these Evils does Adam communicate unto his Posterity. I must
open the latter branch a little farther, because it is most proper to my Text.

The punishment then of Adams Guilt was, the loss of Holiness, and
Happiness; Holiness wherein, and Happiness whereunto he was created, in the
loss of Holiness stands so much of Original sin, as my Text does occasion me to
speak of. The Fathers use to express it by the Parable of the Man, that
passing from Jerusalem to Jericho fell amongst thieves, Luke 10.30.
who robbed him, and wounding him left him half dead: The Schools abridge it
thus, Supernaturalia sunt ablata, Naturalia sunt corrupta: both which being
discreetly understood, contain a sound truth which I express more plainly
thus. The loss of concreated Holiness consists in a Privation, and a
Deprauation; Adam was deprived of the Image of God, according to which he was
created, they call it usually Original Righteousness; and the Powers that
remained after he was thus stripped, were miserably perverted; he became not only
auerse from God, but adverse to him also.

Sin is an Auersion from God, and a Conversion to the world, or a forsaking
of God, and things eternal, to embrace the world, and things temporal. God
left Adam in the hands of his own council, to choose whether he would follow
Rationem Superiorem, or Inferiorem (as the Schools speak) that is, cleave to
God, or to the World, but with this condition, that, which way soever he bent,
thither should his inclination be for ever after; he preferred Earth before
Heaven, and so his propension has been ever since out of love of this earth,
to make head against God, and goodness, so that his Deprauation is not only
Physical, but Moral, not only an Impotency unto Good, but an Opposition to it
also; his understanding is not only blind, but a Sophister; his own Judgment
is a snare whereby he entangleth himself in error, his will is so far from
making a good choice, Ambros. Genesis 6.7. Genesis 8.21. Rom 7.18. Ier. 17.9. Rom 6
6. Romans 7.24.
that it commands always for that which is worst; all his Affections distaste,
and abhor the good which they cannot relish, and therefore not ensue;
Finally, the Flesh is become, Illecebra peccati, sin needs no other bait
then man's senfualitie, All the frame of the Imaginations of the Heart of Man
are evil, only, continually, from his youth; and in his flesh dwelles no good
thing; the hear^ is deceitful above all things; and he bears about him a
Body of sin, and death: And this is that Massa Corruptionis, and Perditionis,
that woeful Being whereunto sin brought Adam. Whereby you may perceive that
though he has lost his Goodness, he has not lost his Actiuenes, and though
sin be Non ens, a Privation, yet it is in ente, a Dreprauation also, by
reason whereof, men that were reasonable Creatures by Nature, yea and Spiritual
also, 1. Cur. 3.1. 1. C^^. 2.14.
are vouchsafed no better names in the state of Corruption then those of (...),
and (...), Sensual, and fleshly Men.

Having thus opened the miserable case whereunto Adam brought himself, it will
not be hard for you to understand the words of my Text, and acknowledge with
King David the Native Corruption of mankind, or the Original Sin meant in
this place.

First then, the want of Original Holiness is in the Text called Iniquity,
or Sin; and well may it so be called; for what is Sin but (...), an
Vnconformitie to Gods Laws? and how unanswerable is his being herein, unto
that state wherein he was made; were he only unanswerable it were Sin, how
much more when he is opposite thereunto, and is become a rebel unto God? can
any thing in the reasonable soul be less then Sin, ^on. 7.
that tempts unto sin? but Concupiscence is Domesticus Hostis, a traitor in
our bosom, that does seduce us, and whose Lusts do sight against the Soul:
1. Vet. 2.11.
Neither only does it tempt to sin, but produce sin also, Iam. 1.15.
et simile producit sibi simile; we must needs make the Tree Evil, that
bears such evil fruit. Neither can it be excused, seeing the Leaven of
Concupiscence has seasoned all the powers of the soul, even of the Reasonable
soul, and so makes the whole man come short of fulfilling the Law, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, with all thy mind, with
all thy strength, etc. Join that general Precept, Exodus 20.17.
with the general Prohibition Non Concupisces, thou shall not lust, and by
them measure the state of a natural man, and he must be very senseless, that
does not acknowledge sin in this Corruption, he must needs make the Habits of
no other nature then are the Actions which proceed therefrom. They that yield
it to be Vitium, but not Peccatum, if they mean Vitium morale (as they must
needs in this Argument) grant what they deny; though they would shift it, by
acknowledging nothing to be sin, but that which has a concurrencie of our
will; which is too scant a Desinition, and (if it be admitted) will excuse, not
only, habitual corruption, but our Ignorances also, and Omissions, from being
sin. But enough of this point.

A second thing that is to be observed in the name given to this Corruption, is
that it is called Sin in the singular number. And indeed, that which is
Original is but One, even the first One that was committed by Adam, only that,
and the evil of that, is propagated to Posterity. The difference between the
Covenant of the Creation, and the Evangelical Covenant stands in this, that
without any imitation of ours, or sinning after the example of Adam, we are
guilty of his first transgression, and the consequents thereof fall upon us,
whereas he communicates no other of his sins, and all other successiue
Parents; until the time of our birth communicate no sins of theirs, but such
as we imitate, and make our own by imitation; and in this sense must we
understand the 18. of Ezekiel, where it is said, Verse. 20.
that the Children shall not bear the iniquity of their Fathers; the second
Commandment must have the same interpretation; Although we may not deny that
temporally God does visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, to the
terror and example of others; whom Magistrates in their Politic Laws imitate
herein, for the good of their State; Therefore, that extension of punishment
must be understood Non absolute, but Secundum quid, not of Original, but of
Actual sins, and those not propagated, but imitated.

The Sin then is but One, but yet that One is such a One, as is Universal,
and Seminall; Universal, if you look to the Act which Adam committed; for it
was an Universal Apostasy, and the Divines which look curiously into it, do
find in it all kind of sins, both of the first, and of the second Table.
But time will not suffer me to particularize.

As it is Universal in regard of Adams Act, so in regard of the corrupt Habit
that followed thereupon, and is an express image thereof, it is Seminall; it
contains the Seed of all kinds of Sin, so that there is no kind of Sin
whereunto the nature of man is not prone; Saint John reduces all that is in
the world to three Heads: 1. 1. Ep. 2.6.
The lust of the flesh, 2. the lust of the eyes, 3. the pride of life, that is,
Covetousness, Voluptuousnes, and Hautinesse; and who is there in whom this seed
is not found? and from whom does it not fructisie more or less, as men have
more or less of the grace of God? Saint Paul speaks significantly, when he
says, that it is (...), a sinning sin, Romans 7.13.
and that operatur omnem concupiscentiam, it works all kind of lusts in man;
Romans 7.8.
and the Septuagint (whom the Vulgar imitates) may happily mean the compound
nature of this sin, when it renders the word in the plural number, which
the Original has in the singular. These properties must be observed, because
by them we may stop the mouths of all profane persons, that extenuate the
greiuousnesse of Original Sin.

As that which has befallen our nature by Adams Fall, may justly be called
Sin; so is this Sin fitly called Native, or Original; for, (as the text
teaches) Man is shapen therein, and therein does his Mother conceive Him; it
is such a sin as we derive from our Parents. But our Parents are of two
sorts, earthly, and heavenly, we have our being principally from God, so says
Job unto him, thy hands have made me, Job. 10. verse 10. etc.
and fashioned me together round about, thou have powered me out as milk, and
crudled me like Cheese, thou have clothed me with skin, and flesh, and fenced
me with benes, and sinews, thou have granted me life, etc. Verse. 15. Verse. 3.
1. Ep. Ioh. 2.16. Genesis 1.31. Iam. 1. Feelesias 15.10.11. etc. Ecclesias. 25.24.
Romans 5.12.
DAVID observes the very same, Psalm. 139. and Psalm. 127. Lo (says he)
children are an Heritage of the Lord, and the fru^^ of the womb is his reward:
But Concupiscence is not of that father, for All that he made was good, and
only Every good, and perfect gift comes from him: Therefore must we fetch
this from other Parents, our Parents that are below, from the womb that bare
us, and the paps that gave us suck; The Mother is here named, and indeed from
the woman was the beginning of sin, and in her we all die; but not in her
only, for the Apostle tells us, that By one Man sin came into the world, and
that Man was Adam. Philosophy teaches, that in generation the man is
Principium Actiuum, he is the principal cause of our Being, and therefore of
our being Corrupted; And indeed the woman could not conceive, which is a
passive action, except a man did infuse the seed, therefore is he implied in
this Text, though he be not expressed.

And as we receitie from both our Parents our being: so do we our being
Corrupt; Sermon. de Excel. Eatust. Apolog. David c. 11.
What Saint Bernard said of Adam and Eve, is true, Prius peremptores, quam
parents, they had first murdered, before they ingendered their Children; and
what of successiue generations Ambrose, Ante vsuram lucis, originis excipimus
iniuriam, et antequam nascimur maculamur contagio, our parents beget Children
after their own Image, Ephe. 2.3.
dead in sin, and by nature children of wrath. And how can it be otherwise?
1. Pet. 1.23. John 3.6.
the seed whereof we are made is Corruptible seed; so that that which is
borne of flesh must needs be flesh, neither can any man draw that which is
clean, Ioh 14.4. (...). 8. Psalm. 58.3.
out of a nature which is unclean; Therefore seeing old Adam is propagated in
all, All must be called transgessors from their youth.

But there is a curious Question, how this Sin is conveyed from the Parents
to the Child, from the days of Pelagius it has much troubled the Church,
argued by the Fathers, by the schoolmen, by the Reformed Divines; yet so as
that the most judicious have been most sober, and least aduenturous to define
the manner.

I will not trouble you with that altercation; Saint Austine has said enough
for the Pulpit in those few words, The propagation is continued iusto, but
occulto Dei indicio; God in so punishing has done no more then he threatened in
the Covenant, although how he does execute this Judgment, he is not pleased
to reveal; but leaves men rather to adore such secrets, then to pry too
far into them: Especially if their curiosity prove so vain, as to deny
that which is evident, because they cannot find out that which is hidden, as
Heretics have done, which have denied Original Sin. Their Sobriety is
tolerable, who supposing the undeniable truth of that Radical sin, seek
only the ways of clearing Gods Justice in this propagation, wherein, (as in
such dark and doubtful cases it often falls out) Salua fide, holding the
fundamental point, they differ about that which is not necessary unto
Salvation.

That which is most useful for us, is to know rather, how we may be rid of it,
De Moribus (...) c. ^. 1. c. 22. ^pis. 29.
then how we do contract it, which Saint Austin expresses in a fit Parable of
a man fallen into a ditch, to whom he that finds him there, should rather
lend a hand to help him out, then tire him with inquiries how he came in: We
see that our ground is ouergrowne with briars, and thorns, yet we know, that
God made the earth to bear better fruits; do good husbands mispend their time
in reasoning how they came there? or do they not rather with their plough, and
other instruments seek to rid them thence? surely they do; and we in the case
of our souls should imitate them so doing. That Original Sin is in us, no
man can doubt, that sees how children die, even in their mothers womb, or so
soon as they come out of it; and the wages of sin is death; in them of
Actual it cannot be, Romans 6.23.
it must be then of Original: if they live we make have to baptize them, and
what does Baptism implie, but that they need a new Birth unto life, seeing
their first was no better then a Birth unto death? Add hereunto that our
Savior Christ's Conception had not needed to be by the Holy Ghost, if so be
natural generation did not enforce necessarily the propagation of Original
Sin; which they should consider, that magnify over much the Conception of
the blessed mother of Christ. Let it suffice us, that the Church Catholic of
old, and the Reformed Churches have resolved uniformly, that we are sinners so
soon as we begin to be, and this Leprosy is hereditarie to us all; that our
worser part has gotten the upper hand of our better, and we are by nature no
better then a mass of Corruption, and the Serpents brood; the sense whereof,
should make us all cry out with the Apostle O wretch that I am, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from this Body of Death?

King David does not only confess, that there is such a Sin, but also that
himself is tainted therewith, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin my
mother conceived me. The words must not be wrested; some have mistaken them, as
if Sin were the cause of Generation. That opinion, though it be found in
some Ancients, yet it is so gross, that it is not worth the refuting; for we
read Genesis 1. Multiply and increase, Verse. 28.
spoken to mankind, before ever Adam and Eve committed sin; except happily
this were their meaning, that before the Fall, the lust of generation was in
the power of man, to fulfill, or restrain it, as reason saw fit; but after the
Fall reason became subject unto lust, and man fulfilled it not when reason
would, but when lust urged him; and this opinion is not improbable.

A second mistake is, that David should lay the blame of his Sin upon his
Parents, and tax their sinful lusts in the act of generation; but (besides
that he could not conceive so ill of his virtuous, and chaste Parents) this were
to make David a Cham, and so to deserve a Curse, while he seeks a Pardon for
his Sin. The Fathers abhorred this sense, and observe, that King David here
speaks not of the personal sin of his Parents, but the natural, which
derived from them, he had in-herent in himself; and that he was in the state
of sin before he saw light.

But this is strange; his Parents were members of the Church, circumcised, not
only outwardly which is most certain, but inwardly also, which is very
probable, and if circumcised, then discharged from Original Sin, and in the
state of Grace: how comes it about then, that they should engender Children
in the state of Corruption? Saint Austin answers briefly Parents non ex
principijs nouitatis, De. Peecata. Merit and Remis. L. 2. C. 2.
sed ex reliquijs vetustatis generant liberos; they that are regenerated, do
beget Children not according to the new Adam, but according to the old, not
according to Grace, but according to nature; for Grace is personal, the
corruption is natural, and God will, that they shall only communicate their
nature, and leave the dispensation of Grace unto himself. Saint Austin
illustrateth it by those who being circumcised, begat Children uncircumcised,
and Corn which being winnowed from Chafe brings forth ears full of Chafe.

And yet notwithstanding, a Prerogative the Children of the faithful have,
Verse 16.
which Saint Paul touches at, Romans 11. If the Root be holy so are the
branches. But this Holiness is in possibility, rather then in possession, and
there is a distance between natural Generation, and spiritual Regeneration;
though by their natural birthright, the Children of the faithful have a
right unto the blessings of Gods Covenant, yet do they not partake them, but
by their new birth, which ordinarily they receive in Baptism, ^it. 3.5.
which is therefore called the Bath of Regeneration. Where hence we may gather
the truth of Saint Hieromes saying, Christiani non nascuntur, sed siunt; we
may not vainly boast with the Jews, we have Abraham to our Father, Ioh. 8.39.
as if he could not beget children in iniquity, but it must be our comfort,
that God corrects Nature by Grace, and thereby makes us living members of the
Church; whereas such the best of natural Parents cannot make us to be: We
owe this blessing to our Father in Heaven, who conueieth it unto us by our
Mother the Church; our natural Parents can yield no such benefit, they yield
the contrary rather, as is clear in this Text.

Ruffinvs gives another good note hereof, Qui ad munditiae locum iam peruenit,
etc. He that is in the state of Grace, must not forget the state of Nature; if
we remember whence we come, we shall the better esteem the estate whereunto we
are brought: No man can be so proud, as to arrogate unto himself, the praise
of that which he is, if he mind well what without Gods grace he was.

But King David was long before Regenerated, how comes he now to make mention
of Original sin? How comes he now to lay the blame of his Actual upon
that? Surely, not without good cause. Circumcision in the Jew, as Baptism in
the Christian, did absolve from all the guilt of Original sin, by means of
Justification; and by means of Sanctification, did impair much of the
strength thereof: Much (I say) but not all; there are still in us relics of
the Old man, a Law in our members rebelling against the Law of our mind, Romans
7.23. Gal. 5.16.
the flesh, and the lusts thereof disobedient to Gods Law, and resisting his
spirit. Saint Paul calls it (...), Heb. 12.1.
Sin that cleaues so fast; so fast, that it cannot be loosed from us a
conceptione ad funus, says Saint Bernard, though we be working on it, and
weeding out of it, from the beginning to the end of our life. Epiphanius has
an excellent resemblance of a Fig Tree getting into a Wall, Here Is. 64.
and spreading his roots therein, which well may it be pruned, yet can it not
be utterly killed, except the stones be taken asunder, and the Wall new built
again: Even so is this native corruption rooted in us, that until our
dissolution we shall not be rid of it. The same God that left the Canaanites in
the Holy Land, to exercise the Israelites, leaves also Original sin in us,
thereby to try, how we will serve, and obey him; until death we shall have
some thing, which we must always watch, resist, keep down, mortify; if we
do not, God will humble us therewith, and we shall receive many a foil
thereby; David had trial hereof, and so have others had also, even all the
sons of men more or less; I except not Jeremy, nor John the Baptist, though
the Advocates of Rome, (confounding the gifts of Edification, with the gifts of
Adoption) would privilege them from the common condition of the sons of
Adam. But let us not forget, no more then King David does, this fountain of
temptation; which in those that are of age will never be idle, it will find us
work either of triumph, if we get the upper hand of it, or of complaint with
Saint Paul, Romans 7. if it prove too hard for us. Verse ^.


You have heard King David's acknowledgement. I come now in a word to speak of
his Plea. His Plea is for Pity, but he makes the motive thereunto to be the
displaying of his Misery; and this he does in the first word (Behold) wherein
he does not so much inform God, as humble himself; God cannot be ignorant of
that which man knows, but he is pleased, that man should in his devotion
express unto him how feeling he is, and how desirous to be unburdened of that
which brought him to offend God.

But we must observe, that there is a double Ecce, or Behold, a Carnal, or a
Penitential, whereof the one extenuates, the other aggrauateth the sin. The
Carnal man's Ecce, Behold, comes out thus; I have done ill, what then? Vitijs
nemo sine nascitur, what needs so sharp a reproof? All men are ill by
nature, if all, what blame deserve I? We would detest a debtor, who by his
unthriftiness has brought inevitable beggerie upon himself, or a diseased
person, that by riot has overthrown his body, if either of them, should be
so senseless of his woeful case, as not to blame himself, and deplore his
state, with a longing desire, and earnest endeavor to be rid thereof. And may
we then brook such Apologies of profane men, that have run so far in debt
unto God, and have made themselves such spiritual Lazars through sin? Far
be it from us to think, that David did so excuse himself to God; No, but as a
discreet Patient, who thoroughly had searched into his own disease, and desired
to be wholly cured, he opens his sore to the bottom, and concealeth nothing
from his Physician. He that desires to be freed from his Actual, but to
continue his Original sin, desires only to put off one punishment, that he
might deserve another. But a true Penitent desires so to be forgiven, that he
may be preserved from offending again. We commend Prisoners for their
wisdom, who knowing they are guilty more ways then one, desire that all the
Indictments may be brought in against them, before the Verdict pass upon
them; that so they may be thoroughly discharged: And he that Arraigneth
himself before the bar of God, should not leave any thing unrepented of,
whereof he knows himself guilty, nor conceal any part of his misery, that
needs the help of Gods mercy, the rather because we need not doubt, least
the multitude of our miseries should tire, or ouerburthen Gods mercy; happily
it may be so with men, he that will forgive seven, will hardly be brought to
forgive Seventy times seven faults, but with God it is far otherwise, in
whom the sight of misery (especially if it be presented with Penitencie) the
greater it is, the more compassion it moves. What a miserable case was Adam in?
Even in that woeful case which I have described unto you in this Text; yet no
sooner came he into Gods sight, but God was so moved, that he was pardoned,
before he was doomed; and the just doom was made very tolerable, by the
merciful pardon.

After God had drowned the old World, what moved him to be more tender toward
the new, Gene. 8.21.
but the pity that he took upon this native corruption, The evil frame of
the Heart of man? Excellent is the place of Ezekiel where the Church is
represented weltring in her Blood, when no eye did pity her, God said, that
then was the time of his love, he said unto her live, Verse 13.
yea, he said unto her, when she was in her blood live, Ezekiel. 16. King David,
Psalm. 103. Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that
fear him; Verse 14.
but mark what a reason he gives, He knows our frame, he remembers that
we be but dust. Does God pity the misery of man, when there appears no
Penitencie in him, and will he reject him, when it does appear? No,
penitencie makes misery to pierce more deeply the tender bowels, and
compassions of God. Wherefore let our, Behold, be expressed by the sorrow which
we conceive for our sinful corruption, and we shall find, that nothing can
more effectually move commiseration.

But I must end. We are at length come to the depth of King David's ingenuitie;
and certainly in repentance a man can go no farther. The first confusion
whereunto a penitent sinner may put himself, is to bring his sin before the
eye of his own conscience; David did so, verse. 3. The second is, to have it
published before men, as in the solemn Satisfactions made to the Church; David
did so, as appears in the Title of the Psalm. The last is, to present it
before God, to draw Gods eyes to behold, as well our Original, as our Actual
sin. In the first, self-love will diminish much of the shame, and our
communion in the same corruption, does much impair the second; but there is
nothing can lessen the third, so pure, so impartial are the sacred eyes of
God; so that David could not be more humble, more could not be expected unto a
full Repentance.

Saint Ambrose upon this Consideration hereof, breaks out into these words,
quis tanto affectu agit paenitentiam? where shall a man find his parallel?
suscepit personam generis humani, says Saint Austin, King David spoke no more
in his own person, then may beseem the person of every man, especially if he
be a Christian; And therefore his practice should be a pattern unto every one
of us; we are as he was, Si David, talis Rex, talibus parentibus, in peccato
natus, quanto magis Nos? The fountain of Corruption runs as high now as ever
it did, well may we deem our selves worse, better without intolerable
arrogance we cannot deem our selves; therefore his Ecce, Behold, will well
beseem us, and we may well fall as low as he in the Confession of our sins.
I press this the rather, because this is a secret which Philosophers could
not, Heretics would not know; and so indulgent are we to our selves, that we
are too willing to be ignorant of, at least to forget, that which our proud
nature does not easily brook. The less the Old man does like it, the more
should the New man study it. And that we study it not in vain, let us all
pray God that we may have Grace to exemplify so good a Sampler, that we may
so deeply lance our Spiritual wounds, as that they may be the better cured
by our Heavenly Physician, and the more severe we are against our selves, we
may find our Savior more merciful unto us. Amen.

PSALM. 51. VERSE. 6. Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts: and in the
hidden part, thou shall make me to know wisdom.


King David in that Vow which in this Psalm he makes for himself, prays
that he may be restored unto, and preserved in the state of Grace. To this end
he lays open his own wickedness, and lays hold upon Gods goodness; how he
lays open his own wickedness you have heard at several times (as I unfolded
the verses that go before,) and you shall (God willing) hear particularly how
he lays hold upon the goodness of God, as I shall have opportunity to
expound unto you the following verses.

But my Text comes in between these two maine points, so that it is hard to
say to whether of them it refers most, for surely it may fairly be referred
to either of them; it may be referred either to King David's unfeigned
repentance for his sin, or steadfast considence in the mercy of God,
therefore it is diversely expounded by others, and it will not be amiss if I
show you how the words look backward, and forward, respect King David's either
godly sorrow, or hope of Grace.

To come to the Text, The argument of it is remarkable Sincerity. Sincerity
is fitly described in these words; truth in the inward parts; without truth
there can be no Sincerity; but the truth that makes perfect Sincerity must be
in the inward parts.

Touching this Sincerity, we are moreover taught, first of what regard it is;
secondly how we may attain it; It is of principal regard, because entertained
with the best affection, that is Delight, and this affection is in the greatest
person, it is in God; God desires this truth in the inwards parts.

But how may it be had? surely not without divine instruction of our inward
man; The inward man is noted, by the secres part, that must be furnished with
good grounds, which here are meant by Wisdom, and this wisdom must come from
Heaven; God must make us know it. These particulars wherein Sincerity is set
forth in this Text are remarkable particulars, so we are taught by the first
word behold; Behold they are evident, they may not be denied, Behold they are
useful, every one must make his profit of them.

And so have I set before you the contents of this Scripture, which I shall now
farther enlarge as the time shall permit, and we may best be edified.

But before I do enter upon the distinct points, I must acquaint you with the
Language of the holy Ghost, which uses often times to mention parts of our
bodies, when it means the powers of our souls; the reason whereof is in
vulgar experience, because so long as the soul dwells in the body, the
powers thereof in their working make some sensible impression upon the parts of
our body, those parts, which even for this cause, have by the wisest
Philosophers, and most judicious Physicians been reputed the proper seats, if
not of the whole soul, yet of the several faculties thereof; My Text does
occasion me to instance in two parts, the Kidneys and the Heart, which are here
to be understood, though in the translation they are not expressed; in the
Original the Kidneys are plainly mentioned, which because they are two,
therefore they are translated parts, and those inward, or hidden parts, because
in the body the Kidneys are usually covered with fat. The Heart is a single
entrall, and therefore called by the name of a part also, a hidden part,
because of the couerings wherein it pleased God, that naturally the heart
should be inwrapt; upon these two parts, several powers of our soul do
work, at least when they work or are wrought, there will be some sense
thereof in these parts, in the Kidneys of Affections, as of Resolutions in the
Heart; this every man that observes himself, may easily assure himself to be
true.

Having thus opened unto you, the reason why the Holy Ghost thus speaks, let
us now come, and look a little farther into the things; By the inward parts
then are meant the Kidneys, and by the Kidneys the Affections that discover
themselves therein; now our Affections have long since, by those that have been
curious obseruers of them, been reduced unto four Heads, whereof two are
exercised with Evil, and two with Good; Evil, if it be absent, we fear, and
if it be present, we Grieve; as for Good that which we have not we Desire, and
we joy in that we have.

To apply this to my Text: I told you that it looks backward, and forward, to
David's Repentance, and to his Confidence; If to Repentance, then to Evil,
malum culpae, the Evil of sin, for which he Grieved, and malum poenae, the
wages of Sin, which he justly Feared. If to Confidence, then to Good, to
Mercy, which so far as he had received, he ioyed in, and desired so much as
he had not yet received; These are those inward parts, the affections of King
David's soul, that are to be understood in this place, in these it is, that
Sincerity must appear, so much is intimated by the word Truth.

But what is Truth? surely nothing else but a conformity of one thing to
another, whereof the one is the Sampler, and the other is the exemplification.
All that is in man's nature received its being from God, and was formed
according to the pattern of Gods eternal decree, which he expressed in the
Creation, and which he often touches at in the reproves which tax the
obliquities of our nature; we should be in our Affections, as God first made
us, and that is the first Truth required in them, a Truth that is opposed unto
vanity, that vanity which does dimimish the wel-being of our nature, and so
far as it does diminish it, of something makes it nothing, for nothing can
truly be said to be, farther then it is partaker of God, of the being which he
gives unto it, who only can say, I am that I am.

Besides the Truth that is opposed to Vanity, there is another, which is
opposed to Hypocrisy, and that is the correspondency of our outward actions,
to our inward affections; for as our outward affections must have their stamp
from God, so must they endeavor to print their true stamp upon our Actions;
for as the seed that is sown in the ground, bears the like seed above
ground, and the fruit is not unlike the Tree; no more should it be in our
moralities, we should not sustain one person in our bosom, and another in
our countenance, be painted sepulchers, full of dead men's bones, we should be
Jacobs (...), plain men, Nathaniels without all guile, Mat. 23.17.
for (...) (says Basil) (...) (says Chrysostom) the character of an honest
man is to be single minded, Genesis 25.27.
single tongued, he that has a heart and a heart, a tongue, and a tongue, has
not truth in his inward parts.

This being the nature of Sincerity; if we will try the world by it, I think
we may justly break out in to King David's complaint in another Psalm, Help
Lord, there is not a godly man left, Veraces defecerunt a filijs hominum, truth
is perished from among the sons of men; the periuries, which are frequent at
Assizes and Sessions, Psalm. 12.1.
the deceit of Citizens which have denominated deceit it self (for from them
is astutia derived, quia nihil lucrantur, nisi admodum mentiuntur; whose thrift
is fitly called craft, because did they not circumue^r, they would come short
of much of their wealth. As for Statesmen all Chronicles do witness that they
use the Foxes case, more frequently then the Lions skin, and Policy is one of
the words, that is degenerated, from a laudable, to an infamous signification,
and is become a Synonymon for Machiauelisme; This is the cause that Leagues,
and Contracts, though confirmed with never so religious bonds, are rather
snares, whereby one State seeks to entrap another, then pledges of their
mutual security. But the quintessence of all falsehood is the Popish
Aequiuocation, and Mental Reservation, then which the Devil never hatched a
more pestilent fraud to bane Societies, and desame Christian Religion. The
reason of all these obliquities, and aberrations from Truth is, for that every
man squareth unto himself a measure of his own, but that measure of Sincerity
which here God has squared out, is every where neglected; The Papist he
makes the Catholic cause his measure, the Politician his Greatness, the
Citizen his wealth, the Iurour the preserving of his Customs, or pleasuring
his friends; these and some such like to these cautions and conditions does the
world patch unto Truth, without which they will not entertayne it. The way to
reform all is to try our Sincerity by the rule here set down, by truth in the
inward parts, first that Truth that is opposed unto Vanity, for hereby must
we correct our inward affections, reduce them to the temper which God first
gave them, and keep them within the bounds, which Gods Law does set unto them;
and when we have done this, then must we come on to the Truth that is opposed
to Hypocris^y, let our conversation be the looking glass of our affections,
and let not any thing appear in the Outward man, that is not in the inward; so
shall we be sincere, we shall have truth in our inward parts. And let this
suffice for the nature of Sincerity.

Such Sincerity is of great regard, that appears first in the Affection
wherewith it is entertained; The Affection is Desire, and Desire is a compound
affection of Loving and wishing, for we cannot desire that which we do not
love, and what we love, if we want it, for that we wish; so that Sincerity
is a lovely thing; And indeed how can it choose but be lovely, that holds
together all Societies, Domestical, Politic, Ecclesiastical? without which
iealousies must needs arise, and so destruction follow, every man commits
himself securely to him in whom he suspecteth no guile, as where he does
suspect it, he thinks himself safest, when he has least to do.

Secondly, as it is lovely where it is: so where it is not, there it is longed
for; for man being by nature sociable, cannot but wish for that quality in
every man, without which there can be no society, therefore those whom
otherwise we hate, because we cannot but have to do with them, we wish them
all this Virtue, Truth in the inward parts; which should make all sorts of
persons careful to nurture those that are committed to their charge, Parents
their Children, Masters their Servants, Pastors their People, Magistrates their
Subjects in this Virtue, and sharply to correct their pronenesse to the
contrary, the World groaneth under the mischiefs of falsehood, yet (as if it
yielded no mischief) every where may you find a School thereof: (...), every
such master breeds such a scholar, as makes him a proof, that he has
profited in his Art.

But the Affection only does not show the regard; it is improued much by the
Person in whom this Affection is found: I showed you that Sincerity is lovely,
and longed for, but it skilleth much who the Person is that loves it, and
longs for it, for our nature is corrupt, and with our nature our affections,
we mistake evil for good, and we misplace our affections often upon evil
rather then good: It is not so with God; as he is, so he affects, he is most
Holy; and such are his Desires also, what he loves is lovely indeed, because
he cannot love amiss; and what he longs for, that we want, because if we did
not want it, he could not long for it; And indeed he must needs love Sincerity,
because it is the Image of himself, for he is Truth, and there is nothing
counterfeit either in him, or from him, yea his Truth is the ground of all our
Faith, our Hope, our Charity, were it not for that, these could have no ground;
Faith could have no ground without his Truth in promising, Hope could have no
ground without his Truth in performing, Charity could have no ground, without
his Truth in loving. Therefore there is Truth in him, and who what is in Him,
he loves in others, for every thing delights in his like; when God had made
all things, and beheld that they were good, he presently kept a Sabbath, which
imports nothing else, but the sweet content that he took in the work of his
own hands. If in all things, specially in those that did best resemble him,
and he is resembled in nothing more then in divine virtue; so that Sincerity
must needs be exceeding lovely in his Holy Eyes.

As it is lovely, so it is longed for also when it is wanting in our nature. By
the Fall amongst other endowments this was lost, Psalm. 62.^.
The Sons of men are become vanity, the sons of noble men are but a lie;
God then beholding them, must needs find wanting, what in the Creation he
bestowed upon them; and what he finds wanting, that he desires may be
recovered; Behold, how he shows himself as a Father, that might deal with
us as a Judge; what he might exact, he desires, and desires as a Father the
supply of that, the want whereof he might punish as a Judge; he takes more
delight to see us recovered mercifully, then justly to perish in our sins.

The words must not be understood exclusiuely; He desires Truth in the inward
parts, as if he desired it not also in the outward; The inward is his Peculiar,
a closet whereinto none can enter but himself, and as his residence is
specially there, so does his eye principally look into that; we may not
think that the Holiness that will content the Creature, will content the
Creator also; when we go about to reform, we must go as deep as Gods eye
goes; and not think that all is well until all is well there; But when we
are provided for that, Mat. 5.29.
we must Let our light shine also before men, the outward parts must have
Truth in them also; God that is the Author of societies, loves the bands of
them also, and by commanding the observation, and commending the obseruers,
testifies his good will toward them, to the confusion of all Equiuocaters,
that divorce the Inwards from the Outward, and care not how much fraud they
use outwardly, while they please themselves with a counterfeit truth inwardly;
We must entertain both such a truth in the Inward parts, as manifests it
self in the Outward, and gives good content both to God, and Man.

But mark, God that desires Truth, in the inward parts, commends not (...),
but (...), he does not bid us root out our Affections, but order them aright,
he calls not for stupidity, but simplicity, he wills us to fly all serpentine
wiles, but to entertain a singleness of mind, (...), Cyril.
unleavened affections are much set by of God, and sincerity is a virtue that
yields sweet savor unto him.

Finally, our Repentance, our Confidence, must specially be seasoned with this
virtue, for unto them is the Text specially applied. And let this suffice for
the regard that is yielded to Sincerity.

I come now to the means by which it may be had, and that is by divine
instruction of our Heart. The Heart is here meant by the hidden part, which
elsewhere is called the Hidden man of the Heart; why it is called Hidden in
some sort, I told you before, as also why it is called a Part, and not Parts,
the entrall is single, and it has a covering, as it appears in the
anatomizing of our bodies.

But by the entrall is meant the Understanding, the thoughts whereof are known
only unto God; They that write of the Temple of Solomon do many of them
parallel it with our persons which are temples of the Holy Ghost, as that was
partly uncovered, and partly covered; so have we an Outward, and an Inward
man, and as that part of the Temple which was covered, was partly Sanctum, and
partly Sanctum Sanctorum: so have we in our Inward man, a covert seat of our
desires, which must be holy, (as you have hitherto heard) and a covert seat of
the rule of our desires, which must be more holy, and that is our Heart, there
does God reside as in his most Holy place, and from thence by our conscience
gives order to the whole course of our life.

This place or power must be furnished with Wisdom; The Apostle does teach us
to distinguish between the Wisdom of this world, and the Wisdom of God,
whereof the former is seeming, the latter is Wisdom indeed; This Wisdom is
nothing but that guiding knowledge wherewith the Conscience must be furnished;
our desires have no reason of themselves, that which they have, they have by
participation of the higher power, which is therefore called (...); because it
is the guide of the inferior powers; now you know the virtue of a guide is
Wisdom, take away Wisdom, he will be but a bad guide, a bad, did I say?
nay, a blind guide, for Wisdom is his Eye, and you know what our Savior
Christ says, Mat. 6.22.
The light of the body is the Eye, if therefore thine Eye be single, the whole
body shall be full of Light, if thine Eye be evil, the whole body shall be
full of darkness. This Wisdom is nothing else but those good and sound
Principles of Direction which should give order to our affections, which of
them should stir, when, and how far; did not Wisdom give this order, out
of a true judgment past upon the Object, Fear would stir, where Hope is
called for, and we would Joy where we should Grieve; but that each affection
takes his proper turn, and observes its just measure we are beholding unto
Wisdom.

But whence is this Wisdom? Job 38.36.
Job moved the question; who has put Wisdom in the inward parts, or who has
given understanding to the heart? he answers himself fully in the 28.
Chapter, and the sum of his Answer is; that God is the giver thereof; The
reason may be taken from the nature of Wisdom, which is answerable to the
name thereof, C. 6.^.23.
so says the Son of Syrach, (...), Wisdom is as the name thereof
imports, and it is not revealed unto many; Fu^l^ Mis^. l. 1. c. 5.
Now it has its name from Tzaphah, which signifies to cover; And indeed, true
Wisdom had a double Covering in the days of King David, a Covering of
Ceremonies, that darkened the things, and a Covering of Infidelity, that made
most men incapable of them, only God could remove these Couerings, clear the
Mysteries of Religion, and give men eyes for to discern them; not that God
uses not the ministry of men, and by men informs us of our duties; but they
can go no farther then the Outward man, Ambros.
Cathedram habet in Coelo qui docet corda, none but our Master which is in
Heaven, can open our hearts, and work these good instructions into our
consciences; This is the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, Behold, Ier. 31.32.
the Day is come (says the Lord) that I shall make a new Covenant with the
House of Israel, and with the House of Judah, I will put my Laws into their
inward parts, and in their Hearts will I write them; and so; says Saint Paul,
2. Cor. 3.17. Ibid. v. 18
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, liberty from both the
Couerings, so that Men with open face behold the glory of the Lord.

And indeed who should repair these gifts when they are forfeited, but he to
whom they are forfeited? the Author of Nature, must be the Author of Grace;
And he is so, abundantly in our Savior Christ, for in Him are all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge hid, Colloss. 2.3.
in making him known, he makes true Wisdom to be known unto us.

It is not in vain that David says; Thou Shall make me know wisdom; for
though in Gods acts the Holy Ghost does indifferently use all times, past,
present, and to come, because they are continual, yet it is not amiss to
observe, that in this life we cannot have so much grace, but we still want
more, therefore we should not rest in the first fruits of the Spirit, but be
still hungring and thirsting after righteousness, Mat. 5.
and forgetting those things which are behind, be still pressing forward in
wisdom, that we may be forward in Sincerity.

Mark that if you lay both these parts together, the means of getting
Sincerity, to the regard that God yields to it, it follows fairly, that
whatsoever in us pleases God, is a gift that God bestows upon us; neither
indeed can any thing that comes not from him, be acceptable unto him; so
that we may well pray with Saint Austin, Da Domiue quodiubes, and iube quod
vis, Let it be thy good pleasure, O Lord, by grace to enable me, and then be
thy Commandment what it will, it shall most readily be observed by me.

Secondly, Sincerity is not immediately from God, he works it by heavenly
Wisdom, neither may we ever hope to be Sincere, except we first be wise; if
the Heart be nor first qualified, the Reins will not be reformed; The world
has yielded too many smatterers in either of these, but because they put
asunder, what God conjoined, they have been good in neither; Our Ancestors
that lived under Popery, were good meaning men (as they say of them) and the
Church of Rome did cherish in them good intentions, but good indeed they could
not be, because they were misguided; We are very inquisitiue after our Guide,
and (God be thanked) we have a good one, and happily we confer often with
him about a good course, but here is our fault, we do but confer with him,
commit our selves to his guidance we do not, we entertain not wisdom into
the inward part, therefore have our inward parts little truth; we are as
foolishly wise, as our Ancestors were falsely sincere; It were to be wished,
that we would join both as King David does, to be wise in the Hidden part,
that so our inward parts may be true; especially when we make our Atonement
with God, and humble our selves before him, if ever, then beg wisdom, the
wisdom of the heart, which may wholly order our affections, that our
Repentance, and our Confidence may both testify, that there is Truth in the
inward parts.

The last thing that I observed, is, that this Sincerity is remarkable, we are
taught it in the first word, Behold; which word notes both Veritatem Diuinam,
and Vtilitatem nostram, the vndoubtednesse of these rules, and the use which we
must make of them; Ecce hoc patens est, (says Ruffinus) this is as clear as
the noone, none but those that are blind can deny, that God loves Sincerity,
and that he gives that wisdom from whence sincerity streams; And as no man
can doubt it: so every man must make use of it, every man must desire this
sincerity that so he may be acceptable to God, and every man must desire to be
furnished with wisdom from Heaven, that he may be furnished with Sincerity;
We are by nature full of vanity and hypocrisy; our corruption was displayed in
the verse that goes before, but Contraria contrarijs illustrantur, we cannot
so well conceive how bad we are, as if we clearly see how good we should be;
when we observe that God requires Truth in our inward parts, then may we
perceive how miserable we are in being conceived and borne in Sin; so the
Ecce here gives light to the Ecce that goes before.

As this gives light to that, so that must be a whetstone to make us to affect
this. And seeing God takes all excuse from us, by making us to know wisdom,
we must receive wisdom into its proper seat, that from thence, it may
produce this acceptable work; We must with David be able to say Ecce, Behold,
thou have made me to know wisdom in my hidden part, that we may also say,
Ecce, Behold, O Lord, that Truth which thou desire in my inward parts.

I conclude all; Behold here the Dove and the Serpent which Christ commends for
patterns to his Disciples, we must have the simplicity of the Dove, and the
wisdom of the Serpent; He that can mix the wisdom of the Serpent, with
the simplicity of the Dove, shall neither be sottishly sincere, nor
deceitfulluy wise.

GOD, that searches the Hearts, and Reins, so qualify both, by his grace,
that being guided by him, we may be accepted of him, accepted for wise
sincerity, and sincere Wisdom, in the whole course of our life; but specially
when we turn to Him, and turn from sin, with unfeigned Repentance, and
assured Confidence. AMEN. PSALM. 51. VERSE. 7. Purge me with Hysope, and I shall
be clean: Washmee, and I shall be whiter then snow.


KIng David desirous to be restored unto the state of Grace, does first lay
open his own wickedness sincerely, and then does he sincerely lay hold upon
Gods goodness. Of the former you have hitherto heard, and are to hear of the
latter hereafter; In opening whereof, you are to observe, how aptly the Remedy
does answer the Disease; In the Disease we found a double wickedness, one
which King David committed himself, another which he inherited from his
Parents; The Remedy cures both: it cures the wickedness which King David
committed, the Malignity, the Impiety thereof, the Impiety by Expiation in this
seventh Verse, the Malignity by Consolation in the eight.

As it cures the wickedness which himself committed, so does it that which
he inherited from his Parents, that was a native Evil, and the Remedy does
cure it, as it is an evil, in the ninth verse, by forgiving, and as that evil
comes by nature, the Remedy cures it by Regeneration, as we shall learn
verse the tenth.

At this time I shall handle only the first branch of the Cure, the cure of
the Impiety of that sin which King David himself contracted; This I told you
was done, by Expiation, or Purification; for the better understanding whereof,
we must guide our selves, by a good rule of Saint Ambrose, Been Veteris
Testamenti Sacramenta non euacuat, et Mysteria Euangelica praeferenda docet;
These words are typical, therefore they have a compound sense; a Ceremonial,
and a Moral, David acknowledges both true; but withal teaches, in which
stands the greatest comfort; The Ceremonial was not to be omitted, because of
Gods Ordinance, but the Moral was principally to be intended, because that
contained the Body, whereof the other was but a shadow; Which must the rather
be noted, because the Holy Ghost does often times tax the Jews for either
wholly diuorcing the Morals from the Ceremonialls, or for that they were at
least, preposterously zealous, preferring the Ceremonials, before the Morals;
but our rule must be to observe whatsoever God commands, but so, that we value
every thing according to the rate which God sets upon it; we are freed from the
Ceremonial Law of Moses, yet are we not left altogether without Ceremonies,
for we have Sacraments, in participating whereof, we must observe Saint Ambrose
his rule; We must not neglect the visible Signs, wherewith God sustaynes our
Faith, yet must we pierce farther into the invisible grace, and that must be
the principal comfort of our Souls; So likewise in prayer, we must fall low
with our bodies, but much lower with our Hearts, lift up our eyes, but soar
higher with our Affections; in a word, Hoc oportet facere, illud non omittere;
neglect not Ceremonies, but intend Moralities chiefly in all the service of God.

But whereas I told you, that the sense of these words is double, Ceremonial
and Moral, before I can inform you in the Moral, I must first resolve you,
what is the Ceremonial sense; And here we find not all agreed, some find the
Ceremony in the book of Exodus, some in Leuiticus, C. 12.22.
some in Numbers; In Exodus we read that the Children of Israel were commanded
to sprinkle their dore-posts with the blood of the Paschall Lamb, that so when
the punishing Angel came to destroy the first borne of Egypt, he might pass by
them.

Chrysostom apprehends that King David in these words prays against Gods
wrath, and desires by such a sprinkling to be sheltered from that: And
indeed, though God forgave David's sin, yet did he by Nathan foretell That
the sword should never depart from his House, 2. Sam. 12.10.
therefore well might he deprecate plagues; But though we find mention of
Hysope in that Law, yet none of sprinckling the person, but the dore-postes,
nor finally any mention of purifying, but of preserving.

Therefore other of the Fathers find this Ceremony in Leuiticus, 14.4.
in the Law of clensing the Leper; And surely the words of my Text, speaking
rather de malo culpae, then poenae, (as appears by those Phrases, I shall be
clean, I shall be whiter then snow) may have good cognation with that
Ceremony; the rather because the Fathers not unfitly make Leprosy a lively
representation of the nature of sin* But in that Ceremony though Hysop were
used for clensing of the Leper, yet the clensing of the Leper there, was
declaratory rather then operatory, whereupon S. Hierome does parallel it with
the absolution of the Priest, who does not remit sin, but declare that it is
remitted of God; As the Priest (says he) did not make the Leper clean, but
upon examination, pronounce him to be clean.

But my Text speaks not of a Declaratorie only, but an operatorie
Purification, Ci^^l. (...).
wherefore we must seek farther into the book of Numbers, in the 19. thereof
we shall sinde a Ceremony that exactly sits my Text, sits it in the
phrase, (as they that are skild in the Original do know) and sits it in
the matter, as you may perceive, if you read the Chapter,; there God
commands the burning of a red Cow, slain by the Priest, V^^. 6.
with which was to be burnt Scarlet, Cedar wood, and Hysop, and of the ashes
which came hereof, and running water was to be made a holy water, wherewith he
was to be purisied that touched the dead, V^^ 18.
a clean person taking Hysop, and dipping it in the water, and sprinkling it
upon the unclean; C. 9.13.
Saint Paul to the Hebrews, moralizing that Ceremony speaks thus; if the
blood of bulls, and goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean,
sanctified to the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the blood of
Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God,
purge your Consciences from dead works, to serve the living God? Out of which
words we may learn to give a true Commentary unto this Text, and observe a
good correspondency, between the Ceremonial, and the Moral part thereof.

Which that we may the better do, observe that the whole Text is a Petition,
wherein we must observe, first severally, what King David beggeth, and of
whom; then jointly, how confident he is of the success of his Petition which
he makes to that person. That which he beggeth, is Purge, Wash; the person to
whom he directs this Petition is God, for to him he prays, but he would
have him do this through Christ, for Christ is meant by Hysop.

If God grant this request, (as he doubts not but that he will grant it, for
it is Prophetica or atio, he prophesies in praying) he then undoubtedly
assures himself of a double effect, that shall be wrought upon him;
Innocence, I shall be clean, and Beauty, incomparable Beauty; I shall be
whiter then Snow.

Let us look into these particulars, and carry along the Ceremonial with the
Moral.

First then see what he beggeth, purge, wash, but these words presuppose some
thing that is not here expressed, and that is from what he would be purged, and
cleansed; Read the 19. of Numbers, there you shall see the Ceremony; it was
from the impuritie that was contracted from touching the dead, and this
impurity did exclude them from access unto the Tabernacle; Saint Paul Heb. 9.
teaches us the Moral of this Ceremony, Verse. 14.
and that the touching of the dead did figure our intermedling with dead
works, that is sins; for they that are infected with them, are said
Ephesians 2.5. to be dead in them; and our Savior means as much by the
Proverb, Let the dead bury their dead. Mat. 8.22.


And indeed Sins are fitly termed dead works, I^b. 1.
for they had their original from him that has the power of death, that is
the Devil, Heb. 2.14.
and they are in us the sting of death, so venoming our understanding, 1. Cor.
15.16.
and our will that they bereave us of the Life of God, to whom we live only by
the true knowing of him, and loving him as we ought; finally, Romans 9.23.
the wages of Sin is death, and death in sin brings upon us death for
sin, the spiritual death in this world, an everlasting, in the world to come.

As he that has to do with sin, has to do with Death: so he that has
the contagion of Death cleaving to him is unfit for the House of the living
God, for that is the House of the living; for God by Covenant, is not the God
of the Dead, but of the Living; Mat. 22.32.
they that are planted in the House of the Lord (says the Psalmist) shall
flourish in the courts of our God; Mark then, in what case a sinner is, Psalm.
92.13.
Job. 2.4.
in the state of Death, secluded from the Living: Skin for skin, and all that
ever a man has, he will give for his Life, though it be but his natural Life,
which is temporal; how much more would be give for his better Life, if he
knew it, I mean his spiritual Life, which is Eternal? If it be a thing
desirable to hold our soul in our body, how much more desirable is it, to
enjoy God in our soul? Especially seeing the soul may be in the body, and
afflict it with hearts grief; but no soul enjoys God, that is not filled
with unspeakable joy.

But Life is not the uttermost of our desire, we are by nature sociable, and
solitarines is a kind of Death; it is so, if we be only excluded from the
society of men, Psalm. 42. and Psalm. ^4.
how much more if we be debarred the Communion of Saints? King David's Psalms
show how passionate he was, when he was debarred the visible Communion by
banishment, how much more passionate think you was he when he apprehended his
exclusion from the invisible, through the deadliness of his sin; These
things out of the Moralized Ceremonies must we set before us, as the Motives
unto this Petition; Purge me, wash me, me, that have lost the comfortable
presence of my God, the life of my soul, and have contracted the contagion of
Death by my sin, and for this contagion, am unworthy to have access unto thy
House in the company of thy Saints; the love of that life makes me abhor
the state of this Death, the desire that I have to that society, makes this
spiritual excommunication tedious unto me, and give me no rest, break my
silence, make me importune thee O God, with Purge me, Wash me, expiate this
impurity that has so woefully distressed me.

These two words, Purge and Wash, look to two parts of the Ceremony; Vos.
18.19.
In the aforenamed 19. of Numbers you shall sinde, that he that had touched
the dead, was first sprinkled with the holy water, and then was to have his
whole body bathed incleane water. These two acts Ceremonial, look to the two
parts of spiritual Purification; In Sin there are two things, the Guilt, and
the Corruption, the taking away of the Guilt, was signified by the aspersion or
sprinkling of holy water, and the Corruption by washing in clean water.

God that has given his Law for us to obey, has added a Sanction unto it, to
hold us in, that we should not dare to transgress for fear of wrath, and
ordained that a deformity should accompany sin, and make it more odious unto
us, out of the love that we bear to our selves; When we enter into
consideration of our sin, the first thing that we should apprehend is the
Guilt, the danger that we stand in to God ward, we should set him before us as
a severe Judge, armed with vengeance, ready to lay on us deadly strokes; this
should make us break into the first Petition; Purge me, O Lord, free me from
Guilt, let me stand on good terms with my God.

But when we have made our peace with him, and all is safe from without;
self-love, religious self-love must make us look home, survey our selves,
fix our eyes upon our souls, and take care to remedy the blemishes thereof;
Deformity in our outward man we cannot endure, I would we could endure it as
little in our inward; we desire the exactest proportion, the fairest
complexion, and where Nature fails, we help it by Art, and think no pains
too great, no cost too dear, that is bestowed that way; Our better part
deserves the greater regard, by how much we should desire more to recommend
our selves to the eyes of God and Angels, then to the eyes of mortal men; yea,
to the eyes of our own souls, rather then to the eyes of our bodies, for that
these are truer Judges, and Judges of the best things; Certainly King David
thought so, who knowing that sin carries with it not only a guilt, but a
stain also, prayed no less Wash me, then Purge me, free me, O God, both from
stain and guilt.

But the Consequence must not be forgotten, the stain and the guilt themselves
desire this favor, were there no evil beyond them, how much more, when (as I
showed you in the Ceremony) they are necessarily accompanied with an
Excommunication; so that purge me and wash me, must imply a desire of
restitution also, a restitution into the Church, and into the Communion of
Saints; a blessing that followed upon King David's person, being purified from
his guilt and stain; and King David must be thought to have (correspondently
to the Law) aimed at that blessing.

And let this suffice touching that for which King David prays. I come now to
consider the Person of whom he beggeth it in his Prayer.

The Person is God, for it is to him to whom he directs the whole Psalm; And
indeed none but God can do this that he prays for, for who can free from
guilt, but he to whom a sinner stands obliged by his guilt? he that set the
Sanction to the Law, must quit us from the danger that is due from that
Sanction; and who is that but God?

And as God only can purge the guilt, so he only can wash away the stain;
he only that made us, can new make us, and he reformeth man to his Image,
that first made him after his Image; This is the work only of God.

But see; here is a limitation of Gods power, he would have God to purge him,
but do it with Hysop; as if without Hysop he could not do it, shall I say?
God forbid; he can do more then we can conceive; they are too presumptuous
that set such bounds unto God, Faustus Socin.
that is a most absolute Lord; no doubt he might have saved us otherwise then
he did; This we may boldly say, he would not do it without Hysop, and his
will is that which does menage his power, what he has freely decreed, out of
his good will; that he brings to pass, by his irresistable power; He spoke
the word, and made us, but he was pleased that the redeeming of us should cost
him more pains, he would use the help of Hysop.

Hysop is literally understood in the Ceremony, so we find it in that often
cited 19. of Numbers, but spiritually by Hysop the Fathers understand Christ,
and make a correspondencie between him and that herb, in two respects, in
regard of the smalnes of the herb, and in regard of the virtue thereof, the
smalnes representing Christ's Humility, that vouchsafed to take upon him the
form of a servant, the virtue noting Christ's efficacy; for as that Herb
works upon our Inwards, De doctr. Christ lib. 2. c. 16.
so (says Saint Austin) does Christ work upon the Inward man.

Hysop works principally upon the lungs (say the Fathers) which are the
bellows of our body, and are an excellent Emblem of Pride; and it was Pride
whereby we lifted our selves up against God, that Christ came to cure with his
Humility, when he stooped unto the ignominious death of the Cross.

But it was not Hysop alone wherewith he desired to be purged, but Hysop dipped
in the holy water, and this does intimate yet more fully, that the expiation
was to be made by Christ; for (to say nothing that the red Cow slain, whose
blood was sprinkled directly before the Tabernacle, was as all other sacrifices
a Type of Christ) those things that are principally to be marked in Christ,
were most liucly represented in the things that were burnt with the Cow; For
there were to be cast in, Cedar wood, Hysop, and Scarlet; The Cedar is the
highest of all trees, and well represents the Deity of Christ; (...). 4.33.
Hysop in the History of Solomon's knowledge in natural things, is opposed unto
the Cedar, as the lowest of plants, and may well note Christ's Manhood; the
Scarlet is an excellent representation of his bloody death, according to that
in the Prophet Esaias, (...). 63.1, 2.
who is this that comes from Edom, with died garments from Bozra? wherefore
art thou red in thy apparel? etc. And indeed Christ's blood is the Bath of
purification, it cleanses from all our sins; if we have our hearts sprinkled
therewith, we shall be free from evil consciences, Heb. 10.22 9, 14 Zach.
13.1.
our consciences shall be freed from dead works to serve the living God.
Finally, his Spirit is that fountain that is opened unto the house of Israel,
E^ek. 36.25.
and the clean waters that in Ezekiel God promised to pour upon his Church;
without Christ, the virtue of his death, and work of his Spirit, God purifieth
no man. The Heathen had their Aquam lustralem, their holy water, and so has
the Church of Rome also, but the Heathen holy water had no respect unto Christ's
blood, the Romish would seem to have, but sanctifying Ceremonies without Gods
warrant are fruitles; not only so, but spiritual usurpations; If we expect
purification from sin, we must tie our selves unto Christ's death, and not
look to partake the benefit of it, but by such means as are ordained of God,
Mat. 15 9.
for the Spirit breaths where it will, not where we will; so that in vain
shall we serve God, if therein we follow no better guide then the
commandments of men. And let this suffice touching the Person to whom King
David directs his Prayer.

Having thus severally considered, What King Danid begs, and Of whom; by
joining the points together, we must see with what confidence he expects the
success of his Prayer. The first point of confidence is employed in the words
purge, wash, for the Original has it, thou shall purge, thou shall wash. And
indeed such future tenses are Prophetical wishes; and why? Faith in prayer
has an eye to Gods promise, and therefore a hope of his performance, 2 ^^moth.
2.12.
and why? God cannot deny himself; he ever will be as good as his word;
Numbers 19, he commands the carnal purifying, and promises the success; and
shall he deny success unto the spiritual, if we observe it? Certainly he
will not.

A second branch of Considence appears in the resolute affirmations, I shall
be clean, I shall be whiter then snow, which import, that as God will be
constant in keeping his word, so he will be powerful in accomplishing the
deed; no doubt of the Effect when he is pleased to be the Efficient; (...).
19. Vos. 1^.
A clean person (says the Ceremony) shall purge him that is unclean, and
he shall be purified; And who so clean as God? in comparison of whom, the
best of his creatures are unclean? If the carnal purification may be expected
from a mortal man, how much more may we expect the spiritual, from our
immortal God?

But mark; here is not only expected a freedom from sin, but also a
furniture of grace, not only innocence spiritual, but Beauty also; so says
David, I shall be clean, that is innocent, yea, I shall be white, that is,
beautiful; Parum est mundari a sordibus peccatorum, Ruffin. in hu^ locum.
nisi contingat decorari candore virtutum, it is a cold comfort to be freed
from impurity, except we be beautified with sanctity; But where sin
abounded, Romans ^.20.
grace abounded much more; sin stripped us of our original Righteousness, and
wounded us in our natural power, and grace does not only heal us again, but
restore us also to whatsoever we lost. The same God that in the Law commanded,
that when a captive Israelite was set free he should not go away empty, Detr.
15.13, ^
but be furnished liberally with whatsoever God had blessed his Master, is not
fast handed toward us, when he freeth us from the death of sin, but adornes
us as beseemes the spouse of Christ.

White is the color of Saints, Mark. 9.3.
it appears in the Transfiguration of Christ, and in the apparitions of Angels
in the Revelation of Saint John more then once, as likewise in Daniel; so that
that phrase implies that the effect of Christ's purifying is not only Grace,
but Glory also, yea unspeakable Glory, so the comparison will have us
understand it, when David says that he shall be whiter then s^ow. It was a
gracious promise that was made, Psalm. 68. though ye have hen amongst the pots,
Verse. 13.
yet shall ye be as the wings of a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers
with yellow gold; yea when the Almighty scattered Kings for his Church she was
as white as snow in Salmon; here David goes a step farther, Verse. 14.
whiter then snow; And indeed well may we resemble spiritual things by
corporal, and eternal by temporal, for that the one does somewhat resemble
the other, but equal them we cannot, we may not, by reason of the many degrees
whereby the corporal is exceeded by the spiritual, and the temporal by the
eternal.

I conclude; Who can say I have made my heart clean? I am free from sin? Prou.
20. Lib. 1. c. 5.
No man; for Habet cor vniuscuiusque (says S. Austin in his Confessions) quod
offendat oculos Dominisscio and fateor; there is not the best of us that has
not touched the dead, that is not infected with dead works, it beseems the
best of us to say with S. Austin, scio, fateor, I know, I acknowledge it, but
we must go on with S. Austin, quis mundabit? who shall make me clean? and
resolve with him, cui alteri praeter te Domine clamabo? ab occultis munda me
Domine, Psalm. 19 12.
O Lord I have none to whom I may hopefully call but to thee, Lord cleanse me
from my secret faults, or in the words of my Text, Purge me with Hysop, and I
shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow. AMEN.

GOd grant we may all so wash our garments white in the blood of the Lamb,
during these days of Grace, that we may hereafter walk with him in white
robes, when we shall be received into the state of Glory. AMEN. PSALM. 51. VERSE.
8. Make me to hear Joy and Gladness, that the bones which thou have broken
may rejoice.


IN the desire, which King David expresses of being restored to the state of
Grace, I have told you more then once, that he lays open his own
wickedness, and lays hold upon Gods goodness. Having at several times
sufficiently showed you, how he performed the former, I began the last time to
open the later unto you.

The first thing, that I then observed, was, that the Medicine does point for
point answer the Disease: the disease was of double wickedness, one King
Diuid committed himself, another he inherited from his Parents. I showed you,
that here was a cure of both. In the sin, which himself committed, we found
Malignitie and Impiety, it vexed King David, and offended God, each of these
has his proper cure: the sin, as offensive unto God, is cured by Expiation,
of that you heard the last time, as it is afflictiue of King David's person, it
is cured by Consolation, and of that you must hear at this time.

But before we enter upon the Text, mark the method of the Holy Ghost,
consider how the Cures are digested: the Expiation of sin, must go before
the Consolation of a Sinner; and why? Sin had never been afflictiue, if it
had not been offensive, we then began to be in distress with the guilt of
conscience, when we displeased God by breaking his Law; therefore if we be not
first at one with God, we must never look to be at one with our selves: ^om.
5.1. Cap. 14.17.
learn it of Saint Paul, Being iustisied by faith, we have peace with God, and
else where more fully, The Kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost, it begins at Righteousness, which is all one with the
Expiation of sin, then upon Righteousness follows Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost: And what are these, but that Consolation whereof I shall now
entreat? Only I give you this note by the way, that when so ever you shall
need the like cure, you neglect not this sacred order; that you tender not
your own case, before you have atained Gods favor; such preposterousnesse
will cause, that your spiritual physic will never sort a wished effect. But
let us come to the Text.

I told you, it contains a cure of the Malignitie of sin; Of the Malignitie
of sin we have here set down the Power and the Author; the power, it
breaks a sinners bones, the author of this power is God, so says the Text,
The bones which thou host broken, the cure is restoratiue Comfort; comfort
noted by two words, Joy and Gladness, that is, Internal and External
comfort, and such comfort is restoratiue, for it will make even broken bones
for to rejoice.

But whence comes this comfort? And what hope is there of it? surely it
comes from God, David beggeth it of him, make me to hear of Joy and
Gladness, mark, every word is significant; the means by which we receive it,
is the Ear, but God conueieth it by the Ear, yea the capacity of our hearing
is the gift of God; all these three things are contained in these words, Make
me to hear.

As God is the giver of it, so there is no doubt, but he will bestow it, the
phrase imports as much, and so does the contexture, for though in my Text it
be read as a petition, Make me to hear, yet in the original, which our
vulgar reading Psalms do follow, it is a plain assertion, Thou shall make me
to hear; Add hereunto the contexture, the inference of the cure upon the
application of the remedy, Make me to hear of Joy and Gladness, what will
follow? The bones which thou have broken shall rejoice.

You hear whereof I must speak, I pray God, that I may so speak, that you
may hear, and learn the means of true consolation in the distresses of your
souls.

The first thing then to be observed, is the power of the Disease, the
Malignitie of sin, and that is the breaking of a sinners bones: the Bones are
but a part of the body, but they are used here to note the whole, and well they
may in this case; for if they fail, the rest cannot continue: the bones are
the pillars (as it were) and foundation of the other parts, the Ligaments are
fastened to them, the Muscles, the Entrals, the Skin, all are borne up by
them. Add hereunto that they being of the strongest substance, that which can
crush them, cannot be resisted by any other part: well then may the bones
signify the whole body, and the breaking of the bones, the consumption of the
whole.

But what? The wound is in the soul, how comes the disease then to be in the
body? surely there is evident reason for it: the body of it self is but a
lump of earth, the life and vigor, that it has, it receives from the soul,
and according to the influence of the soul is the health and strength that
appears in the body: Take a similitude from the Sun, and the Earth; the
earth a huge globe, made to be the nurserie of variety of Plants, Beasts,
Birds, while the Sun shines comfortably upon it, how cheerfully do all
things look? how well do they prove, and prosper? but remove the Sun from
it, as in Winter, or Eclipse the beams thereof, how squalid is the face of the
earth? how do all things even languish as it were and die? Even so fares it
between our souls and our bodies: our bodies are in good liking, they are
Summer-like, if they be cherished by our Souls, but if our Souls neglect
them, then they grow Winter-like and droope.

And how can they but neglect them, when the distresses of a guilty Conscience
have seized upon the root of life, that is the Heart? If that once be cast
into a spiritual melancholy, it grows senseless, and careless of all other
employment, and if the soul wither at the root, how should the branches
flourish? how should any faculty perform its proper work, when the Heart,
that is the common director and strengthner of the rest, gives over her work?
They that have seen any conflicting with this passion, might easily observe,
how neither food, nor friends, nor family, nor children, nor any thing that
either nature or reason does endeare, are any thing regarded by them; but
feeding upon that pyning humor, they seem to take no content, but in their
disconrent, and spend all their thoughts in complaining of this fretting, and
consuming humor. Read King David's Penitentials, if any where, you shall there
see the Picture of such a languishing person, especially in the 38. Psalm,
where expressing his disease Sin, in the fourth Verse he amplysieth the
power thereof working upon his body, There is no soundness in my flesh, there
is no rest in my bones, my wounds stink and are corrupt, I am weary, I am
bowed down greatly, etc. you may read the rest at your leisure, (...) 18.14.
and it is worth you reading, that you may clearly see the truth of that
saying of Solomon, A wounded spirit who can bear? What body can choose but
languish that is possessed by a languishing Soul? A man cannot be so wounded in
the Inward man, but you may read it plainly in the Outward.

The Fathers do Allegorize the Phrase, and by the Bones understand Virtues:
Virtues that are to the Soul, as Bones to the body; for a man as he is a
reasonable creature does subsist in them, even as the body is borne up by the
bones, as it is a living creature: the Cardinal virtues, the Theological, are
our supporters, those as we are men, these as we are Christian men. The
conscience of Sin shiuers these figurative Bones also: for look upon a man
distressed by a guilty conscience, what Prudence in him, that can give no good
counsel to himself? And as for Justice, he cannot have that, for he is
unsociable: his Temperance is to starve himself, and his Fortitude to sink
under his grief: there is not a Cardinal virtue, that has place in him, as a
Man: and as a Christian man Theological virtues have as little place, he
makes no use of his Faith to sustain himself with the promises of God? his
Hope is heartlesse, for he forecasts only fearful things, and little sense
has he either of Gods love to him, or his love to God. Not one of these Bones
continues sound, all of them sink, and are crushed under the burden of sin.
A pitiful case, and yet such is the case of every one that secleth the worm
of Conscience, of every one that is stricken with the sting of that Serpent.

But whence has sin this power? who gives this wounding strength to sin?
Surely God, the Text says so, Tufregisti, thou have broken my bones, Vose 2.
and so in the 38. Psalm, Thy arrows stick fast in me, thy hand presses me
sore.

It is true that God uses means, our Conscience within us, and Satan without
us, to afflict us for sin; but both work upon his command, and according to
the measure, which he prescribes: touching Conscience, (...). ^.
Saint Austins Rule is very true, Iussisti Domine and factum est, vt omnis
anima inordinata sibi ipsi esset paena, God to hold us in from sin, has
placed in us a Conscience, whose office amongst other things is this, to
torture us for sin; and as for Satan we see in Job, that he is but Gods
Executioner, and stirs not, but when, and as far as he has leave, leave
given unto him of God: but whether it be Conscience, or Satan, that which they
harrow us with, is the arraigning of us before Gods Tribunal, setting him
forth in the dreadful Majesty of a Judge, and amplifying our vileness, that
cannot deny the Indictment, that is brought against us: These be the Engines
wherewith they set upon us, this is the painful rack, wherewith they torture
us.

And no wonder if such a spectacle distress them, who are guilty of some
en^rmous sin, that has distressed the most Religious servants of God. Cap.
6. v. 1. and ^.
Esaias saw God sitting upon his Throne of judgment high and lifted up, his
train filled the Temple, etc. Then said he, Woe is me for I am undone, because
I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean
lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts. Habakkuk had the
like vision, and what says he? When I heard, Cap. 3.16.
my belly trembled, my lips quincred at the voice, rottenness entered into my
bones. Cap. 10.
Daniel that is called Vir desideriorum, when a Vision was presented unto him,
being in the company of others, observes, that a great quaking fell upon
them, and they fled to hide themselves; as for himself he says, that his
comeliness was turned in him into corruption, and that he had no strength in
himself. Moses that had his prerogative to talk with God face to face, yet
when God appeared in his Majesty to deliver the Law, when he beheld the
flaming fire, heard the sound of the Trumpet, and felt the Earth trembling
under him, Saint Paul has observed, Heb. 12. That he said, I exceedingly fear
and quake: But what do I instance in these? Our Savior Christ who knew no
sin, but yet put on such affections as belong to a sinner, when our sin was
imputed unto him, presenting himself in the Garden before God, and
apprehending his Majesty armed with vengeance to repay the sins of the
world, how was he afflicted? into what an Agony was he cast? The Gospel does
tell us, that he sweat great drops of blood: If the Prophets, if Moses which
were not privy to themselves of any enormous sin, if Christ himself that
was free from all sin, was so affected and distressed at the sight of Gods
judgments, if their Bones were so broken, how shall they be ground into powder
that come before him laden with enormous, with crying sins? 1. Pet. 4.18.
If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner
appear? Surely, when God with rebukes does correct such men for their
iniquity, he shall make their beauty to consume away like a Moth, Psalm.
39.11. Psalm. 90.6. Psalm. 68.2.
they shall be like the withered grass, when he consumes them in his anger. As
smoke is driven away before the Wind, and as Wax melts before the fire, so
shall the wicked perish at the presence of the Lord.

And thus much of the punishing power of sin, what it is and whence: wherein
you may behold two things most lively set forth before us, the true nature of
grief, and the cause that it has such a nature. The Philosophers teach, that
Dolor is solutio continui, the renting in sunder of that whose content stands
in union: and the breaking of bones what is it but a rent? the soul denies
succor to the body, the parts of the body each denies his service to the
other, yea the powers of the soul grow strangers between themselves, and
virtue it self is bereft of virtue; he cannot want woe thathath such a
distraction in his little commonweal.

Grief there is then, Aug. de vera Relig.
and that has a cause, Saint Austin shall tell you, what it is, fluendo
deserit amatore^ suum corpus, quia ille hoc amando deseruit Deum, your bones
are broken and you are payned therewith, will you know why? the body breaks
with the soul, because the soul first brake with God, if your soul do rend
it self from God by sin, it shall find little rest in that house of clay
whereon it doteth, this will make have to return to dust, when our better part
gives it self over unto vanity. And let this suffice touching the disease.

Let us now come on unto the Cure. That is expressed in two words, Joy and
Gladness: although the words may note one and the selfsame thing, yet may we
not vnsitly distinguish the Remedy, as we did the Disease: the broken bones
were understood Properly and Figuratively: Properly for the languishing of the
body, Figuratively for the languishing of the soul, this being the cause,
whereof that is the Effect: or that being (as it were) the redundancy of this.
Seeing then the Medicine must be of the same extent with the disease, we must
find in it a Comfort for the Soul, and a Comfort for the Body: the Comfort of
the soul noted by Joy, and the Comfort of the body noted by Gladness, so that
the whole Comfort must make up Iubilum, which (as Gregory the great notes in
his Moralls) is such a cheerfulness, as taking root in the soul, does
manifest it self in the body, and the light of the Countenance does argue the
peace that is in the Conscience.

But Saint Austin upon the Gospel of Saint John, has taught us to distinguish
of Joy, there is Gandium veritatis, and vanitatis, a true and a false joy: Joy
of it self is nothing else but the Content that every part of our body, and
power of our soul takes in the object, that was made for to please it: as the
Eye has joy in colors, the Ear in sounds, the Palate in meats, etc. if
these be proportioned to the temper of the sense; so fares it with the powers
of our soul, but sin has distempered us within, and without, and we can
relish no better, then we can discern: we do as ill relish true Joy and
Sorrow; as we do distinguish Good and Evil: therefore that we mistake not
our Cure, we must take heed, that we do not mistake Joy and Gladness, Gaudium
vanitatis, for Gaudium veritatis false for true Joy: that you may distinguish
the one from the other, I will show you three marks, whereby they may be
discerned: true joy is first, purum, it is affected with nothing but that which
is good, that which is evil should properly be the object of sorrow, therefore
all that delight in drunkenness, adultery, blasphemy, or any other sin,
though they seem to have Joy, yet indeed it is no true Joy, for it is, (...)
7.6. Chap. 20.12, 13, 14. ^^ke 6.25.
but as the Crackling of thorns, as Solomon speaks, or as Job, like poison,
sweet in the mouth, that kills so soon as ever it comes into the maw, of
such Christ says in the Gospel, Woe be to you that rejoice for you shall
weep. The second mark of true Joy is, that it is Solidum, it spends not it
self upon toys, but upon that which is of worth: We observe it as a
difference between children and those that are of riper ears, that children
value things as they affect, those that are of riper discretion value them as
they are: a child will prefer an apple before a jewel, and we sinile at it;
but how many of us do more glory in fantastical fashions, then we do in the
greatest virtues? but we shall be driven in the end to write upon them Vanity
of vanity, all is but vanity; yea, those toys will help to break our bones,
for they will prove vexation of spirit: and why? they want the second property
of Joy, there is no solidnesse in them. The third property of true Joy is, that
it is perpetuum, it rests not upon that which is transitory, which may be
taken from us, or we from it; that is a deceitful Joy, the rich man was told
so, Luke 12.19.
who said unto his soul, Soul be merry, eat and drink, thou have goods for
many years, but he heard, Thou fool, this night shall they take thy soul
from thee, and then whose shall these things be? Luke 12.33.
wherefore we must provide our selves bags which wax not old, a treasure in
Heaven that fades not, where no thief approaches, neither moth corrupts,
where such treasures are, there let our hearts be also. But all this while I
have but distinguished true Joy from false, I have not showed you what this
medicinal Joy is; Lib. 1. Cons.
Est gaudium (says Saint Austin) quod non datur impijs, sed ijs qui te gratis
colunt; there is a Joy whereof the wicked never partake, it belongs only to
them, that are thy faithful servants, and what is that? horum gaudium tu ipse
es, they have no Joy but thee, and they think their lives most blessed, when
they joy in thee and for thee.

But how can a man, that is a sinful man come to have God for his Joy? surely
in Christ, and by Christ, so says the Angel to the Shepherds, Luke 2.10, 11.
Behold, I bring you tidings of great Joy, which shall be unto all people, for
unto you is borne a Savior, which is the Lord Christ. In the Prophet Esaias,
Cap. 61.1, 2, 3.
Christ speaks thus, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek, he has sent me to bind up
the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, to give unto them
that mourn in Sion, beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, etc. Cap.
9.3.
And elsewhere speaking of Christ's birth, They shall joy before thee, according
to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil. And
indeed, he that knows the case of one hunger-starued, and bound in fetters
like a slave, cannot deny but the news of liberty, the news of plenty must
needs be good news, joyful news unto him: and such is the news of
Salvation by Christ; when we hear, Son be of good cheer, Mat. 9.2.
thy sins are forgiven thee, when Christ's spirit bears witness to our
spirit, that we are the children of God, we must needs embrace these blessings
with exceeding Joy: as in Samaria there was great Joy, so will there be in any
City where this Salvation comes to sinful men.

You have heard what is the Disease, and what is the Cure, you must hear
whence it comes, not from Earth but from Heaven. It is usual with too many,
when the worm of Conscience biteth them, and they smart from that invisible
sting, to sort themselves with iouiall company, by them to drive away
melancholy, and to charm this Serpent with variety of sensual delights; but
little do they think, that these are Medici nihili, Chap. 13.4.
Physicians of no worth (as Job speaks) and that when they return to
themselves again, and look again into themselves, they shall find that the
worm has crept in farther, and biteth more smartly, the sting gets faster
hold, and paineth more grievously: and no marvel; for may a man expect to be
cured by that which caused his disease? or shall he not rather be the worse,
the more he applies that Physic? Esaias 45.7. Deuteronomy. 32.39.
there is none but God that can create Light and darkness, Good and Evil,
that can wound and heal, kill and make alive again: therefore if in so
desperate a case we desire to have recovery, we must repair to him, and none
but he must be our Physician.

He cures, but how? Per auditum, by the Ear. We have two Rational Senses,
and contentions have been made about their precedencie, the books that are
given us to study, will easily resolve the doubt, they are Gods works, and
his words: if the sight of his works might have recovered us, we should not
have needed the Preaching of his word, but the infirmity of the former is
argued by the supply of the later: and whatsoever Philosophy thinks,
Divinity must hold that we are beholding much more to our Ear, then to our
Eye for Saving wisdom: when I name the Ear, I mean the bodily: the
Enthusiasts have an Ear, but it is only for Gods spirit; but we must have an
Ear for Gods ministers; for ordinarily God dispenses not the Comforter, but
by their ministry. Fead Job. 33.
And this is the highest commendation of sacred Orders, and that which must
work the greatest reverence of the people toward them, for that God conueieth
heavenly treasure by these earthen vessels, 2. Cor. 4.7.
and into their hands has put the power of the Keys, yea to their tongues
has he in a manner tied the efficacy of his word, they bind and loose men's
souls, they open and shut unto them the King dome of Heaven.

They do it, did I say? rather God does it by them; so are we taught by my
Text, God must make David to hear; it is not enough that God send his word,
and great be the number of Preachers, God must breath also with his spirit, 1.
Cor. 37.
and when Paul has planted, and Apollo watered, he must give the increase:
Acts 16.14.
if God do not then open the Heart, as he did Lidia's, we may be no better
then Francis Spera, whose bones being broken with the conscience of his sin,
he could not be cured, because the many exhortations, that were given unto him
by the words of men could have no entrance into his Heart, there wanted there
the spirit of grace: therefore we must with David beg that God would make us
hear.

But I hasten to the last point, you have heard who gives the Physic, you
must hear, what Hope there is that David's petition will succeed: there
appears good hope; good hope in the phrase, for it is not only
Supplicatorie, but Assertorie. I observed the like upon the former Verse, I
will not repeat it. But there appears more hope in the contexture, for there
David is confident, that the medicine shall not be applied in vain, the bones
that thou have broken shall rejoice, so it is in the Original: mark an
excellent difference between Gods children and others, Reprobates in such a
case, Optare possunt, sperare non possunt, they may wish themselves in a better
case, but they cannot hope for better; but the children of God, when their
bodies are even brought to the grave, and their souls to the gates of hell,
yet will they trust in God, and trust to see the loving kindness of God in the
land of the living. We do not believe that the Sun has lost his light,
though the sky be ouer-cast with clouds, Read Psalm. 77.
neither will we think that God has forgotten to be gracious, even when he
lays deadly strokes upon us.

The Chaldee Paraphrase observes not only a Real joy of the broken bones, but
a Vocal also, not only shall our souls be comforted, and our bodies with our
souls, but out of the sense hereof we shall break forth into the Praises of
God, we shall praise our God with joyful lips. Finally, mark the method: the
sorrow of the Inward man casts the Outward into a Consumption: so likewise
the Outward shall partake of Consolation, if so be Consolation by the Ear be
distild into the Inward; Caro vt Cor, no less the flesh then the spirit, being
quickened, shall rejoice in the living God.

I conclude all, As we are all subject unto sin, so are we not free from the
distresses of Conscience. When we are put to it, let us hear, what the Lord
will say, for he will speak peace unto our souls; if our sorrow be godly, let
us not be without hope, Blessed are they, that mourn so, for they shall be
comforted: let us rest assured, that though We sow in tears, yet we shall
reap in joy, the Lord will turn our captivity, Psol. 12^.
he will sill our mouths with laughter, and our tongues with songs. AMEN.

PSALM. 51. VERSE. 9. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine
iniquities.


THe remedy, that King David sought in this Penitential, was answerable to
his distress: That which distressed him was sin, whereof the only remedy is
grace. The sin (as you have oftentimes heard) was two fold, first, that which
himself committed, and secondly, that which he inherited from his parents: he
seeks a remedy for both in Grace. You have heard, that it yields a remedy
for the sin, which himself committed, for the Impiety thereof by Expiation,
and by Consolation for the Malignitie that is therein.

It followth, that now you hear of the remedy, which Grace does yield to the
sin which he inherited from his parents, that is a Native Evil, we commonly
call it Original sin: Grace cures this, partly by Forgiving, and partly by
Regenerating, forgiving of the sin, and regenerating of the sinner. These two
points are commonly known by the names, the first of Justification, the second
of Sanctification: of Sanctification by regenerating our sinful nature, you
shall hear in the next Verse; on this Verse I must speak of Justification
from, by Forgiveness of, original sin.

To come to the breaking up of the Text, there is something therein employed,
and something expressed: that which is employed, is, Gods Providence, that which
is expressed, is, Gods Indulgence; of Gods Providence we have here intimated two
Acts, his Eye sees all things, and all things are recorded by his Hand. Did
he not See all things, it were needless to pray, Hide thy face, and it were
as needless to pray, Blot out, were not all things recorded by his Hand: such
prayers must needs presuppose those works.

Besides this Providence of God so employed, the Text will teach us the
Indulgence of God, which is here fairly expressed: for the better understanding
whereof, I will open unto you, first the suite that King David makes for it,
and then the possibility that there is of his obtaining it.

In the suite we shall see, how answerable his desire is unto Gods work: Gods
work is to See and Record, and his desire is that he would not See, hide thy
face, that he would cancel, blot out.

But in the prayer we must more-ouer mark, 1. to what, 2. how far, he would
have his desire extend. To what, not to his person, but to his sins, hide thy
face, not from me, but from my Sins, blot out, not me, but mine iniquities:
He restrains then Gods acts to their proper object.

But having so restrained them, he inlargeth their work upon that object to
the utter most, he excepts no sin, but would have them all plucked up by the
roots, Hide thy face from my sins, blot out all mine iniquities.

This is King David's suite, a hard suite; you may oubt whether it can be
granted, you may doubt, whether such indulgence may stand with the Divine
Providence, how he that sees all, can hide his face from any thing; and how he
can blot out any thing, that keeps a record of all: I must therefore in the
last place show you, the possibility which King David has of obtaining his
desire, show you, that such Indulgence does not prejudice Gods Providence, and
Gods Providence not hinder such Indulgence.

You have the particulars which are contained in this Text, which I will now
farther unfold, I pray God it may be to our edification.

But before I enter upon the particulars, I must give some light unto the
phrases, which are dark, because figurative, and may mis-guide, if they be
taken as they sound. Whereas then here is mention made of a Face, we may not
conceive, that God has a body made of flesh and blood; they were long since
condemned for heretics, that did so grossly mistake the Scripture; God in
such phrases by a resemblance informs us, as far as we are capable, of his
incomparable Essence. Consider then the use of our face, it is the instrument
of knowledge, therein are the senses placed of seeing, hearing, smelling, etc.
but yet though they appear there, we must not impute the sense unto the body,
but unto the soul, that quickens the body: Philosophy teaches, that Anima
est, quae videt, quae audit, etc. and there is sensible proof of it; when the
soul is departed from the body, though there be an eye left, and an ear, yet
there is neither seeing, nor hearing, whereupon it follows, that the virtue
of seeing and hearing, is in the soul, these are the faculties of a spirit, so
that God may have them, though he have properly no face, he may have that
which is signified by the face, the power of discerning things.

A second use that is made of the face, is, that it serves for a lookingglasse
wherein to behold our affections; this use follows upon the former; for that
which we apprehend outwardly by our senses, does inwardly content, or
discontent, the evidence of either you may read in our countenance; if it
content, we look upon it cheerfully, and turn from it wrathfully if it
discontent: hereupon it comes to pass that the face is used to note
sometimes Gods favor, and sometimes his anger, according as that which is
presented before him, does please or else displease. Out of both these uses of
the face applied unto God, we must learn that there is no perfection in man,
which is not in God that beflowed it upon man; but we must conceive it in God
as it beseems God, according to the vncompoundednesse and infiniteness of
his nature.

The second phrase of blotting out which presupposes a Book, wherein things
are written, is also a phrase borrowed from men, whose brittle memory makes
them have recourse to such helps, least otherwise many of their affairs
should either be forgotten by them, or denied by others: the Book supplies
both these defects, and what is entered there, serves our own memory, and
resolves the doubts of others; we have proof hereof in our Oeconomicks; no
good husband which takes not this course at home; and in the Politics, there
is no well advised State, that is without a Register, and makes not use of
Annals and Iournals. To apply this. God is Master of his house the Church, the
world is his Kingdom, wherein he reigns; we may happily think, that though
he sees all, yet he may forget much: to refute so vain a dream, the
Scripture does remember his Book, not meaning that his memory wants a help,
but that it is as firm as ours is with such a help, yea, much more firm; for
our helps are as much subject to casualty, as our selves are, but Gods book
is nothing but himself, and himself is no more lasting then is his record we
must therefore sublime our thoughts, when we think of Gods Book, and fancy
nothing which is not Divine.

But I leave the phrase and come to the matter: I told you that Gods providence
intimated by these two phrases, consists of these two acts; the first is
Omnia nouit, he has an vbiquitary Eye, all things, (as Saint Paul speaks)
are naked before his eyes, Elihu in Job, Heb. 4.13. Job. 34.21.22.
his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he seeeth all his goings, there is no
darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide
themselves. Psalm. 139.
King David has made a whole Psalm wherein he shows, how vain a thing it
is for a man to seek a hiding place from God. Ecclus. 23.19
The son of Syrach in few words, The eyes of the Lord are ten thousand times
brighter then the Sun, beholding all the ways of men, and considering the most
secret parts, he knew all things ere ever they were created, and when they were
created he looked upon them; Cap. 30.1.
therefore does God in Esaias cry out against them that take counsel, but not of
him, and that cover with a covering, but not of his spirit: and it is not
without cause observed as a great folly in our first father Adam, that he
thought a thicket of trees would hide him from God. The same discase is
inherited by his posterity, we may gather it out of the phrase, ^om. 1^.12.
(...) 3.^0. Job. 24.15, 16.
wherein the holy Ghost describes sins, calling them works of darkness,
because as Christ tells us, Qui male agit, odit lucem, adulterers and theiues
choose darkness, when they will fulfill their lusts; and they that are
drunken (says the Apostle) are drunken in the night: but (silly wretches)
while they think no eye sees them, the eyes of God are upon them, (...).
23.19. Psalm. 39.12.
and he is privy to their most inward thoughts, for night is to him as the
day, and darkness is as the clear light. This is the first work of
Providence, Omnia nouit he knows all things.

The second is, Omnia notat, he makes a record of all things, that is implied
in the Book. Psalm. 139.16. Dan. 7.10. (...) 20 12. (...). 20.12. and cap. 3.5.
Often mention is made thereof in the Psalms, in Daniel, in Ezekiel, in the
Revelation; and the Platonists Mundus intelligibilis, and Idaeaes seem to
import the very same: but that which I principally observe is, that God does
not see things, as if they did not concern him, but (as Solomon speaks) his
eyelids try the sons of men and he pondereth all their paths, yea he does
make a record of them, whether they be good or bad. Verse. 16.
Of the good you have an excellent place, Malach. Chap. 3. when the Atheist had
blasphemed, then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and the
Lord hearkened, and heard it, and there was a book of remembrance written
before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his name. And that
the bad paths of men are also recorded, Verse. 4.
we read Deuteronomy 3. where God having reckoned up diverse enormous sins, speaks
passionately thus, Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up amongst
my treasures? he alludeth to the manner of Kings, whose Records were kept in
their Treasure-houses, as you may gather out of Ezra, Cap. 5.17.
where the Roles are said to be kept, where the treasures were laid up in
Babylon.

The use of this note is made by the Wise man, Cap. 1.
Beware of murmuring, which is unprofitable, refrain from backbiting, (we may
add from all manner of sin) for there is no word so secret, that shall go for
naught, yea inquisition shall be made into the very thoughts of the ungodly.
God keeps an exact Record of all.

These two acts of Gods Providence, refute two Athiesticall Positions; The
first is their Tush, Job. 22.13.14.
God sees not, is there understanding in the Highest? Eliphaz in Job
expresses it most elegantly, How does God know? can he judge through the
dark clouds? thick clouds are a covering to him, that he sees not, he
walks in the circuit of Heaven: so would they put out, but cannot, that
al-seeing Eye, which they blaspheme. The second Position refuted, is Tush, God
cares not, suppose that he sees, yet he cares not for the things below, he
leaves every man to shift for himself, and they think, that the memory of
their lives does not out-liue their breath, they fear no reckoning, so they
blaspheme Gods all-recording Hand: we shall do well by acknowledgement of
these two branches of Gods Providence, to avoid these two rocks, whereat many
old, I fear me new Atheists also, do daily suffer shipwreck.

Having thus far opened unto you, what is employed in my Text, I come now to
open that which is expressed therein; I told you, it is Indulgence, and touching
it I observed, first the suit that is made for it, wherein you may see, that
David does make the branches of his petition answerable to the branches of Gods
Providence; The first branch thereof is, God sees all, and answerably to that
does King David pray, that God would hide his face: and no marvel, for God is
a God of pure eyes, Cap. 1.13.
(as Habakuk speaks) and can abide no iniquity, therefore in whomsoever there
is the conscience of sin, there must needs arise fear and shame, when such a
party is presented before God; fear, for his eyes are as flames of fire, and
sinners are but as dry stubble; Moses in a penitential representation of the
calamity of the Israelites, in the Wilderness, Psalm. 90.8. Cap. 16.17.18.
lays this for the ground of it, Thou have set our iniquities before thee,
our secret sins in the light of thy countenance; and in Jeremy thus speaks
the God of Israel, Mine eyes are upon all their ways, they are not hid from my
face, neither is their iniquity hid from mine eyes; what follows, I will
recompense their iniquity and their sin double, because they have defiled my
land, etc. read the like Amos Cap. 8. Verse. 7.
The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, etc. And the Imprecation
against Judas is fearful, Psalm. 109.14.
Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered of the Lord, etc.

As fear, so also shame arises, we learn it of the same Prophet Jeremy, by
whom the Lord says thus unto Israel, Cap. 2.22. Verse. 26.
Thy sin is marked before me, etc. he adds, As the thief is ashamed when
he is found, so is the house of Israel ashamed: And indeed shame is an
inseparable companion of the conscience of sin, when it is arraigned before a
Judge; we see how Malefactors hang down their heads, and Children blush, when
they are taken in a fault: seeing then there is such fear, such shame, that
arises from our guiltiness appearing before Gods eyes, we cannot wonder that
K. David in his first desire, does deprecate the first act of Gods Providence,
and would have him hide is face, that so he might stand boldly and cheerfully
before God.

His second desire respects the second act of Gods Providence, Deus notat
omnia, God keeps a Record of all, David therefore desires that God would
raze his book. To open this desire, we must observe that in the Scripture
there is mention made of four books, which keep the Records of finne. The
first is Gods Memory, that is the most exact book, all things, with all their
circumstances, are precisely set down therein; it is the express Image of his
Omnisciencie; of that book I have said enough before.

Lest the truth of that book should be questioned, God has provided three
other books that are without exception, which will justify his Record against
the most wrangling sinner. The first is our own Conscience, which shall accuse
or excuse in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ.
It is of this book that Jeremy speaks. Romans 2.16.
The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, Cap. 17.1.
and with the point of a diamond, it is graven upon the table of their heart,
by the Heart, meaning the Conscience, 1 (...). 3.20, 21.
as Saint John does, where withal he aduertiseth us, that this record in our
bosom, bears witness to the record that is in Heaven; If (says he) our
heart condemn us; God is greater then our heart, and knows all things; but
God is not contented with one witness, he has a second, and him without
exception also, that is our Bodies and Souls, they every one retain the
stain of sin, when the act is past, and gone, and from this stain every
part and power receives a new name; our throats are called open sepulchers,
(...) 2.13, (...). 2. (...) ^. (...) 30.3. (...) 18.
our lips poisonous Aspes, our eyes are said to be full of adultery, our
hands bloody, our feet mischievous, our understanding darkness, our Will
perverseness; finally our affections nothing else but impuritie. A sinful man
is a spiritual Lazar, and the leprosy; wherewith he shall appear, will
undeniably prove, what a life he has led. To these two, God adds yet a third
witness, and that is a third Record; The creatures which we abuse in sinning,
shall bear witness, when we are challenged for our sin, Cap. 17.1.
The horns of the altar (says Ieremit) shall bear engraven the sin of
Israel: The stones shall erie out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
shall answer it, Cap. 2.11. Cap. 5.3.
says Habakkuk; your Gold and silver is cankered (says Saint James) and the
rust of them shall witness against you: nothing that we abuse, be it meat,
drink, apparel, goods, or lands, but retains a stamp of our abuse, it is a
book of record. Now then, in ore duorum aut trium testium stabit omne verbum;
if so be doubt should be made of the first book, the book that is in Heaven,
it must needs be put out of all doubt by the threefold book, or record of our
sin, which God has provided here on earth.

Now we thoroughly know the books, let us come to King David's dele, the
blotting out of that which is in the book, or rather the Record, or bill of
indictment, for as such must we apprehend these books. There is no doubt but
David is primarily sollicitous of the first book, and indeed that is the
ground of all the rest, and the rest are but imperfect exemplifications of
that, and if the book be cancelled that is in Heaven, these on earth will be
of no validity, God will not leave them longer uncancelled: if God raze our
sins out of the book of his Memory, he will give an acquittance also to
our Conscience, he will pluck out the tongue of the stains that are in our
Bodies and Souls, and put to silence the clamours of those Creatures, which
we have abused; all those records shall be cancelled, and it is for the
cancelling of them all, that King David does pray.

But mark that Hide thy face, is not enough, except blot out be added. God may
dissemble the sins of men for a time, and punish them at length; (...). 32.
Moses is taught as much, when having prayed that God would forgive the
Israelites Idolatry committed with the golden calfe, God was entreated so
far as to hide his face, to forbear them, but not to blot out, Vos. 34.
that is, to forgive them; for he adds, Neuerthelsse in the day, when I
visit, I will visit their sins upon them, the like is to be observed in the
case of Solomon, Ahab, Manasses, and others. David provides better for
himself then so, he joins both in his desire, and prays not only hide thy
face, but blot out also, and so must we, when we seek forgiveness of sins.
It is a cold comfort to a debtor to obtain of his creditor, that he will not
look upon his obligations; he is not secure, except he have them cancelled;
neither is a prisoner without fear, that is only repriued; and why? he may be
hanged, when he little looks for it; a sinners case is no better then this
prisoners, or that debtors, except God be pleased as well to blot the record,
as to hide his face.

But in the petition I observed, that King David does not only express, what
works he expects from God, but he shows withal Whereto, and How far he
would have these works extend, 1. Whereto, not to his person, but to his
sins; hide thy face not from me, but from my sins: for if God should
withdraw his countenance from us, destruction, and annihilation must needs
fall upon us; our being and our living, depend upon the influence of his
countenance, and indeed our being, and our living they are his workmanship, and
to pray God to hide his face from his own workmanship, must needs imply, that
we would have God hate what himself has made; but God delights to behold that
which is of him, because it is like him, neither does it fear, or blush to
come before him: It is that, which we have patcht unto his workmanship, which
he abhorres to see, and which abhors to be seen of him. Therefore King
David discreetly limiteth the object of Gods works, and will have them work
not upon his person, but upon his sin; and we may not in our petitions
confound these things, that are so different, whereof the one may endure, the
other may not, these acts of the Providence of God; what so ever we have which
is of God, may without dis-comfort endure his all-seeing Eye, and all recording
hand: therefore we may not crave in regard of them, either hide thy face, or
blot out; both these desires must be restrained to our sins.

And to them all. As David does wisely restrain the acts to his sin, so does
he as wisely extend them to all his sins. He was not ignorant of that Maxim
of law, Maledictus qui non permanserit in omnibus, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed is he, that abides not in all, that is written in the Law, for to do
it: ill does the Shipwright provide, who stopping all other leakes, leaves but
one, for the water may enter thereat, and drown the whole ship: even so seeing
every sin is mortal, we may not look for less wages for any one sin
then eternal death; yea, Saint James his rule is, Reus vnius and omnium,
guilty of one, and guilty of all. And why? Cap. 2.10.
though in conversion to the world sinners do differ, yet in auersion from God
they all agree; and he that sets light by God in breaking one commandment,
does not out of the fear of God keep any one; happily it is, because he is
not so prone to, or gains not so much by, other sins; or some other carnal
reason there is; but certainly out of the fear of God he does not forbear
them. Therefore King David would have his sin plucked up by the roots, not one
sprigge left in him; as before he confessed them all ingenuously, so does he
here desire that they may all graciously be pardoned; as in the 1. verse he
begged great mercy, so does he here express, how great he would have it.

The last thing that I observed unto you, was the possibility that King David
should speed in this petition; for it may seem strange, that such indulgence
should stand with the divine providence; that God should See all, and yet not
See something; and Gods Memory to be a record of all, and yet to have
something blotted out. Notwithstanding, that this is a truth, we learn of God
himself in Esaias, Ego sum qui deleo iniquitates, I am he that blotteth out
sins, and remember them no more; the like does God affirm in Jeremy; Cap.
43.25.
yea that which the heathen Orator spoke flatteringly of Julius Caesar, Cap.
31.34.
is most true of God, Nihil obliuisci solet, nisi iniurias, he forgets nothing
but the sins of penitent suppliants.

Wherefore to clear this doubt, we must call to mind, what I told you before
touching Gods face, that it signifies not only his knowledge, but also the
consequent thereupon, his answerable affection; now his knowledge is
necessary, his affection voluntary; so that though it be impossible that God
should be ignorant of any thing, yet he may be affected as pleases himself,
have mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and harden whom he will, as Saint
Paul affirms out of Moses; When as then he is moved in pity toward any
whom he is not ignorant to be sinners, ^om. 9.18.
he is said to turn his face from their sins, Non aduertit (says Saint
Austine) in quod non animaduertit, his indisposition to punish it, is meant by
his hiding his face from it: so likewise his blotting out, is not Gods having
no record of our sin, but not to use it as an indictment against us in
judgment; and so because in law, Idem est non esse, and non apparere; that
whereof no use is made, is figuratively said to be blotted out; so that the
words are not to be understood absolutely, but metonymically; and Ruffinus
does well qualify them with a quasi, quasi abscondit faciem suam, and quasi
delet; God so deals with a penitent, as if his face were hid, and as if his
book were razed, in regard of the sinfulness of his person.

A second proof of the possibility of King David's speeding in his petition,
may be taken from the ceremonial Law of Moses, wherein Gods presence was
figured in the Cloud, so Moses calls it in Exodus; now between that and the
place where the Israelites did sacrifice unto God, there hung a double veil,
Cap. 13.21. and Cap. 16.10, etc.
whereby Gods countenance was hid from seeing their imperfections, when they
humbled themselves penitently at his altar. Add hereunto that the
Propitiatory, was between Gods face and the Tables of the Covenant, which the
Israelites entered into with God, and by which in justice God might measure all
the passages of their life. These are types of greater things, Saint Paul
calls Christ's flesh a veil, and he calls him (...), the Propitiatory, Romans
3.25.

And indeed so it is, Heb. 10.20.
God does not behold us but in Christ, through the veil of that flesh that
suffered for us, in him that has cancelled the obligation that was against us;
not with the eyes of a righteous Judge, but of a merciful father.

And this sense must be added to the former to make the defense complete, and
a Penitent hopeful, that he shall speed of such a prayer.

I conclude all with a good note of Theodoret, who lays this verse to a
former, I know mine own wickedness, my sin is ever before me; thereupon
(says he) it follows well, Turnethy face away from my sin, etc. if we
fix our eyes feelingly upon our sins, God will turn his eyes from them, and
God will not keep them in his book, if We record them penitently.

Wherefore that God may look off, let us look on our sinful selves, let us
book all our misdeeds, that God may blot them out; so shall we find him in
Christ, not a Judge but a Father, his love shall not suffer him to see that,
whereof he cannot be ignorant, neither will he ever indict us, though the
Record be never so fair and full that he has against us; whereupon we may
with King David pray no less hopefully then humbly, Turn thy face from our
sins, O Lord, and blot out all our offenses. If thou, Lord, mark what is
done amiss, who is able to abide it?

PSALM. 51. VERSE. 10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right
spirit within me.


Our natural corruption is cured by Grace, and grace does cure it partly by
forgining, and partly by regenerating: of the forgiveness you have heard on
the former verse, and on this verse you are to hear of the Regeneration.

And that which you shall hear, is first What, then Whence it is. In opening
What it is, the Text will lead me to show you, first in what part we must
have it, and secondly of what gifts it consists: the part is set down first
in general, it is our inwards, we must have it within: but within we have
many inwards, whereof here are two distinctly expressed, and they are two
principal ones, the Heart, and the Spirit, whereof the one notes the
sovereign, and the other the active power of our soul, these are the parts,
that are to be regenerated.

Now the gifts whereof this Regeneration consists, are Holiness and
Stayednesse; Holiness of the sovereign power, and of the active Stayednesse,
the first we have if our Heart be clean, and the other, if our Spirit be
right. This is Regeneration.

But whence is it? surely from God: to him King David seeks for it, Create in
me a clean heart, O God.

As it is fom him, so it is no ordinary gift of his; it is a Work of his
great Might, for it is a Creation, Create in me, and of his great Mercy, for
it is a Renouation, Renew in me; our forfeiture makes us indebted unto Gods
Mercy renewing, not only to his creating Power.

These be the particulars, which this Text does occasion me to consider in
Regeneration; what remains, but that our Regeneration may be furthered by
them, we listen unto them with a religious ear, as they shall be further
unfolded briefly and in their order.

The first point then is the part wherein we must have Regeneration, the text
says, we must have it within. S. Ambrose, lest we should grossly mistake our
corporal inwards for our spiritual, tells us that the inwards here understood
are Intelligibilia viscera, the reasonable powers of our soul; and of them our
Savior Christ says in the Gospel, ^^at. 15.11.
Not that which goes in, but that which comes out defiles a man: now where
sin first began, there must Regeneration begin also; but sin began in the
inwards, Psalm 49.20.
for Man being in honor had no understanding; yea were it not for the
understanding, a man could not sin: for it is an undoubted Maxim, Bruta non
peccant, no creature that is deuoid of conscience, can contract guilt; and it
is as true, that in whom there is no Reason, there can be no Virtue, for Reason
is the proper subject of Virtue, and because of Virtue, therefore of
Regeneration, which is the root of all heavenly Virtues: see then why King
David desires Regeneration within, because there, is the proper seat of it.

And indeed except it begin there, well may a man be an hypocrite, Religious
he cannot be; Mat. 23 27.
he will be but like a painted Sepulcher (as Christ speaks) that within is
full of dead men's bones. Living Temples of the holy Ghost must be like the
material temple of Solomon, whereof the the innermost part was the place of
Gods residence, and therefore was Sanctum Sanctorum, the most holy place; the
next place was Sanctum, holy; and the rest Sanctuarium, partaking of holiness,
though in a lower degree, so much lower as it was farther from the place of
Gods residence: even so, though Regeneration must sanctify our bodies, yet
more our souls, though it must sanctify our Understanding, yet must it
sanctify our Will much more, and that which is most inward must be sanctified
first. I conclude this point with Christ's admonition given to the Pharisees,
Mundate quod intus; ^^t. 23 26.
when we desire Regeneration, let us desire to have it specially in the inward
man, to have our reasonable inwards new molded by grace.

But what inwards? here are two mentioned, the Heart, and the Spirit: these
words are often used the one for the other, and therefore may seem to import
but one thing: but Nazianzene does distinguish them, and so do others both
Greek and Latin Fathers: I will not trouble you with repeating of their
words, thus I conceive, the Heart notes the sovereign, the Spirit the active
power of the reasonable soul.

The Heart then is the sovereign power: for as in a Kingdom there are sundry
ministers of State, but the Majesty is in the King; so in our little common
weal, our senses inward, and outward attend, and inform, but with submission
always to the pleasure of the Will; so that the Will is as it were a King in
the person of man, therefore it is, that the Scripture makes so frequent
mention of the Heart in points of Morality.

But the Sovereignty thereof appears in two special points, in commanding of
the whole man, and in seasoning all his works: that it commands appears by
that received Maxim, Inclinatio voluntatis est inclinatio totius suppositi;
let the Will once incline, and all the whole person bends with it, whether it
be to love, or to hate: what the will hates, the Eye will not endure to behold,
the Ear to hear of, the Tongue to speak of, the Feet to go to, the Head to
think of; Finally, no power of our Soul, or part of our Body, will have to
do therewith, except it be to detest or to destroy it: but on the other side,
what the Heart does love, the Eye is not satisfied with seeing of it, nor the
Ear with hearing, the Tongue cannot talk enough, neither the Hands do enough
for it, it will ever be busying our wits, and we can never think enough
thereon: such power has the Will in commanding the service of the whole man,
and so readily does every part and power obey: we need not seek proof of
this truth, every man may be an instance, or an example of it unto himself.

As the Heart has this commanding power, so has it a seasoning power also: it
gives a Moral seasoning unto all our works, the rule is Actio tantum habet
virtut is aut vitij, quantum voluntatis; look how far our Will does
intermedle with our works, so far are they either virtuous, or vicious: a
good Will makes the work good, and the work cannot be good if the Will be
evil: whereupon Nazianzene observes well, that God has equalized all men in
that ability, which does most commend or discommend, and that is the ability of
the Will: he gives an instance in Liberality, the Widows mites by the
forwardness of her Will were made a greaten offering, then that, which out of
their superfluity the rich did offer in greater measure, measure of coin, but
not of Will; we may apply it unto any other works of wisdom, of strength,
of learning, and whatsoever else; he that is less able, and more willing may
be preferred before him, that is better able, and less willing; in doing
well, and in doing ill, men are doomed accordingly: this is the sovereignty of
the Heart, so to command, and so to season.

But as this power is sovereign, so there is another power that is active, a
power that puts in execution the resolutions of the former power, it is here
called Spirit: our common phrase shows, that this word notes an active
power: for we say that a man is of an excellent spirit, a great spirit, a high
spirit, when we mean that he is fit for, and forward in action; and when we
mean the contrary, we say, that he is of a quiet, a meek, an humble spirit,
Psalm. 131.
that is (as the Psalmist speaks) he does not exercise himself in great
matters which are too high for him: that which the Philosophers observe
concerning the concupiscible, and the irascible faculties of our soul tends
this way; for they make the soul active in pursuing of her objects; the
concupiscible hasting us to them, and the irascible encountering all
difficulties, that may hinder us from them; so that the sovereign power
resolves not in vain, because of this active power, that executes so well; but
certainly were it not for the active power, the souer aigne power were in
vain: God having so lincked them, we must not sever them, and seeing either of
them is so necessary to the other, we must desire to have our Regeneration in
them both.

Out of this which you have heard, you may gather, that though our Inward man
is named, yet the Outward is not excluded, because though a part is named, yet
the whole is meant, seeing the whole follows the condition of these
principal parts; we cannot be regenerated in these principal parts, but the
regeneration will redound unto the whole man.

But what is Regeneration? of what gifts consists it? I told you of holiness
and staydnesse, which are meant by cleanness of the heart, and rightnesse of
the Spirit: where first mark, that Regeneration does not concern the
substance, John 3.4.
but the qualities of our nature: Nicodemus conceived grossly, that thought a
man must enter into his mothers womb and so be borne again, that he may be
newborn; and they conceive as grossly that think, that Original sin is
any part of the substance of man; we lost not our being, but our well being,
as the moon in the Eclipse cease not to be a star, but to be a bright
shining star; the air in the night cease not to be air, but to be
lightsome air; the earth in the winter is earth still, though it be not a
flourishing earth; finally when we have lost our health, we lose not our
bodies, though they become but sick bodies.

Yet may we not conceive superficially of Original sin, it is not as a
painting, but as a dying of our nature: you know, that painting is a color
laid on, but the Dye is a color that sincketh in, we may wash off, or scrape
out a painting, the body continuing the same, but a Dye cannot be so taken out,
but it sincketh clean through the wool, or the cloth, and the inwards of the
stuff are colored, as well as the outward.

The same may be illustrated by the former similitudes, but I will not be so
troublesome; only this I observe, that as Illyricus and others have racked
Original sin too far: so the Pelagians old and new have shrunk it too
much: we shall do well to keep the mean and hold the truth. It is a
corruption, that though it be not our substance (for that can not stand with
the articles of our Creed, as the learned have proved abundantly against
Illyricus) yet is it thoroughly incorporated into our substance, neither is
there any the least particle of our soul, and body, that is not infected
therewith; whereupon God passes his censure, The frame of the imaginations of
the heart of man is evil, Gene. 5.6.
and that continually from his youth: Romans 7.18.
and S. Paul makes his confession, I know that in me, that is, in my flesh
there dwells no good thing: therefore when we come to Regeneration we must
conceive of it, as of a cure that works out a deep rooted Corruption: yea the
terms of cleannes and rightnes must so be conceived, as that the cure does not
only work out corruption, but work in the contrary, perfection: as we see that
the Eclipse of the moon is remedied by the imparting unto it the brightness of
the sun, and the darkness of the night by the succeeding of the daylight,
the winterly hue of the earth is exchanged for the flourishing of the spring,
and the weakness that we seele being sick, by the vigor that we have from
health: Even so fares it with our souls, we put off the Old man, by putting
on the New, and the root of Original sin, by being endued with Original
Righteousness.

This being observed concerning Regeneration in general, we must now descend
to the Regeneration of the parts in particular: the first of which is the
regeneration of the Heart, it is here called Cleanness; I will not fall into
the common place of the defiling Nature of sin, I have touched at it more then
once on the former words of this Psalm, I will keep my self to that which is
peculiar to this part. I told you, it is the sovereign power of the reasonable
soul, and the first point wherein the sovereignty appears, is, that it does
Command: now the blemishes of a commander are two, 1. Folly and 2. Impotencie,
either he knows not what directions to give them that are under him, or else
contrary to his judgment, he is ouer-borne by his affections: take an example
of Solomon the father, and Rehoboam the son: Solomon was wise, the wisest
King that ever was, and no wise King was ever more impotent in his affections,
as appears by his so doting on his heathenish wives, that to content them, he
entertained all kind of Idolatry: the son of Solomon Rehoboam, went as far in
folly, as his father in impotency; the son of Syrach calls him the very
foolishness of the people, Ecclies. 51.
and well he deserved to be so called, that forsook the counsel of the Sages,
and listened unto brainsicke youths, and so lost ten Tribes of twelve.

In these two Kings we may behold the defects of our commanding parts, for
sometimes the judgment of it is so weak, that it misdeemes good for evil, and
evil for good, light for darkness, and darkness for light, and this error
is predominant in those that are without the Church, for of Infidels it is most
true, that they have a foolish Heart; Romans 1.
yea when they think they be most wise in their reasoning they show themselves
most foolish: it were endless to descend to particulars, if I should reckon no
more then those which are touched in the Scripture, how much more if I should
discover it out of there own writings, there speculatiue learning, their
practicke, their theology, their policy, their ethics, their oeconomicks, all
are spiced with folly.

Though this folly be predominant in those without the Church, yet is there
more then a good deal of it within the Church also; were there no other
proof, contentious writings proclaim to the world, that many believers, cum
ratione insaniunt, have a cracked brain and weak judgment, working upon false
principles, or working out such conclusions, as will never spring from truth.

Folly is one defect of the commanding part, but not the only, it has
another, which is Impotencie, though the judgment do not fail in setting the
heart right, yet the affections do transport it, that it cannot resolve right,
Video meliora proboque, deterior a sequor, we know our duty oftener then we
can be persuaded to do it. And this disease, though it be in Infidels, as the
former verse does witness, and Saint Paul much more Romans 1. saying, that They
detain the truth of God in unrighteousness, and that though they have no Law,
they are a Law unto themselves, yet is this disease more common in the Church,
whose sins spring more commonly from the impotency of their affections, then
from the ignorance of their judgment, as it is plain by those that teach
others, but teach not themselves, and commit those faults themselves, which
they condemn in others; there are few reasonably bred, that know not their
Creed, and the ten Commandments, yet when they are put to a real maintenance
of their faith, or observance of the Law, who is he that staggers not, that
yields not to his affections.

Well, seeing these are the defects of the heart, as it is a commanding part,
you easily conceive what the cure thereof must be, and what is the first
property of a clean heart: it is the rectifying of it in regard of folly and
impotencie, the making of it first wise and understanding, the furnishing of it
with good and sound Principles, the knowledge of the good and acceptable will
of God, in a word, a right judgment in all things; this S. Paul means, (...)
2.16.
when he says, We have the mind of Christ, so that be the Scrpent never so
crafty, be sin never so sweetly sugered, evil never so curiously blancht,
be the suggestions of our adversary never so sophistical, yet shall we not
be circumuented, we shall not be deceived by it.

That our commanding part be so freed from folly is not enough, it must be
freed from impotencie also; we must have obedient and religious hearts, Mat.
10.37.
be as ready to do, as to know; love nothing in comparison of God, and doing
our duty; not father, mother, brother, sister, wife, etc. yea we must deny
them all: L^ke 14 16.
I say too little, Christ goes farther, we must hate them all, if they be an
impediment to our following of God, and keeping of his commandments; if we are
so far masters of our selves, as to make our affections conform themselves
unto our judgment, then is the commanding part cured in regard of impotencie,
and so the commanding part, so far as it is rid of folly and impotencie, is
truly regenerate.

But there is in the sovereign part, besides the commanding power, a seasoning
power also, and that must be regenerated. It seasons all our actions with
virtue or vice, according as it is good, or ill. As the knowledge of God is the
regeneration of it, as it is the commanding part; so is the love of God the
regeneration of it, as it is the seasoning part, or rather the conjunction of
the love of God to the knowledge of God.

So that for a virtuous action we must be sani and boni viri, it must be the
work of a well advised and a well-affected man; so that the latter part of
regeneration is but a consequent upon the former, and the heart if it command
well, seasoneth well, and seasoneth ill, if it command ill, according to the
Commandment, our works do prove either Virtues or Vices.

You have heard what is the regeneration of the sovereign power, here is
another power specified, which is the active; Nazianzene calls it (...), it is
that which executes what the commanding part resolves. The word in the
Original signifies either Directum or Erectum, that which keeps right
forward, or stands upright. The active power of our soul is subject to two
defects, it may straggle out of the way through rashness, or stagger in the way
through faintnes; while we are in the way, allurements of diverse kinds draw us
into by-pathes, we are set upon by the crafty serpent; and if that succeed not,
then with terrors we are startled, and made either to come to a stand, or else
to march cowardly. The cure of all this is a right Spirit, when God is pleased
by grace to set strait steps unto our feet, and strengthen our feeble knees,
so that we step not aside out of the way, nor halt in the way: our Spirit is
directus, it keeps good correspondency with our judgment, and executes no
more then it has in charge; and it is also erectus, it bends no more then our
affections doe^; whether it pursue or encounter any thing resolved upon by the
sovereign part: it shows continually a religious stayednesse. Finally,
whereas grace makes a double cure, one on our Heart, and another on our
Spirit, and the regeneration of our Spirit is but an attendant upon the
regeneration of our Heart, we may not diminish the number of the parts, nor
inuert the order; but when we will try our selves whether and how far we
are regenerated, we must look into our inwards, see how we find our selves
there, but specially to these fountains of life the Heart and the Spirit; see
whether grace command in the Heart, before the Heart command, and that it may
season our works well, whether it self be seasoned first with grace: and
having taken this survey of the Heart, we must come on to the Spirit, and see
whether our execution be as holy as our resolution: if grace preserve us from
mis-guiding allurements, and support us against disheartning affrightments,
then is our Spirit as right, as our Heart is clean, both are regenerated by
the Spirit of grace.

The Fathers understand here a double grace, not only the grace of
Regeneration, whereof you have heard, but the grace of Prophecy also,
wherewith King David was endued: as appear in his Psalms, wherein are many
excellent Prophesies. It was no small grief unto him to have that divine
influence suspended, and to have withdrawn from him those heavenly
Revelations, therefore they conceive the words thus, David desired a clean
Heart, that so he might have a right Spirit, for Blessed are the pure in
heart, they shall see God, says Christ: Mat. 5.8. Wis. 1.1.5.
and the holy spirit of discipline will not abide in a soul when
unrighteousness comes in. The holy spirit of Prophecy is long since ceased,
and we cannot be deprived of that, which we never had; but of this we may be
sure, that sin in our heart does not a little bleare our eyes, when we come to
consider of Gods truth in his word, and endeavor, though not our selves to be,
yet to understand those that were undoubted Prophets. But enough of
Regeneration so far as this Text does teach us, what it is.

I come on to show you briefly the last point of the Text, which is, Whence it
proceeds. It proceeds from God, of him King David beggeth it, Create in me a
clean heart, O God: and well may he ask it of him, for God does promise the
gift of this grace, A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
into you, says God, Eze. cap. 36. and S. Paul in his Epistles, does often
direct his prayers for these unto God.

^t how then does Eze. c. 18. bid us make unto our selves new hearts, and new
spirits, and Moses in the Law, Deuteronomy. 10. bids us circumcise the foreskin of
our hearts? Surely not to note our power, but our want, that out of the
conscience thereof we should seek unto the father of Lights, from whom comes
every good and perfect gift. Iam. 1.17.
Or if it be to note any power of ours, it is but power to use the outward
means, but the effect wished has a higher cause, which is the Spirit of God.

And indeed the true cause why the Holy Ghost speaks so differenly, sometimes
calling upon us, and sometimes willing us to call upon God, is, because Gods
inward work is seldom without our outward, though the honor which God does
to the use of the means, must not derogate ought from Gods total producing of
the effects. The more to be blamed is the Church of Rome, who by advancing the
means impair that honor which is due unto God. Let it stand then for a
grounded Truth that Regeneration is the gift of God.

As it is Gods gift, so it is no ordinary gift of his, it is a work of his
great might, and of his great mercy; of his great might, for it is a Creation.
Creation is either to make something of nothing, or at least if that whereof it
is made, be something; yet that thing has no disposition to become that, which
it is made: if you look to the gift, that is given by Regeneration, surely
that is made simply of nothing, it is an effect that proceeds immediately from
the Spirit, who has nothing out of which to work that effect, but his own
almighty power, for non educiture potentia naturae, nature sends forth no
such fruit. If you look upon the Person, that receives the grace, then also
Regeneration will prove to be a Creation: for so far is he from being
disposed fitly to receive grace, Rom 8.7. Is. 11.6.
that he is naturally opposite unto it, the wisdom of the flesh is enmity
against God, so says the Apostle; and the Prophet will tell us, that
regenerating is like the changing of the nature of Tigers, Lions, and Wolves,
etc. a hard work: Saint Austin goes so far, that he thinks it a harder
matter to bring a sinner accustomed to an evil course into a right way, then
to create a world, especially to bring him to entertain the Christian faith,
which is foolishnes to the Gentile, and a stumbling block to the Jew.

The more absurd is the patronage of free will in the case of new birth: the
very word Creation does refute it, 1. Cor. 1.23. 2. Cor. 5. Ephesians. 4.
which Saint Paul uses more then once, and thereby both Testaments put us in
mind, that we can do as little toward our spiritual creation, as we could
toward our natural; in regard of both we may use that of the Psalm. It is God
that has made us and not we our selves, both ways made us, by the power of a
God.

Neither is it only a work of great power, but of great mercy also, that is
intimated by the word Renew, pulchre dixit, innoua (says S. Chrysostom) it is
well said renew, the house was built before, which sin ruined, and grace does
re-edifie; and indeed, that this is not the first time that we are beholding to
Gods grace, the very word Regeneration may teach: we had this clean heart and
right spirit when we were first created, for we were created after Gods image;
sin lost it, grace restored it: now you know that if a Tenant forfeit his
Lease, and a Landlord after re-entry restore it to him again, this is a work
of his goodness, which is more then a work of his ability, for many are able,
and do it not, therefore if any being able do it, the inducement is not his
ability, but his goodness: the like must we conceive of God, it was his
pitying mercy, that employed his almighty power to repair what we had
ruined, to recover what we had lost, to restore what we had forfeited, a clean
heart, and a right spirit.

Finally, both the creating and the renewing are actus continui, works that
God never intermitteth, otherwise we should quickly come to nothing, or rather
which is worse then nothing, become firebrarnds of hell; for we daily forfeit
by sin, and God may daily take advantage of our breach of his Covenant. Add
hereunto that our Regeneration is not in facto, but in fieri, and therefore
needs a perpetual influence, and supportance: for this cause though David
were now in the state of grace, yet does he beg grace of God; though God had
created in him a clean heart, yet does he desire, that God would create a
clean heart in him; and though he bad renewed in him a right Spirit, yet does
he pray that God would renew a right Spirit within him; so does he wisely
provide against forfeitures, and religiously beg the increase of that, which he
had received. But I conclude, sicut rogauit David, it a debet vnusquisque
nostrum (says S. Hierom) David's prayer is a prayer that beseems us all, we all
bear about us a body of sin, and we should all desire that it might be
abolished.

We should indeed, but who does? who does enquire into the uncleanness of his
heart, and the crookedness of his spirit? or who takes notice whether there
be in him at all any part of Regeneration? nay, who does show that there is
any? Nazianzene Oratione 43. writing de Encae^ijs, does give a good
observation, how a man should know whether his heart have any part in this
Creation, or his spirit in this Renouation yesterday thou were a time seruer,
to day thou art not ashamed of thy Savior Christ; yesterday thou did affect
the praise of men, to day thou set more by an honest life; yesterday thou
were delighted with vain spectacles, to day thou art given to divine
meditations, etc. if thou find such a change, Haec mutatio dextrae excelsi, God
has put to his merciful power to make thee a new man: if it be otherwise with
thee, and the day following find thee as bad as thou were the day before, thou
have no part in Regeneration. A fearful case, because the Psalmist moving the
question to God, Psalm. 24.
Who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord? who shall stand in his holy
place? answers, Even he that has innocent hands and a pure heart.

Wherefore be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds, and put on the New-Man,
Ephesians. 4.25.
which after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness: or because this
is a work too hard for any one of us, Let us every one pray with K. David in
this place, Create in me a clean heart, o God, and renew a right spirit within
me. AMEN.

PSALM. 51. VERSE. 11. Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy
Spirit from me.


KIng David's desire set forth in the first part of this Psalm, is that he may
be restored unto, and preserved in, the state of grace. How he desires to be
restored, you have hitherto seen; you have seen, how he sueth first in
general, that Gods Mercy would relieve his Misery, Gods great mercy, his
deep misery; Secondly, in special, how he brancheth his own sin, and
Gods grace; he confesses sin which himself committed, and that which he
inherited from his parents; and he beggeth a twofold grace, that the cure may
be proper to each kind of sin; finally he would not have a plaster narrower
then his sore, nor a medicine that could not thoroughly remedy his disease. Thus
he desires to be restored.

But to be restored is not enough, a Penitents desire must carry him farther,
for how shall it appear that he does unfeignedly sorrow for sin, and affect
goodness, except he be as desirous to continue in, as to be brought unto the
state of grace? (...) Pet. 2.
Nay Saint Peter will tell us that it were better never to have known the way
of righteousness, then after we have known it, to return like dogs to our
vomit, and like swine to our wallowing in the mire. Wherefore the second desire
was necessary for King David, and must be exemplarie unto us. Let us come
then to it.

It is set down in this, and the following Verse, and conceived in a double
prayer, first in deprecation, and secondly, in supplication, a prayer against
that which King David deserved, and a prayer for that without which King David
could not persevere: we will meddle now only with the former prayer.

But in the passage I may not forget a good note of Saint Bernards, where he
commends King David's method, Sermon. 3. de Penticost.
and observes that after he has prayed, Create in me a clean heart, O Lord,
renew a right spirit within me, he prays seasonably, Cast me not away from
thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. When we offend, we fall
into sin, and out of favor, and when we repent, we must not desire to be
received into favor, until we are first acquitted from sin; otherwise we
shall betray that we wish there were no Sanction of the Law, but as for the
transgression of the Law we are not much moved therewith, whereas the least sin
must be more irksome to a repenting soul, then the most grievous punishment.
But let us break up this prayer, wherein I will note two things; 1. the
Manner, and 2. the Matter, the manner is a prayer against, the matter is, that
which King David deserved. Now that which he deserved comprehends two fearful
judgments: 1. Reiection, and 2. Deprivation; I will clear these two terms
unto you.

While we are in the state of grace, we have communion with God, and God has
communion with us, God receives us into his family, and we attend him, we
wear his liuerie, and are known to belong unto him; the first gives us free
access unto his presence, and the second is a participation of his holy
spirit. Sin (as much as lies in it) dissolues both these communions, for we
deserve by it, first, that God discharge us of his service, give us no longer
place in his family which is that which I called Reiection. Secondly, we
deserve that God take from us his liuerie, leave us no mark of our reference
to him; and this is that which I called deprivation.

But more distinctly in reiection we will observe 1. from what Place and state;
both are included in Gods presence; Secondly, with what disgrace and danger a
sinner deserves to be rejected, we may gather them both out of the words, Cast
out.

In the deprivation we will observe; first, Whereof; secondly, how far a
sinner may be deprived.

Whereof; first of what gift, of the Holy spirit; then What worth there is in
the gift, spiritus tuus, thy holy Spirit, or the Spirit of thy Holiness; a
most precious gift; of this a sinner deserves to be deprived.

But how far? that appears in aufer as the taking away, which we will
resolve into these two Notes; the first is the taking back of the spirit which
God once gave him, and therefore some render it, Ne recipias, withdraw not;
secondly, the spirit is so taken back that nothing of it remains with a
sinner, it is not a diminution, but an ablation, a stripping him wholly of the
Spirit of God.

Finally both these, reiection and deprivation, must be considered not in
themselves, but also in their consequences; and the consequences are two, and
they much aggrauate the fearfulness of the judgment: The first is; We cannot
be rejected of our old good Master, but we shall fall into the hands of
another who is much worse, and we shall be forced to wear a much worse
Liuerie if we be stripped of his; Look whatsoever good we lose, we shall fall
under the contrary evil, if we be rejected, if we be deprived. This is the
first Consequence. A second is that such a sinners Case is desperate, God will
hear no man's prayers for him, and he will give him no grace to pray for
himself. And what can follow but that being brought into so bad a case, he
senselesly run a graceless course? which comes to the maine point of my
Text, which I told you was a desire of perseverance in grace, whereunto nothing
can be more opposite then this reiection and deprivation, which is prayed
against by our penitent King.

And so have I broken up this Text, the parts whereof I shall now open farther
unto you, God grant they may further our religious repentance.

First then of the manner of the Prayer; I told you it is a deprecation, a
praying against. When we are in danger we must not be senseless be it but
corporal, how much more if it be spiritual? Now that we are sensible, we can
give no better proof then if we pray against the danger; yea the more earnest
we are in prayer, the more do we manifest the provident fear of our souls.
David had committed enormous sins, adultery, 1. Cor. ^.6. 1. Job. 3.15.
murder; of adulterers Saint Paul tells us, that none shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; and of the murderer Saint John tells us that he has not
eternal life abiding in him; King David finding himself in this danger had
reason to fall unto this kind of prayer, especially having before his eyes the
woeful example of his Predecessor Saul.

But what needed he? 1. Sam. ^.
God had promised that it should go well with him, and with his seed also, and
that when they sin, though he will punish them, he will not withdraw his
Mercy, as he did from Saul whom he cast out from before his eyes; yea and
David for his particular had his pardon brought unto him by Nathan. It is true.
But it is as true, that he that does recover out of a desperate danger, is not
so soon secure, as he is safe; behold it in a corporal danger; If a man were
ready to fall into a deep pit, and a stander by timely stretch out his hand,
and recover him, he cannot so soon recover his spirits, as he saved his
life, you shall see him look wan, feel his heart tremble, scarce get a word
from him, or make him stand upon his feet; he will ask some pretty time before
he can come to himself again. And may we think that he that found himself
upon the brinke of Hell, that saw himself entering at the gates of aeternall
death, that was singed with the flames of that unquenchable fire, and felt the
palpable darkness of that everlasting night, though by Gods mercy he tumbled
not into the pit, came not into the Chambers of death, was not devoured of the
fire, nor cast into the utter darkness; think we (I say) that he can soon
forget those affrighting spectacles? that he can suddenly calm those storms
which they raised in his soul? that he can as soon be secured as he is
safe? certainly he cannot; they that have been exercised in such conflicts
yield undeniable proof; and therefore wonder not that King David
notwithstanding Gods gracious promise, as if he did forget it, makes this
kind of prayer unto God.

Add hereunto, that God does not give his promises to make us idle, but to
exercise our faith in importuning God for a performance; 1. ^im. 4.8.
Piety has the promise both of this life, and of that which is to come; yet
do we not forbear daily to say the Lords Prayer, that we may speed of both.
Our rule then is, That we must use Gods Promises as directions in, not as
dispensations from the devotion we owe unto God. And let this suffice touching
the manner of the Prayer.

Let us come now to the matter; And first let us look to the Reiection,
wherein the first particular was the Place from whence a sinner deserves to
be rejected, that is here called the presence of God. God from the beginning
of the world had a special place whereat he appeared to the Patriarchs, and
they performed their devotions at it; the learned gather it out of the 4. of
Genesis, where God threatens that Cain should be a vagabond, and Cain
complains, that he was cast from the presence of God, that is,
excommunicated from the visible Church: and the seuering of the sons of God
from the sons of Men, seems to have bin in regard of the meeting in that
special place.

But, howsoever that may be doubted, it is out of all question, that when God
made the Israelites a national Church, he had a visible presence amongst
them, he commanded the Tabernacle to be built for that purpose, whereinto he
entered in the Cloud, and rested between the Cherubims on the Mercy-seat; This
was the typical presence of a spiritual residence of God, of his gracious
dwelling amongst his people. This was a thing so much reverenced by the
Patriarchs, Psalm. 27.
that they held it a great blessing to enjoy it; Vnum petij (aith King David)
One thing have I desired of the Lord, and that will I still require, that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy Temple.

As it was a comfort to them to enjoy it: so was it no small punishment to be
deprived of it; King David confesses as much, Psalm. 84.
when he breaks out into those passionate speeches, How amiable are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts, my soul longs, even faints for the Courts of
the Lord, my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God; and again, As
the heart pants after the water brooks; so pants my soul after thee O God,
my soul thirsts after God, even the living God, when shall I come and
appear before God? I amplify this ancient respect unto the Place, that
therehence you may gather the greatness of the loss thereof.

But what is this to us? those types be long since past; but they had a truth
which shall remain until the worlds end, and that is Gods gracious presence
in the Gospel; learn it of S. Paul, who describing the dignity of the Gospel;
sets it forth in these words, God which commanded light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts, 2. Cor. 4.6.
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ, and again, we all with open face beholding as in a glass, the glory
of the Lord, 2. Cor. 3.18.
are changed into the same image, from glory unto glory; so that our Churches
have a residence of God, a residence much more glorious then that of the Jews;
and the loss thereof, if by any means it be brought upon us, we are not to
esteem it unworthy a deep sorrow.

But as the presence notes a place; so does it note a state also that does
accompany the place; I will reduce it to two heads; Gods special providence,
and his gracious acceptance. Where God is pleased to reside, he takes a
special care of the persons; his care may be reduced unto two heads mentioned
in the 80. Psalm, God is a Sun and a Shield; that is, he blesses and
defends them that are his people. It is a pleasant thing (says the Preacher)
to see the Sun, the corporal Sun, how much more the spiritual, the Sun of
Righteousness? King David will tell you how much more; there be many (says
he) that ask, Psalm. 4.
Who will show us, any good? but Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon us, and thou shall put more joy into our hearts, then they whose Corn,
and wine, and oil is increased; and no marvel; for in thy presence is
fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.
and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. Is God a Sun unto his
Church? then every good and perfect gift will come down upon it from the
father of Lights. They are happy that dwell with the Sun? but he that is
happy would be safe also, and he that is the Sun is also a Shield, he hides
his servants in his Pauilion, Psalm. 27.
in the secret of his Tabernacle, he does hide them; he that dwells in the
secret place of the most high, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty:
Psalm. 90.
he shall not be afraid of terror by night, nor of the arrow that flies by
day; Read the whole Psalm, it is nothing but a description of the Shield; In
the entrance to the 18. Psalm David compares God to all kind of Munition; and
Saint Paul, Ephesians. cap. 6. teaches that God does furnish us with complete
Armor. Who can doubt then that God is a Shield unto his? You see what is Gods
special providence over his Church; beside that, the state does contain a
gracious acceptance also; Psalm. 34.14.
They that are near are dear, the Eyes of the Lord are upon them, and his
ears are open unto their prayers; they find grace in his eyes with Noah, and
he smells their sacrifice, he pittieth their defects, ouervalueth their good
endeavors, punishes them less, but rewards them more then they deserve,
Finally, as he appropriateth, as it were, himself to them, so does he them
unto himself. I cannot stand to amplify these things, only mark this; if
the loss of the place be a punishment, there is a great access made to it by
the loss of the state; if it be a punishment not to come near God, what a
punishment is it to be out of such a Sunshine? to be without such a Shield?
what a punishment is it, that neither we nor our works should find any grace
in the eyes of God? we must put these things into the scales when we weigh
our Judgment.

But not these things only, the manner of the Reiection does aggrauate it not
a little; that is intimated in the word Cast out, it is actio indignantis, we
must set before us a person highly displeased, and behold with what countenance
he throws from him that which he detests; David was a King, and he knew well
the mood of an angry King, what woeful effects it produces against those with
whom they are angry; I reduced them to two heads, disgrace and danger; take for
example Ahasuerus wroth against Haman, upon Queen Hesters petition; first he
was disgraced, his eyes were covered, that he might not see the Kings face,
and danger came not far behind disgrace, for he was presently hanged on a
gallows. If the casting out of a Subject by the command of a mortal King draw
with it this double evil; how is it improued when it is acted by the King of
Heaven? But I will open it unto you in a Resemblance or two.

This casting out is called a divorce; now you know that if a husband for
adultery put away his wife, she forfeits her honor and her dower, she is
branded for an infamous person, and destituted of her maintenance; Ose. 2.
Christ (as the Prophet speaks) does marry us unto himself, and thereupon
communicates unto us his honorable name, we are called Christians, and
endoweth us with his whole estate, makes us heirs of the kingdom of heaven;
how great is the disgrace then? how great is the danger that does accompany the
divorce? the disgrace that declares us unworthy of our name, and danger that
cutteth off our title to so glorious an inheritance.

A second similitude is the discommuning of us; we were Gods peculiar treasure,
a kingdom of Priests, so is our Prerogative expressed, Exodus 19. yea, we are
made (as the Gospel speaks) a Kingdom of Heaven; what greater worth, what
greater wealth can be conceived then is in such a state? but if God be
provoked to pronounce Lo-ammi against them, Osea. ^.
you are not my people, I will not be your God, our worth, our wealth vanish
both, they melt with the heat of that fiery doom. I might amplify it by
other Similitudes, the cutting off the oline, the Vine branch mentioned, Romans
11. and Ioh. 15. by the histories of Cain and of Saul, by the censures of
cutting off from Gods people remembered in Moses, and Christ's let him be unto
thee as a publican and a heathen, but I will not tire out your patience. Only
this I would have you observe, that there is never a particle that I have
insisted upon, that is not fit to augment the grieuousnesse of the judgment,
the judgment which casts a sinner out of the presence of God.

I should here take leave of this point, but that I cannot leave out a good
note of Cassiodores; Cuius faciem timet, eius faciem inuocat, a strange thing;
two verses before, he prayed, Hide thy face, etc. and here he prays, Cast me
not out from thy presence; has the King forgot? does he contradict himself?
by no means; mark his words, and see a difference in the things whereof he
speaks, Russinus.
the same difference which before I observed out of Ruffinus; when he prays,
Hide thy face, he limited his petition to his sins; but here he comes to
speak of his person, and conceiueth a contrary prayer, Hide not thy face from
me: we must ever pray that our selves may be still in Gods gracious eye; and we
must pray also that his reuengefull eye be never on our sins.

I have done describing the first punishment, which is the Reiection; I come
now to the second, which is the Deprivation. And here we must observe first,
whereof we are deprived, of the holy spirit; and what is that? that which
makes all Saints: All Saints day.
this very day is a sacred memorial of the gift; If I said no more you might
reasonably conceive it, but it is sit I speak more, happily you will
understand the day better. The Holy spirit (as I told you) is Gods Liuerie, his
Cognizance, John 14.16.
none have it but they that are his; Christ tells us so, I will pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter, even the spirit of Truth whom the
World cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye
know him, for he dwells in you, and shall be in you.

But to what end? there are two principal uses of the Holy spirits
inhabitation; he is unto us the Oracle of God leading unto all truth; without
whom we cannot perceive the things of God, yea they will be foolishness unto
us, but if we have him, 1 Ioh. cap. ^ 1. Cor. 2.
we have an unction that will teach us all things, yea, we can search the
deep things of God. King David had him in a double sort, an Ordinary,
vnuailing his eyes that he might see the wonderful things of Gods Law; an
Extraordinary, illightning him to foretell secrets of the Kingdom of Christ
which were then yet to come; The Chaldee Paraphrase, and many of the Fathers
understand the holy spirit in this later sense for the Spirit of prophecy.
That is true which they say, but it is not enough; King David had also the
spirit of adoption, and he does not forget that, in his prayer against
deprivation. Yea, he must be thought principally to aim at that, for by the
other gift we may serve God on earth, but without this we shall never go to
Heaven; for so says Christ, Mat. 7.24.
Many shall say in the last day have we not prophesied in thy Name? but they
shall be answered, depart from me you workers of iniquity, I know you not:
Therefore no doubt but King David had an eye to that oracle which wrought in
him a saving faith, and did (as we must) fear to be deprived of that.

As the Holy spirit is an heavenly oracle in our Heads; so in our Hearts it is
an heavenly fire. God who instituted sacrifices to be offered by the Church,
would have them offered with no other fire, but that which should be sent by
him from Heaven, yea, the using of strange fire was capital, as appears by
the story of Nadab and Abthu. That type does inform us of a greater truth; it
teaches us wherewith spiritual sacrifices must be offered unto God. The first
sacrifice spiritual must be a pattern to all the rest, Christ by his eternal
Spirit offered himself unto God; wherewith his propitiatory; therewith must
our Eucharisticals be offered; Saint Jude speaks it plainly, we must pray in
the Holy Ghost.

The gift you see what it is, but you do not yet fully see what is the worth
of it; that I gathered out of tuus, it is not only a holy spirit, but also the
spirit of Gods holiness, or Gods holy spirit. Our soul in us is a spirit, and
we love it so well, that Satan said not untruly; skin for skin, and all
that ever a man has will he give for his life; the Angels are yet better
spirits, 2 Pet cap. 2.
higher in dignity then Men, their titles (as Saint Peter affirms) confirm
it, Psalm. 103.
and the Psalmist says that they exceed in Power; and we have reason to
respect them, because they pitch their Tents about us, Psalm. 91.
yea, God has given a charge unto them over us, to carry us in their hands,
that we dash not our feet against a stone. But there is a spirit beyond both
these, even the spirit of spirits, without whom the former cannot be, and from
whom they receive whatsoever good they have, he is the fountain of being and
wel-being to them both. If we love our own souls, and the safeguard of Angels
be dear unto us; how should we love Gods holy spirit, that is so far beyond
them in infiniteness of power, and excellency of being, yea, without whom
they cannot be, nor stir without his command?

The phrase does not only import that the Spirit is Gods, but also that it is
the spirit of that which is most desirable in God, that is his Holiness;
which does much improve the gift when the liuerie that it gives us, and
whereby he would have us known to be his, does make us partakers of this
Divine attribute, wherein to resemble him, should be the highest ambition of a
reasonable soul.

But I will not wade farther in unfolding the gift; what has been said, is
able to make us sensible of their loss that are deprived thereof, especially
when I shall have added thereunto the Manner of losing, which I called a
deprivation. The word is rendered vulgarly, take not away. But this taking
away, has two remarkable things in it, it is a taking back of that which was
given, and a leaving us not so much as any relic of the gift; In regard of
the first some render it, Ne recipia^, take not home again, in regard of the
other, Ne spolies, strip me not altogether, so the Arabicke. I will touch a
little at both of them. First at the Taking back.

He that loses what good he had, is much more sensible of the loss then if
he never had it; he that was borne sickly, and has a long time languished in
a disease, is not so much pained, as he that being healthy and strong, is
shaken with a fever, or tortured with some ache: Poverty and disgrace are more
bitter heart-breakes to them that have lived in plenty and honor, then they
can be to him who was never of better condition then a beggar, or a drudge;
Miserum est fuisse foelicem, the memory of a better doubleth the misery of a
worse estate: it does so corporally, and it will do so spiritually, if ever we
be put to the trial of it; yea we shall find it will do it so much the more,
by how much the touch of conscience is more tender then any other sense; and
the gift which we lose is infinitely more precious then any other gift.

The taking back, does much amplify the deprivation: but how much more does
it amplify that nothing is left behind? Though the harvest be carried away, yet
if there be some gleaning behind; though a Tree be cut down, yet if there be
a root left in the ground; though the Sun go down, yet if it be twilight,
these small remainders of greater goods, are no small refreshings to a loser:
It does a man some good to keep some monuments of his better estate,
especially when they are pledges of some sparkle of good will toward us,
continuing in him, upon whose just displeasure we forfeited all. As God in
favor gives the holy spirit; so in displeasure does he take him away, and we
cannot guess better at the measure of his displeasure, then by the measure of
the deprivation. If he take it but in part, then mercy tempers judgment: but
if he leave no sparkles of grace that may be kindled again, then we become
Loruhama, Hose 1.
we are clean shut out of the bowels of his compassion. And this is that which
King David's trembling conscience does deprecate in these words, Ne auferas,
Take not away.

I have opened unto you the nature of spiritual Reiection and Deprivation; and
I doubt not but by that which you have heard, you conceive that they are
grievous judgments, but the bottomes of them are not sounded, except we also
take notice of the Consequents: two woeful consequents. The first, if man be
rejected of God as before you heard, he must look for a clean opposite
condition, he loses the place of Gods presence, and whether shall he go, but
even to the pit of hell? He loses the state of that blessed place, and he
shall fall into the state of the cursed. God does disgrace him, dares any
creature yield a good look unto him? God lays him open to danger, and whose
indignation then will not burn against him? Whose hand will spare him upon
whom God lays his heavy hand? Guess what will become of them that are
rejected by the King of heaven, by that which you see befall them, who are
rejected by Kings on earth.

The first consequent of reiestion is bad, neither is the first consequent upon
deprivation better: he that loses the holy Spirit, shall be possessed by an
unclean Spirit, 1. Sam. 16.
it was Saul's case, the Text is plain, The Spirit of the Lord departed from
Saul, and an evil Spirit troubled him; where God is not, Satan will be. Some
would be Neutrals in the World, but indeed none are: Man is either a Temple of
God or a Synagogue of Satan: yea, and look how much God takes from us of his
Spirit, so much we shall be sure to have of the unclean Spirit; as Darkness
takes up all the room that is not filled with Light: if we have no portion of
Gods Spirit, those unclean Spirits will possess us wholly. A miserable
exchange, and yet is this the in^uitable consequent of deprivation.

You would think I had brought the judgment to the height, but I have not:
there is another consequent, a consequent worse then the former, Omnis spes
veniae tollitur, so says Gregory the Great, the case is not only very bad,
but it is past all recovery: and why? Is a man rejected? No other man may
intercede for him; See this in the case of a King; How long, says God unto
Samuel, will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from reigning
over Israel? See it in the case of a Kingdom, I will cast you out of my sight,
says God, as I have cast out all your brethren, even the whole seed of
Ephraim, he speaks of the Kingdom of Judah, and therefore pray not thou
Jeremy, 1. Sam. 16. Jeremy 7.
for this people, neither lift up cry, nor Prayer for them, neither make
intercession to me, for I will not hear thee. A pitiful case a man may have
no Mediator if he be rejected. How much more miserable is his case if he be
deprived? for then he cannot pray for himself, it is Saint Paul's doctrine, We
know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit makes
intercession for us with groans which cannot be uttered; and he that searches
the heart knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes
intercession for the Saints according to the will of God. You see there is no
Prayer can be made hopefully, but must be endited by the Spirit, and the Spirit
prays in none but in those that are Saints, therefore they that are deprived
of the Spirit, are deprived of the grace of Prayer, as Zachary also witnesses
which joins them both together, Zach. c. 12. When a man is brought to this
case, that he has no friend to stand up for him, and he cannot be a friend
unto himself, how desperate is his case? What remains then but that he
betake himself unto a wretched course? Surely Cain did so, when he was
rejected, he became the Father of such Giants whom nothing could mend but the
general Deluge; and what a life led Saul after he was deprived? So ill a life
that his own death could not make amends for it, but many of his children were
feign to be hanged up long after to pacify the wrath of God. Yea the Parable
of the unclean Spirit witnesses that they that have been in the state of
grace, and by reiection and deprivation are fallen from it, are much worse upon
the relapse then ever they were before they first began to be good. No wonder
then that David conceived this deprecation against so fearful judgments. Yea
most gracious was God unto him that gave him time for to deprecate, that put a
distance inter meritum and iudicium, between his ill deserving, and Gods just
revenge: he deserved to be cast out, but continued still in Gods presence, he
deserved to be deprived, but he retained still Gods holy Spirit. See what good
use he makes of Gods patience, while he is in the presence, he preuenteth
the casting out; and preuenteth the taking away of the Spirit, while yet the
Spirit abode within him, and his preventing, is nothing but deprecating. And
while we have the like time we must use no other means; how long does God
forbear us, when we grievously provoke him? Were we better advised we would
be more provident, and not ouer-slip the time allowed us for deprecation, lest
to our endless grief we find, that when we are under these judgments, our
state is past recovery.

I should here end, but I must speak a little of this solemn time, All Saints
day.
and of the blessed Sacrament, which we shall now receive: and my Text is well
fitting to them both; to the time, for turn the deprecation into a
supplication, and what will it sound then, but King David's desire to continue a
Saint? What is a Saint? Is it not a person that is vouchsafed to attend the
presence of God? And is furnished with the holy Spirit of God? And he that
prays, Take not from me thy holy Spirit, cast me not out of thy presence,
what does he desire but this? Lord, continue me, what thou have once made me,
let me ever be a Saint. And now you see how true that is which at the entrance
I observed, my Text is a Prayer for perseverance in grace, it was King David's
Prayer, it must be the Prayer of All Saints: I hope we are all such, and that
we may never be other, let us timely pray against those fearful judgments
of spiritual reiection and deprivation: pray so, we must; and that we pray
not in vain, lo, yonder is a gracious answer to our Prayer, we shall find
it at the Table of the Lord (that I may touch at the Sacrament, as I have done
at the time.) Would any man be sure that he is of Gods Family? What better
evidence can he have then that he is fed at Gods Table? Certainly he is not
cast out that is allowed his Ordinary there. Does any man desire to continue
in him the possession of Gods Spirit? Lo, yonder is the fuel that feeds that
heavenly fire; the bread the drink are both Spiritual, they are pledges, they
are Conduits of the Spirit of God; the Spirit will never fail them that
worthily do partake of these. And why? it is Christ's Spirit, and where Christ
is his Spirit must needs go also. But yonder is the fariest picture that ever
was made of Christ; go to it, receive it, that thou may become one with it,
and it with thee: so shall thou be ever sure ever to be of the family of God,
thou shall stand before his presence, thou shall ever wear his livery, and
keep possession of his spirit. Fear not thou have Christ promise, John 6.
Him that comes to me I will not c^^^ forth, and God has said, Heb. 13.
I will never leave thee nor for sake thee. Only le^ (...) not be senseless
of our danger, nor careless of these good means

LOrd our sins are many, they are great but thou have given David a
prerogative beyond Saul, to the Family of David beyond the Family of Saul, to
true Penitents beyond graceless Sinners. Vouchsafe us all to be such Penitents
that we may enjoy there prerogative; when we sin let us not forget to return
in time; and that we be not swallowed up of these fearful judgments of
reiection and deprivation, hear us graciously, when we cry humbly, Cast us not
away from thy presence, and take not thine holy Spirit from us. PSALM. 51. VERSE
12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with a free
Spirit.


KIng. David's desire to be continued in the state of grace, is conceived in
two Prayers, one against that which himself deserved, another for that without
which he could not persevere. I have already opened the former Prayer, I come
now to the later. This later Prayer then that you may the better understand I
will observe therein, what King David beggeth, and of whom. That which he
beggeth is a restitution and a confirmation, restore, stablish. We must
moreover observe in the restitution, whereof it is; and in the confirmation,
wherewith it is wrought. The restitution is of a comfortable sense of Gods
grace. Gods grace is noted by salvation, whereof the comfortable sense is joy.
The Confirmation is wrought by a generous disposition: the disposition is meant
in the word Spirit, which that it may be generous must be free. Such a
comfortable sense, and such a generous disposition are the two supporters of
perseverance; by them are the children of God continued in the state of grace.

But whence do they get them? Surely only from God, it is he that withdraws
in displeasure, and therefore it is he that in mercy must restore the
comfortable sense: as our being so our well being subsists only in him, and
therefore only by him, can we be confirmed therein, therefore King David
desirous to speed of these means of perseverance, seeks them where they may
be had, he beggeth them at the hands of God. These are the contents of this
text, which I will enlarge and apply in their order.

But in the passage I may not forget to observe unto you, that for obtaining
perseverance, the deprecation will not suffice without a supplication; it is
not enough to be freed from the impediments, except we be vouchsafed the
means of perseverance: put the case our Master should never in this World
turn us out of his Family, which is the Church, nor strip us of his Liuerie
which is his holy Spirit; yet if we be not provided of means heartning and
exercising us in this service, better never to continue then to continue so in
that blessed society. The unprofitable servant that hid his Talent in a Napkin
abode in the house with his fellows that were more thrifty, (...) 25.
and emplyed their talents to their Masters advantage; but at the reckoning day
that idle one was cast into utter darkness, there to weep and gnash with his
teeth, when his fellows upon their better account did enter into their Masters
joy. God has done us all this favor as to continue our entertainment in the
Church, we must not neglect our employment in his service; if we do, well may
Gods favor increase our pain, we must never look that it will yield us
comfort. For perseverance is not a bare continuance in Gods Church, and
participation of his gifts, it requires that we make use of it, and advance
his glory. This by the way: let us come now to the particulars whereof the
first is salvation.

The Fathers by this word understand our Savior Christ, and indeed old Simeon
calls him so in his Song, taking Christ in his arms he speaks thus to God,
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation, and salvation is included in the Name of Jesus, therefore in the
Kings Bibles, the Latin has the Name of Jesus instead of salvation. Acts. 18.^.
Saint Peter in the Acts tells us that there is no other name under Heaven by
which we may be saved, but only the Name of Jesus; he is that salutare Dei, so
often remembered in the Prophets, and the saving grace of God mentioned in Saint
Paul. Titus 2.11.


But we must not understand only the person by this name salvation, but also
the fruit: that springs from him, spiritual and corporal. The spiritual, I
have handled upon former Verses; it is the discharge from the guil^, from the
corruption of sin, sin which King David contracted himself; sin which
he inherited from his Parents. Jesus saved King David from them both, this was
his spiritual salvation. Ecclus cap. 47.
But he had a corporal also: God was with him in all his wars, and bare
down his enemies before him; He played with Lions as Kids, and with Bears as
with Lambs; He slew the Giant Goliath, subdued the Philistines, and all the
bordering Nations, whereupon the people sung those words, Psalm. 21.
The King shall rejoice in thee, O Lord, how exceeding glad shall he be of thy
salvation! In the case of King David we must join all three significations,
First, The person of Jesus, Secondly, The spiritual redemption, Thirdly, the
corporal deliverance.

This observed touching the salvation, we must now consider what is meant by
Joy. Joy I told you, is a comfortable sense, between reasonable and
unreasonable creatures, this is a special difference, that though both partake
of blessings from God, yet a true sense of them none have but those that are
reasonable: pleasure animals may have, but joy, they cannot have, for joy is an
affection of a reasonable soul. And reason has taught natural men not to
receive good, but to be affected answerably to the good which we receive. In
things that belong to our natural life every man gives proof hereof; if a
man be hunger-starued, what comfort will he express if one shall bring him
sustenance? He that shall be eased when he is tortured with pain, how merry
will he be? And how will his heart dance for joy, that should be received
again into the Kings favor after some great disgrace? Whatsoever our worldly
distress is, we cannot choose but manifest our content, when we obtain a
release. Whereby we may easily gather that joy and good should go together,
they do so in God, they should do so in all that partake the Image of God, as
he so they should joy in that which is good.

A second thing that we must mark is, that according to the good must the joy
be, as great, as manifold. As great, heavenly things call for greater joy then
earthly, and those things that concern our eternal life, must yield us more
comfort then those things that belong unto our temporal. This discouers a
great defect in the Worlds joy: if our hungry bodies be sed we joy, God daily
feeds our souls with his Word, and we joy not: if our bodies of sick be
made whole, we joy; but who ioyeth in that medicine that restores his soul
from death to life? Who ioyeth in the recovery of Gods favor? That would be
almost beside himself for joy, if he might be vouchsafed but a little
favor? from a mortal King. So far are worldly men from equalling their joy
unto the worth of good, that the greater good can have no share while the
lesser takes up all their joy: yea, that whereunto the Scripture has in a
manner appropriated joy, finds little entertainment in our affections, and
that is the Gospel and Christ the substance thereof, whose attendant the
Angels, the Prophets, the Apostles, in the Old, in the new Testament, make to
be the affection of joy. In their Sermons you shall find joy and salvation
coupled together; they make the news of salvation not only gaudium magnum a
great joy, but also gaudium solum the only joy; Luke 2.
and that with an absit: God forbid, that I rejoice but in the Cross of
Christ. Gal. 6.
How much to blame then are we, that are so far from making it solum, our
only joy, that we are not come so far as to make it magnum, matter of any
extraordinary joy? Yea, in the most it finds nullum, no affection of joy at
all. What shall I say then? Those things which God has conjoined let no man
put asunder, least at the Judgment day, joy and we be put asunder, when we
shall wish, but wish in vain, that God would join us together.

As joy must be as great as the good we have, so must it be also as manifold.
A manifold good must not be entertained with a single joy. I have showed that
salvation is threefold, and so a threefold good. David was a Prophet, and had
Revelations of the Incarnation of Christ, that he should be borne of his Seed,
that he should be the Savior of the World, and he ioyed in this salvation, in
this blessed contemplation of the Kingdom of Christ; he could not with
Abraham see that day, but he must needs rejoice. As the foresight of Christ's
Incarnation wrought in him joy, so could he not reap the fruit thereof to his
own redemption, but he must joy also: the participation of it cannot but bring
pleasure, which we cannot but with great pleasure behold; therefore no doubt
but King David's soul did sing his Daughters Magnificat, and his Spirit
rejoiced in God his Savior. Neither did his temporal deliverance pass
unsaluted by this affection; witness the eighteenth Psalm, which is nothing
else but an amplification of the joy which he took therein. According to this
good example should we learn to multiply our joy, as God multiplyeth his
salvation. Certainly the Church meant we should do so, when it multiplied the
Feasts, which in the old phrase of the Church are called gaudium, gaudie days,
not so much from the corporal refection, as from the spiritual exultation: it
meant we should join joy and salvation together, spiritual joy with
spiritual salvation. But the corporal has almost worn out the spiritual
joy, so much more does the comfort of our bodies carry us away then the
comfort of our souls.

But all this while we are not come unto King David's Prayer, the first branch
of his Prayer that concerns this joy of salvation. His Prayer is, as I said,
for Restitution, restore: he that prays so, gives us to understand two
things, that he feels a want, and that he remembers what is the supply
thereof; both good signs of grace. We hold it a sign of grace in regard of
things temporal: those poor and sick that are in ne^d and pain, we hold
worthy of compassion, when we hear there lamentable complaints; but Vagrants
that even in the Prison being laden with irons, naked, and half starued, can
be frollicke, and glory in their misery, we hold as unworthy of our pity, as
they have little feeling of their own bad case. Apply this now unto our
souls, and see the difference between men and men, and judge thereby what
regard they deserve to find at the hands of God. How many be there that want
this joy of salvation, in whom notwithstanding there appears little sense
that they have of such want? Surely they do live as if eternal salvation did
nothing concern them; such are all profane persons that say, Let us eat, let
us drink, to morrow we shall die, Quibus anima data eft pro sale ne
putrescerent, which make no more account of their soul then of a preservative
that keeps their bodies from turning into dung, whose labor is only to make
themselves everlasting fuel for hell. God regards them accordingly and they
receive as little of this joy of salvation, as they would seem to want it. But
if we mean to receive we must first feel that we do want, and our want
must be declared as King David's was in this supplication, restore. For God then
begins to take pity when men are brought to the knowledge of their wants:
yea, he gives men a sense of their want, before he vouchsafes a supply
thereof.

But read does not only imply a sense of want, but a remembrance also of that
which sometimes we had. It is a good thing for a man to be feeling of his
want, but there is no small access made unto that gracious sense, if we
apprehend withal that our want proceeds from our own vnthristinesse; that
what we want we had, and that it is through our own fault that we are
brought unto this want. And indeed if ever we be in want, we want through our
own default; for God made us perfect, and we became not naked but by eating
the forbidden fruit; and since that time men have been more or less
unthrifty, and have misspent the portion which God has given them. Therefore
we must not come to God with the simple Verb da, that imports only that we
are in want, we must use the compound read, we must confess our selves
Prodigals, that is the right voice of a Christian Penitent.

But whereto shall we apply this restore? To the salvation? Or to the joy?
Distinguish Quod fieri debet, and quod fit, our deserving, and Gods dealing,
and the answer is plain: no doubt we forfeit our salvation, God might strip
us of it if he did reward us according to our sins: Gods Covenant is like a
lease that has a clause of re-entrie, but leaves a power in the Landlord to
use extremity, or deal mercifully with his Tenant: God is unto his children
as a kind Landlord unto bad Tenants: he does not take forfeits as often as we
make them, he does not re-enter upon our Tenement, nor strip us of our
salvation, we are often damnable, yet we are not damned. Notwithstanding, he
does not suffer us to escape scot-free; when he does not take the forfeiture,
he takes a nomine poenae; he does inflict some penalty, yea, and that a
sharp one too, for he takes even from his dearest children the joy of their
salvation; he casts them into sad moodes, he afflicts them with heavy
hearts; when they look upwards they see clouds cast over Gods countenance,
and cannot but sorrow for it; when they look down they see Hels mouth gaping
for them, they cannot but tremble at it: such agonies overtake them and make
them smart for their sins wherewith they offend God, agonies I say of sorrow
and fear. Take a similitude from the Sun, which may make a day, or a
Sunshine day, while it is above our Horizon; it is often day when the Sun
does not shine, but thick clouds breathed from the earth make a sad sky, as
if it were night, yet cannot we say the Sun is gone down: even so many times
are we in the state of salvation, the Sun is with us, we are children of the
day; yet have we no joy of our salvation, our Sun does not shine, we have
no clear day. But from King David you may learn that to be sure of salvation
will not content a religious heart, except he may have the joy thereof also. I
conclude this point; let us take heed that pleasure strip us not of pleasure,
worldly of heavenly; let us not grieve God lest he grieve us, grieve him with
sin, lest he grieve us with sorrow: for we see in King David's example, that
God inflicts such penalties; and if at any time we suffer so for our desert,
let us not continue stupidly in this distressing want, but importune him with
King David's Restore, Restore me to the joy of thy salvation. And so much of
the first part of the supplication.

I come now to the second, from the Restitution to the Confirmation, Stablish
me with a free spirit. Where first we must see what spirit is here meant. There
is a spirit in man, and there is a spirit of God; some understand the one, some
understand the other, I will join both together. For indeed the attribute
belongs to both, Gods spirit is free, and so is man's, but Gods by nature, man's
by grace: couple Gods Spirit unto man's, and then you shall find the saying of
the Apostle true, Where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty: 2. Cor. 3.
Romans 8. John 8.
for it is the Spirit of adoption, and if thereby the Son of God make us
free, then are we free indeed. Therefore I told you that here by the Spirit I
understand our disposition. But this disposition of ours must be considered,
as it is by nature so it is servile; as it becomes by grace, so it is free. I
called it a generous disposition, and indeed so the word signifies.

But to open it a little more fully, John 8. ver. 34
we learn of Christ that sin makes a slave; it appears plainly in that
which we call free will and the attendants thereon. Freewill is resolved into
the judgment we pass upon things, and the choice we make according to the
judgment: now no man has a more slavish judgment then a wicked man, for sin
blinds his eyes, what he does not desire he does not believe, and you shall
seldom see a man possessed with any enormous sin, in whom affected ignorance
is not evident: yea sin makes him put that out of all question, which if he
would use his own judgment, he would find had no credibilitie. Had it not
been for this seruilitie of judgment, Pharaoh could never so long have held
out against Moses, Israel have murmured so often against God, Scribes and
Pharisees have so fearfully blasphemed our Savior Christ, the Church of Rome
so shamefully withstand the truth, and Atheists so profanely scoff at the
reproof of their sins: not one of these many lewd ones which has not a
servile judgment. Neither has seruilitie taken possession only of our
judgment, but of our will also; we can make no better choice then our
judgment will give us leave, if that be servile this cannot be free. Not free?
Nay, it were well, if it were no more servile then our judgment, but indeed it
is much more: for how often do we see what we should do, and yet to please
sin choose to do the contrary? Whether we be regenerate, or whether we be
unregenerate (for the text is understood of both by several Divines) we may
say with the Apostle, Romans 7.
I see a Law in my members rebelling against the Law of my mind, and carrying
me captive unto sin, we have uncircumcised hearts, and do resist the Spirit
of God. Take an example or two: the Pharisees could not deny the Resurrection
of Christ, the Soldiers brought them direct word of it, but see what a
perverse choice they made, Matthew. 28.
rather then they would give glory unto God by acknowledging the truth, they
bribe the Soldiers to outface it with a gross lie. This seruilitie of there
will, is more plainly set down in the Acts 4. Chap. where after Peter had
healed a Creeple in the Name of Jesus, they therefore apprehended him and John,
and fall to this consultation, What shall we do to these men? For that indeed
a notable miracle has been done by them is manifest to all them that dwell at
Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it: a man would expect that their will should
yield unto such clear evidence yet does it not, for mark how they resolve,
That it spread no further amongst the people, let us straightly threaten them,
that they speak henceforth to no man in this name. O servile will!

Neither are these principal faculties only but their attendants also servile,
First, the concupiscible, or that faculty whereby we ensue what we suppose
good, the seruilitie thereof is most palpable. God made all these visible
creatures to serve us, and us to serve only himself; but what creature is
there which man does not advance above himself? Yea deifie that he may be a
drudge unto it? Our meats and drinks so ravish us, that Esau sold his
birthright for a mess of pottage: our money and wealth how base does it make
us? Chap. 1^.
There is nothing worse then a covetous man, says the Son of Syrach, for
such a man will sell his Soul for a morsel of bread. The Apostle calls the
covetous man a plain Idolater, which is nothing else but a slave to an Idol.
And to whom is not an ambitious man a slave? Whose eyes are obseruant of every
man's looks, whose ears attend every man's tongue, whose tongue pleases every
man's humor, whose feet go whether, whose hands do what every man will, that
can inch him forward to the place whereunto he aspires. Finally, look
whatsoever humor possesses us, there is no slavery which for the satisfying
thereof we do not willingly affect: yea mark that the baser things are, the
stronger are men's affections that bow to them; as we see in Epicures, Wantons,
Covetous and other wicked ones; it is hard to see a man so humbly, so earnestly
to serve God, as they do serve their earthly lusts.

Neither is the irascible, or the faculty wherewith we encounter difficulties
while we pursue good, less servile then the concupiscible is in pursuing of
vanity and toys: it makes Pigmies seem Giants unto us, every danger is as
ugly as death, every frown will over awe us, and the least terror cast us
into a Fever. If we be put to it whether we will lose Heaven or Earth, God or
the World, we will quickly betray with what resolution we are carried unto the
best things, and how hardly we brook walking in the narrow way, though it lead
unto the Kingdom of Heaven, how hardly we endure momentany afflictions, though
they work unto us an exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 2. Cor 5.
Read the Story of the Israelites passage from Egypt to Canaan, in them you
may read what manhood we have: Seruilitie has so cowardized all our
Fortitude, that we set lightly even by God himself, if we may not possess him
easily and speedily.

I need say no more: by this time you see what a base and servile spirit we
have, certainly by nature it is most base and servile. I have amplified this
that you might see there is great reason why King David should make this
Prayer, and perceive better what that is which he desires, and what he
means by a free spirit.

He means not a Libertines freedom, he would not be a son of Belial,
have a cloak for licentiousness, but he would be enthrawled to none but
God. And indeed his service is perfect freedom: he would have his judgment
free, he would walk by no light but by the light of Heaven: his understanding
he would have captiuated only to the wisdom of God, and then he is sure he
shall never mistake his true object, truth, because Gods Word is truth, and he
can never err whom God does guide, and verily he is the wisest man that
makes Gods Commandment the rule of his judgment, his judgment is free
indeed. And what is a freewill? Sure that which chooses the only good, that
whose sovereign good is only God; he chooses all that chooses him, so that
having him the will misseth nothing of her proper object: let it pitch upon
other goods, and it will be if not deluded yet certainly skanted, because
nothing can satisfy which is less then that for which the will was made.

As grace does thus free the reasonable faculty, so does it the sensitive
also, it freeth our desires: though there be no Law to compel, yet does a man
readily run the way of Gods Commandments, he thinks he cannot speed fast
enough, nor have enough of that good, which a holy will guided by a wise
judgment recommends unto him: unto him Modus diligendi Deum est diligere sine
modo, he drinks himself drunk at the river of divine pleasures, and is so
insatiable in that, that he passes in the World, for a fool and a madman.
This is the freedom of desire, it made King David dance in an Ephod before
the Arc; it made Abraham follow God, whithersoeuer he did call him; and many
holy men to affect solitariness, that they might have the more of the society
of God, and his Angels! Such a desire is no hireling, it loves good for good,
and will serve God only out of the content it takes in his service; and such
service God requires, and such a desire is a free desire.

The last faculty that is free is the irascible, the courage of a man must be
made free; Saint Paul has expressed that excellently, Romans 8. Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? No, I am persuaded that neither
death, nor life, neither Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus.
Behold a free courage, such a Martyrs courage as will readily obey and run to
Christ, though he must be laden with the Cross: that will be contented to
hate Father, and Mother, Wife, Children, if they hinder him from being Christ's
Disciple.

Put these together, and you may reasonably conceive, what King David means
by a free spirit. And such freedom is to be desired by us all, we must all
desire to be so free in our judgment, will, desires, courage, and so we shall
become generous persons, such as stoop to no base things, and shall stick at
the bestowing of nothing we have, though it be our own selves, whereby we may
compass the true, the sovereign good.

There is one thing moreover meant by this phrase which is peculiar unto David;
and does somewhat concern all those that are in authority, 1. Sam. ca. 16
and that is an heroical spirit: Numb. 11.
God gave him one when he anointed him first to be King, so did he unto Moses,
Exodus ca. 19.
and the Elders which were chosen to assist him. Though every child of God must
by a noble spirit testify his parentage, and that Kingly degree whereunto he
is called of God, yet they that are set over others, must have a principal
spirit in a higher measure, answerable to their charge must their gifts be;
seruilitie beseemes none less then those, who are appointed guides to lead
others out of thraldom.

The next point is King David's prayer, uphold or stablish. His late woeful
experience had taught him that he was labilis and fragilis, that he was apt to
take a fall, and with the fall a bruise; therefore he had good reason to pray
God to hold him up, to strengthen him; yea the best are mutable creatures, as
they were made of nothing, so of themselves they would turn to nothing again.
Therefore he that stands must pray that he may not fall, that his house rest
not upon the Sands to be blown down by the winds, or borne down by the
Waves, but upon a Rock which will hold out against them both.

Secondly, this word imports that he that has recovered a fall, Clem. Alex.
Stromat. lib. ^
desires that he may no more relapse, Vilificat libertatem qui iterum vult
amittere, it is a shrewd argument that he sets light by a free spirit, that
does not desire as well for to keep it, as for to have it, and the desire for
to keep it, does argue at how dear a rate we set it.

Thirdly, Saint Bernards rule is true, Quae modo sunt, modo non sunt, is qui
vere est non acceptat; nec in caducis istis potest vera aeternitas sibi
complacere. Virtue be it never so eminent pleases not God except it be
lasting, he will have every one strive to resemble him as well in constancy as
in sanctity.

Finally, this comfortable sense, and generous spirit, are the two supporters
of perseverance, for what should move him to fall from God, that is heartned
with the comfortable sense of Gods favor, and established by a generous spirit
to do him service? Therefore Gregory the Great gives us a good note, In
(...). Psalm.
that if we mean to persevere, we must take heed that we do not sever
these: Solet quibusdam contingere, etc. it falls out too often says he, that
men luld a sleep with the joy of salvation, forget how feeble their knees are,
and beg not to be held up with a free spirit, and so slip before they are
aware: wherefore he adds, Ita me correctum sac gaudere de venia, vt tamen
nunquam desinam esse suspectus de culpa, Let me never so joy in the pardon of
my sins, as that out of the consciousnesse of my own frailty I should not
desire to be strengthened against sin.

The last thing I noted upon this Text is, Who is the giver of these gifts, and
it appears to be God, for to him King David prays, and what better proof
then that every man seeks it of him, and thanketh him, Sermon 6. Dei on^^e
(...). Cap. 6. 1. Cor. 1.31.
if that he have it? What mean we (says Saint Cyprian) by all the Lords
Prayer, Nisi vt in eo quod esse cepimus, perseueremus? Whereunto agrees Saint
Augustine, and the Apostle tells us, that he that glories must glory in the
Lord: Until we come to God we can find no ground of stabilitie: how glorious
were the Angels in Heaven? How holy was Adam in Paradise? Both left unto
themselves are monuments of the frailty of a creature. If they, how much more
we that come so short of their gifts? Wherefore God having showed us how little
steadfastness there is in the foundation of nature, Psalm. 94.
builds us upon a surer foundation, he builds us upon himself, He is
become our refuge, and the strength of our considence.

And as he only can establish us with a free spirit, so only he can restore
unto us the joy of his salvation. The earth may breath forth vapors, and
intercept the sunshine, but not the Earth, but the Sun it self must dispell
those vapors, that with his brightness he may cheer the earth again: our
sins may cloud the light of Gods countenance, only Gods mercy can make it
break through that cloud, and shed a comfortable influence into our soul, I
say, only God, that for sin withdrew it from us.

It is not meant that hereupon we should grow idle, but we must not ouer-value
our endeavors, Heb. 3.12.
we must take heed that our Lamps go not out, That there be not in any of us
an evil heart of infidelity to depart from the living God, Psalm. 127.
we must gird up our loins, and we must watch. But yet we must still
remember, that Except the Lord build the house they labor but in vain that
build it, except the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain,
Tutiores, says Saint Austin, Esaias 46.
Viuimus si totum Deo damus, and non nos illi ex part, and nobis ex part
committimus; we are most secure while we value our own endeauours at naught,
and give all the glory of our stabilitie to God. Hear ye me, O house of
Jacob, and all that remain of the house of Israel, which are borne of me from
the womb, and brought up of me from the birth, therefore unto the old age I am
the same, even I will bear you unto the hoarie hairs, I have made you, I will
also bear you, and I will carry you, and I will deliver you. If God put his
fear into our hearts, we shall not depart from him, if he keep us none shall
be able to take us out of his hand. Read Colos. 1. Philip. 1.

I conclude, though we can say with Saint Paul, 2. Tim. 4.
I have fought a good sight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
hence-foorth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which God the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day: yet let us with the four and
twenty Elders, Cast down our selves and our crowns before him that sits
upon the Throne and the Lamb, saying, Reave. 4.4.
Praise and honor and glory and power be unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore. AMEN.

PSALM. 51. VERSE 13. Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and Sinners
shall be converted unto thee.


WHen I brake up the first part of this Psalm, I told you that it was a Vow,
and therefore observed therein the parts of a Vow, a Desire, and a Promise, for
when a man voweth, there is something that he would receive, and something that
he must render, render out of thankfulness, for that which out of the
goodness of God he receives. I have ended the first of these two parts, King
David's desire has been unfolded unto you, the brief whereof is, he desired
to be restored unto, and preserved in the state of grace. Let us now go on and
hear King David's Promise, hear what he will render thankfully, if God
vouchsafe mercifully to grant his desire, King David does promise that he will
religiously serve God, this is the sum of his promise.

But in the pursuit of this point we shall be led to see, first of what kind
his service is, and then what reason he gives for his choice. Gods service is
either Moral, or Ceremonial.

The service which King David does promise is moral; this is plain in my
Text, and the two following verses. Will you know the reason of this his
choice? You have it in the 16. and 17. verses; the reason is Gods good
pleasure; his choice is guided by that; God delights more in Moral then in
Ceremonial service, absolutely he does so, and especially in pacification for
such enormous, such heinous sins.

But let us look into the Moral service which he promises, there me thinks
the first thing I see is, that Kiing David has sped of that which he desired
last; He desired a free, a liberal Spirit, and surely but from a free, a
liberal spirit, so large a promise could not proceed. His promise takes up
both Tables of the Decalogue, his duty to God, his duty to his Neighbor. His
duty to his Neighbor, he will edify others, his duty to God, he will
glorify him.

At this time I will insist only upon his promise to edify his Neighbor, for
that is the proper argument of my text; wherein I shall show you first
severally what Means he uses, and what Success he hoped for. The Means are
the teaching of Gods ways; Gods ways, the best of lessons, but such a lesson
as cannot be known without teaching. His Success is the conversion of those
that are taught.

But more distinctly in the teaching we must consider Quis, and Quos, who is
the Master and what Scholars he takes in hand. The Master is King David,
King David newly converted by grace, Ego docebo, I will teach. But whom
Transgressors, Sinners, those that are such as I was; and indeed such Scholars
need such a Master, those that go astray such a one as is newly returned home.
This we must observe in the Teaching.

And in the Converting we must moreover observe Vnde, and Quo, from Whence and
unto whom these Scholars shall return. Whence, that is employed in their name
Transgressors, Sinners, then must they return from their transgressions, and
from their sins, that is from their own ways. But whether? unto God, from
whom they went, unto him they must return, and to return unto God, is to
return unto Gods ways, and so to learn the lesson which their Master
teaches them.

Having thus severally considered the Means and the Success, we will
consider them jointly, we will see how fitly they are coupled together. There
is no true conversion without teaching, and teaching must work that conversion
which must bring a Sinner unto God.

You hear the particulars whereat (God willing) I shall now touch, I pray God I
may so do it that we may all carry away a true touch thereof.

But first you must take a lesson from the connection of the parts of King
David's vow, of his Promise, with his Desire, and the lesson is, we must not be
unthankful, when God is merciful unto us, not that God can be bettered by
ought which we do, for the Psalmist does teach, Bonum meum nihil ad te, Esal.
16.
My good reaches not unto thee, but we should testify that we receive not
Gods grace in vain, our fruit must show what trees we are; and because we are
it by an others gift, Ingenuiest agnoscere and imitari benefactorem suum, There
is no truer character of ingenuitie, then an humble acknowledging whose
creatures we are, and a careful resembling of our Creator. Especially seeing
our gifts are bestowed upon us, not only vt ornamenta, but instrumenta, not
only to recommend us, but also for the good of others. We see it in the frame
of the whole World, in Heaven, and in earth, neither of them is more
beautiful, then useful; yea, the more glorious, the more commodious are the
parts of the Great world, which should make our little world blush, if we use
our indowments as many do their garments, for pride, and not for profit, that
fools may gaze on us, and no body be the better for us. This lesson we must
take in the way.

Let us now come to the particulars, whereof the first is the means that are
used, the teaching of Gods ways. Gods ways I told you is the best of lessons,
for we are in this world, Viatores, wayfaring men, and what should wayfaring
men spend their Study upon; but that which is answerable to their name, that
is a Way. Yea, seeing we are not only wayfaring men, but as the Apostle
teaches, peregrinamur a Domino, 2. Cor. 5.
we are absent from the Lord, what other ways should we study, but vias
Domini, the Lords ways, the ways that are here mentioned in my Text. Surely
that must needs be the safest way, for it is sine diuerticulo, sine
praecipitio, it is a very straight way, it has no turnings where a man may
lose himself, and it tends all upward, no fear of tumbling into the gulf of
perdition.

But the way of the Lord though in it self but one, is yet considered two
ways, first, as God does travel in it unto us, secondly, as we walk in it
unto God, for both causes it is called via Domni; and good reason, for God is
such a Lord as does praeire not only praecepto, but also exemplo, he leads
us not only by good Laws, but also by his own good deeds, and does before
us whatsoever he commands. If he command us to be holy, just, true, merciful,
Psalm. 145.
the Lord himself is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works,
and in another Psalm, All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth. But what
need any more proof, Psalm. 25.10.
when our goodness is but his Image, and our living well, but a showing forth
of the virtues of him that has called us. So that if a man were to choose a
way, 1. Pet. 2.
he can desire no better then the way which the King does go in himself; and
can a Christian have a better then is the way of God.

Way, or ways, the Holiness is but one, but it shows it self in many
forms, in wisdom, in righteousness, in temperance, in patience, in
whatsoever other virtue; the Charity is still but one, but such a one as is
able to give fit entertainment to every object, and because the entertainment
is various, we read sometime Vias, the ways of the Lord, and we read
sometimes Via, because the Charity is always but one: and we should have such
grace as may answer all occasions, neither is it true regenerating grace that
is unprepared for any alteration, that can bear prosperity, but not
adversity, that can converse with God but not with men, that can not be
militant as well as triumphant. This property is a good toueh stone for every
man to try his grace thereby.

But to leave the Lesson and come to the Teaching. The way is such as no man
can go without a guide, and no marvel, for no man ever went it twice, no man
ever passed from Earth to Heaven, and being there came down to the earth to
return to heaven again; happily if he did, he might have remembered the way, and
so go it the second time without a guide, but God allows not a second
journey to heaven, therefore is every man a stranger in this way, whereupon it
must needs follow, that every man does need a guide, or else he cannot be
sure that he goes a right; especially seeing the way he must go, is be set
on either side with so many broad, but mis-leading paths. Teaching then is
necessary for those that mean to go the way.

Having thus in a generality showed you the means that is used, we must now
distinctly consider Quis, and Quos, who is the Master, Ego ^ocebo, King David
says, he will take upon him to be the master. But King David must be
considered as a newly converted Paenitentiarie as one restored unto, and
established in the state of grace, he had plucked out the beam out of his own
eye, before he offered to pluck the moates out of his brothers eye, he was
illightned himself, before he offered to illighten others, and he would not
purge others, before he was purged himself. Great. 1.
Nazianzene has a good rule, Cauendum est ne admirandae virtutis malipictores
simus, we must take heed that we blurre not the virtue which we desire to
limme. A man that goes about to teach another the ways of God, is by that
father resembled unto a Painter that draws Gods Image upon his brother, now
he accounts him a good Painter, that is himself a good pattern of the virtue
that he does teach, but he is but a bad Painter that blotteth out with his
life, what he Painteth with his tongue, who may be cast off with that
scornful Medice cur a teipsum; who will believe him whose deeds discredit
his words? David was not such a Painter, he taught not others, before he had
learned himself.

But how did he teach? Two ways, exemplo, and verbo, his very case was a good
Sermon, a Sermon of the ways of God, of his way of Justice, of his way of
Mercy, David was a monument of both. A monument of Gods justice, who though he
were a man after Gods own heart, yet did God not suffer his sins
uncorrected. A monument of Gods mercy, for though his sins were very
grievous, yet upon his unfeigned repentance they were graciously pardoned. So
did he teach by his example, teach men not to presume, because in him they may
see God is just, teach them not to despair, because in him they may perceive
that God is exceeding merciful.

As he teaches by example, so does he by his word also; witness this Psalm
wherein he taught the Church in his time, teaches us now, and shall teach men
until the worlds end, for what is the contents thereof but this, Come unto me,
hearken unto me. I will show you, I will teach you, what God has done, and for
my soul?

Add hereunto that David was a King, and his care that he voweth may go for
a teaching, for Kings communicate in the name of Pastors, in the Scriptures
they are more then once called by the name of Shepherds, and Constantine the
Emperor said well, that Kings were Episcopi ad extra, they have a kind of
Bishopric, and must be careful of the ghostly welfare of their charge. But
we may not mistake, David did not take upon him the Priesthood as Vzziah his
successor did, and was plagued for doing it, he kept himself within his
bounds, he did but that which all that are trusted with Civil Authority are
bound to do, except what in this kind he did as a Penitent, or as a Prophet,
and his example is a good admonition for of all his rank, all in his case,
yea, it may admonish all; It was Caines voice that said, Numquid ego sum custos
fratris, Am I my Brothers keeper? Yea, God has given (says the Son of
Syrack) a charge unto every man concerning his brother. The law will not suffer
a man to neglect his brothers Ox, or his Ass going astray, or sinking vn^^^^
his burden; has God care of Oxen? or does he not intimate there^^ how much
more we must care for the master of those beasts? It is the property of good
men that the good which they receive from God, they dispense to others, and are
as careful of other men's salvation as of their own, according to the rule,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

We have found the Master; Let us now seek out the Scholars, we find them
here to be Transgressors, Sinners, an untoward subject you would think for a
Master to work upon, to tame such headstrong Colts, and bring such persons to
a better course, and yet nihil aptius, nihil acceptius, no Scholars are more
fit to be undertaken by such a Master, and such a Master cannot better please
the Master of Masters, that is God, then by undertaking of such Scholars,
undertaking to teach transgressors and sinners, to teach them Gods ways that
have gone farthest our of the way, for such must you understand by these words.
It is every man's work to set them forward that are in the way, to teach the
righteous; it is a harder task to fetch them in, that are gone out, and such a
Master must put himself to the hardest task. A Soldier that has played the
coward, cannot recover the reputation of a valiant man, by aduenturing no
farther then ordinary Soldiers, but by undertaking some dangerous assault, or
trying his valor upon an enemy of note, and no teaching is worthy of a
convert, but the teaching of those that are much auerse; for how should he
show that he does thoroughly detest sin, that having rooted it out of himself
can endure it in another? No, his own passion will fill him with compassion,
the remembrance of the loss which himself sustained, of the smart which
himself has felt, the experience (I say) of this double evil, will not
suffer him to stand as an idle spectator, while the spiritual thief, the
murderer, does spoil, does slaughter others; he will be aiding to such
forlorn ones with his best, with his readiest succor. Add hereunto that they
that are converted were corrupters while they were in the state of sin, they
led many out of the way, and who does it be seem better to be stir themselves
for the recovery of sinners, then they by whom many have been made sinners?
It is fit that by this care they do redeem that fault; surely Dives in hell
showed a desire of such a thing, when he prayed Abraham to send teachers to his
brethren, who might reclaim them before they came to hell, it implies a
sorrow (though a fruitless one) which he had for that he had corrupted them;
and he is worse then Dives, who being conscious to himself, that he has been
an instrument of mis-leading others, does not desire to convert at least as
many as he has corrupted.

As there is nothing fitter for such a Master then the dealing with such
Scholars, so there is nothing wherein he can better please his Master, God,
th^n by taking p^ines with such Scholars. God is compared unto an Husbandman,
all the world is his Farm, now you know a good Farmer that has many p^^cels
of ground over grown with Briars and Thorns, takes great comfort to see them
grubbed up, and the ground made good Pasture, or Arable: even so God, who would
have all men ^aued and come to the knowledge of his truth, is well pleased with
their pa^ines that are instruments thereof, ye^, therefore does he convert
some, that by them he may conuertothers; you may gat^er it out of Christ's
words to Saint Peter, (...) ^2.
I have prayed for thee that thy faith should not fail, Tuantem conuersu^,
confirmafratres, When thou art converted, streng then thy brethren; (...).
This lessen is excellently shadowed in a vision of Ezekiels, where the waters
running from the Sanctuary into the dead Sea, healed it, and presently upon
the banks grew up (...) of life, of which we read in the Reu^lat on, (...).
that their leaves were for the healing of the Nations. And indeed all the
famous Conuerts that we read of ^aue ever thought they could not dee God better
service; I will instance but in two, Saint Paul, and Saint Austin; Saint Paul
had been a persecutor, a blasphemer, he obtained mercy, and God put him into
the Ministry, that as his eyes were opened, so he might open the eyes of
others; and what pains did he take? (...).
Becoming all, to all, that he might win some to Christ. Saint Austins
confessions show what his first life was, how sick he was in Head and Heart,
in faith and life, and his Works do show how careful he was, after God gave
him the light of his truth, and fear of his name, to reform others, Epic^res
and Heretics, and work into them a true knowledge and ^eruent love of God. I
conclude this point; As many of us as find grace at any time, must after the
Pattern of King David labor to present some Convert sinner, as an
Eucharisticall sacrifice unto God. And let this suffice for the unfolding of
the means that this King does use.

I come now to the success which is hoped for, which is a Conversion.
Conversion is not a local motion, but a moral change, the making of us of
old, new men, a metamorphi^ing, as Saint Paul calls it, a changing of us into
a new Image. But the nature of this Conversion will better appear, if I first
unfold unto you the two terms, Vnde, and Quo, from Whence, and to Whom,
sinners are converted. From whence you cannot better learn then by their
names, they are called transgressors, such as leave Gods ways to follow their
own, the devices of their own brain, the desires of their own heart. God
made man (says the Scripture) after his own Image, but the Image of God in
man, was much like the Image of the Sun in the Moon, so long as the Moon is
in opposition to the Sun, we see what a goodly light body it has, no sooner
does it divert to either side, but it soon loses its light: even so a man
keeping himself toward God, receives an impression of his sacred Image,
which vanishes when he turns himself from God. Yea, you see daily that when
you walk in the Sun, if your face be toward it, you have nothing before you
but bright shining light, and comfortable heat, turn your back to the Sun,
and what have you before you but a shadow? And what is a shadow but the
privation of the light and heat of the Sun? Yea it is but to behold your
own shadow, that you defraud your self of the other, for there is no true
wisdom, no true happiness, but only in beholding the countenance of God,
look from that, and we loose these blessings; and what shall we gain? A
shadow; an empty Image, insteade of a substantial, to gain an empty Image
of our selves, we loose the solid Image of God: and yet this is the common
folly of the world, men prefer this shadow before that substance.

When we are willed to turn we must remember that we are auerse from God;
when we go our own ways we turn our backs to God, (as the Scripture
teaches) every of our ways goes from him, and when we Convert, we must
turn from our own ways, our evil ways, for such are all ours, we must cast
away the works of darkness, put off the old man, so the Scripture varieth the
phrase of conversion. But there are three conditions that must be observed in
our Conversion. First, Eack. 18.
it must be ab omnibus vijs malis; God loves not mungrels; if a man have been
a Drunkard, an Adulterer, a Swearer, he may not leave his drunkenness, and
retain his swearing, leave swearing, and follow whooring; therefore Moses tells
the Israelites that they must return to God toto cord with their whole heart.
A second condition is delivered by Esaias, Deuteronomy. 23. c. 31 6.
Conuertimini sicut in profundum recessistis, look how profoundly we
entertain sin, so deep must our conversion go, we must search our wounds
to the very bottom, we must leave no creek unaltered, it must be verum Cor,
our inside must be like our outside, so says S. Paul, Heb. 10.22. Thirdly, our
conversion must be constant, we must not be like unto Lots wise, whose feet
carried her from Sodom, and her eyes were back upon it; that will argue that
we repent of our resolution, and that we can easily be persuaded to become
again what we were before. This is the first branch of Conversion (we must if
we return) so remove iniquity far from our Tabernacle, yea from our selves.

The next branch is to whom we must return; If you will return return unto
me, says God in the Prophet: many do return, but it is from one vanity to
another, such a turning as Solomon describes in Ecclesiastes, and there are
examples every where, many of prodigal turn covetous, and of profuse become
base; many a Stoicke turns Epicure, and of senseless, becomes shameless;
many an Atheist turns superstitious, and as if he did repent that he had
been long without a God, makes his fancy the forge of Gods; of such turning
there is too much in the world. But our return here meant, is a return to him
from whom we went, we went from God therefore to him we must teturne again;
lost sheep that we are, we must return to our Shepherd from whose fold we
straied, the only and great shepherd of our souls; prodigals that we are we
must return to the Father that we forsook, even to our Father which is in
Heaven; or to keep my former Simile, we turned from the Sun to the shadow,
and so became dark and cold, ignorant and untoward, we must turn from the
shadow to the Sun again, that we may be light and warm, and recover again
the knowledge and the love of God. A quo habet homo vt sit, (...) 70
apud ill im habet vt been sit, if at any time we be ill, we must not look
that it will be well with us until we come to God that made us.

Put now these two points together, Vnde, and Quo, and we may resonably
conceive what Conversion is, it is that which by another word is called
Repentance; and indeed the word in the Original does import that virtue. But
mark that whereas Repentance is a compound thing of our turning from the
world, and turning unto God, it has its name rather from turning unto God,
then turning from the world; turning from the the world has no commendations
in it, except it be to the end that we may turn unto God, as also turning to
the world, is no Sin, it deserves no blame, unless in doing it we turn
from God; the offense is properly in turning from God, as Repentance consists
properly in turning unto God.

Such a kind of turning is the success which King David hoped would follow
upon his teaching, conuertentur, the sinners, the transgressors will be
converted if I teach them thy way; a confident speech, yet very likely, whether
you look upon vias tuas, thy ways, or docebo, I will be the master, Gods
Ways, are Gods Laws, now of Gods laws we read in another Psalm, Psalm. 19.
that they are perfect, converting the soul, his testimonies are sure, F^^. 1.
1. Cor. 2. He^. 4. 2 (...). 3.
and give wisdom to the simple, they are the power of God unto salvation, in
them is the evidence of the Spirit, they are sharper then any two edgedsword,
sinally they are able to make a man wise unto salvation; there is then good
hope of Conversion from the efficacy of Gods laws; and indeed they are able
to work fidem infusam a saving faith.

Docebo is a good ground of hope also, for that is able to work fidem
acquisitam, a moral persuasion, it works that which makes way to the other,
while what we think credible by reason of the speaker, we are wrought to
believe by the word which he speaks, wicked men commonly scorn good men as
fools, when they tell them of the vanity of the world, and the danger of
sin; they suppose because that they had never any experimental acquaintance
with it, the judge of it most absurdly; but when they shall have a
Nebucadnezzar, an Antiochus, one that has been as deep in sin as
themselves can go, turn Penitent, declaime against; dehort from an ill life,
they cannot but muse, they cannot but doubt, they cannot but bethink
themselves in what state they stand. Or if they may shift of such a Teacher
because they think novelty does abuse his judgment, and the nature of man is
delighted with change, yet when they shall hear a Solomon, a David, a
Prodigal, that was first in the state of Grace, and having fallen foul into
sin, is come to himself again, and upon an experimental comparison of
both, passes an indifferent judgment, gives grace, gives sin each his
due, his thundrings and lightnings against sin, cannot but shake the greatest
Oaks, the tallest Cedars, make the obstinatest sinners to tremble, and bring
them upon their knees to Sing the Psalm of mercy; the Adder that cannot be
charmed by this inchanter will never be rid of his poison until his poison
riddeth him; his case is desperate; he that will not hear a Penitent
malefactor, will never be converted by any Preacher.

I have dwelt long enough on the unfolding of the Means, and the Success as
we are to look into them severally: Let us now in a word or two consider them
jointly, and see how reasonable it is, that those Means be used for this
Success, teaching for converting. A man is a reasonable creature, and
Conversion is an act of the reasonable soul, and therefore not to be expected
but from means that can work our reason, ordinary means of this kind there
is none but teaching; fear of the sword may ouer-awe the outward man, and
hinder us from doing what we would, but it cannot alter the inward man, and
make us well what we should, whether it be truth or goodness that is
commended unto us, it is not torturing^, but instructing, that must make us
believe the one, and love the other; Magistrates may compel to the use of the
Means, but without the natural means no hope that ever any one will
entertain these virtues. The more barbarous has been and is the tyranny of
the Church of Rome, which uses the Inquisition instead of Instruction, and
labors to convert souls, by subuerting of whole states.

Secondly, as without teaching, there is no converting; so if a man should be
converted without teaching his conversion cannot please God, Romans 14.2^.
for Quicquid non est ex fide est peccatum, as good that were never done, which
we do without the guidance of our Conscience, because God looks that in his
service especially we should show our selves reasonable. Wherefore let us
leave Monks to their blind obedience, and the superstitious Papist to his
implicit faith, let us turn to God, but so, that we first be taught his ways;
let not our Conversion out run our Instruction, let them walk hand in hand
together.

I conclude; There is not one of us which does not sometime or other by bad
counsel, or evil example mislead others out of the way; what must we do
then? We learn here of King David; Let us by good counsel, by good example,
bring them, or some others into the way again: the rather, because it is a
work of the highest perfection, to be Gods instrument to bring sinners from
hell to heaven; Dan. 12.3.
Daniel has foretold that Teachers shall shine as Stars in the firmament,
and Saint Paul, that the Converted shall be the Conuerters crown and Glory in
the day of the Lord. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19.


LOrdwe are all apt to go astray, and how many stumble at us, that fall before
us; when thou do us the favor to lend us thy hand, let not us deny ours to
them that are down, let us teach them, what thou have taught us, and let it
profit no worse with them, then it does with us, let us both be converted
thereby, and let us each hasten other in our return toward thee; Let us be
careful to save not our selves only, but others also, that each may be the
others joy, when we shall both be presented spotless and blameless at the
appearing of Christ. PSALM. 51. VERSE 14. Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O
God, thou God of my salvation, and my tongue shall sing aloude of thy
righteousness.


THe religious service which King David vowed, is the Edifying of others, and
the g^^rifying of God: how he will edify others, you have heard, and are to
hear, how he will glosie God.

God may be glorified, either in regard of the particular sauom h^ shows us,
or the general worth that is in himself; David promises to glorify God in
both respects. At this time my Text does occasion me to speak of the former,
wherein I will observe first a spiritual Pange: ha^ouer takes his Devotion,
and then the Devotion it self. In the Pange we shall see what he seeleth, and
to whom he slieth; he feels a sting of Conscience, a remorse of
Bloud-guiltinesse; and being pained herewith, he seeks for ease, he cries
Deliver.

But he seeks discretly, and ardently; discretly, for he seeks to him that
can Deliver, to the Lord, who is interested in the consciences of his
creatures: and as he can, so he will, he is the God of his childrens salvation.
This is his discretion; which he warmeth with Zeal, he is earnest in his
petition, which you may gather out of the doubling of the name of God, Deus,
Deus salutis meae.

Having thus overcome the spiritual Pange that interrupted him, he falls to
his Devotion, wherein you must mark, first the argument that he insisteth
upon, and that is God Righteousness; Secondly, the manner how he does extol
it, which is public, and cheerful; public, for he will utter it by his
tongue; cheerful, for his tongue shall sing aloude. These be the particulars
which we must now look into farther and in their order. And first of
spiritual Pangs in general.

King David had a pardon of this sin particularly, besides a general promise
that God would never withdraw his grace from him, and yet we find him here
perplexed and distressed in conscience. Though I did on a former Verse touch at
the reasons hereof, yet will it not be amiss that I a little farther enlarge
this point. There can be no doubt but Gods truth is infallible, he cannot deny
himself, he will never recall his word, but yet Quicquid recipitur, recipitur
ad modum recipientis, the virtues wherewith we entertain Gods promises are, as
we are, imperfect, because we art partly flesh, and partly spirit; our faith
is not without doubting, and if their be imperfection in our faith which is the
foundation of our spiritual life, our Hope will be answerable, it will not be
without distrusting, neither will our Charity be better, we cannot so love,
but we will fear; And why? Could we cast our eyes only upon God, his
goodness must needs appear wonderful, and so leave a kind of amazedness in
us, neither can we easily believe that he should vouchsafe such favor unto man;
but we more often cast our eyes upon our selves, upon our wickedness, whereby
we have broken Gods laws, upon our unthankfulness, which have set light by
Gods blessings, and this is able to stagger our faith much more; especially
when the Serpent shall plie us with the representation of Gods justice, thereby
indeauouring to ouer-whelme our Meditations upon his mercies, and shall press
unto our conscience the imperfection of our faith, hope, and charity, so far
as to persuade us that they have no truth at all. Here-hence spring those
spiritual pangs, in so much that even in those which by grace have given sin
a deadly wound, you shall perceive many pangs, as it were, of spiritual death,
and as men that are recovered out of an Ague, have many troublesome grudgings
thereof, that disquiet them not a little: even so Penitents, aster enormous
sins must look for many a smarting twitch of the worm of conscience.

But to leave spiritual Pangs in general, and come to that which in
particular is touched here in my Text; he feels are morse of bloud-guil^inesse,
the evil he feels is expressed by the name of bloods, so the word is in the
original, and is used to note either our original corruption, or actual
sin; King David in the former part of this Psalm; confesses both that sin
that he inherited from his Parents, and that which he contracted himself;
therefore of the Interpreters, some pitch upon the former, and some the later.
Saint Austin pitcheth upon the original sin, and supposes that David was
moved with remorse of his corrupt nature, which is the cause of all sin; and
indeed they that are borne in Concupiscence, are said to be borne of flesh and
blood, 1. Cor. 15.
and Saint Paul means that we must put off that, before we can be fully
blessed, when he says, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
heaven. Finally it is that where at God points, Ezekiel. 16. when he speaks
thus to the Church, When I passed by thee and saw thee polluted in thine own
blood, I said unto thee in thy blood, Live. The reason of the phrase is,
because Vitaest in sanguine, (as the law speaks) the animal life subsisteth
in the blood, and the abundance of blood is the fuel of concupiscence;
whereupon some conjecture, not improbably, that to note this, the legal
expiation of sin was made by the effusion of blood.

Some go not so far as original sin, but understand the word of actual
which is the fruit of original; and because of actual sins, some are by
Divines called spiritual, some carnal; spiritual, such as move from, and
are transacted principally by the reasonable faculties of the soul, and have
but sequelam, a concomitancie of animal; carnal, those that are suggested
from, and acted by the animal soul principally, and have but a concomitancie
of the rational; by bloods they understand that later kind of sin. And
indeed such were the sins whereof King David had now remorse, his Adultery,
his Murder, both sprang from blood; adultery from blood luxuriant, which made
him transgress in his concupiscible faculty, murder from blood ebullient,
which made him transgress in his Irascible faculty; The word Sanguines being
plural is by the Fathers observed to note plenty and variety of sin; some
in one word parallel it with the first verse of this Psalm, where David
mencioneth all his Iniquities, and then there is a Synecdoche in the word,
species progenere, the carnal sins put for all kind of sins, which some
resolve into sins past, present, and to come. But it is best to keep our
selves unto the Argument of that story whereunto this Psalm alludes, and then
Variety shall note Adultery, and Murder, and Plenty shall consist in the
many murders that followed the adultery, Vriah was treacherously slain, and
that he might be slain treacherously, many others were slain with him, and
these murders brought out another murder, even the murder of David's own child,
for though he died justly by Gods hand, yet was David the murderer of him, by
reason of his sin; to say nothing of Absolons rebellion, which shed much
blood, and was denounced for this sin of David: David attending unto these
manifold iniquities of his, does wrap them up all in this word bloods, as being
all the evil fruits of his sinful flesh and blood.

But we must not understand only Sin, by the name of Bloods; the Scripture
applies the word unto the Punishment of sin also, and notes, (...) 12.
that all sin proves bloody to the sinner; and therefore the Apostle
observes that without shedding of blood there is no expiation for sin,
whereupon it follows, that all sins are mortal, and do slay the sinner.
Chap. 2.
But of all sins, this is especially true of Murder; the Law in Deutronomic
does intimate as much, when it does require so curious an expiation of
uncertain murder; yea before Moses days, God expressed so much unto Noah, not
only mystically when he forbids the eating of blood, but literally when he
says he will require bloodshed both from man and beast; Gene 9 4.5.
yea he does so abhor murder, and pursue it unto death, that he commands,
that whosoever has wilfully shed blood, shall be violently taken from his
Altar (if he take Sanctuary there) and be put to death. ^^od. 21.14.
Go higher to the Old world and there see how murder is justly called bloody,
and proves mortal to the murderer. Caine was the first that shed blood, and
Caine is recorded for a monument of Gods vengeance; Lamech speaks fully, who
is thought by some to have flaine Caine, and so to have paid home blood with
blood, Gene. 4.
I have slain a man (says he) to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt;
that is, the stabbe which I have given to another, proves a deadly wound unto
my self, in murdering him, have I become mine own murderer; so that in effect
David in the phrase intimates thus much, blood calls for blood, and I
deserve to have my blood shed, that have shed another. This was that that
perplexed him, the conscience of this, was the worm that gnawed him.

And no wonder; he had heard from Nathan that he might not build Gods House,
because he had shed much blood, and yet the blood which he had then shed, was
only the blood of the enemies of Israel, and it was justly shed in battle:
how far then might he well think himself estranged from God, that had so
treacherously, so villainously, spilt the blood of his own subjects; of his
faithful servant; yea of his own child? Saint Ambrose observes that seeing
David was of so gentle a nature, that he spared the blood of his adversary
Saul, we cannot think but he grieved much, when he found himself ouer-taken
with a sin which the goodness of his nature so much abhorred; guess at his
disposition by his speech unto Abigal, who wisely charmed him, when in a
fu^ious mood he would have destroyed churlish Nabal, and all his family,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel (says David to Abigal) which sent thee this
day to meet me, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou which have kept
me this day from coming to shed blood. It were to be wished that Christian
Kings had as tender hearts, and were as easily pacified, as they are enraged;
there would not be so much Christian blood shed, neither would they be such
unnatural butchers of their own subjects. Or because that is rather to be
wished then hoped for, though it would make much for the public good that
murder were prevented, yet I would at least, that when it is committed, Princes
were not so altogether without remorse of that which they have done, and in
godly sorrow would imitate King David, and be timely feeling of their offense,
and provide for the safety of their souls. Though David were a King, and free
from the danger of his own Law, yet found he a controller in his own bosom,
and was indicted by his own conscience, from which the greatest Monarchs
cannot free themselves; Nero Emperor of the Romans, Richard the third, an
usurper in this Kingdom, are in several Histories reported to have felt the
vexation of this fury, and the biting of the worm: And if Monarchs are not
free, how shall meaner men be privileged? And yet I cannot without grief
behold the senselessenesse of many that embrew their hands in blood (whether in
their cups, or for their honor) and never call themselves to an account, never
judge themselves, before they are judged of the Lord, but smother their own
conscience with frollicke living, until their woeful ends, make them fearful
examples unto others. It were well for them if they felt more smart, that they
might with King David, desire ease, and cry out Deliver.

The word is Vox confligentis, or ingementis, Ingementis groaning under the
slavery of sin; peccatiseruitvs pessima, sin is the worst kind of
fl^uerie, and therefore no wonder if it force a cry, and as the children of
Israel in their Egyptian bondage, so men enthrawled spiritually cry Deliver.
Or if it be not vox gementis, it is vox confligentis; David was now in a hard
conflict, a conflict with remorse of sin, a conflict with the fear of
punishment, both were able to wrest from him this word Deliver. Sin is
compared to an armed man, by the son of Syracke, all iniquity (says he) is
as a two edged sword, Chap. 21.
the wounds whereof cannot be healed; it is there compared also to a Serpent
which will bite; to the teeth of a Lion which slaies the souls of men; he
therefore counsels us to fly from it; yea and we had need cry out too;
sin makes a hideous cry against us, it cries in the ears of the Lord, and
calls for vengeance, it cries in our conscience, and gineth us no rest,
there is good reason therefore why we should cry out Deliver, deliver us from
the inward, from the outward cry, which so distresseth, which so afflicts.

But when we cry out against the cry of blood, we must remember, that there
is Mors sicca, as well as Mors humida, many do murder; that shed no blood, Si
non pauisti, occidisti: He that suffers the poor to perish for want of
food, is plainly a murderer, how much more if he take their living from them;
whosoever does either of these, had need pray, Deliver me from blood
guiltiness; blood every day, and every where, touches blood (as Hosea
speaks) and yet we see little remorse, and few there are that with King David
pray, Deliver, that pray to be loosed from the bands wherein they have ensnared
themselves, and to be eased of their guilt.

I told you before, that Blood does not only signify actual but original
sin, and so the Fathers some of them understand King David's desire, as if he
meant that he would not any longer be flesh and blood, he would be rid of that
which is the nurserie of sin, which slakes his life in grace, and disheartens
his hope of glory: And it is likely King David did not call only for
subuention against guilt contracted, but prevention that he might contract no
more; he looks backward, and forward, and it beseems us all to pray against
original sin, (...). 7.
O wretch that I am who shall deliver me from this body of sin?

Finally as Blood signifies not only Sin, but the punishment thereof also:
Gene. 4.
so much the Prayer be understood to deprecate not only sin, but the
punishment also. David heard ringing in his ears Caines doom, Maledictus,
because thou have shed blood, therefore thou art accursed; the doom against
murder, Gene. 9.
which God denounced by Noah, thundered in his ear, 2 (...) 12.
He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed again; he could
not forget that dreadful voice which Nathan uttered unto him, The sword shall
never depart from thy house, and out of sense of all these, as if he were even
presently ready to perish, fall upon this supplication, Deliver; his
Penitertials do show what deep impression the terror of Gods judgments made
upon his soul, and also upon his body; and no wonder if he that so felt them,
did pray to be released from them.

But mark how he Prays; first how discreetly, then how zealously. Very
discreetly, for he makes choice of a person that can, and will deliver, Can,
for he is Deus salutis, it is his proper title to be a Savior. In creatures
you may find vanity that will delude you, or infirmity that will fail you,
even of Kings themselves it is said, that their breath is in their nostrels,
and that they are not saved themselves by their much strength, David himself,
who so often delivered Ismel, and was attended with so many Worthies, yet could
he not expect salvation from himself; the Prophet Ieremies rule is
peremptory, Chap. 17.
Cursed is he that makes flesh his arm, etc. We must therefore resolve, that
salvation belongs unto the Lord, especially when we speak of spiritual
salvation, such as that is wherewith we have now to do, which stands in the
remission of sins, the peace of conscience, and freedom from death, for who
can remit sins but God only? And except he justify us, how should we have
the peace of conscience? God uses Ministers to work these effects, but they
flow from grace, not inherent in them, but assistant to them, and so they are
the effects of Gods hand. And to him also belongs the issues of death, for as
it is his justice that inflicteth it; so, except he release, none can free from
it.

But mark the phrase, the God of salvation; 1 John 1^
is it not a periphrasis of the name of Jesus? And then behold a mystery
sanguis liberat a sanguine, the blood of Jesus cleanses from all sin, and so
delivers us from blood, blood whereof we are guilty: and rising again he
received the keys both of death and hell, and so can deliver us from the blood
whereunto we are endangered.

As David is discreet in seeking to a person that can, so is he also discreet
in seeking to a person that will deliver, for he calls upon him, not only as
a God of salvation, but as a God of His salvation. God is a God of salvation,
as he is the Savior of all men; but no man can call him the God of his
salvation, except he be a faithful man; so that there are two remarkable
things in the Pronoune, for it is verbum faederis Euangelici, and fi et
spec^^lis, David shows thereby that he is in Covenant with God, even in the
Covenant of grace, for no man can use that word, except he be in so blessed a
state, no man can call God His, except God have appropriated himself unto him,
and appropriate himse^fe he does not but by the words of the Covenant, Ero Deus
tuus, I will be thy God. And when God does so appropriate himself we must keep
the ^itle of the Conenant in our Prayers, and direct our words unto him as he
is ours; this is the exercise of a special says, and it is the greatest
comfort of our prayer, it is most likely that he shall speed, that has so
near reference unto God, he that can, will help.

And mark that though he were put to the conflict, yet was he not without
Armor of proof, he saw whence salvation might be had, and comes with
boldness to the Throne of grace; more do conflict with the horror of
conscience, and terrors of death, then prevail against them; to conflict is
common unto all sinners, but to prevail is the prerogat^ue of the children of
God, the God ossaluation does ease, does unburden only those that can truly
say he is the God of their salvation.

David prayed Discreetly; and he prayed zealously also; for mark how he
doubles the word, O God, thou God; Nota in repititione magnum cor^^^ affectum,
says Gregory, such ingemminations proceed not but from ardent affections,
they importune God, and they will take no denial. And indeed God does not
like cold suitors, for that betrayech cold defires, which in one that is at
Gods mercy, has grievously offended, lies open unto the sharpest wrath, can
find no favor, can promise it self no mercy; we must therefore wrestle with
God as ^acob did, reply as the woman of Canaan did, treble our petition as did
Saint Paul, if we mean that our Prayers shall pierce the clouds, climb up
into the Heavens, and enter into the ears of God. Neither sacrifice nor
frankincense were offered without fire, upon the one Altar or the other, no
more must any Prayer come from us, which is not warmed by zeal, quickening it,
and giving it speedy wings to fly from earth to heaven, and make our words a
lively representation of those desires that are conceived in our hearts. And
let this suffice for David's spiritual Pange.

I come now to the Devotion, the argument whereof is the righteousness of God.
But there is a double righteousness of God, the one is legal, the other
Evangelical. The legal is that which deals with men according to their
works, the Evangelical is that which deals with men according to their
faith; the latter is here meant, and not the former; from the former a sinner
can expect nothing but condemnation, because this is the tenor of it, Cursea
is he that abides not in cuerie point of the Law to d^e it; from the later we
may expect salvation, because it stands in the renussion of sins; therefore
we must join Libera that is gone before, with Iudit^a, and so you will find
that it is Iustitta liberans, it is such Justice, a freeth us from Justice, and
therefore Symachus translates it not amisle Misericordia, this Justice is
nothing but plain Mercy, mercy, if your respect us which apprehend it by
faith, for it is nothing else but Gods indulg^nce upon our repentance; but if
we look unto God then it is pl^^^^ Justice, for it is Instice for him to
keep his promise.

We must ris^ a step higher, and in this word find Christ, the Apostle (...) us
that he is made righteousness unto us, (...)
the Prophet, that he is the Lord our righteousness. And verily this sweet
temper of Mercy and Justice is wrought in him, and through him derived to us,
and therefore it is called the righteousness of says, and the righteousness
of God revealed without the (...), when ^^^th apprehends stedfa^^ly, what God
promises faithfully, then is manifested this m^rcifull righteousness. And see
how God puts it out of all doubt, that men are justified by faith, not by
the works of the Law, for though it be a true rule that it is so, yet when we
do see the ^^mpl^ of (...) worthy a person as King David, the rule becomes
more e^ident. Wherefored will never be in the number of those, that presuming
of their me its, and willing to establish their own righteousness, will not
submit themselves to this righteousness of God, Ps^. 1.
but I will go in the sh^^ngtho^ the Lord God, and will make mention of thy
righteousness, even of thine only, this merciful righteousness of God.

There is one p^ant more to be observed in this argument of David's denotion,
which I may not omit, it is made by Gregory the great upon the word Tuam,
H^mini^s^^^ videtur, vt s^um vlsciscatur inimicum, Dei (...), consitenti relax
^e offensam: At the Bar of man, it goes for (...) ^^e, if we repay all men
as they des^rue, but at the Bar of God, (...)
we find another kind of Justice, If we confess our sins, God is faithful
ind^ust to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness;
the rule is general all may have the benefit of it, though over and above the
general rule, (...)
King David had a special promise, at the performance whereof he aymeth in
this place.

But enough of the argument. I come now in few words, to open the manner how he
performs his Devotion. His performance is first public, for he will utter it
with his tongue, The tongue is in the Scripture called David's glory, (...)
30.12
and the best member that he has, because by it he did vent, what he inwardly
conceived, and out of the abundance of his heart, his mouth did speak; the
Angel gives a good observation to young Tobie, (...) 12
It is good to keep close the secret of a King, but it is honorable to ueale
the works of God; therefore we must not keep silence, when we have found
mercy; The reason is clear, we must not be ashamed to acknowledge our
Benefactor, so to do, would argue too much self-love, and pride, and in so
doing we should take unto our selves the glory of God.

Secondly, what God does for us, he does it to encourage others; and how should
they be encouraged, Psalm. 34.
except we do inform them What God has done for our soul? And the most
natural means of informing, is by the tongue, by that may we direct the eyes
of men to behold Gods doing, yea and work their affections also to entertain
them with due regard, particular persons, yea whole Congregations may be
rowsed, may be persuaded by the tongue, therefore I told you that the mention
of the tongue does import that the Devotion shall be public.

Neither public only, but cheerful also, for so he says, that his tongue
shall sing a loud; and well does this beseem King David, for he was the
sweet singer of Israel; he would bestow his best ability in praising of God.
The word imports two things, first, the property of thanks, it must not be
sullen, and dumpish; as blessings come readily from God, so must they gladly be
entertained by men, he is unworthy of them, that does not so express the
comfort that he takes in them. Secondly, the words note the Character of a
Triumph, which is Exultation; we heard before, that David was pained with the
horror of his sin, and danger; out of this if he may escape, see what he
promises, he will make melody to the Lord, he will conceive his deliverance
in a Psalm, so you must understand him, he means not a tune, without a
Dittie, but this, as other of Gods blessings, he will leave of record, it
shall be entered into the Book of Psalms.

But forget not to observe, that whereas the Titles of the Psalms, even of
this Psalm, show, that David delivered his Psalms to the public Musicians of
the Temple, by them to be sung at the service of God, he disdained not to act
the same part himself, as he daunced before the Arc in a linen Ephod, so it
should seem by many of his Psalms, he did not think scorn to range himself
also with singers, with his hand, with his voice, to sound and set forth the
righteousness of God. We are naturally cheerful after a danger escaped, if
it be but corporal, how much more should we be so when the danger escaped is
spiritual? How should our hearts dance for joy, and our tongues break forth
into the praises of God. But I must conclude; in the whole Text we may observe
three notable things, the wisdom of faith, the confidence of hope, and the
earnestness of charity. The wisdom of faith stands in discerning the true
help in trouble; the confidence of hope stands in laying hold thereon
according to our interest in the person; the earnestness of charity stands in
our fervent importuning of him. Secondly, the wisdom of our faith stands in
selecting the argument of our Devotion; the confidence of our hope stands in
our public profession thereof; the earnestness of our charity stands in the
alacrity of our spirit, in the cheerful resounding of that publication. Of
this double wisdom, confidence, and cheerfulness, David is here an
excellent example unto us, God give us grace to make use of his example, for we
may all fall into his case boh of trouble, and comfort, bodily and ghostly.

PSALM. 51. VERSE 15. O Lord open thou my Lips, and my mouth shall show forth
thy praise.


YOu have heretofore heard from me, opening former words of this Psalm; that
King David out of a thankful heart promised to glorify God. Now God may be
glorified, either in regard of some special favor which he vouchsafes any of
us, or in regard of that general worth which he has in himself: David
promised to glorify God both ways. How he would do it in regard of the
special favor which himself had received, I showed you, when I opened the
Verse that goes immediately before; and in opening the Verse which now I have
read, I must show you, how he would glorify God, in regard of that general
worth which is in God. This is the scope of my present Text.

Gods general worth is meant by his Praise; for Praise is the due of worth:
God is most worthy, and therefore most rightly to be praised. What God
deserves David will yield; for he intends to be Praeco a proclaimer of Gods
praise: He will show it forth, Narrando, and Enarrando, the word signifies
both; he will not only deliver a plain history of it, but he will also make a
feeling Co^mentarie upon it. This he will do; but wherewith? That also is set
down in the Text he will do it with his Mouth; with his Mouth, that others
might hear; and that Mouth shall be his own, it shall be the Interpreter of
his own heart. You have heard his good intent, but it is a true pro^erbe, Man
purposes, God disposes: therefore, for the doing of what he intended David
presumes not of himself, but imploreth the help of God. O Lord open thou my
Lips. The Lips are as the door of the mouth; a door shut up naturally in
regard of the service of God; and therefore he had reason to desire, that it
may be supernaturally opened; Lord open thou, God only has the key which
will open this door, so open our Lips, that they may show forth the praise
of God.

These points which I have touched offer themselves to our consideration in the
parts of my Text: but if we lay together these parts, there will arise two other
good Observations out of the whole. The first is, the true use of our
abilities; when we receive them from God, we must use them to glorify him; if
God open our Lips, our Mouth must show forth his Praise. The second
Observation is implied; which is. If our mouth be used to worse purposes, then
certainly some other then God does open our Lips.

I have laid before you the Contents of this Scripture. God so open my Lips,
and your ears, that my mouth may show forth, and your hearts be affected with
Gods Praises, and our duties that shall be opened therein.

The first point that I specified was the Praises of God. The word Praise, as
many other elsewhere, does signify, not the Act but the Object, or to speak it
plainly not the due, but the merit of goodness; so Saint Paul tells the
Thessalonians, that they are his hope, his joy, 1. These. 2.^9.
his crown in the day of the Lord; hope, that is, the thing hoped for; joy,
that is, the thing wherein he shall joy, and Crown, that is the thing for
which he shall be crowned: so here the Praises of God is that for which God
deserves to be praised; so strict a conjunction is there between the Act and
the Object; and so inseparable should the one be from the other, that the name
of the one, may very fitly be used for the other, he that is good should
receive praise, and he that receives praise should be good. Gene. 1.31.
God saw all that he had made, and lo it was very good, and presently he
kept his Sabbath; whose native use is glorifying of, and glorying in, that
which is good: And herein should God be a Precedent unto man; he should not
put asunder what God has conjoined, but as the very word here admonishes, let
Praises be a Synonymon for goodness.

But when we come to determine what Goodness is understood in this word
Praise; some will have us look back unto the Verse going before, and will
have the goodness here meant restrained to the Righteousness there specified,
to the Evangelical Righteousness, the mercy of God in Christ, whereof David
had good proof. And indeed that is the prime Goodness of God, and calls
for the highest degree of Praise. God deserved praise when he made man of the
dust of the earth, so goodly a creature of so base stuff; but he deserved
much more praise, when he redeemed sinful man from the flames of hell, and
made him with his own Son an Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven; to bring so
forlorn a wretch to so exceeding happiness, must needs be a matter worthy of
extraordinary Praise; Ephesians. 1.6.
and S. Paul makes praise the end of that great Work; and in the Revelation
the Angels and Saints all fall down before the I hrone, and give glory for
the same, for that it was a work* not only of Almighty Power, but also of
unspeakable Grace; therefore had they reason, to give glory for the same. This
is true; but yet Praise must not in this place be so restrained: David before
his fall had more contemplations of God then one, and made his Psalms
accordingly; and indeed the very word here used for Praise is Tehillah, and
has good cognation with Tehillim the Title of the Psalms; therefore may we
well extend the one as far as the other; the argument of the Praise, as far
as the Argument of the Psalms; and then you shall find, that there is no Book
in the Bible whose Argument will not come under some one or other Psalm of
David's: he has Psalms of the Creation, Psalms of Redemption, Psalms
Historical and Prophetical, Legal and Sapientiall Psalms; having been so
copious, and in such variety having indicted Psalms before his fall, it is not
likely, that after his fall he will confine his thoughts; and not be so large
in Gods praises, nor intermeddle with all sorts of them. Certainly, when God
is called the praise of Israel, Psalm. 22. ver. 3.
it must be conceived in that wideness which is mentioned, Psalm. 145. All thy
works praise thee, O Lord; for God is totus laudabilis, nothing is in God,
nothing comes from God that is not praise worthy.

So that there is something to be observed in the word Tua, thy praise, that
is, the praise which is proper unto Thee. Gregory Nyssen writing the life of
another Gregory called Thaumaturgus gives a good note, Nulla vera est Laus,
etc. There is no praise truly so called which consists not in that which the
person praised may account to be his own; now that I account his own which
abides with him for ever. By this rule praise is proper only unto God; for
with him only in Goodness is there no variableness, nor shadow of change: He
that praises man cannot praise him but as a mutable creature, so good to day
that he may be bad to morrow, he waxes and he waneth even like the Moon;
yea, and when he is full of goodness, as the Moon of light, yet are there
Maculae in Luna; as stains in the Moon; so have there been blemishes in the
best of those which have been but mere men; the Scripture that has
Chronicled the Patriarchs lives, has Chronicled their faults also. God only
is as the Sun, 1. John 1.5.
he is Light in whom there is no darkness at all; as he is constantly so is he
entirely Holy.

Therefore Praise when it is applied unto men is a word of limitation, it
implies inconstancy or defect, it never so praises but leaves some place
for dispraise; but when it is applied unto God, it is a phrase of
Equipollencie, Exodus 23.
it is all one with God; which is fairly insinuated unto Moses, when he
desires to see Gods face; you shall find in the pursuit of that story, that
Gods glory and Gods goodness are aequipollent terms: and it must be our
endeavor. as far as human frailty will permit, herein to resemble God, to
be nothing, to do nothing, but that which may deserve praise. And let this
suffice concerning the first point, the praise of God. Let us now see what King
David intends to do about this praise; his intent is, to show it forth.

I told you the word does signify Narrare, and Enarrare, to deliver Gods
praises by way of History, and then upon that he studieth to make a feeling
Commentary. In King David's Psalms you may find all kind of Histories, you may
well call them an abridgement of the Historical Books, yea and of the
Prophetical too, which are a kind of History; there are few Narrations that
tend to the praise of God, whereat he has not touched. But his special
commendations stands in the Enarration, in the Commentary that he makes upon
Divine History; he makes us see herein that which otherwise we would not
heed, he makes us sensible of that which otherwise we would not regard. Take
a touch of it in some particulars. He has made many Psalms of the Creation;
read the 8. read the 19. read the 104. see how powerfully he does work the
observation thereof into the hearts of men; in the 8. Psalm mark those words;
O Lord our Lord how excellent is thy name in all the Earth! and again, What is
man that thou art mindful of him? Or the son of man that thou visitest him?
And how powerful are those words, Psalm the 19. The heavens declare the
glory of God, and the firmament shows his handie work, Day unto day
utters speech, etc. but beyond all goes 104. Psalm: Bless the Lord O my
soul, O Lord my God thou art very great, thou art clothed with honor and
majesty, etc. the 107. Psalm is about Gods Providence, but mark the Burden
that is added to every branch, Oh that men would praise the Lord for his
goodness, and declare his wondrous works that he does for the children of
men. The same method does he use in opening the Redemption, Psalm 103. the Law
Psalm 19. and 119. the Deliverance out of Egypt in many Psalms; it were
endless to go over all particulars; take it for a general rule, you shall
find in him never a History whereupon he does not make such a Commentary,
wherein he does not point out some thing that is obseruable, and endeavor to
make us sensible thereof, and to entertain it as matter of Gods Praise; and
this is that which he means by showing forth. Whereby with all he teaches
us, that the occurrents of Gods Providence, which befall our persons, fall out
in our times, or any way offer themselves unto us, must be looked into with
such a reflecting, such an adoring eye, that we must take notice of, and give
honor unto God for his power, his wisdom, his goodness, his justice, his
mercy, that shines herein, and shows it self unto the world. Thus we must
learn to show forth the praise of God.

David adds moreover wherewith he will show it forth; with his mouth; with the
Mouth that others might hear the Praises. And indeed ore fit Confessio, as
fraudis, so Laudis; Luke 12.9.
men therewith as they must confess their sins: so must they set forth Gods
praises, show them forth unto the world, for he that will not confess God
before men, God will not confess him before his blessed Angels. The Church is
a Body, and what befalls any member may befall every one, be it matter of hope,
or fear, sorrow or joy, therefore ought every man to communicate to the other
his case, and his knowledge, to work in them by the same means the like
affection which he feels in himself: yea though we do not feel it, yet
should we have a fellow-feeling each of the others affections, whereof we
cannot ordinarily take notice, except each be informed by the others Mouth. The
Mouth being the ordinary means of communication, the trumpe whereby we do
mutually stir up our selves unto the Praises of God.

But when mention is made of the Mouth, we must not exclude the Heart; for
though the instrument be the Mouth, yet the Musician is the Heart, he causes
the tune of the voice to sound, and adds the Dittie to the Tune; and
certainly the Music will never be wel-come to God, should any part of man be
wanting thereunto; Psalm. 103.
therefore David thus calls upon himself, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all
that is within me bless his Holy name.

Gregory the Great works this observation out of the word Meum, my mouth;
there be many (says he) that praise God, but not with their own mouth, such
as are the covetous, the wantons, etc. They personate some other, they seem to
take unto themselves another man's tongue, when they utter that which they
conceive not in their own hearts. But let such men know, that their Prayers
shall never have access unto Gods ears, whose hearts are estrainged from
Righteousness. Wherefore let us imitate David in another place, (...)
who said, that his Soul should be filled as it were with marrow and fatness,
when he praises God with joyful Lips. Where withal we learn a good
property of him that praises; and that is, he performs it with pleasure;
and indeed no man can sincerely praise, (...)
but he must delight in that which he does praise; for praising is (...) (as
Nyssen speaks) a loving disposition. And Saint Austin, ^au^at Deum veraciter
qui eum amat, he praises God sincerely, that loves he loves him unfeignedly;
and if our delight be not in him, we must not think that we do (as we ought)
praise him.

In a word: you heard before, that Deus was totus Laudabilis, wholly to be
praised, and we must be toti Laudantes, have no part of body or soul that must
not be an instrument to sound forth Gods praise; our whole life should be a
Psalm thereof. And let this suffice touching King David's Intent.

The Intent is good; but men may intend more then they can do, good men have
been over consident in their good meanings. Saint Peter thought he would never
forsake Christ, and he would die in his desence, yet when he was put to it,
he not only cowardly shrunk from him, but also fearfully denied him:
wherefore David is well advised, he presumes not of his own strength, but
has recourse unto Gods help, O Lord open thou my lips.

The Lips are the door of the mouth, a door that is shut up, therefore
need to be opened, and it is worth the marking that the word which we
translate open, is not only of the same original with a door in the Hebrew
tongue, but it is also a word which the Prophets do use in foretelling the
miracles of Christ, for he was (amongst other things) to open the mouths of
the Dumb, and in the Gospel working such a cure, he uses the word Ephata,
(...)
be thou opened; loosing the tongue by the ear.

But we must understand, that in the corporal cure there was an intimation of
the spiritual; and indeed Christ had never come into the world to cure the
corporal, had it not been thereby to bring us to an higher conceit of him,
that he was the Physician of our souls, and came to enable them to speak the
language of Canaan; And this is the opening of the lips which King David here
desires.

This is a great work; great in regard of the difficulty that is in the
thing, (...) 6
or the inabilitie that is in us. There is a difficulty in the thing; for we
cannot praise God farther then we know him, but how little a portion is heard
of him? (...)
We may speak much (says the son of Syracke) yet come short when we
glorify the Lord; exalt him as much as we can: for even yet will he sarre
exceed, and when you exalt him put forth all your strength, and be not weary;
for you can never go far enough. There are yet hid greater things then these
be, Psalm 14^.13
for we have seen but a few of his works. David in few words tells us; that
his praise is above Heaven and earth, that is the conclusion which he sets
down after he had summoned all creatures to praise the Lord.

Seeing God then is above all praise, it is certain, that he cannot be
worthily praised of us, by reason of the difficulty of the work. But were
there less difficulty in that, yet is there great inabilitie in us;
inabilitie from our Affections; inabilitie from our Conscience. From our
Affections; there are two preualent ones that hinder us in this work; first,
Spes Lucri, secondly, Metus periculi; the wages of iniquity will hire a
Balaam, a Judas, to curse Gods people, the subject of Gods praise, and (though
he be the top of Gods praise) to betray the Savior of the world: how many in
all Ages have been so far bewitch with worldly honor and profit? Have
fallen down and worshipped the Idol of men's fancies, and blasphemed God and
his truth?

The hopc of gain is a great tongue tie; The fear of danger is a greater; the
very Apostles themselves fot a time felt the strength thereof; and after their
time it made many Renegadoes and Apostata's, Job 2.4.
Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life, he will
redeem that, though it be with cursing of God himself; the world has had had
too many spectacles of such fear of danger.

But if we can master both these unruly Affections; yet will the conscience of
sin be a bridle to our tongues, it will make us silent, In Leuit. c 13.
or put us to silence. Cyril of Alexandria moralizing those words of Moses,
that he that is a Leaper shall have his mouth covered, says, that he which is
in the leaprosie of sin, has lost all authority of speaking; for how should
he teach another that has not taught himself? Comment. in Nazian. Psalm. 137.3.
And Nicetas to this purpose wittily allegorizeth those words of the Psalm,
How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange land? A sinner is truly a
stranger, and he that is in the state of sin, is farther from God, then
Babylon from Jerusalem; therefore does his conscience tell him, that he is in
no case to make melody to the Lord. Certainly, Chap. 6.
Esaias when in a vision he heard the Seraphins sing the Lords song, Holy, Holy,
Lord God of Hoasts, heaven and earth are full of thy glory, was thereby put in
mind of the fault of his own lips, and the lips of the Jews, which made
him cry out, Woe is me, that am a man of polluted lips, and dwell in the
midst of a people of polluted lips; neither was he quiet until a Seraphin
touched his lips with a coal from the Altar.

But put the case some man may be so foole-hardie, that though he be a sinner,
yet will he not be silent; he shall be put to silence; the unclean spirit
gave glory vnro Christ, when he said, I know thee who thou art, the Holy one
of God; But Jesus rebuked him, saying, hold thy peace; Mark 2.
and Saint Paul refused the testimony of a spirit of divination, Acts 16.
though he spoke honorably of him, and of his followers; these men are the
servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation; yet did
he command him out of the Damsel, and suffered him to speak no more. Neither
is this check given only to wicked spirits, but even unto every wicked man
says God, What have thou to do to declare my statutes, Psalm. 50.
or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth; seeing thou hate
instruction, Eccles. 15.9.
and have cast my words behind thee? Praise is not comely in the mouth of a
sinner; for he that is unholy does defile that which is holy; Hagga. 2.82.
therefore no man may presume to touch sacred things with profane hands, nor
with a profane tongue to speak sacred words. By this time you perceive that
the showing forth of the praises of God is a great work, and whether we look
upon the difficulty that is in the thing, or the inabilitie that is in man,
David had reason to pray, Aperilabia, open my lip;.

But to whom does he pray? To the Lord; Lord open thou my Lips; And he has a
good ground to pray so: Proves 16 1.
Solomon teaches that the preparation of the heart is from man, but the
answer of the tongue is from the Lord; he is the key-keeper of our mouth, if
he shut, no body can open, and if he open no body can shut; ^^^d 4.
God tells Moses that this is his power, Who makes man's mouth, or who makes
the dumb, have not I the Lord? And verily, were it no more but our natural
speech that we desire, we must seek it of him, Acts 17 2^.
in whom only we live, move, and have our being, and who in the person of
Zachary shows, Luke 1
that he gives and takes away even that speech at his pleasure. How much
more must we account him to be the fountain of our supernatural speech?
Certainly Christ gives the glory thereof unto him; (...). 50. Act^ 2
the Lord (says he) has given me the tongue of the learned; and it was from
God that the fiery tongues descended upon the Apostles, Psalm. 8.2.
and enabled them to speak, it is God that out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings has perfected praise. Men may be otherwise satis loquaces, of
eloquent, of free speech; who when they come to the service of God, seem to be
possessed with a spirit that is deaf and dumb, they had need that Christ
should say unto them, Ephata, be thou opened, they will not be able so much as
to say, 1 Cor. 12.3.
Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. But if God once open our lips,
then we shall be able for to speak.

Neither to speak only, for there is more included in the phrase then so,
Psalm 45. Colos 2.
but Grace shall be powered into our lips, our words shall be poudred with
Salt (as Saint Paul speaks) God that opens the lips, will also Suggerere
materiam, supply the matter of our speech; for that is it David aymeth at,
that he may again be the Penman of God, and that his tongue may be the Pen of
a ready writer, that he may speak nothing but that which is indicted by the
Holy Ghost, that his words may flow always from the grace of Sanctification,
and that he may, as he was before, be a Prophet also, and be inspired to speak
by the grace of edification.

Neither does he aim in this Prayer only at the matter of his speech, but at
the manner also, that he may speak with freedom, and with wisdom; with
freedom, that he be no more checked with his consciousnesse of sin. And
indeed ingenuous freedom in praising of God, is a good argument that our
souls are possessed with the peace which passes all understanding, Philip. 4 7
and joy of the Holy Ghost. As in the Prayer he desires freedom: so does he
desire wisdom of speech also; it is Gregory the Greats note, Illius os
aperit Deus, etc. God opens his mouth who does attend not only what he
says, but also when, where; and to whom. Our tongue though it be a little
member, Cap. 3. T^e^ 28. Chap 22.
yet it is an unruly one (says Saint James) Life and death is in the power of
the tongue; which made the son of Syracke to move this question, Who shall
set a watch upon my mouth, and a seal of wisdom upon my Lips, that I fall
not suddenly by them, and that my tongue destroy me not? Whereunto you may
shape an answer out of Daut^s Prayer, Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth,
Psalm. 141.
and keep thou the door of my Lips; so that without this Prayer he could
never have made good that promise which elsewhere he makes, Psalm. 39.
I said I will take heed to my wares, that I offend not with my tongue. One
Pam^o in the Ecclesiastical story is reported to have studied that short
lesson many years, and yet in the end he professed, that he could not attain to
the exact practice thereof. And which of us is here that offends not in his
tongue? And therefore good reason have the best, even the very best to Pray
with David, Lord open thou my mouth, and humbly to surrender the government of
his tongue unto God.

Finally, by this which you have heard, you may easily gather, that lips are
to be understood as mouth before, this is no more exclusive then that, the
heart, the whole man must follow the Lips, as before they did the tongue; for
look with what we will praise God, for that must we crave Gods guiding and
assistance. And let this suffice for the particular points which are contained
in this Text.

I come now to the general, which arise out of the parts laid together.
Whereof the first is this, that seeing David prays, Open my lips, and my
mouth shall show forth thy praise, we must not beg ought of God which we
mean not to employ to his glory, that which comes from him, must return
unto him again; he that is the first cause, must be the last end of all his
creatures, and of their gifts. Therefore when God first opened Zacharies mouth,
then presently he fell to, Luke 1.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc.

When God first endowed us, he did it that we might the better serve him; by
our own default we are disenabled, and out of the sense thereof we must
confess, that without a second gift of grace we can do nothing, not so much
as think a good thought, nor open our lips unto his praise, he must work in
us both to will and do it. Philip. 2.13.


Far be it then from us, that we should with those profane persons, Psalm.
12. say, Our tongues are our own, we will speak, who is Lord over us? And let
ou^ tongues run wild: Certainly God never opens our lips for such end^;
he does not furnish us with any gifts, whereby we should oppose his glory.
But all that comes from him, does show forth his virtues unto the world; In
Exodus c. 3.
and therefore if our tongues produce worse effect^, there is some other then
God that opens our lips. Vereor (says Origin) no sint aliqui quorum
diabolus aperiat ora, many so speak that a man may well fear that the Devil
has charge of their lips; for their words honor him, he is a Liar, and
deceit is under their lips; he is a murderer, and their throats are open
sepulchers; he an impure spirit, and some men's talk is nothing but ribaldrie;
and does not the Devil open their mouths? In some places the Scripture
speaks it expressly; Matthew. 26.
the Devil entered into Judas, presently his tongue fell to conference with
the High Priest, what he might have for betraying of Christ; Satan filled the
heart of Ananias and Saphira, Acts ^.
and they fell to lying against the Holy Ghost; a lying spirit entered into
Michaia the false Prophet, and he presently seduced Ahab to go and be slain
at Ramoth Gilead; (...)
and what else mean those three unclean spirits like Frogs, that came out
of the mouth of the Dragon, (...)
of the beast, and of the false Prophet to gather the Kings of the earth to the
Battle of the great day of God Almighty? Certainly they are those impostors
by whose tongues the Devil does abuse the world.

There are some that have mungrell tongues, out of whose mouth comes blessing
and cursing, that can bless God within the Church, and curse their Brethren
when they are without it; whom I must remember of Saint James his censure,
(...) 3 1.
My brethren these things ought not so to be, can the Fig tree bear Olive
berries, or a Vine Figs? No fountain can send forth at the same hole sweet
water and bitter, fresh and salt. What nature abhors in unreasonable
creatures, sin produces commonly in creatures that are reasonable, are not
we then worse then they? Yea verily; much worse; in that they are but natural
monsters and we are moral. It were much better for us to be plain dumb,
then to be of graceless speech; (...) 12.
for we shall give an account for every idle, much more for every evil word;
I had rather then never speak, then not speak to Gods glory.

And yet mistake not; God needs not our praising of him, only he would have
us use our tongues so well, as that we may be at the day of Judgment praised
by him. Yea, s^eing praising is a delightful employment, God would thereby
cheer up our spirits with a sweet foretaste of that life which we shall lead
in heaven; for praising is the Angels work; in the Church Militant we have
both praying and praising, but in the Church Triumphant there is only
praising, there is no praying at all; that Eucharisticall sacrifice shall
continue when all Propitiatories do cease; for praise is the everlasting
sacrifice of the New Testament, and of that the saying is true; Praise shall
never depart from the mouth of a Christian.

Jews and Christians have both agreed to repeat daily this Text in their
Liturgy; out of that which you have heard you may gather, that it is not
without cause that they have so done: We say it daily; I pray God we may have
learned this day to say it well hereafter; so may we that now in Gods House on
earth speak his praise, sing for ever Halelu: ta^, praise ye the Lord, with
the Saints in Heaven.

The words, as I have opened them are conceived in a Prayer, but as they are
read in the I salter, they represent a Prophecy, the odds is not great,
because a good Prayer if it be conceived for spiritual grace, is indeed a
prophecy, for he that disposes to sue, does purpose to grant.

What shall we say then to these things? But even pray, that seeing God has
the key of our Ears, as well as of our Tongues, and by the temper of our
ears, we may guess what will be the temper of our tongues; and he that has
a deligh to hear his duty, will have a tongue ready to yield God his due,
and God will never open his tongue, that suffers the Devil to keep the key of
his ear, Let us (I say) pray, that by being willingly deaf, we do not become
unwilling dumb, but that Christ by his Ephphata would rid us of the spirit
both deaf and dumb; that having heard these words as we ought, we may use our
tongues as is meet. That we may so do, let us all jointly present our humble
petitions unto God in the words of my Text. O Lord open thou our Lips, and
our mouths shall show forth thy praise.

Blessed are they, O Lord, that dwell in thy House, Psalm. 8^.
they shall always be praising thee. SELAH. PSALM. 51. VERSE 16. For thou
desire not Sacrifice, else would I give it: thou delightest not in burnt
offering.


KIng David in thankfulness for Gods mercy promises religiously to serve
him; but whereas Gods service is either Moral or Ceremonial, he voweth a
Moral and not a Ceremonial service: Of this choice he yields a reason, and
that reason is Gods good pleasure, he makes Gods pleasure to set bounds unto
his Vow, and is willing to enlarge or contract his Vow according to Gods
pleasure. To contract it; as appears in that which he speaks of the
Ceremonial worship, for he forbeares it; and to enlarge it, as appears in
that which he speaks of the Moral; for that is it which he observes as
acceptable unto God.

On this Verse which now I have read, we shall hear of his conceit
concerning the Ceremonial worship; and what he conceiueth of the Moral
worship which is answerable thereunto, when I open the next Verse, I shall then
show unto you.

The Ceremonial worship is expressed in two words, Sacrifice and Burnt
offerings; which words may betaken either in a large, or in a restrained sense.
In a large; so may you reduce unto them all Ceremonial worship; in a
restrained, and so they comprehend the two offerings which the Law required for
a Ceremonial reconciliation of a sinner.

Take them which way you will, my Text sets down Gods disposition toward
them, and King David's conformity to that disposition of God.

Gods disposition is twofold; First, he does not desire them, secondly, he does
not delight in them; before they are offered, he does not desire them, neither
does he delight in them when they are offered: so must you in this place
difference Gods Desire and his Delight.

To this disposition of God King David does conform his service, he professes
that he would have tendered these Ceremonial offerings if God had affected
them, and only because God did not affect them, therefore he does not tender
them; both these propositions are wrapped up in these words, Else would I give
it; I would give sacrifices and burnt offerings if thou did desire them, if
thou did delight in them, but thou desire not sacrifices, thou delightest
not in burnt offerings, therefore do not I presume to give them to reconcile
my self by them.

These be the Heads whereunto I purpose to refer whatsoever I shall deliver
in farther opening of this Text; Now because you may mistake in your Devotion
(as the Jews did) be persuaded in the fear of God to listen attentively to
what shall be said, that you may learn of King David, to pass a true
judgment upon all Ceremonial worship, and upon all corporal service.

Let us come then to the particulars, whereof the first is those words wherein
the Ceremonies are expressed; and they are two; Sacrifice, and Burnt offerings.
Which words may be taken first in a large sense, they may comprehend all kind
of animat Offerings, that were burnt upon the Altar; for of them some were
Merocausta, burnt but in a part; the rest was the Priests portion alone, or
else he did share in it with him that presented the sacrifice. Other Offerings
were called Holocausta, they were wholly burnt; neither the Sacrificer nor the
Offerer had any part therein, God reserved it wholly to himself; so that if
we thus far enlarge these words, they wrap in them all kind of corporal
Sacrifices; Ruffinus, and others, give them so wide a signification.

That signification is true; but happily it is not so proper to this Text; a
more restrained sense may better fit this present Argument. Observe then, that
these words do contain the two Offerings which God in Moses Law prescribed
for the reconciliation of a sinner; he was required to bring one expiatory,
the Law calls it a sinne-offering, and that is it which is here, as
elsewhere meant by the general name of Sacrifice; another Dedicatory, which
was called an Holocaust, and is here translated a burnt offering, but you must
understand it burnt not in part but wholly; therefore it is sometimes called a
whole-burnt-offering. These two Offerings went together in the ceremonial
reconciliation of a sinner; we find it so in Leuit, at the purifying of a woman
after Childbirth, Chap. 12. at the cleansing of a Leper, Chap. 14. finally, at
the expiation of the Tabernacle or Temple, and therein of the whole Church of
Israel, Chap 16. In all these places you shall find that they go together.

But to look a little farther into these Offerings; there are two remarkable
things in them; 1. the Mystery, and 2. the Method. There is a Mystery in either
of them; Romans 6.
In the Sacrifice: That teaches that the wages of sin is death; the innocent
beast was slain, but the sinner first put his hands upon him, to note what we
deserve, and Christ endured for us; from the guilt of our sins we are not
freed but by the virtue of his death. The Mystery of the Burnt offering, is,
we owe our selves wholly unto God, and to him must we give our selves; but
first we must be mortified, we cannot ascend in our thoughts unto Heaven,
except we mortify our carnal lusts that grouell upon the earth. To note this
mortification and vivification of our selves, entire mortification, entire
vivification which leaves no hold unto sin in any part of our body or power
of our soul, and which withholds no part or power of either from the service
of God, and which withholds no part or power of either from the service of God,
was the Holocaust so handled, as we read in the Law; first slain, then
wholly consumed by fire.

Besides the Mystery, there is a Method to be observed in these words; K.
David does not only express them but digest them, digest them according to the
prescript of the Law; when they were both offered the Sacrifice was presented,
before the Burnt offering. The Moral thereof is very good; We cannot have the
honor to serve God, Proverb, 31.27.
except we first find favor to be discharged of our sins; the Sacrifice of
the wicked is an abomination unto the Lord, and without holiness it is
impossible for a man to please God: therefore we must offer our expiatory
Sacrifice before our Dedicatory burnt offering; we must make our peace with
God, before we presume to come into his presence.

Finally, we must take good heed, that we neither maine the parts of our
Reconciliation, nor pervert their order. Maine them we do if we offer the
Sacrifice, but withhold the burnt offering, desire remission of our sins, and
take no care to become the servants of God. Or if we offer the burnt offering
and withhold the Sacrifice, put our selves into the service of God, but yet do
cherish a root of bitterness in our hearts, do not unburden our consciences
of sin. And how few are there that thus fully reconcile themselves to God,
and join together both these Offerings? Some can be contented to be rid of the
unclean Spirit, and have their house swept and garnished, but they keep it
empty, and vnimployed, entertain not God, neither do they deuote themselves
unto his service. Othersome are contented that God shall dwell in them, and
they will be his Temple, but they will have this Temple to be also an House of
Merchandise, a Den of thieues, a very Synagogue of Satan. So do men maime
their Reconciliation, they are loath to be wholly reconciled unto God.

As we must not maime our Reconciliation: so we must not pervert the parts
thereof; the burnt offering must not go before the Sacrifice; neither must we
dedicate our selves to God before we are cleansed from our sins; that were
to put new wine into old bottels, Mark 2.2^.
new cloth into an old garment, which if we do, Christ tells us in the Gospel
what will become of it, the bottels will break, and the garment will rent; and
grace will never abide in a sinful soul, he will quickly return like a
dog to his vomit, and a Swine to wallow in the mire; We must be new
creatures, or else never let us offer to be the servants of God. And let this
suffice for opening, of the two branches of the ceremonial worships; I come
now to consider Gods disposition toward them, and that is twofold; He does not
desire them; he does not delight in them.

Of the words Desire and Delight, though one be joined to Sacrifice, and the
other to Burnt offering, yet do they both reach either of them, and do
oftentimes signify the same thing; but yet here they do not; so I difference
them, and I did it by warrant of the Scripture which observes two parts of Gods
disposition; before these things are offered God does not desire them, that is,
he has given no precept concerning them; God speaks it plain in Jeremy,
Chap 7 2.
Put your burnt offering unto your sacrifice, and eat flesh, for I spoke not
unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day when I brought them out of the
Land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices. Psalm 40
And the Psalmist, Sacrifice and offerings thou did not desire, burnt
offerings, and sinne-offerings have thou not required. In the fiftieth Psalm
there is a plain denial of them, I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices
or thy burnt offerings, because they have not been before me, I will take no
bullock out of thy house, nor he goat out of thy fold. These places do
justify the words of my text, and show plainly that God did not desire them
before they were offered, he gave no precept concerning them.

And as no Precept, so no Promise; he did as little delight in them after they
were offered, as he did desire them before they were offered; read it in
Jeremy, Chap. 6.
To what purpose comes there unto me Incense from Saba, and the sweet Cane
from a far country? your burnt offerings are not acceptable, Chap. 10.
etc. In Esaias God does passionately amplify this point: Hear the Word of the
Lord ye Rulers of Sodom, give ear unto the Law of our God ye people of
Gomorrah, to what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me, says
the Lord? I am full of the burnt offerings of Rams, and the fat of fed beasts,
I delight not in the blood of bullocks, of lambs, Chap. 66.
and of the goats, etc. and elsewhere; He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew
a man; he that sacrifices a lamb, is as if he cut off a dogs neck; he that
offers an oblation, as if he offered Swines blood; he that offers incense
is as if he blessed an Idol. Chap 5. Chap. 5.
You may read the like in Micah, and Amos; so that be they part sacrifices,
be they whole sacrifices, be they Expiatory, or be they dedicatory, God does
not require them, God delights not in them; there is no precept that
requires their performance, there is no promise that does warrant their
acceptance.

And indeed though Desire and Delight, or Precept and Promise are differenced
as I have showed you, yet have they a dependencie the one upon the other; for
therefore does not God delight in these things when they are offered, because
he did not desire that they should be offered unto him; for promise of
acceptance depends upon the precept of offering; whereof there is a precept,
thereunto there is anext a promise, and a promise does presuppose a precept in
all the service of God, prove one, and conclude both, and you overthrow both,
if you can justly deny either. So that if my text did not expressly affirm,
yet would it by consequence infer; that God makes no account of this
Ceremonial worship.

But this is a Paradoxe, for Sacrifices are the peculiar of God, and no man
ever offered them but only unto him who was, or (at least) was reputed to be
God; neither any that have accepted them esteemed themselves less, nor would
go for less in the opinion of the Offerers: Men and Devils that have robbed
God of his honor, have to that end chosen this kind of Sacrilege; by
Sacrifices they have entiled themselves unto the glory of God; and does not God
out of his jealousy make it death for any man to sacrifice to any other but
himself? Exodus 22 20.
and for himself he gives this express Law, Exodus 23.15.
Thou shall not appear before the Lord empty; and what is that, but Thou shall
sacrifice unto him?

But to come more close unto the point. We find directly in the Law Gods both
precept and promise concerning Sacrifice. His precept; for in Leuit. (to name
no other place) how curiously does God distinguish the kinds, set down the
circumstances of all Sacrifices, and the accessories thereunto, and that by way
of command? The Patriarchs before Moses did sacrifice, and can we be so absurd
as to think they did it without the direction of God? No verily; for they had
a spirit of Prophecy.

As the Precept is clear, so is the Promise also; you shall find it in the
same place where you find the Precept; in the first and second of Leuit. you
shall find it called a sweet savor unto the Lord; in the 4. and 8. etc. it is
called an Atonement; Genes. 4.
the first Sacrifice that we read of was Abels, and the Text says plainly
that God had a respect unto Abel and unto his offering; the second was that of
Noah, and of that the text says, Genes. 9.
that, God smelt a savor of rest; Job sacrificed for his friends, Chap. 42.
and the Lord accepted him; and when Aaron offered his first Sacrifice, God
testified his acceptance by fire from heaven: Leuit. 9.
so that it is as clear that God delights in Sacrifices, as that he does
require them, and the promise can be as little doubted as the precept.

What shall we say then to my Text? how shall we make it agree with the rest
of the Scriptures? surely we may do it easily and fairly. God is
All-sufficient, and God is a Spirit; being all-sufficient he cannot need them,
and being a Spirit he cannot be sustained by them; both these points are
clear in the fiftieth Psalm, where God shows that there can be no color
that he should need them, seeing all the beasts of the Forest are his, and so
are the cattle upon a thousand mountains; and God casts off the absurdity
of his being sustained by them, with that pressing and conuicting question:
Think thou that I eat bulls flesh, and drink the blood of Goats? Lucian
scoffingly brings in the Heathen Gods, as if they took great content in the
nidour of the sacrifices; but it were profane to think so of the true God.
The occasion then of instituting Sacrifices was not from God, and that is the
first thing we must learn.

Whence then was it taken? surely from man. We consist of bodies and souls,
and we need by our bodies to be put in mind of those things which concern
our soul, and therefore did God institute them; he did institute them to
help our infirmities. But what did he intend to remember us of by them?
First, of our Ransom; Galat. 4.4.
Christ came not until the fullness of time, but his death was to work
presently upon the Fall, and in that respect he is called, Revel. 13.8.
the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. That before Christ came, men
should not forget by whom they had their redemption and the remission of
sins, God instituted Sacrifices.

Secondly, we were to be remembered of our Homage, we were to acknowledge, that,
what we held we had of God, and were to seek unto God for what we did want;
And in remembrance hereof did God institute Eucharisticall and Votiue
Sacrifices.

Some think that they should have been offered if man had never sinned, but
the Scripture is silent, and I will not be so curious as to dispute it. Let it
pass inter pie credibilia, and it is as possible there might have been
Sacrifices, as there were Sacraments before the Fall; witness the two Trees,
the one of Life, and the other of the knowledge of good and evil.

You may add a third reason which is observed by the Fathers, and that is;
That God therefore instituted by Moses the Sacrifices, to keep his people from
Heathenish Idolatry, and distinguish them from other Societies; which reason
must be warily understood; for it cannot be meant that God took occasion from
the Heathen to institute Sacrifices amongst the Jews; for the Heathen had it
by tradition from the Patriarchs, and God himself was the first Author of
Sacrifices. But this is true, that the Heathen had corrupted four things in a
Sacrifice. First, The Materials, for they used to sacrifice those things which
God forbad. Secondly, the Form, for they corrupted it with many superstitions
of their own. Thirdly, the End; they knew not wherefore they were ordained;
and fourthly, the Owner; they did not know to whom they did belong. From these
deprauations God did cleanse the Sacrifices in the Law of Moses, and so did
distinguish his people from other nations, not by sacrificing, but by
sacrificing as they ought.

The last end of instituting Sacrifices was the provision for the Priests, and
the sacred Feasts, whereat the poor were relieved. These be the reasons why
God instituted Sacrifices, wherein you see that they all import a relief
vouchsafed man.

But yet we have not found out the true ground, why God does not desire nor
delight in sacrifice and burnt offerings; for put the case he did institute
them out of compassion toward men, yet may he desire what himself had
commanded, and delight in that whereunto he has annexed the promise of
acceptance. We must therefore go on and observe that Sacrifices are bona quia
praecepta, non precepta quia bona; they are things in their own nature
indifferent; but they become more then indifferent, they deserve the name of
Good in virtue of the commandment of God: but they lose this worth if so be
we place it in the Sacrifice, and not in Gods Ordinance; no sooner do we so
misdeeme them, but presently God does not desire them; God does not delight in
them.

But to wade farther into their estimate, and to discover more near grounds of
that truth which is in my text; ^t (...) Dei, lib. 10 cap. 5.
in the Ordinance of Sacrifices there are two things considerable, opus
operatum, and opus operantis; Chap. 10.
the Offering, and the Offerer. Touching the Offering S. Austin has a true
rule; Omne sacrificium visibile fuit inuisibilis sacramentum; Sacrifices were
but shadows of good things to come, as S. Paul speaks to the Hebrews; There
was in them a sign, and a thing signified, and the sign was commanded not for
it self, but for the thing signified, to represent our Ransom, or to testify
our Homage. Separate or oppose the sign and the thing signified, and presently
you corrupt Gods ordinance; and then God does not desire, God does not delight
in such Sacrifices. For in the case of our Ransom if you separate, what do
you but transfer the price of Christ's saving blood unto the contemptible
blood of bulls and goats? the legal Sacrifices did purify the flesh, Acts
13.
and made men sit for the visible congregation, not for the invisible without
their reference to the death of Christ; and therefore does Saint Paul say, that
by him all that believe, are justified from all those things from which they
could not be justified by the Law of Moses. And what wonder? seeing our
Ethics, or Oeconomicks, or Politics, whatsoever virtue we have private or
public, if it find any grace in the eyes of God, it is commended by the death,
by the Obedience of Christ.

If we may not separate, much less may we oppose the sign to the thing
signified, set Moses against Christ, and in defense of his sacrifices vilify
the sacrifice of Christ; And yet such blind zeal transported many of the
Jews, who so became guilty of sacrilegious blasphemy.

That which is true concerning our Ransom, holds also concerning our Homage;
we may not separate, we may not oppose the sign and the thing signified. If
we separate; what do we but give a beast unto God, and a man unto the
Devil? and seeing the gift measures the respect, to whom we give the best, it
is an argument that we love him most; He that so sacrifices in stead of
honoring, does dishonor God.

Oppose the sign to the thing signified, and then we do plainly dishonor
our selves; for if we offer what we think best, then, in our judgment, we
are not so good as a beast; and he that judges so deserves rather to go for
a beast then a man; And how should God accept any thing from him, that does so
basely vnderualew himself? Certainly, when such persons come with such
Sacrifices, it may truly then be said, God does not desire them, God does not
delight in them. Greg. Mag.
The rather; because (as I told you) God in his Ordinance did prescribe as well
opus operantis, as opus operatum: Attendit Deus (says S. Gregory) ad affectum
magis quam ad censum, nec animaduertit quantum in eius sacrificio, sed ex
quanto proficiscatur; Sacrifices pass with God, not according to the worth of
the offering, but the good will of the offerer; if that be wanting, the rest
finds no acceptance.

Out of this which you have heard, you may learn, why the Prophets do so
declaime against the Ceremonial worship, and why they speak so contemptibly
of it they are not to be understood absolutely, but relatiuely; relatiuely to
the Cautions of the Law; which are two; first a sound opinion of the Offering;
and secondly a religious devotion in the Offerer. When men's opinions did not
conioyne orderly the sign with the thing signified, or when they came not
piously affected to the service of God, then God did not desire their
Sacrifice, he did not delight in their burnt offerings.

In a word; in their Ceremonial worship, there was Aliquid Primarium, and
Aliquid Secundarium, there was something to have the pre-eminence, and
something that was but to attend that, when two such things meet, Math. 23.23.
then Christ's rule is good; Hoc opportet facere, illud non omittere; we must
spend our greatest devotion upon the Principal, but not neglect the
Secundarie; Had the Jews kept themselves within these bounds, God would never
have derogated from that which they did by his own Ordinance. And if (for our
abuse) God so dis-regard what himself commands, how vile will corporal
worship, which man does iustitute, be in his eyes, when it is soured with the
same leaven? Which yields a good Item to the Church of Rome, whose devotion
is most changeable in this kind.

But all this while I have taken the words, Sacrifice and burnt offering at
large; I told you that the Argument of the Psalm draws them into a narrower
room. In relation to King David's case, they note unto us the two parts of the
Reconciliatory Offerings, the Sin offering, and the Holocaust; and then my
Text is not only true in relation to the opinion and devotion of men, but
absolutely true according to the tenor of the Law. For sins for which a man
may be reconciled unto God by Legal sacrifices are either only Ceremonial
pollutions, (or if moral defects) then they were only such as came from
ignorance or infirmity, as you may read in the fourth, fifth, and sixth
Chapters of Leuiticus, touching the latter and touching the former, in the
12.14. and 15. Chapters. But if a man sinned with an high hand, if that which
he committed were a crying sin, God left the malefactors to the sword of the
Magistrate, there was no Sacrifice appointed to discharge him from such kind of
guilt, as God teaches Numb. 15. and in this sense God sent Eli word, 1. Sam.
13.4.
that the iniquity of his house should not be purged with sacrifice nor
offerings for ever; Verse. 14.
And to that purpose speaks God also, Esaias 22. of the enormous sins of the
Jews; Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you, Quaest. ad Gentil
proaspos: quaest. 97.
till you die, says the Lord of Hoasts; stoning, heading, hanging, were the
expiation of such sins, as Justin Martyr teaches.

But we may not mistake; when God visited such enormous sins with corporal
plagues, then, to stay his punishing hand from proceeding, Number 16.46.
Sacrifice might be offered; Aaron with incense stood between the dead and the
living, when the plague of God was upon Israel, and staid his wrath; (...).
David sheathed the sword of the punishing Angel with a Sacrifice on the
threshing floor of Araunah; Hezechias expiated the Idolatry of his Fathers
time; yea, and by Job (it seems that the wrath of (...) may be prevented too,
for he sacrficed, lest peradventure his sons (...) Hasphemed. But God would
not exempt them by any Sacrifice (...) the Magistrate; he left their souls to
take benefit of the daily (...), and their bodies to public justice, who were
disturbers of the ^^^^like peace either of Church or Commonweal.

Where, by the way you may learn, how holy God would have his people, that in
cases where the Magistrate could not touch them, would have them touched in
conscience, and by Sacrifice seek their peace with God, and not give the same
privilege to their heavenly estate, as he did unto the worldly.

But to apply this unto King David's case, and therein to see the truth of my
Text; His sins were in the number of those which are called crying sins;
for they were Murder, Adultery, Treachery, and Blasphemy; for such sins
there was no Sacrifice. Justin Martyr observes it in the place before cited; If
the Gospel (says he) had not opened unto him the gate of repentance, in Lege
seruatricem non inuenisset humanitatem, he could have found no relief in any
ceremonial expiation; the Kings condition herein was no better then the
subjects, as he confesses in my text. And though he had no superior on
earth to question him, yet does he plead guilty, and intimates what he
deserves at Gods hand; his sins are such which deserve the sword, and Gods
sword he could not but fear, though he were out of the fear of man's.

Add hereunto, that he does not think, that every light remedy will suffice
a King, as great men pass over the like sins with slight penance, but little
do they think that heavy punishments are their due, which though they feel
not from men, yet they may fear from God.

But enough of Gods disposition toward this Ceremonial worship; we are now
to see in few words how David does conform himself thereunto; that, is
contained in these words, Else would I have given it. I resolved the words into
two propositions; whereof the first was, If God had affected these offerings,
he would have tendered them; It is the commendation which God himself gives
that, Act. 13.22.
he was a man after Gods own heart, and he would perform all his will, and
Gods will in sacrifiting he did not neglect, neither in peace nor war. Not in
peace; for when he translated the Arc from Obed Edoms house, 2. Sam. 6.
at every six paces he offered oxen and fatlings: so he offered also when
he went to war, as it appears by the peoples prayer for him, Psalm. 20.
The Lord remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifices. I omit
other places; no man may reasonably think that he would stick at the
offering of any Sacrifice, who gave so bountifully toward the Fabric and
furniture of the Temple, as you may read. 1. Chronic. 29. much more I dare say,
then any Prince in Christendom has in his treasury or ever had. And indeed,
he thought nothing too good for God; how chargeable so ever the pattern of
the Temple was which was delivered him, he most cheerfully made provision for
the full accomplishment of it; wherein he showed himself a good pattern, and
teaches all that be able, to be willing, to advance in the best sort the
service of God.

The second proposition is, that, because God would not have them, he forbore
these offerings; he would not prescribe to God: the satisfaction that God
requires is arbitrary in him, none but himself knows what will content
himself; therefore he must go before us, and we must yield what he does
choose. He must definitely concerning our necessary service, and concerning our
voluntary, at least indefinitely express his will, or else we cannot know or
do what he will accept; by means whereof our offering will be thanklesse,
or fruitless; for (...) will worship pleases me not; it will be cast off with,
Quis requisiuit? L^ay 1.12 Mark 7.7.
Who has required these things at your hands? and in vain do they worship
me teaching the traditions of men.

And well may God so censure it; for experience has proved amongst the
Heathen, yea and amongst Christians also; that when they leave in such cases to
be ruled by God, men run wild, yea mad in their superstitions or rather
impious Piety.

The lash note I give upon this text is; that the Fathers make it a Prophecy
of the New Testament, wherein all carnal Rites were to be done away, and men
were to serve God in spirit and truth, we live to see it, and see to our grief
too many envy themselves the comfort of it; the Church of Rome by a multitude
of inconuenent ceremonies has much darkened the light of the Gospel; and some
are grown so absurd as to think that the Jewish Ceremonies shall be revived
at Jerusalem again.

But I cannot stand to refute these follies; Let me only recommend two rules
unto you out of King David's words. The first is, the rectifying of your
devotion, that you never so mistake the helps which God affords our
infirmity, as to give the the honor of things heavenly unto earthly, or to
let our bodies in God service be other then attendants unto our souls.

Besides rectifying of our devotion, Let us learn to resign our selves wholly
unto Gods will, remembering this; that, as we must not be hasty and go before
him: so must we not be slack in in following him. If in serving of God we
take this course, and are led by this guide, we shall be sure, that our
service shall neither be amiss, nor yet in vain, and may expect that
comfortable doom, Math. 25.23.
Well done servant faithful and true, enter into thy Mastersioy.

PSALM. 51. VERSE. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit; a broken and
contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise.


KIng David being resolved to serve God, advises how it may be done best; In
this deliberation he takes God for his guide, and will make no other choice
then may stand with Gods good pleasure.

Now touching Gods pleasure he informs us, that whereas there are two kinds
of Gods service, a Ceremonial and a Moral, God makes little account of the
Ceremonial. You heard that point opened the last Lords day; that which he
regards is the moral, and of that shall you (God willing) hear this day.

My present Text will tell you two things; first, wherein the Moral service
stands; secondly, how it is esteemed. It stands in the humiliation of the
inward man; the inward man is noted by the words Spirit and Heart, two names
but signifying the same reasonable soul, which, as it can subsist without the
body is called a Spirit; and it is called a Heart as it lives in, and does
manifest it self by the body. This inward man must be humbled; it must be
broken and contrite; two words, meaning the the same thing; but not without
some difference in degree; the former notes the beginning, the latter the
consummating of our Humiliation. This is the moral service, and it stands in
these points.

He that uses it shall find that it is well esteemed; for what was denied unto
the Ceremonial service, is yielded unto this; God did not desire that, but
this he does, it is the sacrifices of God. Wherein mark two things; first, God
that cares not for the slaughter of a beast requires the mortification of a
man, he will have his Heart, his Spirit broken and contrite. Secondly, this one
Mortification of man goes in stead of the manifold slaughters of Beasts; for
it is Sacrifices.

The second thing that was denied unto the Ceremonial was, that God did not
delight in it; but in the moral he does, he will not despise that; in the word
there is a Litote, there is more meant then is expressed, for the Holy Ghost
means that this moral service does speed of both the effects of Sacrifices,
it yields a sweet savor unto God, and he does graciously accept it, it
proves a savor of rest into man; and his soul does feel the comfort of it.

Finally, out of the maine branches of the text, we will draw two Paradoxes;
First, A broken and contrite heart are Gods Sacrifices; therefore this is a
Religious manslaughter. Secondly, God does not despise a broken and a contrite
heart; therefore God is never better pleased with us then when we are least
pleased with our selves.

You hear whereof I shall speak; that you may learn to serve God truly by
that which shall be spoken, listen to it diligently, and with a religious ear.

Before I fall upon the particulars, I may not omit to show you the coherence
of this verse to the former; the former did show of how little worth
Ceremonial worship is, this shows the great worth of the moral. And well is
this clause added unto that; for it is not enough to know what we must not do
in Gods service, our chief care must be to know what we must do; what good
will it do me to know, that Turks, Jews, Infidels worship they know not
what, they know not how? it must be my comfort to know the true God, to know
how to worship him as I ought. The ground is clear; Negatiues are but to
attend Affirmatiues, and God does not reward the forbearance of evil, but the
doing of Good; forbearance does hold back the impediments that would hinder us
in our way but we must not only avoid them, but also go the right way, if we
will come to our iourneys end; In a word, our abilities are bestowed upon us
not only to decline evil, but also to do good. But to the Text.

The first thing that I observed, was, wherein moral service stands; it stands
in the humiliation of the inward man: the inward man is here pointed out by two
names, the spirit and the heart. How these words differ all are not agreed,
upon a former verse I have said something of them; but in this place I think
they note one and the self same reasonable soul, as it undergoes a diverse
consideration. It has a prerogative above the soul of a beast, in that it can
subsist though it be severed from the body, and so it comes near unto the
nature of Angels, and with them communicates in the name of Spirit, which is a
substance endued with understanding and will. But besides this separate Being,
it has another which you may call coniunct, it inhabiteth in, and manifests
it self by the body, quickening and guiding our senses, and our affections;
hence it is denominated from the body, from the principal parts wherein it
does reside, from none so often and so aptly as from the Heart, which is the
the principal seat thereof.

Neither is it without cause that the reasonable soul is remembered under both
these names, the Holy Ghost thereby giving us to understand, that whether we
consider the powers of the soul inorganically, as under the name of Spirit, or
else Organically as under the name of Heart, either way considered they must be
humbled, we must humble no less the superior then the inferior faculties of
our soul; for sin has infected both.

A second thing that we must mark, is, that in our service, God calls not
for Nostra, but Nos, not our Goods but our selves; and to this end did he
command the people to put their hands upon the Sacrifices, to signify whom it
did represent, and to accompany the Offering of the sacrifice with a zealous
devotion, to testify that themselves were to have a feeling of that for which
the beast was offered.

And indeed it was fit that he should offer himself that had offended, that
he might fear to offend when he saw that he must smart; if a beast only
should die, and the pain there of might rid a sinner of his guilt, few would
forbear sin, if any thing make them fear, it is this, that they must bear
the burden of sin themselves.

Secondly, as we must offer our selves; so that which of our selves we must
offer, is the better part, our Spirit, our Heart. In all the Legal Sacrifices
God reserved the Inwards to himself, his meaning was to point out the parts,
which he desires in us, he desires our Inwards, they must be presented in
our Sacrifice; 1 Timothy 4.8.
the Apostles rule is, bodily exercise profits little, certainly very little of
it self, it has all his commendations from the Heart and the Spirit.

But there are two distinct reasons why these parts are principally required in
moral service; the first is, because they are freest from hypocrisy; Ier.
3.10.
God cannot endure that we should turn unto him in mendacio dissemblingly; Now
Simulation and Dissimulation are manifest in our body; for we can personate
therein whom we will, we may so be mask't, as that no body shall know who we
are; but in the inward man we are our selves, we can there seem no better nor
no worse then we are, there does God behold us, and he does judge of us
thereby.

A Second reason is, the preualencie of those parts; they have the greatest
hand in our sin, and must bear the greatest part in our repentance; other
parts and powers partake of sin but by contagion which they contract by their
attendance upon the Spirit, and the Heart, attend then they must in repentance,
but the principal penitents must be the Heart and the Spirit upon whom they
attend.

But enough of the parts which must be humbled; Let us now come to the
humiliation of those parts; they must be broken, they must be contrite.
Between these words there is no great difference; for Contrition is a
breaking very small, and the breaking here meant is a shiuering; the English to
shiuer comes from the Hebrew here used which is Shauar; and you know that to
shiuer a thing is to break it all to pieces. Or if you will put a difference
between the words, then the first may note the beginning, and the other the
consummating of this humiliation, as you know a thing may be first gross
bruised, and that is breaking, and then it may be pounded all to powder, and
that is the contrition of it.

But how do these words agree with the former? by the Heart and the Spirit you
understood the reasonable soul, and has the soul any parts? can that be
turned into dust? Surely no; therefore these words are figurative, they are
resemblances borrowed from corporal things, which do most lively set before
us the humiliation that is spiritual.

But it is a question whence these words are borrowed; some fetch them from
husbandry, some from masonry; either of them has a fair ground in the
Scripture. They that fetch it from Husbandry; for Jeremy and Hosea speak of
breaking up the fallow ground of our hearts, Ier. 4.3. Hosea 10.12.
that they may be sown; Now you know that they that break up their grounds
use the Plough and the Harrow; the Plough turns up the ground in great clods,
that is the first breaking of it, then comes the Harrow and turns those
clods into dust, that is, the second breaking of it; and so these two breakings
represent corporally, what you must spiritually observe in a broken and
contrite heart.

The very same may fitly be represented by the second resemblance that is
taken from Masonry; the Scripture does often tell us, that sinners have stony
hearts, and therefore they must be broken, that they may be made fleshy hearts,
as tender and soft as flesh. Now you know that when a Mason or Plaisterer will
work a rough stone into all kind of shapes at his pleasure, he first breaks
him, (being calcined or otherwise prepared) all to pieces, and then those
pieces he poundeth into dust, then that dust with liquor he can work into a
soft substance, which will receive any shape, according to the fancy of the
Plaisterer. Even so must the Heart and Spirit of a man be hammered by Gods
Word, Ierem. 23.9.
broken and broken again, that so it may be made pliable unto the will of God.
These be fair resemblances, and I might insist upon them, and by them
illustrate the humiliation of a sinner; but I choose rather the resemblance
that offers it self in my Text, and that is contained in the word Sacrifices.

In the Temple or Tabernacle there were two Altars, one of burnt sacrifice,
another of Incense; the sacrifice of either will fit our purpose. That of
incense; Exodus 30. where God tells expressly of what spices the perfume should
be made, he adds these words, thou shall beat some of it very small, and
put it before the testimony in the Tabernacle of the congregation, where I will
meet with thee. The resemblance is very fit.

But it is fitter if we take it from the other Altar; and indeed it is fit we
take it thence; for though my text be true of all moral service, God requires
it, God delights in it, (as might be showed at large if the time would
permit, and it were to my purpose) yet now have I to do with no more then
concerns King David's case, the reconciliation of a Penitent, so much moral
worship as answers to burnt offering and sacrifice, whereof you heard in the
verse going before; now they did belong to the Altar of burnt offerings;
wherefore there will we se^ke, and we shall find our resemblance. For the
sacrifices were first cut in pieces; that was their breaking; secondly, being
so broken they were burnt into ashes, that was a contrition of them, a
contrition and a breaking which does most lively represent the breaking and
contrition required in Repentance. Look back upon them. The Priest that did
cut the sacrifice in pieces, did (as the Jewish Rituals observe) not mangle,
but joint the parts; and what should we do in our Repentance, but orderly
take asunder, and in our meditations view apart the several powers that are in
our soul, and not mingle the understanding and the will, but seeing each has
his own defects, we must feelingly consider the several defects that are in
each power. And this is the breaking of the Heart and the Spirit.

But the parts of the Sacrifice were not only broken, but they were brought to
the fire, and there they were burnt to ashes; and it is not enough for us in
gross to observe the defects of the several powers that are in our soul, we
shall find them intricate, and a very Labyrinth, we must hunt out every
lurking sin, and every particle must bear a part in this humiliation, the
fire of spiritual affliction must pierce even unto the least jot of that which
does partake of corruption; otherwise our Heart and Spirit are not as they
ought, broken and contrite.

Saint Ambrose conceiueth that these words are meant of Christ. And indeed, he
that does but read the 53. of Esaias, which is often alleged by the Apostles,
especially Saint Peter, shall find that Christ had a broken and contrite Heart
and Spirit indeed; the Evangelists do express it in significant words, Luke
22 44. Math. 26.38. Mark. 14.33.
he was in an agony, his soul was (...), on every side encompassed with
heaviness even unto death, he began (...) to be even astonished, (...) to
droope, to become even heartlesse: the Sacrament what is it but a
representation of the humiliation of our Savior Christ? not in conscience of
his own sin, but for expiation of our pride, was Christ pleased to be
humbled, not only in body; but in soul also. And to him must we be conformed;
for he is the best pattern of a broken and contrite Spirit.

But mark in these words broken and contrite, that every kind of concussion is
not a poenitentiall humiliation; Iam 2.19.
for the Devils they fear and tremble when they remember in what case they
stand, Act. 24.25.
and so did Felix tremble when Saint Paul preached of the judgment to come,
and how was Pharaoh shaken when he was under the plagues of Egypt? Daniel 5.
Baltazar quiuered, and his knees smote together, when he saw the handwriting;
but their hearts and spirits were made of tough metal, not one of them brake
or was contrite; but after Gods hand was off, they continued whole, and wholly
the same persons. And so if we do (and it is too common for us to do so)
cry we out never so much, I have sinned, and God be merciful unto me, in our
danger, be it what it may be, we are not humbled as the moral service of God
requires. As we wound our souls; so must we be contented to search those
wounds, and least they fester, Ier. 23.9. Habak. 3 16.
search them to the bottom, we must be contented as thoroughly to grieve for
sin; as to take delight therein.

But a little farther to wade into this point; There are two kinds of Grief
that the Schools speak of Appretiativus, and Intensivus, they apply it
somewhat untowardly, but here we may make a good use of it; for our spiritual
humiliation must testistifie; first, at what rate we do set the favor of
God, and having no better thing to wreck our displeasure upon for the loss
thereof, then our Heart and Spirit, we use them so roughly and choose them for
the subject of humiliation. Secondly, the breaking and contrition of heart and
spirit, do show, that our sorrow is as intensiue as it is appretiatiue; as the
thing is most dear unto us which we afflict: so there can be no deeper wounds
given then those wherewith we afflict it.

But sorrow is not enough unto humiliation; there are two other things that
must go therewith, and are very clearly insinuated in this manner of breaking,
and contriting our Heart. The first is the detestation of sin committed; for
how can a man more clearly express that he does abhor his own wickedness,
then by so breaking and afflicting of his own both Heart and Spirit? if he
make them suffer for it, it is an undoubted sign that he does detest it. A
second thing required is, that a man return to God; and that also is
insinuated in a broken and contrite heart; for seeing it is the hardness of
heart that did shut God out, what is the breaking of the heart but the letting
of him in? Yea; this breaking and contrition being borrowed from the Sacrifice,
there was no incensio sine ascensione; as the corporal so the spiritual fire
does not burn, but it does ascend; therefore fitly does the Holy Ghost call
the Altar upon which the Sacrifices were offered Misbach Gnoloth, the Altar of
Ascensions, that is, the Altar of burnt Sacrifices that do ascend, because all
such moral worship imports a man's religious disposition to be reconciled unto
God.

Hitherto we have spoken of the humiliation of a broken and contrite heart, but
we have spoken nothing of the workemaster, who it is that can so humble both
the Heart and Spirit. He seems not here to be expressed, and yet it is fit he
be known; and if we enquire we shall find, that there is a double Author.

The principal one is God; It is a good Rule of Saint Austins, De fide ad
Petr. c. 31.
firmiter tene neminem hic posse paenitentiam agere nisi quem Deus
illuminauerit, and gratuita misericordia conuerterit. Saint Paul warranteth
this Rule; the servant of the Lord must in meekness instruct those that are
contrary minded, (...) 2.25.
and see if God (peradventure) will give them repentance. But it is true also
that the Heart and the Spirit that is broken and contrite has a hand in its
own breaking and contrition of it self; our own understanding does discover
our sin, and our own heart does melt it self upon the sight thereof; yea,
it would be no virtue of ours, were it not produced by our own reasonable
faculties.

It is true that the Cross sometimes, and sometimes discontent, worldly
discontent because things go not with us as flesh and blood desires, or
spiritual discontent, because the worm of Conscience does bite us, and gives
us no rest, do oftentimes humble us: but these things make not up our broken
and contrite heart, except we be as well active, as passive therein; As Christ
in his so we in our Sacrifices must be and Sacerdotes, and Sacrificium, we must
be both the thing that is offered, and the offerers, we must as willingly
humble our selves, as be deeply humbled.

But here we must observe a good Rule of Saint Bernards when we say that this
humiliation is from God, (...) Arbi^^.
and from man; from Gods Grace and man's freewill; we do not mean that these
are coordinate, but subordinate; Non partim gratia, partim liberum arbitrium,
Grace and freewill do not share the work between them, sed totum singula
peragunt, each of them does perform the whole work; Grace does it wholly,
freewill does it wholly; sed vt totum in illo, sic totum ex illa; As the whole
humiliation is immediately wrought by the freewill of man; so is the freewill
of man enabled thereunto by the Grace of God, Grace determines the will, if not
physically, at least morally.

But to conclude this point; We often read in the Prophets that God does
threaten he will conterere peccatores, crush sinners all to pieces; Saint Basil
tells us, that there is a remedy against it, that is, contrition is to be
opposed against contrition; In ^say 13.
if we will humble our selves, God will never humble us.

I have dwelt long enough in opening our moral service, I come now to show you
how it is esteemed.

Here the first thing that I find, is, that what was denied to the ceremonial
is yielded to the moral service. First, there it was denied that God does
require that, but here it is affirmed that God requires this; for a broken and
contrite heart is Gods Sacrifices. And see here at first we mere with a rub,
for in corporal Sacrifices a man might not offer that which was broken or
bruised, Leuit. 22.
it should seem that in spiritual he may. But the reconciliation is easy,
for those Sacrifices did principally note Christ, who was without all blemish
before he was offered, and yet being such, he was broken for our sins: my
Text does not compare man to the Sacrifice before it was offered (though we
should all strive to be as good as we may, when we present our selves to God)
but the comparison is of man to the sacrifice after it is offered, and then it
may without fault be broken; yea it is brought thither to the end that it may
be broken, neither except it be broken is it any Sacrifice. But to the maine
point.

I told you there are two propositions in these words, the Sacrifices of God
are a broken and contrite heart. First, That God which cares not for the
slaughter of beasts requires the mortification of men; that is the slaughter
which he requires, and therefore is the name Seuach given unto it, which
signifies a beast slain. And this brings us on to another note concerning a
broken and a contrite heart, and that is, Our humiliation is the slaying of the
beastiality of our nature; And indeed every lust is a very beast, and for them
does the Holy Ghost call men by the name of many beasts; sometimes swine,
sometimes dogs, sometimes foxes; he that does abolish these lusts does slay
so many beasts.

A second proposition is, That one mortification of man is to God instead of
all the sacrificing of Beasts. All that were required to reconciliation? or all
simply? surely we may understand it both ways. It may be Sacrifices, if it
comprehend only the Expiatorie and Dedicatorie, as it does, so farte as God
requires these from us, and accepts us in Christ; for he requires no other
Expiation of us, then a godly sorrow detesting sin; neither does he expect
any other Dedication, then that we be wholly converted unto God; and I showed
you how both these are represented in the broken and contrite heart.

Will you extend it to all Sacrifices? you may: Abulens. in Exodus Tom 2. p. 131.
for all had some reference to Reconciliation, even those which seem to have
least; the Votiue and Eucharisticall; for though their principal ends were to
acknowledge or obtain some blessing of or from God; yet the manner of the
sacrificing, so far as it was common to the Sacrifice for sin, did withal
deprecate Gods wrath, and acknowledge that sin made the offerer unworthy as
well of that blessing which he had received; as of that which he begged. Which
must be observed, because this broken and contrite heart looks to the praise
of God, which David not many verses before promised he would show forth; And
indeed a repentant confession is in the Scripture called, a giving glory unto
God.

Finally, these broken Spirit and heart are the Sacrifices which God calls
for; for he is a Spirit, and what can be more suitable unto him, then that which
is spiritual? therefore ever in the legal he did aim at the spiritual, as
you may gather out of the new Testament; the Gospel is set forth in terms of
the Law; to preach is (...) to play the Priest; Romans 15.16.
the people converted are called (...) and (...) a Sacrifice and Oblation, the
skillful handling of the Scriptures, 2. Tim. 2.15.
is (...) rightly to divide the Word; yea, Heb. 4.
the Word it self is by Saint Paul said to be sharper then any two edged
sword, (or Sacrificers knife) piercing even to the dividing asunder of the
soul and the Spirit: the whole passage is full of sacrificing phrases.

I may not omit one thing; we are called a spiritual Priesthood, 1. Pet. 2 5.
yea the whole body of the Church is so called; a Priest must not be without
his Sacrifice; and here are the Sacrifices which God will have every one offer,
even every lay man may offer these Sacrifices unto God.

We may, nay we must offer them; but how will God accept them? surely very
well; A broken and a contrite heart God will not despise. Men use to make
little account of, yea, they make themselves sport, with those that are broken
hearted, and of a contrite Spirit; that mourn like doves, and lament in the
bitterness of their souls; David complains in his Penitentials, yea our
Savior Christ himself in the 22. and other Psalms, that when they were
humbled, then they were derided. And indeed in the judgment of flesh and
blood, these things seem to be of no value, they seem to be contemptible, but
he that does use them shall find, that he shall never be confounded of God;
Joel. 2 13.
the reason we have in Joel, rent your hearts and not your garments, etc. for
the Lord is gracious, merciful, long suffering, Esaias 24.
etc. he will not break a bruised reed, nor quench smoking flax; he that
would not despise Ahab in his humiliation, nor Manasses, will much less
despise a Mary Magdalene, a Saint Peter, a Publican: verily (...) he will never
set them at naught.

But the word has in it a Litote, more is meant then is expressed: God is so
far from despising that he makes great account thereof. I told you that it
is vouchsafed the double effect of Sacrifices: First, it yields a sweet smell
unto God; Luke 15.7.
for there is joy in heaven for one sinner that repents, yea, more joy then
for ninety and nine that need not repentance: and in the Prophet; Esaias 66.
to this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit,
C. 57.
and trembles at my Word. Secondly, it yields a smell of rest unto man; for
so we read in Esaias; I dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit to
revive the spirit of the humble, and te revive the heart of the contrite ones.
De interiore domo. c. 37.
Saint Bernard coupleth them both together; Animam poenitentiae lachrymis
afflictam Spiritus Paracletus libenter consolatur, frequenter visitat, and ad
veniae fiduciam plene reformat. Therefore let us learn of Saint Austin this
good lesson; Aug. cont. 5. Hereses.
quaeramus lapidem quo percutiatur incredulus, and percussus quassetur, and
quassatus comminuatur, comminutus in puluerem conuertatur, conuersus in
puluerem compluatur, complutus seratur, satus ferat fructum, non quod igne
absumatur, sed quod in horreo condatur.

But I may not dwell longer hereon. There are two other notes which I drew, the
one out of Gods desire of, the other out of his delight in, these Sacrifices; I
call them Paradoxes. And so indeed they seem to flesh and blood. God requires
a broken and a contrite heart and spirit as his Sacrifices; then there is a
certain religious manslaughter. And so there is; a man may holily kill
himself, break his heart, and crush his spirit (as it were) to dust: Mat.
5.29.
but this must be done not corporally, but spiritually, as elsewhere we are
willed to pluck out our offending eyes, and cut off our offending hands, we
must mortify not our nature, but the corruption that cleaves to our nature:
such slaying God allows; for indeed it is a quickening; life in sin is
death, and the death of sin is life.

The second Paradoxe is, That we never please God better then when we please
our selves least, seeing God does not despise a broken and a contrite heart;
for we are full of imperfections, of which God would have us rid our selves;
therefore he is glad when he sees us play the good Husbands, weeding our
fields; good Physicians, purging of our corrupt humors, careful not to foster
or favor ought that may offend him, or cause our own ruin: Now this we
cannot do without much disquieting and afflicting of our selves, omnis
medicina salutaris facit dolorem, our corupt nature will repine at such
alterations.

But to draw to an end: What our Savior Christ said when he went to raise
Lazarus, this sickness is not unto death: that must we conceive of all those
whom we see to have broken and contrite hearts; Mat. 17.
rather as he that was to be dispossessed, was immediately before the devil came
out miserably torn and turmoyld, and even left for dead, until Christ put out
his hand, and raised him up safe and sound: Even so shall we feel the
greatest conflicts with sin, when we are even ready to be set free by grace.
Saint Austin sets himself out for an excellent monument hereof in his
Confessions.

Secondly, seeing God is delighted with this Sacrifice, we are forbidden to
despair of our own unworthiness, as to presume of our righteousness: this Text
does warrant us this comfort, when in these fits we seem to be furthest from
God, God brings us then nearest unto himself; for this pang is a forerunner
of health: but senseless sinners have no part in this consolation.

Thirdly, God in this moral service has equalled the rich and the poor: he
does hereby take off their eyes from their worldly estate wherein they differ,
and sixeth them on that wherein they are equal. In these Sacrifices the poor
may be as forward as the rich, and if there be any disadvantage it is on the
rich man's side; for he thinking that he has something to give besides
himself, does give himself to God the less; specially in this kind of
service, which rich men desire not to be acquainted with: God herein takes
down their pride, because he passes by all their wealth, and sets his
estimate upon humiliation.

As for the poor that has nothing to give but himself, God by this Text
yields him this glory, he need not (if he will) be unprovided of the best
gift that can be given, that is, himself, poor self, if he have grace to be
as poor in spirit, as he is in purse, and lament the want of grace, as much as
he does his want of wealth.

Finally, This Text is one of the Prefaces to our daily Liturgy, I would we
did as often practice it, as we do repeat it: Certainly there is great cause
we should, whether we respect sin or woe, whereof there was never more, or
any that deserved more humiliation. The times deserve that every day should be
a day of humiliation, and that every man should affi^^t his soul, the more we
know God requires this service, and the better we see that he accepts it,
the more forward should we be to perform it.

ANd I pray God we may have so heard this Text opened, that our hearts and
Spirits may relent with it; so shall we not be judged of the Lord, if we will
judge our selves: Nay, sowing in tears we, shall reap in joy. AMEN. PSALM. 51.
VERSE 18. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the Walls of
Jerusalem.


WHen I brake up this Psalm, I showed that it consists of two Vows made by
King David, one for himself, another for his Kingdom; I have ended the first,
that Vow which concerns the King, I am now come unto the second, the Vow
which he makes for his Kingdom.

This second Vow, as the first, will be resolved into a Desire, and a Promise.
Of the Promise in the next Verse, the Desire is contained in this. In opening
of this Desire. I will observe, first for whom it is conceived, secondly, what
it does contain. Those for whom it is conceived, are noted in these words
Sion, Jerusalem, which made up the mother City of the Kingdom of Israel, an
excellent type of the Church: for these King David makes a suite, and the
suite for them is in effect the same which he made for himself. He sueth that
they may be restored into the state of grace; that is the meaning of these
words, Do well unto Sion. Secondly that being restored they may be preserved
therein, which he beggeth in these words, Build up the Walls of ^erusalem.
These be the blessings for which he sueth, and he sueth for them in a sense
suitable to the places: his suite is Mystical.

But to whom is the suite made? And for whose sake does he hope to speed?
Surely, he sueth only to God, to him it is that he says, Do good, build
thou the walls: and he hops to speed only for Gods sake, therefore does he
add in thy good pleasure: Do good in thy good pleasure, and in thy good
pleasure build thou the Walls of Jerusalem.

Lay together the parts of the Text, and then you will see in it two remarkable
virtues, confidence in God, and compassion toward the Church. Confidence, for
in the beginning of the Psalm, David seems so dejected that he has enough
to do to pray for himself, he so describes his estate as if he were not
worthy to do so much: but toward the end of the Psalm he shows himself
another man, he takes heart, and becomes a sui^our for all Israel, yea he
presumes to beg for it the greatest blessing of God. But he does it out of
another virtue also which shines here, the virtue of Compassion: he is not
contented to fare well himself, he desires the welfare of his whole
Kingdom: as he made it obnoxious to Gods wrath, so he holds himself bound to
be a mediator for Gods favor. Such charity in praying deserves to be
exemplarie: wherefore let us listen diligently to the unfolding thereof, that
we may learn to exemplify it in our prayers.

The first thing that we must enter upon are those for whom King D^uid
conceiueth this desire: they are Sion, and Jerusalem: which words in the
Scripture are taken sometimes historically, sometimes mystically: that is,
either they nore places in the holy land, or else by those places represent
unto us the Church of God. Because the mystical sense cannot be concerued,
but by the correspondencie which it has unto the historical, I must first
open the historical, that so I may the better guide your apprehension in the
mystical.

Before I do this, I must let you know, that Sion and Jerusalem, were two
distinct places, yet it is usual in the Scripture in naming either to mean
both. In the second Psalm, I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, Sion
there comprehends Jerusalem, for David who is meant in that Text, was King of
both. In the beginning of Ecclesiastes, Solomon is said to have been King in
Jerusalem, we may not exclude Sion, for he was King in that also. This being
briefly observed, I come now to the ^^storie of these words.

Where first you must observe that either of these places were hills; of Sion
the common attribute does witness it, for it is called Mount Sion, and of
Jerusalem it is as true; Josephus reports that it was built upon the hill
Acra, the Psalmist bears witness hereunto, saying, Psalm 87.
He has laid his foundations in the holy mountains; and the common phrase of
ascending to Jerusalem.

Secondly the whole tract of those hills was called the land of Moriah, which is
by interpretation, the place where God appears, or is conspicuous: there God
appeared unto Abraham, when he was ready to offer Isaac; there did he appear
unto David, when the punishing Angel upon David's Prayer was commanded to
sheath his sword; Finally, there appeared the Son of God in our flesh, when
he wrought the redemption of man.

Thirdly, those places were two several Cities, whereof one was in the lot of
Benjamin, the other was in the lot of Judah; Jerusalem that was in the lot of
Benjamin, was conquered by Joshua, but Sion that was in the lot of Judah,
continued in the possession of the Iebusites until the days of King David; he
subdued them, though he did not wholly extinguish them, as appears by the
story of Araunah the Iebusite; David having gotten the possession of Sion,
joined it with a Wall to Jerusalem, and so of two made one City, one City of
those which before were two, and that of two several nations, Iebufites and
Israelites; of this union we must understand these words in the Psalm; Psalm ^^.
Jerusalem is a City that is compacted together in it self.

Fourthly, David having thus united the Cities, translated thither the Arc,
and God there designed a place where the Temple should be built, even upon a
piece of ground that lay indifferently between the Tribes of Indah and Beniam
in, and so it became the fixed place where God chose to put his name, and where
he vouchsafed to reside between the Cherubins, it was Gods seeds Religionis,
the ordinary place of Divine worship; to this the aforementioned Psalm bears
witness, Thither the Tribes, even the Tribes of Israel go up according to the
testimony unto Israel, to praise the name of the Lord.

Neither was it only seeds Religionis, but Imperij also, it was the Kings
royal Chamber, and there he kept his residence, there were the Thrones of
judgment, even the Thrones of the house of David, as it follows in the same
Psalm.

By the way. Out of that which you have heard, you may gather the reason why,
when the ten Tribes revolted from the house of David, Benjamin and the Levites
continued steadfast to it; Benjamin had a great interest in Jerusalem, and the
Levites maintenance depended on the Temple, whereunto their service was
confined.

To go on: Fifthly, you must observe, that though these two places only are
named, yet the whole Kingdom is understood, for this was the mother City;
though the honor of the prerogatives belonged unto her, yet from her was the
benefit, both of Piety and Policy to be derived unto the whole land; yea unto
the whole nation; for in whatsoever Country an Israelite dwelt, he was free of
Jerusalem; you may perceive it by the answer made by the Reubenites, ^shua 22.
Gadites, and half Pribe of Munasses, when they were challenged for idolatry
because they erected an Altar upon the bancke of Jordan, before they passed
over into their own in heritance: It is more clear, Acts 2. where we read
that there were Jews dwelling at Jerusalem of all Nations under Heaven; there
are reckoned some of Africa, some of Asia, some of Europe. And further to make
good this assertion, Philo Iudaeus in his embassy to Claudius the Emperor,
makes this a motive why he should be good unto Jerusalem, because in so doing,
he should preserve many nations, amongst whom the Jews live dispersed.

Finally, these places (as it has been by many Divines observed) were seated
in the midst not only of the holy land, but also of the whole world, the whole
world (I say) that was then known; Gent. 2.
so that as the tree of life in the midst of Paradise, so Jerusalem in the
midst of the whole World might easily be repaired unto by those that did
desire it: and it had fit opportunity to spread it self into the knowledge of
all the world.

These things are to be observed in those places according to the History.
But all things came to the Jews in types, therefore we may not think that
King David, had an eye only to the corporal places, his eye pierced farther,
even to that which was figured therein, he looked to the Kingdom of Christ.

And indeed the Church is in the Scripture called by these names; I might
refer you to the vision of Ezekiel which takes up the last eight Chapters,
wherein all agree that the Church is delineated; or the vision of Saint John in
the last of his Revelation, wherein there is more perspicuitie; but both of
those places are dark, I will point you out plainer, one in Saint Peter; 1.
Pet. 2.
Behold I put in Sion a chief corner stone, etc. he alleges the words out
of Esaias, and shows it was a plain prophecy of Christ, and his Church; Saint
Paul affirms as much of Jerusalem, Jerusalem (says he) that is above, Gal. 4.
or from above is mother of us all; and in the Epistle to the Hebrews both
places are conjoined in this signification, Chap. 12.22.
You are come (says he) to mount Sion, to the City of the living God, to the
heavenly Jerusalem, etc.

I will not trouble you with more places, there are store in the Prophets, I
come to more profitable matter. Ecce typum Ecclesiae, behold the
correspondencie that must be between the Church and those places. Those
places were Hilly and had the valley of Gehinnon under them; Chap. ^5
I cannot give you a better Moral then is contained in that Proverb of
Solomon, The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from Hell
beneath, or if you will, take that of Saint Paul, Coloss 3.7.
Set your affections on those things that are above, not on those things that
are below; thoughts groneling upon the earth bend toward Hell, God will have
us raise our thoughts, and testify that our treasure is in Heaven.

The second correspondencie is taken from Moriah, where the Church is, there is
God to be seen, Psalm. 76.
In Inda is God known his name is great in Israel, in Salem is his Tabernacle,
and his dwelling in Sion; without the Chureh, though God be, yet he is not by
any gracious revelation, not by that transforming revelation whereby God
shining unto us in the face of Icsus Christ does transform us into the same
image both of Grace and Glory. 2. Cor. 3.18.


The third correspondencie stands in the Union; whereupon S. Austen and
others observe the incorporation of the Gentile into the Church of the Jews;
it may be Saint Paul means as much when he speaks of Christ's taking down
the partition wall; Ephesians. 2.14.
for while Sion and Jerusalem were diverse Cities, there was no open passage out
of the one into the other, as afterward there was; Cap 3. v. 6.
howsoever to the Ephesians he teaches that they became (...) one body, and
partaked of the same prerogatives, I mean the Jews and Gentiles.

The fourth correspondencie stands in the prerogatives of this City; for it
was seeds Regni and Religionis, the City of God, and of the King; and what is
the Church but Regnum and Sacerdotium, Exodus 19. Revel. 5.
first a Kingdom of Priests, or a royal Priesthood? The Church bears a
Kingly mind, free from Coertion, yet following the Direction of the Law;
whereunto accords that of Saint Paul, Lex non est posita iusto, 1. Tim. 1 9
Righteous men are not led with the spirit of bondage to do things out of
fear, but they are led by the spirit of adoption, they will do well though
they have no Law. And indeed this is a true Kingly mind.

But as our mind must be Kingly: so must it be Priestly also, all our services
must be Sacrifices, we must prefent them at Gods Altar, and we must offer them
with the fire of heaven; for therefore does God separate his Church from the
world, that he may deuote it unto himself; neither would God ever do us the
honor to make us Kings, except he did expect honor from us as we are his
Priests.

The fifth correspondencie stands in the extent of these prerogatives; though
they were bestowed upon Jerusalem, yet they were to redound unto the whole
Land, yea the Nation of the Israelites; Act. 10.
Saint Peter has moralized this to our hand, Of a truth I perceive that there
is no respect of persons with God, but in every nation whosoever fears him,
and works righteousness is accepted of him; wheresoever we live we may be
of the Israel of God, and partake the prerogatives of the Heavenly Ierufalem.

The last correspondencie stands in the situation; Jerusalem was in the midst
not of the Holy land only, but also of the whole world; a City (says our
Savior Christ) built upon a Hill cannot be hid, Math. 5
and again, Men do not light a Candle to put it under a bushel; God was
never so far estranged from Apostataes, but he placed his Church so, as that,
before Christ's Incarnation, the journey was not hard for any to come at it; and
after Christ's Incarnation, when God was pleased to seek to Men, that in so
many generations did not seek to him, and the Law was gone out of Sion, (...).
1.
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, the passage was the more easy for
all parts of the world; so careful has God been to take all excuse from the
murmuring disposition of sinful men.

The places yield these correspondencies which you have heard; there are
besides these, two other which spring from their proper names; Sion signifies
a watch Tower; Jerusalem, the vision of Peace. Apply this only to the Church
Militant, and then this correspondencie arises; The first represents the
nhture, the second the fruit of Faith.

The nature of Faith is to stand as it were sentinel, and discover, with one
one eye, Gods will, and what we ought to do: with the other eye, our
spiritual foes, and how they make toward us. From such a Faith, the fruit
that we reap is peace; for we shall have peace with God, if we take heed unto
his will, and our foes will not much disquiet us, if they find us standing upon
our guard.

If we apply it not only to the Militant, but to the Triumphant Church also,
then Sion signifies (...), our waiting for the Adoption, Romans 8.
to wit, the Redemption of our bodies, or that same (...) mentioned; Heb. 11.
the saluting a far off, of that which we hope one day comfortably to enjoy.
And that which we shall enjoy is noted by Jerusalem, wherein we shall dwell as in
a peaceable habitation, Esaias 32.
in sure dwellings, and in a quiet resting place, you may read at large hereof,
Revel. 22. and conclude, that quae nunc Sion est, futuraest Jerusalem, the
Church which is Militant, shall one day be Triumphant.

Out of all this which you have heard, you may gather how due the commendation
is which is given to this place; it is called, the City of our God, Psalm. 48.
Fers. 1.2. Chap. 2. Chap. 3.
the mountain of Gods Holiness, beautiful for situation, the joy of the
whole earth. Esaias calls it a Mountain lifted up above all mountains;
Jeremy calls it the Throne of the Lord; others give it other honorable
titles; the Psalmists concludes all in this short Verse, Glorious things are
spoken of thee, O thou City of God.

I conclude this point. As that you have heard is Typus Ecclesiae, so it is
also Imago nostri as it does represent the whole Church, so ought every man
herein to behold what manner of person himself ought to be. In Homogeneous
bodies, such as the Church is, what is commended to the whole, must be
observed by every part, every part must be, though not in quantity yet in
quality, the same with the whole; as of a great wedge, there is not a Mite
which is not as true Gold, as is the whole wedge.

Wherefore you must take all these correspondencies, and apply them to your
selves, and try your selves by them; for certainly every man is a Citiz en
either of Jerusalem, or of Babylon, and if you find not in your selves the
Characters of a Citizen of Jerusalem, you have reason to fear that you are of
a worse society, of the society of Babylon; and then read in the Prophets,
read in the Revelation, of what a miserable Corporation you are. I lean the
examination and comparison of these things to every man's private Meditation,
and pass forward to my Text.

Having found for whom King David conceiueth his desire, we must now see what
he would obtain for them; and we shall find, that it is in effect the same
which he begged for himself, he delivers his mind in fewer words, but he
alters not his meaning, as you will perceive when I have unfolded the
branches.

First then he desires that Sion and Jerusalem may be restored into the the
state of Grace; so do I understand these words, do good. That you may see I
do not mistake them, observe, that there is something which these words
suppose, and something which they express. They suppose that the contagion of
King David's sin did cleave to his people: And surely so it did; such is the
reference between a King and his people, that the finne of the one, does
affect the other; 2. King 21.
Manasses filled Jerusalem with blood, and God was not pacified, Quicquid
delirant Reges plectuntur Archiui. Prou. 28.2.
till for Manasses sins he gave Jerusalem into the hands of the Caldeans; you
see there how the sins of the King do affect the people. And contrarily the
sins of the people doeaffect the King; Solomon speaks it plainly, for the
sins of the people, there are many Princes, God takes them away by untimely
death, as he did Josiah.

This being true, must not be mistaken; for though each of their sins do
affect the other, as far as to bring punishments upon them, yet does it not
follow they should always infect one the other, and so deserve the punishment:
Every man has cause of punishment enough in himself, by reason of his own
peculiar sins; but the occasion of punishing them is often taken from another
man's sins, such an one, as between whom and him there is near reference.

Upon this supposition does King David make this prayer, do good; as if he
should say, my sins do deserve that thou should frustrate my good
purpose, and thine own gracious promise unto Israel. David succeeding Saul,
found the Kingdom in a very bad case; you may read it in the beginning of the
sixty Psalm, and David set himself for to recover it again, as appears
Psalm. 75. yea and God himself did promise by Nathan, that all should do well.
But now he might well doubt, that God would let loose the raines unto his
enemies again, and interrupt all the peace and prosperity of his Kingdom,
and so he should have no opportunity to go forward with this Reformation; he
might fear least God would retract those gracious words spoken of Sion, This
is my rest for ever, here will I dwell; I will abundantly bless her
provision, Psalm. 138.
I will satisfy her poor with bread, and I will also cloth her Priests with
salvation, and her Saints shall shout out aloud for joy.

Having this just ground of fear, he makes this prayer, do good. And so the
good which he means must be Bonum indulgentiae, and Bonum beneficentiae; he
prays God not to lay his sin to his peoples charge, nor for his sake to
interrupt their prosperity, but rather to grant, that the sons of Israel may
be as plants grown up in their youth, Psalm 141.
that the daughters may be as corner stones polished, after the similitude of
a Palace; that their garners may be full, affording all manner of store, etc.

But as before you heard that the places are taken, not only historically but
also mystically: so must these words be answerable thereunto; God then did good
when he sent his Son into the world, dissolved the works of the Devil, and
gave gifts unto men. And we must not conceive of the corporal prosperity of
Israel, otherwise then as a Type of the spiritual: It is excellently set forth
by the Prophet Esaias, Chap 25.
in this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all nations a feast of fat
things, etc.

Finally, the word used by the Psalmist signifies not only to do good, but
to do it with delight, and so God speaks in the Prophets that he will
delight to do them good, and so do it abundantly: for we are not sparing in
doing a thing when we de it with delight. Yea, and the good done, as the word
also signifies, Act. 14.16.
shall contain in it (...), it shall be such as shall cheer up the spirits of
the Israelites; he desires that to them that mourn in Sion may be given,
^sa. 61.
beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, a garment of praise for the
spirit of heaviness. Thus David would have Israel restored to the state of
Grace.

Not only restored to it, but also preserved in it; so it follows in the
Text, Build up the walls of Jerusalem. In muris tuitio salutis; Jerusalem could
not be blessed, but it would be enuyed, yea the more envied the more it was
blessed; therefore it is not enough that it have good, it must also have means
to preserve that good; otherwise better never have it, then to lose it again;
Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere parta tueri: therefore is David as careful
of the safety, as the plenty of his people.

And indeed he did strongly fortify both Sion and Jerusalem, the Psalm
testifies as much; ^sal. 48.
Walk about Sion, go round about her, tell the Towers thereof, mark well her
Bulwarks, etc.

But I dwell too long upon the material Sion, the Church also needs a
preservation, and she must have her Walls, but they are of another kind. A
Lacedaemonian being asked, why their City was not walled: answered that they
had valiant defendants which were in stead of walls unto their C^^ie; the
Heavenly Jerusalem has no other walls, the walls are the Angels that pitch round
about it, Zach. 2.5.
yea God himself does enuiron it as a wall, so says the Prophet.

Beside this invisible, it has a visible wall; the wall of the City has 12.
foundations, and in them the names of the 12. Apostles of the Lamb; All
Governors that watch over Gods people, Revel 21. 1 Samuel 25.16. 1. Pet. 2.5.
Revel. 19. Cant. 6.4.
and keep away their enemies from them are as a wall unto them; for this is a
living City, and all the parts thereof are living; and therefore Jerusalem is
not only said to be trimmed as a Spouse, but also the Spouse is said to be
fair as Jerusalem.

Yea every man's Grace of perseverance is a Wall unto himself, and thereby does
he hold out against all the manifold temptations wherewith he is exercised
while he is militant; our Faith, our Hope, our Charity, all our spiritual
weal and comfort are secured by perseverance.

Here is mention made not only of Walls but of building, and building imports
an addition unto the former Fabric; And indeed great Cities are not brought
to their perfection in an instant; Rome (we say) was not built in a day, no
more was Jerusalem; it did flourish in the days of David, but it was to
flourish more in the days of Solomon; the Temple was not yet built, nor
furnished with those Orders which David received from God, neither was the
Policy settled or the Crown entailed; David wished that all these things might
be perfected, and the state raised to that pitch of Glory, which it attained
in the days of King Solomon.

But to the Mystery. As the Church wants Walls in that it is militant, so in
that it is in Via, in that we are but on our Way, we need Edification and
Building up; Churches have their nonage, and every member has no beter
beginning, then of a babe in Christ, we must not always feed upon milk, we
must use our stomachs to stronger meat, Heb. 5. Ephesians. 4.
they that are young lings must grow on to the age of perfect men in Christ,
they must grow on in Faith, in Hope, in Charity; these must receive daily
accessions so lon^ as we live in this world, yea, and we must not think that
here will be an end of our building; our Faith must end in the sight of God,
our Hope in the fruition of God, our Charity in inseperable Union with God,
until we have put off our mortality and infirmity and attained this
perfection, we have not ended our Building; And there is no doubt but David
looked thus far.

But here we must take heed of two Errors. First, we may not look for new
Reuclations from Heaven, as if God would add any thing to his Oracles; old and
new Heretics fancying otherwise, have set on work the forge of their idle
brains, and have broached illusions of the Devil, as divine inspirations: But
Gods truth is consummated in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, neither
does it admit any accession, either of Romish Traditions, or Anabaptisticall
Illuminations; such building is Babylonish; the building of Jerusalem is only
the working of Gods Word into our heads and our hearts, to make us wise and
holy men.

The second Error is of Iudaizing Christians, who dream of an earthly
restitution of that City, and erecting of a glorious worldly Monarchy there,
which shall not only over top, but overrule all the world. To countenance this
fancy, they corrupt many a Prophecy, and deserve no other refutation then that
check which was given unto the Jews vain atempt in the days of Adrian the
Emperor, by his General; and in the days of Julian the Apostata, by the hand
of God himself. Certainly my Text favors no such Building but that out of
Amos in Acts 15. verse. 16.

You have heard the Contents of King David's desire; I come now to see to whom
he does direct it: unto God: unto him it is that he says, do good, build thou.

And indeed to whom should he go, but to him that can and will grant what he
sueth for? God only can; for he that is Goodness must do good; (...) 1 17.
Every good and perfect gift comes from above, it comes from him: The eyes
of all look unto him, he opens his hands and fills all things living with
goodness. In the Creation he gave beginning to the goodness of a Creature:
and, if it fail, no less power then this can restore it again: In a word,
there is none other Good but he, and therefore none but he can do good,
whether it be natural, or moral good, good of Grace, or good of Glory, all
are but drops whereof he is the Ocean, and he is the Sun from whom these
beams do issue.

His Ability is not all the reason why the suite is directed unto him, but his
Promise also must be joined thereto. Take the words corporally, then has
David a special promise both of the indulgence and beneficence of God, 2. Sam.
7.
take them spiritually, and then the blessings come within the general
promises of Gods Covenant, for that has the promises both of this Life, 1. Tim
4 ^.
and of that which is to come.

For do good, you see there is reason to pray to God; and there is as much
reason for Build thou the walls. Men cannot so much as build corporally except
the Lord build the house, he labors but in vain that builds, much more
spiritually, Psalm. 127.
seeing none can give the spirit but himself, and all our sufficiency is from
his spirit, without which we can do nothing: God is the wall of our wall, he
stands about those that fear him, as the Hills about Jerusalem; Psalm. 125.
Psalm. 147.
he will build up Jerusalem, and gather together the outcasts of Israel.

But when we make God the Author, we do not exclude the Instruments, our
selves and others; but show their impotencie if he make them not both able and
effectual.

The Person is well chosen to whom the suite is directed: but that is not
enough, there must be some motive also which may plead for the Suitor. And here
is the most prevailing motive, nothing without God ever moves him to do good;
many things from without may provoke his vengeance, but nothing can draw from
him works of Grace but that which is within him. And that which is within him
the first mouer, is always his good will.

Gods will is always good, but we then use the addition of good when we feel
the gracious effects thereof; when God deals with us according to the
sweetness of his Nature, not the rigor of his justice. And this phrase
comes then in seasonably, when we have deserved the contrary, as David now
had, and all men do, when they are put to this Petition do good, build up;
witness all the Instaurations that have been since the beginning of the
World. Nothing can be had from God by merit, but we owe it all unto Gods
Mercy, who for his own sake does repair his Church, as at first he gave it a
being only for his own sake. And it is happy that that is the only motive;
for, were it not for that, we should be left comfortless, but from this we
may receive more then we can hope for: He deals like a God, 2 Samuel 7.
and not like a man.

Secondly, this phrase may note some remarkable thing touching the nature and
measure of the gifts. The nature, as if David did desire that most which would
please God best, and did not sue to God for other gifts then such as he takes
the greatest content in; and so that he might obtain Gods good will for Sion
and Jerusalem, he passes not for all the rest: And indeed it it is true
spiritual wisdom, to make Let me find grace in thine eyes the vpshot of
our suite, and to seem to mind no thing else, but the recovery of Gods good
will; 1. King ^.
we are sure then to speed with Solomon of any other good, though we mention
it not in our prayers.

Finally, this phrase may note, as the nature so the measure of the gifts, it
implies that we presume not to carue to our selves, but leave him to enlarge
or contract his bounty, as it seems best unto him. And indeed as he knows
best what is good for us: so is he the best proportioner of his gifts, and will
deal more freely, the less we presume to prescribe unto him.

But let us draw to an end. I told you, that in the whole Text, you might
observe two remarkable Virtues shining therein, The first is Confidence.

In the beginning of the Psalm, King David seemed to be a very wretch so
sinful that he might well seem unworthy to open his mouth for himself; yet
having unburdened his conscience, and poured forth his soul for himself, he
gathers strength and grows bold to pray for others, for the whole Kingdom,
yea for the whole body of the Church; he presumes to importune God to bestow
the greatest of his temporal and spiritual blessings. And the conscience of
sin must not so dishearten us, but when we have made our own peace, we may
become suitors for others also: It is an argument of the Communion of Saints,
and Christ out of a fellow-feeling, has taught us to say, Our Father, 1. Tim.
2.1.
yea the Apostle wills us to pray for all men.

But as we must pray with this Confidence like David: so must we be like
David in seasoning our prayers with Compassion; though we do well enough our
selves, yet must we not be senseless of other men's wants, nor find ease in
ease, while others are in danger: especially, if our selves have been the
cause of their danger, as David was; who as much as lay in him exposed all
Israel to ruin and destruction. He had reason therefore to remember it in his
prayers, and desire God to be gracious unto it.

God has visited our Land with a Plague of Rain, and no doubt but our sins
are the cause of so unseasonable weather; for, Genes. 3.
Cursed be the Earth for thy sake, has a constant truth; and God does not
distemper the Seasons, except we be first distempered. You shall do well
therefore to look upon the Land with Compassion, and remember in your denotion
the distresses thereof.

Finally, learn from King David to put into our prayers, those to whom we
have spec^all reference. Would the time permit, this Note might be enlarged to
Parents, Masters, Magistrates, Pastors; I will insist only on Sion and
Jerusalem, to that we have the nearest reference: No consanguinity, no
affinity works so straight a band as does the Communion of Saints, yet is
there nothing that moves men less; I would it did move more, especially at
this time, when Sion is as a wilderness, and Jerusalem a desolation; what with
the Turk, and what with the Pope, every where is the sword bathed in Christian
blood; if ever, Ne ^rascaris Domine would now be a seasonable Antheme; we
should all pray, Be not wrath very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for
ever. And I would there were that compassionate disposition in us, which
appeared in the captive Jews, Psalm 137.
when they said, If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning, if I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem before my chiefest joy.

GOd grant us all such a disposition, so will our daily prayer be unto God;
Do well O Lord unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem. PSALM. 51. VERSE
19. Then shall they be pleased with the Sacrifices of Righteousness with burnt
offerings, and whole burnt offerings: then shall they offer bullockes upon
thine Altar.


THe later of King David's Vows, that which he made for his Kingdom, does
present unto us a Desire and a Promise; I have opened the Desire, I am now to
open the Promise unto you.

In unfolding whereof, I shall (God willing) show you, First, What it
contains. Secondly, When it takes place. It contains a double undertaking
of King David; He undertakes first for God unto the Kingdom, in these words;
Thou shall be pleased with the Sacrifices of righteousness, with burnt
offerings and whole burnt offerings. Secondly, he undertakes for the Kingdom
unto God in the words that follow, They shall offer bullockes upon thine Altar.

But more distinctly. In King David's undertaking for God, observe a Devotion
and the Acceptance thereof; the Devotion is noted by the name of Sacrifice. And
touching this Devotion, we are moreover taught that it is solid and full;
solid, as appears by the quality, for it is a Sacrifice of Righteousuesse,
and righteousuesse makes Devotion to be solid. As it is solid, so it is full;
I gather that from the variety; for it consists of burnt offerings, and
whole burnt offerings, and these two (as anon you shall hear) will make up a
full Devotion.

If the Denotion be so solid, so full, it will find Acceptance with God; it
will find acceptance, for it will please; and he that is pleased is no other
then God; to him David says, Thou shall be pleased with the Sacrifice of
righteousness.

In the second undertaking, the Kingdom is noted by this word They, for it
repeateth Sion and Jerusalem which were mentioned before; That which for them
David undertakes, is, that they shall be very thankful unto God; very
thankful, for they shall offer Bullockes; and they shall not misplace their
thankfulness, because, they shall offer upon Gods Altar.

But when shall all this be? The Text does tell us in this word Then; Then
shall thou be pleased, Then shall they offer. When God has fulfilled the
Desire, whereof you heard in the former verse, Then shall follow the
accomplishment of the Promise, whereof you shall hear on this.

David vndersaketh this; for, if you mark, he speaks without all
peradventure, he affirms considently, Thou shall be pleased; They shall
offer.

Finally, lay together the many parts of the Text, and behold a blessed Accord
between God and his Church; God graceth the service of his Church, and the
Church acknowledges the bounty of her God; a better accord we cannot wish.
And we may have our part therein, if we listen to that which shall be said, as
attentively, as affectionately, as I hope we will, I am sure we ought.

Before we fall upon the particulars we must take by the way this rule, The
Promise must be understood sutably to the Desire; that, had a double sense, a
litterall and a spiritual and so must this have also; This rule must be
carried through the particulars of my Text: Whereof the first is Sacrifice; A
Ceremonial word, and imports a Legal service, whereof the most part was
performed at the Altar, either the brazen or the golden Altar. But God was
pleased to shadow a Moral in that Ceremonial service, as you may gather out
of Ezekiels last Vision, which is a Prophecy of the New Testament; Saint Peter
speaks it plainly when he tells us, that we must offer spiritual
Sacrifice through Christ to God. 1 Pec. ^.5.


And indeed, what is a Sacrifice, but a visible prayer? Neither is prayer ought
else but an audible sacrifice. Yea, look how many kinds of prayers there are,
so many kinds of Sacrifices was God pleased there should be. Saint Paul
reckons up four kinds of Prayers, whereof the first, 1 Timothy 2.1.
is (...).
Deprecation, when the conscience of sin makes us endeavor to pacify Gods
displeasure; unto this answered the Propitiatory sacrifice. The second kind of
Prayer was (...).
Petition, wherein man seeks to God for supply of his want; unto this
answered the Votiue sacrifice. Either of these, Deprecation and Petition may be
made for others as well as for our selves; whereupon Prayer receives a third
fashion and name which is called (...)
Intercession; whereunto there was an answerable Sacrifice, as you may read in
the first and last of Job, where he Sacrifices for his Children, and for his
friends. Finally, when we have received that which we seek at the hands of
God, by any of the three former kinds of Prayer, then come we to him with a
fourth, and that is a (...).
Thanksgiving; whereunto did answer the Eucharisticall sacrifice.

Seeing then there is such a correspondencie between Moral devotion and
Legal sacrifices, the one may very well note the other, and I did not without
cause tell you, that Devotion was meant by the name of sacrifice.

But touching this Devotion we are moreover taught, first, that it must be
solid; for it must be a sacrifice of righteousness; And indeed it is
righteousness that makes our Devotion solid. But there is a double
righteousness, a righteousness of the Offerer, and a righteousness of the
Offering; I will show you both, first in the Ceremonial, then in the Moral
service.

First for the Offerer. There was about Salomons Temple, a Court which was
called Profane, beyond which no uncircumcised or unclean person might come;
neither of them were deemed worthy to come into the Court of Israel, or offer
at Gods Altar, except he were first circumcised, if a Gentile, and if an
Israelite defiled, except he were first Ceremonially purified. Whereby the Holy
Ghost did give us to understand Morally, that neither Insidels nor unrepentant
Christians are fit to serve God; their sacrifice wants that righteousness
that must be in the Offerer, which is Faith and Repentance, without which no
man is worthy to come into his presence.

There is a second righteousness, and that is of the offering. In the Law God
commanded that no unclean beast should be sacrificed unto him, Nu^^ 18 15.
and in those that were allowed for sacrifice; he endured no blemish either
inherent or adherent, (...). 3 6.
they must not be blind, lame, or diseased, these were inherent blemishes;
neither must they be ill gotten, for God would not receive the hire of an
harlot. Apply this Morally; And then ye must observe, that all impure
thoughts and lusts must be excluded from our Devotion, they are more
abominable then unclean beasts; a man may not beg of God that he may
speed in his adulterous, his murderous, his treacherous designs; we may
beg nothing of God, but that which God allows for good: The lawfulness of
the Desire, is the first Righteousness required in our offering.

But it is not enough that the Desire be lawful, it must have no inherent nor
adherent unrighteousness: 1 (...). 14.
Inherent, our Devotion must not be blind, we must pray with our
understanding; it must not be lame, we must pray with ardent affection;
Finally, it must not be diseased, it must not be tainted with any corruption of
hypocrisy, vain glory, etc. no unrighteousness must adhere to it, if any
do, our Devotion will not deserve to be called, a Sacrifice of Righteousness.

When we examine Devotion by these strict conditions, we, shall find, that
there is no such Sacrifice to be found, but that only one which was offered by
our Savior Jesus Christ; in him was most absolute the Righteousness both of
the offerer and of the offering, and therefore of the offering because of the
offerer; for one person was both, and the style of the person in the Scripture
is (...), (...) 3.14. (...) 110 4.
the just one, and He is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec,
which is by interpretation King of Righteousness, therefore do the Fathers
understand Christ in this phrase. But by participation of Christ's grace, our
devotion may also pass for a Sacrifice of Righteousness.

In the last vision of Ezekiel the Priesthood is entailed upon the posterity of
Zadok, wherein there is a Mystery; Ezekiel 44.
for Zadok signifies Righteous, and he was a type of Christ; so that not
Christ only, but his Offspring (which we are) may offer a Sacrifice of
Righteousness. Esaias 8.
And indeed our persons and our gifts are both righteous, if we be truly
incorporated into Christ. But we must observe a great difference, for Christ's
Sacrifice differs from ours even as it is only just; for his Righteousness is
perfect, ours is but imperfect, we cannot exceed the measure of our
Regeneration, and therefore we may not ascribe unto it more worth then it has
in it. Notwithstanding, we must endeavor to have it such as it is, we must
endeavor that our devotion may be a Sacrifice of Righteousness, that our
devotion may be solid.

That is not enough; although the Son of Syrac does comfort us even in that
respect, when he tells us, Chap. 3^.
that the Sacrifice of the Righteous makes the Altar fat. But here is, besides
the solidnes, a fulness also required in the Devotion; I gather it out of the
variety here specified, Burnt offerings, and whole burnt offerings. The
Arabicke conioyneth these two words as if they noted but one thing, but they
are distinguished in the Original, and in other translations; and there is a
good reason they should be distinguished. For they note all kind of
Sacrifices; for all are reduced to two heads; they were either Animata, or
Inanimata, they consisted of living creatures, such as were birds and beasts,
and they come under the name of Gnolah, or else they consisted of things
without life, such as were flower, oil, etc. they come under the name of
Kalil, here rendered whole burnt offerings; these being the heads of either kind
may well comprehend all the rest.

Secondly, not only all kinds of Sacrifices are noted by these words, but by
consequence all sorts of persons; for Gnolah the burnt offering was offered for
the whole Body of the people, whereunto Kalil, that is, the whole burnt
offering was to be added for the Priest; so that whereas the whole Kingdom did
consist but of Priests and people, all persons are comprehended under these
words.

Thirdly, these Sacrifices were offered every day early and late; In the
morning there was a Gnolah a burnt offering, and a Kalil a whole burnt offering
joined with it, and as much at the Evening, no day was excused from either of
them.

Fourthly, both of these were wholly consumed, no part reserved from God,
contrary to the condition of other Sacrifices, whereof always the Priests,
sometimes the people also, had a share, as in the Votiue and Eucharisticall
Sacrifice.

These thing were ceremonially to be observed; But in these there is a
Morality enwrapt; and the Morality is as manifold as was the Ceremony; that
fourefold, and so is this. First, of all things that we have living or dead,
we must make a present unto God. Secondly, in so doing; the Priest must not
post over Devotion to the people, nor the people to the the Priest, both must
make their presents. Thirdly, every day must be a day of Devotion, if not
publicly in the communion of Saints (although, that it might be public, was
the true intent of the first founding of Cathedral and Collegiat Churches, yea
and of Monasteries also) yet privately Priests and people should day by day
offer spiritual Sacrifices unto God. Fourthly, when we perform our Devotion,
we must take heed of Sacrilege. As we must offer of all kinds: so all parts
of them to God; Acts 5.
we must not be unwilling to forgo any thing if it may advance the glory of
God; Ananias and Saphira their example most terrify us, and it must make both
Priest and people willing to keep^ themselves close to the tenor of the Law,
and to Love the Lord their God with all their heart, and with all their soul,
and with all their strength, etc.

You have heard that the Devotion must be solta, and full; if it be such then
it will find Acceptance with God. Acceptance; for it will please; the Legal
phrase is, it will yield a savor of sweet smell, or a savor of rest, whereof
the Mortll is pleasing or delight, and delight is the highestimprouement of
Love. For Love does first draw the eye to behold a thing; Secondly, it draws
on the Will to approve it, Thirdly, it may open the hand to do good unto it;
but farther it cannot go then to take content in it. So that this delight or
pleasing she weth more then an ordinary Affection. But Affections are as is
the person in whom they arise; No person greater then God, therefore no delight
can be like unto his.

But this is a Paradox; God is (...) all-sufficient, he needs nothing, and
what then can work his delight? yea, it is a wonder that he should stoop to
so base a solace that has so incomprehensible pleasures in his own nature.
Wonder not at it; for it is Condescensio paterna; as Parents use to grace the
small endeauours of their Children: so does God the Devotion of his servants;
Non ex d gnitate rei, sed ex dignatione sua, not that the service descrueth it,
but he vouchsafes to respect it, so that we may defraud our service of the
honor, but we cannot defraud God of the comfort; for Gods comfort does not
depend on our service, it is inseparable from his Essence, but the honor of
our service depends of Gods favorable aspect, which I called Gods Acceptance

But how does this Acceptance appear? If you look to the Legal Sacrifice,
God did testify it to the corporal Sion and Jerusalem by fire from heaven
which consumed the Sacrifice, but unto the spiritual Sion and Jerusalem, 1.
Chron 7.
he does testify it by the sensible comfort which by his Spirit, he does
infuse into their souls while they are Militant, and he will testify it more
plentifully by the light of his countenance which shall shine upon them, when
in the Church Triumphant, they shall stand before his Throne.

Mark here a Correction of that which was said before; you heard that
Sacrifices and burnt offerings were neither required nor accepted, here you
find the contrary. And yet not the contrary; for there they be refused in
Casu, in a Case wherein no sacrifice was allowed, and they be also refused
opposite, if the Moral be not joined with the Ceremonial; but here we have no
such case, no such opposition; God did accept them under the Law as exercises
of faith, and he will accept the truth of them for ever; for that is most
agreeable unto his nature; a spiritual service to God which is a Spirit. And
let this suffice for King David's first undertaking.

I come now to the second, his undertaking for the Kingdom. The Kingdom is
understood in this word they, it refers to Sion and Jerusalem mentioned in
the former verse: they that have the benefit, are they that shall make the
acknowledgement Before it was Ego, the King spoke in his own person, I will
show forth thy praise, I will teach the wicked etc. Now it is Illi, my
Kingdom; Priest and people, both shall be as religions as my self. And indeed
the Kingdom as well as the King ought to be thankful unto God, when God is
good to both.

David undertakes for his Kingdom that it shall be very thankful; for they
shall offer Bullocks. A Bullock is a fair Emblem of a spiritual Sacrihce,
for it fignifieth an heyfer that is come to the age of beng fruitful, (or it
comes of Parah) and yet it has not borne the yoke, nor been put to any
drudgery: And such should every one be that serves God, he should be
fruitful and not servile, abounding in good works, but not be the slave of
sin.

There are two other things to be observed in this word; first, it was the
fairest of Offirings. Secondly, it was the fittest for the Offerers. Amongst
the Sacrifices, the fairer were the Beasts, and of the beasts, the fairest was
the Bullock. God commanded no Sacrifice thet was greater then that. S. Paul
out of Hosea does moralize this Sacrifice, Heb. 13. Hos. 19.
calling it the Calves of our lips, for by Calves are these Bullocks meant.
We may add, that seeing Bullockes were the greatest of Sacrifices, we must
think that nothing we have is too good for God, and we must make our Offerings
of the best.

The Bullock was not only the fairest Offering, but the fittetst for these
Offerers; you shall read Leutt. 3. that whether it were the whole Congregation,
or the Priest that had offended, either of them was to reconcile himself to
God, by the oblation of a Bullock; and seeing they are meant in this place,
such a Sacrifice does best beseem them, but that the propitiatory is turned
into a gratulatorie.

But to whom shall they be thankful? surely to him that does deserve it, to
God; they shall offer upon his Altar; he that fulfilleth the Desire has
iuterest in the Promise, they shall confess that it is He that does good to
Sion, that it is He that butldeth the walls of Jerusalem.

Secondly note that he says not, that they will offer unto him, but upon his
Altar, the Altar that was erected by his appointment. For though it be true,
that where the Altar was, there was God, yet it follows not, that where God
is, there is his Altar. God is pleased to confine not only the substance, but
the circumstance of our service also, Deuteronomy. 12.33.
he would not be worshipped every where.

The Ceremonial Altar is gone, but the Moral thereof abides; where Christ is,
thither must we bend our service, he is the Altar that halloweth our Sacrifice
on him, and by him, must we present it unto God. Again, the Altar does note,
that it is not enough for us privately to recount Gods blessings, we must
divulge them publicly: though the Heathen had their private Altars, yet God
had none but in a public place; therefore the setuice must needs be public
that is done upon the Altar.

Add the Bullock and the Altar together, and then you shall find, that this
was Operaria gratitudo, the hand should testify the thankfulness of the
heart, and the Kingdom would be thankful not in word only, but indeed also;
And indeed God does good to Sion, and builds up the walls of Jerusalem, that
they may offer him such Sacrifice.

To conclude this point, as David in his own Vow made Gods praise the vpshot
of his promise: so does he in the Vow of the People. And indeed the Church
must not desire prosperity otherwise then that God may have the glory of it:
God made all things for himself, and we must subordinate all things unto him,
otherwise we substitute the Creature in stead of the Creator, and cannot excuse
our selves from Idolatry; from which David does free his Kingdom in saying,
They shall offer at Gods Altar.

You have heard of Gods acceptance and the Kingdoms thankfulness; that these
things shall be performed David vndertak^th for both he undertakes to each of
them for the other; for mark how resolutely he speaks, Thou shall be
pleased, They shall offer. Vox fidei and fiduciae, he believes it assuredly,
and therefore does confidently affirm it. Neither, can their be any doubt, but
if our service be the sacrifice of righteousness, God will accept it; for he
will never refuse what himself commanded. And it can as little be doubted that
the Kingdom will be thankful, if God do it that good; for it is a special
effect of Grace to make us so thankful, so that we may not doubt of either.

I have sufficiently opened the Promise unto you, one thing remains, the
circumstance of time when this Promise shall take place; it is expressed in this
word Then, which is set before either of the undertakings, Then shall thou be
pleased, Theu shall they offer, etc. except God fulfill the Desire, there is no
hope of the Promise, but the performance of the Promise will not be far
behind, if the Desire be fulfilled. Touching the Ceremony, we find it in the
Dedication of the Temple, when many thousands of Bullocks were offered, 1. King
8.
and God appearing unto Solomon told him how well he was pleased therewith. And
touching the moral, though in figurative terms, yet it is fairly set down
Ezekiel. 20. and Malac. 3. you have it in a short sentence. Psalm. 110. The people
shall be willing in the day of thy power, Math. 18.20.
and the beauties of holiness; And Christ is as brief, when two or three are
gathered together in my name, I am a among them.

We pray that we may receive grace; and when we have received grace, what
temaineth but that we give glorie^ and we shall give glory as we received
grace imperfectly here on earth, because our grace is imperfect, but when our
grace is perfect, then shall we give glory perfectly to God in the Kingdom
of Heaven; and of that glory which is given in the Church Triumphant do many
of the Fathers understand this place.

Finally, mark a blessed accord between Gods acceptance, and man's
thankfulness; it is an uncomfortable thing to serve, and not to be regarded,
but if any thing will encourage, it is this, Math. 25.
that we shall hear Euge serve bone, well done servant faithful and true,
enter into thy Masters joy. Wherefore let us hearten our selves that God will
accept, and knowing that, let us do our best to please.

I am come to the end of of my Text, and withal to the end of the Psalm; but
God forbid your profit should end with my pains. S. Austin thought that every
man should sing over this Psalm every day; and act a penitent as King David
did. And indeed which of us may presume better of himself then King David had
cause? and who may not desire if he be so bad, to speed as well as King David
did?

He began at Miserere, fell as low in his humiliation as a mortal man can
do; but you see how he ends; his humiliation was not so low, but his
exaltation was as high, and his joy proved as great as ever his sorrow was.

It is a witty observation which Saint Ambrose has; he makes this Psalm a
Psalm of Iubile, he gathers his note from the number: In the Septuagint which
most of the Ancients follow, this is accounted the fiftieth Psalm, therefore
does that Father parallel it to the fiftieth year. The fiftieth year was the
year of Iubile to the Israelites, wherein all debts were released, bondslaues
were set at liberty, and he that had sold it was repossest again of his
Inheritance. And does not that befall a man spiritually, if he be penitent,
which the Israelites enjoyed corporally? yea verily. He that was by sin a
slave unto Satan, by repentance is mad: a freeman of God; upon our repentance
are all our debt-obligations cancelled, which we have either inherited or
contracted: Finally, it returns us again to Paradise out of which we were
cast for sin; a blessed comfort of Repentance, and therefore a blessed use may
we make of this Psalm, the Contents whereof is this virtue of Repentance.

And what can I wish you, yea and my self also, but that from the misery of
sinners, we may ascend to to the glory of Saints? and

We thy humble Servants beseech thee our Lord Jesus Christ, Hieroms Prayer.
that thou will be indulgent to our grievous sins, and grant that being
humbled by true contrition of heart, and having mortified all our corrupt
lusts, we may be prepared as an acceptable Holocaust un to thee, and with the
Angels sing for ever, Haleluiah, Haleluiah, So the Arabi^ ends this Psalm
Haleluiah in the Kingdom of Heaven. (...).

NINE SERMONS On the two and twentieth CHAPTER of the Gospel according to S.
MATTHEW.

The 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. VERSES.

BY The Right Reverend Father in God, ARTHVRE LAKE, late Bishop of that See.

LONDON, Printed by W. S. for Nathaniel Butter. 1629.



NINE SERMONS ON THE TWO AND TWENTIETH Chapter of the Gospel according to Saint
MATTHEW, the 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. VERSES.
THE TEXT. 34. But when the Pharisees had heard, that Jesus had put the
Sadduces to silence, they were gathered together.

35. Then one of them which was a Lawyer, asked him a Question, tempting him,
and saying,

36. Master, What is the great Commandment?

37. Jesus said unto him; Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart,
and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind, etc.


The first Sermon.
NO sooner had I ended the Doctrine of Repentance, which I set before you in
the example of King David, but it came into my mind that the next way to
persuade any man to follow it, was to teach him how he might best be
acquainted with his own state. For though it be true that every man that
knows himself to be guilty does not repent, yet it is as true, that no man
does repent except he know himself to be guilty. Now the Apostles rule is,
Rom 7 ver^^. Iam. 1. ver. 23.
that The knowledge of Sin comes by the Law, the Law is a looking glass
wherein we may see what manner of Persons we are. Whereupon I resolved to make
the Law my next Text. Not that Law which was proper to the Jews, and was
abolished by the Cross of Christ, the Ceremonial, and Politic: But that Law
which is common to all the World, and shall never have an end, I mean the
Moral Law which is contained in the ten Commandments: And indeed they are the
great storehouse of cases of Conscience. If ever a man be desirous to make a
through inquiry into himself, and give up against himself a true verdict,
they will set his Sin most clearly before his eyes, and lay it most
powerfully to his charge. They will. But not so well, except a man be first
prepared: you must first learn a lesson that contains the Beginning, and the
Ending of the Decalogue, and that is Charity, all the ten Commandments spring
from this root, and this is the fruit that we must reap from them all, they
begin from, and they end in Charity; this Charity is the Argument of those
words that now I have read unto you, and the Text is nothing but a Preparatiue
to the ten Commandments; Let us come then to it.

The whole does contain a Conference between our Savior Christ, and a
Pharisee: wherein it was to appear, whether of the two had more skill in Gods
Law. In breaking it up, I will consider the Occasion, and the Argument; The
Occasion, as given, was Christ's conquest of the Sadduces, he had put them to
silence; as taken, was the malice of the Pharisees, they were so vexed
therewith, that they no sooner heard it, but Conuenerunt they conspired to set
upon Christ, this was the occasion. Thus far the Pharisee goes; I mean to
go no farther at this time in unfolding the Text, I will begin then with the
occasion; first as it was given.

Christ in a dispute had foiled the Sadduces, the Text says, He had put the
Sadduces to silence. Here we must learn, first what these Sadduces were, they
were a Sect sprung up amongst the Jews; I will briefly relate their
original, as the Hebrew story has it. Antigonus Sochaeus, not long after the
days of Nehemiah, was the chief Rabbin in the great Synagogue at Jerusalem,
Drusius de tribus sectis Iudaeorum.
who gravely instructing his Disciples is said amongst other words to have used
those, You must not be of servile minds, and do your duty for reward; his
Disciples hearing this, desired him to expound himself more fully. Whereupon
he adds that men must not exspect the reward of well-doing in this world; but
stay for it until the world to come. To these words, Tzadock a chief Disciple
of his took exception, and said, He never heard of any such thing as the world
to come. And thereupon he with another fellow Disciple of his called Baithos
turned Apostataes, and repaired to the Schismatic Tempell built upon mount
Gerizzim, and became principal Rabbis of the Samaritans. And amongst them did
Tzadock first broach his Heresy, and taught them, that there was no
Resurrection of the dead, because no immortality of the Soul and Spirit, and
so consequently no Judgment for to come. Therefore in this life was every man
to make his fortune as well as he could, without any scruple of Conscience,
and satisfy his lust whatsoever it were. If a man desire a fuller relation of
their impiety, let him but read the second Chapter of the Book of Wisdom,
where you have a Sadducee painted out to the full, you have his lively picture.
But that which I specially mark unto you is that the Samaritans and the Jews
were at deadly feude, Ish. 4. ver. 9.
they had no commerce one with an other. And here we find the Heresy of the
Samaritans to have corrupted the Iew^s, and that even in Jerusalem there were
many Sadduces. I say too little, the Sadduces were chief Governors in
Jerusalem; read it Acts 5. where you shall find that the chief Priests to
repress the Apostles preaching the Resurrection from the dead, were assisted
with those of the Sect of the Sadduces.

Flauius Josephus goes farther, and observes that the Sect of the Sadduces
was most favored by those that were rich. And indeed it is most likely;
because they that have a worldly state whereon to rest, are commonly so
addicted thereunto, that they could well be contented there were no other
life: So earthly, so sensual are their thoughts, their hearts, that they
hardly believe, and do desire but coldly the things of a better life. Yea they
think all men senseless and stark mad, that make little account of things
below, that they may more fully enjoy those things which are above. It is a
lamentable thing to see a Church degenerate so far, as not only to endure,
but to give countenance unto a Sect, that did raze the very foundation of
Piety. But it was not their fault only, though Christendom has none known
by the Name of Sadduces, yet Sadduces it has too many; too many that not only
live as if there were no Resurrection: but also where they may be bold, are not
ashamed to maintain so impious a conceit, and persuade men out of Conscience
to live lewdly, who before did it only out of Impotencie of affections.
Magistrates are too patient, to negligent in finding them out, in rewarding
them as they deserve.

I go on in my Text, you have seen what these Sadduces were, now see how
Christ puts them to silence. The word is markable, it is (...), he bridled
their mouths, which is a phrase borrowed from fierce, and stomackfull Horses,
which are impatient of the ryder, yet are they held in by a strong bit, and so
subjected to the will of the Rider perforce, not out of their own
tractablenesse. Men are resembled in the Scripture to such horses, Be not like
horse and mule which have no understanding, Pet. 32.
but must be held in with bit and bridle least they run upon us, wherein you
may perceive that the bridle does not alter the disposition of the horse, but
only stay him from doing what otherwise he would: Even so did our Savior
Christ silence the Sadduces; though they were ill affected to him, and men (as
you heard) of great authority among the Jews, yet did Christ so clearly
dissolve their sophismes, and resolve their doubt with that Authority, that
they became tongue-tide, had not a word to return upon him. Which is strange,
whether you consider, and compare the mean outside wherein Christ appeared,
with the great countenance of the Sadduces, or the out facing of Heresy with
the modesty of truth.

But though Christ stopped their Mouths, yet did he not alter their Hearts,
for though they could not defend Sadducisme, yet did they continue Sadduces, as
appears Acts Chap. 5. and Chap. 23. The reason whereof is, because they moved
their question, not out of a desire to know the truth, but with a purpose to
scoff at Christ. When men seek with such minds unto God, God is pleased to
bring the scorn upon them, but he leaves them in their gross ignorance.
Add hereunto, that when men have resolved to make the satisfying of some
corrupt lust the vpshot of their endeauours; they accept, or refuse all things
in reference thereunto, and stop their Ears and Hearts, so that they hear
with a deaf Ear, and with a dull Heart entertain whatsoever makes against
them. Hence is it that the Ministers pains taken with those, who make their
^elly their God, or commit Idolatry with their Gold, or incline to any
erroneous conceit, or sinful affection, is commonly so fruitless: Christ's
was, who will wonder that ours is. The Use we must make hereof is this; Never
to move question in religion but out of the love of truth, bringing with us a
desire to yield when it is revealed unto us. Secondly, we must take heed how we
set our Affections upon any thing, for if that become once our last end, a
Black-more will as soon change his skin, and a Leopard his spots, as we will be
removed from it. And let this suffice for the Occasion given.

No sooner was it given by Christ's foyling the Sadduces, but it was taken by
the Pharisees; for upon the hearing of it. Conuenerunt in vn^m they fell to
consultation. But here must I briefly show you what these Pharisees were. I^b.
cap. 1. and 2.
We find in the Book of Maccabees, that when Antiochus Epiphanes had taken
Jerusalem, and (as the Prophet Daniel foretold) had put down the service of
God, and interdicted the observance of the Law, many Religious Jews chose
rather to fear God then the King. And when many Apostate Jews made covenant
with the Gentiles, and uncircumcised themselves, the Religious held on the
Circumcision, and observed the Law strictly; they are there called by the Name
A^ideans, from the Hebrew Chasidim, 1. Mac. 2. v. 42.
which signifies men of pious or Religious hearts, in time they changed their
name into Chacamim, that is wise men, and became the oracles of the people, and
were consulted in doubts of Religion. Religion by this time was come out of
their hearts into their heads. They changed their names a third time, and were
called Pharisees, they went still from better to worse. For a Pharisee is he
that is separated from other men, you may learn it of the Pharisee in the
Gospel, Luke 18.11.
I think God I am not like other men, so does he vaunt in his Prayer to God.
And indeed they thought themselves too good to converse with the vulgar sort.
But the ground of this conceit is worth the marking for by that time they took
unto themselves this name the forgerie related in the Apocryphal Esdras began
to be current. Lib. 2. ca. 14. ver. 6.14.
It began to be believed that Moses in mount Sinai received not only a Law
which he writ, but another also which he delivered by word of mouth; that
Joshua received it from him, and others from Joshua, and that so it continued
by Succession until it was conveyed into the Talmud The new Testament calls
it the traditions of the Elders, the Jews themselves Mishne, which the Fathers
render (...), yea they are not ashamed to enter into a blasphemous comparison
of the written Law with the unwritten, giving the pre-eminence to the unwritten
above the written. The Church of Rome has dreamed the very same dream in the
new Testament, as they did in the old; and has fained a traditionarie Gospel,
as the other fained a traditionarie Law. And she comes fairly after them in
the blasphemous comparison, the time will not suffer me to enlarge the
Parallel, others have done it, you may read it in them. I will insist no
longer here upon the Story of the Pharisee, I shall meet with him again:
Only if you compare the Sadducee and the Pharisee, and observe how one did
pare from, the other patch to Gods Word, how the one bent to Atheism, and the
other to Superstition: you will see how hardly men keep a mean either in
knowledge or conversation; some ouer-reach, some reach not home. But we must
hold it the truest Piety to confine our wits, and conform our lives to that
will of God, which we have of record.

Having sufficiently described the Persons, we must now consider their taking
of the occasion; When they heard, they came together. A strange thing; for what
was that which they heard? was it not the making good of their Tenent against
the Sadduces? the proving of the Resurrection of the dead? A man would expect
that they should congratulate Christ's victory, and rejoice in the refutation of
the Sadduces. Happily they would have done so, if there had been nothing else:
but Christ got credit by the Sadduces silence, the people wondered at it, this
was a corasiue to the Pharisees, they were ^ealous that what Christ gained,
they lost. Therefore they maligned his success, and malice has no eyes to see
good turns, or to be moved with them. Nay see; Christ was taking their part
against the Sadduces, and they revenge the Sadduces quarrel upon Christ.
Malice does not only not see good turns but it can forget also ill turns, to
do a mischief unto those that are good. The Sadduces and Pharisees were
professed enemies, yet both of them agree to take part against Christ; so were
Pontius Pilate and Herod made friends to crucify him. The extremes, though
most opposite, yet do either of them impugn the mean in morality;
covetousness indureth not prodigality, nor prodigality covetousness, yet both
concur to overthrow liberality: As it is in the Abstract, so it is in the
Concrete; men carry themselves according to the qualities wherewith they are
seasoned. And this is the reason why, as in the time of Christ, so in our
times, the orthodoxe Christian is assaulted and battered as well by the
superstitious as by the profane.

I have not yet showed you the depth of their malice, it was much that it would
not let them see Christ's well-deseruing, more that they did not see the
ill-deseruing of the Sadduces, but I wonder at neither of these blindnesses;
malice suffers them not to see their own desperate adventure; for they had
not long before, (as it appears in this Chapter) set upon Christ, and went
awy with disgrace: if they would not take warning from the Sadduces foil, they
might from their own. But it is a true rule; Malitia and Ambitio nutriunt
temeritatem, and impudentiam, where a man's heart is possessed with ambition or
malice, he will be commonly foole-hardie and past shame, he will venture
without foresight of his present ruin, and he is shameless and senseless,
though he have never so much cause to blush and take heed. The Devil tempted
Christ, and though he were twice repulsed, yet he set on him the third time;
his scholars have the same resolution. Which must make us not to wonder at the
replications, Chry^ost. 16. in Math.
and triplications of the Adversaries of our Church Audi homo sidelis (says an
ancient Father) hearken to me O whosoever faithful man thou art that willingly
do encounter an Heretic; if the Pharisee could be quiet, then is there hope
thou may quiet an H^reticke, but it is no more possible for to quiet an
Heretic, then it was to quiet a Pharisee. For what? art thou stronger then
Christ, that thou should quiet them whom Christ could not quiet? No; we must
still bear in mind that the Church is militant, when we have put off one
storm, we must look for another: Christ was so exercised, and so has his
Church ever been, and shall be until the end of the world. Finis vnius
cruci^ est gradus alterius; Christian men by one conquest do but make way to
another conflict. Chrysostom. Hom, quae supra.
And the Enemy of the Church, saepe confunditur, nunquam placatur, though
often confounded, will never be appeased. And let this suffice for the Occasion.

I come now to the Conference, whereof the first part is the Question moved.
Here I told you we were first to see Who moves it. Laying the words together,
I found there were two sorts of Actors, many plotted, for Conuenerunt in vnum,
all the Pharisees laid their heads together, and they repaired all to Christ;
all their wits did hammer it, and all their Persons countenance it, they were
not unadvised upon that which they spoke, and they did afford it their best
assistance: which makes much for the amplifying of Christ's wisdom and his
constancy, that could reply so suddenly to that which so many heads had
premeditated, and was not daunted with the presence of so many great Rabbines.
What Grace he gave to his disciples he wanted not himself, Ma. 10.19.
dabitur in illa hora his spirit did suggest in an instant what he should
speak; and he had a mouth given unto him, which the adversaries could not
resist.

As many plotted the Question: so there was but one that did propose it; S.
Chrysostom and other of the Fathers observe a policy herein; for the
Pharisees had reason to doubt of the success upon their former proof:
therefore they handle the matter so, that but one should speak, and if he
prevailed, they would all triumph because he was of their Sect; but if he were
foyld, then they would put it off, and say it was but his private conceit. The
like Stratagem does the Church of Rome use, they publish their opinions by
single men whom we have refuted, they tell us they are not bound, no not to the
writings of Bellarmine himself. As for the Pope he is careful to resolve few
doubts out of his Chair. And so they provide that they will not be refuted, no
not when they are refuted. But Chrysostom gives them a good Item, Leuis est
consolatio, si quis in seipso confusus est, quod ab alijs ignoratur, it is but
a cold comfort for a man to set a good face upon a business, when the
conscience is sensible of its own confusion.

Although the Person were but one, yet was he no ordinary one, he is set forth
here two ways: first, as very great in show, great for his learning; for he
was a Lawyer, S. Mark calls him a Scribe. And here I must open one Antiquity
more. If we look into the original of the Jews Religion, which is Moses Law,
we shall find that God committed the teaching of his people unto the Priests
and Levites. Whereupon is grounded that saying of M^lachi; The Priests lips
should preserve knowledge, Chap. 2.7.
and the people should ask the Law at his mouth. And to that end were the
Priests and Levites not only to minister in the Temple, and teach in the
Synagogues; but to be of Council also in the Synedrion at Jerusalem, and in
the inferior Senates throughout the whole holy Land. But when corruption had
ouer-flowen the Church of the Jews, and the Priests and Levites had
degenerated, then started up certain usurpers, that took upon them the
doctrinall part of their function. Of whom Christ speaks in the Gospel, The
Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses Chair. Matt. 23.
Which two seemed to differ (as Genebrard thinks) no otherwise then the
Canonists and the Schoolmen in the Church of Rome. Or to speak more properly
to the Jewish aniquities, the Scribe was a Textuarie, and the Pharisee a
Traditionarie Divine. Understand me not exclusiuely, for the Pharisee did allow
the Text, and the Scribe the Traditions, but it should seem they were not both
alike studied in, or zealous for them both. Neither must you think that all
Scribes were Usurpers; for if they were of the Tribe of Levy (as was Esdras)
their calling was lawful. But they did usurp Moses chair if they were of any
other tribe. Much like unto the orders of Friars which started up in the night
(as it were) of Christendom; and taking advantage of the ignorance of
ordinary Pastors, encroach't upon their function, and ingrost all Devotion
into their hands.

When you hear this questionist called a Lawyer, you must understand that he
was by degree a Rabbin, or a Doctor of the Law. For there were Nouices which
were brought up at the Doctors feet, as Paul at the feet of Gamaliel. Yea
they had Lay-followers, as the Friars have lay Dominicans, lay Franciscans, and
lay Jesuits, who hold it no small ghostly comfort to wear the badge of any of
those Fraternities, and to be partakers of their merits. And the Fraternities
do gladly embrace such followers, they thrive not a little by their Alms, and
their countenance. But such followers are called Disciples; they have not the
honor to be called Rabbis, neither come they under the name of Lawyers or
Scribes; Whereupon it follows that this man was great for his learning. But
this greatness was only in show; for though they were accounted Doctors by
their Nouices, yet were they but ill seen in Gods Law; Legis verba tenent hi
Scribae (says Saint Ambrose) vim ignorant, they were ready at the Text, but
altogether ignorant of the sense: like Anabaptists and Brownists. Christ
observes two notable defects in them; the one was that they did reatch the
Ceremonial Law too far, and the other; that they did shrincke the Moral Law
too much. So that their Key of knowledge did open the Kingdom of Heaven,
neither to themselves nor others. Whereupon Saint Paul does not without cause
move the question; Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe? 1. Cor. ^.
Where is the Disputer of this world? So we may conclude of this Scribe, that
he was great for learning, but that greatness was only in show.

He was not great only for learning, he was great for holiness also, for he
was a Pharisee, and Pharisees were Saints among the Jews. For they did
supererogate; lived not only according to the written Law, but according to
the traditions also. Whatsoever did concern solemn prayers or religious
worship, was learned from them, and they were a Law unto the people. Aui^^^^ 18
cap. 2. lib 17. cap. 13. ^^de ^e^^ Iud^^^^, lib. 2 cap. cap 7.
Flauius Josephus says, that they had gotten such Authority by their
holiness, that though they did oppose King or Priest, yet the people would
give credit to them. I will not trouble you with particularizing their
superstitions, they were as apish as the Friars are. And they were as great
busy bodies as either the Jesuits or our precisians are. But all this
holiness was but in show, if the things themselves did not speak it, our
Savior Christ in the Gospel does paint out the vanity thereof. Saint Paul
after he had been a Pharisee, and was become a Christian, tells us that he
accounted all his Pharisaisme was no better then loss and dung. Phil 3. Here Is.
16.
Epiphanius passes a very true censure upon it, when he tells us that it was
spontanea and superflua Religio, nothing but a pack of willworship, and that
which sets a man never a whit forward toward Heaven; nay it set them
backward rather: Christ gives the reason, they made the commandments of God
of none effect by their Traditions, Mat. 15.6.
or at least they leauened them. So that when I say he was a great man whom
they made their Champion, I mean great in their eyes, but not indeed or in
Christ's eyes. What he was indeed, and what he appeared to Christ is intimated
by that which follows, he came with a sword in his heart, he was a Tempter,
what is that but a Devil? It is one of the Titles which Saint Paul gives unto
him, and all Tempters do resemble him; Tempters in that sense which is here
meant: for God is said to tempt, not as ignorant of us, but to make us to know
and show our selves: and not with any ill meaning toward us, but intending our
good. But devilish Temptation proceeds either from Infidelity, when it is bent
against God, and shows that we do not believe that which we ought to
acknowledge in God, namely his Wisdom, his Power, his Holiness, etc. so the
Jews are said to have tempted God in the Wilderness; or else it proceeds from
malice, when it is bent againstman, and seeks some advantage to work his
destruction. The temptatation that in my Text is bent against Christ, is mixed;
it proceeds partly from infidelity, and partly from malice, they did not
believe that he was the Messiah, and they would willingly have destroyed him,
because he affirmed himself to be so. In this sense they often tempted
Christ, sometimes tempting his Power, Luke 11. sometimes his clemency Ioh. 8.
sometimes his Zeal in the question of divorce, Math. 19. sometimes his
allegiance, as in this Chapter in the question of Tribute.

That which we must mark in the temptation is, that as temptation presupposes
ignorance of the Person whom we tempt, both what he is, and what he will do:
So there is great difference between simple ignorance, which in simplicity of
heart makes trial for better resolution; such a trial as Nathaniel was
willed by Phillip to make of Christ, Ioh. 1.
Come and see, when he doubted whether any good could come out of Nazareth?
and that of the Samaritanes Ioh. 4. who being bid by the woman to come and see
a Prophet, went, heard, and believed: such kind of tempting in simplicity of
heart, neither is ill nor displeases. But the Pharisees proceeded from
Ignorantia prauae dispositionis; notwithstanding Christ had done so many things
miraculously, and spoken so many words most wisely: yet are they not moved
either with his words or works; but passing by that which should reclaim
them, they seek matter of advantage whereby they may oppress Christ. There is
no kind of people so mischievous as those which are learned and want a good
conscience; for their Learning is nothing but armata nequitia, it serves both
for defensive and offensive weapons of sin. A learned wicked man is two ways
worse then he that is unlearned, though he be wicked: worse passiucly; for he
can most hardly be wrought by, or brought unto the truth: worse actiuely, for
he can find out most tricks, and take most advantages of doing ill. Wherefore
we must take heed to our knowledge, and pray God that he would give us such as
may be accompanied with a good conscience, least otherwise we become brethren
of the Pharisee, and our Questions moved to Christ, prove no better then his
temptation. You see that he came with a sword in his heart, and that he had a
mischievous purpose; see now what oil streameth from his lips.

He saluteth our Savior with a smoth tongue, Master: Saint Hierome does not
unfitly compare flatterers unto Bees, which have honey as well as stings;
flattery is the best art of insinuation. The title is honorable which this
questionist gives unto Christ; for it was the title of the Rabbis, of all
those that took upon them to teach the people. It was much affected both by
the Scribes and Pharisees, as you may read in the Gospel, and why? They held
it an honorable acknowledgement of their learning. But though they did affect
it, yet was it due to Christ, by reason that He was the great Prophet that
should come into the world, D^^^. 8.
he was the Wisdom and the Word of God, John 13.
you call me (says Christ to his Disciples) Lord and: Master, and so I am. But
as for this Scribe he had no intent to express so good a conceit of Christ,
or such purpose as to be Christ's Disciple: you may learn it out of S. John,
where with scornful indignation they bid the blind man be Christ's Disciple, as
for themselves they were Moses Disciples. Origin has a witty observation upon
the nature of correlatiues; as none is a father except he have a child, so none
except he be his child can truly call another father. The same correspondencie
should there be between Master and Scholar: we do but abusiuely call him Master
to whose instruction we purpose not to commit our selves as does beseem a
Scholar; but as Judas cried, Hail Master, when he was playing the Traitor: so
does this man use the word Master, when he is playing the Tempter: and enerie
one that calls Christ Master, or Savior, and is not a true correlatine in
disposition, est frater Pharisei; and many such brethren have the Pharisees in
the world. Couple that which you have heard of these Persons what they were
indeed, and what they were in show, and you shall perceive that the questionist
is an Angel of darkness, though he make show of an Angel of light. The
Devil never appears in his own hue: and they must not want a fair pretense
that plot mischief against others. I have discovered the Questionist
sufficiently unto you; it remains that we briefly consider of his Question.

And here we shall find, first that the Question is indeed good, for it is
about Gods Law, and men cannot better employ their thoughts then there about,
King David does often recommend this study. But there are two soul abuses
wherewith this Scribe, this Lawyer does corrupt his question; the one is vain
glory, the other is impiety. He heard Christ tax the Sadduces for their
ignorance in the Scripture, he thought it was now time for him to get himself
credit, and no better means then the moving of such a Question. The vain
glory is a foul fault, but the impiety is much worse; for he makes Gods
word serve for a weapon in the Devils quarrel. He learned this of the father
of Temptations, who used such weapons against Christ: and he is followed therein
by most heretics, whose practice is to oppose the truth by the truth, God by
himself. As if the malice of man could deprehend any such advantage of
oversight in God, whereby any might be induced to sin against him, but abuse
they may, they can never use aright such weapons: and if they do abuse them,
well may they sometimes, nay they do too often, succeed in their adventure
against men, but it is senseless that they should hope to speed against God,
or Christ.

The Question is not only good, but it is weighty also: for it is about the
great Commandment in the Law; great for greatest, for the Hebrews have not
superlatiues, Mark calls it Primum omnium, the chiefest of the
Commandments: Another Scribe, Luke 10. seems to expound the word (great) by
those words; What shall I do to inherit everlasting life? So that the great
Commandment seems to be that, the keeping whereof does best please God, and
gives us the nearest communion with him. Wherefore though it skils not which is
the greatest, so we set our selves to keep all as we ought, yet is the
resolution desired useful to make a man know how far he is gone from God.
It should seem that there was a Question here abouts between the Jews, some
holding for the Ceremonial, Mark 12.33.
some for the Moral, as we may gather from this Scribes answer made
elsewhere. And this Scribe as Mark calls him, or Law yer as here, would show
himself to be no ordinary man by his question. It is true that though all
the Commandments of God be equal in regard of the Author, and nothing may be
accounted small that comes from God; yet in regard of those that must observe
the Law, all are not equal, and Christ himself tells us that there are
Mandata minima. Matthew. 5.
Wherefore the doubt had a good ground: but the Scribe, knowing that the Law
had three maine Heads, the Moral, the Politic, the Ceremonial; and that
from every of the heads sprang manifold branches; moreover, supposing that
Christ was illetterd, Matthew. 13.54.
and not seen in these studies: thought that it was the only way by such a
Question, either to disgrace his knowledge, if he could not suddenly lay
together the variety of Commandments, and out of an advised comparison pass
a true judgment, and so they should lessen his reputation with the people. Or
if he did answer to the Question, and clearly express himself, then he
should set those that held the contrary tenant against him, and so at least
wise, they should do him some mischief, which was the vp-shot of a Tempter.
And to that and he does not only Socratically move this question, hoping for
an ironicall conclusion, and to put a scorn upon Christ: but politickly also,
hoping to distract his Auditors, and raise him up many adversaries. But foolish
man that he was, he looked only upon Christ's outside, of his inside he knew
nothing. Had he known who Christ was, he would never have made such an
adventure. He that gave the Law understood the Law to the full, and he knew
the degrees of observance which prescribed them unto men; the event proved it,
and the Tempters success was far other then he exspected; as hereafter you
shall hear.

There is one note more, De magno mandato quaerit (says Chrysostom) qui
minimum non impleuit, Matthew. 23.
the Scribes and Pharisees did use to bind heavy burdens and lay them upon
other men's shoulders; which they would not lift at with the least of their
fingers, ambitious of profound knowledge, but careless of any degree of true
piety. We have many such that busy their wits in the most learned Inquiries
of Gods Predestination, of the day of Judgment, of the mysteries in the
Revelation, of Chronology, Genealogy, sacred Antiquities, and in the mean
time soaring in these contemplations aloft, take no heed unto their steps, but
are spectacles to the world of no small Moral infirmities. Wherefore
Chrysostom advises well, Quaerat de maiore Iustitia qui impleuit minorem, let
us practice our lessons as we learn them, and not pain our wits in studying
a greater, until we have brought our Hearts to obey a lesser commandment:
otherwise we shall be but like the Alchimists, that all their life are making
of Gold, and go to their graves stark beggars.

You have heard both of the questionist, and the question, and how well the
question fitteth the questionist, the temptation represents the tempter.
Examples are not unfitly compared unto looking Glasses, wherein we may behold as
well what to eschew; as what to follow, in this we have found little to be
followed, much to be eschewed.

GOd grant we may make the right use of it, and that we do not in our lives
show our selves to be either Scribes or Pharisees, either counterseitly holy,
orignorantly learned. But let our inside be no worse then our outside, and let
us presume of no more then we are sure is good, either in our life or learning.
Finally let us in simplicity of heart become the Disciples of Christ, and let
our ghostly edification be the end of our enquires. So shall we be free from
the just censure, that was deserved by this questionist, and that for this
question; a question otherwise good, but tainted by the ill meaning of so bad a
questionist. The second Sermon.
MATT. 22. VERSE. 37. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall Love, etc.


THese words contain an answer to a question, the question was moved by a
Lawyer; the answer thereunto is shaped by our Savior Christ. Having
heretofore unfolded the Question, it follows that I now come on and unfold
the answer unto you, wherein first we must observe, that Christ does
vouchsafe an answer unto a tempter, Jesus said unto him, to him, who before is
said to have come to tempt Christ. Secondly, we must see what the answer is
which Christ does vouchsafe; it is such as does fully, yea abundantly resolve
the question, and which withal does discreetly, and powerfully defeat the
malice of the questionist, this later point is implied, but the former is
expressed in the Text. At this time I will meddle only with the Answer to the
question; I will show you the particulars contained therein, and handle as many
as the time will permit.

In the Text we do find that Christ does fully, yea, abundantly resolve the
doubt; for he not only affirms which is the great Commandment in these
words; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, etc. but he
confirms it also, in these words, On these two Commandments depend the Law
and the Prophets. To resolve the Question fully does not content, he does
resolve it abundantly also, he teaches the Pharisee more then he did ask; he
asked but after one Commandment, Christ teaches him two, as well that which
enioyneth the Love of our Neighbor, as that which enioyneth the Love of God;
he gives an Answer with a vantage, but this vantage proves in the end a
disadvantage to the Pharisee: as hereafter you shall hear.

But more distinctly to break up that which Christ affirms to be the great
Commandment: We find that therein God inioyneth Love, thou shall Love. As he
does enjoin it: so he teaches where it must be seated, and on whom we must
bestow it. It must be seated in the inwardman the Heart, the Soul, the Mind.
And it must be bestowed upon the Lord our God, and our Neighbor. Neither is it
enough to bestow it on them, except in bestowing it we observe an Order, and a
Measure. An Order, for we must first love God, and then our Neighbor.
Therefore in my Text is that called the first, and this the second
Commandment. A measure; for we must love God more then our Neighbor; God with
all our Heart, Soul, and Mind, this first (says the Text) is the Great
Commandment.

But we must love our neighbor only as our selves, therefore does the Text tell
us that this 2nd. is not equal, it is only like to the first Commandment.

Let us come to the particulars, whereof the first was this; Christ does
vouchsafe an Answer, and that to him whom he knew to be a Tempter. Though the
person deserve to be reproved, to be rejected; yet Christ bears with him,
and does not refuse to satisfy his demand. Wonder not at it, long before he
dealt no worse with the Arch-tempter, in the 4. of S. Matthew, you shall find
that he replied unto him even a third time. And in so doing taught us, that we
must not be ashamed to avouch Gods truth though it be to the Devil himself:
nay we have a more comfortable note included herein. For if Christ dealt so
graciously with those that came dissemblingly to learn of him; what confidence
may we have that he will answer us, if in singleness of heart, and humility
of spirit, we open unto him the scruples of our conscience, and desire his
resolution? no doubt but he that bids us to seek, Math. 7.7.
will help us to sinde, and we shall receive of him that bids us ask, and
he that bids us knock will open unto us.

But this point of answering questions in Divinity deserves to be stood upon a
little longer, and our judgment set right that it err not herein. We must
then learn of the Preacher, that There is a time to speak, and a time for a
man to hold his peace; Chap. 3.
this distinction in the Proverbs is fitted unto answers; Answer not a fool
according to his foolishness, lest thou be like unto him; answer a fool
according to his foolishness, Chap. 26.
lest he be wise in his own conceit. So that there is a time when a mau may
answer a question, and a time wheu a man may not answer it: and how shall we
be able to distinguish these times? Surely, the time when we may not answer,
is known either by the question or by the questionist. If the question be
either frivolous or curious, it must have no answer; for we must not feed
men's either idleness or sauciness. Tit. 2,
Touching frivolous questions, we have S. Paul's rule, foolish questions avoid:
And for curious questions we have our Saviors example: Ioh. 21.
Christ bad Peter follow him, Peter asked Christ what shall John do? Christ
takes him short, What is that to thee? follow thou me. If we look into the
Schoolmen, and the Casuists, we shall find that their wits have been idly
busy, yea and often wickedly too, in answering such questions as were very
unfit to be demanded; yea the resolutions upon Cur and Quomodo, Why and How,
in debating articles of Faith, beyond the bounds which are set down in the
Scripture, have bred the greatest distraction in Christendom; while each side
with words and with blood shed maintains his determination of that point,
which if it had never been heard of, the Christian Faith had been never a
whit the less sound, and the Communion of Saints had been preserved. Aug.
expla. 56.
Take this then for your first rule; that if a question be either not
behoouefull, or above our reach, it must receive no answer; nay ordinarily we
must not give answer to them that study questions which nothing concern their
calling; especially if neglecting theirowne duty, they are too inquisitiue
after that which concerns other men. The world is much sick of this disease,
and you shall hear oftener of idle and curious questions, then of those that
concern the health of men's souls, and the ordering of their calling;
Christians are herein as ill employed as were the Jews.

Though there be no defect in the question, yet there may be in the
questonist, in regard of his ill disposition, be it Obstinacy or Impiety,
though his question be good, he deserves no answer. An Heretic, (says
Saint Paul) after one or two admonitions avoid, (...). 3 10.
knowing that such a man is (...) he carries his doom in his own bosom, and
does wilfully withstand the truth, he must not be answered because of his
obstinacy. Math 7
Touching Impiety we have Christ's Rule; Give not holy things unto dogs, and
cast not your pearl among Swine, lest they trample them under their feeet, and
turn again, and rent you: yea profane Atheists move questions touching God
or sacred things which they disbelieue, that they may therewith make themselves
wickedly merry; our silence must take from them all occasion to blaspheme, and
such questionists must receive no answer. Truth is never mute for want o^
arguments of defense, but sometimes silent out of holy wisdom; whereas
falsehood has nothing in reason to reply, but yet it will be ever prating. To
our purpose then, the premises conclude, that it will be time to speak, and
that we may answer though it be a fool, so the question be profitable, and
the questionist be not profane.

But Chrysostom sets down the two useful ends of our answer, Hom in
Math. 26.
when we answer a fool, it must be either for the public confusion of proud
folly, and to make Pharisaicall spirits see they know not what they think they
know: or for the edification of the standers by, those which with meekness
will receive the truth: we may not suffer such to continue perplexed through
ignorance. At these ends did Christ aim in his Answer. And so have I
sufficiently showed you, why Christ does vouchsafe an answer, though he that
moved the question came as a Tempter.

Let us now come on to the Answer that Christ vouchsafes; whereof the first
branch is Thou shall love. Wherein I will open two points, 1. What is enjoined,
and 2. to Whom. That which is enjoined is Love, and he that must love is noted
in this word Thou; Chap 6.
in Deuteronomie you shall find that this Thou is Israel.

Love is in the number of those things, quae melius sentiuntur quam verbis
exprimuntur; man may better feel then say what it is: yet this is out of all
question, that it is an Affection, and whereas our affections are either
sensual, or rational, Love is found in either of them. There is a sensual
Love, we see it in Beasts, they love their mates, their offspring, their
benefactors. But we have not to do with this love, farther then to note, that
this in man though it be not the rational love, yet should it be guided by
the rational. And were it so (as commonly it is not) as appears by the
enormous wantonness, and monstrous lusts that have been, that are in the
world, men would not prove themselves to be worse then beasts, as every where
they do Co^^dies, Tragedies, other Poems have too much of this stuff, and it
is the argument of two many true Histories. This Love if regulate, though it
be not illicitus amor, yet does it not rise to the pitch of that Love which is
commanded here. ^ut the Love here meant is that which is in us as we are
reasonable creatures, or rather religious, as appears after in Thou. The
Divines commonly call it Charity, and so will I for distinction sake. Though I
hold that the exception of the Rhemists taken to the word Love in our
Translations is but a mere Cavil, and I could easily prove it such.

To understand what this Rational Love or Charity is, we must remember what
God said when he had made Adam, It is not good for Man to be alone, let us make
him a help like himself. For though that be spoken of Mariage-Charitie, yet
does it contain the ground of all other. For even by the law of creation,
every man is subject to some want, the supply where of is to be found in
another. Pla^^ (...) p^sin.
Therefore the Mythologists have wittily conceited that (...), that is plenty
and penury were the parents of love, because these two mutually affect the one
the other, and Love is nothing else but that strong attracting and full
contenting power, which brings them and holds them together. The Hebrew
Ahabh and Habha and the Greek (...) import as much, if you will give credit to
the Etymologists. But to open the nature of it a little better, Charity has
in it the power of Union, and Communion; Union of Persons, Communion of their
Abilities. Union of persons mutual, Austin deord^^li. 2. ca. 18,
for amicitia non est si vel vnus tantum sit, vel vnus tantum amat. Now union
requires (...) ratione intellectus, and (...) ratione voluntatis. ^regor. Mag.
^. 2. p. 1582. and 1583.
Therefore union is only between those that are good; for only good men are
(...) they can tune well together: so cannot the wicked, they are like discords
in Music, though they join their tunes there will be but a jar in the
sound. If you put gold to gold they will agree well, and hold fast together;
but mingle Iron and Clay, you may read in Daniels Image, they will presently
fail asunder. And indeed how should wicked men ever entertain union with
others? They hold not long like themselves, but change like the Moon, and
therefore they are unfit for Union. Union requires (...) a correspondencie in
disposition; and (...) a familiarity in conversation. But this is to be found
only in virtue; virtues are all agreeing between themselves, so are not
vices, and therefore virtuous men of all sorts can consort together not so the
wicked, they cannot long continue society. A momentanie conspiracy there may
be, but a loving union there can never be, such a union as should make sever
all Persons to become as one, and transform the loving into the beloned
person, and so ^oyne the Soul of one to the other, that it seems not to be
vbi animat, sed vbi amat, it lives as it were, it enjoys it self, not in
the body wherein it breathes, but in that person whom it loves, according to
the definition of Love, est passio animi qua erga aliquem ita afficimur* vt
nostri obliti, toti in eum, eiusque obsequium feramur.

Upon this first act of Charity which I called Union, follows a second act
which is called Communion, what the persons have, that they communicate, each
communicates with the other all that it has. There are three kinds of Good,
as the Philosophers call them, first, Honeslum, secondly, Vtile, Thirdly,
Iucundum: and they teach us tot genera amorum, as they do bonorum. But
Christians are to know that their Charity must be full, it must contain a
Communion in all kinds of good, and observe in them a due order.

First the Communion must be in bono honesto, in virtue and virtuous actions;
for therein is the sure foundation of Charity, and without that there can be
none, non est bonitas vnioms nisi sit vnio bonitatis. Upon this first communion
follows a second, and that is in bono iucundo; for each Person takes content
in the other, and they strive mutually to make each the others life sweet and
comfortable. Upon these two follows a third Communion, and that is in bono
vtili, each does communicate in the wealth of the other, and each supplyeth the
others wants. You have an excellent pattern of this Charity in the Acts of the
Apostles, both in regard of the Union and Communion, read it, Chap. 2. from the
41. verse unto the end thereof. And observe the threefold Communion between
those Christians that were first united into the body of the Church. But
worldlings communicate, some only for thrift, as tradesmen, some only for
pleasure, as good fellows: and these Communions attend not any Communion in
honesty, and therefore come not within the compass of our Communion; neither
will they hold long, because of natural hatred: take away the necessary
outward tie, and it will appear.

But to open the Communion a little farther; we may resolve it (as Philosophy
does) in Beneuolentiam, and Beneficentiam, Good Will, and Good-deeds. The
persons do repay each the other hearty Affections. Whereupon follows a
sympathy, a fellow feeling that each has of the others state; 1. Cor. 12.
which S. Paul does excellently amplify, the effect of it is in the 26. Verse,
Whether one member suffer, all the rest of the members suffer with it, or if
one member be honored all the other members rejoice with it. Men that are in
Charity bear one another burdens, and partake each of the others comforts,
and that as feelingly, as if another were their own case. And this is the
benevolence of the Communion. Secondly, there is in the Communion Beneficence
or Good-deeds, each does not seek his own, De sect. Philo. Tom. 3.
but another good; and where there is Charity, Meum and Tuum are verba
frigtda (as Saint Chrysostom speak^th) they melt at the heat thereof. Men have
all things in common, and no man thinks ought to be his own; his own,
quoad (...) in regard of the use, though it continue his quoad (...) in regard
of the property. For it is an Anabaptisticall dream to make a perpetual Rule
of that which was but temporary, for some part of the Apostles days, and to
turn an extraordinary case into an ordinary. But good will is cherished by
mutual good offices in society. And the good offices do consist in 2. things
principally, in donando and condonando; giving and forgiving. In giving, loving
Christians strive ever beyond their ability (as Saint Paul speaks of the
Macedonians) And the reason is plain, 2. Cor. 8.
nonest vectigalis amicitia, they do not merchandise their good deeds, but
provoke each the other to emulation. And as for Forgiving, Salomons Rule is
true, Charity covers a multitude of sins, Prouorb. 10.10.
and will forgive not only seven times but seauenty times seven. In other
things a mean is commended, but in regard of Charity he is most commended
that does least keep a mean, a mean in good will, or a mean in good deeds,
the more of either, the more perfect is the Charity; for the harvest of
Charity holds all the year long, and it is a treasure that can never be
exhausted, cum soluitur, non amittitur, sed multiplicatur. Will you have a true
description of the Properties thereof, read 1. Cor. 13. Will you have a true
exemplification of it, read the Song of Solomon. Of these two Union and
Communion, the latter is the fuel of the former, and by Communion the Union is
continued; alitur ijs rebus quibus gaudet. Whereupon it follows that there is
one thing more which I may not omit concerning the nature of Charity, and that
is the Constancy thereof, Love is strong as death, Jealousy is cruel as the
grave, Cant. chap 8.
the coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame; many
waters cannot quench Love, neither can the floods drown it, if a man would
give all the substance of his house for Love, it would be contemned. Abhorret
vera Charitas omnia distrahentia; pereat, qui inter nos dissidium volunt. We
must not be like little children that love to day and hate to morrow, nec ita
amare ut aliquando osuri, manente bonitate, and non exigente superiore lege aut
patriae aut religionis.

I have competently opened unto you the nature of Charity: But you must
observe that whereas there are two things in it, the quality and the exercise
thereof, Bernard.
it is not the quality but the exercise that comes under the commandment,
Vbicunque in Scriptura dilectio requiritur non tam extgitur dilectio affectus,
quam Charitas operis; Gal. 5. Deuteronomy. 10.
the quality is the gift of God, for he is (...) Charitatis efficax, it is
he that makes men to be of one mind, and circumciseth men's hearts that they
may love, and Charity is the fruit of the Spirit. And the Spirit does work it
in our hearts, not only by moving without qualifying them (as Peter Lumbard
erroniously thought) he improueth our Charity too far; but the Love of God
is powered abroad into our hearts by the holy Spirit, Expla. 11, ad Carth.
and substantialis Charitas dat accidentalem (as S. Bernard speaks) God which
is Charity gives unto man the gift of Charity. But when we have received the
gift of God, we must employ it, we must not receive the grace of God in
vain. As in nature, so in grace we have our abilities for action, and the
Parable will tell us what will be our doom, if we hide our Talent. But the
Commandment is affirmative, and therefore tenet semper, but not ad semper, we
must never be without a loving disposition, yet are we not bound to manifest it
but as occasion shall be offered us. Yet must we take heed, that we neither will
nor do ought that is contrary unto Charity.

You have heard What is given in charge, you must now hear to Whom this charge
is given; Thou shall love, and this Thou is Israel, so we read in Moses,
Hearken O Israel, Thou shall love. Deuteronomy. 6.
It is given then to the regenerate; for Israel is a name of the Church, of
those that were in covenant with God, and had in their flesh the seal thereof.
Without the Church is the Kingdom of Satan, and where Satan reigns, there
Satanisme, that is hatred is, there can be no true Charity. John 13.35.
Christ tells us, it is the badge of his followers, By this shall all men
know that you are my Disciples, Cant 2 4.
if ye love one another. In the Canticles it is called the Banner of the
Church: now you know that the Banner keeps every Soldier to his own
station, and so strengthens the whole by every ones good order. And we never
break our rank in the Church militant, and hazard the whole by our disorder;
but we do it through want of Charity.

What is spoken to the whole Church, every member must take it to himself, and
understand himself in the word Thou. Saint Paul has taught us that hatred and
Charity distinguish carnal and spiritual men; 1. Cor. 3.
by Charity Saint John tells us it is known that we are borne of God. 1.
Ioh. 3.10.
Sola Charitas diuidit inter filios Regniaeterni, Austin. de Trinit.
and silios perditionis, says Austin, we have no assurance that we shall be
Saints in heaven, except we entertain the Communion of Saints on earth; if in
this life, we delight in hatred, after this life we shall be ranged with
those which are hateful.

But whose charge is this? who is he that commands, Thou shall love? surely,
it is Gods charge, he lays this commandment upon his Church. Do you hear
it and not wonder at it? God is a Sovereign Lord, he may give what Laws,
please him unto the Creatures which he has made; yet see how gracious he is,
he will lay no other charge upon his Church, then that which may be performed
by love; then which kind of command, nihil facilius, nihil foelicius, none can
be more easy, Chap. 38. etc.
none can be more happy: nothing more easy; for what difficulty can there be
in Love? If God should come upon a man as he did upon Job, and press him to
reveal all the secrets of the Creation and providence; much more if he should
bid him open the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, he might answer, Alas
Lord, I am an ignorant man. If he should bid him build such a Temple as
Salomons was, and furnish it with so many instruments and ornaments of gold and
of other precious stuff, he might say, alas, Lord, I am a poor man. If he
should bid him go and root out all Infidels from the face of the earth; he
might answer; alas, Lord, I am a weak man. And so to many like commandments
he might plead some excuse. But when God says, Thou shall love, no man has
any excuse to plead but the malignitie of his own nature; yea, no man comes to
Heaven that did not love, though many poor, ignorant, weak ones, etc. come
there. A poor man may love as well as a rich, an ignorant as a wise, a weak
as a strong; especially, seeing, though Charity consists of beneficentia,
as well as beneuolentia, good deeds as well as good will; yet there is a
dispensation allowed for want of good deeds, ^. Cor. 8.
if a man have a good will. For, he is accepted according to that which he
has, not according to that which he has not. So that although God has
dispensed his temporal blessings unequally; yet the spiritual he will have
common unto all. I mean those which are the Graces of Adoption, amongst which
Charity is a chief one, and by it, though there be otherwise great distance
between man and man, yea, the Creator and his Creature; yet may they easily
be brought together.

Neither is Love only an easy work in it self, but also it does facilitate
other things, our doing, our suffering, both are made easy by Charity. Let a
man attempt any thing whereunto he has no mind, and it grows presently
tedious, but Love takes away all bitterness of pain. It was a painful life
that Jacob lived under Laban, as he shows in Genes. Gen 29 verse 20.
31. yet the seven years that he served for Rachel, seemed to him but a few
days, for the love that he had unto her. The like we may observe in all sorts
of men that are affected with any kind of profit, or pleasure; how does the
covetous man toil himself out of the Love of money? the ambitious out of the
Love of honor? the faulconer, the Huntsman, out of Love of their sports?
Guess by them how cheerfully we would be doing good, if we were
prepossessed with Love; for Love sweetens all pains: yea guess by Lust what
Love can do that goes upon much surer grounds.

Love does not only facilitate our doing, but our suffering also; out of love
to their wives and children, what hunger? what thirst? what wounds do
Soldiers endure?

But beyond all go the sufferings of the Martyrs, of whose wonderful patience
and constancy therein, you can give no other reason but Love, They loved not
their lives unto death, Gal. 5.
because they did love to keep Gods commandments. I begin now to understand
S. Paul, against Love there is no Law; for though there were no Law, yet he
that loves would readily obey, he needs no other obligation, 1. Ioh. 5.^.
to whom to do his duty is a very pleasure. I now begin to understand Saint
John; The commandments of God are not grievous; for griese and love cannot
stand together, it is rather a grief not to do that which our soul does
love. You see then that God could not provide an easier commandment for us
then Thou shall love.

And could he have provided a happier? No verily, for though amor be sui
praemium, it carries contentedness in the very nature of it; yet, as if that
would not satisfy, all the requisites unto felicity are distinctly ascribed
unto it. Whereof the first is freedom of Spirit; he in whom Charity is, has
exchanged the spirit of bondage for the spirit of Adoption, then which there
cannot be a more ingenuous, a more free spirit. So that whereas no obedience
pleases God, but that which is voluntary, it is Charity that makes us such
servants as God requires. A second requisite unto felicity is store or plenty
of provision, and what better purueyer can we have then Charity? Look how
far it extends, so far, it enritcheth; for (...) look how many friends,
so many supplies we have of our wants, and if all men were true friends, Hom.
5. adps ^ul. Asti^ch.
no man could want that which another man has. The last requisite is
security; and there it no guard to the guard of Love; for by Charity it
comes to pass (as Chrysostom wittily observes) that one man is as many
men, as he has friends: whether you respect acquisitionem bonorum, or
depulsionem malorum, so many pair of eyes to watch for him; so many pair of
hands to defend him; so many pair of feet to travel for him; so many heads
to advise, tongues to speak, hearts to encourage, and what better munition
would a man desire? God commends Charity when he vouchsafed to hear Job for
his friends; and in the 41 Psalm shows that nothing is more detestable then
treachery in friendship. Would time permit me I should show you, that there is
nothing like unto Charity, that does prove a man to be a man, and turn a man
into a God. Some guess that Homo has his name from (...) to note that he is
a sociable Creature: but it is out of question that Ratio and Oration were given
him for this purpose, that men might have communion one with another. Take
Charity out of his tongue, what is it but an unruly evil, (as Saint James
calls it) full of deadly poison, a world of wickedness, a firebrand of hell,
that is able to set the world on fire. Take Charity out of the reason of a
man, then that will prove true which God told Noah, The frame of the thoughts
of the heart of man are only evil, and that of Jeremy, The heart of man is
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. So that you may seek a
man and not find him in a man, if Charity be away. But season him with
Charity, and then shall you see the excellency of a man; his tongue will be a
tree of life, and the issues of life will come out of his heart, as Solomon
teaches in his Proverbs.

I told you that Charity does also turn a man into a God; for God is
Charity, and he that dwells in Charity dwells in God, and God in him.
Therefore Christ commending Charity, gives this reason, that we may be like
unto our Father in Heaven. It is not without cause then that Saint James
calls it, the royal Law of liberty, and Saint Paul, the supereminent way.
Other gifts (says Saint Austin) are given by the Spirit, but without Charity
they become unprofitable; Vbi Charitas est quid potest obesse? Vbi non est quid
potest prodesse? In God it was Charity that set the rest of his Attributes on
work, when he made, when he redeemed the world; and our abilities will all
be idle except they be set on work by Love; and if Love stir, all will
come plentifully from man as they do from God.

Finally, as Charitas is omnium hominum, so omnium horarum and locorum,
nunquam, nusquam excluditur. Which cannot be said of any other affection, there
is no man that may not love, and that at all times and in all places. Wherefore
God has laid this fundamental Law, Dilige, then which there is no more
excellent gift, and it is the immediate ground of Piety, the root of all
moral virtues, and Theological also, as hereafter you shall hear; and hear
that hoc vnum necessarium.

LEt us now beseech the God of Love so to sweeten our nature with his holy
spirit of Love, that being rooted and grounded in this fundament all Law, all
our works may be done in Love. AMEN. The third Sermon.
MATT. 22. VERSE 37. With all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all
thy Mind.


OVt of those first words of this Verse, Thou shall Love, you have been
taught, What it is to Love, and who it is that is bound to observe this virtue.
We must now come on; and see in the next place, what is the seat of Love; and
in my Text we find that it is pointed out in three words the Heart, Cap. 12.
Cap. 10.
the Soul, the Mind; Moses Deuter. 6. and out of him S. Mark and Saint Luke
add a fourth, which is Strength.

The words may be taken confusedly or distinctly. Confusedly, and so they will
teach us only in gross the seat of Love. Distinctly, and so they will show
us that these parts which are the seat of Love, are ordinate and subordinate.
Ordinate ad intra, as Love must be within us, and ordinate ad extra, as Love
must be employed without us. Subordinate, for one of the parts is imperative
or definitive, the other are Imperatae and definitae. And out of altogether we
shall learn that Charity is a Catholic and transcendent virtue. I purpose to
handle these words both ways, as they are taken confusedly, and as they are
taken distinctly, because though the first understanding of them be true, yet
the second is more full: and my desire is that you should understand that most
fully, which you are bound chiefly to observe.

Some then suppose, that, as in other places, so in this, many words are heaped
together whereof the meaning is but one; they yield a double reason. One is,
because if you compare Moses, and the other Evangelists in whom this Text is
found, with Saint Matthew; you shall find that these words are either not
reckoned by the same number, or not digested in the same order. Another reason
is; for that the Holy Ghost calling for the same duty, does often mention but
one or two of these parts, as if they did import as much as all the rest. And
indeed it is true as the first reason affirms, that propter Emphasin, or
Exegesin, to show the earnestness of the speaker, or to help the
understanding of the hearer, the Holy Ghost does often multiply words of the
same signification. I will give you an example of either; of the Emphasis;
Hearken O daughter, and consider, incline thine ear. Psalm. 45.
The Holy Ghost means no more but this, he would not have the lesson pass
unregarded. Of the Exegesis; I will incline mine ear unto a parable, I will
open a dark speech; Psalm. 49.
the Holy Ghost by these words (dark speech) does but help the reader to
understand what he means by a parable. You may light upon many such examples
in reading the old, or the new Testament: And it may well be that the Holy
Ghost does in this place intend by these many words to make a deeper impression
of that which he speaks in us; and that every of these words should give
light unto the other. As for the second Reason; Wheresoever we find fewer of
these words expressed, the rest are implied; which they cannot deny that allege
the reason: because they conceive, and conceive aright, that the whole Soul is
meant.

But I told you the words may also be understood distinctly. Bernard thinks
that these three words, Heart, Soul and Mind, were intimated in Christ's
question tripled to Peter, Love thou me? Louestithou me, affectuose?
Prudenter? Fortiter? But I rather think they point out those other three
remarkable things in the seat of Charity; which I have named; The first, that
it is virtus ordinata, it takes up the parts wherein it is seated in a due
order. The second, that it is virtus subordinate; of the parts wherein it is
seated, the first is to guide and command the rest. The third, that it is
virtus transcendens; if it must be in all these parts, then it takes up the
whole man.

First it takes up the parts wherein it must be seated, in due order, and this
order is two fold; there is ordo ad intra, and ordo ad extra; an order in the
spreading of it within us, and an order for the using of it without us.
Touching the order of the spreading of it within us, observe that here the Holy
Ghost sets down, first the native seat of Love, which is the Heart, and
then the Deriuatiue seats, which are the Soul and the Mind, whereunto you
must add the Strength, I will touch briefly at them all.

First there is no question but the Native seat of Love is the Heart, the very
definition shows it, for Idem velle, and idem nolle vera est amicitia; Love
is nothing else but a correspondence kept between persons in willing and
nilling the same thing. So that there cannot be any thing more voluntsrie then
Love: therefore in the Canticles, Christ speaking to his Church, instead of
thou have inflamed me with Love, says; Thou have enheartned me; so you shall
find it in the original; and King David does defire that his Heart may be
knit unto God; so that there the fountain must be opened, and Charity must
begin there. The reason is, because Good is the proper object of the Will, and
what is Charity but the embracing of good? And therefore the Will must be
first seasoned therewith; and it is the Will that is here understood by the
Heart. But Charity is like unto a fountain that ouerfloweth, and though it
begins at the Will; yet does it diffuse it self into other powers, much
like the vital spirits that having their original in the Heart, are conveyed
from thence in the Arteries throughout the whole body. Charity then has
besides the native, diverse Deriuatiue seats.

The first here mentioned is the Soul, by which is understood the
concupiscible faculty, by which we long for that which we Love, which when we
obtain, we take our delight in it. This power must receive a stream of
Charity, and whether we do long for, or delight in any thing, we must do
both in Charity: Charity must make these of sensual to become rational,
otherwise the longing, and the liking of a man, will be no better then the
longing, and the liking of a beast. And indeed they are too commonly so; this
distemper began in Eve, and has been propagated in to all mankind, not to be
corrected, but by a stream from this fountain.

A second deriuatiue seat here mentioned, is the Mind, thither must Charity
send forth a stream; for our wits are apt to be sorges of vanity, and to
yield snares to entrap others. That which must correct this ill disposition is
Charity; it will so qualify our wits, that they shall never be ill employed.
The word that the Evangelist uses is worth the marking, it is (...) or
discourse: Charity must not only season our understanding that it may be
capable of the apprehension of good, but also, that our Meditations may be
upon that which is good. In this life our soul has no intuitiue knowledge,
that is reserved for the life to come; a discursiue it has, and that must be
seasoned with Charity. Besides these we find elsewhere a third deriuatiue
seat, and that is the Strength; the Hebrew word is Meodh, by which is noted
the irascible faculty, or that courage wherewith we undertake to pursue what
we love, and resist the opposite; In doing whereof, because we often make use
of our substance, or goods, the Caldee Paraphrase renders the word by
substantia, but the Enuangelist out of the Septuagint renders it (...)
strength, by which that courage is meant which before I specified, enixe omnia
moliaris, and viriliter. Now this courage must not be without Charity, there
must come a stream thereof even into this power also: Men must not be so
valiant as to forget to be in Charity; nor without Charity bestow their
substance. If we find Charity in the streams, we may not doubt but it is in
the fountain, and we may conclude well it is not in the fountain, if it be
not in the streams. Because it is not with this fountain spiritual as it is
with the corporal; for a corporal may be full, and yet not ouerflow. But
this spiritual fountain have it never so little of the water of life, even of
that little, some will run over, and the deriuatiue seats of Charity will
keep some proportion to the Primative.

You see there is an order in these seats of Charity, ad intra, as Charity
spreads it self within the Soul. Look upon the words again, and you shall
see that there is also ordo ad extra, a good provision made in these seats for
the exercise of this virtue, when it must be employed without us. For though
it be properly the Will that must love, yet must it love discreetly and
effectually. And see, here is not only the elective power seasoned with
Charity, which is the Heart, but the directive also, which is the Mind, and
the executiue which is the Soul and strength. So that God gives us thereby to
understand that we must not only love, but love as we ought; he will not
have our love to be either indiscreet or idle. Ignorance is no good mother of
Love, of Lust it may be, and therefore the Poets feign Cupid blind: but God
will have us know what we love. And though men do not always love so much as
they know; yet certainly he that knows little cannot love much; not love as
beseems Charity, which I told you is a reasonable Love.

As Love must not be ignorant, no more must it be idle: God will have the
executiue faculties employed, the soul, and the strength must attend the
discretion of the mind, and choice of the will, and endeavor to obtain what
the one does direct unto, and the other choose. If this be done then is our
Charity as ordinate in the exercise, as it is in the spreading.

Besides the Doctrine of the Ordinatenesse of Charity in regard of the seat
thereof: we must look into the Subordinatenesse; for of the seats one is
Imperative and Definitive, the rest are Imperatae, and Definitae. Charity is an
elicite action of that power which is the native seat thereof, the Will: it
springs properly from thence. But it is an action of the other powers as they
are commanded by the Will, the Will lays a command upon them all, and that
command is Love. The understanding must Love, the Soul must Love, the
Strength must Love, all of them by the commandment of a loving Will. The Will
prepossest her sclfe with Love, does not only derive her quality into them,
but command them also to employ the same. And here must I lead you to observe
another point of the powers of our Mind, Soul, and Strength: Their actions are
indefinite, our understanding may muse upon what it will, and to what end it
will, if it be left unto it self: and if the Soul be left unto it self; it
may long after, and delight in what it will: and so may our Strength pursue or
repel. But God is not pleased that they should be left unto themselves, that
they should work at random, they are all subjected to the power of the Will.
The Will commands the Mind whereon to think, what to study; to employ its
discourse upon that which her self does Love, Lord (says David) what Love
have I to thy Law? All the day long is my study in it. And as for the Soul,
mark how that follows the Will, I have loved (says David) the habitation of
thy House, Psalm. 26.
and the place where thine Honor dwells. Hereupon sprung that passion; My
Soul longs, even faints for the Courts of the Lord. Psalm 84.
Neither is it less true of the Strength, as it appears in the same Psalm;
they go from strength to strength until every one of them appears before
God in Sion. Yea Charity puts sin was into them that Love, which make
them as strong as Death which cannot be conquered, Can. 8.
and like a flame of fire which cannot be quenched. So that though the seat of
Charity be manifold, yet is one of them a limiting power, and the other are
limited, the Will receives Charitte, and makes all the rest of the powers to
frame themselves for the advancement thereof; it restrains their rouing
disposition, and makes them bend all their service thereunto; Certainly in
sensual Love it is too plain; carnal men draw their thoughts, their desires,
their endeauours, to that which they love carnally. It should be so with
spiritual men also, and no doubt has been in many servants of God, that have
lived in the world as if they were not of it; their Will has showed a great
power in commanding the powers of their Soul, though they have found some
reluctancie.

Out of all gather this, that Charity is virtus Catholica, a virtue that
ouerspreadeth the whole man. And no marvel; for it is the Image of God, and
Gods Image was not limited to apart, no less then the whole man was made after
his Image. Seeing then God is Charity, man must represent in every power a
Charity answerable unto God. In the Canticles, wherein this virtue is lively
set forth, Christ and his Church are not only said to be each the Beloved of
the other, but each is called by the name of Love, Christ in the second, the
Church in the seventh Chapter. As if the Holy Ghost did mean we should never
leave extending this virtue until we were as it were wholly transformed into
it: or until it did as universally quallifie our Soul, as our Soul does
quicken our body, Of good qualities which are commended unto us there is a
double perfection, partium, and graduum, of the parts wherein they must
subsist, and of the degree whereunto they must arise. Of the degree of
Charity, I shall speak hereafter, when I come to the measure, the perfection
here required is of the parts; the Holy Ghost calls here for every part of
man, and will have no part of him void of Charity. This is agreed upon by
all; and therefore I told you that it may well be called a Catholic virtue.
Much a do there is in the Christian world, whether are the truer Catholics
We or the Romanists, and each side strives to make good his claim, even unto
blood. Might this Catholic virtue, which is out of controversy, prevail in
our lives, the quarrel would be sooner determined, and we should be better
provided against the common enemy. But the more is the pity, malice makes a
way unto malice, the mutual malice that distracteth Christians, unto the deadly
malice of the Turk that would destroy all. Romans 3.
The description that Saint Paul makes of an unregenerate man does fit too
well many of those that go for Regenerate; Charity that should of right have
all, has at all no part in them; the poison of Aspes is under their tongues,
their throat is an open sepulcher, their feet are swift to shed blood, etc.
And their Inwards are worse then their Outward, whether you look into the
Head or into the Heart, mischief and hatred possess both; Charity can find
place in neither. What Christ foretold has fallen out in our age, Matthew. 24.1^
the Charity of most men is grown very cold, which is a shrewd
prognostication, that spiritual death grows a pace upon the World, at least
upon this our part thereof.

As Charity is Virtus Catholica, so is there a Transcendencie thereof. For in
that Charity takes up all these powers as the seat thereof, it takes up all
the virtues that are incident to these powers. I will pass by our Affections,
and our Senses over which it has a full command, as Anger, fear, etc.
hearing, seeing, etc. I should weary you, if I should run through all these,
and show you the sovereignty of Charity over them all; I will insist only
upon Virtues, whereof there are two sorts, Moral and Theological.

All Moral virtues are reduced unto four, which are called Cardinal, first
Prudence, secondly Justice, thirdly Temperance, fourthly Fortitude. Not one of
these is exempted from the sovereignty of Charity, because their proper seat
is not exempted. The proper seat of Justice is the Will, the Civil Law does
define it thus; Iustitia est constans, and perpetua voluntas ius suum cuique
tribuendi; if Justice be in the Will, and the Will, as you have heard, be the
seat of Charity, then must Charity moderate Justice; without her, sumum ius
would be summa iniuria, Law would be strained beyond Equity. As Charity is at
hand to temper Justice in the Heart, so is it at hand to temper Prudence in the
Head; it tempereth the Done with the Serpent, and makes them that are
otherwise as wise as Serpents, to be careful that they be as innocent as
Doves. We are apt to be prudent for our selves, and care not who is the worse
for it: here Charity is at hand to tell us that we must not suffer our wits to
work to the wrong of others. That Prudence is no prudence which is not
Charitable, without Charity we may be wily, we cannot be wise.

Come to the Soul, the seat of Temperance, because of the Concupiscible
faculty thereof, Charity has a hand here also; for Temperance stands in the
moderating of our sensual desires and delights, and is not Charity most
preualent in this moderation? which is (as you heard heretofore) so accompanied
with a fellow feeling of other men's weal and woe, and is most sensible of our
own also: and therefore is the sit to prescribe our feasting days, and
our fasting days; and to make us seasonably either rejoice, or mourn. It is
the best rule of Temperance.

And it may not be excluded from Fortitude, it must teach us what to dare, and
what to fear: when we bestow our courage aright, when amiss: Courage not
directed thereby is no Fortitude, many are mighty to hunt as Nimrod, to drink
as those Jews that are censured in Esaias, and to make their strength the Law of
unrighteousness; as the Atheists in the Book of Wisdom. But this is not the
strength of men, but of beasts; and so does the Scripture set forth such men.
But the rule is; id tantum possumus quod iure possumus, righteousness must be
the Law of strength, not strength of righteousness. And before you have heard
that Righteousness is guided by Charity, and therefore Charity does give Law
unto Fortitude also.

You see that Charity is trans^endent above the Moral virtues; It is
transcendent over the Theological also. For though it be one of them, yet is
it the chief one, 1. Cor 13.
learn it of Saint Paul; Now abides Faith, Hope and Charity, even these
three, but the greatest of these is Charity.

Take them asunder, and see the truth hereof; see now transcendent it is above
Faith. But here we must distinguish inter Ortum, and Vsum, the original, and
the use of Faith. Faith is not derived from Charity, but Charity from Faith;
for Charity is Faiths first borue. But it obtains this power over faith, 1.
Cor. 8.
that Faith without Charity edifieth not, it is Love that makes our Faith
intend its object. For though Charity have its light from Faith, yet Faith
has all its Heat from Charity: and light, were it not for heat would not be
active. And therefore Saint Paul says; If I had all Faith so that I could move
Mountains, if I have not Charity, it avails nothing. But what needs any
better proof then this that Charity commands the Mind; and Faith is the
perfestion of the Mind, for it captiuateth our wits unto Gods wisdom, and
makes us build undoubtedly upon that which God affirms. Faith then cannot
but be subject unto Charity, to whom our Mind is subject. And what shall we
say of Hope, that is a patient longing after that which is promised by Faith,
and so it partaketh somewhat of the Soul, and somewhat of the strength,
whereof you heard before: therefore must it needs follow their condition, it
must needs be at the command of Charity. And who would long for that which he
does not Love: or how could Hope be patient, if Charity did not keep it in
heart?

We have found that it does transcend Faith and Hope; you would think it could
go no further, but it can. For Charity does transcend Charity it self. It
has a double Act, a direct and a reflected; the direct, is that whereby it is
carried to embrace other things; the reflected is that whereby it does delight
in its own disposition. And of this that we continue in loving, we can give
no other reason but this, that we do love to love, and so does Charity
become transcendent above Charity, that which is reflected, above that which
is direct. So that Bernards rule is true, Tanta est Virtus Charitatis vt si
desit frustra habentur caetera, si adsit recte habentur omnia.

I have discovered unto you the seat of Charity; I have showed you a
fourefold seat thereof, the Heart, the Soul, the Mind, the Strength; there
is not one of these four, but is a power of our Soul. But has Christ
forgotten our Body? has it nothing to do with Charity? nor Charity with it?
God forbid, for we are soctable in regard of our Bodies as well as our Souls,
and theresore must the one be charitable as the other. We must have
charitable eyes, the Scripture condemns an evil eye, and in condemning an
itching ear, it commends Charitte to our ear; and God that does not endure
a slanderous tongue, does teach us how our tongues must be qualified. So
likewise does he call for charitable hands, when by the Prophet he speaks
against bloody ones. And has my Text forgotten to provide for these? No
verily; for what is necessarily included, may not be thought to be omitted. For
what is the Body? of it self, it is but a dead Instrument, and the Instrument
follows the motion of the chief Agent. The Philosopher can tell us, that
Anima est quae videt, quae audit, etc. it is not thy body that sees, but thy
soul by thy body, and so does it hear and speak; it performs all its
natural actions. And so does it its Moral also, more heavily in some then in
other some, by reason of the temper, does the body in moral actions follow the
Soul? but yet it follows. And this may be a good reason why God rememi^reth
here the powers of our Soul, and not the parts of our Body. But there is a
better, and that is delivered by S. Paul, The Law is spiritual: Christ lays
the ground of that; God is a Spirit, Ioh. 4.
and he that worshippeth him must worship him in spirit and in truth. Now we
are sure that there is no hypocrisy in our Charity, if the seat of it be
the powers of our Soul, there may be, if it be the parts of our body;
witness the Pharisee, to whom Christ not only directs but fitteth his speech
also; who made some show of Charity to the world, but his inwards were full of
Hatred in the sight of God; for he was a Tempter. And this does Christ
perstringe, or strike at in pressing these words of the Law; and shows that
God does not esteem the outward deed without the inward affection. And the
Lesson whch we must all draw from the seat of Charity is this; that our
outwarid charitable conversation must be rooted in our like inward disposition.

I should now, if time would give leave, carry every man's eye into his own
bosom, there to take a view whether this virtue be Catholic, and
Transcendent or no; and if he find any part vnpossest, or not improued as
far as it should be, I should persuade him to see it presently amended. Nay,
I should tell you from that which all the world sees outwardly, that few have
Charity inwardly; for if they had, how could their eyes be so full of
Adultery? their ears so set open to entertain slanders and untruths? their
mouths so ouer-flowe with blasphemy and ribaldrie? their hands be so
exercised with extortion and cruelty? Certainly these things could not be
without, if Charity were within. And if Charity be not a Catholic and
Transcendent virtue in us, no hope that it is either Ordinate or Imperative;
these are perfections whereupon the other are raised as on a foundation. But I
cannot stand to take this view and quicken your ear; only remember this that
if Love do not, Hatred will take up this full Soul.

GOd, that has commanded this extent of Charity, give us eyes to see our
want, and grace whereby to supply the same, that so this virtue may be excluded
out of no power, that has right unto them all; and the parts of our Body may
be conformable to the powers of our Soul. That so no power nor part may
appear deuoyd of Charity, whether in the eyes of God or man. AMEN. The fourth
Sermon.
MATT. 22. VERSE. 37. The Lord thy God.


THe Scripture that does command Charity, does withal teach, Where it must
be seated, and upon whom it must be bestowed. Where it must be seated you have
already heard, you are next to hear upon whom it must be bestowed. And here
we find two kinds of persons both capable of our Charity, because they can
return Love for Love; and it is the property of Love to be mutual. Of these
two persons the names are expressed, the first is the Lord thy God, the second is
thy Neighbor. But we must farther observe, What is included in these Names;
the Cause why they must be beloved, and Who are excluded by them. They are not
capable of the Love due to the Lord our God, that come not under his name:
neither are they capable of the Love due to our Neighbor, that are not
contained under his name. Secondly, though the Persons only are named, yet are
there things also comprehended under the names: even such things as have
reference to the Persons: and whatsoever things are opposite are excluded
thereby. Touching the first person only shall I handle these points at this
time. First then of his name. He is called the Lord our God; every word has
some remarkable thing in it. That which is here rendered Lord, is in Moses
Iehoua; but the Septuagint, partly because the Greek tongue has no Characters
wherewith to express that word, and partly because the signification of it
cannot be fully expressed in any Language by any one word, use (...) as the
fittest which they could light upon; the Evangelist does follow them, and so
do the vulgar translations. But when you hear this word, you must not
understand it in a popular but in a mystical sense. I will open the mystery
unto you. It notes then two things; the one is absolute in God, the other is
relative to his creatures. In God it notes the prerogative of his nature,
which stands in two things, the singularity, and the eternity thereof.

Touching the singularity: When Moses asked God What is thy name? Exodus 3 14.
God answered him, I am that I am; The Scripture calls him by diverse names,
sometimes True, sometimes Just, sometimes Holy, sometimes Mighty, etc. We must
no otherwise conceive of these Names, then as being his very Nature: We call
him True, and what is his Nature but Truth? and Holiness is his Nature, whom
we call Holy; the like must be observed in his other Attributes, they are all
his Nature, and and therefore inseparable from him: he must cease to be,
before he can cease to be that which he is properly called. And herein he
differs from his Creatures, whose Virtues are a distinct thing from their
Nature, and therefore they may be stripped of them, and yet continue themselves
still; a man may cease to be holy, just, true, and yet be nevertheless a man.
The reason is plain, he cannot say as God does, I am that I am, his
Attributes and his Nature are not all one.

But this singularity of Gods Nature, does appear specially in two
compositions with the Attributes, whereof none are capable but be. The first of
which is (...), etc. look whatsoever perfection he has, he has it of
himself, and is not beholding to any other for it; he is his own Original,
and therefore his is the perfection it self; he that is (...) Good of
himself, is (...) Goodness it self: the like may you say of the rest of the
Attributes.

The second Composition, is with (...), as (...): all the treasures of wisdom
are hid in him, he is Almighty, Coloss 2 3.
the fullness of all perfection is in him. In regard of these Compositions it
is, Jude 15.
that the Scripture uses these Phrases, God only is wise, Math. 19 17. 1
Timoth. 6.1^
there is none good but God; God dwells in light which no man can attain
unto. And indeed no Crea^^^e has any perfection which is not given it from
above, which comes not down from the Father of Lights; and that perfection
which it has, is but as a beam in comparison of the Sun, and but as a drop
unto the Ocean. You see what is the singularity of Gods nature pointed out in
the word Lord, as it is used to note the Hebrew Iehoua.

Besides this Singularity, it notes also Gods Eternity: And indeed where
there is such Singularity, there cannot choose but be Eternity, the one does
necessarily infer the other, as I could show you, if the Time would permit.
The Cabalists find Eternity in the Syllables whereof the Name Iehoua is made:
they find a preterperfecttense in the last syllable, a present tense in the
middle syllable, and a future tense in the first. Chap. 4. verse 8.
This might seem idle subtilty, but that S. John in the Revelation goes
before us in so resolving the name Iehoua, telling us that the Lord is (...),
Revel. Chap 3.6. 1. Timoth. 6 16. Chap. 1.17.
which was, which is, and which is io come. But to to give you more plain
proof of this Eternity; In Malachy God speaks thus; I am the Lord, I change
not; Saint Paul tells Timothy, God only has immortality; Saint James; with
God that is the Father of Lights there is no variableness nor shadow of
change. You see then that there is Singularity and Eternity in the Nature of
God, and both are noted by the Name Iehoua, or Lord.

But as these things are noted when we look into the Nature of God, so is
there another thing noted which is Gods relation to his Creatures. And indeed
though the name Iehoua seem not to be, yet is the name Lord apparently a
relative word; so that what God is in himself, of that he is a fountain to
his Creatures; all things live, move, and have their being in him, and when he
sends forth his Spirit he renueth the face of the Earth. Yea, not only the
dependencie of the Creature upon him, but also the making good of his Word unto
his Creature is employed in this Name; God himself teaches it, Exodus 6. where
he tells Moses that he had before appeared unto the Fathers by the name of
Shaddai Allsufficient, but he would now appear in his name Iehoua, as a
powerful efficient; he would perform the promise which he had made unto the
Patriarks. To conclude this point; Out of that which you have heard you may
gather that the name Lord does note an everliving, and ouerflowing fountain of
Blessedness, and Perfection.

The second word is God; in the Original of the Law it is Elohim, it it notes
the Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and such a God does
the Church acknowledge, and by her acknowledging God for such, differs from
those that are without the Church. Those without the Church, though they have
not reached home, yet have they gone far in the knowledge of Iehoua, in the
knowledge of the fountain of Perfection; but by strength of Reason they could
never find out the Trinity; some touches we read in Trismegist and the
Platonists, but it was traditionary Divinity that brought them to the knowledge
thereof, and that too very imperfect, and corrupt; to say nothing that
Trismegist is by the learned censured for a counterfeit. But the true knowledge
of one God in three Persons is a peculiar mystery of the Church, the Infidels
for want of faith cannot comprehend, do not acknowledge it. But this Trinity
may be considered either ad intra or ad extra; as it is in God, or as it does
manifest it self to man. As it manifests it self unto man, so each Person
purteth on another consideration, the first of a Father to men, the second of a
Redeemer, and the third of a Sanctifier. Although it be necessary for the
truth of our Faith to acknowledge the Trinity, in the first manner, yet the
Comfort of our faith lies in the second consideration thereof, as will appear
in the third word of my Text, whereunto I now come, and that is thy, the Lord
thy God.

Wherein we must first mark, that as there are three persons in God: so every
one of those persons is Ours; he that is a Father, is our Father, he has
adopted Us: and he that is the Son of God, has redeemed Us to make Us Gods
sons, and his own spouse; and he that is the Holy Ghost has sanctified Us,
that we may be his holy Temples.

Secondly we must draw the Name Lord throughout all these persons; he that is
our Father is the Lord, and so, is he the Lord that is the Son, the Holy
Ghost is Lord also; that is, they are all three the over flowing Fountain of
blessed prefection, and what they are, they are it to me, for they are all
three my God, and so their good is mine. They are mine by Creation: I was made
after the Image of God, and so are they all three mine, they were the sampler
according to which I was framed; For because God could not be like man, man was
made like God, 1. Tim, 2.16 Colos. 2.9.
that likeness might be a ground of mutual love. But much more mine in the
Redemption; for then God was manifest in the flesh, the Godhead dwelt bodily in
my nature; God became mine (...): my nature has possession of his person, and
is admitted into an association in his works. It is no small prerogative then
that is intimated in this word thy God; I understand now what an honor is done
to the Patriarchs when God says, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob; what honor is done to David's son when God says, I
will be his Father; this appropriation of God is the greatest prerogative
vouchsafed unto the Church. I have opened the Name unto you, out of which you
may presently gather Who are excluded from our Love, the Love that is due to
the first Person, even omnes fictitij and factitij dij, as well corporal as
mental Idols, all that are not capable of this title Iehoua Elohim, with whom
we are not, or at least we should not be in covenant. But because hereafter
when I come to the Commandment, I shall fall upon this point, I will now pass
it over.

As such persons are excluded: so there is included in the Name, a reason of
our Love; and we find therein a double reason; Exemplum and Meritum. Good
examples are strong persuasions, and men fashion themselves to nothing more
willingly then to that whereof they have a pattern in their betters. Now the
exactest pattern of Charity is in the Lord God; for there is Unity and
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity: Austin de Triritat. l 15. c. 17. and alibi.
and what is that but the two parts of Charity, Union and Communion? But this
is too high a speculation for a vulgar ear.

The second reason is more popular, and that is Meritum, this merit is two
fold, dignitatis, and dignationis. Dignitatis, the merit of Gods own worth;
for causa diligendi deum est ipse Deus; Bernard. Basil^n Psalm. 46.
there is enough in God, to make him lovely; and why? (...), good and lovely
are reciprocal, that which is lovely is good, and that which is good is
lovely; whereupon is grounded that Maxim in Philosophy, Bonum est quod omnia
appetunt; Reason has no better mark to guess at that which is good, then the
propension of all men for to attain it. Now look upon the Name the Lord God,
and see whether you do not find that good in it which does challenge Love.
Begin with Dominus, ou heard that he was goodness it self; if a man do love
that which is good, how can he but love goodness. Nay; if we love the
streams, with what love must we embrace the Fountain? If we Love that good
which is dependent, how much more that which is independent? Seeing there is a
possibility for us to be defrauded of that which is dependent, but of that
which is independent we cannot be defrauded. Yet see the common folly of men,
Iere. 2.13.
they forsake the fountain of living waters, and dig unto them Cisterns that
can hold no water.

If (...) deserve Love; how much more (...)? You heard before that what God is,
he is it to the full; Creatures have but drops, or beams: and who would leave
the Fountain to rest contented with a drop? And when he might enjoy the whole
body of the Sun to solace himself in a single beam? And yet such folly
there is in the world, and he that thinks Gods gifts lovely though they are
but single in a Creature, how little is he affected with the loveliness of
his Creator? We cannot deny that good is the object of our Love, therefore
where there is the greatest good, thither we should bend the greatest of our
Love; do thou love Wisdom? Colos. 2.3.
All the treasures of wisdedome are hid in him; do thou love Holiness? It is
to him that the Angels sing, Holy, holy, holy; Esaias 6.3. Psalm 24.1. Psalm. 16.11.
do thou love Wealth? The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is; do
thou love Pleasure? In his presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand
are pleasures for evermore. Finally do thou love Power and Honor? He is the
Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory; even a King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords. Add hereunto; that what he is, whether (...), or (...), he is it Only;
he is it Eternally; both which are strong Motives unto Love; for we use to love
that which is not common; as that which is common, by reason of the
familiarnesse of it grows vile in our eyes; now such good as is in God is no
where else to be found. As we love those good things which are not common: so
we love them the more, the more they are lasting, because our desire would
never be defrauded of that wherein it takes content; this good is more
lasting then our desire; the good of every Creature is as mutable as the
Creature is, yea more; because it differs from the nature of the Creature:
but this good being all one with the nature of God, it is as lasting as is his
nature. It is no marvel then that every Creature eluding our desire, which is
carried unto good, does (as it were with a real voice) put us off when we dote
upon it, and by experience say to us, Non ego sum bonum tuum, it is not I that
am thy good which is to be sought after: and after all our painful inquiry,
we are driven to Saint Austins resolution; Fecisti nos Domine propter te, and
irrequietum est cor nostrum dones requiescat in te; so great is the capacity
of man's desire, that nothing can fill it but only the Lord; and his soul must
needs remain empire, that does not make the Lord the object of his Love.

You see that there is much worth in the Lord, and great cause why he should
be beloved; there wants not worth also in God, in every of the three persons
in Trinity. Had we eyes to look upon them ad intra, as they are in the blessed
Trinity, we might easily perceive it; but there is no proportion between our
eyes, and that light, therefore we will forbear to behold the dazeling
brightness. Only of this we may be sure, that every person is most lovely,
because every of them loves the other; the Scripture speaks it plainly; the
Father loves the Son, the Son loves the Father, and the holy Ghost is the
love of them both; Now what they love is lonely indeed, because their judgment
is most upright, and their desire most Holy. But we will not sound that
bottomless depth, let us look upon these persons as they manifest themselves
ad extra, and see how lovely they are. He that is a Father in the Trinity
does manifest himself as a Father to the Sons of men; the Scripture does
often remember his tender bowels, he shuts them not up, no not against them
that are Prodigals: a Father and a Mother on earth may forsake, may forget
their Children; but our Father in Heaven cannot forget, he will not forsake
his. And is not such a Father lovely? God the Son does manifest himself to
the world as a Son, he uses all his credit with his Father to work not
only the remission of man's sins, which he expiated with his blood, but also
the advancement of their Persons whom he vouchsafes to be his Spouse; by
taking man so near unto himself, he brings him near to God also, and
makes them Children that were Servants, intitles them to Heaven that deserve
to burn as firebrands in hell. And is not such a Son lovely? The holy Ghost
does manifest himself as the holy Ghost, quickening man and sanctifying him,
testifying by these effects that he is a Spirit of life to him, even of such a
life as makes him a sacred Person; he makes him a living Temple, a fit
habitation for himself, that he may be an Oracle of God within him, and
kindle the fire upon the Altar of his Heart, wherewith only he can offer
acceptable Sacrifices unto God. And is not this holy Spirit lovely?

All three Persons are most lovely, if the consideration go no farther then
that which I have expressed. But how great an access will be made unto their
louelines, if you draw through every one of them that ground of louelines which
before we found in the name Lord? for the Father is Lord, the Son Lord, and
the holy Ghost Lord, as we are truly taught in Athanasius his Creed; every one
of them is (...), good of himself, and all-good: and by this access we must
in our meditations improve their louelines.

But I have dwelt long enough upon meritum dignitatis, the desert of love that
is included in their own worth; I told you that in the Text we sound another
merit, and that is meritum dignationis, the interest therein vouchsafed us.

Were there none but meritum dignitatis, there were ground enough of our love,
but this meritum dignationis, the interest that we have does quicken us to take
notice of the worth that is in the thing. Every man naturally loves that which
is his own, and if the thing be good, it does him the more good to look upon
it: Let a man walk in a fair Meadow, it pleases him, but it will please him
much more if it be his own; his eye will be more curious in prying into every
part, and every thing will please him the better; so it is in a Corn field, in
an Orchard, in a House, if they be good, the more they are ours, the more
contentedly do they affect us; for this word meum is suauissima amor is
illecebra, it is as good as an amatorie potion. Then mark; put tuus to
Dominus, and if so be the Lord be lovely; how much more lovely should he be
in our eyes if he be our Lord, and does appropriate that infinite good that
he has unto us? he holds of none but of himself, and who would not joy to
be owner of that good which is independent? He is whatsoever heart can
desire, and who can but rejoice in having him, in having of whom we can want
nothing?

Put tuus to Deus, and see how it does improve the motive of love there also.
Had we nothing to do with so tender hearted a Father, so sweet natured a
Son, so gracious a Comforter as is the holy Spirit; we could not but love
them if we did know them: But when we do hear that these bowels of the
Father do yearne upon us, that we are the Spouse whom the Son of God does
woo, and that the holy Ghost vouchsafes to make his Temple of us; how can we
be but loue-sicke? how can our Hearts choose but melt, and our Affections
gasp, and bray like the Heart after those Persons which have in them so strong,
so manifold persuasions to love?

But alas, we that in regard of our carnal love, are easily transported by
any seeming good, are altogether senseless when we are solicited by our
spiritual good; so senseless, that God is passionate in his Prophets when he
does tax our more then bruitishnesse herein; Isay 1.
Hearken O heaven, hear O earth, for the Lord has spoken; I have nourished
and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me; the ox knows
his owner, and the ass his masters crib; but Israel does not know, my people
does not consider. Ier. 3.
Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? yet has my people
forgotten me days without number. We do love our corporal benefactors, at
least while they are doing us good, but our spiritual benefactor we forget,
even while he is doing us good; for when is he not doing it? we cannot look
upon our souls, our bodies, our state, but we see the perpetual influence of
his goodness; and yet Tuus works little here; and though God vouchsafe us a
great interest, yet are we little moved therewith. We can love a man in whom
there are so many defects to allay the regard of his goodness, and from whom
we may receive as much wrong as favor; how much more should we love God in
whom there is no defect, and from whom thou can receive nothing but good?

I have showed you the reason of love, which is included in the name: it
follows that I now come on to the duty that is required, and that is Love.

Wherein we are first to observe that God speaks not unto us as unto
servants, but as unto friends; he would not have us in his service express a
spirit of servitude in fear, but of adoption in love; he would not be feared
as a Lord, but loved as a Father: O derint dum metuant is a Tyrants voice; God
will have all his servants ingenuous, he will have our service as natural, as
is our allegiance. Wherein the King of Heaven gives a good pattern to all
Kings and Governors in earth.

Though God has qualified us many ways to do him service, yet does he in
this word diliges Love, show what he does principally respect, and his eyes
are upon nothing so much as our Love, not on our wit, our wealth, our honor,
etc. yea, all other things are valued according to our Love, and without Love
they are nothing worth: And why? Love is that which sets all a work; for he
that loves will keep Gods commandments, he will do no evil.

But we may not forget, that seeing this Love has for its object him that is
so far above us; we must not sever it from Reverence, which must qualisie
the love which we owe to our Superiors; in expressing our affection we must
not forget our distance; yea and our fear in regard of our flesh, may be
servile to awe it, and keep it down, though it must be also filial in
regard of the spirit, to keep it in heart.

I should now, if the time would give leave, show you how those things that are
required in love must be applied unto this object. The first property of Love
is Union, and we should endeavor to become one with the Lord, to be
transformed into him, and as near as a Creature can partake of his Creator,
partake of the divine nature. We should desire Union also with God, with God
the Father by Adoption; with God the Son by a spiritual Wedlock; with God
the holy Ghost by entertaining him as his Temple: we should so grow one with
all three persons. From this Union our Love should come on to a Communion,
Communion in that infinite good which you heard is in the Lord; for though
Union be a great advancement of our Nature, yet does our comfort stand in the
Communion; neither did God ever intend the Union, but for the Communion. As we
must have Communion with the Lord; so with God also: as Children we must
communicate in the inheritance of our Father; as a Spouse, in the honor and
state of a Bridegroom; as the Temple in the ornaments and endowments thereof.
Yea, in this Communion there must appear Beneuolentia, and Benesicentia, there
must appear an intercourse of good will, and good deeds, between the Lord God
and us; otherwise we do not love as we should. This is not all; the seat of
Love must be exercised also, the Heart; for the love of God must be free, God
does not respect forced Love. The Mind; God will be known before he is
loved, and he will have them that love him to meditate upon him; he will not
regard an indiscreet Love. Thy Soul must be exercised; if thou do not long
after him earnestly, and take sweet content in him, thou do not love.
Finally, thy Courage must be employed; thou must be as resolute to compass
this spiritual Union and Communion, as carnal wooers are in pursuit of their
Love; De vera virgiaitate.
it is Saint Basils Similie. And why not? seeing for the most part they are the
worse for their loving, and we are sure for ours to be the better. But I must
leave the enlarging of these things to your own private Meditations.

You may remember I told you that though the Person only is here expressed, yet
things are also included so far as they have reference to this person: we
must respect every Creature as it is Gods, and grieve at the abuse of the
meanest of them. But our special regard must be unto those things that work,
or witness this spiritual Love. Work it; as Gods word, and his Sacraments:
these things we must have in a singular regard, by reason of the heavenly
power which they have to work Love, the more we use them, the more it will
appear we desire to Love. As these things work Love: so there are other
things that testify it; our praising of God, our praying unto God, our
readiness to please God, though we suffer for it; the more we are exercised
in these things, the more it will appear we are in Love.

But though God kindle Love in us by his Creatures; yet must we not love him
for them; for that were Amor Concupiscentiae, but we must by them be led to
love him, and that is Amor amicitiae. Mea tibi oblata non prosunt (says Saint
Bernard) sine me, nec tua mihi sine te; though we come to know God by his
Creatures, yet must our Love immediately fix on him. As those things which
have reference are included so are those things excluded which have no
reference, and whatsoever things which do not lead to him, draw from him; of
all which this must be kept as a a rule; Pereant qui, and quae inter deum and
nos dissidium volunt, we must have nothing to do with whatsoever will separate
between God and us.

You have heard what the Person is, Confess. l. 8.
and what it is to Love him. When Saint Austin put these two together, he fell
into that humble admiration; O Lord who am I? That thou should command me to
Love thee. And verily, a man may well wonder: Has not God Angels? Archangels?
Cherubins? Seraphins to love him? And what grace is it then for him to stoop
so low as man? Yea and whereas the best ability of man is too base to be
employed in his service, he does this honor as to stoop to the meanest of
our abilities; he commands our Dust and Ashes, this worms meat our vilde
selves, to Love him, that is, to be as it were consorts with him; for amor
nescit inaequalitatem; therefore God does (as it were) deifie that which he
does so far honor. ^sal 8.4.
When David looked upon the interest which God has given us in his Creatures,
when he put all things in subjection under our feet, the beasts of the field,
the fishes of the sea, etc. he breaks out into Quid est homo? Lord, what is
man that thou art mindful of him? Or the Son of man that thou so regardest
him? What an admiration then should arise in us, when we see what an interest
God has given us in himself? Especially seeing he has no need of us and all
the gain is ours: can we forbear with amazedness, and wonderment to utter
the same words; O Lord what is man? Nay, out of the sense of every man's own
interest to say, Lord what a man am I, that thou should be so mindful of
me? And what a Son of man am I, that thou should so regard me.

David when he describes the temporal blessedness which he wishes to
Israel, Psalm. 144.
concludes, Happy is that people that is in such a case, but he adds to our
purpose, yea, Happy are the people whose God is the Lord? The prerogative that
Man has above other creatures, yea, that the Christian has above all other
Nations, should make, us set it at a higher rate then commonly we do.

A word of the day and so I end. This is All Saints Day, and it is Love that
does characterize a Saint, for (...): Basil in Psalm 44 Nyssen. de Anima and
Resurrect.
yea (...); we have in Earth a Communion of Saints, in Faith, Hope, and
Charity, but in Heaven there is no Communion but only in Charity: Faith and
Hope are done away. Nay, in Earth our Communion with God stands properly in
Charity; for there can be no mutualnesse between God, and Us but only in
that; and to be mutual is a property of Charity; as I told you at the
entrance of this Sermon.

We believe in God, but God does not believe in us, we hope in God, God does
not hope in us; but if Man love God, God loves him again; and therefore Love
is the proper virtue of Saints; it is that which both in Earth, and Heaven does
knit us unto God. Psalm. 18.
What shall we say then to these thing? seeing Charity begins a Saint on
Earth, and consummateth him in Heaven, I will vow with King David, I will love
thee my Lord my strength, etc. And that I may perform this Vow, I will pray
with Saint Austin, Lord, so inspire my heart that I may seek thee, seeking may
find thee, and finding may love thee.

ANd grant, O Lord, thy Grace unto us all, so to exercise our selves in this
Love, that we may have the honor to be thy friends both in Earth and Heaven.
AMEN. The fifth Sermon.
MATT. 22. VERSE. 39. Thou shall love thy Neighbor.


THere are two Persons expressed in my Text on whom we must bestow our Love.
First, The Lord our God, and Secondly, our Neighbor. I spoke last of the
former of these persons; It follows that I now speak of the later, so far
as I am occasioned by these words, Thou shall love thy Neighbor. Wherein it
will appear, that Love is not only due to God, but also to his servants, as
many as can return Love for Love; that is, all Rational Creatures; so far
as God has conjoined us, we must not sever our selves, for every creature
loves his like: Amity is inseparable from society, at least it should be.

For my fuller unfolding, and your better understanding of these words, I will
therein distinctly consider, first ^o whom, then what is due. The Person is
called a Neighbor, that which is due to him is Love. But farther in the person
we must see, first, that in him there is found the ground of that Love; I will
discover it when I have opened the Name. Secondly, that every man has his
interest in this ground, the text points out this, when in a reference to
every man, it calls the person, Thy Neighbor. As this must be observed in
the person: so in the Duty we must observe, that we that have the interest
must perform the Duty; this interest belongs to every man, and so does the
Duty also, if thy Neighbor, then thou must Love. But though all do not so,
yet he to whom God speaks in this Law must, and that is Israel: the members
of the Church must not fail in this duty, Thou must love thy Neighbor. These
particulars I hold worthy of observation in this text; I will therefore enlarge
them. I pray God it may be done to our edification. First, then of the person.

He is called our Neighbor; the word signifies one that dwells by us, or is
joined with us, but there is more in the word then is vulgarly conceived; I
will distinctly show you the extent thereof. There is a double Neighborhood;
First, an humane, Secondly a Divine; the humane is that which we apprehend by
the light of reason; the Divine is that which we know not, but by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Such Neighborhood there must be, because God
has joined us, in nature, as we depend upon Iehoua; and in grace as we are in
covenant with the Lord our God.

Of the humane, the first degree (for it has more degrees then one) is that
which first offers it self to the common understanding, and that is
Neighborhood in place; whether that place be the same Town, or Parish, or
Country, or Allegiance: all these have a Neighborhood between themselves,
and have some bonds, by which they are knit together, because men are naturally
sociable creatures, and as the word Reang imports, like sheep of the same
Pasture. Add hereunto that society is enforced, Quia non omnis fert omnia
tellus, this linketh Ilanders with the Continent by Leagues, and Commerce.

The second degree is neerenesse in Blood, this Neighborhood is between those
that are of the same kindred. And indeed, this was the first Neighborhood that
ever was in the World: for several Families dwelt by themselves, you may
gather it out of Genesis the tenth, where the roots of all Nations are set
down, as likewise in other Historical Books. For, what is an Ismaelite, but
one of the offspring of Ismael an Edomite, but one of the Posterity of Edom,
that is Esau? and an Israelite, one that comes from Israel, that is Jacob?
Yea, Affinity in the first Age was not ordinarily contracted, but between
those of the same blood; when by remoteness from the stock it grew cold, they
warmed it again by the help of Wedlock. But after that Nimrods arose, those
mighty Hunters that contented not themselves with their own Dominions, (such
as were the Governors of those four famous Monarchies) they subdued other
Nations to themselves; as likewise did they intermingle with other Nations,
whose multitudes could not be contained within their own Territories; here
hence arose that mixed neighborhood, which we see in all the world, a
neighborhood that seems rather of place then in blood. But howsoever they of
the same blood are distracted in place, yet is there a natural neighborhood
between them still. The Laws of men have set bounds unto Consanguinitie, and
beyond the tenth Degree, they acknowledge none, except it be in the succession
of Monarchy, or absolute Principalities, wherein (some Lawyers hold) there is
no limitation of Degrees. But howsoever Policy allows limitation of
Consanguinitie, the Scripture does not; for Acts 17. Saint Paul teaches the
Athenians, that of one Blood God made all Mankind: so that all men are the
sons of Adam, and they are all kin. The Apostle goes a step farther in
that place, and out of a heathen Poet proves, that we are all the offspring of
God; and indeed, in Adam we were all made after Gods Image, and so must needs
have Alliance between us. It is true, that when we look upon the several
generations in the world and the petie Dominions, whole Nations seem to be
strangers one to another; the Northern to the Southern, the Eastern to the
Western, they of Europe to those of Asia, both unto them of Africa, all three
to them of the New world: but if we acknowledge the root from whence we all
spring (Adam and God which is the Lord of all) we must needs confess, that no
man can be a stranger to us, because every man is our blood, and communicates
with us in the Image of God. And if we conceive any man unworthy to be
accounted of our cognation, let us know that Rex coeli honoratur vel
contemnitur in imagine sua, not the dead Images of the Church of Rome, but this
living Image of the nature of Man. The world is but like a great house wherein
the family, though but one, must lodge dispersed because so great; or if you
will a large Signiorie under which there are many Tenants, but all of the same
Homage, and holding of the same Lord, so that man can no more be a stranger
unto man, then one tenant of the same Lordship can be unto another, or one
person may be unto another in the same family. Thus far our neighborhood
reaches by the light of Reason, for you may perceive by the very text which I
alleged out of the Acts, that for this third degree of neighborhood, there is
an evidence in Reason, which another Poet also confirms; Hom. Odyss
(...). All both strangers and poor are belonging unto God. Were there no
other light but this of Reason, we see that neighborhood reaches very far.
But the Holy Ghost that by the Scripture has inspired into us a clerer light,
has taught us another kind of neighborhood which I called Divine, and this is
the neighborhood of the Church: and is between all them that belong
thereunto. For these persons have all one Father in Heaven; one Savior that
died for them all; one Comforter that dwells in them all; they partake of the
same Sacraments; they are taught the same Gospel; they are called to the same
Kingdom; there is not the least of these prerogatives, but communion therein
is enough to make a neighborhood.

And this neighborhood also has several degrees; The first is that which is
between men on Earth whereof some are all already of the mystical Body,
they are incorporated into the Church, are made members of Christ, are
quickened by the Spirit; are professed children of the Kingdom of Heaven; these
wheresoever they live, they must needs be neighbors, because they can live no
where out of the body, the body (I say) of the Catholic Church. Whose
extent may be over the face of the whole Earth, but wheresoever it is, it is
but one: as we profess in the Creed, one holy Catholic Church. Though of
men there be very many which are not in this Church, and therefore may seem
not partakers of this Divine Neighborhood, yet indeed they must not be
excluded from it, for what they are not they may be; the commission of the
Gospel sends the Ministers unto all, Go teach all Nations, and God would
have all men saved, neither is there any respect of persons with God, Jews,
Gentiles, Males, Females, bond, free, all are capable of the Gospel. Whereupon
Saint Austin groundeth that saying of his, multi intra lupi, extra oues; many
are within the Church, that are indeed wolves, though they be in sheep
clothing, and many are without the Church, that are indeed sheep, though they
appear in wolves clothing. He means it of Gods purpose, which is to permit
many Christians to turn Apostataes, and to reclaim many Infidels, and make
them Christians; you see that Judas of an Apostle became a Traitor, and Saint
Paul of a Persecutor became an Apostle.

Here comes in a strange enlargement of our Neighborhood; for it
comprehends even enemies also, the same person whose malice makes him carry
himself toward thee, as an enemy, must in regard of his possibility of
coming to the state of grace be reputed by thee to be a neighbor. Were not we
enemies, not only strangers when Christ came to seek us, and holy men
converted us? All enmity must give place where God shows mercy. And if
malice of an Infidel do not exclude him from being thy neighbor: much less
does a faithful man cease to be a neighbor unto thee, if happily he grow to
be malicious against thee, for thou that persecutes Christ in him. Thus you
have heard the first degree of Divine neighborhood.

The second is between Men and Angels, for they are our neighbors, they are
inhabitants of Sion, whether we are brought when we are made Christians; Heb.
12.
they are of the same nature with us, though not in regard of our bodies, yet
in regard of our souls; and they partake of the same holy Spirit; Heb 1. Psalm.
39. Psalm 91. Matthew. 18.
yea, they are ministering spirits, for all their sakes that shall be heirs of
salvation: they pitch their tents about us; they carry us in their hands:
Christ in the Gospel calls them our Angels; all which are marks of
neighborhood. Touching the Saints departed, there can be no question, for
though they are advanced to greater perfection: yet the condition of
neighborhood is not altered, they can no more cease to be our neighbor, then
they can cease to be members of Christ or children of God, or living stones in
the Temple whereof we are a part.

There is a third degree of neighborhood Divine, and that is between us and
Christ; the Fathers Greek and Latin, meditating upon the parable of the
Samaritane which is in the tenth of Luke, acknowledge Christ to be our
neighbor. And verily whatsoever other sense may be fastened upon that parable,
1. Ioh 1. c. (...). Math. 1.
it is certain that our Savior Christ came so near us in his manhood, that
he may well go for our neighbor, he pitched his tents amongst us, he became
Immanuel, God with us, he became bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh. Yea
there is no kind of relation requisite unto neighborhood that is not found in
Christ: he is the Lord of his Church, the Husband, the Father, the Brother,
Ioh. 13. Ephesians 5. ^sar. 8. Romans 15. Ioh. 15.
the Friend, etc. No doubt then but if any, he must needs be our Neighbor.
And in him our neighborhood is brought unto her highest pitch; for higher it
cannot go and not exceed the pitch of a Creature; whereas it is only the
reasonable Creature that comes under this name of Neighbor.

It may now be questioned whether any be excluded from our neighborhood,
seeing we have taken up all the Inhabitants both of heaven and earth: whereto
I answer that no reasonable Creatures may be excluded by us, but those only
that are either in Hell, or of Hell: In Hell, as Dives and the rest that burn
there; Of Hell, as the Prince of darkness that rules in the Air and his
Angels: not one of these are capable of divine neighborhood. Not those in
Hell, as Abraham tells Dives, there is a great gulf between; Luke. 1^.
no intercourse between them and the Saints. And for the other, though there
be two much neerenesse in place between them and men on earth: yet there
should be no commerce, because they are under a definitive doom, and so all
hope of ueighbour-hood cut off between them and us. There is a third sort of
persons that are excluded from divine, though not from humane neigh-bourhood
those whom the Scripture calls sinners against the holy Ghost men that sin
unto death (as Saint John speaks. But because these are hardly discerned
except they turn plain Apostata's, we must not be hasty to put any in that
rank. Our zealous Spirits in this age have been too forward in such
separations; it were much better for us to acknowledge many that are not, to be
our spiritual Neighbors, then to deny any that are. And so have I set you
out the bounds of neighborhood both humane and divine.

The second point that I observed in the Person is the ground of the duty, the
duty is Love, and there is a ground of love in the Person, take the
neighborhood which way you will. Look first upon the humane neighborhood;
the first degree of it is neighborhood in place; the first motive that drew
men together, was auxilium and solatium, that they might mutually help one
another, and each sweeten the trouble of another life: hereupon arose the
Proverb, better is a Neighbor at hand then a Brother, a far off; so that
here we find a fair a ground of Love. But in the degree of Consanguinitie we
find that which is fairer; for it has in it (...) natural affection, which
moves of it self, when there is nothing else to move it: Yea, many things
that are apt to work the contrary disposition cannot remove this; as you may
observe in Parents, and Children, and Kinsmen whose nature has not
degenerated, they cannot choose but love, even when there are many prouocations
to hate. Take one example for all; David's compassion toward his rebellious
son Absalon.

Yea, extend we consanguinitie as far as the Scriptures have taught us to
extend it, we shall find ground for the like extent of our Love. Strangers to
our knowledge, must not be strangers to our love, because they bear in that
blood of Adam which is common to them with us, the Image of God, which is the
greatest thing that we are to glory of as we are men. And seeing we all hold
it of the same Lord; our common reference unto him does require our mutual
respect, no less then does that common endowment which we receive from him. I
am sure by this time you do not doubt but there is a fair ground of love in
humane neighborhood, you shall find yet fairer in that which is divine;
follow it by the degrees.

The first degree I told you was that which is between men in the Church
militant; there is no part of our Catechism that does not teach us a ground of
love in this neighborhood. You cannot say your Creed but therein you profess
the Communion of Saints, and therein many grounds of love. You begin the Lords
Prayer with Our Father, and so profess that every member of the Church and
you, are Children of one heavenly Father, wherein you acknowledge in every
member a ground of love. Throughout the second Table of the Commandments, our
neighbor is enjoined to love us, which iniunction to perform he having taken
upon him in his baptism, we cannot look on him but we see ground why we
should love him: for then we look on the man that has vowed unto God that
he will love us. And if we look on him as he partakes in the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, then we see another ground why we should love him; for then we
behold him, as professing that he does love us: in testimony whereof the
Saints were wont to begin this Sacrament with a mutual holy kiss, in lue
whereof the supersticious kissing of the Pax succeeded in the Romish Church.
You see then that if so be the sociablenesse which is natural requires love,
that of grace requires it much more.

What shall we say to them that are without the Church? that persecute the
Church, is there any ground of love in them? yea, the wickedness of man cannot
euacuate the right of Nature, much less of Grace, they are our neighbors
whether they will or no, by Nature, because they are men; and so are they also
by Grace, because they may be Christian men: so that we cannot say to them in
neither respect, what have we to do with you? Therefore in the same person
we must distinguish between his ill affection toward us, and his
neighborhood, which God vouchsafes him, and not let the malice of the one
intercept the sight of the loveliness that is in the other. And if so be we
may not forget that spiritual Louelines which is only in hope, as it is in
Infidels, much less may we forget that Loveliness which is indeed in those
which are Christians; these have in them most undoubted grounds of Love.

The next degree of Divine neighborhood is between us and the Church
Triumphant, Angels and Saints, we cannot doubt of their Loveliness, if we
know wherein their neighborhood consists; I showed it you before; and
further they really testify their Love toward us, the Saints in praying for
the Church in general; the Angels in being ministering spirits for the good of
the Church. Heb. 1.
But here we must take heed that we enlarge not this bounderie too far; for
men that have made little account of Saints on Earth, have made too much of
them when they have been departed this life, and to Angels they have
attributed more then ever God bestowed upon them. We for the avoiding of their
errors must confine our thoughts within the just bounds of their Loveliness.

The third degree of neighborhood, is that which is between the Church and
our Savior Christ, and here we find the fullest ground of Loueliness^ that
ever was, or will be created; the Church says truly in the Canticles, totus
est desiderabilis, view him from top to toe, C. 5.16.
you shall find nothing in him that does not show him to be a most lovely
neighbor, peruse all his fore specified references toward his Church, there
is not the least of them that does not challenge the love thereof.

And now that we have gone over all, you see a good reason why the word that
is used by Moses, Reang, signifies not only a neighbor but also a friend: for
every one that is a neighbor, is by the virtue of his neighborhood, to be
accounted as our friend.

Secondly, that all persons must be considered, as they are in God, and
Christ, and not as in themselves, otherwise we shall misdeeme them; for any
communion which a man has with God and Christ, cannot but seem unto us an
apparent right that he has to be accounted our neighbor and our friend. But
he that appears unto us as deuoid of both these communions, he cannot seem
unto us to be our neighbor, and therefore not our friend.

A third thing that I noted in the person whom we must love, is every man's
interest in him; for the Law speaking to every man says, He is thy Neighbor;
therefore thou must not look upon him only with thy direct sight, but with a
reflected also. Let us run over the degrees of Neighborhood again, and see
how every of them does concern every one of us. The first degree of humane
neighborhood, is neighborhood in place, that was instituted (as I told you)
Propter auxilium and solatium; and God knows, there is no man that does not
stand in need of both, and it is not Gods will that any should be excluded
from either: but every man has an interest of help and prosit from him that
is his neighbor in place; therefore we must every man take care to yield, and
expect to receive whatsoever help or comfort he has in himself, or is in any
other; these gifts must be mutual, they must be interchangeable, a neighbor
must do for thee, as well as be a receiver from thee, therefore does God call
the neighbor thine.

The next degree of humane neighborhood is that of blood, wherein men are
brought nearer one unto another, then they can be by any politic Laws,
because of a nearer interest which does combine them; the interest of nature.
For every man has his nature and being in or from those of his blood, the
father has his being in his son, the son has his being from his father, a
brother has his being in a brother, an uncle in a nephew. And so between all
other degrees, there is an interest of being which one has in anoher more or
less, as the degrees are more or less remote. Whence it is that politic
neighborhood respects no man but out of deliberate reason, it is quickened
by hope of receiving like kindness when time shall serve: but neighbors in
blood respect each other out of an inborne affection; for it is natural to
every man to affect himself and his own being, without any farther
consideration, and consequently he cannot but affect another, in whom he
beholds his being to be preserved as well as in himself, or from whom he
conceiues his being to have proceeded. Hence it is that Parents love their
children, and children their Parents, and a brother loves a brother, and an
uncle his nephew, even where they look for no retribution. Come we on to the
third degree of neighborhood, which superaddeth another ground of love, and by
consequent increase of interest.

This third degree goes beyond that of blood, as the Laws of men do limit
Consanguinitie; but yet in true judgment, Consanguinitie has no stricter
limits then the nature of man, because all men are made of one blood; and so in
true judgment every man must think that he has in every man an interest of
his natural being; and upon this ground a man in whom nature is not
degenerate, will love another man; and do for him be he never so strange unto
him, and though there be no hope to be recompensed by him; upon this ground a
Christian will love and relieve a poor Turk.

But setting aside this just extension of Consanguinitie that we are all made
of one blood; we are all neighbors also in that we are all made by one God,
and after one Image of that God; whence arises another ground, of love
similitude; in our nature we all resemble God, and in our original we all come
from God: and hence comes increase of that interest which we have one in
another; the father thinks the bond of his natural affection toward his
child to be strengthened if his child be like unto him; especially if he be
like in that which is the greatest honor of the father; so does a brother
think of a brother that is like him; and generally similitude is conceived to
give unto those men betwixt whom it is an interest each in the other; therefore
men cannot in reason acknowledge that reference unto God wherein they all meet,
they cannot conceive how they all partake of the same Image of God, which is
their greatest honor as they are men: but withal they must confess a mutual
interest, which hereby they have one in another.

Let us pass on from the Humane to the Divine Neighborhood, and see what
interest we find there. The more grounds of Love, the more interest; Now here
is grace added to nature: Children we are all of the same Father in Heaven, and
not by many Descents (as in humane Consanguinitie we fetch our pedigree from
Adam) but immediately, for we are all made children by the same Baptism; so is
our Consanguinitie collateral in the first degree. And can we then deny a
mutual interest that are Fratres Germani Brother-Germans? Let us look upon
one another as we are in Christ our Savior, we are incorporated into him,
and so members one of another, and therefore we cannot have less interest one
in another then the Eye has in the Ear, or the Ear in the Hand, or the Hand
in the Foot, each has need of the other; and they may claim right each in the
others ability: Like interest will arise out of our being Temples of the Holy
Ghost, the living stones that make up that building do mutually support
themselves; Et fortitudo omnium tota esb singulorum, they are made mutually
necessary by the manner of their compacting.

Neither have we a religious interest only in those that are already in the
Church, but also in those that may be. What interest in re, we have of them
that be within, we have of them that be without in spe; they may be Christians,
and so become profitable helps unto us in the mystical body of Christ: in
regard of this hopeful interest may they justly claim our Love, and our
pains to work their Conversion.

The second degree of Divine Neighborhood, is between us and the Saints and
Angels in the Church Triumphant, who continuing still to be members of the
Church must needs with all continue unto us the interest which we have had in
them. Therefore the Angels call themselves our fellow servants. And it goes
inter pie credibilia, Revel. vlt^
that the Saints do pray for us, at least in general.

The last degree is the neighborhood with Christ; I need not prove unto you
that we have an interest in him, and he in us. We call him our Lord, our
Savior, our Brother, and he as many ways calls us his, his Body, his
Spouse, his Church: these mutual appropriations d^e necessarily infer
mutual interest. Thus have we found the extent of neighborhood, in every
part of this extent we have found a ground of Love, and there is not a parcel
of this ground which does not concern every of us; a man would think that the
case being such, our own propension would produce the duty, and that there
needed no such Commandment as Thou shall Love.

But yet the Commandment is no more then necessary; for what degree of
neighborhood is there which is not infested with hatred? Neighbors in place
how do they envy? Tradesmen in Towns, and inhabitants in the Country, if
their Lands lie near, quarrel every where, and seek to ruin and destroy,
not only to vex and disquiet each other: as if that which was instituted for
succor and comfort did yield the best opportunity for malice and rage to
work on. As for neighborhood in blood, Rom 1.
how soon did Cain make that unnatural reply even to God himself, Am I the
keeper of my Brother? Cham discovered his fathers nakedness. The Apostle does
tell us of Infidels that were without natural affection, and every smatterer
in Histories can give examples thereof, and justify that Proverb, Rara est
concordia fratrum.

Come to the more remote Consanguinitie, which is moreover graced with the
Image of God, few have taken notice thereof, strangers have been thought a sit
subject to prey on, and men have shed their blood without remorce. Matthew. 10.21.
And fares it better with Christians? Does not Christ's prophecy prove true,
The brother shall deliver up the brether to death, and the father the child,
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put
to death?

I need not instance in particular persons, for what Nation is there round
about us wherein there are not many lamentable spectacles of Civil wars, and
unchristian throat-cutting? The world is every where full of Nabals and
Samaritans. As for Infidels; rob them, and reproach them we do, but who does
labor their Conversion, and seek of enemies to make them friends, and of
strangers to make them fellowcitizens with the Saints? But it may be we
respect the Church Triumphant more; No; even here also our uncharitableness
appears, for we grieve the Angels which are witnesses of our carriage; and
live clean contrary to the good examples which the blessed Saints have left
unto us. Finally, the world is grown so profane, as that men tread under their
feet the Son of God, they account the blood of the Covenant wherewith they
were sanctified, an unholy thing, Who can make any better construction of those
blasphemies which come from foul mouths, when they call the sacred wounds,
and blood, and body of Christ to witness their impurities? Seeing then there
is so little Charity toward our Neighbor, take neighborhood howsoever you
will, you see there is great need of this Commandment; Thou shall love thy
Neighbor.

But what is it to love? Gal 6. Ephesians. 4
I might tell you in few words, Let not eueryman seek that which is his own,
but that which is another. I might branch it into these two points, first, a
man must be careful to do no hurt, and secondly do all the good he can for
his Neighbor; and in doing good he must be as kind in adversity to weep with
them that weep, James 5. 1. John 3.
as in prosperity, to rejoice with them that rejoice. Or I might carry you
along through all those branches which were touched when I opened those words,
Thou shall love; I told you then that Love begins in Union of the persons,
it comes on to Communion first in good will, and then in good deeds, and this
every one that loves does labor to express both in soul and body, for it
must be sincere. But because I have expressed diverse kinds and degrees of
neighborhood, I cannot better teach you what it is to love your neighbor,
then to persuade you to entertain each kind of neighborhood, and that
according to its degree. Is any man thy neighbor in place? be (as occasion
serves) his Help, his Comforter, otherwise God will not account that thou
love him, Non prodest si nos continet vna domus and separat diuersa voluntas,
plus attendit Deus vnitatem animi quam loci. (...) any moreover thy neighbor
in blood? let him find how much nature is more potent then Law, and let
Consanguinitie double the heat of thy affections to wards him. Do thou
apprehend that all Mankind is made after the Image of God? Let thy humanity
toward strangers testify the reverence which thou bear to thy Maker, Job 3^
Let not the stranger lodge in the street, but open thy doors unto Travelers.
Neighborhood in place, does but supply neighborhood in blood, therefore if we
respect that which is the sample, much more must we respect this which is the
sampler. Art thou advanced to an higher degree of neighborhood, in that thou
art a member of the Church? thy good offices must be multiplied accordingly,
and thou must promote the Communion of Saints, with much more zeal then the
society of men, here thou must show how far Grace goes beyond Nature. Is
man thy friend? Dilige eum in Dec, love him because already he stands in good
terms with God. Is he thy enemy? Dilige eum propter Deum, love him for Gods
sake, and after Gods example; he makes his Sun to shine, and his rain to
fall upon the just and unjust, thankful, unthankful; therefore, If thy enemy
hunger, Romans 12. Mat. 5. Prou. 16.
give him meat, if he thirst give him drink, and so heap coals of fire on his
head. If thy enemy be a member of the Church, remember he is but like a part
of thy body out of joint; though it be painful, yet how tenderly do thou
handle it, and never leave until thou have set it in joint again? Even so
should thou use thy brother, never leave until thou have brought him to
yield thee as much content as he has wrought thee woe. Is he without the
Church that does afflict thee? Look not upon him but upon the Devil that
provoke him; pour out thy malice against the Devil; for this is a lawful
enmity, Gen 3.
upon that ancient ground, ponam immicitias; but pity the man, let him find in
thee the comfort of a Neighbor? Thou can not better overcome the Devil then
by such love of thine enemies. A man cannot so many ways afflict thee, but
thou must be as many ways charitable unto him, as Christ teaches in the fifth
of Matthew, verse 44. In a word, Amor nescit inimicum, and this every Christian
man must show, or else he will betray that he is no living member in the
mystical Body of Christ; for how does he live therein that is either
senseless or Satanicall? his own body will refute him. 1. (...).
As we must love our Neighbors in the Church Militant, so must we love also
our Neighbors of the Church Triumphant; we must reverence the presence of the
Angels that are about us, and not misdemeane our selves before them, nor grieve
them in their Ministry; we must thankfully commemorate the lives of the
Saints departed, and be careful to resemble them in their virtues. But we
must not with the Church of Rome rack our love toward either Angels or
Saints, and honor them farther then we have warant, much less derogate from
God or Christ in our honoring them. As for Christ, it is not hard to conceive
how we must Love him, his Names will guide us. The Church is his Spouse, she
must Love him with a chaste Love, the Church is his Body, she must Love him
with an obedient Love, He is our Brother we must love him with a Natural Love;
the diversity of his titles will teach us how to diuersifie our Love, for he
bears no title which we must not entertain with an answerable Love.

In all that you have heard you may perceive that there are diverse kind of
persons that challeng our Love, but Christ calls never a one of them by his
proper name, but comprehends them all under one name Neighbor; (other names
would have imported some personal respects) teaching us two things; first,
that our love must be without respect of persons; we may not love because a
man is rich, wife, or Honorable; nor for any other worldly respect, these be
the motives that sway with Publicans and Sinners, with carnal men, but these
are base respects in the eyes of Christian men. Especially seeing God that has
made men unequal in these, has made them equal in better things. Yea, and
these which are so unequally distributed, are therefore so distributed that
they might give the fitter opportunity for the exercise of our Love. Look
upon thy Body, it is made of the four Elements whereof one is cold, another
is hot, one is moist, another is dry, Does the hot abhor the cold, or the
moist the dry? No, rather they impart their qualities to them, and out of so
loving neighborhood comes this goodly fabric of man's body, which would
soon be dissolved if this loving neighborhood should fail. The whole frame
of the world is preserved by the loving association that is between unequal
creatures; so the great world the little world, both do teach us how due our
Love is unto neighborhood, only in regard of neighborhood.

The second thing that we must observe is, that we must take the scantling of
our Love from the kind and degree of neighborhood. But of that I shall speak
more when I come to the measure: only now observe that, as I told you, when I
spoke of the Love of the Lord our God, that Love must not only extend to his
person, but to those things that belong unto him: so must we conceive also of
the Love of our Neighbor. Whereupon are grounded those Laws, Thou shall not
see thy Neighbors Ox nor his Ass going astray, sinking under his burden,
lying in a ditch; but thou shall bring him home, ease him, lift him out; In a
word, whatsoever thing concerns our Neighbor in any kind or degree of
neighborhood, we must testify the acknowledgment of our reference to him in
carefully procuring the welfare of that thing.

You have heard the Duty. But who must perform it? Surely, whosoever has the
interest, is he thy Neighbor, why then thou must love him. But the Law
speaks properly to them that are under the Law, and so Thou an Israelite, and
teaches us which are the Israel of God; In this word Christ taxes the
Pharisees gloss who straightened the extent of neighborhood, Matthew. 5.
as appeared by the Addition they made to the Law, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor, and hate thine Enemies, they confined neighborhood to their own
sect, at least to their own Nation. And we see at this day the Jews mention
not Christians without reproach, no more then Papists do Protestants. But a
Christian must know that in Jesus Christ there is neither Jew nor Gentile,
Coloss. 3.11.
Grecian nor Barbarian, male nor female, bond nor free. Saint Austin has a
conuicting reason, De Doctrina Christiana c. 30.
which is that otherwise there would be some persons, with whom we might
commit adultery, whose goods we might steal, whose bodies we might murder,
without any sin against them, which is absurd.

The case of the Canaanite was extraordinary, Austin. tract. in Iohannis cap.
15.
we may not match our affections with Gods precepts, as if they were alike
lawful. Wherefore let us bear fruit answerable to the seed which God has
sown in our hearts, and though our nature be prone to satanisme and hatred
(for this charity is a strain above nature, and known only to those of the
Church) yet let us mortify it, and subdue it to the Law of God, Let us not
define whom we must love other wise then we are taught of God; let us not
think we love as many as we should, if we exclude any from our love; for our
love must be the fulfilling of the Law, therefore it is impossible for us in
regard of any man whatsoever, to perform the Law which binds us to him
without Love.

NOw therefore the God of Love season all our hearts so with Love that Hatred
being clean rooted out; we may all be of one mind, of one heart, and out of
the sweet sense and comfort hereof, we may all say and sing, Ecce quam bonum?
Behold how good and joyful a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity? The sixth Sermon.
MATT. 22. VERSE 37, 38, 39. Thou shall Love the Lord thy God, with all thy
Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind.

This is the first and great Commandment.

And the second is like unto it, Thou shall Love thy neighbor as thy self.


THe last point which I opened upon this Text, taught us, upon whom we must
bestow our Charity; we learned, that we must bestow it upon The Lord our God
and our neighbor; upon these persons, and upon those things that have
reference unto them, must it be bestowed. Therefore though the Commandment
seem in nature to be but one (for it is only Love) yet Christ breaks it
into two, and these two unequal.

As it must be bestowed on them: so, in bestowing it, we must observe an Order,
and a Measure, both are plainly prescribed in the Text. The Order; for here is
a Frist, and a Second commandment mentioned. The Measure; for here is
mentioned the great commandment, and a commandment that is only like it. We
are willed to love first The Lord our God; secondly Our neighbor; this is the
Order. And we are willed to love the Lord our God with all our heart, soul and
mind, etc. and our neighbor as our selves; this is the Measure.

Order then and Measue are to be observed in the bestowing of our Charity. And
indeed without Order and Measure, no work has either Beauty, or Perpetuity;
look upon the frame of heaven and earth, were not the parts thereof so well
ordered, had not each of them his limits, it could neither be so goodly, nor so
lasting a Creature; want of Order would blemish the goodlinesse, and want of
Measure would shorten the lastingnesse thereof: Even so is it in Charity,
inuert the Order, alter the Measure required therein by the Law, we do
foulely deforme it, and all society grounded thereon, be it heavenly or
earthly, will quickly be disolued.

This time will not suffice for the opening of both; wherefore I will now only
handle the Order, and reserve the Measure for some other time.

Touching then the Order that is to be observed in Charity, we must know that
it is twofold, there is Ordo ad intra, and ordo ad extra, an order in the
generation of it, or the working of it into our souls; and an order in the
employment of it, as we express it in our lives. Of the first Order you heard,
when I opened unto you the seat of Charity, and showed you that it is either
Primitive, or Deriuatiue; it must begin at the Heart, and from thence spread it
self into the Soul, the mind, the strength. With that Order we have nothing
to do now; my Text leads me to speak of the second Order, the Order of
employment; the bestowing of it upon others, after we are seasoned with it our
selves.

To come then to this Order; to understand it we must take this Rule, Scire
quid facere debeamus, and nescire ordinem faciendt, perfecta scientia non est;
morality requires, that we not only know what we ought to do, but also in
what order; otherwise the knowledge of our duty is imperfect, therefore
imperfect; because it will be indiscreete, discretion being that which does
distinguish and digest the parts of, De Cinit Dei. lib 5 cap. 22.
and points in, our duty. So that take away Order, virtue will presently
dege^erate into vice, especially if we admit that definition of Saint Austine,
short, but true, V^rtus est ordo amoris; virtue is nothing else but the well
ordering of our Charity. Wherefore the Order of Gods precepts must not be
passed over unregarded, because therefore does God keep an order in
commanding, to intimate unto us, what order we must keep in our living.
Whatsoever is good may be beloved well, or ill, well, if you observe the order,
and if you neglect it, then you love it ill.

But let us come closer to the Text. Here we find a first, and a second
Commandment. It is doubted by some whether they are rightly so called, seeing
that which concerns our Neighbor, was first delivered, Leuit. 19. verse. 18.
and therefore delivered on mount Sinai, Leuit. 27.34. Comp. numb 10, ver. 11,
12 with De^^r 1 6 and vide Deuteronomy. 2 1^
and that which concerns the Lord our God was delivered afterward, Deutro. 6.
verse. 50. and therefore delivered in the land of Moab, Deutr. 1.5. The distance
of times wherein they were delivered was thirty eight years. But we must not
insist upon these words, as referring to the times wherein Moses delivered the
Commandments, but as expounding their sense, as they are a Sum of the
Decalogue, and point out the principal duties prescribed therein. Now because
the Decalogue was engraven in two Tables, and the brief of the first was our
duty toward God, therefore is that called the first Commandment, and our
duty toward our neighbor being an abridgement of the second Table, it is
therefore called the second Commandment.

Where by the way you may take notice, that those Jews err, who breaking the
ten Commandments into two fiues, think there were sieve graven upon either
Table, whereupon it would follow, that the first Commandment which commands
our duty toward our neighbor, was joined with those Commandments which
enjoin our duty toward God, which cannot stand with this first and second of
my Text.

Having found in regard of what Scripture these Commandments are called First
and Second: Let us now see how well the matter contained in them does deserve
these names. And here we shall find that this Order is very natural, for as in
their being, so in being the objects of our Love, these persons are to go the
one before the other; God, before our Neighbor; God has the first right unto
our Love, and then our Neighbor.

But let us look into the Commandments a sunder. The love of God is termed
the first Commandment, and it is two ways first, Ordine naturae, and
dignitatis; whether you look to the original of the Loveliness, or to the
worthynes that is therein. You cannot deny the Lord our God to be the
original of loveliness, if you remember what I observed unto you on the name
of Lord God, and our Lord God, not a branch of these observations which does
not strongly prove this primacie of Love; but I choose rather to represent it
unto you by two or three familiar Similes. The first is of Consanguinitie.
Brethren love each the other, but their Love is not immediate, it passes unto
them by their Parents in whom they both meet, and there grows the root of
their love, take away that dependencie which they have thereon, and brotherly
affection will presently wither: Even so it is between us and our neighbor,
Love we must, and why? Because we are sons of the same Father, Malachi
points out this ground, Have we not all one father? Chap 2. (...) 10
Wherefore does any man wrong his brother? You see here is a fair ground of
Primacie. There is as fair in our body, wherein our members have a fellow
feeling each of the others case, and they bestirre themselves for their mutual
comfort, but whence comes this but from the Head, where is the fountain of
sense and motion? The members have no virtue for which they are not beholding
to the Head. The Church is a body, whose Head is Christ, and Christ is the
fountain of fellow-feeling, whereof if he do not communicate an influence, we
shall be absurd if we seek it in the body, yea we shall seek it in vain.
Take a third Simily of an House, or a Temple; these buildings hane a foundation
whereupon the whole pile is reard; the parts support the one the other, but it
is the foundation, the corner stone, that knitteth them, that holds them all
together; you ruin the house, if you loose the foundation. And the Temple of
God which we are, or the Communion of Saints wherein we live, where shall we
find the sinnewey bands of it, but in the Spirit of Christ, whereof we all
drink which foundeth us all on him? I might amplify this point by the title
of Creator, which belongs unto God, which cannot be acknowledged, but it
will enforce his right to the first fruits of our love, from whom our being
takes beginning.

In order of nature then it is clear that our first love belongs to God. Now I
will make it as clear that in Order of worthiness it belongs to him also.
Love is an affection of our Will; our Will naturally is carried unto good,
where then we find apparently the preeminencie of good, thither must the
precedencie of our love deservedly bend; now the preeminencie of Good is out of
all question in God, he is so good, that Christ tells us there is none good
but he. Matthew. 19.17.
When I opened the name of the Lord our God, I fell upon this point, and I said
enough to clear it, wherefore I will now be the more brief, I will only
point out three grounds, the least of which does argue God to be worthy of our
first love, if that which we love be good.

First God is good ase, he has no other original of his goodness but
himself; and this no other can be but God. Others as they have their being,
so have they their goodness from him, Enerie good and every perfect gift
comes from him, (...) 1.17.
which is himself the Father of lights.

As God is good ase, so he is perse, good by nature, yea Goodness is his
Nature. In all Creatures Nature and Goodness (I speak of moral goodness)
are two distinct things, so that Goodness may be separated from the nature,
and be recovered by it again; Angels by Creation had and lost it; it was Adams
case, but he recovered it again; both of them were like the Moon, between
whose brightness and Body there is no such union, but that they may admit a
separation, as appears in the Eclipse: but Goodness and God are as Light and
the Sun, one so essential to the other that they cannot be severed except
they cease to be. A seeming Eclipse there is of the Sun, but that seems to
us which indeed is not: even so though God never cease to be good, yet may
flesh and blood conceive worse of him; but it is only a carnal conceit, Iam
1.17.
for in Gods goodness there is no variableness, nor shadow of change.

Thirdly, God is good propterse, he has no end of his goodness without
himself; other things have their goodness given them for a farther end, their
goodness is not only for their perfection, but for their union to some other,
to this they tend, and are restless till they attain this: but Gods goodness
is absolute, it is its own end, and beside it self, it needs nothing, as
appeard before the Creation, while it enjoyed it self, and it is no necessary
but an arbitrary Graciousnes, out of which God vouchsafes to entertain
communion with his Creatures. If then the most worthy good do justly challenge
our first love, then certainly our first love is undeniable due unto God, whose
Goodness has this threefold pre-eminence; whereupon it will follow, that we
are bound first to love the Lord our God, and the commandment that enioyneth
this is for good reason called the first.

But though the first, yet not the only. Victor Antiochenus has a good note,
Primum eo magis vocat, vt secundum quoque quod a primo diuelli non debet,
commodius inferri queat. The Pharisee moved his question concerning the Great
Commandment, Christ tells him there are more Great Commandments then one,
and therefore begins with the first, that he might the more fitly teach him
the second, a second inseparable from the first. This second it did concern
the Pharisee to know; for whatsoever his love was to wards God, it is plain
he was without the love of his Neighbor, because he came to tempt Christ;
and therefore Christ strikes directly at his fault, and shows him that there
is a second Commandment beside the first, even such a one as without which the
first cannot consist; for there can be no true Love of God, which is not
accompanied with the love of our Neighbor, 1 Ioh. 4.20.
He that loves not his neighbor whom he does see, how can he love God whom
he does not see? So that Christ does answer not only fully but abundantly.

The word Second does moreover teach us that these Commandments are not
Co-ordinata, but Sub-ordinata, the do not go hand in hand, but one does
attend the other, and there is good reason why, because the one does flow from
the other. To open this a little more fully. This Commandment has a
secondarinesse in nature, and a secondarinesse in worthiness. A secondarinesse
in nature; for we cannot love the fountain of Love, but we must love the
streams that flow from it, the same nature that teaches Children to love
their Parents, teaches them to love one another; Abraham thought so, Genesis 3.
when he persuaded Lot not to contend upon this ground, for we are Brethren;
and Moses upon the same ground would have reconciled two Israelites that were
at variance, when he reproved him that was injurious, thus; you are Brethren.
The secondarinesse is as plain in the resemblance of the Body; Acts ^.
for the members that are respective of the Head, should not in reason be ill
affected between themselves; the sense which they derive from the Head, makes
them effectually feeling of each others state: and Christians cannot be
senseless of any part which is in Christ's body, except they have lost the sense
of their conjunction with Christ their Head. Finally, the living stones that
are in the Spiritual Temple, do as willingly embrace and hold fast each the
other, as they do gladly entertain the fountain of their union, which is the
holy Ghost; whatsoever motive there is that persuades us in the first place to
love the Lord our God, does persuade us in the second place for to love our
Neighbor, because our Neighbor and we do partake thereof; so that the love
of our Neighbor is a second Commandment to be obeyed, not arbitrarily, but
necessarily, because the same nature teaches us in the second place to love
our neighbor, which taught us in the first place, to love God.

Another secondarinesse there is, and that is of worthiness; for though our
Neighbor deserve to be beloved, yet is his worthiness but secondarie. And
why? Such is his Goodness; God is good a se, his goodness springs from
himself; but our Neighbors goodness is a Deo, he has it from the gift of
God; God is good perse, Goodness is his very nature; but our neighbor is good
only in Deo, so far as he has communion with God. Finally, God is good
propter se, there is no end of his goodness, but his own glory; but our
neighbors goodness is ad Deum, it aims at something beyond it self, and
that is at God, and union with him. So that this must pass for an undoubted
and grounded truth, that as the reason why we must love our Neighbor must be
Goodness, so that Goodness must be conceived to be but in a secondary
degree: And as the effect does respect his efficient, so must the love of our
Neighbor respect the love of God, because no man can love his neighbor
orderly, that does not first love God. Yea, as he concludes soundly, that
has the principles whence his conclusion must issue, ever in his eye, and
observes their direct influence into the Conclusion: even so a man can never
err in the love of his neighbor, that guides himself by his love of God;
for Quod primum est in vnoquoque genere est mensura reliquorum.

In a word, we must never love our neighbor but in a double intention; a
primarie, which looks upon God; a secundarie, which looks upon our
Neighbor, and beholds God in him. This Rule is of special use to make our
love regular, whereof we have an excellent example in the Macedonians to whom
Saint Paul bears witness that they gave themselves first to the Lord, ^. ^or
8 5.
and then to the Apostles according to the will of God: we must not be
content to know this will do our neighbor good, but see that it agree with
the first Table, which does qualify the second.

It is true, that as in natural knowledge, so also in the affection of Love,
we begin a prioribus sensui, we first apprehend the lineaments of a living
body, and then discern therein the effects of a soul, and last of all come to
know the Soul it self: even so in the course of nature, we first take notice
of our neighbor, and the inducements to love him; then we apprehend some
higher cause that works these inducements; and last of all, we acknowledge
that that cause is most lovely: whereupon Saint Austin, Tract. in. Ioh.
Diligendo proximum purgas oculum ad diligendum Deum. But yet, as in natural
knowledge, when by going backward, we are come to that which is first in
nature, we make that our guide to understand distinctly, what before we knew
but confusedly: even so, though the imperfect love of our neighbor, does draw
us to a knowledge of our love of God; yet when we have attained that, we must
take the true taste of our affections from thence, and that must correct the
corrupt relish which otherwise would be in our Love; for it fares with our
spiritual taste as it does with our corporal, if either be possessed with any
quality, whatsoever it receives will seem answerable, according to the Maxim
in Philosophy, Intus apparens excludit alienum.

Again, this order of first and second does teach us that we must first give
to God and our Neighbor our Love before any other gift; for all other will
easily follow, if this go before, and they are all of no value if they flow
not from this; it is not possible we should do any other service, if we yield
not this, and if it were possible, yet we should do it in vain: Therefore
we must repute this first and second Commandment the foundations of piety,
before we set our selves to do our duty, we must love God if we will serve
him; and if we will serve our Neghbour, we must first love him.

To conclude this point, out of all which you have heard you may learn the
truth of that which Saint Austin has, Lib. 15. d. ciuit. Dei. c^p 22.
Ipse amor ordinate amandus est, Love it self must be loved orderly, and if
Order be requisite in the exercise of every virtue, much more in Charity,
which is the root of virtues, in so much, that where there is no Order, there
can be no Charity, Austm. ibid.
because this Order is nothing else but that Quo been amatur quod amandum est,
vt sit in nobis virtus qua been viuitur; so that he lives justly and holily,
which passes a true judgment upon the objects of Love, and such a one is he
only that has his Charity well ordered, for he, nec vtitur fruendis, nec
fruitur vtendis, he does not mis-applie his Love.

But where is he? In Cant. cap 2. verse. 4.
Nunc confusam in plerisque and inordinatam licet videre Charitatem; it is
Gregory Nyssens complaint; and this inordinatenesse began very early; Saint
Jude tells us of the Angels, that they kept not (...) their Original, which
is in effect, they did not observe the subordination of these Commandments,
they would have no dependencie upon God, and so shut him out of their Love;
Adam did no better, who being made after the Image of God, affected another
likeness, and so cast off the first of these two Commandments. The children
of God that coupled themselves with the daughters of men, were most infamous
for this disorder of their Charity: And who is not guilty of it? where be
the Parents that begin not their love at their Children, and care for no more
of the love of God then may stand with their thriuing for them? Saint Paul
insinuates as much concerning man and wife, when he tells us that the
unmarried care for those things which belong unto the Lord; but the married
take care for those things wherein they may please each the other, as if that
were ordinarily their principal care. And how servants forget their love of
God, while they seek to please their masters, you may perceive in every shop,
where apprentises are inured to lying, false-swearing, deceiving, and all to
advance their masters commodity. It were infinite to run over all degrees of
persons; but if you list to do it, you shall find that all their Charity is
out of order, for want of this Order, and that they place the precedencie of
their love amiss.

And it were well if men went no farther then to prefer Man before God: there
is as much disorder in our love of Things, yea the disorder in the love of
Persons, grows from the disorderly love of Things: O ciues, ciues, quaerenda
pecuniaprimum est,
Virtus post nummos, --
Profane men think that gain is the best godliness, and covetous men will
sell even their souls for a morsel of bread; Esau sold his birthright for a
mess of pottage; yea Judas sold our Savior Christ for thirty pieces of
silver. De do^^ Christ. (...) 1 cap 23.
Saint Austin distinguishing things tells us, that some are supra above us,
as God; some intra within us, as our own souls and selves, some iuxta even
with us, as our neighbors; some infra below, us as the world and worldly
things; we may add, some contra, our deadly enemies, as are the Devil, and
the powers of darkness. Of these, Love is due to God above us, to our Selves,
to our Neighbors, we find them all three in the Commandment of Love, but we
find not there those things which are below us, much less those things which
are opposite to us. And yet when we come to consider what Order the world
keeps in Love, we shall find that these two which God never thought worthy
of our Love, have the greatest share therein, and we have no leisure to love
the other, so great is our love to these; at least our forwardness in the love
of these, makes us backward in the love of the other; our meat, our money,
our pleasure, our profit, that were by the Creation subjected unto us, are
become masters of our affections; yea, the cursed serpent can so charm them,
that we will deny him nothing; and men, like a generation of vipers, do his
will, as if the Devil were their Father; so farreis Charity disordered.

The more reason have we to listen to this Method of Lone, which is here taught
by our Savior Christ, and think that there is more in these two words First,
and Second, then we did happly apprehend. Certainly the knowledge of them is
of great consequence; for it is the true rule of virtue; and the observance of
them is of great difficulty, for our corrupt nature can hardly be brought unto
it; wherefore we must imprint deeply in our minds that which we have heard,
and pray God that we may have grace to do what we are taught.

LOrd, we confess that our Love hither to has been perverse, and that
nothing can rectify it but thy Spirit: We beseech thee that he may so
inform our judgment, and reform our affections, that we consecrate the first
fruits of our Charity unto thee, and that thou may have the precedencie
therein: But let not our Charity rest there, but descending from thee, let it
light on those to whom thou directest it; yet so, that but for thee, and in
thee, we may love nothing beside thee; So shall we be thy beloved, if we be
such Lovers; and be admitted into the blessed society of those whom thou have
honored with the name of thy friends, in the Kingdom of Heaven. The seventh
Sermon.
MATT. 22. VERSE. 37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with
all thy soul, and with all thy strength.

This is the first and great Commandment.


IN bestowing our Charity, we must observe an Order, and a Measure, an Order,
because concerning it we find in this Text, a First, and Second commandment; a
Measure, because of the two Commandments, the one is great, the other is but
like unto it.

Having the last Lords day opened the Order, it follows that this day the
Measure be opened unto you.

For entrance hereunto we must take these two Rules: First, though Charity
be a common due to God and our Neighbor; yet must they not both be served by
the same Measure, and why? the Persons are unequal: God is infinite, our
Neighbor is finite, and we may not dispense equal portions to unequal
persons.

The second Rule is, That the Order lays the foundation of the Measure, and
therefore is the Order correspondent unto the Measure, he that has the
praecedencie in, must have the praeheminence of our Charity, and whom we must
love last, we must love least. God is first in Order, therefore must he have
the greatest measure, thou must love him with all thy heart, all thy mind.
etc. thy Neighbor is but second, therefore he must have a lesser measure,
thou must love him as thy self.

The time will not suffice me, so far as is meet to handle both these
Measures; wherefore I will confine my pains to the former, and that is expressed
in these words, all thy heart, mind, soul. If we must love the Lord our God
with all these, then we must love him perfectly; but that perfection is no
other then the perfection of a man; for thou must love him with heart, mind,
and soul; so that we have two points to handle, first the perfection of that
Love wherewith we must love the Lord our God; secondly, the degree of that
perfection; wherhence will arise a third point, and that is the just reason why
this first Commandment is called great.

I begin with the perfection. In the question of virtue, Divines require a
double perfection, one partium, the other graduum; there is a perfection of the
parts in man, which must be seasoned with the virtue, and the virtue in those
parts must arise unto it is full pitch. This Text requires both these
perfections in Charity; the perfection of the parts of man are intimated in
the enumeration of the heart, mind, soul, strength; unto these all our inward
and outward abilities may be reduced; so that there is no power nor part of
man, that must not be qualified with the love of God.

But of this perfection I have spoken, when I showed you the Seat of Love; I
made it plain unto you, that there was to be in our Charity a perfection of
parts: That with which we have now to do, is the perfection of degrees; the
Text will tell us that it is not enough for every of those parts to have the
love of God in them, they must also be wholly taken up therewith; and this
perfection is noted by the word All which is added to Heart, Mind, Soul,
Strength. Let us come then to it.

A Commandment is the sooner admitted, if the reasonableness of the ground
thereof be first discovered, I will therefore first discover the ground, upon
the reasonablesse whereof this great Measure is required. The ground is
twofold, there is one in God, and another in Us. The ground that is found in
God, is taken from the preface of this Text, as Moses has delivered it, and
Saint Mark has repeated it; the preface is, Hearken O Israel, the Lord thy
God is but One; but One, therefore the entire Object of our Love; he will not
give this his glory unto any other, neither will he endure any Corriuall
herein; the beginning, the middle, and the end of this Object, is only He that
is Alpha and Omega, first, and last. Had we many Lord-Gods, then might we have
many objects of our Love, the Object can no more be multipliced, then he can.
Take all the parts of his Title asunder, and you shall sind Onenes and
Intirenes therein.

He is first called Lord, which imports the fountain of Being, and Goodness
which does accompany the same. Now there is no other fountain but He, for as
he is, that which he is: so are are all things of him, yea and in him also, no
one shareth with him herein.

As he is the only fountain of Being, of all being, so is he of Goodness,
Math. 1^ 17.
of whatsoever thing is good. Our Savior tells us, there is none good but
he; and Moses, that all which he made (and he made all) was exceeding good;
Genesis 1.
Every good and perfect gift comes from him; and if from him, then it is in
him, be it honestum, iucundum, or vtile; so that we can seek nothing without
him, James 1.17.
which we may not find in him, and find it much more eminently.

Neither can we forsake any thing for him, but in having him, we shall have
more then an abundant amends; for as he is One, so he is All, Aug. Manual. cap.
33.
all good is contained in this One Lord, and bonorum totum totaliter
diligendum, we can do no less then be wholly his, that does vouchsafe to be
wholly ours.

As for the name God, which I told you imports the three Persons, what every
one is called that he is Only and Graciously. Call no man Father on earth
(says Christ) for you have but one Father, even your Father which is in
Heaven, Math. 23 9.
and he is a most loving Father, no such tender bowels to be found, no not in
most natural and indulgent Parents.

As for the second person, which is God the Son, he is Vnicus and Vnice
dilectus, an only Son, only begotten, most dearly Beloved; we can find no
means of our being adopted, being accepted, but in him, and by him. Jesus is
not divided, how often does he proclaim it in Isay, Beside me there is no
Savior; Isey 43.
neither is Christ divided, he is the only Prophet, that can acquaint us with
the counsels of God; the only Priest, whose sacrifice can pacify God; finally,
the only King, that can subdue all the enemies of the Church, and make it
partaker of his Kingdom.

Neither is the third person less Vnus and Omnia, the Apostle tells us that
there is, but one Spirit, and he deriueth all graces from him, 1. Cor 11.
be they graces of Adoption, or graces of edification, he works all, and he
works in all, he is our Leader, our Comforter, our Sanctifier, our Supporter.

Ours, I say, for (which is the last note in the name) whether it be Lord or
God that is One, they are that which they are unto us; unto us have they
appropriated their Oneness, for they are to no other what they are to the
Church; and the Church (as heretofore I have told you) is meant by Thou; and to
the Church, they communicate their All, all the treasures of their common and
several Good, so far as the Church is capable thereof. I suppose, that if
you have well heeded what I have said, you will acknowledge that there is a
fair ground in the Lord our God, why he should challenge all our love. Let us
come now and look upon our selves, and see what ground thereof we can find
there.

When the question was moved unto Christ, whether the Jews ought to pay
tribute unto Caesar, or not; he called for the Coin, and asked, whose image
and superscription it bare? and when they answered him, Caesar's; he replied,
Give unto Caesar, those things which are Caesar's; but he adds to our purpose,
that upon the same ground, they must give unto God those things which are Gods;
If the image and superscription were a just ground why Coin should be paid
unto Caesar; where Gods Image is found, there is as good a reason that that
should be rendered unto him. Now Gods Image is found in us by Nature, for we
were made according to his Image; so that all which we receive from him, we owe
unto him by the Law of Creation. A second way is Gods Image in us, by Grace;
for our Regeneration is but a second Creation, wherein we are reformed unto
that Image, according to which God at first created us. All then is due unto
God a second time, by the Law of our Redemption, so that whether we look upon
our heart, our mind, our soul, or strength; it may well be demanded of us,
Quid habes, quod non accepisti? What have thou, which thou have not received?
and if we have received it all, the exaction is but reasonable, Si totum exigit
a te, qui totum fecit, refecit te; surely Saint Paul thought so when he wills
the Corinthians to glorify God with their bodies, and with their souls; he
adds this reason, for they are Gods.

Well then we have found fair grounds of this Measure; for if God be such and
such to Us, (as you have heard) the only lovely thing, and all that can be
beloved, and we are all his, and all that we have is due unto him, both by
Nature, and by Grace, then ought we with All to express our love toward him.

But what is it to love him with All? Surely it is to love him sine Diuisione,
and sine Remissione; none of our abilities must be divided, none of them must
be slack in doing of this work. First, of the Division.

We must not divide our Heart, that is, (as the Scripture speaks) have a
heart, and a heart, a heart for God, and a heart for the world, will that which
God wills, and fulfill the will of his enemies also, as if we would keep
good correspondencie with both; we must always will the same thing, and our
will must conform it self only unto Gods, if it do not, we do not love God
with all our heart, because our heart is divided.

As our Heart must not be divided; no more must our Mind, we must not be
(...), double minded, unstable in our resolution; we must not be (...), like
Meteors hanging in the air between Heaven and Earth, or as (Elias told the
Israelites) halt between two, between God and Baal, make all Religions
indifferent, and think that we may as well partake of the Table of Devils, as
of the Table of the Lord, and like waves of the Sea be tossed up and down with
every blast of vain doctrine: but we must captiuate our wits wholly unto Gods
Wisdom, and be so resolute in abiding by his truth, that if an Angel from
Heaven should bring us any other doctrine then that which we have received from
God, that Angel must be accursed. If our faith in God be not so fixed, our
Mind is divided, we do not love God with all our Mind.

As we must take care that these Reasonable faculties be not divided: so must
we take care also of the Unreasonable; of our Soul; that is, the Concupiscible
faculty. I told you that has two works, the one to long after that which we
would have, the other to delight in it, when we have it; neither of these
should be divided; and why? they must both attend the Will; we may not long
for that which we may not will, neither may we delight in that, for which we
may not long. If we long for more things then we do will; non been currimus,
we take not the right way to bliss; we fall into by-pathes: and if we delight
in more then we should long for, non been quiescimus, we take up our rest,
where we shall find no rest; we have a divided Soul, we do not love God with
all our Soul, as we should.

The other Unreasonable faculty is noted by our strength, they call it the
Irascible faculty; and it is that Courage wherewith we encounter those
difficulties which either cross our Longings, or interrupt our Delighting:
this must not be divided, for this must attend the Soul, the Longing, the
Delighting thereof; it must bend all its force to further that, that so it may
be both constant in longing, and perseuerant in delighting. It must not be like
Metius Suffetius (that wicked Neutrall) look on, and be ready to favor the
strongest side; much less must it take part with the adverse; if our Courage
be thus divided, we do not love God with all our strength; for we should
imitate King David, to whom the Scripture bears witness, that when he
offered, he offered to God with all his strength, 8. Chron. 29.2.
and so did he with all his strength dance before the Arc; whatsoever
ability we have, we should employ it to the best advancement of the love of
God. 2. Sam. 6.14.


You have heard the first impediment of loving God with all our heart, etc. I
told you of another, which is Remissness, or slacknesse; and this follows
necessarily upon the other; for as a river that runs strong in one channel,
will have a more weak current if it be divided; upon that principle, Vis
vnita fortior: so fares it with our ability, Pluribus intentus minor est ad
singula sensus, a man cannot divide, and intend either his heart, or his mind,
or his soul, or his strength, as he ought. Touching this Remissness in the
service and love of God, take a Similitude from Music; He that plays upon
an Instrument may strike every string, b^ do it negligently or weakly, Psalm.
81.92.149 150.
and so impair much of the sweetness of the Music; therefore in the Psalms
those Levites that were the Musicians, are called upon, not only to sing, and
to play, but to sing lustily, and with a good courage; and to praise God upon
the loud Cymbals, and upon the high sounding Cymbals. Has God care of
Instruments? Speaks he not it rather for our souls? To intimate their
devotion to God. Psalm. 108 8. Psalm. 103.1.
Surely King David thought so, when he said, Awake Harp and Lute, I my self
will awake right early, and does not more often call upon his Instrument, then
upon himself, to praise and serve God; Praise the Lord O my Soul, and all
that is within me praise his holy name; So that it is not enough to give every
part unto God, except every part do its best to Love.

I might carry you through all the parts; and show you what is the Remissness
of them; Of the Heart, which is a willing-nillingnesse, or a
nilling-willingnesse; of the Mind, which is a wauing doubtfulnesse; of the
Soul, if the longing be faint, and the Delighting have in it Acediam, or a
loathing; of the strength, if it sink or shrink. If any of our abilities be
thus impaired, then is there a Remissness in them, which hinders our loving
God with all our Heart. But I choose rather to point it out in a generality by
two Marks, one of which the Scripture sets upon the thing beloved, the
other upon true Lovers. The thing beloved, is said to be Sweeter then Honey,
and the Honie-combe; more to be desired then gold, then much sine gold; more
precious then pearls, and most costly stones; finally, nothing desirable is
comparable to it: If we do not conceive so of the object of Love The Lord our
God; there is apparent Remissness in our Love.

The mark set upon the true Lovers, is, Psalm 63.1. Psalm. 42.1. Cant. 2 5.
they compare themselves to parcht ground which gapeth after the rain; to a
chased Heart that brayeth after the water brooks; to those which are
Loue-sicke; If we find not such a passion in our selves, then is there likewise
a Remissness in our Love: Read. Psalm. 84.
that which was the commendation of the Macedonians must be affected by all
Christians in the love of God; The abundance of their joy, and their deep
poverty, abounded to the riches of their liberality, for to their power I
bear them record (says Saint Paul) and beyond their power, were they willing
of themselves; such must be our disposition.

The rather because all division of our abilities is a plain abandoning of the
love of God, for no man can serve two masters (as Christ tells us) if he love
the one, he will hate the other; two loves, if one be good, and the other bad,
(...) Med^tat. cap. 5.
cannot stand together. Take an example, or two. The sons of God, that is,
those that did love God, fell in love with the daughters of men; what issue had
they? Giants; (...), such as fought against God. The Samaritans worshipped both
the God of Israel, and the Assyrians Idols, and they were the most deadly
enemies of Jerusalem; Never have you seen an heretic, that is, a person that
professes partly the truth, and partly error: but he turns a bloody
persecutor of the Truth; and he that loves God and the World, out of his love
to the World, will do the greatest dishonor he can to God. This is the
reason why God will have All, or None; Ananias and Saphira were stricken with
sudden death for withholding a part of that whole substance which they
freely vowed to God, and which (had it not been for their vow) they might have
disposed at their pleasure: And if the embeseling of so small a matter, due
upon no other ground, then upon a free Vow, received so heau^e a doom; of how
much sorer punishment shall we be worthy, if we withold our better things
which upon a more necessary vow are due unto God?

As for the Remissness; that also is followed with a curse, for cursed is he
that does the work of the Lord negligently; Iere. 4^.10. Revel 3.16.
and Christ will spue out of his mouth all those that are but luke warm, that
are neither hot, nor cold; God loves none but zealously cheerful Lovers, and
less then an entire dedication of all our faculties will not please him.

But mistake not, all other things besides God are not excluded from our Love;
if they were, how should we love our Neighbor? whom notwithstanding in this
Text we are commanded to love. Wherefore for the farther understanding of this
Entireness of our love of God, we must not take other things Opposite, but
Composite, we must exclude nothing from our love, that does not enter into
competition with God, and oppose it self against the love of God.

Secondly, if there be any thing that may be beloved jointly with God, it must
not be taken as Coordinatum, but Subordinatum; it must not share equally with
God, but keep its distance, and receive our love by a reflection from God.
Excellent is that which Saint Austine has to this purpose, Totum quicquid
aliud diligendum venerit in mentem, illuc rapiatur, quo totius dilectionis
impetus currit; and Minus te amat Domine, qui tecum aliquid amat, quod propter
te non amat.

Thirdly, upon this Inequality, must our love ground an unequal estimate of
things, and we must love God above all appretiatiue; we must account all in
comparison of God, to be but as dung, to be very loss.

Finally, according to the estimate, must the heat of our affection be, we
must love God above all intensiue also; we must love other things as fit to be
used, not fit to be enjoyed; yea we must use all the world, as if we used it
not: but we must love God, as him, whom we would not only use, but enjoy
also; yea so enjoy, that we may be able to say with King David, Psalm 73.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none on earth that I desire with
thee. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart and my
portion for ever: when we attain hereunto, though we love other things
beside God, yet we love God as we ought; for we will (as Solomon bids us)
think upon him in all our ways.

But I may not forget, that though I seem to have said much of our love of
God, yet there is a limitation expressed in the Text; though All be required,
yet no other All then that which can be performed by man; for it is all thy
heart, thy mind, thy strength, etc. we may not expect that we should be
able to love God according to his own worth, but we must love him to the
uttermost of our power: Only God, can love God as he is worthy; so the
Father loves the Son, the Son the Father, and the holy Ghost both; but a
finite creature, can have but a finite virtue, which can bear no proportion
unto God, who is infinite, as also is his goodness, which is all one with
himself.

This serves to check all pride which thinks that by loving it can demerit
God; well may he vouchsafe to accept our poor endeavors, but the best come
short of deserving ought at Gods hands; especially, when the heart, mind, etc.
though they be called ours, yet are they nothing but his gifts, (as before you
have heard) and so are all their endowments, namely this of Love.

And if we cannot merit by love, much less can we supererogate in loving;
for who can give God more then is due, that learneth by this Text, that All is
due unto God? Praetererogate happily we may in some indifferent thing which God
leaves to our choice, although that choice also must be guided by the
general end whereat all our actions must aim, and the ability which we have
received of God; whereof if we employ not the one to the other, well may God
be indulgent to our weakness in choosing; certainly it deserves no
commendation. But as for the Act of loving, so far is it off, that we can
supererogate any thing, that we cannot so much as praetererogate a jot therein.

I have opened the Measure wherewith we must love the Lord our God, the
perfection, the degree thereof; but I doubt I have not done it so popularly and
plainly, as that every one does conceive me, and can try his own love by that
which he has heard, and discern when it is come to this strain; I will
therefore propose from the mouth of our Savior Christ, certain plain Rules,
which are for the capacity of the meanest hearer, which if he apply unto
himself, he may thereby guess at the pitch of his love.

The first is, He that loves father, mother, wife, children, etc. Mat. 10.
Mat. 19 20. Luc. 14.26.
more then me, is not worthy of me. The second, He that forsakes not father,
mother, wife, children, etc. The third, He that hates not father, mother,
wife, children, etc. he cannot be my Disciple. There be many things and
persons (as you heard before) which we are allowed to love, but we must love
them only until they come unto the comparison; if then the question be
whether of the two we love more, to whether of them we will stick, in a case
where both cannot be held; or upon which of them we will fall foul, when it
is not possible for us to keep in with both: if then we can with Moses
esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt we
conform our selves to Christ's first rule. (...). 11 26.
If when God calls, Heb. 11.8.
we can with Abraham forsake our country, and our Fathers house, though it
be to go to a Country which we know not; we conform our selves unto his
second rule. And if we can be as resolute as Leui was, Deuteronomy. 33.
who said unto his father and his mother, I have not seen them, neither did he
acknowledge his brethren, nor know his own children, that he might keep the
word and observe the Commandment of God, even that Commandment which is
delivered elsewhere, Deuteronomy. 13
If thy Brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy Daughter, or the
wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul, entice thee to
Idolatry, thy eye must not pity him, thou must not conceal him, thou shall
surely kill him, and let thine own hands be first upon him; if thou can (I
say) be so resolute, then do thou conform thy self unto Christ's third
Rule.

The examples which hitherto I have alleged show only what must be a
Christian man's observance of Christ's rules quoad sua and suos, so far as
concerns a man's goods or his friends: but Christ's rules go a step farther,
Luke 14.26.
for they mention a man's own life also, and tell us how little we must set by
that in comparison of our love of God. Christ knew well that Satan has a
shrewd temptation to stumble thee when thou have profited so far as tua and
tuos, and that is to try thee how well thou do love God quoad te, Job. 2.4.
in comparison of thine own person, skin for skin, and all that ever a man
has will he give for his life, affinity, consanguinitie, amity, farewell all
so our life may be preserved; but our love of God must overcome this
temptation also, and we must take in this case Saint Paul for an example, who
being dissuaded from going to Jerusalem because bonds and imprisonment did
expect him there, made this answer, What do you weeping and breaking my
heart? Acts 21.13.
I am contented not only to be bound, but also to die for the name of the Lord
Jesus.

A great resolution; and yet not so great as our love of God requires of us.
For though dying seem to be a bitter work, yet to die for the name of Christ
adds much sweetness unto it, and why? it makes a plain martyrdom; and of
that S. Paul has given this definition, that it is nothing else but dissolut
and esse cum Christo: To be dissolved does little content nature, but what would
a man rather desire then to be with Christ? for to be with him is to be as he
is, that is most happy; so that hitherto love is not come to its height; for a
man may so far love God, and love God for himself, because his own good goes
pari passu, with the love of God; Moses went farther, Blot me out of the book
of life, rather then thou should not make good thy word to Israel; a strange
wish; and that of a thing impossible; for it is impossible that any child of
God should be excluded from eternal life; so that he may seem to have wished
rashly and vainly; but this Commandment will excuse him (as it will S. Paul's
like wish when I come to speak of the love of our neighbor) this Commandment
contains the best Commentary on his words, for they import no more but his
absolute love of God; so absolute that were there no Heaven where with his love
should be rewarded; yea, though Hell were the place wherein (notwithstanding
his love of God) he should be eternally tormented, yet would he not withhold
Gods due, he would love God with all his heart.

And indeed so high must we ascend in love; if we will ascend to that pitch
which is contained in this Commandment; though our love shall have a reward, a
most plentiful reward; and we may (after the example of Christ, and the
Saints) look upon it, and encourage our selves with the hope of it; yet that
must not be the first motive of our duty, God may challenge it without a
reward, and we must acknowledge it to be a just debt. Thus if we love God, we
love him as we ought, that is, we love him above all things, and we love him
for himself, for that must needs follow, when we love him for no other thing,
no not for our own sakes, but are willing to hazard all, even our selves and
all, for the love of him. From this measure when we depart, we do offend
against our love of God; how much more if we love those things which are
contrary to him? and can be contented that others offend him, or are so
graceless as to offend him our selves.

But I must draw toward an end. The last point which I observed in my text, was
the reason why this is called the Great Commandment. I need give you no other
reason then the doctrine which you have heard concerning our love of God; for
you have heard enough to persuade you that the Commandment is very great; yet
I will point at some few reasons.

The Commandment then is Great, first, in regard of the Object, for what can
be greater then the Lord our God? secondly, in regard of the Act, for it makes
our nearest approach unto God; both in Union, and Communion with him. Thirdly,
in regard of the Quality; it is the sweetest commander of all our abilities.
Fourthly, in regard of the Sovereignty, it gives law to the whole man.
Fifthly, in regard of the Efficacy, it works the greatest effects. Sixthly, in
regard of the Commodity, it has the most precious promises. Finally, in
regard of the Continuance, it out-liueth all other graces, for Charity never
fails, 1. Cor. 13.8.
other graces do not out-liue this mortal life, No wonder then if S. (...)
call it a Supereminent way, and in a comparison prefers it before all gifts,
not only of Edification, but of Adoption also. 1. Cor. 13.


And what is the use of all this? but to make us see how little we perform of
this Commandment, and how little cause we have to boast of the best, that we
do therein. Who is he that can deny that his ab^lities are divided, and that
he loves more things then God? yea, most things more then God, and those not
only idle but evil things also?

And if we cannot excuse our Division, much less our Remissness; the days
are come which Christ foretold, and the Charity even of the Church is grown
key-cold, yea every one is come to that lithernesse which God taxes in
Malachi, ye say, Behold, what a weariness it is? Cap. 1.
Whether our love be put to Do, or to Suffer, it is quickly tired, it quickly
gives over; and how should he ever yield all, that does repine, if but a part
of his Heart, Mind, Soul, or Strength be employed in the love of God? I
report me for the truth hereof to every man's conscience, and because the time
bids me end, I desire every man to keep a scrutinie hereof in his own
bosom.

DOmine imperfectum nostrum vident oculi tui, vtinam and nos videamus: Lord,
thou that searehest and triest us, know how little love of thee there is in
the best of us; kindle this heavenly fire in all our hearts, and let the flame
thereof take all the powers of our souls; and parts of our bodies. And seeing
it is not praise worthy, barely to love thee; cast us into a spiritual trance,
that being strangers unto all things of this life, we may with indefatigable
constancy aspire unto thee, August. Soliloq. cap 19. Amo te Deus meus,
magisque semper amare cupio, etc. accendar totus vt te totum diligam.
be restless till we are fully by love joined unto thee. Yea, let us put off
our selves, and with a happy alteration be wholly transformed into the love
of thee; Or if we cannot but love other things besides thee, Let the love of
them, attend our love of thee; the more we love thee, let us desire to love
thee the more; till all on fire like the Seraphins, who in this love are said
to come nearest unto thee, we may (as we are here enjoined) love thee the
Great All of Holiness, and Happiness, with this manifold, but mean All of
ours, all our Heart, all our Mind, all our Soul, and all our Strength. The
eighth Sermon.
MATT. 22. VERSE 39. And the second is like unto it; Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self.


IN bestowing our Charity, we must use a Measure; and this Measure varies, as
do the Persons upon whom we must bestow it; they are unequal, therefore they
must not be equally beloved. The Text therefore does assign unto each his
proportion, to God his, and his unto our Neighbor. Of Gods I spoke last.

It follows that I now speak of our Neighbors; It is expressed in these words
that now I have read unto you. Yet does it not take up all the Verse; for that
we must love our Neighbor, and that the love of him is the Argument of a
second Commandment, I have heretofore showed you. But there remain two points
untouched; of which the first is the limitation, and the second the comparison
of this Love. The Limitation is in these words, as thy self, the comparison in
these, The second Commandment is like the first.

But to break it up somewhat more distinctly, I will observe in the
limitation, that there is one thing implied, We must love our selves; and there
is another thing expressed, the love of our selves must guide us in the love of
our Neighbor. So likewise in the Comparison I will show you; first that there
is no equality, because the Commandments are but like; and yet
notwithstanding because they are like, they have a good Correspondencie, the
Second to the First.

These be the particulars which I mean (God willing) to open unto you
briefly and in their order; I pray God I may do it so effectually, that we
may all learn to keep our neighbourly charity within the prescribed bounds,
and so love one another, that our mutual love may testify to the world that
we all have the love of God.

I come now to the limitation. Whereof before I open the particulars, I cannot
omit to touch at a good observation of Saint Basils, he tells us that the Love
of God is not (...), exclusive of all others, but it admits the love of others,
as (...) as helping to fill up the the measure thereof, so that it have
dependencie thereon. Before you heard that we must love God with all our Heart,
Mind, Soul, and Strength; you would think that because God challenges all,
no other may partake of our Love; but it appears to be otherwise, for that we
are here willed to love our Neighbor and our selves. The reconciliation is
this; all must be devoted to God, but it must be employed as pleases him, and
it pleases him that we bestow it there wheresoever he vouchsafes to impart
himself. I will show it you in a plain Similitude. Light is the only object
of our eye, for our eye was made to see the light; but light is not only in
the body of the Sun, or Moon, or Stars, but by beams it does insinuate it
self into all these lower creatures, and presents it self in that great
variety of colors wherewith this lower world is beautified; in seeing them,
we see the light, and delighting in them, we take pleasure in the light, from
whom they have their gracefulness: Even so, God is the proper object of our
Love, and his goodness must draw our abilities unto it, and it is able to
satisfy them to the fall, though they to the full can never possibly
comprehend it; So that out of the nature of God we need not seek for any
other object of our Love. But because God is pleased to communicate himself
unto his Creatures, and frame the reasonable of them according to his Image, he
would have our Love to attend this communicating of himself, and be bestowed
on them whom he does so grace. And this our so loving of others detracts
nothing from that All which is due unto God, because we do it by his
direction, and our Love does still reflect upon him, and in loving them we love
him, as you shall hear an on more at large.

But let us come to the particulars, whereof the first is that which is employed
in the Limitation, and that is The love of our selves; for if we must love our
neighbor as our selves, then undoubtedly we must love our selves. It might
have been thought that Christ in setting down the object of our Love, had
left us clean out, as if we were not to love our selves: but that we may, yea
must love our selves, it is clear, because the Love of our selves is made the
measure of that Love, which we must yield to our Neighbors.

Though this be clear, yet is there a great difficulty in the Commandment, I
mean not of practice (though that will appear hard to flesh and blood when it
is expounded) but of understanding it; for how does Christ command us to love
our Neighbor as our Self, whereas How we must love our selves, he seems not
to teach at all.

He seems not; and indeed some think that he does not. And why? A man is
taught by nature Wherein, and How to love himself; Nature has taught us to
wish and procure our selves all good, at least whatsoever we think to be
good, and whatsoever we think to be evil, evil unto us, Rom 16. Job. 14.
that we abhor and resist; there is no indulgence that may pity our
infirmities, no beneficencie that may supply our wants, which out of Love of
our selves we do not naturally desire; as also condoling and congratulating of
our woe and weal. Yea natural reason, if it have not lost reason, has taught
men to distinguish Bona animi, Bona corporis, and Bona fortunae, and give them
their due precedencies, and answerable estimates in our desires; our soul is
more precious unto reason then our body, and our body then our goods, and we
are in reason affected with the welfare or ill-fare of every of these
according to its price.

Neither does nature teach us only to love things which concern us, it
teaches us also the manner of our Love; Romans 12.
for it teaches us to Love our selves in regard of these things. First,
Sincerely, there is no hypocrisy in natural Love, 1. Ioh.
this love is without dissimulation. Secondly, Really, we love not our selves
only in words but in deeds also. Thirdly, Tenderly, we are very feeling of our
own weal and woe. Fourthly, Constantly, no difficulties or crosses can make
us weary of loving our selves. This being our inborne love, some think that it
is supposed by Christ, and according to this supposition made the Measure of
that love which we owe to our neighbor: So that the Commentary upon these
words as thy self, is made by Christ in another place, Mat. 7.
That which you would that men should do unto you do you unto them; Cap 4.
whereunto you may add Tobies negative. Do not my son to another, that which
thou would not endure by another should be done unto thee. Christ's meaning
is, that before we resolve how to carry our selves toward our neighbor, we
must suppose him to be in our case, and our selves in his, and then think with
what measure we would have him to measure to us, and mete ou^ the same to him.

If the Judge that sits upon the ench, the Landlord that deals with his
Tenant, the Tradesman that venteth his commodities, finally, every man that
deals with another did square his carriage by this rule, there would be much
less wrong in Society, and much more comfort in men's consciences; for Pulcher
liber cor tuum, every man bears in his own bosom a fair Table engraven
legibly by the finger of Nature, wherein, if he would read, he might learn
without any other help, what usage is fit for his neighbor. And if men were
as prompt Scholars in learning active Charity, that is the charity which
they must show to others, as they are acute Doctors and teachers of the
Passive, of that charity which they expect from others; the Moralists and
Casuists might save much of their pains in discoursing and determining of our
mutual duties.

But (...) or the corrupt love of our selves, which spends our affection
inordinately, and makes it unworthy to be accounted the natural love of a
man's self, because it is more brutish then reasonable, does make us oftentimes
to love indeed our neighbor as our selves; but such a love of our selves, is
too base to be the measure wherewith we ought to love our neighbor. Yet is
there too much of such mutual love in the World; such is the love of all those
that fall in their desires and delights below the condition of men; yea some so
low that they may be consorts for the Devil.

If Philautie, or corrupt love grow not so base, yet may it grow insolent, and
men may appropriate themselves to themselves, as if none were worthy of their
love; and therefore they are all for themselves, and not caring if all the
World mourn so they rejoice, or be in want so they have their fill: Forgetting
that natural Principle, that Homo is animal politicum, a sociable creature,
and though (...) in propriety we are our own, and so are our goods; yet (...)
in regard of the use of our selves and our goods, both are ours for the comfort
of others, and they should be as dear to us as we would have our selves dear
unto them, were they in our case.

But this takes not away the distinction that is between them. Before you
heard how many ways a man might be a neighbor, a neighbor only in place, or
in blood, or in the common nature whereof we all partake, or in Society either
private of friendship, wherein likeness of disposition does link us, or
public, either Civil or Ecclesiastical. We must clothe every one of these
with his due circumstances, and as occasion offers us to have to do with any
of these, we must personate them unto our selves, and look what we may justly
challenge, if we were in their case: by the rules of Morality, that must we
offer to every one of them, be he only a Man, or also a Kinsman, an inward
friend, or fellow member of the Church or Common Weal; finally, be he a
superior or inferior unto us. And this is indeed, to love our neighbor as
our selves; and for want of making this supposition the rule of our resolution,
what we would not willingly endure, we offer with great eagerness to others;
and withhold from them what we think cannot without injury be denied unto us;
Which is the more blameable in Christians, because that rule Whatsoever you
would that men should do unto you, do the same unto them, not only preached,
but practiced, made Christianity venerable in the eyes of Alexander Seuerus,
an Heathen Emperor; who acknowledged this Apothegme, Quod tibi fieri non vis,
altori ne feceris, learned from Christians, and squared his judgment by it.

This sense of the Limitation of the love of our neighbors is a good sense,
and it were to be wished that at least so much were entertained by the World;
it would set much right that is awry. But I hold there is much more meant in
the Text then so, for that supposition rises no higher then the state of
Nature. My Text belongs also to them that are in the state of Grace.

Wherefore observe, that though Christ seem not to teach how we ought to love
our selves; yet indeed he does; for the love of our selves, is inwrapt in our
love of God; though God call for the duty as respecting himself; yet in doing
what we are bid we benefit our selves; it is the true love of our selves. For
what love does a man owe unto himself, but the love of his Perfection? And
what is his perfection but the love of God?

Go over the parts God will have employed in this work. The first is our
Mind, or our Understanding; what greater perfection can that have then the
knowledge of our sovereign good? This is life everlasting (says Christ) to
know thee the only true God, John 17.
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

The second is our Heart; and what greater perfection can that have then to
entertain God? John 14.
If any Man love me (says Christ) my Father will love him, and we will come
unto him, and make our abode with him; and where Gods and Christ's abode is,
there is the Kingdom of Heaven; even righteousness, peace, and joy of the
Holy Ghost.

The third is the Soul; and whether does the desire thereof run, but unto
God? Psalm 84.
and where will it rest but only in him? My soul longs, even faints for
the Courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God;
Blessed are they that dwell in thy house. The sensitive Soul, that is on
attendant upon the Will; what greater happiness can it have then to feed upon
the crummes that fall from that Table where God suppeth in the reasonable soul
of man? whereat nothing is served but the bread, the water, the fruit, the
food of life.

The last ability is our Strength; Psalm. 84.
and Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, O Lord; they go from
strength to strength, but whither? Ibid.
That every one may appear before God in Sion. David therefore had rather be a
door keeper in Gods House, then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness; and he
gives the reason, for God gives good wages to his servants, Ibid.
The Lord is a Sun, and a shield; he will give grace and glory, and no good
thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Yea, whereas in the
service of others we cannot use our strength but we wear it out. It is not so
in the service of God, he satisfies thy mouth with good things, Psalm. 103.
so that thy youth is renewed like the Eagles; Even the youths shall faint and
be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall; But they that wait upon the
Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up their wings as Eagles;
they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint. Isay
40. The longer a man serves God, the more able he will be to serve him.

So then, that a man may love himself, he must love God, and he that does not
love God, cannot Love himself; because by Love he has communion with God,
wherein stands his happiness; and of this happiness he does defraud
himself, so far as he comes short in his Love of God.

And indeed this is no small difference between God and the devil. The devil
in show bids us Love our selves, do all for our selves, and we are so
simple as to believe him, and think that we do so; whereas the event proves
we do all for him, and to our own ruin; for he is the plain Image of
Usurers, who live by the sweat of other men's brows, and cunningly grow rich
by undoing others with a seeming relief. But as for God, his precepts bid us
renounce our selves, give our selves wholly unto him, but in the conclusion,
he has nothing, we have all. According to the answer which the Father of the
prodigal made to his murmuring eldest son, who expostulated thus with him;
Loc these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy
Commandments: and yet thou never gave me a Kid, that I might make merry
with my friends; Son (said the Father) thou art ever with me, and all that I
have is thine. Much more is this true of our heavenly Father, who does not
desire to keep us busily and well employed for his own thrift, but for ours,
it is for our comfort and not for his own.

Be not sad therefore O Christian Soul, if he that made thee wholly, will so
wholly be beloved of thee, as if he had left thee nothing wherewith to sollace
by self, for thou do never love thy self better, neither ever shall thou
take greater content in thy self, then when thou love God with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy strength.

Thus at length we have found out the second measure, the measure of that Love
of our neighbor, which is prescribed by Grace; a man is here bid by loving God
to love himself; that so loving himself, he may know how to Love his
neighbor. Because he that does not Love God, cannot love himself, and so by
consequent cannot Love his neighbor, Love being so sanctified, it is true
which the Schools have, Regula est prius regulato and se prius quis diligere
debet quam proximum.

Seeing then such is the Measure wherewith we must Love our selves, we must
keep the Love of our neighbor within the bounds of the Love of God. We must
love in him the love of God, if he have it; Psalm. 16.
Mine eyes (says David) are upon such as are faithful in the land; my delight
is in thy Saints and such as excel in virtue; and elsewhere describing a man
that shall dwell in Gods Tabernacle, and ascend into his holy Hill, he says,
Psalm. 15.
that it is he in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honors them
that fear the Lord. When one told Christ, that his mother and brethren stood
without desiring to speak with him, he answered and said to him that told it,
who is my mother? And who are my brethren? And stretch out his hand toward his
Disciples, saying; Behold my mother and my brethren; for whosoever shall do
the will of my father which is in Heaven, he is my brother, my sister, and my
mother.

If we cannot love our neighbor for that he is not yet seasoned with the Love
of God, we must love him that he may be so seasoned; for so did Christ love
man, not for that he was, but for that he might be the son of God, Acts 28.
and heir of Heaven, as himself was. And Saint Paul when upon a Sermon
Agrippa told him thou have almost persuaded me to be a Christian, I would
(says he) that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, 1.
Epistle 1.
were both almost and altogether such as I am. excepting these bonds. And Saint
John, That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also
may have fellowship with us, and our fellowship may be with the father and with
his son Jesus Christ. For this cause would not Saint Paul have the beleiuing
wife forsake the believing husband, 1. Cor. 7. and Christ so loves his Spouse,
because all fair, etc. in the Canticles.

You see then that if we love our neighbor we must love him propter Deum, in
regard of the love of God. And why? because you must not love your selves
otherwise. De Doct Christ. lib. 1. cap. 22.
Whereupon Saint Austin gives this good note: Siteipsum non propter teipsum
diligere debes, sed propter Deum, non succenseat homo sieum diligas propter
Deum; If I make the love of God the only reason why I love my neighbor, my
neighbor has no cause to be offended with me, because I must make it the
only reason why I must love my self.

And this will lead us to another note; Christ says that we must love our
neighbor as our self, but not for our self; that were amor concupiscentiae,
but ours must be amor amicitiae; he that loves for himself cease to love,
2. Cor. 12.
if he cannot, and when he does not speed of his own benefit; but he that can
say with Saint Paul, Quaero vos, non vestra, will say with him, Idem.
I will love you, though the more I love the less I am beloved. Such love is a
stable love, like that of Booz toward Ruth, whereof Naomi said, the man will
not be at rest until he has finished the matter.

But yet observe, that though a man must love his neighbor, rather for his
neighbors sake, then for his own that loves him; yet must he not do it so
much for his neighbors sake, as for Gods, toward whom he must bend all his
neighbors love, as being the vpshot of humane felicity.

This which I have observed in thesi, or in general concerning our neighbor,
must be applied in hypothesi, and fitted to every degree of neighbors. Though
they be knit together by natural or civil obligations which yield reason of
lower degrees of love; yet must not Christians rest there, they must improve
their love until they have brought it as high as this measure of grace; Parents
love their children, Governors those that are committed to their charge,
Citizens, Friends, love each the other; but whatsoever else causes this love,
we love them not as our selves except first having qualified our selves with
the love of God, we qualify them therewith also.

It is a question whether As be a note of similitude or equality, so that it
is enough to love our neighbor with such a love as we love our selves though
not with so great. A needless question if Christ's words be understood as I
have opened them. If you take them in the first sense as the measure of our
mutual love is dictated by the light of Nature, there can be no doubt but the
measure must be equal; for how can I suppose my self in another man's state
and him in mine, and in reason deal any jot worse with him, then I would have
him leale with me, if the case were altered: to scant the measure if it were
but in the least grain, is plain philautie, or corrupt love of a man's self.

Take the measure in that sense which is dictated by Grace and that will admit
no inequality of love; for should I love the love of God in any man less then
I do in my self? that would savor of envy at the least, if not implerie; for
I should have an evil eye when God is good; yea, I should not as I ought take
comfort in the highest advancement of the honor of God. The Scripture teaches
us to do far otherwise, A new Commandment give I unto you, (says Christ)
that you love one another, as I have loved you, that you also love one another:
Ioh 13.
Now you know how Christ loved us, and gave himself for us; forgetting (as it
were) all the content that he took in his own Holiness and Happiness, that he
might promote ours. Saint John applies it to us: 1. Ioh. 3.
Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us,
and we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren. Take an instance in Saint
Paul: Phil. 2.
If I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, that is, in
working and increasing it, I joy and rejoice with you all; for the same cause
also do you joy and rejoice with me. Or if this instance do not satisfy
because that Saint Paul's death which he wished was a martyrdom; and though
he preferred the love of the Brethren before his corporal life, yet therein
he manifested the greater love to God; for higher in his love to God, during
this life, a man cannot ascend, then willingly to be a Martyr, to to seal
Gods truth with his blood, and confirm the faith of the Church. Rom 9.
S. Paul has another of a higher strain concerning the love of our neighbor,
which be vtterth with a sad Preface, testifying that he is earnest and well
advised. I say the truth in Christ I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in
my heart; for I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
Brethren, my Kinsmen according to the flesh; Divine brotherly Love how do
thou transport the Apostle? to whom Hell is not terrible, nor the loss of
Heaven grievous; so the Israelites might escape the one, and obtain the other.
And did he not then love them more then himself?

But might he do it? and may we imitate him herein? Surely he might without
any offense to God, testify his wish, because he does not contradict Gods
decree, which will not have Holiness unhappy; but supposing there were a
posibility that a man having no sin, might be subjected to those torments,
he means that he could be contented to undergo even the torments of Hell, so
the Israelites might have the grace to believe in Christ; and to have such a
mind is no sin, but it brings Charity to the highest pitch to which it
can possibly be raised in a Creature. Neither is there any reason why we may
not imitate him herein, seeing what was virtuous in him cannot be vicious in
another man.

But indeed it is not to be expected that our Charity will ever fall into so
heavenly an Ecstasis, it is well if we come so far as to love our neighbor
as our self: although it is not improbably obserud by some upon those passages
which before I cited out of Saint John, that the Law which bids us love our
Neighbor as our self, could not teach perfect Charity, because the Jews
being under age were not capable of so profound a doctrine and therefore Christ
under the new Testament goes farther with the Church being of ripe age, and
would have Christians love their neighbors more then themselves; this is a new
or Evangelical Sicut.

Which being true, Aquinas his conceit followed by many Romanists must needs
be false, who teaches that it is against nature, morality, and Charity for a
man to love his neighbor more then himself; except happily we will
distinguish between the inward affection and the outward action of Charity:
the inward affection must be equal to all, at least as great as to our selves,
but in outward action, because it is impossible for us to do this good unto
all, we must dispense it as far as our ability will reach, proportioning our
endeavor according to the number and strictness of obligations whereby we
stand bound to persons; for so is Paul's rule; Galath. 6.
While we have time let us do good to all men, especially to those that are of
the Household of faith; and in this respect we may love our selves more then
others.

But to shut up this point, with some few observations. The first is, That
seeing our Love toward our neighbor must be such as you have heard, you see
how little brotherly and neighbourly Charity there is in the world; there be
few that observe the Measure prescribed by Nature, scarce any dream of that
which is prescribed by Grace.

Secondly, you see that the love of our neighbor must not be mercinarie, as
for the most part the worlds is; for who is hired to love himself? Or who
seeks for any other reward of that affection but only the love of himself?
The Love of our neighbor should be as free; yea it should be clothed with all
the properties which before I specified: First, Sincerity, secondly Realitie,
thirdly Tenderness, and fourthly Constancy.

Thirdly, you see that we must not love our neighbor, either in peccato, or ad
peccatum; we must neither cherish any man in sin, neither may we tempt him to
commit it. And why? We must not so love our selves; Qui amat iniquitatem odit
animam suam, such an affection is not Love but hatred, deadly hatred, which
leads unto eternal death.

Fourthly and lastly you see, that as we must bridle our selves and our lusts
least we sin, and afflict our Souls if we have sinned: so must we deal
with our Neighbor also, hold in as many as we can (though against their wills)
to prevent their sinning. And if they have fallen, we may not suffer their
wounds to fester; though we put them to smart and pain; yet must we endeavor
their reformation. De Trinit.
S. Austins rule is worth our observing; Potest odium blandire, charitas
saeuire, radicem inspice; attend verba; illa blanditur vt decipiat, Psalm. 141.
haec saeuit vt corrigat; Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness,
let him reprove me, it shall be a excellent oil which shall not break my
head; Christ does so chastise his Church, and God those whom he reputes
children and not bastards. Heb. 12.
But enough of the limitation. A word or two of the comparison, and so I end.

I told you it is not a comparison of equality, because this second
Commandment is but like the first. And indeed how should there be equality
in the Loves, when there is so much inequality in the Persons? But Christ
puts it out of all doubt in the Gospel, when he tells us that We must
forsake, yea hate father, mother, brother, sister, yea even our own selves and
lives, if they come in competition with our Love of Christ and the Gospel,
which is all one with the Love of God.

Though there be no equality between the Loves, yet there is a good
Correspondencie; for the second Commandment is like the first, it flows from
it, and bears the very Image of it, so like that Saint John concludes, that
He that does not love his brother whom he has seen, 1 Job 3.
never loved God whom he has not seen. It is the best way to know whether a
man be a counterfeit in his observance of the first Commandment: by trying how
he keeps the second.

But take notice of three or four points wherein the likeness stands.
First, in Obiecto, for a man in his Neighbor must love nothing but God.

Secondly, in Subiecto, for this Love must take up all the powers of man, as
the Love of God did; though with a subordination. And it makes the straitest
knot; straiter then either consanguinitie, or affinity, or any other kind of
society.

Thirdly, in Fructu, a double fruit, for it brings forth all the duties of
the second Table, as the Love of God did the duties of the first. It brings
them forth most readily, most cheerfully; for what will he stick at that
Loves? Mat. 25.
And it reapeth the very same fruit which the former did, which is eternal
life. When I was an hungered ye fed me, says our Savior, come ye blessed,
possess the kingdom, etc.

Fourthly, in Duratione, It lasts as long as the other does, that is, it is
everlasting, for Charity never falls away, no more then does the communion of
Saints.

I omit other resemblances; only this I note concerning both Charities, that
they must be begun in this life, Gal 5.
otherwise we shall never have them in the life to come, for it is a fruit of
the Spirit; after this life God gives not his spirit, therefore he gives not
Charity; from hence men carry the Spirit, and with it Charity; in hell there
can be no charity, because none carry the spirit thither.

I conclude; The Ecclesiastical story reports that S. John the Evangelist,
the beloved Disciple and chief Doctor of Love (as appears by his Epistles)
when he grew so old that he was carried to Church, and could Preach no longer,
used to say nothing at all Church meetings to them that came to him, but only
Filioli diligite inuicem; Children Love one another, Children love one another,
and being asked why he reiterated it, he said, Quia preceptum Domini est, and
sisolum fiat sufficit, Hier. in Epist. ad Gal.
there needed no other lesson to keep all things well. Sure I am there is no
lesson more needful, in these bloody, in these malicious days, and therefore
instead of a longer conclusion, I will use to you (and I pray God I use it not
in vain) a Tautalogie or sacred ingemination not much unlike unto that of S.
John, Love your neighbors as your selves, Love your neighbors as your selves,
Love your neighbors as your selves. This Grace God grant us all, for the
public good of Christendom, and the private of every Society, through Jesus
Christ. To whom with the Father, etc.

The ninth Sermon.
MATT. 22. VERSE 39. Upon these two depend all the Law and the Prophets.


IN our inquiries we desire to know not only what is true, but also upon what
ground we may acknowledge it to be so; neither are our doubts fully satisfied,
except we be informed of both. Therefore our Savior Christ that vouchsafed an
answer to the Pharisees question, so answers, that he leaves no place for
farther dispute; for what he affirmed, that he confirms; he proves soundly
that the Love of God and our Neighbor, so described as you have heard, deserve
to be accounted the Great Commandment; and the proof is contained in these
words that now I have read unto you. The sum of it is this, That which is the
brief of the Bible, may well go for the great Commandment; but the love of
God and our Neighbor are such a brief; therefore there is no question, but
they may justly challenge that title of pre-eminence, and we must acknowledge
what Christ says in Saint Mark, that there are none greater then these.

But to open the Text a little more fully; we will consider therein, first
severally the parts of the Bible, which are the Law and the Prophets; and the
contents of those parts, which are the two Commandments of Love. Then jointly
we will see, how these contents can be so fully enlarged, as to take up those
parts, the two Commandments, all the Law and the Prophets; and those two parts
so contracted, as not to exceed these contents, all the Law and the Prophets
not to exceed the two Commandments; for the Text says, they do all hang upon
the Commandments. These be the particulars which I shall now (God willing)
enlarge and apply, briefly, and in their order.

The first is, the parts of the Bible. When I speak of the Bible, I mean the
old Testament; there was no more extant when Christ conuersed, here on earth,
the rest was added after his Ascension. Now you shall find all the Books of
the old Testament concluded sometimes under one name, that is either the Law or
the Law of Moses, or the Prophets; and as Saint Peter speaks, the sure word
of the Prophets. Sometimes the Books are divided; Christ divides them two
ways; Once into three parts, the Law, the Prophets, the Psalms; often into
two, Luke 24.
in the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16. They have Moses and the
Prophets; and in his commendations of Saint John the Baptist, The Law and the
Prophets prophesied until John, which is also found, Luke 24. Where it is said
that Christ taught the two Disciples that were going to Emmaus, out of the Law
and the Prophets; and this division (so familiar to Christ) is used in this
place.

I am not ignorant that there are many other divisions collected by the learned
out of Jewish and Christian Writers, but I will not trouble you with them; I
have showed you those that are in the new Testament; and of them I will open
this unto you.

The first branch is the Law. By a Law is understood that obligation unto duty
which is laid by those that have authority upon reasonable creatures.

Of Laws there are two sorts; that which is called the Law of Nature, and that
which is called positive Law.

The Law of Nature was concreated with a reasonable Soul, and was to be in her
the nursery of all kind of virtues or honesty of life; it is that which is
commonly known by the name of the Moral Law. And the things that are
prescribed therein, are Praecepta quia bona, they are commanded because they
are good, good in their own Nature, they are properly called Virtues.
Therefore is this Law immutable, vndispensable, it binds all Nations, and in
all Ages.

It is true that sin has much impaired our knowledge of, and obedience to
it; yet there remains enough in the ruins of our Nature, to make even
Infidels inexcusable at the Day of Judgment, as Saint Paul teaches. Rom 2.


The second kind of Law is called Positive; this is made upon such things as
are in their own nature indifferent, the use whereof notwithstanding is fit to
be ordered by the wisdom of the Lawgiver, as is most expedient for the State.

Now, a State does undergo a double consideration, of a Church, and of a
Common Weal; therefore the Laws are of two sorts, those that concern the
Church are called Ecclesiastical, and those are called Civil which concern
the Common Weal.

These Laws contain Bona quia praecepta, being in their own Nature
indifferent they are made, unto those that are subject to the Jurisdiction, not
indifferent in their use: by reason that that is limited by a Law: So, that
although, if there were no Law, a thing indifferent might be done or left
undone; might be done this way or that way; yet the liberty is taken away when
a restraint is laid upon us by those that have Authority.

Notwithstanding, this kind of Law, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, is
mutable, is dispensable, yet so that none can change it, none can dispense with
it, but he that makes it; according to the rule of the Law, Eius est
destruere, cuius est construere; none can abrogate but he that does enact,
except he have some lawful superior.

What you have heard of Law, is most true of Moses Law with which we have now
to do; for that is the most exact Sampler of all Laws, I mean Laws of
public Governments of States; (for we have nothing to do now with the Laws
of Arts, Sciences, and of Tradesmens Corporations.)

In Moses Law then you shall find, first, the Law of Nature; that is in the
Decalogue or the ten Commandments, the exactest Moral Law that ever was
penned; for never did any so strictly as that does search into man, and commend
the perfection of virtue unto him, yea, command his conformity unto it.

As for Positive Laws, Moses has delivered both sorts; The Ecclesiastical,
or those that frame the Israelites to an outward devotion beseeming that Church
in the religious worship of God; commonly called the Ceremonial Law. Besides
which he has also delivered Civil Laws, such as were fit to order the Common
Weal of the Israelites, commonly called his Politic Laws. Though we may not
deny that there be in him some Ceremonial Laws that have reference to the
Civil Policy, or the second Table of the Decalogue; and some Politic Laws,
that have reference to the first Table and worship of God. Neither may we
forget touching Positive Laws, that they are all attendant upon the Law of
Nature, the Ecclesiastical or Ceremonial upon the first Table, the Politic
or Civil attend upon the Second. And let this suffice concerning the first
Branch; The Law.

The second Branch is the Prophets.

The original of a Prophet amongst the Israelites, you shall find in Moses to
have been this, Deuteronomy. 17.
When God had delivered the Law by his own mouth, the people were so
affrighted with the Majesty of his presence; that they desired they might not
hear God speak any more; thereupon God promised that he would raise unto them
a Prophet of their Brethren, whom they should hear; His Office was to supply
the defects and defaults of the Priest; For the Priests lips were to preserve
knowledge, and the people were to ask the Law at his mouth; moreover, in the
difficulties and distresses of the Church, they were to consult God by the Vrim
and Thummin, and deliver his Oracles. But the Priests did quickly degenerate,
they intended principally the beneficial part of their service, which were
Sacrifices as for the doctrinall, they cared not much for that. Wherefore God
raised up Prophets, and by them refresht the peoples memories concerning his
Laws; and though they had some thing answerable to the Vrim and Thummin, that
is, they did deliver divine Oracles; yet if you mark them well, those Oracles
do contain little, besides the gracious promises that are made unto them that
observe the Law, and serve to encourage them to do well; or the Judgments
that are threatened to the transgressors of the Law, and serve to deter them
from doing evil. Although we may not deny that the corporal blessings and
curses were shadows of spiritual; and the temporal of eternal.

So then you see that the second part of the Bible is but a practicke
Commentary upon the first, the Prophets upon the Law; The Prophets apply the
Law to the peoples lives, and pronounce them accordingly.

And thus much of the parts of the Bible, what they are, and what they mean, I
come now to the Contents, and the Contents are the two Commandments of Love.

But these two Commandments may be considered as Special, or as General
Commandments. As Special, so they require only the act of Love. As General;
so they signify the habit thereof, as it is the Nurserie of many other
virtuous acts.

To make you understand this, we must observe that a moral Virtue has two
Acts, the one is called Actus elicitus, or its proper work, the other Actus
imperatus, the work which is at its command. I will show it you by a familiar
Similitude. The Sun has a proper work, which is to shine or give light unto
the World; and it has a work of command also, for it makes the earth to
bring forth fruit, which is done by virtue of an influence of the Sun into
the earth: Even so Love has a proper work, which is to be kindly affected to
the Person beloved; but besides this it has a work of command; it lays a
charge upon all the Powers and Abilities that we have to be serviceable to
him whom we love. For example; If I love God, my Love will command my feet to
go to his House, my knees to bow in his presence; my mouth to speak of his
praises, and to pray unto him; finally, whatsoever is within me, without me,
belonging to me, shall be devoted to him, and do nothing that displeases him.

Take a taste of this also in the love of our Neighbor. Do I love him? then
surely if I see him naked I will command my Wardrobe to clothe him; do I see
him hungry and thirsty? I will command my victuals to feed him; and I will
command my self to visit him if he be sick, or in prison, by the command of
Love my counsel, my countenance, my house, my purse, all shall be at the
command of my Neighbor. Finally, these works reach unto not only all virtuous
acts, but also to the acts of our vocation, for they must be seasoned with
Charity, as appears in the positive Laws.

When then I say that these two Commandments are the contents of the Bible,
you must comprehend more under them then the proper work of Love; Christ
means also the other work, the work of command; if both these works be
joined together, they will make up the contents of the Bible.

I have opened unto you the two maine branches of my Text, as they are
considered severally. I told you we must consider them jointly also.

And here first we are to see how these two Commandments can so be enlarged,
as to be the contents of the whole Bible; we will see it first in regard of
the Law.

The Law I told you, is either Natural or Positive; these Commandments are
the contents of either of them, though in a different manner. The truth of this
appears in three points. I will show them in both kinds of Law. First, in the
Law of Nature.

First, Charity is the Seed of all that kind of Law, it springs as naturally
from it, as a spreading Tree does from his root; witness the ten Commandments
(which I told you are the exactest draught that ever was made of the Law of
Nature) there is never a branch of the first Table, that does not arise from
the Love of God; we will have no other Gods, because we love God entirely; we
will make no Images, because we love God holily; we will not take Gods Name in
vain, because we love God reverently. Finally, we will keep the Sabbath,
because we love God sociably in the Communion of Saints, and celestially, as
having here no dwelling place, but looking for one to come. As for the second
Table, Romans 13.
Saint Paul has made the observation to our hand, where having particularized
many, he summeth up all in this general Rule, If there be any other
Commandment it is comprehended in this; John 13.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Concerning both Tables, Christ's
rule is short, If you love me keep my Commandments; and what a company of
duties does Saint Paul derive out of Love? 1. Cor. 13. Whence you may learn
also, that not only so much as is in the letter, but whatsoever else is in the
sense of the ten Commandments, springs from Love; of which sort Saint Paul
there specifieth sundry particulars.

Secondly, as all Moral duties spring from Charity; so must the mark whereat
we principally aim in doing them be Charity; we see that all plants which
have their influence from Heaven, look up to Heaven again; as he that loves
God will have no other Gods besides him: so a man must have no other Gods
besides him, only for this end that he may love him. If he be moved by any
other end, profit, pleasure, or whatsoever else, he does not keep the first
Commandment: no more does he keep the second, that makes no Idol; nor the
third, that takes not Gods Name in vain; nor the fourth, that keeps the
Sabbath, except they do these things in reference to their love of God.

The second Table requires the same Rule. He that honors his Father or his
Mother; that does no murder; that does not commit adultery; that does not
steal; etc. shall not pass for not guilty at the Bar of God, except his
purpose were to testify in his obedience, the love that he bears to his
Neighbor.

A third Reason, why Love is said to be the contents of the Moral Law, or the
Moral Law is said to hang upon it; is, because without Love that Law can never
be understood; Love gives a clear sight (as it were) to the understanding,
Origin.
applying it self to any particular Commandment concerning our duty to God
or our Neighbor, because it must have no straiter nor wider bonds then Love
sets unto it. Yea, if a man be once inflamed with Love, the Spirit of Grace
will be aiding unto him, and help him to understand the Law aright. Whereas
they which are without Love, and the Spirit that does accompany it, have many
carnal scruples and suspicions which perplex their judgment, and straighten
the measure of their obedience.

The second Law is Positive, and Love is the contents of that also; though (as
I told you) somewhat in a different manner. For Positive Laws be they
Ceremonial or Politic, which are grounded upon things indifferent, spring
indeed from Charity, but not immediately, as does the Law of Nature, the
Wisdom of the Lawgiuer comes between, and considers how far they may be
remembrances of, and furtherances to Charity; the Ceremonial to the love we
bear God; the Politic to the love we bear to our Neighbor. But though
Wisdom come between; yet must not that Wisdom (certainly Gods did not)
resolve upon any Law which Charity did not approve; and so even those Laws
also may be said to spring from Charity.

And as they spring from it: so must our obedience to them aim at it; it must
not suffice us to keep the Law of the Church, and of the Commonweal, but we
must keep them to testify how much we tender the glory of God, and the good
of our Neighbor, which the Wisdom of the Magistrate teaches us may be
advanced this way. Yea, those that are disposed as they should be in Love,
will not be so friuously curious in scanning of, or cauelling with the Laws
of men, Ecclesiastical or Civil; considering that Love binds them in things
indifferent, to captiuate their wits to the wisdom of the Magistrate. And
which is more; they will obey more conscionably and more fully, and think
there is more then a penalty due to the transgression thereof, and more then
the avoiding of scandal required in the Obedience; these are but Accessories,
Love teaches the true end of the Law, the Love that inditeth it, shows the
true end in obeying it; and points out the glory of God, 1. Sam. 15. Mich.
c. 6.
and the common good. The observance of these Laws is not in morality thanks
worthy, except Charity be the life of our obedience.

Finally, this Love must clear the eyes of the Judge or Interpreter of the
Law, and teach him how far it must be pressed. Yea, and teach the Lawgiuer
also, when he may dispense, and what he must alter, in these dispensable and
changeable Laws; his Wisdom in both must be guided by Charity, the Charity
that is contained in both these Commandments.

In both (so says the Text) on these two Commandments hang the Law and the
Prophets; Hila^
Alterum sine altero nullum ad salutem affert profectum, both must go
together. It is true that sometimes the Scripture ascribes unto one of the
Loves, as much as here Christ does unto both, Matthew. c. 7. but then there is a
Synecdoche in the speech; so that in one expressed, both are understood: And
well it may be so, because a man cannot love God but he will love his
Neighbor, because he must love his Neighbor for Gods sake, and he cannot
love his Neighbor but he must love God; for this is the stream that flows
from that Fountain, and you know if there be no Fountain, there can be no
stream; distinguish we may, sever we cannot these two Loves; though they
show themselves in two acts; yet they proceed from one habit. As it is but one
virtue of my sight, that sees Heaven above me, and earth below me: so it is
but one Virtue of Love that unites us to God above, and our Neighbor here
below. Wherefore, What God has conjoined, let not men sever; let them not
sever these two loves in their study of the Laws; both Loves do make up the
full contents of either Law. And if these Laws depend on Charity, then simply
all, because there be no other kinds then these; and so we must conclude,
that whatsoever Law is not squared by Charity, deserves not the name of a Law.

You happily may expect that I should show you that these two Loves are the
contents also of the Prophets; But what need I? seeing I have told you that the
Prophets are in effect nothing but the Law, or the Law looking upon the lives
of the Israelites. Whereupon it will follow necessarily; that if so be the two
Commandments be the contents of the Law, they must needs also be the contens
of the Prophets; and that more evidently, by so much as Examples are more
evident then Rules. Wherefore we will pass over that, and come to a point of
special regard.

Some captious persons may demand, If the love of God and our Neighbor be the
contents of all the Law and the Prophets; why do they print so many Books?
Leuit. 19. Deuteronomy. 6.
Why do you preach so many Sermons? So may the laziness of wretched men argue
for it self; but it may receive an answer out of that which I have already
said, or rather out of that which Christ says in my Text; for though by Moses
God had delivered these two Rules of Love; yet in his wisdom did he think it
fit, upon them to make a first Commentary by Moses, and a second by the
Prophets; And who are we that we should think our selves wiser then God,
that made the Commentaries? or better then the Israelites that received them?
Wherefore, we must observe that though Love be the ground of the Law; yet it is
but as a Seed, and though a seed grain be potentially, or in possibility an
ear, yea, many ears of corn; yet must the ground be first plowed, and the
seed sown, the rain must fall upon the ground, the Sun shine upon it,
before it come to be an ear, and be carried into your Barn for your
sustenance: even so the Word of God requires the plowing up the fallow grounds
of your hearts, there must be a sowing and a watering of it before it will
fructify, and your lives be the better for it. Men look immediately upon
particulars, and not upon the general rule by which they should frame their
lives. Add hereunto that we must remember, that not only good is commanded,
but also evil is forbidden, and though we keep the Affirmative, yet we need
Negatiues. There are first Principles in all Arts and Sciences which are
vertually the whole body of the Art or Science; but it is not for every one to
draw out the conclusioons whereof the whole body must be made. And it is much
more hard to draw out practicke Conclusions then speculatiue, because they are
clothed with many circumstances. And though it be hard to draw out all the
Commandments of the Law of Nature out of Love; yet you will find it much
harder to draw the positive Laws. After all the ease that God has done us in
the Bible, yet if Magistrates and Ministers do not make Commentaries upon
those Commentaries, the Church and Commonweal would be full of ignorance, and
men would not know how to apply or resolve the general Rule. To say nothing
that what we do know, it is as if we did not know it, because had we not
those powerful remembrancers, the Minister in the Church, the Magistrate in
the State, we would take no heed to do what we know.

I come to the last point of my Text; you see how these Commandments may be
enlarged to take up both parts of the Bible. But can those parts of the Bible
be so contracted as not to exceed these contents? For the Bible does contain
as well (...), what God offers us, as (...), what he requires of us. I
answer; some enlarge the words so far as to make them comprehend both, yea,
the very Gospel; for that Christ's Redemption tendered us therein is nothing
else but the gladtydings, that what these two Commandments enjoined us is by
Christ fulfilled for us. Saint Paul's words sound that way, Romans 8.
That which was impossible for the Law by reason of the weakness of our flesh,
God sending his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemed
sin in the flesh, Math. 5.17. Rom 10.4. Gal. 3.2^.
that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us; and Christ says,
I came not to abolish the Law, but to fulfill it, and he is the end of the Law,
and the Law a Pedagogue to Christ.

But Hilarie has a good Rule. Sensus dictorum sumendus est ex causis
dicendorum, Christ's words are an Answer, and therefore must be understood
sutably to the Question. Now the Question was touching that which was enjoined
us, therefore the Answer is not to be thought to extend farther. And
doubtless, the Questionist thought nothing of the Gospel, for how should he
think upon that whereof he had no knowledge? Wherefore in contracting of those
parts we must include no more then that duty which is enjoined us by the Law,
as it is contradistinct to the Gospel, and all that is contained herein.

Yea, Saint Austin was conceited that not only God did work the Law and the
Prophets out of this ground, but that the very Heathen also wrought all their
allowable Morality and Policy out of it; Neither is there any point of this
kind in Christian Religion which may not be fetched out of Heathen Writers;
Not that any one of them has all the Rules, but that there is no Rule which
may not be found in some one of them. (I except always the Rules of the
Gospel.)

Whereupon it follows, that Reason it self acknowledges the truth of all
those Rules. I will not be so confident as to affirm that the Heathens did
ever acknowledge all that I have opened on these two Commandments; a glimpse
they had of most of it, the writings of Plato, Seneca, others do testify as
much; the fragments of the twelve Tables, which are the foundation of the
Civil Law, and the body thereof testify how far Reason has gone.

But I hasten to an end.

You have heard a Lesson which is recommended unto us in Christ's Answer; I
told you it is a brief of the Bible, the whole is no more in effect then, Love
God above all things, and thy Neighbor as thy self; a short lesson you would
think; but it is a very hard one, whether you respect the proper work of
Love, or the works which it commands.

The reason is partly in our Ignorance, which does not easily learn our duty:
and partly in our Concupiscence, which hinders us from doing that which we
know; from these two impediments, no mere man ever was free, De perfect and
Iustit ad Coelest. 1. Cor 13.
since the fall of Adam, neither is it likely any man shall be until the end
of the World. Wherefore Saint Austin is of opinion, that our entire obedience
is reserved for our state in Heaven, When that which is perfect is come, then
shall that which is imperfect be done away; Saint Paul speaks it of Charity
which shall not be abolished in Heaven, but consummated; where we shall love
God, though not quantum diligibilis in se, yet quantum ab homine; and our
Neighbor as our self.

But Saint Austin gives a good Rule why these Commandments were given. I am
ante praecipitur, quia non recte curritur, si quo currendum nescitur; quomodo
autem sciretur, si nullis praeceptis ostenderetur? Therefore we must
understand the Commandments aright; we are wayfaring men, and these Laws
trace out the way which we must go to Heaven. We, I mean as many as are
faithful. For to us is the Law given; and some steps must we make herein every
day that we may be the forwarder to our iournies end. So all our work should
proceed from it, and the Love of God should order our life especially; with
that we should be principally affected, and coldly with other things in
comparison of that, 1. Cor. 7. v. 31.
Use the world as if we used it not.

If a man be perplexed in his deliberation, how he should carry himself,
because the profound disputes of Morality exceed his capacity: let him
hearken to the good counsel of an ancient Father; Noli per multa tree, nec
discendi terreat te ramorum diffusio, radicem tene, and de magnitudine arboris
noli cogitare; A man may rid himself of much trouble in resolving his
conscience what to do if he season his Heart well with the Love of God and of
his Neighbor. I mean not that he should refuse other helps, if he may have
them, but the more he has of this, the less he will need other. (...), that
makes us obey out of fear, this out of goodness.

The Papists abuse this Text, for they say this is one of the directories of
the Church, whereby she may supply her Traditions; but it warrants no supply
of the Moral Law, much less of Articles of Faith, though if it be reasonably
used, it may extend to positive Laws.

Lastly, seeing all hang on these two Commandments none can cry nesciebam, I
knew not what to do.

But I draw to an end. In the Hebrew Bibles the first Characters of these two
Commandments are extraordinary great, whether by the appointment of Esdras
when he digested the Bible, or by the Authors of the Mazoreth, when they set
down the various lections, I will not dispute; of this we may be sure, that
whosoever was the Author, he meant we should take notice of these as most
remarkable Commandments. Not such notice as the Jews take, who write them in
schedules, and wear and read them as Amulets to keep from them all evil;
which superstition diverse Christians did imitate in Saint Hieromes days,
hanging about their necks little Gospels. In Matthew. c ^^.


But that Father says well, that caskets and closets may hold our Bibles and
be never the better for them; they are the better for Scripture, who lay it up
in their hearts; and this God meant the Jews should d^e when he bade them bind
his Laws as frontlets about their heads, Deuteronomy. 6.
and bracelets about their arms; he would have them in all their ways think
upon them, and be ever exercising themselves in them; and not to use the
ceremony only forgetting the substance. And I pray God these Commandments may
be such frontlets on our eyes as God meant, and not such as the Jews used.

Charity is the end of the Law; the fulfilling of the Law; 1 Timothy 1.5. Rom
13.10. Col. 3.14.
as Saint Paul speaks in imitation of Christ; the bond of perfection; the way
of life; yea, the superexcellent way; all these commendations the Scripture
gives it. But beyond all commendations goes that which Christ gives it in my
text, Upon it hang all the Law and the Prophets.

Wherefore owe nothing to any but this that you love, Romans 13. Chrysostom. Col.
3. v. 14. 1. Cor. 16.14.
which is a debt that semper soluitur, nunquam persoluitur. Above all things
let us seek after Charitte, and let all our things be done in Love. Yea, let
us fall in love with Love, that so we may grow therein, until we come where
it shall be so consummate, as that all our life shall be spent in Love; in
loving God with all our heart, with all our mind, with all our soul, with all
our strength; and loving our Neighbor as our self.

THE CONCLUSION OF THE FORMER ARGUMENT, DELIVERED IN a Sermon, on the twelfth
of Saint Mark, Verses 32, 33, 34.
And the Scribe said unto him, Well Master thou have said the truth: for there
is one God, and there is none other but he.

And to love him with all the heart, and withal the understanding, and with
all the soul, and with all the strengh, and to love his Neighbor as himself,
is more then all whole burns offerings and Sacrifices.

And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him; thou art
not far from the Kingdom of God. And no man after that durst ask him any
question.


Our Savior Christ in the conference which he had with the Pharisee about the
great Commandment, Matthew 22. had to do with a Question, and a Questionist;
The question was good; the Questionist was a Tempter, therefore he fully, yea,
abundantly resolved the question, but he put the Questionist clean besides his
purpose, and marred the pl^t of the Pharisees; For they thought either to
disgrace or endanger him; disgrace him, if he were silent; or, if he did
answer, to endanger him to those that were of a contrary opinion. But Christ
handles the matter so that they sped of neither of these ends; for he answers,
that they might not disgrace him for ignorance; but answers so that he clean
defeats their malice.

This being but insinuated in Saint Matthew, is fully opened by Saint Mark,
therefore at length, to put an end to the Doctrine of the great Commandment,
whereupon I have dwelt long, I have chosen these words, as the fittest close of
that Argument: I purpose (God willing) briefly and plainly to unfold them unto
you.

Therein then we are to observe Christ's discretion, in answering; and the
confusion of his adversaries by his answer. The first point is gathered out of
the whole body of Christ's speech; the second out of the event thereof.

More distinctly. The discretion appears in that Christ answers not only
secundum veritatem truly, but also ad hominem, he fitteth his answer to the
Questionist. Answers out of his own Principles, so that he cannot deny it,
and discouers his sin, that he may be stung with it.

Touching the confusion of the adversaries, that is double, as they were of two
sorts. For one moved the question, the rest plotted it, both are confounded,
but not both alike. The confusion of the Questionist is comfortable, two ways
comfortable.

First, in regard of his ingenuitie, for he does acknowledge openly what
Christ answers, yea, and justifies it soundly, though with the disgrace of
his companions.

Secondly, in regard of the clemency with which our Savior entertaines it.
First, he took notice of it, he saw that he answered discreetly. Secondly,
he encouraged it, for he told the Questionist that he was not far from the
Kingdom of God. Thus was the Questionist confounded.

His Accomplices also were confounded, but their confusion was damnable, for they
had no more to say, they asked him no more questions; not because they were
ever a whit the better for our Saviors answer, but because they durst not.
Their malice was ouer-awed, they durst not play the Serpents any longer, and
set upon Christ with craft, and temptation, but from this day forward they
turned Lions, and put him to a cruel death.

This is the sum of this Scripture, the particulars whereof I will run over
again; I pray God it may prove for our instruction and edification.

First, then of Christ's Discretion; it is gathered out of the body of his
answer, which contains not only a truth, but truth fitted to the Questionist,
fitted two ways. First, because it works upon his own Principles, for Christ
keeps himself to the words of the Law, and makes Moses give the Scribe an
answer. Now the Scribe was a Doctor of the Law, and Moses authority was
sacred with him. Add hereunto Christ's answer was the Scribes own Tenent, as
appears, Luke the tenth. Where Christ moving the question, another Scribe
answers the very same words of the Law. So that he could not deny Christ's
answer, except he would contradict himself. The like discretion in working
upon the Adversaries Principles, does Christ use in his dispute with the
Sadducees about the Resurrection. They are said to have received only the sieve
Books of Moses, and out of those Books does Christ make good that Article of
Faith. Saint Paul imitates Christ, arguing against both Jew and Gentile.
Against the Jews in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where you may perceive that
he takes most of his grounds out of the Law. Against the Gentiles in the Acts;
Chap.. 14 and 17.
where he seeks no farther then the Creation, and the Providence to convict
them of Idolatry. The Fathers in the Primitive Church took the very same
course, as appears by Justin Martyrs Apologies to the Roman Emperors, and his
Dialogue with Trypho the Jew. The like might be showed out of Origin, Irenie,
Tertullian, Eusebius, and others; whether they deal with Infidels or
Heretics, they press them still with their own principles. And so must we,
for so shall we conclude most evidently against them, and if any way, this is
most likely to prevail with them.

A second branch of Christ's Discretion is this, that his Answer stings the
conscience of the Questionist, it lays his sin open before his eyes. For he
was a Tempter, and to tempt is a work of Satan, which has his name from
hatred. So that Christ's answer does unmask the Questionist, and show, that
although the title of a Pharisee and a Scribe, the one for Holiness, the other
for Knowledge seem to make near approches unto God: yet in that he is a
Tempter, he will be found far from him, if he be measured by the great
Commandment, the tenor whereof is nothing but Love. And such a manner of
teaching, which closely conueys a good admonition to the heart, when it seems
only to inform the head, is very discreet, and has many worthy precedents.

But enough of Christ Discretion; let us come now to the Confusion of his
adversaries; and first to the comfortable confusion of the Scribe which moved
the question; wherein we are first to see his ingenuitie, double ingenuitie.
For first he acknowledges that Christ had answered right, Well Master, thou
have said the truth. He acknowledges it (I say) which is not only to know,
but to confess openly what a man does know. Yea he confesses it before his
fellows, at whose hands he knew he should have no thanks for his labor. So
to confess must needs be an ingenuous Confession.

And indeed such an ingenuous Confession does well beseem all in debates of
Religion. For it falls not out in them, as it does in the Games of Actiuitie,
wherein only he that conquereth is crowned; the conquered also shall have his
crown in this case, if being convicted, he acknowledge and submit himself
unto the truth.

It were to be wished that the World would imitate this Ingenuitie, that God
might forgive us our infirmities, and give us grace to profit in the way of
eternal life. But the World is possessed with a spirit of obstinacy, so that
men will not be persuaded though they be persuaded, nor convicted when they
are convicted, be it in head or heart. When we deal with Papists, or
Anabaptists, we have too lamentable proof hereof, they carry themselves like
deaf Adders, they stop their ears, and will not hear the voice of the
Charmer, charm he never so wisely.

But to leave the absent, and direct my speech to our selves that are present.
Are our Hearts better disposed then their Heads? I would they were; but
experience teaches that though our sins be laid never so clearly before
us, and Gods Law that condemns them often applied close to our Conscience; yet
few there are that become sensible as David was upon Nathans reproof; or as
the Ninevites were at the preaching of Jonas. The want of this Ingenuitie is
the cause why drunkards, sweareas, adulterers, all wicked livers,
notwithstanding all our instruction, continue still like unto themselves. But
let them take heed; their obstinacy will one day cost them dear, they will be
put unto a worse shame for perseuering in sin, Eccle 4 Aust Epist ^8.
then ever their Repentance could bring upon them.

You have heard one branch of the Scribes Ingenuitie, manifested in his
acknowledgment of the truth when he heard it. But he does not only
acknowledge, but he does justify it also, he shows that he is able soundly
to confirm it. And indeed this is complete Ingenuitie, when a man does not
only yield, when he has nothing to say against the truth, but also goes
farther, and becomes an Advocate thereof, showing the reason that moves him,
and may move others to subscribe unto it.

See how this Scribe does it; To love God with all our heart (says he) and our
Neighbor as our self, is better then all burnt offering and sacrifice.
Nothing could come in competition with Moral Law but the Ceremonial; giving
it then preeminence above the Ceremonial, he gives it absolute preeminence,
and so proves Love to be the great Commandment, following herein the
direction of God himself in Esaias, Osea, Amos, Cap. 1. Cap. 6. Cap. 5. Cap. 7.
and Jeremy. I have handled this point upon the fifty one Psalm, and
therefore intend to pass by it at this time; only giving you this rule,
whereby you may the better judge of his proof; Charity pleases God
immediately of it self; Sacrifices please not but in virtue of Charity.

But mark how with this his Reason he does perstring his fellows. You know
the Pharisees were for their Corban, Irenie i. ^ c. 323
and taught children to disobey and destitute their parents, rather then not to
perform their sacrifice; which Doctrine of theirs this Scribe acknowledges to
be most perverse, a fruit of covetousness. Of whom we may learn this good
lesson, that we must not perfunctorily read the Scriptures, but learn by them
how to argue for them, by knowing what is contained in them, and weying what
will follow upon them.

Secondly mark that whereas this Questionist came as a Tempter, he so profited
by Christ's answer, that he went away a commender of Christ; which ingenuitie
of his makes it probable, that of himself he was well disposed, but carried
away with ill company; of which sort no doubt but there are many in the Church
of Rome, many that rather follow the stream, then their own judgment, whose
unhappiness it is to be so unhappily yoked; which must teach us to take heed
how we sort our selves with malicious adversaries of the truth; least we
become like unto them, at least be made instruments of theirs.

Finally observe, that Christ has a greater conquest over the Pharisees, then
he had over either the Herodian or the Sadducee, for he only put them to
silence, so that it was left wholly to the Auditorie to judge whether they were
fully answered or no; but the Scribe that thought to speed better is driven to
a harder straight, he is driven to confess, and that before the people, that
Christ had answered the truth; he that thought to procure his disgrace, is
made the trumpet of his praise and glory; so strangely does God work in the
hearts and consciences of men, according to that in the Psalm, He received
gifts for men, even for his enemies, that the Lord God might dwell amongst
them; and to this purpose are his arrows said to be very sharp, and to
pierce the hearts of the Kings enemies; Psalm. 45.
the preparation of the heart is of man, but the answer of the tongue is of
the Lord; Baalam went to curse the Israelites, God made him bless them; Saul
went to take David, God made him prophecy of his succession; the messengers
went to take Christ, but they returned with this commendations of him, Never
man spoke as he speaks; Saul went to persecute the Christians of Damascus,
but on the way he was so changed, that when he came thither, he preached the
Gospel. So does the rage of man turn to Gods praise, and the fierceness of
their Spirits does he refrain, he turns Lions into Lambs. And thus much
shall suffice to be spoken of the Scribes Ingenuitie.

I come now to Christ's Clemency, the clemency wherewith he entertained that
Ingenuitie; the Text says first that he took notice of it, he saw that he
answered discreetly, (...), the word is significant, as one having a reasonable
soul. The proper object of our understanding is Truth, it is naturally carried
thereunto; and so is the will to Good, the the natural object thereof. But
these reasonable abilities are diuerted and perverted by our sense and sensual
appetite which beset us, and which we are desirous to please; Whereupon it
follows, that though men be reasonable creatures; yet are their resolutions
for the most part, carnal; so that it is no small commendation for a man to
be able to sequester in his consultations, the better part from the worse, and
notwithstanding the solicitations of the worse, to follow the direction and
inclination of the better, as did this Scribe.

And what he did Christ saw, his piercing eye discerned not only the words
which he spoke, but the fountain also from whence they sprang; otherwise he
would not have spared, after his custom, to have told him plainly that he
was an hypocrite. But Christ is so far from blaming him, that he seems
rather to encourage him. For (which is a second branch of his Clemency) he
tells him that he is not far from the Kingdom of God.

There are two things in the Law, first the Depth, and secondly the End of it,
both which the Pharisees misunderstood. The Depth, as it appears, Matthew. 5.
where Christ shows how shallowly they did understand it. The End, for that
they so rested in the perfection of the Law, that they little thought of the
relief which man's inability to perform the same was to receive from the
Gospel; and therefore they stumbled at the doctrine of Christ, who never meant
to derogate ought from the Law considered in it self, but to discover man's
weakness, the conscience whereof should make him fly unto the Gospel.

This Scribe seems to have had a reasonable understanding of the Depth of the
Law, but he was not come so far as to have an understanding of the End
thereof. Notwithstanding because the knowledge of the Depth, is a good step to
the knowledge of the End; therefore our Savior Christ tells him he is not far
from the Kingdom of God.

By the Kingdom of God, or of Heaven, the Scripture usually understands the
Gospel, that is the way unto eternal bliss. Now seeing Christ is the end of
the Law, and the Law is a Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ; he that does
well understand the Law, how the Moral exceeds the Ceremonial, and how much
the Moral requires at the hands of men, (as this Scribe did) if he do but
try himself thereby, he will see what need he has of the Gospel, and may be
persuaded to embrace it. Therefore does Christ tell him, that he is not far
from the Kingdom of God.

Non abest procul, abest tamen. A man that is almost at the top of the water,
may as well be drowned as he that lies in the bottom; therefore a man must
not content himself to be almost a Christian, as Agrippa did; he must be
altogether, if he mean to be saved. Therefore Christ in these words wills the
Scribe to build forward, and to supply that which he wanted of the means to
life.

Observe here how Christ would not break a bruised reed, nor quench a smoking
flax; because of his ingenuitie, he handled him gently. Teaching us how
odious unto him a Romish butcherie is; and that we in dealing with Adversaries
of the Truth must follow the Apostles rule, In meekness instructing them that
are contrary minded, 2 Timothy c. 2.
if God at any time will give them repentance unto the knowledge of his truth.
Especially, if we see them prefer the truth before their own private
affections, and not resist the Holy Ghost.

What became of this Scribe the Scripture does not teach us; it is not
unlikely, but that afterward he believed in Christ, and that his ingenuitie
made good use of Christ's clemency.

I have opened unto you the comfortable confusion of him that moved the
question; they that set him a work also were confounded, but their confusion
was damnable.

For though their mouths were stopped, yet their heart was not stopped, their
heart was not changed, they continued malicious still. They asked him no more
questions, no more serpentine questions; otherwise questions they did ask him,
but having by their perplexing temptations labored in vain, for that still
they had the worst: Yea, and (which vexed them more) Christ by answering them
got honor amongst the people, who wondered at his readiness and wisdom: Luke
13.
they therefore gave over playing the Serpents, and turned Lions. The next
news we hear of them is, that they contriue and compass the death of Christ.

And this is the right Method of the world, when disputations and books will
not make good a bad cause, nor bear out error and falsehood: then the sword
is set a work to do what the tongue or pen cannot, and the blood of Gods
servants is spilt to satiat cruel minds. This Age has too lamentable proof
thereof, all our neighbor countries be turned into shambles of the Church. But
wonder not at it, for Venena inuidiae possunt superari, sed difficulter
quiescere, Malice may be ouerawed, but it will never be idle, if it may work
with opportunity. Therefore I told you that their confusion was Damnable;
Damnable, seeing their reason was convicted, and yet they persecuted Christ.

I will dwell no longer upon this point, because I touched it in part before in
this, and also in the first Sermon. Only observe, that which Saint Paul has,
God makes the wisdom of this world foolishness, and takes the crafty in
their wiliness; so that we may say with him, Where is the Scribe? God puts
into the mouths of Christ's adversaries such an answer as that they confirm
his Doctrine, and Testimonium ab Aduersario validissimum. Moreover their
answer cleares the innocence of Christ, when they were still confounded that
sought to have just cause against him. And no wonder, for he that foiled the
Father of temptations, could not be foiled by any of his Children.

One point more, and so I end. It is a note of Saint Chrysostomes, tentando
Iudaei sibi acquisiuerunt confusionem, nobis prouiderunt salutem, the
Temptations wherewith Christ was exercised by the Jews, occasioned him to
deliver many excellent lessons for the instruction of his Church. So did God
bring light out of darkness; and how many excellent tracts have the Fathers
written, which had never come from them, if their industry had not been
whetted by the enemies of the truth. And the same providence, at this day sets
the Orthodoxe a work to look more and more into the mysteries of the Kingdom
of Heaven; enabling them to stop the mouths of gain sayers, and to bring
their Charge forward to the measure of the age of a perfect man in Christ.

I conclude, you have heard of exemplarie discretion and confusion; discretion
of Christ; confusion of Christ's adversaries. You shall do well to imitate
Christ's discretion, learn of him to be not only Innocent as Doves, but wise
as Serpents. If our words be poudred with such salt, they are most likely to
yield grace unto the hearers.

As for the confusion of Christ's adversaries, let us take heed of the damnable
confusion, that does but help men forward to fill up the measure of their
sins in this world, that they may have the greater measure of plagues in the
world to come. But let us set before us the comfortable confusion, let us be
ever ready to show our ingenuitie, that we may have experience of Christ
clemency. Only let us take care not only to begin well, but also to go on;
not only to come near unto, but also to enter into the Kingdom of God; that
Christ which is as ready to encourage as to discern our good disposition, may
establish us in grace, and crown us with glory, who only can so work us
readily to obey, that he may bless our endeauours; and receive us in the end
with those comfortable words, Well done servant faithful and true, enter into
thy Masters Joy.

Pntot^ dox THe.
TEN SERMONS Delivered on the nineteenth Chapter of Exodus, containing the
Preface of GOD, and the preparation of the people to the promulgation of the
LAW.

BY The Right Reverend Father in God, ARTHVRE LAKE, late Bishop of that See.

LONDON, Printed by W. S. for Nathaniel Butter. 1629.



TEN SERMONS DELIVERED ON THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER OF EXODUS, containing the
Preface of GOD, and the preparation of the People to the promulgation of the
LAW.
The first Sermon.
EXODUS. 19. VERSE. 1, 2. In the third month, when the children of Israel were
gone out of Egypt, the same day came they into the Wilderness of Sinai.

For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come to the Desert of Sinai,
and had pitched in the Wilderness, and there Israel camped before the Mount.


YOu may remember that opening unto you those words of our Savior Christ in
the Gospel of Saint Matthew, Chap 22.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with
all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and thy Neighbor as thy self; I
told you they were the general contents of the Decalogue, whereof I then
promised you a special and distinct explication. I have not forgotten that
promise, although I have been interrupted by interuenient texts occasioned by
the times* wherefore my purpose is this day to begin my performance of that
promise.

And I could not do it on a fitter day, for this is Ascension day, and it was
an Ascension day that is mentioned in my text. Moses, being a type of that
whereof Christ was the truth, began upon the day here mentioned to ascend into
the Mount, thence to bring the Law: as our Savior Christ upon this day which
we solemnize ascended into Heaven, thence to send the Holy Ghost, which as the
Apostle tells us, gives life to the Law. Add hereunto, that as Christ
ascended into his glory, so Moses in his Ascension had a kind of
Transfiguration, for coming near unto God his face so shined, that he was
feign to put a veil upon it, because the children of Israel could not endure
to behold it.

There is then a good correspondencie between this Feast and my text. Neither
do I only think so, but our Church also which commands the tenth of
Deuteronomie to be read this morning, wherein is a report of this Ascension of
Moses. So that the time which I have chosen is fit, and I mean, God willing,
not to be scant in my performance. I will pay you the principal with interest
for I mean to unfold not only the twentieth Chapter, but also the nineteenth
of this Book, though that more fully, yet this competently. And there is good
reason why; for the nineteenth contains a remarkable preparation to the
twentieth; neither will the twentieth be so well understood, or regarded so
well, if the nineteenth do not make us more docill, and attentive, then
vulgarly men use to be. Wherefore what God thought fit at the giving of the
Law, will not amiss be remembered at the expounding thereof: it will be
behoofefull for you that I quicken your capacity; and raise your attention
with these powerful observations, wherewith the Holy Ghost does preface the
promulgation of the Law.

You must then take notice of the forerunning Circumstances, and Solemnity,
which are recorded in this Chapter. The Circumstances (whereof only I shall
speak now) are two. First, the Time, Secondly, the Place: of both which we
have here the two terms, A quo, and In quo, Whence they take there beginning,
and where they have their ending.

Of the Time, the reckoning begins after the children of Isreal's going forth
out of Egypt, and it ends on the third month, the very same day, that is
the very same day that the third Month began. As for the place, the text
teaceheth us, first, whence they came immedately from Rephidim. Secondly, where
they took up their rest; in the wilderness of Sinai, thereon the cloud
pitched, and they encamped before it.

These be the particulars which I mean to observe in these Circumstances. That
you may the better understand them, I will resume them again. God grant that,
as I open them more largely, so you may hear them more profitably.

The first Term then of the Time, shows us whence the reckoning does begin,
it begins at the children of Isreal's coming out of Egypt, which words do
not only note a motion from a Place, but also an Alteration of their State: for
they did not only come out of the Land, but also out of Bondage, wherewith they
were oppressed in that Land. And such a going out gives the name, unto this
Book, this Book is called Exodus, and (...) is nothing but a going out, a
going out of bondage into liberty.

There is a great mystery in the word which concerns Christ and his Church;
we learn it in the Transfiguration of Christ, therein Moses and Elias
appeared unto him, (...), Luke 9.31.
and spoke of the Exodus or departure which he should perform at Jerusalem.
The Apostle makes it plain, Heb. 2. By death (which is an exodus, Verse 14,
15.
for we usually say that a man is departed when we mean he is dead) he
overcame him that had the power of death, that is the Devil, that he might
set them free, or give them an Exodus, which all their life time werein fear
of bondage. And who are they but the Church? Let this be the first note.

A second is, That God did not give his Law to Israel when they were in Egypt,
but when they were come thence: when they were a Society by themselves, then
he gave them a Policy, whereby they might be Distinguished, and Ordered.
Distinguished, first, from themselves, for though before they were a Church:
yet was it but Domestical; each Family, at least each Tribe, was left unto it
self; but now they were to become a National Church, to be knit into one
Body, which could not be, but by one form of government. And this form,
being of Gods Ordinance, must needs distinguish them. Secondly, from others
also, whose Policy was but of humane institution. Moses tells them, that the
very heathen should acknowledge the difference: especially if, as God did them
the honor to distinguish them by the Law, so they should answer the
Distinction in the good order of their Lives, whereat the Law did principally
aim.

There is a mystery in this point also, which Saint Paul does observe out of
the Prophets Esaias and Jeremy, Come out from amongst them, 2. Cor. 6. v. 17, 18.
and separate your selves says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I
will receive you, I will be your Father, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters says the Lord Almighty, So long as we are mingled with the heathen,
and learn their works, God will not vouchsafe us his Oracles, nor incorporate
us for his people, the branch must be broken off from the wild Olive tree,
before that by grafting it can be made partaker of the fatness of the true
Olive. Therefore our Baptism begins with Abrenuntio, I renounce the Devil
and all his works, etc. then come we to the confession of our Faith and
profession of our Obedience. And this Separation if not in Place, yet at least
in Disposition, we must hold to our lives end, if we mean to have any
communion with God.

This is a true rule, but not to be rackt, as it was by Nouatians and
Donatists of old, and is by the Anabaptists and Brownists at this day. For they
fancy Egypt in Canaan, and think that the Oracles of God, are revealed only
to them in their Schism. Silly souls that they are, feeding only upon the
wind, and running mad with their own devices.

The Romanists are little better, they please themselves with the usurped name
of Catholics, and conclude the Holy Ghost within the Diocese of Rome, and
affirm, that none can go out of the Popes sheepfold and be saved. Chap. 11.8.
But we that have tried them, and found them to be the spiritual Egypt
mentioned in the Revelation have upon just grounds come out from the, and
without any prejudice to our Communion with the Catholic Church, have
forsaken their corruptions, since which time the Oracles of God sound more
clearly to us, and are enjoyed by us more comfortably.

You have heard whence the reckoning of the Time begins: let us now see
where it ends. The word in the original signifies, either a new Moon or a
whole Month, and therefore a whole Month because a new Moon. For it is an
usual thing in the Scripture to denominate the whole time, from a principal
part thereof, Genesis 1. The evening and the morning were made the first day. Luke
11.
Ieiuno bis in Sabbato, says the Pharisee in the Gospel: the sense is well
expressed in our English, I fast twice in the week, the week is there
denominated from the Sabbath, which was the seventh day thereof; and the whole
year is in Hebrew called Shanah from the Tropicke point, to which when the
Sun is come, it turns from us or to us: in like manner is the whole month
denominated from the beginning thereof. Our language bears some marks of
this observation, for what is a Month but a Mooneth, that is, the time of the
Moons period or circle?

The word then being doubtful, there are here other words added to expound it,
which are, On the same day, that is, the very day of the new Moon. For as for
their opinion, that think it was the third day, that so the number of days
might answer the number of months, it is not so agreeing to the signification
of the word, therefore the most judicious Chronologers justly reject it.

But you must moreover observe, that because the Moon was made to rule the
night, Psalm. 104 19.
and as the Psalmist speaks, for certain seasons, and to distinguish times,
therefore in the first ages of the world (and at this day in some Countries)
the civil months were not Solarie but Lunarie, that is every month began
with the new Moon, and ended at the change; Numb 18. Psalm. 80. Es^y 1.
when therefore you read in the Scripture, that amongst the Feasts of the
Jews, one was the feast of the new Moon, enjoined by the Law, and practiced
by the Jews, you must understand that, of the first day of every month.

So then my text, in the third month, in the same day, is as much as the first
day of their third month. Theirs I say, for we cannot parallel ours with
theirs, ours being Solarie and theirs Lunarie months. Every one of ours
partaketh two of theirs, and every one of theirs partaketh two of ours.
Therefore when Chronologers say this was the month of June, because the first
month was April, they must be understood warily. Only, this is agreed upon by
the Jews and Christians, Greek and Latin Fathers, that this day was the
seven and fortieth after the Israelites departed out of Egypt.

Whereupon will follow another note, more for the capacity of of the people,
That God did not defer long, the giving of his Law, for he suffered not much
more then a month, and half to pass before he gave it. So great a Body
would not have held out without confusion, except it had been speedily
provided of a Law. Verse 18.
Iethro taught Moses, as appears in the Chapter which goes before, that the
government of so huge a multitude, was a burden too heavy for one to bear,
wherefore following his advice Moses made many Officers. But God was not
pleased to be so familiar with them as he was with Moses, whom he knew by
name, and spoke with all face to face, that they should come immediately to him,
for resolution of their doubts. Therefore a general Law was expedient, and it
was timely given them. The King of Heaven in this branch of his providence
being a good pattern to Kings on earth, teaching them that they must not leave
their subjects cases, to the discretion of their under Officers, but command
them to be ordered by an indifferent Law. Put both the Terms together, that
wherein the reckoning begins, and that wherein it ends, and there will
arise another very profitable note. For how comes this month to be called
the third? The ancient year of the Jews began at Autumn, when they gathered
in their fruit, as it appears, Exodus 23. and from that this was the ninth
month. It is true; but God in Exodus 12. took order for another Epoche, he
commanded from that time forward their year should begin at the Spring, This
month shall be unto you the beginning of months; the beginning of the Sacred
year, as some distinguish, calling the other Politic. Yet the Sabaticall, and
Iubile began at the other; it may be because of the rest of the Land the
Feasts began here.

I will not dispute, whether this were a new or a renewed beginning; Whether it
now were first instituted of God, or whether it had his beginning when the
world was first framed. Let Chronologers perplexe themselves with that doubt,
who are still seeking, but cannot agree, at what time of the year the world
began; the resolution thereof is not to our purpose if it might be had: But
hardly can it be had, for the world being an exact Globe, there were in the
first moment of creation all seasons of the year, though in several places;
and the season from whence they will begin the world, must be understood but
(...), according to the place first inhabited (Paradise) whose situation is not
yet resolved. This we must observe, That though the common reckoning of time
be from the beginning of the world, yet have all nations specially Epoches of
their own, occasioned by memorable events, which have befallen their States;
which being not well either known or heeded, cause those great perplexities
and errors in Chronology. I will not trouble you with enumeration of them,
they that are learned may find them in the Chronologies, the ignorant may find
enough in the common Almanackes.

That which I will observe unto you is, That our merciful God, has so done
his wonderful works, that they ought to be had in remembrance: and amongst
other helps of memory God uses this of Chronology. We should not think of
these dates of times, but we should refresh our memory of that which was done
at the beginning of that date. God was pleased that the Israelites should so
be remembered of their deliverance out of Egypt. And the Church by whose
ordinance the year of the Lord is so familiar in our tongues, and in our pens,
would have us still think how much we are bound to God, for the Incarnation of
our Savior Jesus Christ.

Descend to smaller matters, but yet of good regard; when you find in your
Almanacke the general Earthquake, the year eighty eight, the Gun-pouder
treason, etc. Consider with your selves, that neither Gods judgments, nor his
mercies ought to be forgotten by us. Yea, this Chronology must put us in
mind, that neither our being, nor our being that which we are, be it good or
bad, was always the same. There was a time when it was otherwise with us, and
the memory thereof must not be buried in oblivion, least we prove unthankful,
as certainly we will, if we make not so good use of the Chronology. And let
this suffice concerning the first circumstance, the circumstance of time, the
Beginning and Ending thereof.

Let us now come to the second Circumstance of Place. And here we must first
see, Whence the Israelites came immediately, they departed from Rephidim, a
place of pressure, and the last place where they conflicted with difficulties
before they received the Law. Exodus 17. Numb. 33.
There, was no no water, and there, Amaleke set upon them. But God relieved
them supplying them with water, and giving them victory over their Enemies.

God did not give them a Law, before he had given them good proof of his
gracious power; he made them fe^^e the extraordinary relief of his hand,
before he spoke unto them with his voice; thus dealt he in delivering of the
old Testament. And thus dealt Christ in delivering of the New; he wrought
miracles before he preached Sermons. And indeed this is a very likely way to
prevail with men, to have their reason first subdued before their faith be
informed. When reason is first brought to confess that which is done cannot be
done but by a divine power, then will faith easily believe that what is spoken,
John 3.
is a divine word; Learn this of Nicodemus, Master we know that thou art a
teacher come from God, for no man could do that which thou do except God
were with him. Act 14 v. 16.
So were the men of Lystra, the jaylour, and others brought to believe.

Another note is, that there is great difference between Gods dealing with
them, before they came to Rephidim, and when they came there. For before they
came there, their deliverance from their enemies was wrought by God without any
concurrencie of theirs; Exodus 14. v. 13.
Fear you not (says Moses) stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord
which he will show you to day. But afterward when Amalek came and fought with
Israel, Exodus 17. v. 9.
then Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men and go out, fight with Amaleke,
etc. I will pray. Though God was pleased to deliver them from their enemies,
yet not without their own labor of body; yea and devotion of mind too, after
he had once set them free. Therefore it was fit they should now have a Law to
guide them in their actions, and in their devotions, and God gives them one.
And us whom preventing grace does first make Christians, without any
cooperation of ours, afterward will God have to be instruments to cooperate
with him, and that in this cooperation we follow his direction, for he loves
not will worship, and therefore that we may do what pleases him, in the
service wherein he uses us, he gives us for our Guide, his sacred Law.

Thirdly, whereas God first gave them Victory, and Water at Rephidim, and when
they were free from bodily danger, and provided of food, then God gave them the
Law. We may here observe, Greg. Niss de vit mos p. 17^.
that Homo supponitur in Christiano, and our animal life must be provided for,
that we may intend our spiritual.

Come we at length to the last Term of this second Circumstance, and that is
the Place whether they came and where they settled. This place was the
wilderness of Sinai, they pitched before that mount.

First the place was a wilderness. Philo Iudaeus inquires the reason, De
De^^log.
why God would give his Law not in some City, but in a vast Desert: And though
he resolve modestly, what is the true reason God only knows, yet does he
yield some likely reasons.

One is this, because the worldly employments of Citizens, wherein their
thoughts and desires are for the most part taken up, make all sins abound
there, both against the first and second Table, and men so prepossest are not
capable of good laws. Retiredness from such employments, and solitariness
which silence, those clamorous and disturbing thoughts and affections open men's
ears and hearts better to listen to God. When we are weaned from the world we
are fitter to be. Gods Disciples to learn what he teaches; therefore God
says, Ose 2. v. 14.
ducam vos in solitudinem, and loquar ad Cor. This made many in the Primitive
Church, to forsake Cities and the frequencies of people, and in solitary
places to to give themselves to spiritual contemplation. Which custom
degenerated long since into superstition, whereof the Church of Rome has too
many spectacles, in there Anchorites and Ermites, m^ere hypoc^ites, which abuse
the credulity of the simple with their seeming holiness.

A second reason which he gives, is, that as Nauigators before they set to
Sea, are provided of Tackling and other necessaries which they must use at Sea:
so God was pleased to furnish the Israelites in their way with those Laws
which they were to make use of, when they came into the Holy Land. You may if
you please improve this reason mystically. Canaan was a type of Heaven, the
wilderness a type of the world which we must pass through, the grace whereby
we must live in the world to come, we must be furnished with in this present
world. Glophy (...).


To leave Philo Iudaeus, take another from Cyrillus Alexandrinus. Desertum
typus Ecclesiae militantis, a Desert is a type of the militant Church,
certainly this Desert was, it did most lively represent to the Israelites,
what they were by Nature, and what they became by Grace. This wilderness was
of it self a disconsolate place, it had neither meat nor drink for
reasonable creatures, yet did the Israelites abound both with meat and drink
there; that wilderness was to them as commodious as a paradise, they had
showers of bread from heaven, and streams of water from the rock. God that
provided so for their bodies in so desolate a place, provided no worse for
their Souls, whose condition was by nature as barren as the wilderness. They
were to conceive that his Law was to be unto them a spiritual Manna, and a
spiritual Drink that streamed from the rock Christ, they were to repute it
the bread and water of life. Learn the Allegory out of Esaias, The wilderness
and the solitary place shall be glad for them, Cap 35. v. 172.
the Desert shall rejoice and blossom as the Rose, it shall blossom
abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing, the glory of Lebanon shall
be given unto it, the excellency of Carmell and Sharon, Cap. 44. ver. 3.
they shall see the glory of the Lord and the excellency of our God. And
again more plainly; I will power out water upon him that is thirsty, and
floods upon the dry ground, I will power my spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thine offspring.

I will add one reason more, Revel. 12. Heb. 11.
the Church is oftentimes by Tyrants driven to flee into the wilderness, Gods
children are made to wander in Deserts, and in Dens and Caves of the earth;
but God giving his Law in the wilderness, bids us be of good courage, for
there is no place so desolate in worldly respects, but God will not only be
there with his, but will there also open unto them the treasures of his
wisdom, and receive their Devotions. Wherefore though I walk in the midst
of the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; thou O Lord wilt
be with me, thy rod and thy staff shall comfort me. Psalm. 23.


It was not only a wilderness wherein God gave his Law; but the wilderness
of Sinai, there were more wildernesses then one, through which they passed: all
the country from the Red Sea to the Holy Land is wilderness: therefore in
their Travels we read of the wilderness of Sur, of Sin, of Pharan, and here
of Sinai, which was in Madian; for there Moses dwelt, and fed his Father
in-lawes sheep when God first appeared unto him. Gal. 4. ver. 25.
But more distinctly we learn of Saint Paul that Sinai is a Mountain in
Arabia. And whereas there are three Arabia's, Felix, Deserta, and Petraea, this
was the last of the three, and it was through that, their way lay into Canaan,
that compasses the South and South-east part of the Holy Land. Sinai a
Mountain in this Arabia did denominate the wilderness that lay about it. But
whence was it denominated it self? Surely the word in the original signifies
a bramble bush. Some histories report, that there are such brambles there, that
a Bird cannot light on them but he will loose all his feathers. I leave the
truth of that to the reporter. Of this we are sure that there was a Bush there,
wherein God appeared to Moses in a flame of fire: and from that bush it is most
likely that this hill was named, as all the rest of their stations bear Hebrew
names. For from whom should they learn how to call them, that had no body
there besides themselves? But God was pleased that that hill, should keep a
perpetual remembrance of his apparition in the bush, because the bush was such
an excellent emblem of his Church. A double emblem, First noting, that though
we by nature are as fruitless and hurtful as brambles, Heb. 12.19.
and God is a consuming fire: Yet that consuming fire can be so gracious, as
to abide in this unworthy plant of the wilderness, and not to consume it.
Secondly, what himself will not consume abiding in it, that no fiery trial
shall consume, be the wicke I never so much enraged against it.

I will not trouble you with the tradition that you shall read in some, that
there are stones to be found about this Hill, which if you break, in memory
of this bush, you shall find in them the print of a bush. Of this we are sure,
Exed. 3 ver. 4. Antiq lib. 2.
that in honor of this bush Moses calls the Hill (though under another name
Horeb, which was a part of Sinai) Montem Domini, in honor I say of this bush.
Although Josephus says, that before God appeared there to Moses, vulgari
rumore creditum numen ibi habitare, it was commonly reported that God
frequented that place, and so was it in^^^ ss^^^lis propter Religionem, men
durst not ascend into the top of it, not only because it was an exceeding high
mountain, so high that men could not see to the top of it, but also for the
reverence that men did bear to some Divine power, that was thought to abide
there. This conceit, though it may have some color from the third of Exodus,
because it is called the Hill of God, before the story is reported of Gods
appearing in the bush; yet we must know that anticipations in giving names are
usual in Scripture, especially where stories are written long after the events
are past: and Moses seems to control that conceit of Josephus, in the
blessing which he gives to the Tribe of Joseph, Deuteronomy. 33. ver. 16
for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, let the blessing come upon
the head of Joseph, dwelt, he says, not dwells, teaching us that it was a
transient not a perm^^ent abode. Exodus 2 5.
And God means no more when he bids Moses put off his shoes, because the
ground whereon he ^^ood was holy ground? Holy, when God was present, but when
God departed, the holiness ceased, although the title continued even in the
days of Elias; but that was in a mystery, that God, 1. Reg. 19. ^er 8
would in the very same place have the Prophet report the foul breach of his
covenant, where his covenant was first made with Israel.

This makes little for any countenance of pilgrimage to the Holyland, for God
himself said that of an holy, he would make it a profane place, because the
Israelites had polluted it with their sin. But I will not trouble you with
that point.

This I may not omit, that God gave his Law upon a Hill; As Hell was shadowed
in the valley of Hinnom which was a very deep place: so heaven is usually
figured by hills, places lifted up high above the earth. And such places were
anciently designed for sacred uses, whether God revealed himself to men, or
men performed their devotions to God. The places are obuious in the Old
Testament and in the New, Sion, Gibeon in the old; the mount where Christ made
his Sermon, where he was transfigured in the New Testament, etc.

To speak a little to the day. Christ ascended this day in his Person, and we
in good time shall ascend in ours. But there is an ascension which must go
before that Ascension, an Ascension of our Conversation before the ascension of
our Person. Colos 3. Phil. 3.
We must seek those things that are above, where Christ sits on the right
hand of God. We must have our conversation in heaven. Of this the Hill puts
us in mind, as we are excellently taught by the Psalms proper for this day,
the 15. 24. and 68. read them at your leisure, and remember to learn out of
them, that groueling thoughts beseem not the children of God.

I come at length to the last point, the Israelites encamped before this
mountain, Numb. 9.
the cloud which was their guide rested on it, and where that rested they were
to encampe, and not to move except that moved before them. This was their
twelfth and their longest station, the cloud moved not hence almost in the
space of a year, the Tabernacle was built here, and so much of the Law, as is
recorded until the tenth of Numb. was delivered before they departed hence.

But that which I chiefly note is that the place where they encamped was not
only sacred as you have heard, but also fore-appointed of God. For when God
appeared to Moses in the bush, Exodus 3.
he said unto him, This shall be a token that I have sent thee, when thou have
brought the people out of Egypt, Li. 2. c. 12.
you shall serve God upon this Mount. Which Flauius Josephus expresses very
well, In hoc loco sacrificium gratiarum actionis ob felicem successum
offeretis, where I first acquainted thee with the glad tidings which thou
should carry to my people, there shall thou and my people offer me the
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, when I have made good my word.

We have a laudable custom this week to perambulate our parishes, and in the
fields to sing certain Psalms, or read certain portions of Scripture; this
some dislike as superstitious, it is because themselves are not so religious as
they should be. You see Gods precept, and the practice thereof you have in the
twenty fourth Chapter; you have likewise Jacobs vow, and his performance of
that vow by Gods own appointment. Gene 28.35.
Though we must serve God in the Church, and at home, that hinders not, but we
must serve God also in any other place, where he has done us good, or does, as
in our Cattle, Corn, or whatsoever else belongs unto us.

The Jews have a conceit, and others out of them, that the Israelites pitched
upon the East Side of the Hill, that they might worship toward the West. But
that agrees not with the story, because they came out of the South; and it
has a false ground, that what was commanded them when they were within the
Tabernacle and the Temple (whereof neither was at this time built) should be
observed wheresoever they were; which could not be observed after they were
built, for they were ever to pray toward them, and that could not always be
East. But the truth is, as it appears verse 9. they pitched about the hill, as
they might best see the representation of him, and he might best be heard of
them that was their chief general. There is a mystery in it worth the
marking, with which I will end. It shows that the Church is always in Gods
eye, and God must always be in the Churches eye. And this is on his part a
most gracious, on our part a most blessed aspect.

LEt us beseech God, that we may be ever as the apple of his eye, and he may
ever be the delight of our eyes in his Church Militant, that so he may lift up
the light of his countenance upon us, and we may behold him as he is, and that
for ever in the Church Triumphant. AMEN. The second Sermon.
EXODUS. 19. VERSE. 3, 4. And Moses went up unto God, and the Lord called him
out of the mountain, saying, thus shall thou say to the house of Jacob, and
tell the children of Israel:

Ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I bare you on Eagles
wings, and brought you to my self.


WHen I began to unfold this Chapter unto you, I told you that the contents
thereof were the Circumstances and the Solemnity that did fore-runne the
promulgation of the Law. The Circumstances were two, the Time, the Place, I
have spoken of both. I now come on to the Solemnity.

In opening whereof we shall see. First, that there is a common minister used
therein, Then, that there are two principal branches thereof.

The Minister is Moses, he was common to the parties that did con^ract. The
Parties were, First, The Lord God, Secondly, the house of Jacob, and the
children of Israel, between these Moses went: He went up from the people unto
God, and God returned him with a message to the people. God called him out of
the mountain saying, Thus shall thou say to the house of Jacob.

The branches of the Solemnity are two. The first is a mutual Stipulation
which past before the parties met; The other is a Preparation of the parties
against their meeting, answerable to either of their persons.

Though the stipulation were mutual, yet God begins, and he makes the
first motion, then the Israelites answer and entertain his offer.

In the motion which God makes we must consider; First, whereof he remembers
them. Secondly, upon what terms he will contract with them.

He remembers them of two of his undeniable works. One done for them, The
other done to them. That which was done for them, was a work of Justice, it
was Vindicta, the revenge of their wrong upon that which he did to the
Egyptians. The work which he did to them was a work of mercy, it was
Vindicatio, their deliverance.

But touching this work we are taught more distinctly wherein it stood, and
whereat it aymeth, or rather the Manner, and the End of it; the Manner, God
carried them on Eagles wings; the End, God brought them to himself.

These were the works, and they were undeniable, vos vidistis. You saw those
things with your eyes, and you can desire no better proof. Only thus far
purpose I (God willing) to go at this time, and therefore I will not encumber
your memories with breaking up the Chapter at this time any farther.

That then we may orderly pursue our present purpose, you may remember that the
first particular I pointed out was the common minister. And He was Moses a
remarkable person. Flauius Josephus, and Philo Iudaus amongst the Jews,
Eusebius Caesariensis, and Gregory Nyssen amongst the Christians, to omit
others, have set out the life of this Worthy at large, though some of them have
inserted Apocryphal relations. Not to trouble you with whatsoever might be
gathered out of them, I will only out of the Scripture give you some short
notice of the man. In Exodus the second, he is set out as a spectacle of Gods
extraordinary providence, by the barbarous Commandment of a cruel King, he
was exposed to the mercy of the river Nilus, but he was preserved by that
Kings daughter, and bred as if he had been her son. There was a mystery in
it, God typed out in his person, the condition of his people, whose deliverer
he was then designed to be. He was unexpectedly to set them free when in their
own eyes their case was most desperate.

Neither was his person only typical, his qualities also were heroical, Acts
7.22.
first, his Intellectual, skillful in all the learning of the Egyptians; to
say nothing of his forty years contemplation in Midian, of which Philo
Iudaeus; there are four moral virtues, which they call Cardinal, he had them
all in a high degree. Prudence, God gave him the spirit of Policy, Numb 11.
as it appears by the story of the seventy Elders, to whom God gave part of
his Spirit, when they were made his assistants in the government. Justice, the
apology which he makes upon the rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram,
witnesses that, I have not taken one Ass from them, Numb 10.
neither have I hurt one of them, the Holy Ghost gives him this testimony,
Heb 3.2.
that he was faithful in all Gods house. Temperance, how little was he
transported with the love of profit, Heb. 11.
or pleasure, that thought the rebuke of Christ, greater riches, then the
treasures of Egypt, and chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season. Fortitude, no man can
doubt of that, who considers that being a single man, in show a mean man,
he should adventure to go to so mighty a King in so unpleasing an errand;
not fearing the Kings wrath, when he had exasperated him, nor desisting from
urging what he had in charge, though he were threatened by him; certainly God
that sent him on that message endued him with an extraordinary courage.
Besides these Moral he was renowned for his Theological virtues, his Faith
and his Hope, Saint Paul has chronicled, Heb. 11.
and ranged him with the most famous Worthies. And in Charity he did exceed
them all, he is not only commended for the meekest man that lived, Numb. 12 3.
but so indulgent were his bowels toward his ungracious charge, that he
desired rather to be blotted out of Gods Book of Life, Exodus 32 v. 3^.
then they should be punished as they deserved.

Finally, no National Governor of the Israelites besides Moses did ever
communicate as a type in the threefold honor of Christ. Moses was a Prophet,
Deuteronomy. 34.
and there never lived such a Prophet as Moses was, for his Books contain the
foundation of all prophecy, therefore do the Fathers call him, Oceanum
Theologiae, the great Sea of Divinity. He was a Priest, yea, Sacerdos
Sacerdotum, Nazian.
he did not only act the function, but also consecrated Aaron and his sons
thereunto. Finally, he was a King, a mighty King, not only ruling the twelve
Tribes, but also conquering their enemies, the Amalekites, the Midianites, the
Ammonites, the Bashanites, but above all the Egyptians, and also he sacred his
successor Iosuah, giving him part of his glory.

I have insisted the longer in this delineation of Moses perfections, to the
end that you might perceive, that though God Almighty can compass his will,
by the weakest of means: yet he uses to endow men proportionably to that
wherein he means to employ them, he does perform weighty works by worthy
men; such a one was Abraham the Father of faithful men, David the Father of
faithful Kings, and our Moses called to be the Law giver of Israel. This
Person, so eminent a person went between the parties to the Covenant.

The Parties are two, each called by two names, The first is called the Lord
God, Lord that is the name of his nature Jehovah, he is of none, and all
things are of him. God, that is, the name of the persons, subsisting in the
nature, or in whom the nature does subsist, Elohim signifies all three; so
that we have here Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, even the true
God, and such a one is he that is the first party to the Covenant.

Neither is it enough to conceive of God in gross, we must so as it were
resolve him. We must behold God the Father, that becomes our Father, God the
Son that makes us sons, and God the Holy Ghost that vouchsafes us to be
his Temple: all three persons act their part in the Covenant.

Notwithstanding all three concur, yet must we take special notice of the
second Person Verbum Dei, as the Chalde Paraphrase calls him here, Esaias 63 v
9. Mal 31. Acts 7.
and throughout this Chapter, The Angel of Gods presence, the Angel of the
Covenant, that is Christ, he was the Angel that conuersed with Israel in the
Wilderness. And indeed it was he, that in this Covenant became the
Bridegroom of the Church, for the day of the Covenant was a wedding day, as
anon I shall show you more at large.

The true knowledge of this first party, makes much to the Dignity, the
Commodity, the Constancy of the Covenant. Dignity, for with whom can we
contract more honorably then with our Lord God? The higher he is above us, the
more honor in the contract is done unto us. And this Party makes the
Contract as Profitable, as it is honorable, (...) 2. Ez^k 16.
not only because he can do us good that is the Lord God, but also because he
will do it, because his contract makes up a marriage knot. Finally, a
Covenant made with such a party, is a Covenant of salt, James 1.17.
an incorruptible Covenant, there is no variableness nor shadow of change with
him, and therefore in regard of him we need not fear any divorce.

The second Party is also set forth by two names, the house of Jacob, the
children of Israel; which yield us a Civil and a Mystical Observation. The
Civil is in the first name, therefore are they called the house of Jacob,
because they were his offspring. Read Genesis the tenth, and you shall find
that all Nations in the beginning of the World, did this honor to their first
Ancestors, they were called by their name; after this pattern were the
Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, Ismaelites distinguished by the stock from
whence every one sprang. Conquests and Colonies have long since altered this
fashion, neither can we now tell the true original of any Nation under the
Sun, except that of the vagrant Jews, who by Gods special providence remain
yet unconfounded with other Nations.

The mystical observation is in the second name, the same people are also
called children of Israel. Israel was a second name given to Jacob, signifying
that he had prevailed with God, and his Enemies should not prevail against
him. Now because that blessing was to be not only Personal but National, his
posterity communicated in his second name, and Jacob confirmed it unto them in
the benediction which he gave to the twelve Patriarchs.

In these two names then we are taught, that as this people were to be a seed,
not only according to the flesh, but also according to the promise, so were
they to enter into the Covenant, as persons clothed with this double relation
to their Ancestors. We have a double birth, one from ours mothers womb, the
other from the Churches womb; the latter we claim in right of our parents
from whom we have the former, and we should remember that God expects we
should be as well heirs of their Faith, as of their Lands; and not look
otherwise to have any interest in his Covenant, except we be as well children
of Israel, as of the house of Jacob. Well, by this time you reasonably
understand who the parties are that enter into the Covenant.

Now I must show you that Moses whom before I described was their common
Minister. It is plain in the text, that he went up from the people unto God,
that is, to the mountain of God, as the seventy supply; add, to the
representation of God that was upon the mountain, for that is meant by the
name of God. And God sent him down with a message to the people; that is
plain in the text, God called him out of the mountain, saying, thus shall
thou say to the house of Jacob, etc.

It may be a question whether Moses went up before God called, as some think
he did; to relate the success of his embassage to Pharaoh; and to receive
instructions what manner of worship God would have done unto him in that place,
in performance of the sign which he gave to Moses of good success: or to be
farther directed what the people should now do. These may be thought
reasonable inducements to Moses to go up uncalled. Others think that God
called before Moses went up. The reason is, because he had before been checked
for coming too near, when God first appeared there unto him; it is likely
therefore, say they, he would be more modest, and not ascend before he was
called, therefore they render the text for God had called him. But whatsoever
is to be thought of this question, the whole Chapter puts it out of question
that he went between them both, that he was Gods mouth to the people; and the
peoples mouth to God, and so was as the Apostle calls him a Mediator, Gal. 3.

But least we mistake we must observe that there is a principal and a
Ministerial Mediator. S. Ambrose opens the difference between them, Tom. 2.
p. 3^^.
the brief of it is, Moses was but a figure whereof Christ was the Truth; or
to speak in the Apostles words, Christ was the son, and Moses was but the
servant, to signify that there is such distance betwixt God and man, that they
cannot come together without some interuenient person. God appointed properly
his son to be the Mediator, but in a type of him he appointed Moses. And
there is a perpetual succession of such mediating persons, in the Clergy,
which do administer (...), they inform us of Gods mind, and present the
Churches duty unto God, and though in a much lower degree then Moses, yet we
must repute them Mediators, Ministerial Mediators, otherwise the word cannot
be usurped without arrogancy by any mere creature.

I have done with the common Minister, and come now to the first branch of the
solemnity, which is the mutual stipulation; mutual I say, this is worth the
marking. That God would be pleased to Contract, that may Command, this is a
great grace done to man; for so though we owe all our duty to him, yet for
our performance of it, he becomes now a debtor unto us. Not only so, but also
our good deeds have a double valuation, one of Justice, another of Mercy. Gods
Justice when it scanneth them, finds them very mean, Mercy sets a higher
rate upon them, it esteems them not only as a duty, but as a means which by
Gods ordinance may acquire a reward. So is God pleased to grace our duty, for
it has not this estimate ex dignitate operis, for any intrinsecall worth, but
ex dignatione gratiae, out of Gods gracious acceptance. The Fathers meant no
more by the merit of works, and we should not differ from the Church of Rome,
about the word merit, if they did not rack it farther. It is too much pride to
challenge the reward of our works at Gods Justice, which are happy if we may
expect it from his Mercy: the rather because the little which God requires
and would accept, the best of us do not perform as we should, we need a
second, that we may have the benefit of his former grace.

Though the Stipulation be mutual, yet God makes the first motion: and indeed
who should begin in such a work? who can think himself worthy of such a
Contract, if it were not offered of God? especially being in the state of
sin. Nay, when it is offered, we have good reason to think our selves most
unworthy of it. 8. Sam 25.
Abigail when David's servants told her that he would take her to wife, bowed
her self on her face to the earth and said, Behold, let thy handmaid be a
servant to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord. And how then should we
abase our selves, when an offer is made us of marriage to the son of God?
Such hopes could never enter into our hearts, therefore God must needs prevent
us therein, we cannot presume that we shall come so near him, except he
vouchsafe thus to favor us.

But let us come to the Motion, and see whereof he does remember them. From the
first time that Moses brought them the message, that they should be delivered
out of Egypt, they had showed themselves untoward people, murmuring upon the
least occasion, and repenting that they had hearkened to Gods voice, and come
out of Egypt. God does not challenge them for this, though well he might, and
the best of us would have done; we would not have endured so great
unthankfulness, but God was more patient. Before the contract he did not so
much as reprove them, much less strike them for their murmuring. And how often
does God pass in silence our sins, and win us to our own good with second
favors, when he might justly punish us with neglect of the former?

In steed thereof he recounts those things, wherein he had already well
deserved of them, that the remembrance thereof might make them more willing to
enter the covenant by virtue whereof God was pleased to deserve of them much
better. The works of God whereof they are put in mind are two. The first is
that which he had done for them, and it was a work of Justice, he had revenged
the wrongs which they had received from the Egyptians. The Egyptians were of
the posterity of Cham, infamous for Idolatry, -- Quis nescit qualia demens
Aegyptus portenta colat? so that there was cause enough why God should destroy
the Egyptians, though they had nothing to do with the Israelites, but God
took an occasion from the wrongs done to his people, to power forth his
displeasure upon them. Wisd. 19.


The wrong was double. First they brought friends into bondage, that had well
deserved of them. The story is plain in Genesis how Joseph saved them from
perishing by famine, and therefore how willingly they received him and his into
the Communion of their Laws, therefore it was against all Law to make them
bondmen. God therefore which is judge of all the world sent Moses, and by him
commanded Pharaoh to deliver them, and to suffer them being his first borne, to
go three days journey into the wilderness and sacrifice unto him. But so
far was Pharaoh from obeying God, that hardening his heart, he vexed the
Israelites more: What then did God? In revenge of his people, he brake
Pharaohs hard heart, he made the proud King give him the glory both of his
Justice and of his power, while he destroyed that ancient, that goodly
Kingdom, and slew the persons, the principal persons of it, the offspring of
those whom Joseph had saved, together with their country. Moreover he forced
them to make an amends to the Israelites for their servitude, not only in
willingly letting them go, but in furnishing them also for their journey with
the richest of their garments, and most precious of their Jewels. This did God
to the Egyptians. And indeed it was God that did it. For though there were some
ceremonial means used, yet there were none used that were effectual; Moses
and the people did but look on, Gods immediate power produced those wonderful
effects. The same God that took this vengeance for them, is the same still,
and he will never suffer his Church to be unrevenged; though he suffer her to
be cruelly persecuted, when he sees time he will do to her enemies, as he
did to the enemies of Israel. Saint Paul, Saint Peter, and Saint Jude teach it
briefly. 2. These 1. 2 Ep. 2.
Saint John in the Revelation delivers the Doctrine more a large by way of
prophecy, and the Ecclesiastical Story shows, that that prophecy is
accomplished for a good part of it.

The second work shows what God did to the Israelites, and that is a work
of Mercy. Moses here teaches the Manner, and the End of it.

The Manner. God bore them on Eagles wings; we account it a great honor that
God does unto men, when he gives his Angels charge over them, to carry them
in all their ways, that they dash not their foot against a stone. And indeed
it is a great honor that these glorious spirits which attend Gods throne,
should become ministering spirits and attend sinful men. How great an honor
is it then that God does us, Heb. 1.14.
when he himself vouchsafes to be the supporter of Israel? Carries them as
a man carries his little babe. God puts them in mind of it by Esaias, Chap.
46. verse. 3.4. Hearken unto me O house of Jacob, Deuteronomy. 1.
and all the remnant of Israel, which are borne by me from the belly, which are
carried from the womb, and even to your old age I am he, and even to the hoarie
hairs will I carry you, I have made, and I will bear, even I will carry and
I will deliver you. And Christ like the good shepherd in the Gospel, bears
his sheep, and so likewise in the Prophets. And indeed the passage out of
Egypt was a Divine transportation: for of so many hundred thousand, that past
so great a journey through so desolate places, there was not one sick, not one
tired; and how could they have all been so well at ease, except God had
carried them? They might well take to themselves those words of Esaias. (...). 31.
They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up
with wings as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary, they shall walk,
and not be faint. When at any time we have strength to do that which neither
in our own judgment, nor in the judgment of others we are able to do, we
must give the glory of it to God, as David does in the 18. Psalm, we must
acknowledge that God did carry us through.

God does not only say that he did carry them, but he carried them upon
Eagles wings, quasi super alas aquilarum, says the Chalde Paraphrase, as it
were upon Eagles wings. There is a Simile in the phrase, which breeds two
inquiries, first who is understood in the Eagles, secondly what the Wings mean.

Some understand Moses and Aaron the two guides, that led the people of Israel
out of Egypt, and will have them compared to Eagles, Propter acumen
intelligentiae, and altitudinem vitae, by reason of their piercing judgment,
Hom 46. in Matthew.
and their holy life. Saint Chrysostom nearer to our purpose says, that they
were Mollissimae pennae misericordiae diuinae, as it were the down feathers of
Gods mercy, because they handled the people committed to their charge
tenderly, and entreated them gently, in imitation of Eagles, of whom some
report (how truly let the naturalists inquire) that whereas other birds carry
their young ones in their talents or claws, which cannot be done without some
griping, they lay them upon their wings, and so transport them without any
grieuance: which is a good emblem for Magistrates, and teaches them paternall
affection toward their people.

Saint Ambrose resembles Christ to an Eagle, Lib. de Solomone
and that in three points. First because as the Eagle fluttereth over her young
ones, and safegards them from any that would annoy them, so does Christ
carefully protect his Church. Secondly as the Eagle stirs up her nest, and
takes up her young ones, enforcing them to look toward the Sun, thereby
trying her generous or degenerating brood: even so does Christ make trial of
true and counterfeite Christians, he reiects them as counterfeits that have but
Owls sight, and which hate the light; but those which can look upon the Sun
of righteousness, and delight in beholding him, they go for true Christians.
And why? They can see their pray a far off, and where the carcass is, there
will the Eagles be. Sursum Corda, though Christ be in heaven their thoughts
ascend thither. Thirdly, the Eagle hates the Serpent, and wheresoever he
sees him, renteth him with his beak, and Christ the seed of the woman did
break the Serpents head, there is perpetual enmity between them and their
seed. There is good correspondencie in these points between Christ and the
Eagle; but they cannot be so fitly applied in this place, because the word in
my Text is plural Aquilarum, of Eagles except we shall say that Christ had in
him the perfection of many Eagles, or was attended with many Angels, which are
sometimes compared to Eagles, Ezekiel 1. Reu 4.
and the Cherubins in the Temple and Tabernacle had large and broad wings.

But let us come to the wings. By them are meant two things, the first is the
height, the second is the swiftness of the flight.

The Eagle flies very high, Prou. 23. Ier 49.
whereupon many Proverbs are grounded in Scripture. And this high flight
intimates that the Israelites were carried above the reach of their enemies,
so that they could neither hinder nor hurt them. Not that they were lifted up
in the air, but they were as safe as if they had been: because (says the
Psalmist) thou have made the Lord the most high thy habitation, Psalm 91 ^
there shall no evil befall thee. Certainly, the Cloud interposed between the
Israelites and Egyptians would not suffer them to take any harm. And indeed
the children of God are very secure except it be for their good, their enemies
shall never have their will of them, no more then the Egyptians had of the
Israelites.

As the Eagle flies high, so does he fly swift also; the Scripture groundeth
many similies hereupon, Job 9.1. Sam. 1. and gives us to understand, that from
the time that the Egyptians let the Israelites go, which was ^o soon as Moses
had performed all the miracles intended of God for plaguing the Egyptians, the
Israelites had a very quick passage. And indeed, it is a wonder, that six
hundred thousand men besides women and children, and a rabble of strangers,
should in one night be ready and get out of their enemies land, and that with
all their impediments of stuff and cattle, and flocks. Neither was it a less
wonder that in one night, they should all pass through the Red Sea, and
standing on the shore, the next morning see that all their enemies were
destroyed. Certainly, they that made such speed were carried upon Eagles wings;
it was a divine power that conveyed them. And how quickly does God change the
face of the world, when he is pleased to work a great deliverance? The Church
of Christians is not herein inseriour to the Church of the Israelites. For as
the Israelites had a Dragon, so Pharaoh is called, Ezekiel. 29. from whom they
fled; even so have the Christians, Revel. 12. And Eagles wings are there given
to the woman, the type of the Christian Church, to sly into the wilderness:
as the Israelites upon Eagles wings were carried into their wilderness. So
like is God always to himself, and the Church always provided for a like.

I may not forget the order of these words, that work which was first done, is
first commemorated, and that which was last done, is commemorated in the last
place. And why? though God for sin does otherwise punish the wicked, yet in
this world he does it commonly, that he may free his Church. But I touched at
this before, therefore I will pass it over, and come to the end of both
works. God brought them to himself. And this is a greater blessing then that
he carried them on Eagles wings, that showed a deliverance from evil, this a
bestowing of good. The Eagle does sometimes carry her young ones only from a
dangerous unto a safer nest, sometimes she rouseth them out of their sloth,
and directs them where they may find their prey. Even so deals God with his
children, he freeth them from danger, Luke 1.
and brings them to comfort, He brings them to himself, to his service
(says the one Chaldie Paraphrase) to the doctrine of his Law (says another)
and indeed we are delivered from our enemies that we may serve God, and live
according to his Laws. If there were no more in it, it is a great comfort so
to be employed.

But there is more in it, I told you that the end was a Covenant of wedlock,
so that to my self, is as much as to be appropriated unto me, and to be my
Spouse, to be the Mother of my children, and bear inheritors of the Kingdom
of Heaven. Any way to come near God is a great honor, but to come so near,
and become so dear, is more grace then man's heart can conceive, or his tongue
utter. But the two next Sermons will be spent for the most part in amplifying
this, therefore I will speak no more of it at this time.

You have heard of both the works. One point remains which I will touch in a
word. Both these works are undeniable, the proof is Vos vidistis, I appeal
to your eyes, whether I speak not a truth, and your fresh experience does
justify my words. Rational proofs satisfy much but not so much as
sensitive, therefore the intuitiue knowledge that Angels have, is far more
excellent then our discursiue: and what is our hope, but that our faith shall
be turned into sight? Neither does sight work so upon our head only, but upon
our heart also, Segnius irritant animos dimissa per aures
Quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus.
had God done these things and they had only heard of them, they would have
been moved with them much less: the more undoubted their knowledge, the more
strong should their affections be.

Finally observe, that Vos vidistis you have seen, is referred not only to the
work of Mercy, but also to that of Justice, wherein God does condescend to an
affection that is predominant in us. It does add not a little to the content
we take in our better estate, if we see withal our enemies brought into our
worser. Psalm. 58.
When the righteous sees the vengeance, he will rejoice, and wash his feet in
the blood of the wicked. Mal. 1.
Your eyes, (says God to the Jews) shall see the desolation of Edom, and you
shall say the Lord will be magnified from the border of Israel. Luke 16.
Lazarus in Abraham's bosom to his greater comfort sees Dives burning in Hell.
Esaias 66.
And after the last judgment, the Saints shall go forth, and see the
carcasses of them that have transgrest against God. This does not commend
(...), but allows congratulating of Gods judgments.

To conclude. These two works, serve to work two affections, which sway much
in the ordering of our life, Fear, and Love. In the work of Justice, you see
that God is almighty, there is no striving with him, he that will not relent
with repentance, shall be grinded with his vengeance. In the work of Mercy,
you see that God is bountiful. Let us not be unthankful, but let us repay
Love with Love. In a word, seeing every day God does present such spectacles
before our eyes, God grant we be not like the Israelites of whom Moses
complayneth that they were as if they had no eyes,

RAther he give us grace to make such use of our eyes in beholding his works,
that his Fear and his Love, may ever live in our hearts. So may he ever
manifest his Justice for us, his Goodness to us, until having delivered us
from all our enemies here on earth, he bring us to himself, to live with him
blessed for ever in Heaven. AMEN. The third Sermon.
EXODUS 19. VERSE. 5, 6. Now therefore if ye will obey my voice indeed, and
keep my Covenant; then shall ye be a peculiar treasure unto me above all
people; for all the earth is mine.

And ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation. These are
the words which thou shall speak unto the children of Israel.


IN the motion which God by Moses makes unto the Israelites; I told you that
there are two points considerable; the first is whereof God does remember them,
the second upon what terms God will contract with them. I have handled the
former, I come now to the later, wherein you shall see first what God requires,
then what he offers; both points are to be handled, first severally, and then
jointly.

That which God requires is Obedience and Fidelity, Obedience; They must hear
Gods voice; Fidelity; they must keep Gods Covenant; that which God does
promise is a plentiful reward, which is set forth first Comparaetiuely, then
Absolutely; Comparatively, it is a gracious prerogative, for they shall be a
peculiar treasure to God above all People; and this prerogative is gracious,
because all the world is Gods Absolutely, it is set forth in regard of
Eminency, and Sanctity; Eminency, for they shall be unto God a King dome of
Priests; Sanctity for they shall be unto him an holy Nation.

Having considered these points severally, we must consider them jointly also;
we must see how that which God does offer depends upon that which God does
require; Gods blessings are promised upon condition of our duties, Now
therefore if ye will obey, etc. Then shall ye be, etc.

This is the substance of the whole passage, whereof I mean to handle at this
time only the first branch, whereunto that we may all learn to conform, let
us in the fear of God listen to the particulars thereof, as they shall now be
vnsolded briefly, and in their order.

First, then of the Obedience; Israel must hear Gods voice. I need not in many
words observe unto you that God being a Spirit, has properly no corporal
voice, such as we have, but yet by his almighty power, he can at his
pleasure create voices, and by them reveal his word unto men* or else if he
d^e not create a new voice, he can by his inspired servants deliver his mind.

But to make this point a little plainer. Gods voice is either direct, or
reflected; Direct is that which he does immediately utter unto men, such was
that voice, wherein God delivered the Decalogue in Mount Sinai, a terrible
voice and wonderful; wonderful in that it was heard of so many hundred
thousand at one instant; terrible, for it did so affright them that they
desired to hear it no more.

Moses in Deutronomie does not only describe, but remember also the Israelites
of this voice, and it is this voice that is principally understood in this
place.

Besides this direct there is a reflected voice of God, wherein God makes
himself known to some particular persons, with whom he talks face to face,
as he did to Moses, and by them makes his will known to the whole Church;
this reflected voice was used by God, because the people could not endure to
hear the direct; they did deprecate the hearing of that, and God condescended
to their desire, and from that time forward spoke unto them, first, by Moses,
and then by other men.

But this reflected voice has a reflection also; as there may be an echo of an
echo; and so the Priests that received the Law from Moses and the Prophets, and
read it to the people, and the Pastors that receive the Gospel from Christ
and his Apostles, and preach it to the world are Gods voices; of them all
Christ's saying is true, He that hears you, hears me, and he that hears
me, hears him that seut me.

The voice then must not be restrained to the direct, it must be extended to
the reflected also, to the primarie, and to the secondarie, so long as all
three agree in one, and the later does represent the former; and so by
consequent all the Scripture is Gods voice, and they are Gods voices unto us
that are sincere Preachers of the Scripture, which now is the summarie of Gods
Word; for other voice of God we must now acknowledge none, but leave the
Romanists, and Enthusiastes to be deluded with their counterfeit Echoes, and
imaginary Voices.

Having showed you what is meant by the voice, I must now show you what it is
to hear; Of hearing then there are two sorts, a physical and a moral; a man
is defined to be animal rationale, a living creature endued with reason; now if
he hear only as a living creature, that hearing is common to him with beasts,
which having sense are apt to apprehend sounds and be moved with them; but a
man in hearing must do more, he must hear not only as animal, but also as
rationale, his sense must be but as a gate to convey the Voice unto his reason;
and then must the Voice work upon his reasonable powers, his understanding and
his will; it must inform his understanding, and he must assent to it, and it
must persuade his Will and Affections, and he must also submit to it, otherwise
he does not hear as a reasonable creature, though as a living creature he
does hear; well may his action be Physical, moral it cannot be. But even
Moral hearing is of two sorts, Philosophical or Theological; philosophical
I call that which goes no farther then natural reason can carry us; and so
if we hear the Voice of God, the contents thereof will be no better then folly
to our blind understanding which scanneth them; 1. Cor. ^ Romans 1.
or we shall prove our selves fools when we draw our conclusions out of them;
And as for our Will and Affections, they will be enmity to them, and that our
sinfulness may appear more sinful, by them, we will be more exasperated, to
set our selves against God. Romans 7
Man's reason is unreasonable in hearing Gods voice, which otherwise in hearing
man's voice shows it self very reasonable; witness the many examples of
Philosophers Eagle-eyed in humane literature, but Owle-eyed when they read the
Scripture, such were Porphyrie, Gallen, and others.

There is then an other Moral hearing, which is Theological. When God says
Ephata to a man's ears, as Christ did to the deaf man in the Gospel; when God
does circumcise men's ears, as the Law speaks; when God does open men's ears
to hear as the Learned; when our hearing is tempered with Faith, and we rest
undoubtedly resolved of Gods truth in regard of our understanding, and in
regard of our Will, the word of God is sweeter unto us then Honey and the Honey
comb, more to be desired then Gold, yea then much fine Gold: Psalm 19.10.
then we hear Theologically, we do audiendo audire, hear indeed; or as it is
rendered, we do obey Gods voice, we are such hearers as are doers of Gods
word. Psalm. 10 6.
And this was excellently figured in the boaring of the servants ear, who in
the Sabaticall year would not take his liberty, out of the Love he bare to
his Master, and his Wife and Children: Christ in his own person makes the
allusion, and we may accommodate it to our own persons. In a word, a man does
hear Theologically, when the Law which is perfect conuerteth his Soul, the
testimony of the Lord that is sure, Psalm 19.
makes him wise of simple, the statutes of the Lord that are right rejoice his
heart, and the commandment of the Lord that is pure does illighten his eyes;
so that this hearing-eare is of God, Deuteronomy 29.
as also the Voice is; and therefore Moses tells the Israelites that God has
not given them ears to hear, and Christ in the Gospel says, qui habet aures
ad audiendum audiat, for vobis datum est, it is not to every body given to
hear; but of them to whom it is given, Christ has pronounced, Bless are the
ears that hear that which you hear.

Having heard what the Voice is, and what it is to Hear, we must now join
them together; and indeed speaking is for hearing in civil society, neither
would God ever have given men tongues, if he had not given them ears. And if
for this life he so provides, how much more does he provide so for the life
to come? Surely S. Paul says, that he received grace and apostleship (...),
Rom 1 5. 1. These 2 13.
that men might hear him, with faith; and he calls the word of God (...), a
word of hearing, that is a word which must be heard; Esaias goes a step farther,
and calls the word of God, Cap 53 1. Rom 10 16.
Schemugnah, Saint Paul renders it (...) hearing; who has believed our
hearing? So it is in the original; the meaning is, who has believed the word
that we Preach, to the end that men might hear it? The word of God is still to
sound in men's ears, and men are still to hear the sound thereof.

How injurious then is the Roman discipline, Luke 11. Matthew. 23.
which like the Jewish Lawyers takes away from people the Key of knowledge and
shut up the kingdom of heaven against men? Which heretofore made it a mortal
sin to read Gods word? And now clogs the liberty it grants, with such
cautions that very few (especially of those that are with in the reach of the
Inquisition) dare be acquainted with it; yea and those clogs content not, but
now it is thought fitter utterly to deny liberty.

As such teachers are injurious: so are there some scholars impious, that may
but will not hear, whether out of contempt or neglect; they are impious
murderers of their own Souls; for this Voice only is the Voice of life, and
it quickneth by the ear; although we must not so limit the conueiance thereof
by the corporal ear, that we exclude the eye; for our eye also since Gods
word is written by reading, may convey Gods Voice unto the ear of our Soul;
and men by this second means are not a little edified in Gods truth; the
Fathers (especially Chrysostom) does commend reading earnestly to the people;
yea the Law has commanded it long since, when it willed the Jews, to write
the Law upon their door posts; certainly the Jews even at this day inure
their children to a daily reading of the Law; so soon as they come to years
of discretion; and it were to be wished that Christians did imitate them therein.

But mark that as the Israelites must hear Gods Voice, so they must hear it
absolutely, for God does not yet acquaint them with the contents of his Voice,
he speaks indifinitely, he requires obedience not to this or that
Commandment, not to this or that Article of faith, but to whatsoever he shall
purpose. And well may God require such obedience; for he is first (...) Truth
of himself, yea Truth it self, so that a man need not fear that at any time,
or in any thing God can be deceived, or will deceive us; neither can agree
with the Omniscience, and Holiness of his nature. Secondly, God is (...),
Almighty, and the sovereign commander of man; so that his word is not only
Truth, but a Law; where the word of this King goes, there goes power; it
admits no disputing, no resisting; As he is (...) Truth, so we may safely
captiuate our wits unto his wisdom; as he is (...), so we must dutifully
submit our wills unto his commands; upon these two foundations are built our
absolute obedience unto Gods indefinite Voice.

The word my voice is a word of limitation, Ioh. 10.
Christ's sheep hear his voice, the voice of a stranger they will not hear;
Gods voice must be reputed obiectum adaequatum of his people hearing; we must
neither stretch nor shrink it, neither add thereto, nor take therefrom.

These two Attributes of Truth and Power, are so proper unto God, that they are
not communicable to any creature; Omnis homo mendax, Psalm. 116.
every man may deceive or be deceived; and Omne sub regno graniore regnum est,
the greatest Sovereigns unto men, are subject unto God; therefore men's words
must be tried, before they must be believed; we must not credit all their
words, and we must yield obedience unto men, no farther then may stand with our
obedience to God. This must be observed, because the glory that is due only
to God, is too often communicated to men: so Disciples take their masters
instructions as Divine oracles, and follow them in error, out of a preconceipt
that they are not men likely to err. But Saint Paul's rule is, Omnia probate,
1. These. 5 1. Job. 4.
quod bonum est tenete, prove all things, but hold that which is best, and
Saint John, try the spirits whether they be of God or no; for many false
Prophets are gone out into the world; Amicus Plato magis amica veritas, we must
never dote so upon any man, as to forget that he is a man, that is a creature
subject unto error. If this caution had been observed, and the Disciples had
in all ages examined their masters Doctrine, by his word that is (...): neither
should the Church heretofore have been, neither would it now be pestered with
those many Sects that dictract the same.

As Disciples have their caution, so have Subjects also; they must dutifully
obey their superiors, but always with a saving: saving the Allegiance which
they owe unto the Superior of Superiors, that is unto God; so long as there
is no contradiction between the commandments of God and superior men,
subjects must obey, though the obedience be unsavory, and the command rigid;
but so soon as there appears a contradiction, endure they must patiently the
Sanction of the Law, but perform the Precept, they must not. Were this caution
observed by Subjects, did they consider the subordination of all earthly Powers
to the power of God: many enormous sins had never been committed, neither
would the people so familiarly shift their Religion at the beck of their
superior.

But above all usurpations of Gods glory in this kind, take notice of the
Votiue blind obedience of the Religious Romanists (especially of the Jesuits)
they make it a part of their solemn profession, and put it in practice
impiously and mischieuously, as the world has palpaple and woeful proof, True
it is that they pretend good limitations set to their Vow, as that the
superior must not be obeyed against Gods Law, and the law of Nature: but while
they make the superior the interpreter of both these Laws, and that they must
rest in their superiors Voice, as in the Voice of Christ: what they abhor in
words, that they commit in deeds; they commit many things both against the Law
of God, and nature. And in general all Papists that hold the Popes
infallabilitie, taking from him the resolution of our faith and manners, how
do they serve God, against Gods will, and massacre Gods servants out of an
erroneous zeal for Gods glory?

Let the conclusion then of this point be, that no man may dispute or resist
any voice of God, but withal he does challenge Gods Truth, and his Power; and
whosoever requires absolute credit, and obedience to all his words, he usurps
Gods Attributes which are incommunicable, that is (...), and (...); Unerring
Truth, and Vncontrowable Power; And so have you the first of those things which
God does require which is Obedience.

The second follows which is Fidelity; Israel must keep the Covenant of
God; a Covenant is a solemn contract made between diverse persons; and Gods
Covenant is the contract that is made between him and his Church in those
terms, I will be your God, and you shall be my people.

But of Covenants there are two sorts; Foedus aequum, and Faedus iniquum (as
the Ciuilians speak) Foedus aequum is that which is made between persons that
are of equal rank, whereof one is not superior to the other; Foedus iniquum
is that which is made between persons, that are impari iure, of unequal rank
whereof the one is superior to the other. When we speak of Gods Covenant made
with man, we must not conceive that that the persons are equal, they are very
unequal, there is no proportion between them, neither can there be between
an infinite and a finite person; this must be observed in the very first
Covenant that ever God made, the Covenant of the Creation; for then the Persons
differed as the Creator and Creature, there was odds between them.

Secondly, as there may be odds between the persons that enter into a
Covenant. so there may have been before they enter into the Covenant no
enmity, or no great enmity between them; Nations that never were at war
may enter into Covenant one to strengthen himself by the other, or one to have
the freer commerce with the other; but oftentimes it falls out that Leagues put
an end unto quarrels, and Covenants are the security of a reconciliation, and
open the intercourse of mutual good offices which war shut up. Though the
Covenant of the Creation had no precedent enmity, yet that of the Redemption
had, and therefore it is called not only (...) a Covenant; but also (...) a
Reconciliation; when we were enemies Christ died for us, and by his blood was
the New Testament ratified.

Thirdly, the Covenant primarily here meant is the Decalogue; on those Ten
Words did God make a Covenant with Israel; and the Tables wherein they were
written were called the Tables of the Covenant; 1 eut 9 11.
the Arc wherein the Tables were put is called the Arc of the Covenant; 1.
Reg 8.1.
and the Tabernacle wherein the Arc was, was called the Tabernacle of the
Covenant. But this Covenant of the Decalogue has a double consideration,
whereof the one is Intrinsicall, the other is Extrinsicall; the Intrinsicall is
that which looks to the natural power of the Law, which is to discover
sin, to convict a sinner, and to doom him according to his desert; the
Extrinsicall consideration is that which looks to the supernatural power of
the Law, and that is to be a Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, who is the
end of the Law, and came to fulfill it. To shadow this double consideration,
the Decalogue was clothed with the Ceremonial Law, wherein the offerer
imposing hands upon the Sacrifice did confess himself guilty, and the
slaying of the Beast showed the desert of a sinner; thus there appeared what is
the natural power of the Law. The supernatural power also appeared in the
ceremonies, in that the offerer unburdened himself upon the Sacrifice as a
sinner does upon our Savior Christ, and that by the death of the beast the
offerer was exempted from death: as men are delivered from death, by the death
and passion of our Savior Christ. Wherefore though the Covenant of the
Redemption be but one, yet in regard of the shadow, it is called the Old, and
in regard of the substance the New.

You have seen what is the Covenant of God, you must now learn what it is to
keep it. First, we must learn to observe our distance, though God do us the
honor to contract with us, yet must not we presume to equal our selves to
God; for so shall we betray our ignorance that we know not of what kind the
Covenant is; we must therefore discern the inequality of the Persons that
have contracted, and we must confess how low God has descended that has
vouchsafed to take us into so near a reference.

As in keeping the Covenant we must observe our distance, so must we not be
unmindful of the danger, which we have escaped thereby; he that considers
not that he stood at Gods mercy when he was received to grace, that he was by
merit a firebrand of Hell when by mercy he was designed to be a Saint in
Heaven: cannot as he ought, keep the Covenant of God. Now the Decalogue
wherein this Covenant stands has a double consideration; therefore he that
will keep Gods Covenant must make use of both.

First, he must make use of the Intrinsecall consideration, and of every branch
thereof; by the Law comes the knowledge of sin, therefore that he may have
a true iudgemement of the nature, differences, and degrees of sins, he must
be well conversant in the Decalogue, he must not trust to Moral Philosophy,
to Civil Constitutions, and Customs, to Pharisaicall or Papisticall
Traditions, these are but imperfect guides in such inquiries. Only Gods
Covenant can tell what is, and what is not finne; Moses is the best Casuist.

Secondly he must often survey himself at this glass of the Law, and there
find the excesses, and defects of his life; no other thing can represent them
so truly as this will do; this Glass will neither flatter nor deforme us; our
consciences directed hereby will return a true verdict, and indict us of no
less sin then we have committed.

Thirdly, as a man must convict himself according to the Law: so according to
the Law must he doom himself; acknowledge whatsoever is due to a wretched
sinner, what place, what state, what worm, what fire, what loss, what pain,
that all these are due unto himself; this Intrinsecall consideration of the
Law must every one have that will observe Gods Covenant.

But he must not rest here, he must come on to the Extrinsecall, the
supernatural Power of the Law, whereat the Lawgiuer did finally aim; man
finding no innocence in himself must seek it in Christ; he must unload his
conscience upon the propitiatory Sacrifice, and wash his garments white in the
blood of that Lamb; through confidence in Christ's death he must insult
against that death which is the wages of his sin. Rom 6.
Finally what was impossible for the Law by reason of the weakness of his
flesh, Romans 8.
this must be his comfort that God sending his own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh but after the spirit.

You see what it is to keep the Covenant of God. I may not omit the reason why
God calls it his Covenant; and the reason is twofold: First, because we being
inferiors and enemies could not prescribe any Articles to God, but were to
take such as he was pleased to prescribe both to himself and us; so that
though there be two parties to the Conenant, yet is there but one that
proscribes. And we may well be content with it for being in that case that we
were, in, we could not have wished for so much as God has done for us. A
second Reason is, because in point of Religion couenanting with any other is
forbidden; God brooketh not, that, he having appropriated himself as it were
unto us, we should communicate unto others the honor that is due to him. The
Covenant of God is of the nature of those leagues which require entire
offensive and defensive service; we must have to do with no others but for the
Lord, and in the Lord.

I draw to an end. Let us lay together the two parts of the Text, and so you
may learn two good lessons.

That which in the former part is called Gods voice, is in the later part
called Gods Covenant; the later name sweetens the former; the first is
imperious, the second is gracious; and who would not hear that voice the
argument whereof is nothing but Gods wonderful favor; though the pride of our
nature be impatient to be commanded, yet can it not choose but take it for a
great honor that we are contracted with, by the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and
Earth; that we are contracted with, about our heavenly advancement, and our
everlasting emolument.

Our second Lesson is. That seeing to hear Gods Voice is to keep his
Covenant, the breach of our duty is not only Sin but Persidiousnesse; our
evil deserving of God is aggrauated by Gods well deserving of us, which we
should well observe: for if we have not lost all ingenuitie, the due
consideration hereof will work in us the deeper remorse for sin past, and be
unto us the stronger preservative against sin to come.

Add a third Lesson; that hearing the Voice is put before keeping the
Covenant, because that is a means unto this; for we cannot keep Gods
Covenant, but by the grace which we receive by hearing his Voice. I will end
with the Prayer of King David.

TEach me, Psalm 119, 33, 34
O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end; give me
understanding and I shall keep thy Law; yea, I shall observe it with my whole
heart. The fourth Sermon.
EXODUS 19. VERSE. 5, 6. Then shall ye be a peculiar treasure unto me above
all people: for all the earth is mine.

And ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation.


IN the message which God sent by Moses to Israel, testifying upon what terms
he would covenant with them, there are (as heretofore I have observed two
remarkabe points, the first teaching What God does require; the second, What
God does offer. And these points must be considered, first in themselves, we
must see what they mean; then between themselves, we must see how the one
depends upon the other.

I have handled the first of these points; I have showed you what God requires
of Israel, he requires their absolute obedience, and their constant fidelity,
that they hear his voice indeed, and that they keep his Covenant.

It follows that I now come on to the second point, that I show you what God
offers, and that which he offers unto Israel is a gracious Prerogative.

A Prerogative is some great good vouchsafed us, wherein we exceed others; and
in Gods offer there is a manifold good contained.

This good is first specified, then it is amplified. In specifying it, God does
first resemble it, he tells the Israelites they shall be a pecullar
treasure; Then he brancheth it into a double blessing, an eminency of their
state, They shall be a Kingdom of Priests; and a Sanctity of their persons,
They shall be an holy Nation.

These blessings so specified, are also amplified in the words, Eritis mihi;
ye shall be to me. It is a great blessing to be a peculiar treasure, to be a
royal Priesthood, to be an holy Nation; but to he any of these, how much more
to be all these unto God, does not a little improve our blessing?

You see the Good is great, which they are vouchsafed; But we do not yet see
that the having of it is a Prerogative. It becomes then such, if it be not a
common good, and if therein we go beyond others; and such is Isreal's
blessing, that which God will vouchsafe them to be, they shall be above all
other Nations. The offer you see does contain a Prerogative.

But this Prerogative is moreover Gracious; gracious, whether you respect the
Receiver, or the Giver, the receiver vos ye, persons of no worth, the giver
God, that has no want, all the earth is mine; in so little worth of theirs, and
less want of Gods, to honor them so far, must needs be a work of Grace.

I have laid before you Gods offer; All Saints day.
it deserves your attentive listening unto it, the day which we solemnize
puts us in mind of our interest therein, and we may become all Saints,
because this gracious Prerogative is offered to us all. Wherefore that we may
partake it, let our diligent ears quicken the desire of our hearts, to
entertain these particulars, which I shall now unfold unto you, briefly and in
their order.

I begin with the Prerogative; The Good therein offered is first resembled unto
a peculiar treasure. Of the goods which a man has, (if a man have much goods)
he commits some to his servants, they are trusted with the keeping, and the
care thereof, but if he have any thing of special price, and which he
esteems more then ordinary, that he lays in his own Cabinet, he reserueth
the keeping thereof unto himself. The portion of Good which is so tendered, is
by the Holy Ghost called Segulia, 1 (...) 19. Luck^ 2 8.
which we render a peculiar treasure, such as King David had, and Solomon. Unto
this practice of Kings, or great men, does God allude in this resemblance; all
the world is his, but by commission, or permission, he intrusteth his
creatures with much of it; but his Church is more dear unto him then so, he
makes her the subject of his special care, and gives us to understand, that
she is a special Jewel, (...) an exempt people, and (...) a people of
extraordinary note, so the Translators render Segulla; no phrase more usual in
Moses, then to call Israel a precious people, and never does God resemble his
Church when he means to honor it, but he resembles it to things of
greatest value. I will not trouble you with the Canticles, Cap. 4.1^.
where it is called Hortus conclusus, and is made the very Paradise of God; I
will keep my self to our present allusion. In the old Testament the
Tabernacle was a type of the Church, as it was militant, the Temple of Solomon
was a type of it, as it shall be triumphant, and what were both of them made
of, but of the costliest timber, metal, stones, silk, that could be had?
Esaias foretold the fabric of the Church in the state of Grace, that it should
be of Carbuncles, and precious stuff; and how sumptuous is the state of it in
Glory, as it is described by Saint John in the Revelation? Cap. 21.
Our Savior in the Gospel compares the Kingdom of Heaven, Math 13.
which is the Church, unto a treasure hid, and to a pearl of very great price.

But to speak more plainly; the fountain from which the Church springs is
the precious loving kindness of God, Psalm 36 7. 1. Pet 1.19.
the redemption that was paid for it, was the precious blond of Christ, the
foundation whereupon it is built, Esaias 28.16. 1 Cor 3.11.
is a precious corner stone; the doctrine by which it is built up is gold,
silver, and precious stones, the persons whereof it consists are vessels of
Gold, 1. Tim. 1.19. 1 Pet 1 4 1 Pet 1 7.
vessels of honor, all the promises that are made unto it are precious
promises, and their faith is precious; how can they then choose but be a
precious people?

If you have not enough to prove it, that one phrase puts it out of all
doubt, that the Church is Gods peculiar treasure; God himself resides there,
and frames the Church unto his Image; Christ lives there, the Church is his
body; the Holy Ghost does breath there, the Church is his Temple; finally the
Angels attend there, the Church is (...), Cyrill Alexand.
it is the Sanctuary of God. Can there be any thing added unto the value,
where there is such a Presence? And where there is such a Providence, becomes
not the Church most peculiar? Certainly that which is the Treasure of those
Divine mysteries, must needs be accounted Gods peculiar treasure.

I will dwell no longer upon the Resemblance; only take notice that it
promises more then an ordinary good, in so significant a phrase. And indeed
what tongue can express the favor that is implied, in the value that God
sets on us, and the care that he will take of us, when he calls us his
Peculiar treasure?

But what God resembles, that he brancheth; he opens the good more
plainly, which he did but shadow figuratively, and the first branch does set
forth the Eminency of the state of Israel, They shall be a Kingdom of
Priests. The phrase is read diversely, 1. Epist. 2. Cap 1. and 5.
Moses has here a Kingdom of Priests; Saint Peter renders it a Priestly
kingdom; in the Revelation Saint John tells us that Christ has made us
Kings and Priests. The reconciliation is easy, for in the Church, every
member of the Church, is so a King, that he is a Priest, and so a Priest, that
he is a King. And why? He is Primogenitus, Gods first borne, Exodus 4.22.
so God called Israel (and Saint Paul tells us, that they that come into the
Church, Hebr. 12.
come into the congregation of the first borne. Now the Law of nature does
acknowledge this right of Primogeniture, that is made a man Lord of his
brethren, and Priest of the most high God; so that these words Kings and
Priests, are equipollent to first borne, and are the ground of our prerogative,
whereof you shall hear anon.

But let us take these words a sunder. Cap 16. Cap. 12.
First then the Israelites shall be Kings. The Church as it is described in
Ezekiel is adorned with a Crown, and that woman which is described in the
Revelation, has a Crown of twelve Stars upon her head, Psalm. 45. Matthew. 18.
the Psalmist calls her a Queen, the Parable of the marriage Feast, calls
her the Wife of the Kingssonne, her state is royal; and all her children are
Filij regni Children of the Kingdom, the Gospel that is verbum regni does so
honor them, they are heirs apparent unto the kingdom of Heaven. Saint
Chrysostom upon 2 Cor. 1. Ad sinem Cap.
does excellently open the Analogy between a member of the Church and a King.
A King, says he, has a Crown, and God does Crown his people with mercy and
loving kindness. Psalm 103.
A King has his Robes of state, and the Church is at the right hand of Christ,
in a vesture of Gold wrought about with diverse colors; Psalm. 45.
Christ himself is her clothing. A King has his Guard tending upon him for
his honor and safety; and the Angels of God pitched their Tents round about
the godly. Psalm. 34.
A King has a multitude of Subjects whom he does direct, and correct, and the
children of God have many thoughts and desires over which they have power, to
order and repress them. And indeed herein principally stands the Kingdom,
residet in se quisque animo regali, every man is a Sovereign over himself,
he does polish his own little Commonweal, prescribing a measure, and
observing good order, in his head, in his heart, in his soul, and in his body.
It is the Kingdom of grace which is Preached in the Gospel, (...) 2. (...) 3.
John 8. (...) 1.
by which we obtain the Kingdom of glory, which is promised to them that
rule well therein; sl^uerie to sin, is the direct opposite unto this
kingdom; this title forbids us all earthly and sensual thoughts and
desires, it requires that we be kingly in both, or else we do not answer our
title. And, the more is the pity, there are but few that answer it; but let
us take heed, this is our danger, he that is not a King in grace, shall never
be a King in glory.

You see the first advancement of the Churches state, which is to be Kings;
The second advancement is to be Priests; and a Priest was he that offered
sacrifice, and every member of the Church must offer, he must offer at both
the Altars. At the Altar of Incense, Prayers and Prayser. Prayers Psalm. 141.
David prays that his Prayers may come unto God as the Incense. Praises, Psalm.
50. we are willed to sacrifice praises. And as they must offer at the Altar of
Incense, so must they at the Atar of Burnt offerings also; Psalm. 51.
a sinner repenting becomes a Priest, because a broken and contrite heart is
the sacrifice of God, such an (...), sacrificing of man's own self, is a
special act of Christian Priesthood. And so is in general (...) well doing;
Heb. 13. Cap. 12.
Be not weary, says Saint Paul, of well doing, for with such sacrifices God
is well pleased; and he exhorts the Romans to offer up their bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, which is their reasonable service of
him. A Priest, says Origin, is men's Deodicata, and he is called a Leuite which
does continually attend God, In Leuit. 25.
and minister to his will; in this sense Esaias says of the Church, you shall be
called the Priests of the Lord, and they shall say unto you, the Ministers of
God.

This second title of honor puts us in mind religiously to serve God, for it
is a plain contradiction for a man to be a Priest, and not to attend the
Altar; he that never prays unto God, never praises him for his benefits, he
that never repents of his sin, nor crucifieth his sinful flesh, he that
does not exercise himself in good works, does really renounce the Christian
Priesthood.

And here by the way let me observe unto you, how senselesly they cast dirt
into their own faces, that vilify Gods Ministers in the name of Priests;
forgetting that it is one of the honorable titles which themselves are
vouchsafed of God; and it is their dignity in Gods word, to be styled Priests.
But happily they would be such Kings, as are no Priests, absolute in
themselves, and acknowledge no superior, which was the headlong pride of
Angels; and of Adam.

Put this title of Priest, to that of King, and then you shall find that this
does temper that, for it teaches that our Eminency is subordinate; for a King
is he that has inferiors, a Priest is he that has a superior; for a Priest
does honor those above him, as a King is honored by those that are below him;
the name of a King must not make us think so highly of our selves, but the
name of a Priest must teach us to be humble; we must so carry our selves,
Masters of our selves as that in all things we be the dutiful sernants of God.

Well then Kings we are, and Priests, but how? in Christ. The name of Christ is
as much as anointed, and Christ was anointed to be the the King of glory, and
a Priest after the order of Melchisedecke; and we in Baptism put on Christ, we
are grafted into him, Aug de Ciuit. Dei lib. 10 c 10.
and so become Christians, partakers of his unction; and if of his unction,
then of his Kingdom, and Priestood, Whosoever therefore does separate himself
from Christ, does withal deprive himself of his Royalty, and his Priesthood;
for we are not Kings, nor Priests, but in him, and by him, who is the
sovereign both Priest, and King; so Saint John teaches in the first, yea, all
the Saints profess in the fifth of the Revelation.

You have heard hitherto much of a King, and a Priest; but these titles must
not be misconstrued, they favor not the rebellion of Corah, Numb. 10.
Dathan, and Abiram, nor Anabaptisticall anarchie, not the wrest of those words
in Daniel. The Kingdom shall be given to the Saints; Cap 7.
as all are Kings, so are all Priests: and as all are Priests, so are all
Kings: all are both spiritually, without prejudice to Civil, or
Ecclesiastical government. The case is clear both in the Old and New
Testament; Deuteronomy. 33.5.
for notwithstanding this promise Moses continued a King (so he is termed) in
Israel; and Aaron with the Levites did minister in the Tabernacle; and the
rebels against both were fearfully swallowed up by the earth that cleft under
them. And though the Apostles give unto Christians the same honorable title
that God by Moses gives to Israel: yet do they require them to be subject to
higher Powers, Romans 13. Heb 13.
and obey them that watch for their souls, and threaten vengeance and
damnation to such as are disobedient.

Wherefore that we be not carried away with the error of the sons of Belial,
let us observe, First, touching our Roialtie, that regnum Dei est intra nos,
the kingdom here spoken of is a kingdom within us; and Rex est qui se regit,
the King in this kingdom is he which rules himself well; the sphere of this
sovereignty extends not farther then a man's own person; we may not
confound it with the kingdoms of this world, with those Powers that are
ordaind of God, for the peace and benefit of Church, and Commonweal; if we
do, we do misconstrue Gods words, and are usurpers of the Civil Sword.

So likewise must we conceive of the Priesthood; for there is Sacerdos in
persona sua, a Priest that acts only his own person, and there is Sacerdos
in persona aliena, a Priest that does act the person of another. Lay men are
Priests, if they be Christian men, but they act no bodies person but their
own; they perform no other sacred duties but such as every man does owe to
God: the Clergy they are Priests, but they are so in persona aliena, they
represent the persons of others; you may perceive it in their form of
speeches, they speak in the plural number, We beseech thee, O Lord, We
praise thee O God, etc. and all the people says thereunto, Amen, confessing in
that word, that the Minister is but their mouth; not that he deriueth his
power from them, as if they had it habitually, and communicated it actually to
him (for never can it be proved, that Holy Orders were at any time in the
multitude) it has ever been either Native or Donatiue still by the
appointment of God, who made it Native only to the firstborn, at first; and
then to the seed of Aaron; and after their Priesthood determined, it became
Donatiue, Christ gave it to his Apostles, and by his Apostles took order to
continue a succession, but so as to derive the power of Holy Orders, still from
them that were in Holy Orders; so that (...), in use, it was ever the whole
Churches, as the sight of the eye is the sight of the whole body, but (...),
in possession, it was never, Basil. lib ^ de Baptismo. Aug, de Ciuit Deili^.
20, cap. 10. Leo de anniuersaria assumptione, Sermon. 3.
no more then the whole body could ever see. We must not then confound the
Hierarchicall, and the Mystical Priesthood, no more then we may the external
and the internal Kingdom, each must keep within his bounds.

And as we must in our private be religious as Priests in serving God: so we
must not without a lawful calling; and a man's lawful calling is not as
Anabaptists dream, his own conceited ability, but a Mission and Commission
from lawful Superiors; without such a Calling, I say, we may not intermeddle
with Pastoral Functions.

Finally, the public Kings and Priests, must neither of them abuse these
titles, neither of them must wrest this place. The Romanists are careful to
remember Kings that they play not Priests, they amplify Vzziahs example that
was stricken with Leprosy for being so presumptuous; I would they did as well
remember Christ's speech, whose Vicar the Pope claymes to be, John 18.36. Luke
12.14.
My kingdom is not of this world, and that, Man who made me a Judge to divide
inheritances? they would not so often, being Priests, usurp upon the sword.
But let them take heed, Christ told Saint Peter, Math. 26.52.
and they will find it one day true, The Priest that medleth with the sword,
shall perish by the sword; the Kings over whom the Pope has long tyrannized,
shall one day work his ruin. And thus much of the Eminency of the Churches
state.

I come now to the Sanctity of their persons; Israel shall be an holy nation;
and indeed Kings who are Priests, such as you have heard described, how can
they choose but be Holy? especially seeing the persons that communicate in
those titles are the Firstborn, Exodus 13.
for the Firstborn by the Law were holy to the Lord. And what is the oil
wherewith they were anointed, Exodus 30. Cap. 2 Cap. 1 18.
but oleum sanctitatis, holy oil? what are their persons, but Temples of the
Holy Ghost? Jeremy calls them Gods first fruits, and Saint James tells us
that all Christians are a kind of first fruits to God. 2 Cor. 11.2. Ephesians. 5 27.
The Church is by the Apostle said to be a chaste virgin, without spot or
wrinkle; in the Revelation the Spouse is clothed in fine white linen, Revel.
19 8. Esaias 26.
which is the righteousness of Saints, in the Prophet she is called, The land
of righteousness, finally, in our Creed, the holy Catholic Church. ^sal 101.
King David required virtue in his servants, He that walks in a perfect way
he shall serve me, how much more God? To whom the Psalmist speaks thus, Lord
who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, who shall abide upon thy holy hill, God
answers, He that leads an vncorrupt life, etc.

But what is Holiness? Origin will teach us; the holiness of a man must be
conceived as the holiness of a beast, a vessel, a vestment; now those things
were separated from profane uses, and dedicated to sacred: so must a man be
first separated from earth and earthly things, he must not set his affections
upon them; though he be in the world, Col. 3.2. John 17.
yet he must not be of the world; he must not love the world, nor the things
in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life; 1. John 2.15. Ephesians. 5.11.
he must have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness; This is
his separation, the first branch of Holiness.

The second is Dedication, his life must be devoted unto God; Christianity is
an imitation of the Divine Nature, a reducing of himself to the Image of God
in which he was created, 2. Pet. 1. Ephesians. 4. 1. Pet. 2.
to righteousness and holiness of truth, a showing forth of the virtues of him
that has called us into his marvelous light. If a man profess himself to be
a Painter, and take upon him to make the picture of a King, and mis-shape him,
does he not deserve just blame? yes surely, for he occasioneth strangers to
think meanly of the Kings person, because of his ill favored portraiture: and
shall a Christian escape punishment whose life is to be a visible
representation of Christ, if Infidels blaspheme Christ, while they judge of him
according to his counterfeit? he shall not. Wherefore faciamus de terra
coelum, faith Saint Chrysostom, In Matthew. 12. Tem. 2 p. 332.
let us represent Heaven in earth, let us so live as that men may say that God
is in us of a truth, Let our light so shine before men, that they may see our
good works, and glorisie our Father which is in Heaven. Holiness is the true
characterizing quality of a Christian, it distinguishes between the
faithful, Just. Martyr ad Diogn^t. p. ^97. (...) in Apolog. p. 61.
and infidel, they differ not in place, in apparel, in diet, etc. but in
charity, in piety, in obedience, in patience, in every Christian virtue,
whatsoever show a man make if he want these virtues, he is but like the Iuglers
Ape which being attired like a reasonable creature, and dancing curiously to
his Masters instrument, deceived the people of Alexandria, until one espying
the fraud, threw a few Dates upon the Stage, which the Ape no sooner espied,
but he tore all his vizard, and fell to bis victuals to the scorn of his
Master, which gave occasion to the Proverb, An Ape is an Ape, though he be
clad never so gaily. Nyssen applies it unto men that call themselves
Christians, profess that they know God, Tom. 2. de professione Christiana.
and that their hope is in Heaven, but no sooner does any vanity come in their
way, but their heart does betray where there treasure is; but let them remember
the Proverb, It is a snare for a man to devour that which is holy, Origin
applies it to the sacrilege that a man commits that vowed himself in
Baptism to the Lord, and gives himself unto the World. I conclude this point
with Gods words in the Law, Lenit 11.44. Math. 5.4^.
Be ye holy, for I am holy; and with Christ's words in the Gospel, Be ye
perfect, as your Father in Heaven is perfect; sin must not reign in our
mortal bodies, because we are an holy Nation.

You see how the Good which God offers to Israel is specified, you must next
hear how it is amplified, that appears in the words, Eritis mihi. As the
Proprietarie is, so does the value of a thing rise, he adds to the worth, at
least to the esteem thereof; though man only to the esteem, yet God also to
the worth, for he can proportion the creatures worth answerable to his
esteem; he whose glory shines in the heavens, and handie work in the
firmament, does declare his glory much more in the Church, according to that
in the Prophet, This people have I formed for my self, (...) 45.
they shall be to set forth my praise.

And indeed of what regard the Church is with God, we may gather out of that
which God has done for it, he is become a father unto it, in Christ; and
tendreth every member thereof as his dear child; he has given his only
begotten son to death for the salvation of it, and made him the Bridgeroome
of the Church; the Holy Ghost does he send to guide, to comfort it; and the
Angels are ministing spirits for their sakes that shall be heirs of salvation.
Can any man believe this, (...). 1.
and not believe that we are a precious treasure unto God? He has provided
for us a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, (...) 12.28. 1. ^ct. 5.4.
an immarescible Crown of glory, he has communicated unto us the Throne of
his own Son, and given us power over all our enemies, and can we doubt but
we are Kings unto him?

And as for our Priesthood, James 5 16.
that is as evident; the prayer of the righteous auailes much; their sufferings
are to him sacrifices; all their life is a savor of a sweet smell; and he is
well pleased with the work of their hands. Feuci 7 14.
Finally, they have washed their robes white in the blood of the Lamb, they
are clothed with the righteousness of Christ, God vouchsafes to converse with
them, to dwell with them, therefore they are to him an holy Nation.

We that account our selves happy, if we be dear to great men, great, if we
be but petty Lords, think not meanly of our selves, if we be but Priests unto
Baal, and look big if we have but the righteousness of a Pharisie: how
happy should we think our selves, that are vouchsafed to be the Favorites of
the King of Kings? how should we esteem our selves, that are made Kings of
Heaven? how should we glory in our divine Priesthood, and joy in our true
Holiness? when we consider our selves as we are in our selves, dust, and
ashes, weak and wicked ones, we may well cry out with David, who am I, O
Lord, and what is my Fathers house, that I, O Lord, should be such a one unto
thee! and sing the Virgins Hymn, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my
spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior, for he that is mighty has magnified
me, etc. And when under the Cross we find that in the eye of worldlings we
are reputed worms, and no men the reproach of men, and the despised of the
people, when they oppress us with more then Egyptian bondage, scoff at the
sighs and groans which the Holy Ghost indites in us, and repute all our
devotion to be but madness, when they traduce us as Samaritans, as friends of
Publicans and Sinners, yea, as instruments of Beelzebub, and condemn us to a
shameful death, as pestilent fellows, traitors, and blasphemers: what
greater comfort can we have then this promise of God, Eritis mihi, You shall be
to me a peculiar treasure, a Kingdom of Priests, an holy Nation? But I go on.

You have heard of much good, but what you have heard does not yet amount to a
Prerogative, that appears in these words, above all people. When we have good
things that are not common to others, especially if it be better then they have
any, then have we obtained a Prerogative; and this was Isreal's case, for the
Church was not now Catholic, as it had been before Abraham's time, and was to
be after the coming of Christ. Gods promise was Catholic to Adam, though
Cain played the Apostata, it was Catholic also to Noah, but his children fell
away; therefore when Gods reuiues it unto Abraham, he made it but particular,
and Israel only was his Inheritance, In Judah was God known, his Name was great
in Israel; Athanas. de Incarnat. verb.
not that others might not be, if they would become Israelites, but ordinarily
none but Israelites, or Proselytes, had part in the Promise. Therefore the Law
speaks thus, What Nation is there so great, Deuteronomy. 4.
who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we
call upon him for? And what Nation is there so great, that has Statutes, and
judgments, so righteous as all this Law that I set before you this day? And
the Psalmist, God shows his word unto Jacob, Psalm. 147.
his Statutes and Judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt so with any Nation,
etc. This is often repeated by Moses, Deuteronomy. 10. but especially Chapter 32.
Seeing then God does compare one Nation unto all people, and prefer it, he
does extol his own grace, and teach us that the blessing is singular; and if
singular then a Prerogative; and because singular, and a Prerogative, the more
to be esteemed.

Surely in worldly things we think so, for what is he that has any gist or
good which others have not, who does not esteem it as much for the rareness,
as for the greatness thereof? I would we did pass as true a judgment upon
our heavenly Treasures; surely the Church was wont to do so, Pone me vt
signaculum, Cant 8.
says the Spouse, Set me as a Seal upon thy arm, and in her Plea, Populus
tuus omnes nos; We are thine, enen the sheep of thy pasture. Esaias 63.
As God does honor us above others, so will he that we be mindful of his
special favor.

Put now together the Greatness of the Good, which God offers with the
Singularity of the favor, which God vouchsafes Israel, and they will yield
us a definition of the Church; for what is Ecclesia but a people chosen out of
the world, and preferred before it, in that it is Gods peculiar treasure, and
to him a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation?

But I leave that point to your private meditations, which will be the fuller,
if you add the next particular unto it, for that also is considerable in your
contemplations of the Church. That which God offers is a Prerogative, and such
a Prerogative as is Gracious, I gather it first out of Vos, Deuteronomy 7
ye, ye shall be unto me a peculiar treasure, etc. And who are ye? neither
the most, nor the best of people; Moses from God tells them so; bondslaues in
Egypt, and much more bound to Satan, for they were a rebellious nation; more
base in mind, then in condition; and therefore God bids them look unto his
free love the cause of their deliverance, Et dare non dignis res mage digna
Deo, the less worth there appears in the receiver, the more grace does there
shine from the giver.

As Isreal's want of worth made the gift gracious, so also was it gracious in
that God was not driven to make the choice out of any want, for all the earth
is mine (says God;) All Nations they are the same by nature, and it was free
for God to make choice of any other; the more choice God had, the more grace
he vouchsafed to them whom he chose; so that we must resolve the words thus,
Although all the world be mine, yet thou shall be to me; and so the Offer will
appear absolutely free.

What shall we say then unto these things? Surely as God has little cause, by
reason of our vileness, to joy that we are His: so we have great cause, by
reason of our happiness, to joy that God is ours; who would be ambitious after
any woddly thing, that may be partaker of this gracious prerogative?

And all Nations may partake of it. It is true that these words were spoken to
Israel; and therefore the Jews at this day count all Nations slaves beside
themselves, appropriating unto themselves this Prerogative; but their pride
should blush when it considers that God has so many hundred years stripped them
of their spiritual ornaments, and made them corporal slaves to all the World.
1 Epist. 2.
Saint Peter applies this very text unto Christians, and the four and twenty
Elders confess thus unto Christ, Revel. 5.
Thou have redeemed us to God, by thy blood, out of enerie kindred and tongue,
and people, and nation, and have made us unto our God, Kings, and Priests.

These words then belong to Us; Romans 11.20.
yet must we not be high-minded, but fear; Gen 49.
if Israel lost his primogeniture, so may we; God may say to us, as Jacob said
to Reuben for his sin, Non excelles, thou shall be disinherited, Hos. 1.9.
Gnammi, may become Lo-Gnammi, they are Gods people, may cease to be his
people. What is the way to prevent it? Surely, duty to consider of this
gracious Prerogative, and endeavor carefully to partake thereof. If we esteem
it, as it deserves, and desire it, as we ought; we shall not fail to have it,
and by it be entered into the household of Saints; those Saints whose memory we
solemnize this day; for they became such by this Prerogative, and this
Prerogative will make us such; if we be Gods peculiar treasure here on earth;
we shall be it much more in the kingdom of heaven, by how much our gold shall
be freer from dross, and no cloud shall dim our precious jewels. If we be
Kings here in the state of grace, our kingdom is but like that of David, full
of war; but when we come to heaven, our kingdom shall be like that of
Solomon, it shall be a kingdom of peace. And our Priesthood which is now
often interrupted, and neglected often, shall never depart from before God, and
we shall sacrifice to him day and night.

Finally holy we are now, rather in the good purpose of our mind, then in the
performance of our life: but then we shall be Trees of life, ever laden with
kindly fruit, fit to honor, to cheer, both God and men.

LEt us all pray for, and God grant unto us all, such a beginning of this
gracious Prerogative in this life, that we may have the full consummation
thereof, with all the Saints departed, in the life to come, Amen.

Remember me, O Lord, with the favor of thy people, visit me with thy
salvation, That I may see the felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice in the joy
of thy people, and glory with thine inheritance, Psalm. 116.

The fifth Sermon.
EXODUS 19. VERSE. 5. Now therefore if ye will obey my voice, etc. Then shall
ye be, etc.


IN the first message which from mount Sinai, God sent by Moses unto Israel, I
have told you heretofore that there are contained two remarkable points, the
first shows what God requires, the second what God offers. I told you then
also, that the Text leads me to consider these two points, first severally,
then jointly; I have already considered them severally; I have showed you what
they mean; it remains that I now consider them jointly, that I show you how
they depend one upon the other. And this Observation I draw from the reference
of these two particles, If and Then, If ye shall obey my voice, etc. Then ye
shall be unto me, etc.

But to deal more distinctly. Out of this reference we may draw too good
Observations, The first, We must not exspect what God does offer, except we
perform what God does require, for thus speaks the Text, If ye shall hear
my voice, and keep my Covenant, Then shall ye be unto me, etc. The second,
We may not slicke at that which God requires, because that which God offers
does infinitely exceed it; that will be evident if we compare them as they are
laid down in the Text, Ye shall be unto me a peculiar treasure above all
people, a Kingdom of Priests, an holy Nation, If you hear my voice, and If
you keep my Covenant; Now there is no comparison between these.

Out of these two Observations, do arise two other; for this reference will
teach us that Our faith and our Charity must go before our Hope, for we must
hear Gods voice which is the work of faith, and keep Gods Conenant, which is
the work of Charity, before we can exspect to be Gods peculiar treasure, a
Kingdom of Priests, an Holy Nation, which blessings are the matter of our
Hope. And back again, Our Hope must keep in heart, both our Faith and
Charity, for he that is thus resolved that he shall be Gods peculiar
treasure, a King to him, and his Priest, finally, Holy to the Lord, no doubt,
no danger, will stay him, will quell him from hearing Gods voice and keeping
Gods Covenants; he that so hops, will believe and love God.

These are the particulars wherewith I will endeavor, God willing, to order
and quicken yours and mine own faith, hope, and charity, I pray God we may
all so listen to them, as those that mean to live by them.

But before I open them unto you, I must acquaint you with a difference of Gods
spiritual promises: of them some are Absolute, some are Conditionals, we may
not confound them; Absolute are all those prophecies of the Messiah to come,
and the work of Redemption foretold and presigured in the Old Testament,
whereof in the New we read the full accomplishment; they take up the first part
of our Creed; and of all these absolute promises, Gods saying in Esaias is true,
My counsel shall stand, and I will accomplish all my will, Cap 46.
mauger all the infidelity of man, and the machinations of Satan, without
great absurdity, yea impiety cannot these promises be conceived to depend on
the will of any ereature, Angel, or man.

Conditional promises are those which concern particular persons, or states,
participation of Christ, incorporation into the Church, fruition of crernall
life; of all these the rule of Saint Austin is true, Quifecit te sine te, non
saluabit te, sine te; every person, every state, must put their hands to this
work, or else it would never go forward. My Text does contain a Promise of
this later sort, a Conditional, not an Absolute promise. Let us come then to
it.

The first Observation that I made upon the reference of If, and Then, was
this. We may not exspect what God does offer, except we perform, what God
requires. In conceiving the mystery of our Redemption, we must observe a
double method of God, the one according to which he resolved on it, the other
according to which he was pleased to communicate it. If you look unto the
first method, that was first in Gods intention, which was last in his
execution; he resolved first upon the End, to manifest his Mercy and Justice,
in saving a certain number out of the Mass of perdition, and leaving others
to perish therein through their own default; and he made choice of, and
proportioned such means, as in his wisdom, might seem fitest to compass
this End. If we deny this, we make Gods providence more indiscreete, then is
usually that of well advised men, for in all their deliberations, they begin at
the end, and according to the rule of wisdom, Finis praescribit speciem, and
mensuram mediorum, they dispose all things answerable thereunto.

But as when men have done their deliberations, and give order for their work,
they prescribe first the means, in their order, and by those means, will have
such as they employ, to compass those Ends: even so does God, setting men in
time on the way to their salvation, whereupon he was eternally resolved, lead
them first to the means, without which it is not his pleasure they should ever
come unto their happy End. These two methods must not be confounded, the
method of publishing the Gospel, with the method of Gods making the first
Decree thereof; The Decree of saving men, did not run the same way, with the
Decree of bringing men to salvation. I would not observe this dark point unto
you, but that our English Anabaptists are become plain Arminians, as their
Pamphlets show which they scatter abroad to corrupt the people. The ground of
the error of both, as the learned may perceive in ripping up their discourses,
is the confounding of these different Decrees and Methods, when they study the
mystery of our salvation.

But let us come to plain matter. God from the beginning though he were Lord
of all, and might at his pleasure give Law to any, yet has he proceeded with
his reasonable creatures by way of Covenant; now a Covenant consists of
mutual stipulation or promise, Gods to Us, and ours to God, so runs the
Law, Hoc fac and viues, to do Gods will was to be our promise, and Gods
promise was to give us life; so runs the the Gospel, Creed, and saluus
eris, we must yield Faith unto God, and God will bestow salvation upon us; It
is the first thing children learn in their Catechism; as they are taught that
by Baptism they are made children of God, members of Christ, and heirs of the
Kingdom of heaven: so likewise are they taught, that by their suerties they
have vowed to renounce the devil and all his works, the pomp and vanities of
this wicked world, to believe the Articles of the Creed, and keep Gods holy
Commandments. There is then a mutual conditioning between God and man; man
with God, so Jacob, Genes. 28. which is generally to be observed in all votiue
Prayers* God with man, here, and elsewhere, Deuteronomy. 28.

And yet we may not mistake, for there is great odds between these
Conditionings: for when God conditioneth with man, he asks nothing but what
was due to him before; all the obedience we can perform is due by our native
allegiance, the allegiance which a Creature owes to his Creator; but we in
our conditioning with God, may not desire ought of God, which he has not first
promised (for no Creature may carue to himself, he must be contented with
that which God will vouchsafe him) and whatsoever he offers unto us, is such as
whereunto we have otherwise no right. Add hereunto, that we may be sure of
God, that what he offers he will perform, for with God there is no
variableness nor shadow of change. Scio cui crediderim. Iam. 1.
But he cannot be so sure of us, Omnis homo mendax, we never abide steadfast in
our Covenant.

But Gods conditioning with us, I must open unto you a little more fully. Know
then that though what God requires, we must perform, yet perform it out of
our own strength we cannot; original sin has d^^inabled us; and by adding
actual unto it, we are made less able; though in regard of their natural
gifts there is inequality between men, yet a bono caelesti omnes aeque
auersi, nisi discriminet gratia. God requires that we should hear his voice, 1
Cor. 2.14.
believe in him, but a natural man cannot perceive the things of God; yea he
will wink with his eyes, and stop his ears least ^ee should see and hear,
return and be saved. God requires that we keep his Covenant, (...) 8.
but the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, it is not, it cannot, be
subject to his Law. Yea so impotently are we given to spiritual fornication,
that though God graciously woo Us, yet gracelesly we reject him. Thereis no
remedy then but the condition which God requires on our part, must remain
unperformed, except he give us grace wherewith to perform it; he must give us
supernatural power to perform this supernatural work. 1. Cor 47
Quis te discernit? Quid habes quod non accepisti? He bids us hear his
voice, believe in him, whereas faith is his gift, he must purify our hearts by
faith. He bids us keep his Covenant and love him, but Charity is a fruit
of the Spirit, Acts 1^.
and this fire must be kindled from heaven, God must circumcise our hearts, and
make us keep his laws; Dat non tantum nouas reuelationes, s^d and bonas
voluntates, for no man can come to the Son except the Father draw him, Ex
nolente faciens volentem, as says Saint Austin.

But if God give, that which we must give to God, how is the work ours? Surely
thus, though God give the ability, yet he will have us make use of it; use
the eye of faith which he does illighten, and so obey his voice, use the
Charity wherewith he does seasen our hearts, and set our affections upon him;
let it be our chiefest care to hold fast unto him, if we do so, we shall be
reputed performers of the condition; for grace does not take away the liberty
of our will, though it gives new qualities, working upon it not only
Physically, but morally also.

Yet here again remember that we need a second grace, that we may make use of
the first, for our understanding though enlightened may be circumuented with
Sophistry, and our will may be transported with vanity, even after God has
sanctified it (though otherwise the Will does tend naturally to good, when it
is sanctified, as the understanding to truth.) It is clear in Adam and Eues
case, immediately upon their Creation after Gods Image, how foully were they
ouer-reacht by the Serpent? How shamefully did they plunge themselves in sin
in the full integrity of their nature? And if they could stand so little in
the fullness of grace, how little shall we be able to stand that come so short
of their their measure? Least therefore we make no use of our ability, God
must be pleased to do for us, that which he was not pleased to do for them
he must in compassion of our frailty, either keep off temptations, or arm
us against them, he must give us grace to make use of his grace. In any other
sense to conceive that the first grace is indifferent, and our will does
determine it, is an Arminian dream.

Not that we are excusable, if having abilities we do not use them, for
temptations work not physically, but morally; persuade they may, they cannot
compel; and it is plain that we do not use that care and conscience in
trying the fallacies wherewith we are tempted to disbelieue God, and those
allurements which endeavor to withdraw us from God, as we do in reading the
discourses of humane Arts, and entertaining aduises concerning our worldly
State. Therefore we are without all excuse, and should justly perish for our
sin when we neglect the means that are given us of God, inward or outward.
And indeed all would so perish that have them, because all would so neglect
them, did not God as well follow, as prevent some with his grace, provide by a
second, that they receive not the first grace in vain.

You have not yet heard the uttermost that God does for us toward the
performance of this condition, for the condition must be performed not for a
day, or a year, but all our life long; it is not enough for to hear Gods
voice to day, and to morrow to despise it; to day to be true to him, and to
be false to morrow; our Faith and our Charity must be as lasting as our life.
But alas our faith and our charity have their wanings, they fall often into a
sown; we break every day with God, and if we break with him, he is no
longer bound to us; yet he does not so deal with us, nor take the advantage
which we do give him: he is like a kind Landlord, who when his Tenant
neglects his Covenant, and he by virtue of the Lease may make a re-entry,
forbeares, and gives his Tenant leave to salve the forfeiture; he is
long-suffering toward us, and gives us space to repent and return to our good
God, which is always ready to receive us unto grace, and to pardon our
offenses. Yet we may not presume of this upon the Covenant, for when God does
it, he does it upon another ground, upon the ground of Predestination. Yea,
that which the kindest Land lord uses not to do, God out of his goodness
does supply us with those helps, whereby we may recover again his favor; by
the ministry of his word, or some other means, he seasonably works in us
repentance and faith, and indeed this is a great hight of grace, Philip. (...).
that he that beginnineth this good work in us will perfect it to the day of
the Lord, that we are thus preserved by the power of God, and that he does so
put his fear into us, 1. Pet. 1.
that we depart not from him totally or finally.

What shall we say then to these things? Seeing that God by grace is Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the end, the author and the finisher of the
performance of the condition required; therefore though we perform what we
are commanded, yet must we give him the glory, and he that does glory, must
glory in the Lord.

I will shut up this first observation with two good Admonitions. The first
shall be this, when we receive these commands from God, Hear my voice, keep
my Covenant, let us humbly pray with Saint Austin, Da domine quod iubes, and
iube quod vis, Lord enable me to obey thee, and then lay upon me what
commandment thou will. Or rather, if you will let us pray as the Church
teaches us when we hear the ten Commandments, Lord have mercy upon us and
incline outr hearts to keep thy Law. And God give us all this Spirit of Grace
and Prayer. 1. Epist 1.


The second admonition let us take from Saint Peter, Brethren give all
diligence, by the practice of Christian virtues, to make your calling and
election sure; for if ye do these things you shall never fall; If we follow
the first admonition God will not be wanting unto us; if the second, we shall
not be wanting unto our selves. Thus much of the first Observation.

The second follows, We must not stick at that which God requires, because
that which God offers does infinitely exceed it; That which God requires is
neither thank worthy, nor, in comparison, of any worth. It is not thank
worthy, for what thanks does a man deserve for yiedling that which he does
otherwise owe to God? nay, which God, as before you have heard, does give him
to bestow. I will not again amplify these two points, I add a third, what
thanks does a man deserve for working his own perfection? for to hear Gods
voice, and to keep his Covenant are the perfection both of our head and of our
heart; they were first qualified for this use, and this use is their
happiness. It is true that so long as Concupiscence does distemper our soul,
these employments at first are not so pleasing, they relish as medicines to a
sick body. And if you mark it well, this is no small difference between
Virtue and Vice; wickedness is sweet in the mouth, and a man hides it under
his tongue; but when he has swallowed it it is like the gall of Aspes unto
his conscience: but with virtue it is clean otherwise, the first time we
enter thereupon is the harshest time, Eccles 6. Verse 24, 25.
the longer we are acquainted, the better friends shall we be, Put thy feet
(says the son of Syracke) into wisdoms fetters, and thy neck into her
chain, bow down thy shoulder and bear her, and be not grieved with her
bonds, Verse. 28, 29.
for at last thou shall find rest, and it shall be turned to thy joy; For then
shall her fetters be a strong defense for thee, and her chain a robe of
glory. He that makes his ear liable to Gods voice, makes his ear happy,
and he makes his heart happy, that makes it steadfast in the Covenant of God;
for wherein can he take more contentment? And does a man deserve thanks for
thus bringing his own person to perfection?

Put the case these things were thank worthy, yet certainly, in comparison,
they are but of little worth: for of what worth is the obedience of a servant;
in regard of the favor of a Sovereign that vouchsafes him to be his
Favorite? Of what worth is our love of God, which is our Sovereign Good, in
regard of Gods love of us, which have in us no loveliness at all?

Nay, mark; it bids us tender our selves unto him, and what are we but as
earthen vessels? and what does he with us? he makes us vessels of gold, the
peculiar treasure of the King of Heaven. He bids us obey, but that he may
make us Commanders; we must hear his voice, keep his Covenant, these are
marks of obedience, but thereupon we shall be Kings, and Priests, those are
marks of authority. Finally, he bids us apply our selves unto him which
does beseem a creature, and he will make us like unto himself, like unto our
Creator, we shall be holy, as he is holy.

Behold here then the bounty of God, and folly of man; the bounty of God who
gives, though according to our capacity, yet not according to our deserts;
he gives as beseems himself; according to the widensse of his own
Greatness, and Goodness, does he fill his creatures with his blessings,
especially Man, and above all men, these whom he receives into the Church. A
man would have thought that it had been mercy enough in God, in such a
strange fashion to deliver Israel out of Egypt, to take such sharp vengeance
upon their enemies, to promise the Israelites that they should not be subject
to the plagues of Egypt, and that he would bring them into a good land, a land
flowing with milk and honey; a man would think, I say, that these blessings
did more then deserve their best obedience and fidelity, and they could in
reason desire no more; but so to deal with them was not enough in the eye of
Gods bounty, he measures unto them with a more liberal hand; and how often
does he give unto every one of us more, not only then we deserve, but also then
we can desire? especially concerning our spiritual state, wherein he is most
bountiful to the meanest of his children.

As God exceeds in bounty, so do men in folly; for their ears are open to
none seldomer then unto God, to whom they are due; neither are they false to
any so much as unto him. Let the World or the Devil, or our own flesh
solicit us, how attentive, how credulous are we? how willingly do we suffer
our selves to be deceived, to be robbed by them? but when God speaks to us
whose word is truth, who counsels nothing but for our eternal good, how
heavy eared are we, shall I say? nay, how rebellious? Christ may complain, I
have labored in vain, I have spent my strength in vain, Esaias 49.
all the day long have I stretched out my hands to an vnbeleiuing, and a
gainesaying nation.

Yet this is not the uttermost of our follies; for in our falsehood to God we
are not only contented to be robbed by others, but rather then we will not
have our will to do our selves mischief, we will hire them that shall rob us.
God in Ezekiel observes it in the resemblance of the Israelues to a strange
kind of Harlot, for whereas usually they are hired to be naught, she did use to
hire her lovers, and prodigally to bestow upon them the blessings which she
had received from God, that with them she might commit spiritual fornication
against God; so much more does our sottishness esteem our chiefest enemies,
then the author of our sovereign good. This folly first took place in Eve,
wherewith she infected Adam, and from them both, do we all derive it, and
there is none of us, which does not usually betray it; witness the many good
Sermons which we hear, and whereby we profit little, but run madding after
every vanity that woes us, and every new corruption how suddenly does it
ouerspread most of us?

I will dwell no longer upon these primitiues observations, I come to those
which I derived from them.

There are three virtues which are called Theological, Faith, Hope, and
Charity, of these three consists, as it were, the life of a Christian man;
now though they are all three given to a Christian, at one time; yet in nature,
one of them goes before another. This text will teach us how we must order
them; Faith must have the first place, for we must first hear Gods voice,
Heb^^ i.
and to hear Gods voice is the work of faith. And indeed the Apostle tells
us, that He that comes unto God must believe, and without faith it is
impossible to please God. Saint Austin therefore makes Faith the foundation of
our spiritual building, we must begin our Piety there. There is in every one
of us by nature a knowledge of God, and so a kind of Piety, but this will not
make a man Gods peculiar treasure; but the limiting of our piety to his voice,
and performing his Covenant; for naturally men vanish in their discourse, and
(...) does not please God.

The next Virtue must be Charity, for as heat springs from light, even so
does Charity from Faith; Faith works by Charity, and as a man believes, so
will he love. Now Charity is meant by keeping Gods Covenant, that is the work
of Charity.

But withal observe, that Faith and Charity both go before Hope; for we
must hear Gods voice, and keep his Covenant, before we can look to be his
peculiar treasure, which is the matter of our Hope, if we do not, we shall be
perverse servants, hope untowardly; for Sine fide spes non habet firmamentum, a
man that does not believe, cannot hope; how should a man hope for good from him
whom he does not believe? and Sine charitate, spes non habet inuitamentum, he
should not hope, that does not love; and love is a strong encouragement unto
hope. A very Heathen could say (...), ^lutarch.
they that are well bred hope not but upon sound reason. Saint Paul, He^.
(...). Cap. 8. Cap. 5: Eccles. 1.
a better Author, says, that Faith is the ground of things hoped for, he then
that hops without faith has an ungrounded hope. The same Heathen Author
says, that the hopes of a virtuous soul are genuine, but if they be in a
vicious soul, they are but bastards; Job compares them unto a Spidersweb; the
Book of Wisdom varieth the resemblance of them with great cloquence, Ye that
fear the Lord trust in him. Quaenam spes hypocritae, what hope has the
hypocrite? Seeing then that vice can be no ground of hope, it is not without
cause that Saint Paul in his two Apologies which he makes for himself, the
one to the High Priest, Acts 24. the other to Agrippa, Acts 26. lays for the
foundation of his hope, his care to keep a good conscience; and indeed, by how
much the more a man loves God, the bolder may he be to trust in him.

When Faith and Charity have done their work, and yielded their furtherance
unto Hope, then comes Hope in seasonably with her work, and makes amends
unto them both, by quickening both Faith and Charity. First, it quickneth our
Faith; Hope, Pedag^g. lib. 1. cap. 6.
says Clemens Alexandrinus, est sanguis sidei, it is the blood of Faith, and
you know what the Law says, in sanguine anima, in the blood is the life of
that thing whose blood it is; certainly the life of our faith is in blood of
Hope; for the more we let out this blood, the weaker grows our faith, and he
that despaires will quickly become an Apostata; Therefore that we may be
constant in our faith, when the winds blow, and the waves beat, and we are
tossed in the Seas of this World with perplexing doubts, we must take sure
Anchorhold in Heaven; we must draw up our souls in that golden chain of
Hope, and by it be as it were present with our future felicity; 1. P^^. (...).
and then we shall find, that it is (as Saint Peter calls it) Spe viua, a
living hope; it will answer its definition, Spes est futurae pollicitationis
religiosus assensus; Hope most devoutly rests upon the promises of God, the
performances whereof are yet for to come; it is unto us a second faith.

As it does thus keep our Faith in heart, so does it our Charity also, for it
bids our charity not to consider what it leaves, but what it shall have;
Spes semper in ^nteriora tendit, non retro respicit, it forgets the World,
which we have forsaken, and still presses forward unto the blessed estate
whereunto we are called. Christ for, Heb. 12.2.
the joy that was set before him endured the Cross and despised the shame and
Moses and the Prophets that forsook their country, their kindred, their
profit, their pleasure, were animated hereunto, by having an eye to the
recompense of reward. I had utterly fainted, Psalm. 27.
says King David, but that I verily look to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living.

Gregory Nyssen has a witty conceit (...), Afflictions are but the flowers
of eternal felicity, we must them willingly gather the flowers for the
fruits sake. And indeed many abhor the flower because their hearts are not
steadfastly set upon the fruit; wherefore when our charity to Godward grows
cold, let us rowse it, and warm it as David did his, Why art thou cast down,
O my soul; and why art thou so disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I
shall yet praise him, who is the help of my countenance and my God. Saint
Chrysostom meditating upon those word; of the Psalmist. I trust in God, why
say ye then to my soul, fly hence as a bird to the mountains, gives us a
good observation, Spes omnia componit, Hope calmeth all things, he falls upon
diverse particulars which dishearten men from the service of God, banishment
into a Wilderness, who will be disquieted with it, that hops that God will
accompany him there? Dreadful Armies besieging us, what need we fear seeing
our Hope is confident that he that is with us is mightier then they that are
against us? the rack and threatening us, torture the foresight of our Crown
will make us senseless of our most bitter Cross. In a word, No man ever
trusted in God, and was confounded, he that builds upon this principle,
whatsoever he suffers for God will never be disheartened.

But I may not forget to put you in mind of a good saying of S. Austines,
Qualis res, talis spes; Godliness has the promise of this life, and the life
to come; if our hope rest upon the earthly thing, it is but an earthly hope; it
becomes heavenly, if it be carried unto those things which are heavenly. God
dieteth his children in regard of things earthly, he would have them hope for
them, as if they did not hope, as those that can be contented to want them,
when God thinks it not fit to bestow them; but the Hope which must support
both Faith and Charity, it must be a resolute hope of this plentiful reward
that is promised in my Text, of the gracious prerogatives of the Church; we
must look for them assuredly, and without wavering long for them; such a Hope
will keep our Faith waking, and our Love working, donec spes fiat res, till
God make good his word.

I draw to an end. That which God offers in reward of that which he requires,
does (as in the last Sermon I told you) amount to as much as Ius
primogeniturae, the Birthright of Gods firstborn. You know the story of
Esau, he had it in a Type, and sold it for a mess of pottage; Saint Paul's
admonition given thereupon to the Hebrews, shall be mine to you, Chap. 12. v.
16.
Let there be no such profane person amongst you; Esau when he had so
despised his birthright, found no place of repentance, though he sought it
with tears; and we, if we neglect the hope of so great salvation offered us,
in refusing the condition which God requires of us, shall weep and sue in
vain, with those wretches in the Gospel, after the door is shut, and find no
entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Wherefore I will close up my Sermon, as the Son of Syracke closes up his,
Behold, says he, with your eyes, how that I have had but little labor, and
have gotten me much rest. Work therefore your work betimes, and in his time,
he will give you your reward.

ANd God grant we may so perform that which God requires, that we may obtain
what he does offer, and in due time find, that faithful is he that promises,
and that saying in the Psalm to be true. In keeping of his Commandments
there is great reward. The sixth Sermon.
EXODUS. 19. VERSE. 7, 8. And Moses came and called for the Elders of the
people, and laid before their faces all these words which the Lord commanded
him.

And all the people answered together and said, All that the Lord has spoken
we will do, etc.


ON the two Verses immediately going before, we heard of a gracious message
which God by Moses sent unto Israel; on these two verses we shall hear, that
Moses delivered it, and the Israelites returned an answer to it.

Touching the delivery of the message we must observe, First, To whom Moses
makes his report; and Secondly, how he does discharge himself therein. He
makes his report unto the Governors of the Tribes, for he called the Elders
of people. And in his report he discharges himself fully and clearly;
fully, for he reported, All which God had commanded him unto them; and
clearly, for what was commanded him he laid before their faces.

Touching the answer we are to consider; First, Who makes it; then What
manner of answer it is that is made. They that make it are the Congregation,
the People answered and said. And in them we find here two commendable things,
Unanimity and Alacrity. Unanimity, for they joined together in the answer,
All the people answered and said.

Alacrity, for not one stuck at it, every one was as forward as another, they
answered all together.

As for the manner of their answer, it is a consent, they accept of the motion
which God makes by Moses, They will do. In this Acceptance there is an
obserueable mixture, of very much modesty, and overmuch considence, they do
not presume, and yet they do presume. They do not presume, for whereas in the
message there was something which God required of them, and something which God
offered unto them, they pass eue^ in silence that which God does promise, and
do not capitulate for that. Neither do they limit God in that which be
requires, they yield absolutely unto it, All that the Lord has said we will
do. In these two points they show very much modesty, they do not presume.

Look upon the words again, and you will acknowledge in the answer overmuch
confidence, you will confess they do presume; presume of their ability, and
presume of the extent of their ability. For what say they? Faciemus, we will
do that which God commands, yea Faciemus omnia, we will do all that which
God commands. And are either of these in man's power? Can he make good the
least of these undertakings? Surely he cannot. Therefore they lay too hard an
obligation upon themselves, and so express in their answer overmuch
confidence. Though as you shall hear anon there is a commendablenesse in
their confidence.

These are the particulars which I purpose (God willing) to speak of at this
time; I pray God we may all so hear, as to imitate, that when God sends a
gracious message unto us, we may return no worse answer then Israel does
unto God.

The first particular that I pointed at, Exodus 18. Numb. 11.
was the persons to whom Moses makes his report; They are the Governors of
the Tribes, who are here called the Elders of the people. But the Elders when
they note Governors are in this book understood two manner of ways, Elders
by birth, and Elders by choice. Elders by birth, such were all the first
Governors in the world; as Parents in their families; and the firstborne of
many brethren after the death of Parents, by the Law of Nature; and in this
sense does Moses speak of Elders in the third and in the twelfth of this
book. But because the Eldest in years are not always the wisest, nor the
most upright; therefore when the Israelites became a Nation, Moses ordained
Elders by choice, as appears in the Chapter next before this; he made such
persons Governors as he thought were best qualified for such an employment.
And these Governors still retained the name of Elders, partly because they
were, as near as might be, chosen our of those that were eldest in age, as
appears in the fore cited place, or at least such as succeeded them in their
right; ^^sd chap. 14.
and partly because Wisdom is gray hairs, and an unspotted life is old age.
Their office gives them this title to put them in mind that the maturitie of
their judgment, and the gravity of their carriage, must be such as be
seems, the ancientest of the people. So have the very Heathen conceived,
(...) Se^ect.
as may be gathered out of the Lacedaemonian (...), the Roman Senatus, both of
them assemblies of ancient men, ancient not so much for their years, as for
their good parts. And we also in our Governors Civil and Ecclesiastical
retain this title given by the Holy Ghost. For in Corporations the chief are
called Aldermen, and in the Church the Pastors are called Presbyters or
Priests, that is Elders of the Church.

The only observation that I will give upon the title is this; interpretetur
quisque vocabulum suum, and nitatur id esse quod dicitur, Let every one in
authority consider often of this his name, and endeavor that his life may be
answerable unto it. The rather because there can be no shrewder
prognostication of a States or a Churches downfall then the degenerating of
those Elders into youngsters, whether in Head or Heart, whether green witted,
or inordinately affected.

But why does Moses make his report unto the Elders? Surely, because there was
of it a kind of necessity, and in it a very good policy. A kind of necessity
there was, because the voice of one man, though never so strong a voice, could
not be heard by such a multitude. Therefore as in great Armies, (and this was a
very great one, it consisted of six hundred thousand men, besides women and
children, and a rabble of strangers that accompanied them) as, I say, in great
Armies, the General calls the vndercommanders and acquaints them with his
pleasure, that by them it may be made known to their several companies: even
so deals Moses, what by himself he could not do, he is feign to do by
these Elders, by them he reports the message unto all the Congregation of
Israel. Yea, and sometimes when all Israel is named, you must necessarily
understand immediately the Elders. This he did of necessity.

But with this necessity there was a very good policy, for the Governors
being newly created, he did inure them to exercise their authority, and the
people to reverence the word of their mouth, that so the ordinance might not be
in vain. And according to this rule does Saint Peter direct Christians to be
subject to all manner of ordinance of man, not only to the King as supreme, but
also to those that are sent from him. There is not the meanest Officer but he
has some beam of the Kings power, which challenges from the people a
proportionable respect.

You have heard to whom Moses makes his report, let us now see how he
discharges himself therein.

Surely he shows himself a faithful and a wise Messenger; faithful, for he
delivers his message fully; wise, for he delivers his message clearly.
Let us consider these points asunder.

He delivers his message fully for he told the Elders all that the Lord
commanded him. It is the Rule of the Law, Deuteronomy. 4. v. 1^.
Thou shall not add nor take from it; it is the promise of our Savior, that
the Spirit should lead the Apostles into all truth, and bring into their
remembrance All that he had spoken. And for practice we have our Savior
Christ, John 12.
All that I have heard of my Father have I made known unto you; and Saint
Paul, I have showed you all the counsel of God. These are in the New
Testament. John 14.
And in the old Testament Micheas the Prophet, when the messenger of Ahab would
have had him do as the other Prophets did, that is, 1. Kings chap. 2^
speak pleasingly to the King; As the Lord lives (says he) what the Lord
says unto me that I will speak. Nay Balaam, though otherwise he loved the
wages of iniquity, yet did he answer Balaks messengers, Number. c ^2. v. 18
though Balak would give me his house full of gold, yet can I not go beyond
the word of the Lord to do either more or less. From these good Rules, and
these good precedents they that are honored to be Gods messengers must
learn, that it beseemes Referendaries to keep themselves to their
instructions, and deliver so much as and no more then they have received in
charge.

But to speak a little more distinctly to this point. The message did consist of
two branches; First, That which God required; Secondly, That which God offered.
Moses that did deliueral Gods Commandments delivered both these branches, he
informed them of their duty, as well as of Gods mercy, and of Gods mercy no
less then of their duty. And indeed both are requisite to be taught; our
duty, that we do not presume, Gods mercy, that we do not despair; omit
either, and you may me the doctrine of Gods Covenant. There is also committed
unto us, the Law and the Gospel; the one to humble, the other to comfort men;
we ought to conioyne both, and you must be content to hear of your duty
as well as of Gods mercy.

We preach them both to our people; the Papists charge us with taking from the
doctrine of the Covenant, but the books of our Confession, the Articles, and
Catechismes, and the book of our Devotion, our public Lyturgie, and finally,
the Homilies which are appointed to be read unto the people, refute this
slander. But we justly charge them with adding to the doctrine of the Covenant
the books Apochryphall, and their ungrounded Traditions; and we remember them
of that saying of Solomon, Pro^ 30 v. 6.
add not to Gods Word, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar. And
what we have censured in them are nothing else but the forgeries of men's
brains, which may not be reputed the Oracles of God. Therefore though we call
upon you, dutifully to hear and receive, as well what God requires, as what he
promises: yet as necessarily to salvation, we do not, we should not call
upon you to hear more then he requires, or to believe more then he promises.

But enough of Moses Fidelity, Let us now see his Wisdom.

As he discharges himself fully: so does he discharge himself clearly
also. For he laid all that God commanded him before the faces of the Elders,
Nec incautis nec nescientibus ingeritur Lex.

Here first we meet with a strange phrase, for can words be laid before men's
faces? you would expect that the Text should have said, Moses spoke that which
God commanded in the ears of the people, and here we find their ears turned
into eyes. When the Holy Ghost means evidence of speech, it uses to express
it in such significant terms. Saint Paul telling the Galathians of his
perspicuous preaching the Gospel unto them, (...). 3. v 1.
says, that Jesus Christ was described in their sight, and crucified before
them. Although the Holy Ghost do speak to some in Parables, Mat 13.
that in hearing they may hear and not understand, (which he does in
punishment of their contempt of evident truth which has been laid before
them, Mat. 6.
because as the Proverb is, Pearls are not to be cast unto swine, nor holy
things unto dogs:) yet to those that hear with a reverent and an obedient
ear, Mat. 13. ^. 11.
Datum est nosse mysteria regnicoelorum, the Parables are unfolded, the
mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven are laid before their face.

To open this point a little better. We must distinguish the Covenant of God
from the Illustrations and Amplifications thereof. The Covenant it self both
Old and New is plainly delivered, whether you respect that which God requires,
or that which Godoffers, as well in this chapter, as in other parts of the Bible.
But there are many Illustrations and Amplifications of either of these,
Typical, Mystical, dark and hard to be understood, which the people cannot
understand without an Interpreter, ea, which the Interpreter himself cannot
understand without manifold help, help of Devotion that Gods Spirit may
inlighten him, and help of Meditation painfully scanning and comparing the
branches of the Text, with other places; finally, help of Variety of humane
literature, which gives great light sometimes to the phrase, sometimes to the
matter in hand. But above al in matters necessary to salvation, we follow
Catholic Tradition. This we say. And yet the wrangling Romanists bear the
World in hand, that we say there is no difficulty in the Scriptures; and that
for their guide we refer the people only to their private Spirit; which are
gross untruths. We encourage the people to read the Scripture, and tell them,
that though there be some depths therein, wherein an Elephant may swim, yet
there are some such shallowes wherein a Lamb may wade. The simplest may meet
there with all parts of their Catechism, the ten Commandments, the Articles
of their Creed, the Lords Prayer, the Sacraments. These points contain the
substance of the Covenant, and they are plainly delivered there. And more then
these are not necessary to salvation. Some may have more, some less
understanding of these, according to their breeding; yet all should understand
these. And for this purpose did Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles, and the Fathers of the Primitive Church commend unto the people the
reading of the Scriptures. But we advise them to leave unto the learned, at
least to learn of them to understand those things that are veiled; and soberly
to edify their piety with these things which they shall find there vnuailed,
or laid before their faces.

I have done with the delivery of the Message, I come now to the Answer that
is made thereunto.

And here we are to take notice first, Who makes it; the whole Congregation;
The people answered.

But do not you remember that the Message was delivered to the Elders? why
then do the People answer? Surely because the Elders received it to deliver
it to the people, and therefore not only the Elders but the people also were to
make an answer.

Some are of opinion that the Elders were the representative body of all the
people, and that their consent was the consent of all, and that all were bound
by that which they did; as in Parliaments the chosen Knights and Burgesses; in
Synods the chosen Proctors of the Clergy have such obliging voices. Which
conceit the Romanists wrest so far, as thereupon to make the tenants of the
Elders of the Church, the ground of the peoples faith, to which purpose they
also abuse the maxim of Cyprian, Ecclesia est in Episcopo, The Church
subsisteth in the Bishop; and vbi non sunt Sacerdotes Ecclesia non est. The
same premises serve as well to conclude for the Lyturgie in an unknown tongue,
and for their private Mass. For if the people may believe because their
Bishops believe, they may as well, (as indeed they do) serve God in the Priest,
and in the Priest they may communicate, without any their priuitie to what he
does, or any their cooperation with him, from which they are necessarily
excluded by private Masses and unknown Prayers. But the reason why the people
are said to answer to that message, which is said to have been delivered to
the Elders, will better be declared by another simily taken from an Army. In
the spiritual host of the Lord, every one takes Sacramentum militare, and
solemnly professes his consent to the Covenant. In the Old Testament children
of eight days old when they were circumcised and received the seal of God,
had their Sureties that undertook for them that they should stand to the
Covenant. So in the New Testament, when children were baptized they anciently
had (as appears by the ancient Lyturgie) and so now they are required to have
Sureties that vow in their name. Whereby it is clear that the Church has ever
taught, that the stipulation necessary in the Covenant does personally
concern the people, and that they cannot unburden themselves of it upon their
Elders, and therefore of purpose the Holy Ghost names not the Elders but the
people, when it specifieth the Answerers. Although we will not deny that of
the stipulation made by the people, the Elders which heard it made report unto
Moses.

Having found the Answerers, we must observe two commendable things in them,
whereof the first is Unanimity, for they joined all in the answer. The word
all is taken sometimes Communiter, sometimes Vniuersaliter, that is, sometimes
for the greater part, sometimes for every particular person. Again, whereas
men are ranged into diverse Degrees, some Nobles, some Commons, some Rulers,
some Subjects. All does sometimes note only genera singulorum, all sorts of
men, sometime singula generum, every one of every sort. The Unanimity which is
here meant is of the largest size, and signifies not only the greater part,
but every one, not only all sorts of men, but every one of every sort. And
indeed, if in the message, you shall hear, etc. you shall be, etc. God do
mean every one of every rank, then all in the answer must mean so, for all
that were spoken unto, answered. God in his Covenant, as the Ministers have
authority to promulge it, comprehends all, we are to preach the Gospel to
all, and tender the Sacraments to all, (...) 2. v 4.
all must hear, all must receive, God will have all men saved and come to the
knowledge of his truth. If any be excluded, he excludes himself. Yet are
there in the world of such wretched men, many more, then of those that do
consent, for many more are Infidels then Christians. And between those that
consent there is not that unanimity as is to be wished, some hold of Paul,
some of Apollo, some of Cephas; The East Church against the West, and the West
against the East; and each part has its Subdiuisions, thus the seamelesse
coat of Christ is rent into many pieces. I would we could all learn
Unanimity of these Israelites, and that with one heart and voice we would
make the same restipulation unto God which here they did.

Besides their Unanimity, there is in them a commendable Alacrity. For they
did not only answer all, but they did answer all at once; All the people
answered together. There are two ways of collecting voices, per scrutinium, by
private whispering in the ear, or some other private course; or viua voce, by
a free and open delivery of the mind. The first was thought sit to avoid
quarrels that were likely to arise, if the voices were known who gave them.
But when men use not the benefit of that course, but (...) with open face
profess their consent it is a sign they are, neither ashamed nor afraid of
their doings, which are the characters of a cheerful heart. Whereas therefore
they might privately have expressed their consents, and they do it openly, it is
a plain argument of their Alacrity But were not this, yet their answering
altogether puts it out of question. Saint Paul tells us that in a race all
run but one carries the prize, and therefore he bids all so run as that
every one may obtain. Now these so answered, 1 Cor. 9.24
as that no precedencie of voice could be distinguished, and while every one
did strive to speak first, all their voices made up but one first voice. So
willingly did they all consent, that one was not suffered to be more forward
then another. The like shall you find in Exodus 24. in Esdras, and in the Book
of Chronicles when the people come to profess their readiness to stand to Gods
Covenant. And God is pleased that there should be monuments extant of the
forwardness of his people to receive him as there are of his enemies to reject
him. In the Parable of the Marriage feast the invited guests (...) without
deliberation, Luke 14. v. 18.
and with too much readiness refused to come. And shall we not be as forward
that do purpose to come? God loves a cheerful giver, as of his goods: 2.
Cor. 9 v. 7.
so of himself. And in this case the old Proverb is true, Bis dat qui c^to
dat, I will interpret it by those words of Christ in the Gospel, Matthew. 11.12.
the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it.

Enough of the Answerers, let us come now to the Answer.

The Answer does contain their Acceptance, they promise that they will stand
to the Covenant which was represented to them by Moses. Neither had they
received the Law except they had first had a disposition to be commanded. God
will not covenant with the unwilling, his people must be, as the Psalmist
calls them Populus spontan^us, Psalm. 110.
a willing people. Especially those that are parties to the Covenant of Grace,
for that is a Conjugal Covenant, and a Conjugal Covenant is knit by love,
both parties consent with a ready mind. God inquires after his former gifts
in us for our capacity of more. Therefore we may not look that God will offer
force to our will, by grace he t^keth away the seruilitie, but the liberty of
our will he never takes away; our choice is free, such as beseems reasonable
men. Yea, the nearer God draws us unto him, the more in our doing will he
have us like unto himself, he will have us not only to do well, but to do
it willingly.

Whereupon will follow two things; the one is that we cannot murmurre against
God for imposing the Law, seeing, he lays no heavier burden upon us, then we
are willing to undergo. The other that we cannot excuse our inconstancy
seeing what we did resolve on, we resolved upon it advisedly, we liked well of
the conditions, when we first entered into the Covenant. And certainly, as it
does add much to Gods mercy, that he would take this loving course, so it
will add much unto our sin, if having upon deliberation dutifully accepted
what God does offer, we shall gracelesly break with God.

But in this acceptance of the Israelites, there is a remarkable mixture of
contrary qualities, Modesty and Confidence, for therein they do not presume,
and yet they do presume. First see their modesty.

You must call to mind that in the message sent them, there were two parts, the
one showed what God required of them, the other what he offered to them. In
their answer they show much modesty in regard of both parts, I will show that
modesty first, that respects what God does offer. Observe then that in their
answer they pass that over insilence, they do not capitulate with God for
it. And indeed the stipulation of our duty, must be absolute and not
conditional, (though Gods promise to us, be conditional and not absolute.)
And why? we owe our duty to God absolutely, and Gods mercy is not due to us,
but out of his gracious promise. So that to capitulate would imply a denial of
our native obligation, and that we would not obey, were it not for the
adoptiue; besides we should seem to doubt whether God will be as good as his
word: as God has reason to doubt of us that we will not be so good as our
word. So that to put a difference between Gods fidelity and ours, this branch
of the Israelites modesty may beseem us all; it may beseem us rather
assuredly to expect, then unmannerly to capitulate for that which God does
promise: so deal children with their Parents, Subjects with their Sovereigns;
and we much more ought so to deal with God our Father, and our Sovereign in
Heaven. Our eyes, yea, and our hearts too must be more upon that which God
requires, then upon that which God does promise. Not that we may not hearten
our selves with that which God does promise, yea, and remember God of it also
in our Prayers, after the example of the Patriarch Jacob. Genesis ^8.
But if we be silent we do in godly humility insinuate that we hold our
selves unworthy of it, and we shall speed never a whit the worse. For what we
forbear to do out of this consciousnesse of our unworthiness, God will
supply out of his abundant goodness; he will set an honorable estimate upon
our duty, and will take it as worthy of whatsoever he does promise. We cannot
undervalue our selves so much as God will ouerualue us.

The second branch of their modesty is, that replying to that which God
requires, they do not limit him, but yield their obedience as far as he
requires it. Yea, if you compare the clauses you shall find that God spoke but
indefinitely. If you will hear my voice, If you will keep my Covenant; but
they do answer universally, All that the Lord has said we will do, they
submit themselves unto Gods charge in the largest sense. And indeed this is
true Piety not to carue out our own obedience, but to let God carue it out,
we must absolutely captiuate our wits unto his wisdom, and surrender our wills
wholly unto his pleasure, his Law must be the bounderie of our life.

Hitherto you have seen that in their answer there is much modesty, much
modesty, you have seen they do not presume. But I told you that if we look
upon the words a second time, we shall find that there is over much confidence
in them, we shall find that they do presume.

They presume first of their Ability, faciemus, we do not think Gods
commandments impossible, we will do that which God commands, we think we
may adventure to promise so much. Cap. 4.
Saint James checkes man's confidence in a smaller matter, go to (says he) you
that say to day and to morrow we will go to such a place, and there buy and
sell, etc. whereas you should say, if we live, if the Lord will. If our
Ability be so small in regard of those things which are here below, and
concern this animal life, that we may not presume of our selves but under
such a condition: how much more must we add a condition when we speak of
those greater matters, those that concern our spiritual life? here we should
add, if Gods grace be sufficiently vouchsafed me, if he shall be pleased that
his strength be, made perfect in my weakness. For Auxilium speciale, is more
extraordinary then generale, and we must beg the special, the general will
not suffice is this case. If King David confessed and did as it were wonder at
Gods grace, that himself and his people offered their goods so willingly unto
God: how much more comes it of grace, and grace to be wondered at, that a man
does wholly and cheerfully deuote himself unto the service of God? Therefore
we must all remember that Item which Christ gave to Saint Peter, a great
undertaker in this kind, Mark 1^.
the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak; and imitate Saint Paul, a more
modest undertaker, who affirms of himself, I can do all things, Phil. 4.
but it is through Christ which strengthens me. Wherefore what the Israelites
omitted, we must in all these vows supply, If God shall convert, if God shall
incline our hearts; otherwise our undertaking will savor of too much
confidence, and we shall be guilty of presuming.

It was too much that they presumed of their ability; but see their confidence
goes farther, they presume of the extent of their Ability also, faciemus
omnia, we will do all that the Lord commands us. Certainly if they will do
so much, they will do more then ever any man did, or can do, except him that
was both God and man our Lord Jesus Christ.

To make this plain, understand that in the Law there are two parts, the
Affirmative and the Negative, and either has something in it, which is
impossible to be done in this life. The Affirmative requires that we Love God
with all our hearts, with all our minds, with all our strength, and our
neighbor as our self. The Negative, Ne concupiscas, Thou shall not lust. It
is confessed by all that are not Pelagians or Pelagius like, that neither of
these can be performed in this life.

Touching the Affirmative I will say no more then that which Saint Bernard
observed, that whereas in our Charity thereis Affectus and Actus, the
Affection and the Action: we must exspect in heaven the integrity of our
Affection, as the reward of the best endeauours of our Action, while we are in
this world; and if the integrity of our affection be above the reach of this
life, much more the integrity of our Action which flows from the other, and
is correspondent to it. I will insist a little longer upon the other clause,
the negative part of the Law. The rather because if I can make it plain that
we cannot perform the negative, it follows undeniably that we cannot
perform the affirmative. For as one instance to the contrary overthrows an
universal affirmative: so if we be tainted with the least spot of
concupiscence, our Charity cannot be entire. Observe then (that I may tread
the steps of the Romanists and overthrow their conceit of Moral perfection in
this life, out of their own principles, that in regard of the negative part of
the commandment, there is perfectio viatoris and comprehensoris. Perfectio
comprehensoris the perfection of a man when he comes to heaven will be this
(says Saint Austin) Non concupiscet, he will not there covet at all, covet
any thing against the prescript of Gods Law. But we may not exspect to have
that perfection in this life, because God is pleased even in his best Children
to continue here Luctam inter spiritum and carnem, a conflict between the
flesh and the spirit. Only in Baptism he takes away reatum Concupiscentis,
and regnum Concupiscentiae, those that are regenerated are not guilty, because
sinful Concupiscence is or stirs in them, neither does Concupiscence
continue her sovereignty over them.

So that God unto their perfection in the Church militant requires only of his
Children, vt post Concupiscentias ne eant; that they take no care for the flesh
to sulfill the lusts thereof. Rom 13 14. Rom 8. v. 1.
And there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus that walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit; which is Saint Paul's conclusion upon the
conflict described, Romans 7. and he shows plainly that he would have it
understood of the New and Old man's Conflict, not of reason and sensuality as
the Arminians. And can men perform so much as in the Apostles words is
required? The Romanists say they can, but they say it untruly. For this
contention of the spirit and the flesh is not duellum but Bellum, it is not a
single combat but a plain war. And you know there is great ods between
these; for in a single combat a man is to ward but one, and be has but one to
wound. But in the war, in a pitched battle, Singuli pugnant contra omnes,
and omnes contra singulos, every man must take care of all his enemies that
are in the field. For there is not one of them but may give him a wound, eminus
or cominus, either buckling with him, or striking him from aloof. So that when
he gardeth his head from one, another may smite him at the heart; when he
makes all sure before, he may be smitten behind, or he may be pierced in the
sides. As he is thus encumbred in the defensive, so is he in the offensive
also; he may not think himself safe, so long as any one of his enemies does
live. Behold here a lively Image of the militant Soldiers of Christ; they have
not to do with one, but with many enemies; the flesh, the world, the devil.
And these have under them many desperate Soldiers. The flesh as many as we
have senses and affections, parts of our bodies, and powers of our Souls. The
world as many as there are creatures. And the devil is a Prince of many
legions. We must withstand them all, and that at all times; and not only
withstand them, but also stand against them, at all times we must look to be
set upon by them, and we must set upon them. A very hard task, Pluribus
intentus minor est ad singula sensus, says the proverb, and the more our
strength is distracted by many, the less must it needs be against any one.
Were I only to defend my eye, happily I might make my part good against the
lust thereof; but at the same instant that I turn them away least they behold
vanity, I am assaulted with an itching in my ear, that is exposed to
flattery. Put the case I bestirre my self so well that I keep the enemy out
of both those inlets, he will give me a fall by my tongue, he will cast some
fiery Dart into that, it shall be set on fire of Hell (as Saint James speaks)
to slander, to blaspheme, James 3.6.
to speak some idle or evil words. Neither are my hands secure at the very
same time from being solicited with briberie or unto bloodshed. It were
infinite to go over all the powers of my Soul, all the parts of my body, they
are all at once and ever in the same danger, and must all at once and ever be
put unto the same labor both defensive and offensive.

Add hereunto three great disaduantages, of the spiritual warfare above the
corporal: for in the corporal warfare as there are many enemies, so those
against whom they come being many, distract them that they cannot all fall upon
one: but in the spiritual war it is not so, all our spiritual foes at one
time may set upon every one of us, yea they never go a sunder, for our flesh
ever joins with the world, and the devil with them both.

The second disadvantage is, that whereas open hostility in earthly warfare is
not always accompanied with treachery, in the spiritual it is. For our
selves hold secret intelligence with, and yield assistance to our ghostly
enemies, we betray unto them a propension that we have to be conquered. And
when the battle ioynes, our members become weapons of unrighteousness, and
with our own lusts we fight against our own souls.

The third disadvantage is, that in earthly warfare when the soldiers come to
execution, they spare none, and they go upon a good principle, shall I spare
his blood that will be ever ready to spill mine? 1. Sam. 15. Reg. 20.
Saul in sparing Agag, and Ahab who spared Benhadad were taxed, and punished
for their foolish pity. But of this foolish pity there appears too much in
our spiritual warfare, for if God bring the world under us, yea and our flesh
too, we are afraid to be hard hearted to either of them, we hold it too much
spirituality to crucify the world, and we hold it too much inhumanitie to
crucify our own flesh. And by reason of this indulgence, even when they are
foiled, they are still in heart, still in hope to recover the masterie, and
bring us under again.

This being the condition of sinful man, the Schoolmen hold that no man in
the state of grace, is of sufficient strength to over come all sin; though they
add, that there is no one sin, which he may not overcome, they speak of
actual sins: and they speak truly, if they be understood of that which a
man may do. For if a man be tempted unto any sin, if he pray unto God for
grace, and make use of that grace which God does give him, he may withold
his consent, and choose whether he will act it, and if he do consent and act
it, he is without all excuse. Tertullian has a pretty simile, when two
strive oftentimes the one overcomes the other, not because the conqueror was
the stronger, but because he that is conquered was the more cowardly, and such
cowards the best of men do prove very often in their spiritual war are. But
it is in vain to dispute what may be done by grace against all sin or any one
sin otherwise then to show al men's frailty. For the least of the two was never
so done, as that any man can truly boast of perfectio viatoris I will follow
this point no farther. By this time I doubt not but you conceive that the
Israelites in their answer were over confident, they presumed too much of
their ability, R^m. 8.
especially of the extent thereof, they did not know what was impossible to the
Law by reason of the flesh.

And yet mistake not, there is a virtue in this vice. Neither is their
confidence so blameable but there is something commendable in it. When a father
wills something to be done by his child, the child does, not so much consider
what it can do, as what it would do, and therefore undertakes even beyond
its strength. The father that sees it, does not so much dislike the vanity of
the attempt, as he likes the willingness to obey, he delights in the good
nature of his child, and desires that his abilities may be answerable to his
endeauours. And in this sort did God take the answer of the Israelites, as it
appears in the speech which he made to Moses when he presented the like words
unto him; I have heard (says he) the voice of the words of this people, they
have well said all that they have spoken, so he commends their confidence. But
to give them to understand that they undertook more then they were able to
perform, Deuteronomy. 5.
God adds a wish, O that there were such an heart in them, that they would
fear me and keep my Commandments always. For nullius momentiest subitus
affectus nisi accedat perseuerandi constantia. As the parable of the two
Sons, Matthew. 21. plainly shows.

God foresaw that all this profession of the Israelites was in them but a flash
of a temporary faith, Psalm. 79.
such as out of temptation appears in most of us. For if we be prevented with
grace, yea in many good things out of the light of nature, we assent unto the
truth of Gods Law, and our hearts incline to the good thereof. Yea if we sit
Judges in other men's cases, and are not transported with prejudice and
acceptance of the persons, we manifest this assent and inclination to the Law
of God in general, in our dooming of other men; but we do not cast up our
own accounts. When our own case comes a foot, and we are exercised with
any particular temptation, then Gods wish is necessary, O that there were in
them such a heart! It is necessary even for those that have been so forward
to say and that commendably, All that the Lord has commanded we will do. Let
us then know that the strictness of Gods charge serves only to exercise our
faith in Christ, to inflame our love toward God, and to encourage our hope of
perfection in heaven. Multum ille in hac vita profecit qui quam long sit a
perfectione Iustitiae proficiende cognoscit.

But I draw to an end. This answer did the Israelites make unto the message
that was sent from Mount Sinai, what answer then must we make unto the
message that comes to us from Mount Sion? The yoke that Moses put upon them
was grave, an heavy yoke, Acts 15.10. Matthew. 11.30
the yoke that Christ puts upon us is suave, an easy yoke. The easier our
charge, the readier should be our acceptance; it could not be so commendable
in them to under take beyond their ability, as it will be shameful in us if
we come short of them in expressing our forwardness to obey God. For if their
state were glorious ours does much more exceed in glory, 2. Cor. 3. What
remains then, but that we oblige our selves chearefully to the Covenant of
Grace, and penitently bewail our manifold defects in observing our obligation?
and that in our conflicts when we are driven to cry out, O wretch that I am,
who shall deliver me, etc. Romans 7.2^.
we answer, Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord?

I conclude all with that passage in the Psalm, Lord, thou have commanded that
we should keep thy precepts diligently, and let David's wish be every one of
ours, Oh that my ways were made so direct that I might keep thy Statutes.

The seventh Sermon.
EXODUS. 19. VERSE. 9. And the Lord said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thee in a
thick Cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe
thee for ever.


YOu may remember that I brake this whole Chapter into two parts, a mutual
stipulation that passed between God and the Israelites; and a preparation of
the parties for so great a work, as was the promulgation of the Law. I have
spoken of the mutual stipulation, it follows that I now come on to the
preparation.

This preparation is first ordered; then the parties being orderly prepared do
meet each other. The order for Gods preparation is set down in this verse; for
the Israelites in many Verses following.

Touching Gods preparation we must observe, first, that he will vouchsafe his
presence at this great work, I come to thee; Secondly, touching Gods presence,
the Text will teach us the Manner and the End. The Manner is such as beseems
the person, and fitteth the business; as it beseems the person, so it is
maiesticall; as it fitteth the business, so it is mystical: both are included
in the thick Cloud.

The End of Gods presence was, partly to grace Moses, who was to be the
Lawgiver, that the people may hear when I speak with thee; and partly to
dispose the people aright, who were to receive the Law, that they may believe
thee for ever.

These be the points, and they are remarkable, therefore are they prefaced
with a note of attention Lo, which will also direct our application; it is
remarkable that God was present, it is remarkable that his presence was full
of majesty, and mystery, the countenance which God vouchsafes Moses is
remarkable, and remarkable is that disposition toward Moses, which God
requires in Israel. I beseech you therefore in the fear of God to mark these
points diligently, whilst I clear them unto you briefly and in their order.

I come. God vouchsafes his presence at the work, and is this strange? Must
this have a Lo put upon it? Is it strange for God to do that which he cannot
choose but do? Acts 7.49.
For he fills heaven and earth, heaven is his throne, the earth is his
footstool; read the 139 Psalm, and see whether a man can be any where
without the presence of God, He bears up all things by the word of his
power, says the Apostle, therefore it is not strange that God should be
present at this work who is every where: it is rather strange that God should
be said to come to it, as if he changed the place of his presence, which he
cannot do, because he is infinite. Observe therefore, that though God be
euerywhere alike in regard of his being: yet in regard of his being manifest he
is not every where alike; now it is not his being, but his being manifest that
is meant in this place, therefore the Chaldie Paraphrase instead of the Hebrew
I come, says fitly to this purpose, I will appear; and because God does not
always appear to men alike, therefore when he does more notably appear unto
them, he is said to come. Touching the variety of Gods appearing or
manifesting himself to the world, take a similitude from the Sun. The Sun
does manifest it self, first, by daylight, and that is common to all that
dwell in the same Horizon unto which the Sun is risen; some have more then
the daylight, they have also the Sunshining light, which shining light of the
Sun is not in all places where the day light of it is; finally the Sun is
manifest in the heavens in his full strength, for the very body is present
there, which none can endure but the Stars, which become glorious bodies, by
that special presence of the Sun amongst them: In like manner God in whom
all things live, move, and have their being, does manifest himself, unto some
by the works of his general providence, of which manifestation Saint Paul
speaks when he says, Acts 14.
God left not himself without witness to all nations in that he did good, and
gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons filling our hearts with food
and gladness, This manifestation of God is like the daylight, Psalm. 145 v. 15.
it is common to all, it is an universal grace, The eyes of all things look
up unto thee, O Lord, and thou give them their meat in due season. There is
a second manifestation and that is peculiar but to some, it is like the
Sunshine, it is that manifestation which God vouchsafes his Church, of
which Esaias speaks, Arise, shine, Chap 60.
for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, but
darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, for in
comparison of the Church the rest of the world sits in darkness, and in the
shadow of death. The third and last manifestation is that which God makes of
himself in heaven, to the Angels and Saints, the cleerest and fullest whereof
a creature is capable; and those, which partake this presence of God, become
thereby glorious Saints, more glorious then the stars which receive their
resplendent luster from the aspect which they have to the Suns body. The
manifestation that we have to do withal, is of the second sort, it is not so
clear as that which the Saints enjoy in heaven, it is not so dark as that
which is common to the world, but it is of a middle temper proper to the Church
militant, to whom God is said to come when he does so manifest himself unto
her. From hence we must take notice that as there are those who are in better
case then we are, so there are who are in worse case, and therefore we must
thank God for our present advancement, and remember that we make forward to
that neerenesse unto God, which is reserved for us in heaven. This may suffice
for our understanding of this phrase, I come.

The next point is the manner of his coming, In the thick cloud. Before I
speak distinctly hereof, I will give you a note upon the Cloud. Some make a
question whether it be the same Cloud which guided the children of Israel
through the wilderness, or some other; they think some other greater and
thicker, but they think so without great reason; for after that the guiding
Cloud once rested on the Tabernade, we hear no more of any Cloud upon Mount
Sinai, neither did Moses after that ascend unto Mount Sinai, but God delivered
his mind unto him in the Tabernacle where the Cloud then rested; and God
promised to dwell amongst the people after the Tabernacle should be built, by
bringing the Cloud and his glory thither, which was accordingly performed
(Exodus 40.34.) Exodus 19.43, ^^
before that the people removed from Mount Sinai, yet after that time we
read of no other Cloud upon Mount Sinai. Instead then of coining a new Cloud,
observe rather how by degrees God approached to his people; at their first
coming out of Egypt he kept aloft in the air, the people had not yet shaken
off their Egyptian disposition, neither were they sitted for any nearenesse to
God. When they rose higher in their thoughts, and had contracted with him, God
descended lower, and came nearer unto them, he descended to the top of Mount
Sinai. Afterward when they had yet better expressed their affection to entertain
God by building the Tabernacle, God vouchsafed to come lower to them, he chose
to reside in the midst of their Camp. And let us take this for an undoubted
lesson, the better we (prevented by grace) prepare our selves for God, the
nearer will God approach to us.

I now come to speak distinctly of the manner. I told you that the manner of
Gods appearance was first maiesticall, because in the thick Cloud, in this
Cloud, that you may see the majesty of God, observe first that God was in it,
for there was the Angel of God, that Angel in whom is Gods Name, so we read,
Exodus 23. verse 21. and who is called Gods presence, Exodus 33. verse 14, 15. so
that the Cloud was Gods chair of State, or his Chariot, or Pauillion, as the
Scripture does call the Clouds when God puts them to this use. And as God
was in the Cloud, so was the Cloud environed with an host of heavenly
Courtiers, becoming the majesty of such a King, learn it out of the sixty
eight Psalm, The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of
Angels, the Lord is amongst them as in Sinai in his holy place. And besides
these attendants we find observed two other Ceremonies of State. As Kings give
notice of their coming by the sound of Trumpets, so this Cloud was attended by
the voice of a Trumpet exceeding loud. And as before Kings there is wont to be
carried the instrument of Justice and Vengeance the Sword, so was Gods
appearance in this Cloud attended with those dreadful Meteors Lightning and
Thunder. Lay together those particulars, and you will confess that God
appeared in awefull majesty when he came in the thick Cloud. The Israelites
confessed as much, Deuteronomy. 5.24. Behold, the Lord has showed unto us his glory
and his greatness, we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire.
Mortal Kings never put on greater state then when they go to their
Parliaments, the reason that moves them is the same that moved God, that men
should fear to offend them whom they see armed with so great power, and the
greater regard be had unto their Laws.

As the thick Cloud does set forth Gods majesty, so is it also full of
mystery.

The first mystery to be gathered out of it, is observed by God himself; he
clothed himself with a thick Cloud, to put the people in mind, that having
seen no shape of him, they should not presume to make any image. Let our
lesson be, Voluntas Dei non essentia quaerenda in hac vita, what God is, is a
lesson for the life to come, in this life it is enough for us to learn what
Gods will is.

A second mystery in the Cloud is that it agrees well with the revelations of
the Old Testament, Gal. 4.
for God appeared then in shadows, and figures, there was a veil cast over
the Law, which was figured in the veil wherewith Moses covered his face, 2.
Cor. 3. So that though the Church in the Old Testament had much more knowledge
then the rest of the world, (for they had saving knowledge, as appears, Heb.
11.) Yet he that is least in the Kingdom of God, says Christ, is greater then
John Baptist, notwithstanding that he was greater then any Prophet of the Old
Testament.

A third mystery is the condition of the Law, Chap. 33.
which in Deuteronomic is called a fiery Law, very piercing, and very
scorching, it enters far in searching of a man's conscience; it is a discerner
of the thoughts; I had never known, Heb. 4.12. Romans 7.7.
says Saint Paul, that lust is sin, had not the Law said thou shall not
lust. As the Law is piercing because fiery, so is it scorching also, it vexes
and tormenteth their consciences whom it finds guilty, it is a burden too
heavy for the best of us to bear, Acts 15. Saint Austine observes well,
Breuis differentia Legis and Euangelij timor and amor, although both these
affections beseem both Testaments, and he that loves must fear, and he that
fears must love; yet Fear was preualent in the Old Testament, and Love is in
the New; We have not (says Saint Paul) received the spirit of bondage to
fear, Rom 8.15.
which was the state of man under the Old Testament, but we have received the
spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba, Father, which is the liberty of the
New Testament. The same Apostle resembles the different conditions of the
Church under the two Testaments to the different conditions of a child when he
is in nonage, and when he is come to his full age, Gal 4.
while he is in his nonage though he be heir, yet is he kept in awe and under
a Pedagogue, but when he comes to full age his Father affords him a more
cheerful countenance, and more liberal maintenance: Even so under the Law
the Church was kept under and scanted of grace, but under the Gospel she is
more free, and endued with a more plentiful measure of Gods holy Spirit.
Finally, hereunto looks the difference that Saint Paul makes between Mount
Sinai and Mount Sion, Heb. 12. the terriblenesse of the one, and the sweetness
of the other, I shall have occasion to compare them before I come to the end of
the Chapter.

By the mixture of the Cloud and of the Fire, you may also conceive a mixture
of our knowledge of God: as the light of the fire signifies that he is in some
good sort manifested unto us, 1. Cor. 13.1^.
so does the Cloud signify that out knowledge is very imperfect, we see but
as through a glass darkly: that which we know not of God, is much more then
that which we do know. Let this suffice for the manner.

I come now to the End, which is twofold, for God came first to grace Moses,
whom he designed Lawgiuer to Israel, or rather Referendarie of that Law which
himself would give unto them. And he graced him two ways.

First, in coming to him and not unto them, so says the Text, I will come to
thee. Moses was upon the hill, the people in the bottom, now the Cloud came
down but to the top of the hill, not into the bottom, wherein there was no
small grace done to the person of Moses: in the sight of all the people, God
vouchsafed his presence only to him and not to the people.

The second grace is yet greater, that in the hearing of the people God would
speak with him, for it is not here said that God did speak with them. But
that we mistake not this grace which is done to Moses, and give him more
honor then hereby was by God intended toward him, we must observe, that
though here we find no mention of Gods speaking with the people, but only of
his speaking with Moses, yet Deuteronomy. 5. verse 5. Moses himself says, that God
talked also with them; and here we read that God so talked with Moses, as that
he talked in the hearing of the people. When here we read of Gods talking
with Moses only, without any mention of Gods talking with the people, hereby
the Holy Ghost intends to honor him with the Mediator ship of the Old
Testament: that honor which Saint Paul gives him when he says, The Law was
given by Angels in the band of a Mediator. But where Moses says, Deuteronomy. 5.
that God talked with the people: there the Holy Ghost would teach us that God
intended the Law to the people. And out of both places compared together, it
follows that the Law was committed to Moses, to the end that the people might
receive it from him, not only as he should deliver it in the two Tables, but
also as he should report unto them by word of mouth. And because they were to
receive Gods Law as he should report it, that they might be sure he brought
them nothing but that which he received from God, therefore God uttered the
Law to him in their hearing. Whatsoever comes from a man as a mere man will
hardly work upon the conscience, because of that known principle, Omnis homo
mendax, men have their errors, and their private ends, therefore their proiects
are entertained with jealousy, that they mistake or intend their own good;
but if a Law be once known to be Gods pleasure, we readily submit, because we
know he is (...) and (...) he can neither deceive nor be deceived, and he
has absolute power to command. Upon this principle those famous Lawgiuers
amongst the Heathen did make it their first labor to persuade their people
that they had familiar colloquies with some divine power, by whom they were
directed in their Law-giuing: Minos with Jupiter, Lycurgus with Apollo, Numa
with Aegeria, etc. Mahomet could never have made his Alcoran so current, but by
that notorious imposture of a Dove which had been taught to come familiarly to
his ear, and which to the people he pretended to be the Holy Ghost;
Heretics old and new have had their Enthusiasticall guides; Papisticall
pretended apparitions and revelations are much of this kind, abuses of that
sacred principle. But to the point, when God would establish the Canon both of
the Old and New Testaments, by two demonstrations he showed that they came
from him, the one of Miracle, the other of Oracle. So did he establish that
which the Church received by Moses. First, he gave him power to work many
Miracles, which was a second proof that he came from God, for no man could do
what he did except God were with him, the very Magitians confessed so much,
Digitus Dei est hic. Secondly, God not contented to give him the power of
Miracles, because Magitians might, if not do them, yet make show of them,
added also this second confirmation of Oracle, which puts the other out of
controversy, because it is not so casie to be counterfeited. Our Savior
Christ by whom was laid the foundation of the Canon of the New Testament, had
the same evidences to confirm his doctrine; besides the many Miracles which
he wrought, that Oracle was once and again uttered from Heaven, Matthew 3.
Matthew. 17. Matthew. 24 25.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. And withal he
forewarned his Church not to rest barely upon Miracles, for that false Christ's
and false Prophets shall arise, and show great signs and wonders.

But why did God grace Moses by speaking with him in the hearing of the people?
Surely the end was, that they might believe him for over, that faith toward
his person might be wrought in them. For Faith properly relieth upon the
person, and rests upon his word, although it does not comprehend many things
which he speaks; as indeed the Israelites did not understand many parts of
the Law, yet never did they question them because they were delivered by Moses,
(...) was enough to them, farther inquiry they made none.

But how could Moses be believed for ever, seeing he is dead diverse thousands
of years since? Surely Moses lives in his Writings, he that believes them,
believes him. The Prophets long after him, refer themselves to him in his
Writings, Ad legem and testimonium, Chap. 8.
says Esaias, Remember the Law of Moses which I gave him in Horeb, says God, in
Malachie. Thus also in the New Testament, Chap. 4.
Christ refers to him, You believe in Moses; Matthew. 22. John 9.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses his chair, And we find the Jews
still covering their oppositions to Christ and his Apostles with pretense of
their faith to Moses, We know that God spoke to Moses, we are Moses his
Disciples. So deeply did this Oracle of God take root in them, that through
ignorance and misconceit, it became their stumbling block, and that which
truly understood should have brought them to the Gospel, through the error of
their judgment set them against it. God does as much as is fit to establish
our faith, but we often pervert the best means to our own ruin.

I may not here forget to observe unto you a gross error of the Church of
Rome. God spoke once to Moses, says my Text, in the hearing of the people,
that the people should believe his words for ever, therefore the Canon of the
the Law was to stand for an eternal truth. The same must we affirm of the
Canon of the New Testament, whose confirmation is much surer, as Saint Paul
testifies, Heb. 2. Hence it is that we call upon the Church of Rome to
reform according to this double Canon; but they call as fast upon us for
Miracles and Oracles, to confirm our Doctrine. But new proofs are only for
new Doctrines, we allege nothing but that which was taught by Christ and his
Apostles, and consequently nothing but that which has been already proved by
Miracle and Oracle; an^ that which has been once thus proved is to be
believed for ever.

The last note which I gave on my Text is, that it has a word which bids us
mark diligently all the points thereof, mark what Gods coming is, in what
sort he does manifest himself unto us; that which is not vulgar (...) must
not vulgarly be regarded; mark that Gods coming to give the Law was full of
Majesty, full of Mysteries, we must adore his Majesty, and not neglect any
one of the Mysteries; finally, mark, that whom God employeth in his service,
he vouchsafes honor to their persons, that his Word may pass with more
weight from their mouths. The end of all is our good that we may cleave faster
unto God.

ANd God grant that by the Ministry of man our faith in God may so increase,
that at Christ's second coming our faith may end in a beatificall Vision, and
then we shall have no other Teacher but God. The eighth Sermon.
EXODUS. 19. VERSE. 10, and part of the 15, and 22. VERSES. And the Lord said
unto Moses, Go unto the People and sanctify them to day and to morrow; (yea
and the Priests to Verse 22.) and

Let them wash their Clothes, and be ready against the third day. Add out of
Verse 15. And not come at their Wives.


YOu may remembe what I have told you more then once, that there was a
Preparation to go before the Promulgation of the Law, a Preparation of God,
and of the Israelites. This Preparation was first ordered, and then the meeting
followed.

So much of the Order as concerns God, I opened the last time, it follows
that I now come to the other part which concerns the Israelites.

This branch of the Order does prescribe, First, their Purity, and Secondly,
their Modesty. Their Purity (whereof only at this time) is delivered in those
words which now I have read unto you. Wherein, we will observe, First, A Work
that is enjoined, and secondly, the Circumstances that do attend that Work.

The Work (in a word is, to Sanctify. But we are moreover taught wherein this
Sanctification does stand, and Whom it concerns. It stands in a Ceremonial
Observance, They must wash their clothes; and forbearance, (this you must must
supply out of the 15. Verse) They must not come at their Wives.

These Works that must be done concern the Governor and his Charge; the
Governor is Moses, he must sanctify; his Charge are the Israelites; but they
are divided into the People and the Priest; (you must supply the Priest out of
Verse the 22.) both these must be prepared.

The Circumstances that must attend this Work are two, place and time; the
place is the Tents, the ordinary place of the Israelites abode. Go to this
people. The Circumstance of time is double; for here we have mentioned, first,
the time during which the Work was to be a doing, and that is to day and to
morrow; Secondly, the time against which the Work was to be done, and that was
the third day, the day wherein God would appear unto them, and they were to
come in his presence.

You see then the particulars of my Text, I purpose (God willing) to open them
now, and God now so open all our ears and hearts that we may learn by them to
sanctify our selves; so shall God never appear unto us, nor we appear
before God but to our endless comfort.

Come we then to the first particular, and that is the Work which must be
done; this is in a word to sanctify. To sanctify is to separate from a common
to a sacred use. God made us not only men, that is, reasonable creatures, but
also his children, that is, consorts with Angels, and we were by times or by
turns to intend no less our Heavenly then our worldly vocation, the things of
a better no less then the things of this present life. To take off our
thoughts and desires, our care and endeavor from this world, and bestow them
upon the world to come, from the earth, and place them upon heaven, is that
that which the holy Ghost means by Sanctifying of our persons. And verily
before the Fall, no more was required thereunto then such a change of our
employment; but after the Fall more is made necessary; for sin cleaves unto
our nature, we are conceived and borne therein: Psalm. 51.
Not only those that are without the Church, whom Saint Paul describes, Romans
1. but also those that are within the Church, whom he describes in the third
of that Epistle. And this sin does defile us; read Esaias the first Chapter,
and Ezech. 16 there you shall see how loathsome, how ugly we are by reason of
our sin. Esaias 64. v. 6.
All our righteousness (as the Prophet speaks) is like a menstruous cloth.

Neither does sin only defile us, but by us it defiles all other creatures,
Concupiscence is a contagious thing, Contactu omnia foedo inquinat, what it
touches it staineth; Titus 15.
Unto the impure (says the Apostle) nothing is pure, nothing is pure to a
sinful man, because his mind and conscience is defiled. So that (...) are
synonyma; Acts 10.
the common thing, or things vnseparated, the things of this life that are not
hallowed are all impure. Wherefore to sanctify now is not only to change our
employment, but also to cleanse our selves from sin; and before we do
dedicate our selves unto God, we must remove not only our employment from the
world, but also our corruption from our persons; Corruption, not only that
which is inherent in us, but also that which by our means is adherent unto our
goods, and to other creatures, whereof we make any offering to God.

This which in gross I have said concerning Sanctification, is distinctly
taught in the rest of my text, and the rest of my text is a fair Commentary
upon this word, for therein you shall see, first, the separation of sin from
them, in the washing of their Garments; Secondly the separation of their
employment from the world, in not coming to their Wives; and last of all, that
which is the vp-shot of all, their preparation to meet God. Let us look into
these points orderly.

First into the ceremonial observance. The Israelites were to wash their
clothes. God fitted his Law in the old Testament unto the nonage of his Church;
so the time before Christ's Incarnation is called by the Apostle, Gal. 4. 1 Cor.
10.
and all things came to his people in types and figures; much of their Law was
ceremonial. But those ceremonies of Gods institution were (as the fathers call
them Sacramenta) they were mystical things, they had an outside, and an
inside, an outside corporal, an inside spiritual; wherein they differed
from Heathenish and Pharisaicall ceremonies; for example to instance in the
ceremony which we have in hand. The Heathen, the Pharisees had their washing.
Touching that of the Heathen we read in the profane Authors, and in the
Gospel we read of that of the Pharisees; both of them had Lauacrum but not
Mysterium, the outside, but not the inside of the washing: their thoughts
reached no farther then the Carnal work, ascribing to the Carnal work a
supernatural power; which the Poet taxes in the Heathen. Ah nimium faciles
qui tristia Crimina coedis,
Tolli fluminea posse putatis aqua.
And our Savior Christ taxes it in the Pharisees, who thought when they had
washed their hands they were quit from their briberie. Neither is the Romish
sprinkling of Holy water much better, whether we look to the consecration of
it, or the confidence that is put in it. In the the consecration, the Priest
does pray without a promise; and as for the people, they rest upon Opus
operatum, the doing of a work that has no warrant, and so trust in a lie.
Ceremonies of significancie the Church may institute, but ceremonies of
efficacy it cannot institute; God only, who is the fountain of grace can
institute those Conduits by which he will convey them to us.

But to leave these carnal ceremonies, and come to the mystical. Saint Austin
gives this good rule to guide us in understanding them, Epist. 49. Quest. vet.
Humana Consuetudo verbis, Diuina potentia etiam rebus loquitur, It is usual
with men to express their meaning in words, God has moreover another
language, suitable to his power, he speaks by things, by corporal things to
let the Israelites understand spiritual; and their ceremonies were Symbola
pietatis, sensible Images (as it were) of their moral duty.

But least we mistake, we must observe three differences between the cutside
and inside of the ceremonies.

First, the corporal part of it was to be considered, not according unto its
own nature, but according to its reference, not according to that which it was
in it self, but according unto that whereunto it was ordained of God, so
Sacrifices were to be considered, not as beasts or birds, etc. but as Types of
Christ that was to die for the sin of the world: but the spiritual part of
the ceremony was to be considered and esteemed according to its own and
absolute nature.

A second thing is, that the Type contains good or evil in regard only of
the Commandment which requires the doing or the forbearing thereof, whereas
otherwise the thing in it self is indifferent: but the inward part of that
ceremony is commanded or forbidden, because in its own nature it is good or
evil.

Thirdly, man can only perform the Corporal or outward part of the
ceremony, the inward and spiritual can be done only by the special grace of
God; and we may not ascribe unto the Creature that which is in the power, and
gift only of the Creator.

These rules being considered in general, must also discreetly be
distinguished according to the maine parts of Religion, which are two, (...),
that wherein God does exhibit ought unto us, and (...), that wherein we do
present some thing unto God. The ceremony wherewith we have now to do is of
the later sort, for washing our clothes is a part of man's sernice which he does
to Godward.

In all the Purifications of Moses Law, washing of Clothes was always one, as
you may find in the Book of Leuiticus, where those Laws are set together; and
the Jews from this precept gather the practice of baptizing them whom they
receive into their Covenant and Church.

Neither was this an Introductorie Law of Moses, but a declaratorie; for we
read of it in the story of Jacob, when he did purge his family; Gene. 35.
one of the ceremonies practiced, was the shifting of Garments, which shifting
implies washing, because it was a putting off the soul to put on the clean;
and the garments of those Countries were clean by being washed, as anon you
shall hear.

By the way take this observation; that the ceremonial Laws of Moses
(excepting such as were requisite upon the Churches becoming National, or
were occasioned by the Israelites deliverance out of Egypt) were in practice
amongst the Patriarchs from the beginning of the world, as may be gathered out
of Genesis.

Let us now come closer to our present ceremony. And here first it is worth
the inquiring, why God should pitch upon this kind, upon the washing of
Garments? The reason is evident in the Scripture; the similitude of God
according to which we were Created is compared to a Garment, not only by the
fathers, Jeremy, Ambrose, Austin, and others, but also by the Holy Ghost, who
speaking of the loss thereof, says, that thereby we become Naked; Gene. 3.
and the recovery of that Image is the buying of raiment from Christ; the
phrases of putting on Christ, Reave. 3.18.
putting on the new man, putting on the Armor of light, allude hereunto, and
if you mark it well, our original righteousness resembled a Garment in three
things.

For first it did cover and adorn us as a robe of majesty sit for him, that
was made to rule in this lower world. Secondly, as a Garment that is put on may
be put off: so might we loose our original righteousness. And indeed Adam was
disrobed thereof, and we in him: The fathers say, L^ke 10. v. 30.
he was meant by the man that going from Jerusalem to Jericho fell amongst
thieves, and was robbed. Thirdly, though a man keep his robe on, yet may it be
stained, so though a man do not forgo his righteousness recovered in Christ,
yet may he much blemish it. These correspondencies are fair grounds of Gods
choice of this ceremony.

We have not now to do with the wanting or loosing of our garment, only let me
tell you, Revel. 3. v. 17.
that Christ speaks of some that think they are clothed when they are ^aked;
let us take heed of being such blind Laodiceans. Revel. 16. v. 15.
Again, Christ bids all take heed that they loose not their garments, and
their nakedness and filthiness appear; let us take heed of such
unthriftiness; though Adam smarted well for it, we shall smart worse; God
restored unto him (...) his first raiment, Luke 15. v. 2^.
and he restores it to all his, to as many of them as put on Christ: but if
they loose it again, if they put off that garment, their nakedness shall
never be covered again, Heb. c. 6.4. and Cap. 10.26.

But we have not to do with that desperate sin, we have now to do with
stayning of those garments which we keep. The ancient color of garments
which they did usually wear was White, and so very apt to be stained, therefore
they were often to be washed and scoured. In the Primitive Church, one of the
ceremonies of Baptism was this; the baptized person had a clean white garment
put upon him with these words, Take this White garment and keep it unspotted
until thou be presented before the tribunal of Christ. The Churches meaning
was that we should continue in that innocence which we received in Baptism.
But that which Christ said unto the Church of Sardis, Thou have a few Names
which have not defiled their garments, was spoken but comparatively of them,
and absolutely it can be spoken of none; for who does not defile himself more
or less, and stain his innocence? Yea and that more ways then one? and that
too in a high degree? And the ground of this Commandment is, because the
Israelites in Egypt had defiled themselves with Idolatry and other kinds of
impiety.

The Church of Rome exempteth some of their Saints from mortal, though not
from venial sin; some from Actual of both sorts, but not from Original as
John Baptist, the Virgin Marie from original also: but they are conceits
whereupon themselves are not agreed; wherefore leaving them to wrangle, 1. John
ver. 18.
we will hold with Saint Austin, That if all the Saints in the world (during
their militancie) had been assembled, their common confession would be this,
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us.

Now when our corporal garment is unclean, what do we? We do that which is
commanded here, we wash it, we scour it, but we must do it as it is
commanded here, that is mystically. When a Dog is beaten before a Lion, the
meaning is, that by that which is done to the Dog the Lion should see what he
deserves. And Theoderet notes well upon this place, that When God bids them
wash their garments timorem illis ingerit, religiosioresque reddit, ex his enim
colligebant magis expurgandam animam. God does not delight so much in the
cleanness of garments: as in the purity of oursoules; for (...) is (...).
Nazian.
And no marvel; for (...), says Nazianz.) As that wihch does enter a man does
not defile a man, no more does that which covers a man; therefore Christ
bids the Pharisees wash their own insides, and then all things should be
holy unto them, for unto the pure all things are pure.

Except happily we may say, that the Garment also is defiled, Jude 23.
because spotted with the flesh, and so there is in this phrase a touch at the
contagion of sin; which was also meant in the Ceremonial uncleanness, when
they were bid to wash their Garments: but that vanishes so soon as our selves
are purified; the Holy Ghost would have us take principal care of our souls
that they may be purified. And there is a fountain opened to the house of
David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem; Zach. 1.13.
we may wash our selves white in the blood of that Lamb, for his blood does
cleuse from all sin; and if our sins be as red as scarlet, he can make
them as white as snow; Malachie says, Chap. 3.
it has in it the virtue of fullers soap, it is his blood that can make his
Spouse all fair, make his Church without spot or wrinkle; he that is purged
therein, shall have his Conscience cleansed from dead works to serve the
living God. By his Spirit and our faith does Christ's blood work these things;
wherefore let us all pray with King David, Psalm. 51.
Purge me, O Lord, with Hysope and I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be
whiter then snow.

Mark, that the Israelites are bid to wash their Garments, not to change them,
though it appears, Exodus 33. that they had change of raiment. There is a
mystery in it; it signifies that the children of God from the time they are
incorporated into Christ, though they have often occasion to scour out the
stains which their Regeneration contracteth, yet they do not shift it, it
shall abide the same for ever, bettered in quality, but never altered in
substance.

Finally observe, that though the children of Israel did often wash their
Garments Ceremonially while they abode in the Wilderness, yet did their
garments never wear out; contrary to the common Observation, A Landresse
washes fair, but she wears withal: Even so though we do spiritually
bathe our souls often in the blood of Christ, our Regeneration will not spend
at all, nay, it will be very much increased.

I have dwelt long upon this Ceremonial Observance, I will be shorter in the
rest.

The second part of Sanctification is the Ceremonial forbearance; when we
have removed that uncleanness which comes from our person by sin, then
must we withdraw our person from employment on the world; and that is meant by
the Israelites not coming as their Wives.

And mark the phrase. Saint Paul does exhort us, 1 Thessalonians. 4. v 4.
to keep our vessels (that is our bodies) in honor, and not in the lusts of
concupiscence, that is, not for to accompany strumpets, which we cannot do
but we shall betray our selves to be subject to dishonorable affections; so
Saint Paul calls them (...) in opposition to marriage which is honorable in
all; 1 Thessalonians. c 4.
This honorable state of marriage does Saint Paul make a branch of Holiness.
But here is a strain beyond it even that Holiness is as it were, no
Holiness: when we are to prepare our selves for God, we must forbear the use
thereof. Will you know the reason of it? We may say, that though the ordinance
be holy, yet the Accessory which from our Concupiscence comes to the use
thereof makes some thing cleave thereunto which may make us unfit to come
immediately from the use thereof to give our attendance upon God; which is
intimated in the Ceremonial Law delivered, Leuit. 15. besides, the presence of
carnal pleasure makes us not so ready to entertain those pleasures that are
spiritual. These things a man may say, and say truly, that it is sit every man
should observe Saint Paul's rule, 1. Corin. 7 v. 5.
by consent for a time, the man must for bear his wife, and the woman her
husband, that they may give themselves to Fasting and Prayer.

But there is an higher point which at this time concerned the Israelites, and
that is, the day of their appearing before God was to be their espousall day,
God was then to contract himself to them, as appears, Ezech. 16. And should a
man mind the earthly, when he is called unto an heavenly espousals? No
verily; it is then time, if ever, for a married man to be as if he were not
married, to be as if he were an Angel, to show that he has no other love but
Christ, to show that Christ is his beloved, as he is the beloved of Christ. The
desire of that match must drown in us all delight in our earthly companion,
be she never so lovely in our eyes.

But, when they are bid not to keep company with their wives, it is not meant
simply of their company; for they should both join, as in suspending their
power each over the other, and each endeavor to please the other* so in
provoking each the other to care for those things that belong unto the Lord,
and with a virgin-like disposition to prepare themselves for him.

It is not needful for me to remember you, that God in forbidding the
Conjugal Act, forbids all attendants thereupon, or prouocations thereunto;
for that is a common rule to be observed in all Gods Commandments as
hereafter you shall hear. Only this I will note unto you, that by this one
carnal content all others are meant, yea all lawful profits and pleasures,
and God will have us show, that being not only reasonable, but religious
persons also, we are so far masters of our worldly Desires, that we can,
when we are to attend God and his service forbear, not only illicita but
licita also; and be so far from delighting in any thing that is unlawful,
that we can willingly deny our selves those things, the use whereof God has
otherwise, and at other times made lawful for us. Vrias would not keep
company with his wife while the Arc was in the field, 2. Sam. 11. brutish is
the Jews conceit that think the Sabbath the fittest day to lie with their
wives; Chastity beseemes married men when they go about sacred things,
especially at solemn times.

I have done with the separation required, separation of sin from our
persons, and our persons from the world.

You would think that it were fit I should now come to the other Act of
Sanctification which is dedicating our selves unto God. But there are some
things mentioned in my text, which I must take in by the way. We must see
first whom this Sanctifying concerns; it concerns first the Governor
Moses, He must go and sanctify.

But Moses did as yet sustain two persons, he was both King and Priest; for
he had not put off the Priesthood, seeing Aaron as yet was not consecrated.
And indeed this work may be done, either by the Priest or by the Prince: by
the Priest; so Joel commanded them to sanctify a fast; Ezechias and others did
the like as Princes. Ieet 2 15.
But the difference is, that the Prince does it Imperio and Gladio, by
peremptory command, and threatening the sword; but the Priest does it Mimsterio
and verbo, as a servant, and not using any other power but of the keys Prince
and Priest both serve God in this work, but they serve him with this
difference.

It skilleth not much whether of these persons Moses did act in this business,
it is plain that he was authorized to do it from God. And his authority was
to do it two ways. First, to acquaint them with Gods pleasure; and then to
take care that they did conform thereunto. And indeed, good Magistrates,
whether Temporal or Ecclesiastical, Austin. Epist. 50.
must not only give Laws to the people, but also see that they be executed;
and in vain is the wisdom of good Laws, if no care be used to have them
kept; a Governors providence must extend to both. Therefore the text goes on,
and shows that this Sanctifying concerns all the Israelites; the people are
mentioned here, and out of Verse the 22. you must supply the Priests.

Some think that the name Priest is used in this Chapter by anticipation, and
that Moses here informs them how they were to sanctify themselves after they
were consecrated; and it is very true, that while they did serve they did
forbear their wives, and wash though not their clothes which they shifted in
the Sanctuary, yet their hands and feet. But the Priests here meant were the
firstborn, who were then the ordinary Priests, and the work was presently to
be done, it was not to stay till Aaron was consecrated.

The principal note that I give you herein is, that though there be different
callings in the Church, some are Pastors, and some are people; yet as the
salvation is common unto both: so are also Faith, Hope, and Charity.

In moral duties, in works of Piety and Charity, the Priest must go with
the people, and the people must go with the Priest; though the Priest must go
before the people in these things, yet must he not go alone; yea Moses
himself, though otherwise a Shepherd, yet herein is a sheep, he that
sanctified others must sanctify himself. A Governor must in virtue be
exemplary to his charge.

These persons must be prepared. And Sanctification is the best preparation,
the word signifies also to be Confirmed. And indeed, Purity is the ground of
Confidence; sin is fearful, as you may perceive by Esay's, W^e is me, Chap.
6. and Saint Peter's, Go from me Master, Luke 6. read Psalm. 1. Luke 21. Esaias
58. and Wisdom 5. it appears there, that righteousness is confident in the
presence of God and the enemies thereof.

I have done with the persons whom this Sanctifying concerns; Let us now come
to the circumstance. I will run them over briefly.

The first is the place, the place was the Tents, the ordinary abode of the
Israelites, thither Moses was sent, Go to the people, and whether he was sent
there is was to be done. And indeed the Acts required could conveniently be
done no where else; for where a man used his wife, there he was to forbear;
and where do the people use to wash their clothes but at home?

That which we must take notice of is this. Before we come from home we must
think whither we are going, and fit our selves for Gods presence before we
come at him. We must not have our worldly, much less our wicked affections to
put off when we enter into Gods House; our shoes must be put off before we
tread upon holy ground; private meditations and devotions must go before the
public hearing of Gods Word, and performing of divine service; and seldom
does he serve God at Church, that does not begin his piety at home. And the
reason why our devotion is so often interrupted by unseasonable and
unreasonable thoughts, and desires in the Church, is because we do not rid our
selves as we ought of them, by preparing Sanctification before we come there.
Wherefore that we may be much more religious when we come into this place,
let every man begin the practice of his religion in his own house.

The second circumstance is the circumstance of Time; this I told you is
twofold. First, here is set down a time during which this Sanctifying was a
doing, that is, to day and to morrow. The time allowed for Sanctifying varieth
much in Moses Law; in some cases it was but one day, in some seven days, in
some forty days, in some eighty days, you may read it in Leuiticus, I will
not now enquire into the reason of the variety.

That which I will observe is this; our Clensing, or Sanctifying is not
perfected in an instant. As wounds are easily taken, but not easily cured: so
are sins quickly contracted, but not quickly purged. Sins are compared unto
scumme, and you know meat will ask some good boiling before all the scumme
will come out of it; it is compared to dross, and you know metals must be long
in the fire, before they will be refined from their dross; or to keep my
self to my text, stains if they be deep in a garment, will not be fetched
out without the fullers soap, and he does not scour garments without a great
deal of toil. David therefore desirous to be rid of his sin prays thus,
Multiplica laua, wash me again and again, wash me thoroughly from my sin;
And the old Canons required, that Penitents should spend a good deal of time
to scour off their contracted guiltiness and corruption. Ester 2.
If the women that were to be joined with the Kings of Persia were to be so
many months a purifying, shall it be much that we take this time to be
purified that must be joined with the King of Heaven? A time there was of
purifying before all the Jews Feasts, John 1^.
the Jews prepare before they go to their Synagogue, so do the Turks; it
was one of the Laws of the twelve Tables, Deos cast adeunto, and procul hinc
procul este profani, and sancta sancte was the admonition given to the people
in the Christian Churches: the Fasts that went before all solemn Feasts, the
forbidding of marriage for certain time, (which some without cause except
against (although we cannot deny that Dispensations are grown to an abuse)
tend to this purpose. Finally, the old Vigils, and the ordinary Eues of
Sundays and Holy days show the Churches desire herein to imitate God, and to
appoint a moderate time to dispose us to divine service, and the Commemoration
of Gods blessings.

A time is here appointed by God, but it is a very moderate time, God does not
tire us out in our Preparation. 2 Cor. 2 v. 7.
And Saint Paul that would not have the incestuous Corinthian swallowed up of
sorrow, by reason of an ouer-long Penance, does bid man and wife for devotion
not to forbear company ouer-long, lest Satan tempt them. 1. Cor. 7. v. ^.
The Church is to be discreet in appointing, and Christians in undertaking this
time of washing, lest that which otherwise is good may be turned into evil.

If the Law required three days preparation for hearing, how many more for
obscruing it? If the Law required preparation, how much more the Gospel?

Iosepus says that the Jews during these two days did feast, Huge de Sancto
Victore says, that they fasted. And verily the latter opinion is much more
probable; for surely mystical washing of Garments and forbearing of wives are
works fitter for fasting then feasting.

But I will not trouble you with that; I come to the last point; which is, the
Time against which this work was to be done; and this is the third day, the
day wherein God would vouchsase his presence, and they were to give their
attendance; and this will bring us to the complement of Sanctification. For God
delights not in our separation from sin and the world, except it be to
remove them as impediments, that so we may be capable of Him, his Spirit, his
Word, and his Grace; Wisd. 1.4.
For wisdom will not enter into a wicked or worldly soul; God will not put
new wine into old vessels, nor new cloth into an old garment, he will not cast
pearl before swine, nor holy things unto dogs. The children of Israel
borrowed of the Egyptians rich clothes when they went to sacrifice to God,
Exodus 13. Luke 1^.
The prodigal child was not permitted to eat of the fat Calfe before he was
clothed with the chief Robe, and a Ring upon his finger; Jacob before his
going unto Bethel, Genesis 35.
Gods House, purged his Family; Job 1.
Job sanctified his children before he sacrificed; Esaias 6.
Esayes lips were touched with a coal from the Altar before he could receive
his message. When we come before God, we must endeavor to be like unto him,
Leiuit. 11.44.
Holy as he is holy; for God is a God of pure eyes, Habak. 1 13.
and can behold no iniquity; such as be wicked cannot stand before him.

Wherefore cleanse your hands, James 4.8.
ye sinners and purge your hearts ye double-minded, If he that was invited to
the marriage was challenged for wanting his wedding garment, how shall God take
it at his Spouses hand, if she come unprepared? We read Ezech. 16 how God
trimmed her against that day, the day of Espousals, and how he will trim her
against the marriage day, we may read Revel. 21 But I cannot stand to amplify
these things. To draw to an end; I will put you in mind to do that to a good
purpose which you usually d^e. You put on clean linen, your best clothes, and
how often do you look in a glass to see that all be handsome before you
show your selves in the Church to your Neighbors; I was about to say, that
they may see how gay you are? but I will hope in Charity you do it out of
good manners to God. You that will not come slouenly before your betters,
should do well not to come stouenly before the Lord of Heaven and Earth.

But remember that God that approves this outward decency, requires the
inward much more, he will have you lift up to him, not only clean hands, but
pure hands also; he will have you not only to hear his Word, Luke 8. v 15.
but also to receive it (...), into an honest and good heart; A neat outside,
and a slouenly inside is like a painted sepulcher full of dead men's bones. And
most Churches are full of such painted sepulchers. They are a generation clean
in their own eyes, but not washed from that filthiness. Prou. 30.

I wish better to you, and I hope better of you. Therefore I exhort you, I
exhort my self in the words of the Prophet Esaias, Go out of her, expounded by
the Apostle, 2. Cor. 7. or briefly in the words of the Apostle, Let us cleanse
our selves from all uncleanness both of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness
in the fear of God. And that this exhortation may succeed with us, no worse
then Moses did with the Israelites (for they did as they were commanded, Verse
14. and observed the first stipulation, 1 Thessalonians. 5 23.
Verse 5.) The very God of peace sanctify us throughout in spirit, soul, and
body, and keep us blameless to the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; At what time having had our fru^ here in Holiness, our end shall be
everlasting life. This God grant us for lesus Christ his sake, To whom, etc.

Blessed are the pure in heart, (...) 8.
for they shall see God. The ninth Sermon.
EXODUS. 19. VERSE. 12.13.21.24. 12. And thou shall set bounds unto the people
round about, saying; Take heed to your selves, that ye go not up into the
Mount, or touch the border of it: whosoever touches the Mount shall surely be
put to death.

13. There shall not a hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot
through, whether it be beast or man, it shall not live: when the Trumpet
sounds long, they shall come up to the Mount.


THat branch of Gods order, which prepared the Israelites ^o receive the Law,
required their Purity and their Modesty; I spoke last of their Purity, I
come now to speak of their Modesty. It is delivered in those words that now I
have read unto you. Therein we must observe, that Moses had his charge, and the
Israelites had theirs. Moses charge is, to make a fence between the people and
the Hill, he must set bounds round about the people. The Israelites charge is,
they must not break through the fence made by Moses, They must not go up into
the Mountain. The Israelites must not.

But they are divided into common People and the Priests, the Prohibition is
laid upon them both; upon the People in this 12. verse, and in the 24. verse
it is laid upon the Priests; Moses is to bid both, take heed unto themselves.
Neither to themselves only, but to their beasts also, they are put into the
number, verse 13.

Besides this in the Prohibition the text does lead us to consider, the
stricktnesse wherewith the Israelites were to observe it, and the sharpness of
the punishment which they were to undergo if they presume to violate it.

The stricktnesse is great, for they might not transgress the bounds set them
either Cominus, that is, at hand, by so much as touching the border, making the
very first and least approach unto it; there can be no less then touch, and
the first touch is in the border.

As they must not transgress Cominus: so must they not Eminus aloof, they
must not gaze on the Hill, and you know, the eye can go whether the foot
cannot come. God will have the first Inlet and the first Outlet of sin to be
heeded. And he will have them both heeded under a Pain, a sharp Pain, it is
no less then death, the Transgressour must die.

But observe touching this death, that it is such as is inflicted upon an
execrable thing, and the doom thereof is unpardonable. See both these points
in the text.

First the execrablenesse of the Transgressour; all must abhor him: for, No
hand may touch him; and yet all must be against him, for they must stone him
with stones, or shoot him through with Darts. And he that dies so, dies as
an execrable thing.

He that Transgresses must die that death without remission, Moriendo
morietur, he shall certainly die, Non viuet, he shall not live; both phrases
are peremptory; they leave no place for pardon.

Not for the pardon of any one, for the text says, Quicunque, Whosoever shall
presume to transgress, be he of the People, or be he of the Priests, be he a
reasonable creature, or be he a beast, the doom is unchangeable, They must die.

Die certainly, for though they escape the hands of men, yet they shall not
escape. God will break out upon them, as we read verse 24. especially upon the
greatest of them, which are otherwise most likely to escape. He will break out
upon the Priests.

Finally observe, that the charge of the Israelites is often repeated and
limited to a time; you have it in my Text, and you have it again and again in
the 21, 22, 23. and 24. verses: what God will have carefully obeyed, of that he
will have us often remembered.

But our obedience is limited. Though in morals our duties are everlasting,
yet our ceremonials do last but for a time; When the Trumpet sounds long,
then the Israelites may go up into the Mount.

You have heard the particulars whereof I mean to entreat on this text; they
all Preach unto us Modesty, to be showed whenever we approach God, or have
to do with sacred things.

That we may learn and practice it, Let us in the fear of God listen to that
which I shall further say of these points briefly and in their order.

The first is Moses charge. He must make a fence between the people and the
Hill, set bounds round about the People, or as it is in the 23. verse, He must
sanctify the Mountain, and make of it a Sanctuary. And indeed well might it
so be reputed, when it was covered with all the visible tokens of Gods
maiesticall presence; and if it be sanctified hereunto, then it follows, it
must be reverend in our eyes, and inviolable by us, we must not esteem it as
common ground, nor make bold with it as if it were such. Every man should know
his distance and observe it; but ignorance in some, and negligence in others,
are the causes why men left to themselves, either know not what they should
do, or do not what they know. God therefore in pity of our ignorance, and to
hold in our unruliness, has appointed those that shall set us our bounds;
especially, in things indifferent, wherein presuming of lawfulness, few will
have an eye to expediences. The vulgar eye is not sharp enough to discern it,
neither is the vulgar heart pliable to the observance of it. It is the work of
the Governor to remedy both these defects.

Neither only in things indifferent, but also in moralities; for they are to
make Laws even upon the Law of nature, and keep us to the doing of that,
which we would not do, though our Conscience suffer us not to be ignorant
thereof, because the moral Law is written in our hearts. What man that has
not put off a man, knows not that murder, adultery, theft are sins? And
yet what more common in men's lives? The commonnesse has made it necessary for
all States to set bounds unto their people in regard of these things.

And if in regard of Civil, how much more of Ecclesiastical things? Men are
never more lawless then in those things wherein you would exspect that every
man should especially be a Law unto himself, that is in keeping his distance
from God. But herein also we need a Boundarie, and God has appointed those
that must set it.

And who are they, but such as Moses, those that are set over us? For Moses
must be considered here, not only as a messenger from God, but also as a Ruler
of the Israelites; neither were they to hear him only as a Counselour, but as
a commander, his words did more then inform, they did order their lives. And
in a word this is a principal branch of Magistracy, to take away the common
excuse of offenders, which is, Non putaram, I wist not that this was my duty,
and to direct them by Laws, before they call them to an account for their
lives.

I will not here fall upon the question which is much debated at this day,
whether Magistrates may set bounds unto the people in causes Ecclesiastical as
well as Civil. Only take notice, that here by an example we are taught, that
they may. And let this suffice for Moses charge.

The Israelites charge is, They must not presume to go up unto the Mount. And
indeed a Boundarie were no Boundarie if it might be passed. You know by your
ground that an Enclosure is no Enclosure, if it may be common; how much more
must this be conceived of the Enclosure of God, that Ground which he has
fenced unto himself for a Sanctuary? If it be a trespass to break through
your neighbors fence, how much more through the fence of God? This is
Transgression indeed, it is indeed Peccatum, for that is quasi pecuatum,
playing the unruly sheep that will not be kept within his pen, or to speak
plainly with S. John, 1 John 3 4.
it is (...), the Transgression of Gods Law. But God will not have his people
Sons of Belial, such as cannot endure his yoke, Psalm 2.
he will not have them like those insolent ones, that say, Let us break his
bonds, and cast his cords from us. God has given a Law to the sea, saying,
Job. 38.
Hitherto shall thou come, and here thou shall stay thy proud waves, and the
Sea passes not the bounds which God has set it. How much less should we
presume, notwithstanding the swelling of our nature, and the impetuous
affections thereof? God exspecteth we should check the presumption of our
nature.

But about all presumption, we should take heed of that which is the highest,
going up into the Mount, profaning of the Sanctuary of God, and ventring in
sacred things farther then he gives us leave. Curiosity in this kind has
been the mother of Heresies, when men have been busily witty in searching
into, rather then believing of that profound Article of the Trinity.

Man that is not able to understand his own nature (David confesses such
knowledge is too wonderful for him) dreameth that he can comprehend the
nature of God. (...) 39.
Others have lost themselves while they have diued into the mysteries of the
Incarnation, who are not able to understand their own regeneration. Some
ouer-studie themselves in the Book of Gods providence, and would know more
then is possible for man to conceive of Gods counsel in Predestination, of the
cooperation of grace in free will, etc. Others climb not so high but yet they
go to far in determining the manner of the mystical Union in the Sacrament,
and discovering of mystical senses in many passages of the Scriptures. To say
nothing of the Jewish Cabalists, of Astrologian diuinations, of heretical
Revelations, and heathenish mysteries. It is too clear, that what with the
curious Cur Why of some, and quomodo How of others, there has been manifold
passing the Bounds, climbing the Mount, and intrusions upon God, and the things
of God.

It is natural to a man to desire knowledge, but since we did eat of the
forbidden fruit, we have been very perverse in that desire; we that have no
mind to know God as we ought, are very eager to know him as we ought not. In
this world, Non Deum scrutari sedam are debemus, we should rather desire to
love God then to know him, whereas we desire rather to know him then to love
him, and as our first parents desire rather to eat of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, then of the tree of life. And we need, as a spur unto good
and saving knowledge: so a bridle to restrain us from that knowledge which is
curious and presumptuous: (...) 12.
wherefore blessed is that discretion which makes us wise unto sobriety.

I will conclude this point with a good admonition of the Son of Syrach.
(...) 3.
Seek not out the things that are too hard for thee, neither search the things
that are above thy strength, but what is commanded thee think thereupon with
reverence. The ground of that good advise you shall sind in Meses, (...) ^^
The secret things belong unto the Lord God, but those things which are
revealed belong unto us, and to our children for ever, that we may do all the
words of this Law.

I have hitherto told you only in general whom this Prohibition does
concern; but in the 24. verse, we find a distribution of these persons, there
we sind that the Law is laid not only upon the People, but upon the Priest
also.

No body will make a a question of the people, what modesty beseems them;
yet there was a time when the question was made of them also: (...) 16.^.3.
for Korah, Dathan, and Abiram came upon Moses and Aaron thus. You take too
much upon you, all the congregation is Holy, and the Lord is amongst them, God
is as near to every man as he is to you, and every man may come as near God
as you do. See you how they plead for confusion, and animate the People to be
bold with God? But they were taught better manners.

I but if the people be, what is that to the Priest? Yea, the Priest also is to
learn modesty. Not only the minor Clergy (as the Rhemists mince it) but the
mayor too, they that are likely most to presume, were to have a special Item.
For the pride of our heart will carrievs above our selves when we see that
others are placed below; therefore they that are advanced in any degree need to
be remembered that they keep their station.

This did God excellently express, in the fabric of the Tabernacle and of
the Temple, wherein there was. First, Atrium prophanum, thither might Infidels
and unclean persons come, but no farther; within that was Atrium populi,
thither might the Lay both women and men come that were circumcised and not
unclean, but farther they might not come, except it were to offer their
special Sacrifices; within that was Atrium Sacerdotum, thereinto might the
Levites come to do their service to the Priest, but no farther; within that
was Sanctum, thereinto might the Priest go to offer Incense, but no farther;
within that was, Sanctum Sanctorum whereunto the High Priest only had access,
and that but once a year, in reverence of Gods majesty sitting in the Cloud
there upon the Mercy Seat between the Cherubins. You see that the nearest
places to Gods presence were of rarest access, and that by fewest persons.

Look what state God kept in the Tabernacle and Temple, the same he kept at
this Hill, appointing unto the Israelites several stations, the multitude both
of Priests and people have their station allotted in this text. Some might come
nearer as Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and the seventy Elders, but they are willed
to worship afar off; and Moses alone was to come near the Lord, but they are
expressly willed not to come nigh. Verse 2^.
In this Chapter Moses and Aaron are called up alone, and are excepted out of
the prohibition, they may pass beyond others whom God calls, and they only.
God was pleased to do them this honor. And we must repute it a great honor
done unto them, that they might come so near unto God.

Our Savior Christ in the days of his humiliation kept the like state so
far as might stand with his form of a servant. For he did not conue^se so
familiarly with the multitude, as with the seventy Disciples; nor with the
seventy as with the twelve Apostles; nor with the twelve Apostles, as with the
pillars of them, Peter, James, and John, who only were admitted to be privy
to the highest glory that he manifested on earth, which was his
Transfiguration, and the deepest Passion which he endured on earth which was
his agony. Yea, even of these three he chose out one as the principal
favorite (John) whose style is the beloved Disciple, who at supper leaned on
his bosom, whom Saint Peter himself used unto Christ when he would be
resolved, Who it was that should betray him? Finally, him he made the high
soring and sharp sighted Eagle; the beholder and penner of that Revelation,
which has as many mysteries as words.

God then who is an absolute Monarch will be a free disposer of his favors,
and we must not presume of more then he vouchsafes; the People may not, the
Priest may not, both must take heed unto themselves that they do not presume.

Take heed unto themselves? Then themselves have a pronenesse to curiosity.
Ia^^e^ 1
And indeed so it is; for every man is baited and so ledaside by his own
lusts, and there is no lust so ancient in man as pride is. Yea the first sin
of Angels was the stepping over their bounds; and though pride be not homebred
in man, as it was in Angels; yet experience proved in Adam and Eve, that man's
nature is a soil very apt to conceive the seed of pride if it be sown in it
by the Devil; neither will any seed of iniquity prove sooner or faster.
Considering then the aptness of our nature to receive, and forwardness to
bring forth this evil fruit, God does not without cause by Moses bid the
Israelites take heed unto themselves.

Neither to themselves only, but to their cattle also, they must be watched
that they break not the bounds. And indeed, if our peccare be quasi pecuare,
if we show our selves beasts when we do straggle, then it is the property
of beasts to straggle, and seeing it is their property, they must be looked
unto.

But you will say; that they are unreasonable creatures, and so able to do
morally neither well nor ill. True, but yet the place which we must not
profane our selves, we must much less suffer our beasts for to profane.

Yea observe it well, and you shall find, that whether we keep fasting days
or feasting days, God will have even beasts to communicate in some sort in the
Ceremonial part of our piety. In the solemn repentance of Niniue, not only
the men but the beasts also are commanded by the King to be kept from meat,
to be clothed with sackcloth. In the Law of the Sabbath, when man rests, the
beast must rest also; think you only in a cruill sense? There is more in it
then so, as hereafter I shall show you. God would have them also to observe his
Feasts. And here we see that what prohibition God lays upon men, he lays
upon beasts, neither may profane holy ground.

And may ours do that which theirs might not do? May dogs tread in Gods
Sanctuary during the New Testament, which under the old Testament were not
suffered to be so very dogs, that is, impudent creatures? It should seem we
think they may; else would we not bring them hither, and endure them here;
not only to disturb Gods service, but also to disgrace Gods House. I shame to
speak, what we blush not to see, the marks of their vncleanlinesse in the
most sacred places of this Church, and I think other Churches are not used
much better. Well, I would we were more sensible of it. But if we be not,
assure our selves, that not only Papists, but Jews, Turks and Infidels, will
rise in Judgment against us, who endure no such brutish profaneness of holy
places.

I might tell you of your children also, if the time would give me leave, whom
you bring hither, but no otherwise then as to a market place to pipe and dance,
to cry or to mourn, Matthew. 1^
to do any thing saving that which beseemes a Christian, and the reverence
that they should show here. Whereas you should inure them to hear, to bow
their knees, hold up their hands and eyes, and testify that they honor God
even before that they have discretion to know him. But I will take some other
time for this, now I go on in my text. The next point herein is the
strictness wherewith this prohibition is to be observed. The Israelites must
not transgress their bounds, either Cominus or Eminus, at hand, or aloof, by
but touching so much as the border of the Mountain, or gazing upon that
representation of Gods presence which was upon the Mountain.

As God does honor Kings by giving them the title of Gods: so does he use to
resemble the state of earthly Kings when he represents himself unto the
world. Now the Eastern Kings, to whose state the Scripture does commonly
allude when it sets forth God, used to require two Ceremonies of their
subjects. The one that they should not press into their presence uncalled;
that you shall read, Ester 4. the other, they never looked their King in the
face, but ever demissely fixed their eyes upon the ground while they were in his
presence. Alluding to these Ceremonies of state does God here require, that the
Israelites be not too forward with their feet, nor misplace their eyes.

And indeed if we may not without unmannerliness press into the presence of a
mortal King, how much less into the presence of the King of Kings? If earthly
majesty is thought to be undervalued if it be made the object of a subjects
eye, what disrespect is done unto the glory of God, if it become a familiar
spectacle of a creature? Esaias 6.
Surely the Angels veil their eyes with two of their wings, when they attend
the presence of God, and in the most holy place the Cherubins were made with
their eyes looking down unto the Mercy seat, not upward to the Cloud, the
Type of Gods presence. 1. Pet. 1. v. 1^.
Whereunto Saint Peter alludeth, when he says, that into the mysteries of the
Gospel the Angels themselves desire (...), with bowed heads to peep. If there
be such modesty in the Angels eyes that are such glorious creatures; how much
modesty should there be in our eyes that are but mortal men, most weak and
wicked creatures? And if ever God may expect reverence from us, certainly then
when he sits as it were in Parliament, and gives Laws unto his people.

Yea verily, God does us a favor in that he does prohibit our presumption. For
our abilities are nothing proportioned to that object, and our near approach,
without extraordinary support, would but work our confusion; as they have
confessed that have made trial of it. And it is the maxim of Philosophy,
Excellens sensibile corrumpit sensum. God as the Sun, is not comfortable but
in a reasonable distance.

Mark moreover, that both the first Inlet, and the first Outlet of Sin are
restrained by this prohibition. The first Inlet is by the eye, by that the
tempting object enters us; so it entered Eve, the sons of God, Achan, and
David, all of them were taken by gazing. Add hereunto that there was another
evil that might be feared from the eye; they were called now to use their
ears and not eyes, to hear God, not to see him. In Heaven we shall see God,
here we must hear him, here we must live by faith, there we shall live by
sight. Therefore God will not have our eyes to hinder our ears, our gazing on
the Mount to hinder our listening to his Law.

Not that it is an evil thing to see God, but it is evil to see with
curiosity when we are forbidden; as it was for Lots wife to behold Sodom,
after the Angel had bid her not to look back.

Therefore is this first Inlet of sin forbidden; the rather, because it will
easily set on work the first Outlet of sin, and whether the eye goes
before, the foot will be ready to follow after; if we gaze upon the mountain,
it will not be long before we touch the border. And touching is a kind of
tasting, and a taste does but set an edge upon our appetite; he that does once
relish any sin will never leave till he be glutted with it; give your
appetite an inch and it will take an ell. Where. fore God cutteth off all
occasion of presumption; as in the twel^th of this Book he took order lest
the Israelites should eat leaven in the prohibited time, that they might have
no leaven in their houses: Even so here, lest the Israelites should venture up
the hill, he forbids them so much as to touch the border thereof, or gaze
on that which appeared thereon.

And we must make a covenant with our eyes, and with our feet that neither of
them come, within the lists of sin, and so we shall be sure to sin with
neither.

You have seen how strict the charge is; Now you must hear how sharp the
punishment will be if they break their bounds. The punishment is death. You
may think this very rigid Justice, no less then death for violating a
Ceremony. For it was but a Ceremony to hold back the foot, and withold the
eye from that sacred place, the access whereunto was not in its own nature
unlawful, for others without blame went unto it. But Gods Ceremonies contain
Moralities, and we must not look so much upon the outward as the inward
action, which of this Ceremony was modest Reverence, or reverent Modesty.

Secondly, our eye must not be so much upon the matter wherein we offend, as
the person against whom we offend; though the matter commanded be but small,
yet it is no small matter to despise him that commands. And how shall it
appear, that we surrender our sclues absolutely to his pleasure, if our
obedience be not at his command, when his command does limit our use of things
indifferent? Yea, the lighter the thing wherein he does try us, the greater
our contempt if we disobey.

By these rules must you take the scantling of Adams sin, which was much
greater indeed then in show; neither was his doom: more grievous, then his
sin was heinous. The like must you judge of this doom.

And this will stay your wondering when you read the story of Vzza in the
second of Samuel, Chap 6
who was stricken dead when he offered to do as he thought a good office, to
stay the Arc when it was ready to fall: but the Arc was not made to be
carried in a Cart but upon men's shoulders, and for neglecting that was he
stricken dead; as you may gather by the correcting of that fault in the very
same Chapter. Neither would David have been displeased with Vzaes death, if he
had sooner known this; 1. Sam. 6.
nor the Bethshemites would never have asked this question, Who is able to
stand before this holy Lord God? when that more then fifty thousand were
slain for looking into the Arc. For God had provided, Numb ^.
that the Le^ites that bare it should not come near till the sons of Aaron
had wrapped it in three or four couerings, if before that they touched it, they
were to die. How much less might the promiscuous multitude behold it, and not
suffer for their presumption?

Two affections there are, Love and Fear, which must order our respect toward
God; and the less we are apt to love God, the more does God take order we
should fear him. And Severity is never more seasonable then when the first
foundation of a State is laid: as this of Israel now was; for if Laws be then
slighted, they will never be obeyed, and awe well begun in the people is like
to be the longer lived. Therefore will God have Justice so quick in this case,

But here is not only death denounced, but such a death as belongs to an
execrable thing. For first, all men must abborre the person; so I understand
the phrase, No hand shall touch it. Though some conceive thereby, that all
rescuing of the malefactor is forbidden.

But that sense, though it be good, yet is not so natural to my text. This
rather is meant, that no man must desile himself by touching him, who by his
presumption had made himself abominable. For as he that being himself impure
touching holy things in the Law makes them profane and abominable: so he that
being otherwise pure, intrudeth upon holy ground, or ^surpeth holy things,
makes his own person abominable. And none is reputed of God more abominable
then he that is sacrilegiously presumptious.

Though no man must touch him, yet every man's hand must be against him, they
must stone him with stones, or shoot him through. If near, then must they
stone him with stones, if farther off from them, then they must shoot him with
darts; every hand must try every means rather then they must suffer the
malefactors to escape. And he must needs be an execrable person against whom
God does arm the hands of all the people with justice.

Finally, note that this doom is unpardonable, the very phrase imports as
much Moriendo morietur, non viuet, these words note a peremptorinesse in the
sentence. You have the like in Ezech. 18. as the contrary thereunto in that
place, He shall live, he shall not die, notes a certainty of life. We must
take heed of corrupting the phrase, as Eve did, Genesis 3.
who when God told Adam, At what time thou shall eat of the forbidden fruit,
moriendo morieris, Thou shall surely die; she turned the phrase which was
undoubted into a peradventure, and told the Serpent lest ye die.

And see our weakness. Commonly in doubtful cases we incline to the worst;
she did but doubt she might not do it, the Devil puts her out of all
doubt, and tells her she may do it. It is not good therefore for us to play
the wantons with Gods threatenings; if we mean to hold in our untoward nature
from sinning, we must understand them in that rigor as God does deliver them.

Every man must. For here is Quicunque, no respect of persons, none of the
people, none of the Priests; as many as are forbidden to sin: so many are
threatened the doom. Neither have the great any privilege to do ill and
farewell, all shall fare as they do. Neither only men but beasts also; you
have heard before they were forbidden to transgress: so here you see, if they
do transgress, they are doomed to die. The master shall be punished in the
loss of his beast, because he looked not better to him; and the beast shall
be punished, because it had ventured to profane holy ground; for I told you
before, that even beasts were tied to do reverence to the Sanctuary. Man and
beast must die, if they transgress, die by the hands of the Israelites.

But a malefactor may yet hope that the people will be foolishly pitiful; at
least great ones may think they may find as much favor as Agag did at the
hands of Saul. What then? shall they escape? shall Gods doom be reuerst? it
shall not be reuerst, they shall not escape; The Lord shall break forth
against the greatest of them.

Gods justice is fenced with mercy, and his mercy is as it were a bulwark
between us and his justice; but if so be our sins grow to this height, it
will not be held in. And when it rusheth forth, it is like an ouerbearing flash
of lightning which flies not abroad without a fearful clap of thunder, it
terrifieth, and destroys together. But more of that hereafter.

There remain two points more, which I will touch in a word. The first. This
prohibition is often repeated, here we have it in my text, and we have it once
and again toward the end of this Chapter; you would think this superfluous,
Moses himself thought so, he seems somewhat discontented with God for
inculcating it so often. But Moses was but a Nouice in government, therefore he
thought once telling was enough. Dan 7 9.
God which is the ancient of days, and thoroughly acquainted with man's
infirmity, knows that his forgetfulness, his vntowardlinesse, needs be
remembered, he must be urged more then once; and often is not more then enough,
to work our care, and keep us in awe.

See then Gods clemency, that does not hold his tongue in warning, that he
may hold his hand in striking. We are no better then the Israelites, neither
do we less need reiterated warnings then the Israelites did; the Minister
therefore must not be secure of his charge, but suspect these defects in them,
and redouble his admonitions to them. As Moses added a Deuteronomie to the
former Books of the Law though he repeated but the same thing; and the
Evangelists added Gospel upon Gospel of the same argument; and the Apostles
added Epistles to Epistles, not much varying their doctrine: So it must not
grieve us to write and speak the same things to the people, and for them it is
a sure thing (as the Apostle teaches) Philip. 3. v. 1.

The last point shows, how this prohibition is limited in time, When the
Trumpet sounds long, then shall they come up to the Mount.

It is disputed, whether these words point out the time wherein the Israelites
must come out to meet God; and then come up the Hill, is but to come to the
foot of the hill, whether Moses brought them. Or whether it point the time when
God would go from the Mount, and leave it free to be resorted unto by man and
beast. This last agrees better with the old Translations, the Septuagint and
Chaldie, and the most judicious Divines pitch upon it, and we will follow
them. Though I will not rashly define, whether the symbolicall presence of God
left the Hill before it rested upon the Tabernacle, which almost was a twelve
month after.

But this I note. That positive Precepts are not perpetual, when their end
cease, the Law is at an end. Yea, and the vigor of it sensibly decays,
when the people become unfit to use it: so that God does not tire out their
care and fear of danger, but sets them free in due time, whom for a time
he does restrain. After God was departed, that Hill was no more a Sanctuary;
well might the Israelites bear a civil respect unto it, a religious they
might not without impiety.

Which I note the rather, because of the common superstition, especially of
Papists, who continue a religious opinion and respect unto the places which
Christ frequented in the days of his flesh, and the Apostles after him; Canaan
for example, which they term the holy Land. Whereas God has long since, as
he long before threatened, profaned that place, neither may we expect any
heavenly virtue from it, but out of gross superstition. Yet will we not deny
unto all those monuments a due respect: so that it be no more then civil.

But to our purpose. The ceremonial prohibition is ceased, but the moral
contained under it must never cease; we must never cease with reverence to come
to Gods house, Psalm 5.8.
and not forget in his fear to worship toward his holy Temple.

Moses bad the Israelites Take heed to themselves, he discharged his duty in
commanding this modesty, and the Israelites obeyed, they did not pass their
bounds, nor came before they were summoned, Verse 17. and therefore escaped the
punishment; a blessed concurrence both of Pastor and people. And what can I say
but bid us Take heed to our selves? Let us take heed of the sin here
forbidden, Let us take heed of the punishment here threatened, Let us be as
ready to obey, that I admonish not in vain; and we shall never undergo the
punishment, if we avoid the sin.

And a better way to avoid it I cannot commend unto you, then that which was
practiced by King David, you have it in the Psalm. Lord mine heart is not
haughty, Psalm 131.
nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise my self in great matters, or in
things too high for me; surely I have behaved and guieted my self as a child
that is weaned of his mother, my soul is even as a weaned child.

Here I should end; but I may not forget to bid you join this Sermon with the
former. That taught you Purity, this Modesty. It is not enough for a man that
com^ (...) unto God to be pure, he must be modest also; we are apt to presume
upon our Holiness, but modesty will keep us humble. Modesty will teach us,
that be we never so pure in our own eyes, (...) 15.15.
we are not so in Gods, The Heanens are not clean in his sight, and He lays
folly to the Angels; How much more to men who dwell in houses of clay, and who
drink iniquity like water?

Wherefore, Let us never think our selves more worthy then God thinks us,
yea, let us acknowledge our selves unworthy of the least grace that God does
do unto us; so may our humble holiness make us more capable of Gods goodness
here, and blessedness hereafter.

To God the Father, God the Son, etc. The tenth Sermon.
EXODUS. 19. VERSE. 16. 16. And it came to pass on the third day in the
morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud, etc. to
the end of the twentieth verse.


WHen God and the Israelites were prepared in such manner, as at several times
I have showed you, God to deliver, the Israelites to receive the Law; then they
met together. This their meeting is the only point in this Chapter that
remains unhandled, my purpose is (God willing) to dispatch it, at this time,
that so hereafter I may come on to the next Chapter, which contains the
principal matter of my arrant.

We are then first in this meeting to consider when, and What it was When, it
was upon the third day, and that in the morning. To know what it was, we must
see, Pirst, In what manner, Secondly, by what Mediator. The manner has two
remarkable things, the Signification which God gave of his readiness to come,
and the Impression which that made upon the Israelites. The signification was
full of dreadful state, for the ha^bingers came before to provide Gods place,
Thunder, lightning, the cloud, the trumpet, etc. And these harbingers were very
dreadful; some to the eye, the slashes of lightning that brake out of the
cloud, the duskie flame that ascended from the whole Hill on fire: some to the
ear; the claps of thunder, and the loud sound of the trumpet.

As the harbingers were dreadful: so they made an answerable Impression in the
Israelites, the Impression was hopeful fear.

Fear; the Israelites quaked in their Tents, yea and Moses himself quaked
upon the way. Neither will you wonder that the reasonable Creatures did quake
at such a presence, when you read in my text that the mountain, the senseless
mountain became (as it were) sensible at this foretast of Gods access unto
it, it trembled exceedingly. Such was the fear.

But this fear was not without Hope: for notwithstanding it, they set out from
their Tents, and came onto their standing to the foot of the Hill, the place
where they were to attend Gods coming down upon the Mountain, and this they
could not do without some hope.

But in this interuiew we must take notice of the decorum or decency observed
by the Israelites, and the gracious benignity expressed by God.

The decorum or decency was this; the Israelites came first to their place
before God came to his. And you know it is good manners when unequal persons
meet, that the inferior should wait for the coming of his superior.

The benignity was this; no sooner did man make toward God, but God
vouchsafes to meet man half ways.

Out of both these will arise another note. That except man ascend above
himself, and God descend below himself, there can be no meeting of God and
man. These things we shall consider in the manner.

But this manner suffices not unto the meeting, except there be moreover a
Mediator; for persons so far distant in nature as God and man cannot come
together except some body come between. And here we find Moses acting that
person, he puts heart into the quaking Israelites, and led them out of their
Tents to the place where they were to attend God, and he kept them in heart
standing between God and them while the Articles of the Covenant were
proclaiming.

I have pointed at the particulars which I purpose (God willing) to handle at
this time briefly and in their order. God grant that we may so profit thereby,
that whenever God gives any signification of his access to us, we may be
affected with a religious fear toward him, that so keeping this manner by the
help of our Mediator, we may give him a blessed meeting.

Come we then to the first particular, the circumstance of time. It was the
third day, the third after their coming unto mount Sinai, but the fiftieth
after their coming out of Egypt. Which you may gather, if you add hereunto
the time specified in the first Verse of this Chapter; there you read that they
came to the Hill the first day of the third month. Now the months of the
Jews being Lunarie, and reckoned from one conjunction to another, in vulgar
computations are reckoned to consist of thirty days one with another, though
in the exactness of Astronomy, it be somewhat otherwise; this being known
we must calculate thus.

The children of Israel came out of Egypt the fourteenth Moon (as they call
it) that is the fourteenth day of the Lunarie month; so that of the first
month they spent seven teene days on their way; for so many there are from
fourteen to thirty inclusiuely. Add hereunto the whole second month which
consists of thirty days; and seventeen and thirty makes forty seven;
whereunto if you add the three days which they had been now at the Mount,
your number will be just fifty. So that the Law was delivered the fiftieth day
after the celebration of the Passover.

You may not think this note ouer-curious, it is of special use in comparing
the new Testament with the old. The truth did exactly answer unto this Tipe,
and Whitsuntide keeps the same distance from our Easter. Christ the true
Passover was offered for Us to deliver us from the slavery of sin, death,
and Hell, at the season of the year, wherein the Passover was offered for the
Redemption of the Israelites out of the Egyptian thraldom. And at that time
in which God delivered the Law unto the redeemed Israelites, he gave the
spirit, which is the life of the Law unto the redeemed Christians. That spirit
which is the finger of God to write the Law in the fleshly Tables of our
hearts, which the I sraclites long before received written indeed with the
finger of God, but in no better then the two Tables of stone. So that that we
enjoy the truth whereof they had the Type. Understand me de (...) of the
formal administration of this first Covenant, Colos 2. v. 14.
which did contain only (...) (as the Apostle calls it) man's Obligation,
what duty he owed, what punishment he deserved. These be the things that are
principally represented in the form of this first covenant. And therefore does
the Apostle call it the ministry of the letter, and of death, 2 Cor. 3.6.
in opposition to the second Covenant which he calls the ministry of the
spirit and of life. Otherwise we may not deny that the Patriarchs had the
spirit of Grace also, though not dispensed by the form of the old Covenant,
yet whereunto the old Covenant led them as a Schoolmaster; making them
sensible of their misery, it made them seek unto Christ for remedy.

But I have touched at this point once before, therefore I will dwell no longer
on it. Only take this note, that as Whitsontide follows Easter, so does
Sanctification follow after Justification; whom God redeemeth, to them he
gives his Law, and he does sanctify all those whom he instifieth. He that
keeps one feast must keep both; because he that has one, has both these
gifts.

I need not speak of the Morning, which showed Gods exemplarie forwardness
for this blessed meeting; which we shall do well to follow as David did, Psalm.
130,

Enough of the time. I come now to the signification of Gods readiness to
come. I told you it was full of state, the harbingers come before to prepare
Gods place.

Mortal Princes come not to great assemblies, to Parliament, to the throne of
Judgment, to the ratifying of Leagues, Act. 25. ver. 2^
but (...) with a great deal of pomp. If ever, they then show their royalty,
they make it appear that they are neither beggarly nor contemptible, nor
unable to revenge themselves, they make show of their glory and their power.
There is reason for it; for the vulgar that have no judgment of true Morality
are held in from disrespects to their Governors by these ceremonies, and the
attention of their ears is kept waking by such amazing of their eyes; and
discreet Policy does this way make them obedient beyond their understanding.

God takes the same course, and shows not himself unto his people, but with
much ceremonious Majesty at this meeting, which did partake of these three
kinds of assemblies. For it was a Parliament, it had the Image of an Assizes,
and therein was the conjugal league confirmed between God and Israel. I shall
touch at all three.

I might lead you to behold this in his appearing to Abraham, Gene. 25.
when he entered into Covenant with him, where the thick darkness, the
smoking furnace, the fire go before him; 1. King. c. 19.
his apparition to Elids which was attended with an Earthquake, a whirlewind,
and a fire too. None so stately, Cap. 4.
so ample, as that which is described by Ezechiel, and Daniel, except happily
that in the Revelation. I omit many others, it is enough in these to let you
see, that it was usual with God to show himself in state, to send his
harbingers before him. The reason whereof is, to work a due respect toward
his sacred Majesty, you are taught it plainly in the Psalms. Give unto the
Lord, O ye mighty, give unto the Lord glory and strength, give unto the Lord
the glory due unto his name, worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. The
reason follows in the Psalm, and it is taken from these harbingers of God
the Thunder and the Lightning; you may read it at your leisure.

I call these the harbingers of God, because we may not grossly conceive,
(...) lib 2. (...) ^^.
that God is like unto any of these. Saint Austin has refuted that dream; and
indeed it is the seed of Idolatry. They are but the attendants upon God, his
guard, you may call them, or you may call them his host, they are the
instruments of his Power, he was pleased to use them to set forth his state,
both in Mount Sinai (as we read here) and in Mount Sion, as we read, Act. 2.
the place parallel to this. But I will keep my self to mount Sinai.

I told you then, that the harbingers here specified were dreadful; dreadful,
some to the ear, some to the eye. The eye and the ear are the best
Intelligencers of the reasonable Soul, the quickest of apprehension, and
truest in their information. And therefore when God will work our heart, he
works it by these, and in these you shall first see what feeling we have of
dreadful objects. You have a prouer be touching the ear, (...) 5.
which the holy Ghost uses more then once, I will do a thing which whosoever
hears both his ears shall tingle. Experience does discover this, that
hideous noyses work a commotion in our spirits; and make them fly up into the
head, and ring there as it were an amazed alarm, and that in diverse forms,
which are better discerned by our feeling then I can express in words. And as
for our eye; such spectacles, how do they fix them, as if they could not
move, dazell them as if they had no sight, melt them, as if they were a
fountain of water? God could not present these Objects to such eyes, such
ears, but they will be confessed to be dreadful. Dreadful in their own
nature, for so are flashes of lightning; huge and duskie flames of fire; great
claps of Thunder; the sound of such a Trumpet, whose loud sound might be heard
of so many hundred thousand people. And if they were dreadful in their own
nature, as experience teaches, how much more when they are clothed with such
circumstances as these were? The circumstance of Place: for these meteors were
wrought in the lower Region of the Air, whereas the middle Region is their
natural place; In the Deserts of Arabia; a dry parched Country which
yields no exhalations, no vapors, which are the matter of these meteors.

Add hereunto the season of the year; for it was now the month of June,
(...) (...) (...) 3.2^.4.
a time wherein these Meteors are not usual. But specially observe out of
Nyssen, that as at the destruction of Sodom so now, the sky was clear, there
was no prognostication in the Air of such an imminent storm. So that it could
not be imputed unto nature, it must needs be confessed that the finger of God
was there. Job 38
And God (whom the Book of Job does set forth as the father and treasurer of
Rain, of Winds, of Thunder, of Lightning, can at his pleasure, immediately by
his word, or else if it please him by his Ministering spirits, the bad Angels as
it appears, Job 1. how much more by the good, who attend his Throne, and whom
he used at this time, produce such Meteors when and where he he will? But the
more vnexspectedly he produces them, the more dreadful they are, and were at
this Time and Place.

I am not yet come to the quick. It is a good rule in Divinity, that these
harbingers or attendants upon Gods apparitions, are an Image not only of his
greatness, but of his providence also. In them as in a looking Glass you may
behold the work which he has in hand. I will show it you in this present one;
you may make use of the rule in understanding other of Gods works.

God was now about to deliver his Law, and these harbingers represent the
dreadfulnesse thereof. The dreadfulnesse of the precept; that is noted, first
by the lightning and then by the thunder. By the lightning; for the precepts of
God are like sire, they search and discover the duty of a man. It is a
shallow conceit that the natural man has of his duty to God or to his
Neighbor; Romans 7.
Saint Paul confesses what a stranger he was in it till he was better
nurtured by the Law, and gives this for a general rule. By the Law comes
the, knowledge of sin. So that the Law suffers not a man to be ignorant of
his Obligation, but sets it most legible before his eyes. This is the
Lightning of the precept of the Law.

And this lightning comes not without a clappe of Thunder: for when a man
from the Law reflecteth upon himself, and sees how short he comes of
fulfilling the Law, what perplexing terrors will arise in his thoughts, what
unquietness will distress his soul? His spirit within him will be
overwhelmed, and the tumult of his Conscience will drown the sound of all
consolation that shall be ministered unto it: many have had woeful experience
hereof.

As you have seen the Image of the precept of the Law; so must you also behold
the Image of the Sanction. For the Trumpet calls to judgment; the flaming
fire is an Image of the doom, the wicked shall be summoned with much terror,
and they shall be sent into endless torments. For the summons shall be by the
Trumpet, and the wicked shall go into everlasting fire.

I cannot stand to amplify these things: only take these few observations;
that if this high Parliament of God be kept with so great terror, how
dreadful shall the grand Assizes be? Our Savior Christ in the Gospel has
set it forth by three Euangelisls, Matthew. 24. whom you may parallel with Mark
and Luke; where you shall find, that if this be terrible, that is much more
terrible.

Secondly observe, that things corporal come short of things spiritual, and
no words can fully express those things which are here meant, for much more is
meant then can be said, and according to the meaning does the terror arise.
Gods Motto may well be, Nemo me impune lacesset.

Thirdly, we must consider the wonderful patience of God, and stupiditie of
men. God shows us in this spectacle of Thunder, Lightning, etc. what he can
do, what we deserve. But what sometimes Caesar said to the Questor, who would
have hindered him from entering into the Treasury at Rome, shaking his sword, It
is easier for my Power to dispatch thee, then for the goodness of my Nature to
be willing to strike thee; may much more truly be said of God; His Power
makes him Merciful, and his Mercy does manage his Power. The Author of the
Book of Wisdom opens this at large. Chap. 11. etc.


But what stupiditie is there in the mean time in men in provoking of God that
is armed with such power, and has in readiness such instruments of death? Yea
which gives such evidence of them, to the intent that they may fear before
him?

It is true that mocking Atheists ask, 2. (...) 3.
Where is the promise of his coming. But this is vox coeci and surdi, they do
wink with their eyes, and stop their ears, other wise there is no man but in
all ages God has discovered unto him the Ensigns of his revenging power.

For have we not Thundering and Lightning in all ages? You will say they are but
ordinary Meteors; no more is a Rainbow. And yet that Meteor has a mystery in
it, and that Bow of Heaven is called Gods Bow, because it contains a
perpetual Prophecy that the world shall be no more destroyed with water. Genesis
9. Numb. 10.
And are not the Thunder and Lightnings called Gods voice? And why? because
they signify that God will come to judgment with a tempestuous fire.

We may also make the same use of the Trumpets; Sure Saint Hierome had a good
meditation when he said, That whether he did eat or drink or whatsoever he
did, he heard the Trumpet sounding in his ear, Surgite mortui and venite ad
iudicium. I will not stand to allegorize the two silver Trumpets, still sounded
while the Sacrifice was burning at the Altar. Verse 7.
I will only bid you remember Saint Iudes note of Sodom and Gomorrah, whose
perpetual burning God has left as a remembrance of the everlasting fire of
Hell.

Some are yet more desperate, and call for the Day of the Lord; Let it come,
Let us see it, as you may read in the Prophets. Fool hardy wretches, that
desire that which they will never be able to endure. Luke 23.30.
Upon the first ouerture of it, their hearts will fail them, they will be at
their wits end, they will call to the Hills and Rocks to cover them. The Kings
of the earth, the great men, the mighty men, bond and free, all sorts of men
shall then cry out, The great day of the Lambs wrath is come, Reave. 6 1 Pet.
4.18
and who is able to stand? And indeed, If the righteous scarcely be saved,
where shall the wicked and ungodly appear?

But to leave them; The last observation that I will give upon this dreadful
state shall be, That we are much bound unto God, that we live not under the
Old Testament, but under the New, that God has brought us not unto Mount
Sinai, but unto Mount Sion. Where God appears in our nature, and comes
meek, and in the form of a servant, so sensible of our infirmities, that he
cries not, Esaias 42.2.
his voice is not heard in the street, he will not break a bruised reed, nor
quench smoking flax. He puts upon us a light yoke, and an easy burden; his
doctrine is a Gospel; their feet are beautiful that bring it; Esaias 52 ^.7.
this yeara is an year of Iubile; his Trumpet sounds nothing but
deliverance; his Light is comfortable like the Sun, Psalm 45.2. Cant. 5. v. 16
for he is the Son of Righteousness; his lips are full of Grace, his Mouth
is most sweet. In this Hill all things are lovely, there is nothing dreadful
at all. And why? God has given us the Spirit of Adoption, which is the Spirit
of Love, Rom 6 2. Tim 1.
and of a sound mind: so that we can endure the very top of Mount Ston,
whereas they could not endure the bottom of Mount Sinai.

Time will not give me leave to pursue this comparison, you may amplify it out
of Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 3. Heb. 12. And if you will have it to the full, you
must parallel the whole Oeconomic of the New Testament, with that of the Old.

Only let me give you this note for a farewell to this point; That as the
Patriarchs that were brought unto Mount Sinai, did bear themselves out under
those terrors by casting their eyes forward unto Mount Sion, the place of
comfort: So we lest we grow carnally secure during our abode at Mount Sion,
and surfeit upon the comforts thereof, must cast our eyes backward upon Mount
Sinai, and rowse our selves with the terrors thereof. The solace of Sion is to
none so pleasant, as to him that comes newly from Sinai; their souls do
best relish the Gospel whose consciences have first sinarted from the Law, or
that have been exercised by that hopeful fear, the point that comes next
to be handled in my text.

Hopeful fear then is the impression that was made on the Israelites by the
dreadful Harbingers of God.

First, Fear. Fear is argued from quaking. For we usually say that men quake
for fear. And indeed what is quaking of the body, but a consequent of fear
in the soul? For the spirits are conveyed by the arteries, the sinews, and
the veins into the outward parts to sustain, confirm them, enable them to
their functions; and the vital parts send them forth abundantly while
themselves are secure. But while we are or suppose our selves to be in any
great danger, all those forces repair unto, and endeavor to safeguard those
principal inward fortresses, especially the heart. Whereupon the outward parts
being unfurnished fall (as it were) into a shaking Palsy; and so Quaking is a
consequent of fear.

But let us fit this impression unto the apparition, and so you shall find,
that it follows thereupon. If there were nothing in these Harbingers but an
Image of Gods Majesty, yet you shall not find in all the Bible, that ever any
man had any extraordinary glimpse of Gods glory, that did not upon the
apprehension thereof become as it were dead, and give himself over for a dead
man. Read the story of Gedeon and Maneah, in the Book of Judges, and of the
Prophets whose inspirations were accompanied with Visions, Ezechiel, Daniel,
others; the general rule is, Si te nouerim Domine, me ipsum nouerim, I shall
never know how vile, how frail I am by any thing so well: as by presenting my
self before the glorious Majesty of God.

Let us descend to the second Image that is to be beheld in these dreadful
Harbingers, the Image of the Law, and let us see how that works fear.

The Image of the Precept; I told you it is scarching, and you cannot therewith
search a man but you make him fear. Ask Saint Paul, he tried it, and will
tell you so, he found by surueying himself, That the Law was spiritual, and
he was carnal, and out of a sensible acknowledgement that his strength was
nothing proportionable to the Law, (...) 7. (...) 19.
he brake out into those passionate words; O wretch that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? King David surueyed the Law, and the
excellent properties of the Law; but what is the vpshot of his meditation? Even
this: Who knows how often he offends? Lord cleanse me from my secret faults,
keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, lest they have dominion over me.
And verily no man can behold himself in that glass and consider what manner
of person he is, but he will be driven to that prayer in the last
Penitential, (...) 143
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
flesh living be justified.

The Precept then makes afraid. And does not the Sanction also? Certainly it
does. The Prophets, that had a sight of God armed with vengeance against
sinners, how do we find them affected, and affrighted? C^ap. 6.
Esaias saw the Lord sitting upon a Throne, high and lifted up, his train filled
the Temple, above it stood the six winged Seraphins, etc. it is a Vision of
judgment, and it made Esaias cry out, Woe is me for I am undone, (...) 3.2.16
etc. Habakuk had a Vision of the like argument, which he describes more at
large; and hear what was the effect; When I heard it, my belly trembled, my
lips quiuered at the voice, rottenness entered into my bones. Psalm 119
David confesses of himself, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, O Lord,
and I am afraid of thy judgments.

But you will say: such objects may work fear in a natural man, but what
need these Israeltes to fear? They came armed against it, they came prepared
with Purity, with Modesty, and should such men fear? It is certain they did
fear; and there was good reason for it, for what proportion between man's
Ability, and the Majesty of God, when man is at the best? And the Israelites
ceremonial preparation could not so suddenly become moral, that will ask
more time then three days. The more they had of the old man, the more they
were subject unto this Passion, and it might well rise in them, though the
object which they discerned were aloof off, as indeed it was; for their Tents
were in some good distance from the Hill, and though they were so far cut of
danger, yet were they not out of fear, the dread of these Harbingers of God
seized upon them.

Add hereunto, that the spirit of the Old Testament, as Saint Paul tells us,
is the spirit of bondage and fear, and so this passion had good
correspondencie with that Covenant.

Neither upon them only, but upon Moses also did these dreadful Harbingers
work, for so must you understand those words in the text, Moses spoke; Saint
Paul will tell you what he said, Verse 19. Heb. 12.
I exceedingly fear and quake; so terrible was the sight in his eyes.

The Rhemists come in here unseasonably with the doctrine of their Traditions,
and they will have Saint Paul by tradition know that Moses spoke those words.
As if he might not know it as well by Revelation, for the spirit of Prophecy
looks as well backward as forward. Else how did Moses pen the Book of
Genesis, that speaks of things done so many hundred years before?

But what gain they if we do acknowledge he had it by tradition? Do we
deny all traditions? We acknowledge traditions of many Histories; as that of
Iannes and Iambres. Of Ceremonies; as that of concluding the Passover with
blessed Bread and Wine, whence Christ took an occasion to improve them to an
higher use, and institute the Eucharist.

Our question is about Articles of faith, and I hope this is none; and
therefore they may keep the note in store, until they meet with a more
pregnant place.

But let us leave those Wranglers, and come to Moses. Happily you wonder, why
he should quake? A man that came so near God, and was so dear unto him; God
talked with him face to face, as familiarly as a man talks with his friend.

I but then these Harbingers did not appear; no Thunder, no Lightning then, no
burning Hill, no loud sounding of the Trumpet; when these appear they will
make Moses himself to quake. And why? shall I say, because there are some
relikes of sin even in the best of Gods Saints during this life, and being
not perfect in love, they must needs be subject unto fear? If I should say
so, 1. John ^.
I should say something, but not all that is to be said. For our Savior
Christ that was without all sin, when he appeared in our nature, at the (as
it were) Mount Sinai. Certainly, at the Tribunal of God, where he had
presented, if not to the eyes of his body, yet of his soul those dreadful
attendants upon the Throne of Judgment, the sight cast him into an agony, and
made him sweat water and blood, it made his humane nature to droope, as
himself confesses, and be heavy unto death. And do we wonder that the
servant fears, where we see the son in such a case? Let not the holy Ones
of God, think to be privileged from that whereunto the Holy of Holies was
pleased to be subject. Let us all rather confess, that that indeed is
dreadful which is dreadful to such a person, and let us all fear that which
Christ himself feared.

But why go I so high as Christ? If they should not have feared, the Mountain
would have risen in Judgment against them; for that trembled, Verse 18. Psalm.
18.
it trembled exceedingly. In the Psalm it is said that the Earth shook and
trembled, the foundations also of the Hills were moved and were shaken; alluding
unto this story, another Psalm says, that The Mountains skipped like Rams,
Psalm 114.
and the little Hills like young sheep; and moving the question, What ailed ye
O ye Mountains that ye skipped like Rams, and ye little Hills like Lambs?
The answer is made; Tremble thou Earth at the presence of the Lord; at the
presence of the God of Jacob. And shall not we fear him, nor tremble at his
presence, when the senseless creatures show themselves awfully sensible of his
access unto them? surely our senselessness must needs be without all excuse.
Yet some such there have been. Such were the Scribes and Pharisees, who, when
the Sun lost his light, the Rocks cleft, the Graves were opened, and the
Earth quaked were so little touched, that their heart could serve them to
contriue a forgerie wherewith to countenance that villainy wherewith they
brought Christ to his painful and shameful death. This was a spirit of
slumber indeed, and never did a greater spiritual Lethargy seize upon the
sons of men.

God ever keep us from such senselessness, and give unto us the spirit of
fear, whenever his dreadful Harbingers present themselves before us; yea,
let us often represent them unto our selves, that this fear may be seasonably
present with us.

But let our fear be such as was that of Israel, and of Moses a hopeful fear.

For there is a fear that deterres from God, and there is a fear that does
only humble us before God. Ge^ 4
The first is the Reprobates fear, and makes men like unto Caine, Renegadoes
and Vagabonds, forsake God and go they know not whether. But the godly man's
fear makes him tremble, and yet keep on his way; though he go quaking yet
he goes to God.

And indeed, after God has made us sensible of our weakness, and his
greatness; he uses to support and strengthen his children, he makes them
experience the truth of that answer which Christ gave to Saint Paul, Psay 6
My grace is sufficient for thee, my strength is made perfect in weakness 2.
Cor. 12. verse. 9. So did he hearten Esaias with a cole from the Altar, Daniel
with a touch, Deuteronomy. 15.
Moses with an answer, a kind answer, and by Moses he bid the Israelites not
fear. And what wonder if he support his children in these tremblings, seeing
he supported the Hill? for other wise the hill being al on fire and trembling in
the fire must needs have bin consumed, but it held out. Yea and so did Moses
and Aaron when they entered into the cloud, and trod upon that fiery hill, no
less securely then the three children did in the fiery Furnace, whereinto
they were cast by the appointment of Nebuchadnezzar. (...) 3
And so shall the righteous at the day of judgment, when all the world is on
fire, and a louder Trumpet shall sound then this at mount Sinai. And we must
repute it a singular privilege of the children of God, that they can subsist
in such a place, and such a presence.

The lesson wherewith I will conclude this point, is that of the Apostle,
Philip. 2. ^ 12.
We must work out our salvation in fear and trembling; or if you will, that
of the Psalm, Serve the Lord in fear, Psalm. 2 ver. 11.
and rejoice before him with reverence. The Lord loves in his children the
mixture of fear and hope.

The argument of the I sraelites hope is, that they set out from their Tents,
and came on to the place of their attendance, and expecting of Gods descending
on the Hill. I will not here trouble you with the manner of their march. After
the Tabernacle was built God prescribed a manner; what they did before the
Jews tell us, but in the silence of the holy Ghost we will not be curious. It
is likely they came as Deuteronomy. 27. when the Covenant was as it were renewed.

In this moving of God and Israel to the place of meeting, I observed the good
manners of the Israelites, and the benignity of God.

First the good manners of the Israelites. For if you mark the text, they came
first to their place, before God came to his. And it was fit it should be so;
for God being so much better then man, it had been insolent rudeness for man
not to wait for the coming of God.

I need not spend time to prove so common, so known a morality, at your
ordinary meetings, if they be public, you practice the same. I rather choose
to note a mystery enwrapt herein, which is, that although God preuenr us in
regard of our ability to come to him; yet when we are enabled, he looks
that we should make use of his grace, and cooperate with him, and not expect a
second blessing before we have well husbanded the first; and we should think
it grace enough done unto us, if he then vouchsafe to answer our desires, and
crown our endeauours.

I do not here patronize Popish freewill, for I speak not de libero, but
liberato arbitrio; what our will can do in entertaining the first grace is not
the question, but what it must do after it has received grace. And therefore
here also the Romanists come in unseasonably with their observation.

The second thing that I observed was Gods benignity, which appears in this,
that if man make toward him, he will meet him half way, God descended upon
the Hill after the children of Israel came out of their Tents toward the foot
of the Hill. Luke 15.
We know the Parable of the prodigal child's father, who descried his sons
returning home a far off, and made haste to meet him: It is a lively picture
of Gods benignity, and we cannot have a better encouragement to seek unto him.

Put both these notes together, and then observe, that if ever we look there
should be any meeting between God and man, man must rise above himself, but
God must fall below himself. For we see here, that the children of Israel came
out of their Tents, and moved toward the upper ground, giving us to
understand, that Sursum corda, Colos 3
we must set our affections on those things that are above. Base thoughts and
groueling that are sixed upon things below, and mind earthly things, a natural
man that will continue himself, and that cannot put himself off, or soar
above himself, and have his conversation in heaven, is not fit to give meeting
unto God.

Again, if God should keep at his own pitch, and fall not much below
himself, humble himself (as the Psalm speaks, to regard those things that
are below; how should we poor wretches be raised out of the dust? How should
we needy ones be lifted out of dung-hils? How should we ever be set with
Princes, and ranged with glorious Angels?

I come not home enough: I told you before, that this was Gods Parliamentarie
meeting, that it bare some image of his grand Assizes. It was more, it was the
great day of the espousals of Christ and his Church. And did not the Kings
son and heir, the Son and heir of the King of heaven stoop very low when
he came to espouse himself unto such base and sinful persons? Surely, when
we consider the exceeding hight of Gods estate, and the lowness of our own,
of how little regard we deserve to be, and yet of how great regard we are; we
have good reason to think that Gods goodness makes him, as it were, lay
aside his majesty and be unlike himself, that he may so far like us, and
link us so near unto him. How then should we strive to ascend unto him, that
does thus vouchsafe to descend unto us?

You would think that by this time there is enough done to fit the meeting. We
have purified the Israelites, we have learned them mode^^ie, they have been
humbled with fear, and they have gone out from themselves, ascended above
themselves, and God has fallen below himself, there has been much done.

And yet there is one thing more to be done; there wants a Mediator. Galath
3.1.19.
And so indeed the Apostle says, The Law was given by the hands of a
Mediator. And we have here a Typical one; and that is Moses, these persons
would never have come together, except he had come between.

And we find here two Acts of his: the first is, that he put them in heart
when they quaked, and led them the way toward the Mount; neither would they
ever have adventured, had they wanted such a guide, their fear would have
been too strong for their hope.

Neither did Moses only put them in heart to go on, but also kept them in
heart when they were come to their standing, by his encouragement it was that
they held out, while the Articles of the Conenant were proclayming; they had
flowne off, if he had not stood between God and them.

But this was but a typical Mediator, the true is our Savior Christ, it is
by him, Heb. 4. Romans 5. Ioh 10. Ioh. 14. Revel. 3 7. Heb. 6.
that with boldness we come to the Throne of Grace, it is by him that we have
access unto God; He is the Door, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, even the
true way unto eternal life; He has the key, opens and no man shuts,
shuts and no man opens, neither does any but he bring Children to God.

And whether he brings us, there he keeps us, we are preserved in him,
and by him. For as at first we are accepted in Gods Beloved: so by his
perpetual Propitiation and Intercession are we continued in the love of God;
he stands between God and us, covering our imperfections that they offend
not God, and tempering the dreadfulnesse of Gods majesty with so much grace,
that the aspect thereof becomes comfortable unto us.

I will not fall into any long refutation of the Romish new coined Mediators,
they egregiously dishonor the Saints and Angels while they make them usurpers
of Christ's office. And howsoever their Schools qualify the matter, their
Liturgies cannot be freed from this imputation. And the notions of the vulgar
understanding, and the affections of their heart in their practicke devotion
are framed according to their Liturgy, not according to their Schools; the
more reason have we to censure the abuse. Moses at Mount Sinai, Aaron in the
Tabernacle may be typical Mediators, but there is no true one either in Earth
or Heaven but only our Savior Jesus Christ; None of Redemption, as the Papists
confess, neither any of Intercession, as we moreover hold, and hold it with
the Primitive Church.

But I here end my Text, and with my Text this whole Chapter.

Only I will give you one general observation upon it, which may not be
neglected. This whole Chapter is but an Exordium to the next Chapter, shall I
say? or to the whole Law? indeed to the whole Law, but immediately to the next
Chapter.

Now in this Exordium, I would have you observe, how God plays the skillful
Orator, and performs all things which the best rules in Rhetoric require
in an Exordium. The rules require, that an Orator should Captare beneuolentiam,
work himself into the good liking of his Auditors. And why? because if they
like not the man they will not much care for the matter. And does not God this
at the fourth Verse? Does he not set forth his well deseruings of them, in
overthrowing their euemies? in setting them free? And what may better give God
an interest in their love, then the experiment that he had given them of his
real love?

The next rule of Rhetorike is, Reddere Auditores dociles, to bring them that
already affect the man to be desirous to be informed of the matter. And how
is that done? by showing how much the matter concerns them, how beneficial
it will be to them. For men gladly hear of their own good; and the greater
the good, the more gladly do they hear of it. See how excellently God plays
this part of the Orator, at the fifth and sixth Verses, how significantly he
sets forth the benefit which they shall reap by their obedience, showing
them what a rate he will set upon them, what an approach they shall make to
him, how sacred, how blessed their state shall be; which is so much the more
to be esteemed, in that they shall have it as a Prerogative, none shall have it
but they. And who will not be curiously inquisitiue after such a matter, and
hear them gladly that bring such good tidings.

The third point of Rhetoric is Auditores attentos reddere, to rowse his
Auditory, make them shake off all dullness and drowsinesse, that no part of the
speech slip by, or pass vnweighed.

This is done by setting before us the danger that may overtake us, and the
respect that must be used by us. And God omitteth not this point of Rhetoric,
all the rest of the charge is spent hereabout. It serves to quicken and
quallifie the Israelites as beseemed that heavenly Sermon which they were to
hear from the mouth of God. Chrysoil.
Hitherto tend, their Preparation which you heard of heretofore, and the
humiliation wrought by the Harbingers of God, whereof you have heard this day.

What shall I say now to you, but only this? The same Sermon that was preached
to Israel is to be preached now to us; for we are now the Israel of God,
therefore unto us belongs this Oratorie of God. Yea, God has deserved better
of us then ever he did of Israel, for we enjoy the truth whereof they had but
the Type. We have reason then to affect him. Yea, and to affect also that which
is delivered by him, for it contains our sovereign good, our blessed
communion with God. And those spurs of attention must work upon us no less
then upon them: Because, though we be not called to the Parliament, we must
come to the Assizes; the Assizes is much more dreadful then was the
Parliament. Finally, though we were not at those Espousals, we shall be at the
marriage feast; It concerns us therefore to provide our wedding garment.

In a word, will we, nill we, we are parties to this Covenant, though not as it
was veiled, yet as it was vnuailed. Therefore not one of the Articles must
pass us unregarded, because inquiry will be made after our conformity unto
every one of them.

GOd grant that we may so set God and our own good before our eyes, that we
may willingly open our ears, and gladly apply our hearts to hear him, and
hear of it; that what we shall learn at the foot of Mount Sinai, may make us
more fit to climb to the top of Mount Sion; Heb. 12.
So shall we be incorporated into the blessed Society that dwells there,
while we live here, and hereafter having our Harps sing there a new Song
before the Throne, before the four Beasts and the Elders, Revel. 14.
which none can learn but the 144000. which are redeemed from the Earth. AMEN.
FIVE SERMONS PREACHED in Saint Mary's in OXFORD. Upon Luke 3. Verse 7, 8, 9. BY
The Right Reverend Father in God, ARTHVRE LAKE, the late L. Bishop of Bath and
Wells.

LONDON, Printed by W. STANSBY for Nathaniel Butter.

1629.



FIVE SERMONS PREACHED AT Saint Mary's in OXFORD.
The first Sermon.
LVKE. 3. VERSE. 7.8.9. 7. Then said he to the people that were come be
Baptized of him. O generation of Vipers, who has forewarned you to flee from
the wrath to come?


THis Chapter is the second Lesson appointed for this Morning Prayer; the
Argument whereof is nothing else but a story of Saint John Baptists service,
what pains he took, and what success he had; his pains were great; his
success diverse. To say nothing of them with whom he prevailed nothing at all,
such as were they that despised the counsel of God against themselves being
not baptized of him, Luke 7. This Chapter shows that between them with whom
he prevailed, there was no small odds; for some were sincere, some hypocrites;
Saint John uses them accordingly. For he instructs the sincere mildly; but
his Sermon against hypocrites it very sharp; you have it in my Text; my Text
is Saint John's reproof of those Jews which came dissemblingly to his Baptism.

More distinctly to open it, consider Whom he reproves and How. The persons
were many, a multitude, and they seem well disposed, whether you respect their
Pains, or their pretense. Their pains, they came out, they took a journey
from home to come unto him and the pretense of their journey cannot be
disliked, for they came to be baptized. Such were the persons.

But how deals Saint John Baptist with them? Surely, notwithstanding their
great number, and their fair show, he does not spare to tell them that they
were in worse case then they thought, and must take a better course then
hitherto they had. For their Case, whereas there are but two heads whereunto we
reduce all Evil, Malum culpae, and Malum paenae, Sin and the wages thereof:
he tells them that they were free from neither; deep in sin, for they
were a generation of Vipers; in danger of the wages of sin, which is the
wrath to come. In danger they were of it, and yet they were not aware, for, Who
had forewarned them to ^ite from the wrath to come? No master, as yet, had
taught them that leison. So he opened their case.

But here to have ended his Sermon had been to leave them to an un(...) end,
even to desperation; but he does not leave them so; as (...) would have them
thoroughly to understand their own case: So does (...) prescribe them a good
course; his words are plain, but (...) of them is dark, by a few propositions
I will make it (...). The (...) was to have a double being in the Covenant, an
here(...); the hereditarie was nothing but the birth-righ, which (...), (...)
ad rem; be that lineally descended from Abraham, might cla^me to be admitted
into the Covenant which God made with him. The posse^^orte consisted in his
personal grace, which gave him Ius inre, when he did not only descend from
Abraham according to the flesh, but communicated also with him in the graces of
the spirit. These two beings in the Covenant were to concur in every Jew,
and they could not be scuered without danger, danger not to the Cou^nant, but
to the Jew. Now mark Saint John's words, he shows that the Jews did
separate the Personallgrace from their Birth right; wherefore he calls upon
them to remedy that, bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance. This is the
Personal grace which Saint John will have the Jews add to their Buth right,
and which he tells them they cannot separate without danger; danger to
themselves, not to the Covenant.

To themselves; Begin not to say with your selves: We have Abraham to (...)
father, We have Abraham to our father, is too single a plea, it plead^^h only
the birth right; God can derive that unto others without (...). This Covenant,
he can raise children unto Abraham of the very steres. And he can ^ustly,
according to his Covenant, reward you as you deserve, root you out of that
family, Now ^^the (...), etc.

You see what is the substance of this Scripture, and the (...) that I shall
handle thereon, not all at this time, but so many as the time will perm^^.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give us understanding in all things.

I begin at the persons, and of them first, consider the Number: the na^^^
great, a Multitude, in the original it is Multitudes; Saint Matth^^ con^^^imes
it by particularising the several companies. But whereas the word (...) may
signify either the quality, or the quantity of persons, the quality, and so
is used for the vulgar people, whom in English we call the Multitude, or else
may signify their quantity: here it is taken not for quality, but quantity.
For the persons are many in number, Jerusalem came out, all Iudaea came out,
and so did all the confines of Jordan, Matthew. 3.
so says S. Matthew; and he says also that amongst them that came out, there
were more then vulgar persons, for there were Pharisees and Saduces, Antiq.
lib. 3. cap. 14 de Bell^. Iudaic. lib. 2. c. ^
persons of principal note amongst the Jews, as appears not only in the
Gospel, but also in Josephus. And of those there came a great many, so many, as
that some would have the word Multitude in Saint Luke to be restrained unto
them, according to the direction of Saint Matthew, in whom this sharp Sermon
seems to be made only unto the Pharisees and Saduces.

But because hypocrisy might be common unto more, we will take the words at
large, and concerning the Multitude observe this; that though they had lost the
true knowledge of the Messiah, yet the hope of a Messiah they had not lost,
they hearkened diligently after him. Their calamity sharpened their desire; such
was their misery under the Romans, that no person either seditious or
superstitious promised news of the Messiah, but he was flockt unto by men of
all sorts; we have a touch at it in the Acts, but in Josephus it is delivered
more at large. Acts 5.
The same God that in punishment of their gross mistake of the Messiah
suffered them to be abused by Impostors, honored the coming of the true
Messiah, with resort of no small numbers to his harbinger. And this agrees
well with those titles that the Scripture gives unto Saint John; he is called
the voice of a crier; he was heard far, and rowsed many; he was a burning
Lamp, he shined clear, and drew many; his doctrine, his life were both such
and so powerful, as be seemed the harbinger of Christ, that harbinger that was
to take up many lodgings for him; by them Saint John prevailed. And Ministers
must herein imitate him, and the people must imitate these multitudes; they
must learn of them to come forth.

And so from the persons I come to their disposition. They seem well disposed,
first in their Pains, they came from home unto Saint John, and some of them
came somewhat far. The principle is good and ancient, that men that will
serve God must go from their own home; though a man may serve God at home,
yet the sollemne place of worship was commonly distinct from the private home;
so was it even in the days of Adam, as Bertram observes; it is more clear in
the days of the Patriarchs, but most of all in the time of the Tabernacle and
Temple (to say nothing of the Synagogues,) and the most Christian Emperors did
not disdain to come into public assemblies of the Church. As Religion grew
cold: so private Oratories were ^rected, at first only for Kings, afterward
for Peers, and now scarce any man, of more then ordinary rank, that must not
have a Church in his own house. Men think themselves too good to sort with
the common assembly. But though their be a subordination of States in the
Commonweal, yet this subordination cease when we come into the Church,
where all should alike bow and pray, hear and obey, as having but one God, one
Savior, one Faith, one Hope, and all these far from respect of persons;
whereupon Saint Paul grounded his exhortation, Heb. 10 15.
which I also renew unto you, Forsake not the assembly, as some do. In a word,
we must go out to Saint John Baptist, not from our home only, we must go
from our state also; these Jews did go out from their houses indeed, but not
from themselves, and so their pains was rather great then good; not like
Abraham that did not only come out from his fathers house, but from his
Idolatry also, especially, if we come to receive sacred things, we must
forsake our former evil ways.

Let us us see their pretense, That cannot be disliked they went to be
baptized. Baptism was a Sacrament wherewith God began the New Testament.
Whenever God began a new reformation of his Church, he did always accompany
it with some new Ceremony, which served to show the beginning of that work,
and to keep it in remembrance. When Adam fell, God altered the Ceremonies
whereunto he was used before the Fall, namely, the tree of life, and the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, into Sacrifices, that might prefigure the
Redemption by Christ. When the world degenerated again, and God renewed this
Covenant with Abraham, he instituted a new Ceremony, that of Circumcision.
When Abraham's posterity degenerated, God reformeth again, and to point out
this new Reformation, he instituted the Tabernacle, the Priesthood of Aaron.
And when this could not hold the Jews in the truth of Religion, God comes to
his last Reformation, and that has his Ceremonies also; whereof the first was
Baptism; Baptism whereby men were admitted into the Church of Christ. And
this Baptism was the easier entertained by this ^ultitude, because the
Prophets had foretold, that when the Messiah came he should pour forth clean
waters, Ez^k. 36 v 25.
and cleanse the filthiness of Israel with them. Galatinus says, that the old
Rabbis did understand it of such a work of the Messiah. But whatsoeuet is to
be thought of his judgment: who does oftentimes make the most of the Rabbis
sayings, sure it is that the Prophets words do sound that way, read Ezech.
36. Esaias 44. Zachary 13. where this point is enlarged, and Baptism foretold,
(...) 5
which also was prefigured in Naamans cleansing, and in the curing virtue of
the poole of Bethesdah. In a word, hearing that by this Ceremony they might be
admitted into the kingdom of the Messiah, they frequented it.

A dispute there is, whither Saint John's Baptism and Christ's were all one?
Some difference is pretended out of the Fathers, but they are mistaken, as
Zanchius has well observed in the Annotations upon his Confessions. Neither is
it likely that the Baptism of Christians should differ from the Baptism of
Christ; although the efficacy of Saint John's Baptism was not from his
sprinkling of the water, but from Christ's giving of the spirit.

The defect of these persons that came to be baptized was, that they did affect
Baptismum fluminis, but not flaminis, and this Saint John apprehended, and this
made him to be quick with them, as he showed himself to be in the manner of
his reproof; I come now to that wherein you may perceive the spirit of Elias.
Notwithstanding their great number and fair show, whereof the one would have
terrified, the other deceived ordinary men, this Prophet, (of whom Christ
says, Matthew. 11.9.
more then a Prophet) reuealeth and declares the bad case of these I^wes, as
by the holy Spirit, it was no doubt discovered unto him; for Christ elsewhere
uses the same phrase, and that to the same persons. And mark that he does not
only in general preach repentance, but he does discreetly apply himself to
the persons, and tempereth his language as is fitting to them. And so should
we do; for nothing is more absurd then uniformity of language, when we have
to do with different hearers. But yet herein we must not be indulgent to our
corrupt affections, but the fire that kindles our zeal must be heavenly. We
must reprove those within the Church more sharply then those without, and the
leaders more sharply then the followers, those that are Hypocrites, then plain
dealing men. And it was fit that the Pharisees and Saduces that were so
selfe-conceited, and so domineered over the consciences of the common people,
should hear how little they did answer the opinion they had of themselves,
and the people should see there was no reason they should have their skill in
the Scriptures, or holiness of life in so great admiration. The Saduces and
Pharisees were at odds between themselves, but all agreed in this quality of
Vipers. And if they that pretend so fairly, are so reproved, how should they
be reproved that are openly profane? There are but two heads whereunto we
reduce all evil, Malum Culpae, and Malum Poenae, Sin and the Wages thereof;
he shows that they were no^ free from either. First, not a Malo Culpae, not
from Sin; for they were a generation of Vipers; few words, but they reach
home, and challenge these persons as being gone as far, as may be in sin.
For, behold, the three dimensions thereof, the Intensiuenesse noted by the word
Viper, Secondly, the Extensiuenesse, noted by the word Generation, and Thirdly,
the Protensiuenesse, the generation of Vipers. The word Viper shows that they
were corrupt, every one in his own nature, and the word generation shows
that the corruption had ouerspread whole multitudes, for a generation is a
multitude of persons that live at the same time; put Generation and Vipers
together and that will import that the infection reached from Parents to
children, whereof the later were no better then the former. It is a woeful
thing if sin be only personal, and defile the nature of any one man; but yet
there is good hope that the righteousness of a multitude may slay Gods hand
from proceeding against the personal sin. If of personal, sin become
National, the case grows much worse; and yet some hope remains even for a
whole sinful Nation, if their Parents were not such; for God does oftentimes
spare the children far gone in sin, in remembrance of their Parents which
had served and feared him. But when they also have been bad, and sin is
become natural to a Nation, what hope? none, for sin can go no farther then
of personal to become National, and of National to become natural. So far
was sin gone in these persons, whom here Saint John calls a generation of
Vipers.

But to single the words, a Viper is a beast, the persons of whom Saint John
speaks were men, behold that unto men he gives the name of beasts. Man that
was created after the Image of God was to better his estate and become like an
Angel, but by the Fall he made it worse, and fell below himself, to the
condition of a beast. Man being in honor (says the Psalmist) has no
understanding, Psalm. 49. v 20.
but becomes like the beasts that perish. Hence is it that the Scripture does
often give him the name of a beast, Basil. in Hexameron Hom 8. and 9. Tertull.
contra Iudaeos cap 4.
of a Lion, of a Leopard, of a Wolf, etc. yea what beast is there whose name
the Scripture does not fit unto man? giving us to understand, that he is a
compound beast, compounded of all those ill qualities that are observed in any
beast; so that no one beast, be it never so bad, can be matched unto man,
seeing man can transform himself into the savageness of all; be as cruel as
any Lion, as ravenous as any Wolf, as implacable as a Bear: as crafty as a
Fox, as filthy as a Swine, etc. But of all beasts he is most compared unto the
worst, that is, to the Serpent; and of all kinds of Serpents (for there are
many kinds, even an Alphabet almost as Gesner observes) the last in the
catalogue, and worst is the Viper mentioned in my text. The Fathers observe
sundry properties of the Viper, and they are witty in the accommodation of
them unto men; but because the learned Naturalists disprove the observations, I
will not trouble you with the applications. And indeed, the Holy Ghost is not
very curious in distinguishing the kinds of Serpents, but applies them
indifferently unto men, calling them sometimes by the name of one Serpent, and
sometimes of another.

That which we must principally, observe is, the ancientnesse of this phrase,
which leads us to the first fall of man; of all beasts the Devil pitched
upon the Serpent, and by the Serpent wrought the overthrow of man, and unto
this overthrow does the Scripture allude, when it calls men a generation of
Vipers, which in plain terms is the children of the Devil, as Christ
speaks John 8. and 1. Epist. John Chap. 3. We are all by nature children of
Wrath, but by adoption children of God, and if grace be in us we are
denominated from our new not our old birth; but these are denominated from
their old, as if they had no new. John 8.

But there are three things in the Serpent which carry a correspondencie unto
sin, the venom, the craft, the terrestreitie. The venom being in the
Serpent is insensible, but coming from him disquiets those that receive it:
even so sin is not felt of the sinner, yet is it mischievous to them that
have to do with him. Secondly, the Serpent is crafty in conueying his venom:
even so are sinners, they recommend their wickedness under some fair
pretense; evil works not upon well disposed persons, except they be deluded
by some fair show. And therefore they are like Serpents in that their outward
show is fair, though the inward be venomous; Chrysostom.
and so Christ compares the Pharise to painted Sepulchers, within full of dead
men's bones. Last of all: the Serpent groueleth upon the earth, and feeds
thereon: even so of sinners, the highest minded sinners, their thoughts are but
base and earthly.

Hitherto I have spoken but in general; this phrase in special sort belongs
unto the Jew, then whom none is more properly the brood of the Serpent. The
first enmity, and the most direct was to be between the woman and the
Serpent, his seed and hers; and the seed of the woman is our Savior Christ,
and they are most the brood of the Serpent, that most directly impugn him; and
none does this so much as the Jew. The heathen people as they know not Christ,
so they care not for him. The Turks though they do not receive him for the
Son of God, yet do they reverence him for a great Prophet; yea, they will
not receive a Jew to be a Turk, except he first, as it were purify himself
by being a Christian, and of a Christian turn Turk. Only the Jew is in direct
opposition, and the most desperate impugner of our Savior Christ, witness
their Talmude, as Galatinue reports; and other histories of this day have
registered such blasphemies, as neither I can endure to utter, neither would you
endure to hear, more then enough to show that they are most properly the brood
of the Serpent. Neither is this sin personal to some few of them, but
national, the same malice is found in them all. Neither is it only national,
but natural also; they have for many generations brought up their children in
it; so that we may well say that sin is grown in them to the highest,
amongst them there is neither good egg nor bird, they fill up the measure of
their fathers iniquity; nay, they far exceed them. Ordinarily sinful
Parents do not teach their children to be like themselves; a drunkard will
not endure that his children should be such; no more will the Adulterer; only
the Jew labors nothing more then that his child should be like him in his
sin; every succession eats more sour Grapes then did their predecessors,
they are a generation of Vipers. A pitiful fall, for those that had not only
Abraham, as they thought, but God also to their father (as hereafter you shall
hear) to become such, and a great heart-gaule to their pride to be branded
with such a name*

But to leave them, and touch a little at our selves; seeing there will always
be a generation of Vipers in the world, it is Gods pleasure also there should
be a seed of the woman, this to impugn that; and Universities were intended
principally to nourish such seed; we do little answer the intent of Founders
and Benefactors, and requite their Liberality very ill, if these goodly
buildings degenerate into Vipers nests, and harbor a generation of such
vermin. Mistake me not, I mean not Jews, for though they principally are,
yet are they not the only generation of Vipers, All sinners are in their degree
Vipers, drunkards, adulterers, blasphemers, whatsoever wicked persons, and of
such there are some in these places, Sin is even here become personal. Yea,
there are a great some, we may say it is National also, there is a Generation
of these offenders. And it is too much endeauo^ured to make these sins
natural also; those that are grown old in them labor to leave a succession
after them, and cannot endure, that though they die their sins should die
also. But so ill a brood should be crushed; the very head of the Serpent
should be bruised, the seed of the woman should set it self to this work, and
none of us should be at rest till this is done.

The time is past, and I can go no farther; only this I wish, That because you
are next to hear of Malum Poenoe, the Wages of Sin: you would, in the mean
time, think well upon this Malum Culpoe, which you have heard, I mean the
measure of sin, that the feeling of this may prepare you for the fearing of
that, and both may make us fitter to entertain that remedy which Saint John
does teach us of both. Amen.

The second Sermon.
LVKE. 3. VERSE. 7. 7. Who has forewarned you to fly from the wrath to come.


SAint John does not only tell the Jews that they were deep in sin, but
also that they were in danger of the wages thereof; and he tells it them in
these words, Who has forewarned you to fly from the wrath to come? Wrath to
come is the proper and full wages of sin, from which they that must fly are
certainly in danger. But this danger is of that nature that of our selves we
may run into it, but we cannot of our selves foresee it, we need a
forewarner. The Jews needed one, but had not what they needed, which made
Saint John press them with this question, Who has forewarned you? Of this you
have not been forewarned.

So then the argument of these words is the Jews second evil, Wrath to come;
whereof we are taught, First, what is the remedy, flying; and Secondly, that
these Jews wanted that remedy, for, Who has forewarned you to fly from the
wrath to come?

I begin at the evil, wrath to come: few words, but a full definition of the
wages of sin; for they consist of wrath, and that wrath has his note of
difference, It is wrath to come. I will not enter into any subtle dispute, how
wrath is incident to the impassible nature of God; only lest you should with
Marcion dream of an evil, or with the Epipicure, of an idle God: I must put
you in mind of Athanasius his rule; The speeches wherein we talk of God, are
borrowed from men, but we must so conceive them as is befitting God, (...).
James 1.^^.
Now the odds that is between God and men, we may learn of Saint James, who
gives us to understand that there is the same odds, as is between the Sun
and the Moon; he compares God unto the Sun, when he calls him the Father
of Lighss, but remoueth from him the properties of the Moon, which is the
Image of man, namely, variableness and shadow of change. The Sun and the
Moon both work upon the earth, but the Moon alters nothing, but she is
first altered her self: if she cause a flux and refluxe of humors below, she
waxes and waineth in her light above; but the Sun that so turns and
windeth the hue of all this lower world, continues still the same, and when it
scorcheth most, is never a whit the warmer. Even so men cannot disquiet others,
but they are first disquieted themselves, whereas God changes his creatures,
continuing himself unchangeable. The sky of God is ever clear, Nazian. orat.
19
raise he never so many storms on earth. This being heeded that we fasten
nothing upon God unbeseeming his Majesty, neither turn the Suune into the
Moon, or God into man, I will now plainly let you see what the Holy Ghost
means by Gods wrath. God gives his Law, and expects obedience thereto, and
if we fail two things follow upon our transgression, God is displeased, and
we shall smart; both these does the Holy Ghost usually understand by Gods
wrath. Wrath then notes not only a bare act of Gods will, but it signifies
moreover two effects that are joined therewith, the effect of sin, which
offends Gods holiness, and the effect of Gods Justice, that takes vengeance
on sin; the first may be called wrath in God, the second, wrath from God. But
to clear this a little farther. All our actions should have a double end, a
direct, a reflected end; the direct is to please God, the reflected is to
procure our own good; they were both shadowed in the Sacrifices, Sacrifices
should all our actions be. Now the Sacrifices were of a sweet smell, they gave
content unto God, and also of rest, they procured peace unto men: and it is
Gods pleasure that his honor and our welfare should both go together; and
when we would divide them, Hab. 1 13.
then arises Wrath. First* Wrath in God; for God is a God of pure eyes, he can
abide no iniquity, so says the Prophet and the Psalmist, that such as be
wicked shall not stand in his sight; he hates, he lotheth, Esaias chap (...)
he abhorres sin, stops his ears, turns away his eyes, and shrinketh in
his hand at the presence of sinners; nay, his spirit wrastles, is grieved,
despited, and quenched with, and by the ungodliness of men; these be all
Scripture phrases, to set forth the first wrath, which flows from the neglect
of the first end, whereat we should aim in our works. But this wrath goes
not alone, the other wrath does still attend it, wrath from God attends wrath
in God, and therefore sins are usually called prouocations; a commentary
upon which word we have in the seventh of Jeremy) do they provoke me to
anger (says the Lord) and not rather their own selves, to the confusion of
their faces; Though God be patient yet will he not suffer the wicked
unpunished, Exodus 34. If men will not turn he will what his sword he has bent
his Bow, and prepared the instruments of death, Psalm. 7. No man ever
discontenteth God but he does it to his own woe.

Thus have I so far as was requisite to my present purpose showed what the
holy Ghost does understand by Gods wrath; I must now sever so much, as does not
belong to my Text. Whereas then there is wrath in God, and wrath from God, my
Text has to do with the latter; and whereas that also is either in this World
or in that which is to come, the note of difference which is here put unto
Wrath, shows of which of these Wraths we are to speak, no present Wrath but
Wrath that is to come. (...) Caianos com. 3. p 85.
And first Epiphanius scanneth this word To come, and tells that it argues
the impassibilitie of the nature of God; affectus exortem se probat deus
praeuaticinatus futurum iudicium. If a man doubt whether the Wrath in God be a
Passion, he may (says Epiphanius) be resolved that it is not, in that it is
foretold; for Passions are wrought by present objects, but here the effect is
foretold before the working of the object, which is an argument that Wrath is
no perturbation in God, but a mature resolution. This by the way. Let us come
to the point.

Punishment is meant by the Wrath to come, but what punishment? Whether the
destruction of Jerusalem, or the damnation of these Jews? Surely both, both
do communicate in this name Wrath to come; compare Matthew. 21. with Matthew. 23.
as all other things, so this Wrath to come came to them in a Type, and
therefore Christ joins the destruction of Jerusalem, with the desolation of
the World, in one Sermon prophesying of both. Immediately then, Saint John
means the destruction of Jerusalem, but mediately the last judgment day; I
will touch at both. First at the destruction of Jerusalem. To open which
briefly, and yet competently I might relate Christ's prophecy, and refer you
to the Commentary that shows the event thereof, Flauius Josephus his
History. But I choose rather to present unto you Hosea's three children, that
were borne therein: you have them in the first of his Prophecy, and they are
these; Iezreel, Loruhama, Lo-ammi, which intimate the three degrees obserueable
in that Wrath. The first notes that Gods arm acted it; though we hold truly
that there is no penal evil in the City which God has not made, and that it
is he which creates all light and darkness: yet extraordinary plagues are
especially ascribed unto him; when these fall upon men, his Axe, his Sword, are
said then to be working; the very Magicians will confess the finger of God is
in them; Job 32 13.
and who will not use the words of Elihu, It is God that has cast him down
and not man? Philostratus reports that when Titus the Emperor, Apud Photium
in Bibliotheca.
after the overthrow of Jerusalem should have been crowned by his Soldiers
as a Conqueror, he refused it, and gave this answer, This work is none of
mine, I lent my hand, but God gave the struck. You see a very heathen did
confess the birth of Iezreel. But Iezreel was not the only, child Lo-ruhama
was borne also, God gave the stroke, and it was a Merciless stroke; Theodoret
observes well in comparing the many judgments that besell the Jews, that they
were vindemiati and defoliati at other times; their enemies had fruit
gatherings upon them, and they had falls of the leaf, they were made very bare,
and brought very low: butyet never so low as now when they became as the
Fig Tree which Christ cursed in those words, never fruit grow on thee any more,
when they became not only a naked but also a withered Tree, Mal. 1.^
when the habitation of Jacob became like the habitation of Esau, a border of
wickedness, and the Jews as the Edomites, a people with whom God is effended
for ever. Tertullian in his Apology describes their woeful state; Caeli and
soli extorres, sine Deo, sine homine, Rege, they may neither breath in their
own air, nor tread on their own ground, they have help neither from God nor
man, as if they were the brood of Caine continual vagabonds, semper noui
vbique alieni, never suffered long in any one pla^^, neither entertained
otherwise then as mere strangers, whatsoever liber^^ they have, they pay for
it to the uttermost.

Saint ^^nard goes farther in an Epistle of his saying, Never was there such a
(...) as God has brought upon the Jews, who are Catholic slaves, slaves in
(...) the world.

I will not rip up stories to prove this, even this year God has made us see
the truth hereof, Germany has yielded a spectacle of their slavery. In the
City of Frankford which was inhabited with many thousinds of them, when they
were preparing themselves to solemnize that day wherein they bewail the
destruction of Jerusalem, the Inhabitants otherwise exasperated against them,
wreakt their displeasure upon them, and hazarding many of their lives, rifled
most of their goods, and forced them out of their City. There is yet a third
child the worst of the three, Lo-ansmi; the heauiest calamity that ever befell
the Jews. God oftentimes afflicted them, and the affliction was very sharp,
but he never before dissolved the bond whereby Israel was knit unto him, and
was by Covenant his peculiar people: but now that which Theodoret would have
the world to wonder at, silij facti sunt canes, and canes filij, We that at the
plauting of the Gospel were no better then Dogs, have now the honor to be
children of God, and they that then were children, what are they now but Dogs,
Dogs not vouchsafed so much as the crummes that fall from their masters table?
At first their Kingdom failed, then failed the Prophecy, and now the
Priesthood fails also: there is no bond of Commerce left between them and
God; such was the destruction of Jerusalem.

But this was but a Type, we were in this to behold a greater evil, the
eternal damnation of the Jew. Non aliquid vsitatum dicit, says Chrysostom,
it is no usual matter that John Baptist means by the wrath to come; it is
not the sword, or pestilence, or famine, that he terrifieth them with; he
puereth them in mind of some other judgment, such as they had never heard
before. We are then from the Type to come to the truth, from the destruction
to the damnation, which is here called, wrath to come.

And the first thing that this phrase puts us in mind of is, the difference
that God has made between Angels and men; both sinned and were sentenced, but
the stroke of Justice was respited unto man, which on the Angels was inflicted
presently; no space left unto the Angels to be reconciled unto God, but God
has given a space unto man. Saint Chrysostom observes well there upon, If
thou sin and God do not presently strike, think not that he does it out of
Impotencie, he does it out of Patience; it cannot be Impotencie, for he
presently did strike the Angels that are greater then men, it is Patience then,
which argues Gods wonder full mercy toward man. Yea and thereupon it
follows undoubtedly, that during this space which God grants for
repentance, no man need to despair, Lib. 2. de Panitentia.
or to be despaired of. Saint Ambrose is confident herein, I am persuaded
(says he) that if Judas, Judas that betrayed Christ, had spoken unto Christ,
that which he spoke unto the high Priest, I have sinned in that I have shed
innocent blood, he might have been saved; if Judas, who not? Man is not doomed
definitely in this life.

But I must remove a stumbling block, for restraining Wrath to that punishment
which is to come, I may be thought to deny it in any of those punishments
which we feel in this life; and indeed I do deny it. For whatsoever is
inflicted here is improperly Wrath, and in comparison deserves not the name of
Wrath; you may call it Wrath materially, but formally it is no Wrath. I will
show it by a three fold difference which is between the punishments of this
life and those of the life to come, The first is in their Original, the second
in their Measure, the third in their End. For the Original; we must learn
that wrath is no immediate affection, there is something else that comes
between it and the Will, and that is Love and Hatred; the Will is prepossest
by one of them before it brings forth Wrath, and Wrath is the immediate fruit
either of Love or Hatred; we learn it out of Gods message sent by Nathan to
King David, 1. Sam. 7.14, 15.
If thy children break my Laws and walk not in my statutes, I will visit
their sins with the rod, and their offenses with scourges, but my Mercy I
will not take from them, as I did from Saul, David's house felt stripes, and so
did Saul's, but mercy laid on those, and hatred these. The very same may you
gather out of Gods words in the first of Malachi, Jacob have I loved, Esau have
I hated, and these two God expressed in punishing them both, as it follows in
that Text.

Now all punishments in this life they are effects of Love, that Love which
fixed a space between our sins, and the receite of our wages. But when the
space is ended, the Love does end, whatsoever we feel after it is the stroke
of hatred, Psalm. 88.
God forgets then to be merciful, and shuts up his loving kindness in
displeasure. So that as this stroke is properly Wrath: so the other cannot be
but improperly so called, seeing thereby God so chastises us not because he
hates us, but because he loves us; Castigo te non quod odio habeam sed quod
amem, is in this life much more truly said of God then it can be by any man.

The second difference is in the measure, a double measure, of the stroke, and
of the time. Touching the stroke, Nazianzen observes, (...). Nazia. Orat. 15.
p. 228. (...).
that in this world, God does allay his severity with mercy, but they that
shall be punished in the world to come shall drink the very dregs of the cup
of his wrath; the judgments in this life are but the smoke of wrath, the
preface unto torments, such stripes as Schoolemasters give unto little children
that learn their A.B.C. But the judgments in the world to come they are more
then smoke, they are the flaming fire it self; read Mal. 3.4. they are more
they the preface to torments, they are the torments themselves; so we read of
the rich Glutton that he was in the torments; Finally, they are more then
childrens smart, they are the stripes of the oldest Truants, such as are
provided for the Devil and his Angels; E^eck. 8.18
Then God will deal in his fury, his mercy will not spare, neither will he
have pity, and though they cry in his ears with a loud voice, he will not
hear them. If any body desire to know more of the measure of the stroke, let
him read the Prophets, they are copious in amplifying the terror of the Lords
Day.

Besides this measure of the stroke, there is a measure also of the time; for
in this world afflictions are but momentanie, in the world to come they are
eternal; here heaviness may continue for a night, but joy comes again in
the morning; as God does not suffer all his indignation to arise: so is he very
quickly reconciled, so quickly, that it scarce can be remembered that he was
offended; certainly it is too usually forgotten. But in the world to come wrath
is permanent, Affliction (as Nahum speaks) arises not the second time, the
worm never dies, neither does the fire ever go out. This being the odds in
the measure, it proves, that, in comparison, that which is inflicted in this
life, deserves not the name of wrath, especially if you add the third
difference, the difference in the End.

Saint Austine does give us a distinction of wrath, Con^. 2.^^ Psalm. 58 ^a
consun^pti^nis, Ira consummationis.
and tells us that there is a wrath consuming, and a wrath consummating; a
wrath which God inflicts to make men the better, and a wrath which God inflicts
therewith utterly to destroy men; that is the wrath which he inflicteth in this
life, and this is the wrath which he inflicteth in the life to come. And
indeed God in this life does not punish man but the Devil; God reserueth man's
punishment to the life to come. The corruption that is in our nature is the
Devils possession, in working out that God works out him, and it is his
intent to work him out; his strokes here are like a physical potion given to
a sick body, not to abide in him, but, when it has drawn unto it self the
matter of his disease, to be cast out again with the humor that did offend
him. This is the true end of Gods chastisements in this world. But it is as
true that this physic does not always sort this effect; the fault is not in
the potion, but in the stomach that takes it; if the stomach have strength
to make use of the potion then does it recover thereby, but if it want
strength, then does the potion increase the peccant humors, and augment the
patients disease. The wicked for want of grace are the worse for their
punishment, it proves unto them wrath of consumption; but they that have grace
are the better, wrath to them is better then laughter (as the Preacher
speaks) because by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better;
^celes 7.
and chastisement brings forth the quiet fruit of righteousness to them that
are exercised thereby; Heb. 12.11.
yea, Mayor ira quado Deus non requirit.
Saint Austine observes well, God is most displeased with us in this world,
when he is displeased least, and his long patience here does prognosticate his
heavier vengeance hereafter; it makes it suspicious that we are bastards and
no sons, if, seeing such is our infirmity that we cannot but sin, we be
not timely reclaimed by chastisement of sin. But to shut up this point; that
which proceeds from love, and is executed with so tender a hand to so good a
purpose, as is our perfection, does not deserve the name of wrath; this name
belongs more properly to that punishment which proceeds from Gods hatred,
and is executed without mercy to the eternal destruction of man, and that is,
The wrath to come; therefore is the day thereof properly called, The day of
wrath, and the persons that suffer then are properly The vessels of wrath; In
the number of which that we may not be we must harken to the Remedy.

And the Remedy is flying, fly from the wrath to come; if the Remedy be
flying, then there is no standing to it, no traversing of our indictment, no
bribing of our Judge, no privilege of our persons, no relief from our
strength, no standing to it by these or any other means, we must fly. But
flying is either corporal or spiritual, the corporal will be attempted, it
should seem so by Christ's relation in the Gospel; and Saint John says in the
Revelation, Revel. 6
that Captains, and rich men, and great men shall fly to the rocks, to the
hills, and desire to be covered, to be hid from the wrath of the Lamb, but all
in vain, for they are rejected by rocks and hills. And indeed, whether should
they fly then, when all the world becomes Gods jayle, and every creature
becomes his jaylour? yea, the shower that does attend Christ's coming to
judgment is a shower of snares; Psalm. 7. Amos 5.19.
and the Prophets, Amos especially, does excellently show the vanity of this
flight, It shall be as if a man did fly from a Lion, and a Bear met him, and
he runs from the Bear unto a wall, and there a Serpent biteth him, that is,
whithersoeuer he turn, he shall find those that will seize upon him, he cannot
possibly escape, not by flying corporally. He must then fly spiritually; and
indeed it is spiritual flight that is the Remedy. But what is spiritual
flight? Surely we must conceive and be in travel with amendment of our
lives, and never stop until we have brought forth a complete spirit of
salvation; that is, we must fly from sin, and fly unto grace, in both which
consists the flight from wrath. Quem poenit et peccati iram Der mortalem
facit. Lactantius de ira D^^.
He that judges himself in this world, he whose heart is pricked with remorse
of sin, whose heart trembles, melts, and is broken with the fear of Gods
wrath, he that sings the song of mercy, and lays hold upon the
Mercie-seat, desiring to be made a vessel of mercy, this man flies, and the
more he exercises himself in these, the swifter he flies from the wrath to
come.

But to come closer to the text; flight from the wrath to come is the benefit
of Baptism; for these Jews came to the Baptism, and Saint John moving then
this question thereupon does show that flight from the wrath to come is the
right use of Baptism; Baptismus aqua est sed quae igne^ aeternum possit
extinguere.
which Nazianzen does wittily intimate, when he says, that Baptism is such a
water as is able to quench the eternal fire; Saint Peter more plain in his
Parallel of Baptism to Noah's Arc shows, that in Baptism there is to be
considered, not the washing away of the filth of our flesh, but a good
Conscience makes request unto God through the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
This is the manner of flight.

But from what must we fly? Mark; From wrath, from wrath to come. From
wrath; there is the stroke which we feel, and the stamp of Gods displeasure
in that stroke; that wherewith we must be moved most, and from which we must
especially fly is Gods displeasure, which is the sharpest part of the stroke.
As good men out of grace in this world when they repent do grieve more, for
that they have offended God, then that they have cast themselves in danger of
Hell: so by Gods providence, to the damned shall the loss of Gods favor be
more gricuous then the torments of Hell, which is answerable to the nature of
sin, wherein auersion from God is more grievous then the conversion to the
world, therefore in our flight our eye must be principally not upon the
stripes which we might feel, but upon Gods disfavor. Thus must we fly from
wrath.

And our flying from it must be whiles it is yet wrath to come, no flying from
it when it is present; there is no Oil to be bought by the foolish Virgins
when the Bridegroom is come; Noah entered the Arc before the flood came; Lot
went out of Sodom before it rained fire and brimstone; the children of Israel
sprinkled the blood of the Paschall Lamb on their doors before the destroying
Angel slew the firstborn of Egypt; in Ezekiel, in the Revelation the
servants of God are marked and sealed before Gods wrath is executed; all these
are but Types signifying, that if we mean to escape, we must take advantage
of the time, agree with our Adversary in the way, Luke 12.
left he pass us over to the Judge, the Judge to the Serieant, the Serieant
to the Jailer, never to be released until we have paid the utmost farthing,
then has God no ears to hear our cry, no eyes to pity our state, but
Wisdom will laugh at our destruction, and rejoice when our fear comes;
wherefore provide Physic before thou art sick, and Righteousness before
Judgment.

You have heard the Evil and the Remedy; the misery of these Jews was this,
that they wanted this Remedy; and why? They wanted one that should forewarne
them to fly. We can cast our selves into danger, but foresee that whereof we
are in danger we cannot; it is the Devils policy to hoodwinke us in this
respect, or to bus^e us with other objects, lest we should be reclaimed by
this; therefore it is Gods second mercy that we have forewarners. The word
signifies to show and to foreshew; Intus apparens excludit alienum.
to show, to Sense, and Reason. Touching our Sense that Axiom is true; If
there be any Object that busieth it, other Objects are not discerned by it; Now
he that draws us into sin, takes order that we shall not want variety
of other objects, therefore this object needs a Remembrancer; we need have a
Map of Hell to be set before us (not such an apish, or rather impious one, as
is depainted in the Jesuits Chamber of Meditations, whereby they make
Proselytes, treacherous Proselytes, such as this Age has had too much proof
of) but such a Map as the Scripture makes, and which by the finger of the
Spirit is able to make a solid impression in our souls, as it is excellently
described in Job. Chap. 33.
So must he show to Sense.

There is a showing also to Reason; for even when we see these things flesh and
blood has sophisters wherewith to stay this flight; they that do not deny
there is a Hell, yet think that Gods providence does not see them amongst so
many thousands, or cares not for that which they do; therefore there must be a
confutation of that sophistry, such a one as is Psalm. 94. Understand ye
brutish among the people, and ye fools when will ye be wise? He that planted
the ear, shall not he hear? and he that framed the eye, shall not he see?
He that chasteneth the Heathen, shall not he correct? Thus must the
forewarner show.

Neither show only but foreshew also; for if there be no flying but from the
wrath to come, then before the wrath come it must be shown, for when it is
present, it shall need no showing; the testimony of our own conscience shall
the clear our fancy, (...).
and resolve our reason; our sense shall then have nothing else to apprehend,
neither shall our reason cast any doubts of the truth thereof; whosoever then
is judged of God, (...).
shall also be condemned of his own conscience, he shall set to his seal
That, God is true, and that his Judgments are most just; you have such a
confession in the fifth of Wisdom. Foreshew then he must. But all foreshewing
is not enough; for many can endure to see it afar off, Amos 6.3.
as they in Amos that did not deny but put far off the evil day; and so the
evil servant in the Gospel, My Master will come, but after a long time;
therefore the word here used signifies to foreshew a thing imminent, (...);
who has foreshewed you to fly from the wrath hanging over your heads? that
the Judge is at the door? that ye are at the gate of Hell? such a kind of
foreshewing is that that will shake off carnal security, and will if any
thing, make men betake themselves to this flight.

Finally, mark that the forewarning must be not only of the wrath to come, but
also of the flight. If the forewarning were only of the wrath to come, and we
had only the torments of Hell set before our eyes, what could this do but make
us at our wits end, and ouerwhelme us with despair? but here is the comfort of
the forewarning, that it sets before us the flight also; and as it fixes
one eye upon the danger to humble us: so does it the other upon the Remedy
wherewith it is Gods pleasure to relieve us. The Ministers (for they are
chiefly these Forewarners) have two branches of their power, to bind, to loose;
to bind the obstinate to the wrath to come, and to loose all those that will
make use of the flight, amongst which these Jews were none; For who has
forewarned you? says Saint John unto them. Before I come to the question, I
must a little describe the persons; they were Sadduces and Pharisees. There are
but two extremities of Religion into which men run, Superstition and Atheism;
these fell, the one, that is the Pharisees, into the one extremity; and the
other, that is the Saduces, into the other extremity. Now sins are of two
sorts; some whose nature is in opposition to the flying from the wrath to come,
and some which are such as they do not exclude the same. A Drunkard, an
Adulterer, a Murderer are grievous sinners, and in danger of the wrath to come,
but the Principles are not corrupted upon which the forewarner must work when
he persuades then to fly; they do believe the judgment to come, and in
cold blood will easily believe that there is evil in their lives; therefore
upon such, good counsel may work, and we see daily that many such are
reclaimed. But there are many whose sins are opposite unto this counsel of
flying, either because they think there is no wrath to come, as the Saducee,
or that they are out of danger of it, as the Pharisee, upon such it is hard
working.

Now come to the question, Who has forewarned you? I am not ignorant, that
sundry Writers, ancient and later, suppose that this is Quaestio admirantis,
and make Saint John Baptist, who received all others quietly, when these
persons came, to stand amazed, and wondering, Is it possible? has Gods grace
prevailed with Saduces, with Pharisees? and will they also be Christ's
Disciples? Is Saul among the Prophets? Can he that thought there was no Hell,
be brought to fly from Hell? and he that thought himself righteous provide
against the Judgment day? Surely such examples are rare, not that God does not
yeil^ some, to show nothing is impossible to his grace; but he yeildeth but
few, because men should take heed of such sins; and we see by experience how
Pharisaisme in Papists, and in Atheists Saducisme, frustrate the labors of
many painful Forewarners, the corrupt Principles of their conscience hinder
their preuayling Who forewarne them to fly from the wrath to come.

But I take the Question rather to be Negative, and that, as Christ often, so
Saint John here does detect their hypocrisy, and tells them that they aimed
little at that which was intended by Baptism. The Kingdom of God happily in
their sense, they could be content to enter into by the Baptism of Saint
John, for their Messiah was to be a worldly King; or if so be they thought
upon wrath which they desired to escape, it was wrath present, not wrath to
come, the wrath of men not the wrath of God; they would shake off the yoke of
the Romans, they feared not the pains of Hell; when they perceived that Saint
John's Baptism sorted not with their desire, it is observed that they despised
it to their destruction; and when Christ asked them, Whether it were of heaven
or of men? they durst not answer him from Heaven, least Christ should come
upon them with Why did you not then believe it? Add hereunto that it is not
likely Saint John would have reproched them with these words generation of
Vipers had there not bin hypocrisy in them. I conclude then, that the Question
contains a negation, and that S. John herein does set forth the second evil
of these Jews, They wanted means of forewarning which might apply to them the
Remedy, which God has appointed against the wrath to come. Matthew. 21. v 25
(...). Orat. 31. p. 501.
Nazianzen observes well, It is not the Nation but the disposition that makes
a Pharisee; every Country may have Pharisees and Saduces, for it is not the
name of a Nation but a conversation, and therefore this question may concern
us, and we must inquire into our selves whether we have either a Pharisees or
a Saduces disposition. And indeed we shall find too many of both, Heretics,
Atheists, upon whom Forewarners cannot work, and if we be better disposed, we
must acknowledge Gods great mercy, that as he has appointed wrath, so he
has appointed a Remedy; we must learn both of our Forewarners, and so
learn both, that we be the better for them, and escape the vengeance that is to
come.

The sum of all is, sins and punishments are not inseparable, God has set
a space between them, and appointed a Remedy to the one for the avoiding of
the other; for the knowledge hereof he referres us to our spiritual Pastors,
and we must take heed we have neither Saduces nor Pharisees ears, which may
make us incapable of their forewarnings.

O Lord that have appointed Forwarners to thy Church, so bless their pains,
that they may fix our thoughts on, and resolve our reason of that wrath which
is to come; not only the sight of it, but also the flight from it. Let us not
despise the riches of thy goodness, forbearance, and long-suffering, nor with
hard and impenitent hearts treasure up unto our selves wrath against the day of
wrath; Romans 2. Eccles. 18.
but knowing that thy goodness leads us to repentance, let us so think upon
the wrath that shall be at the end, that we may fly from sin to grace, and
so be thought worthy to escape this evil, and stand in the last day with
comfort before the Son of man; stand for ever to give glory unto thee the
Father of mercy, through Jesus Christ our only means to obtain this mercy,
in the Communion of the holy spirit, who only teaches us to make the right use
of this mercy. Amen. The third Sermon.
LVKE 3. VERSE 8. Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of Repentance.


SAint John Baptist has in his Sermon hitherto showed the Jews of their bad
case, in regard both of sin and woe. If he had here ended, he should rather
have seemed to be a minister of Moses then an harbinger of Christ; and
although happily he might have awakned the worm of Conscience to bite them
with the terrors of the Law; yet should he not have answered his fathers
prophecy by giving light to them that sit darkness, Luke 1.
and in the shadow of death, and guiding their feet into the way of peace;
wherefore to show that he came indeed in the spirit of Elias, and meant to
turn the hearts of the fathers toward their children, Malachi. 4.6.
and the children toward their fathers, before the Lord came and smote the
earth with cursing; as he impartially gave the Jews to understand the evil of
their case: so does he carefully endeavor to set them in a better course.

The ground and scope of his words is in effect this. Every Jew is to have a
double being in the Covenant, an hereditarie, a possessorie; in that he is the
of spring of Abraham he has a title to the promises, but possession of that
whereunto he is entitled he has none, except he partake of the same grace that
was in the Patriarch. These two must concur, they cannot be severed without
danger; danger, not to the Covenant, for God will be true though all the World
be liars, Rom 3 4.
but unto so many as were graceless Jews; although they vaunted that they
were Abraham's seed, yet were they never to come into Abraham's bosom.
Wherefore seeing the Jews did divorce these things which God would have
conjoined, Saint John advises them to correct this error, and to begin to
tread Abraham's steps, least otherwise they be nothing the better for being
Abraham's sons. So then the Baptists exhortation has two parts; the first
teaches what these Jews ought to intend, the second, upon what they may not
stand. That which they ought to intend is Penitencie; that whereupon they may
not stand is their Pedigree; at this time only of the former.

That which the Jews ought to intend is expressed in these words, Bring forth
therefore fruits worthy of repentance, wherein we are to observe, first the
Inference, then the Argument. The Inference; S. John gathers this counsel
out of his former reproof, and wishes them to take a better course, because
they were in so bad a case; this is the force of the particle therefore. In the
argument we have the works, and an answerablenesse that must be between them;
the works are two, Gods, and man's, God gives Repentance, which man must
employ in bringing forth fruits. The answerablenesse is, Man's work must keep
good correspondencie with Gods; Men must bring forth fruits such as are worthy
of repentance. Of these points briefly and in their order; I begin with the
Inference.

Although in the fits and heat of our passions it seem otherwise, yet is it a
grounded truth, that there is no man except he be given over to a reprobate
sense, which does not naturally abhor to be either wicked or a wretch. You may
perceive it by his judgment in cold blood; And ^o peccanti o^endere mala su^,
vitia si non excidero inhibeho Seneca Epist. 40
certainly reason does acknowledge this to be so true, that Seneca thought one
of the best means to reclaim a man that goes a stray, was to set his case
before him; though I shall little please (says he) yet I will be bold to let
him that erreth know his fault, for it is likely that thereupon if he do not
presently turn, Tunc melius proteruns coriqimus, etc Gre^. Mag in and astor.
yet he will at least make a stand. Gregory the great a better Author
speaks in the voice of Religion; we cannot take a better course to reclaim
untoward natures then if we show them how ill they do, when they suppose they
do well, and turn their vain glory into a profitable shame. The holy Ghost
master both of reason and Religion, is the guide unto them both. For in the
Scriptures we find that the Prophets seldom show what God requires before
they have showed the Jews what they want; they preface the doctrine of that
which they should be with a former doctrine of that which they were; the
instances are every where to be found, I will allege some few; God himself
when he deals with Adam after his fall begins with, Where art thou? The
fathers Commentary is not unfit, Non modo vbi loci sed vbi conditionis.
God demands of him not only in what place, but in what case he was. Surely
their Commentary is made probable by Adams answer; for Adam does answer as
well in what case, I was naked, as in what place he was, I hid my self.
Wisdom in the first of the Proverbs deals thus plainly with men, How long
ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and ye scorners delight in
scorning? Our Savior Christ uses the same method in his Epistle unto the
Church of Laodicea, (...) 3.
Thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Thus they
all set before their eyes with whom they deal, as Saint John Baptist does,
their poor, and woeful case. But they rest not therein, but proceed from the
reproose unto the remedy, as S. John Baptist does, least other wise they should
seem rather to reproach then to reprove, to insult upon them rather then to
correct them. Nemo prudens punti quod peccatum sit, sed ne peccetur.
It is not so much as good Policy, much less Piety to punish because men
have offended, they should rather provide by punishments that they offend no
more; and therefore are chastisments called corrections, because they are not so
much afflictions for as preuentions from committing sin. Now reproves are
Verbal punishments, therefore they must imitate them, so show a disease, as
that withal they prescribe the cure thereof, 1. Sam 2.6
imitating God, who, as Anno speaks, kills and makes alive again.
Certainly he which asked Adam, where are thou? Relieved him again with, the
seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head; and Wisdom that began with,
How long will ye fools delight in folly, etc. concludes with, Turn you at
my reproof, I will power out of my spirit upon you, I will make known my
words unto you; And our Savior Christ, least he should seem to vpbraid the
Laodiceans offers them a present supply of gold, of raiment, of eye-salue,
Rnuel. 3.
of whatsoever they did want. Certainly if so be we add the means how they
may recover whom we reprove, we are most likely to speed of their amendment;
for the remedy prescribed is an evidence that the reproof proceeded from
Love, and the reprehender may say with S. Paul, 1. Cor 4
I wrote not these things to shame you, but as my beloved I warn you: and Love
is so necessary in reproof, that Saint Austin is of opinion, That no man
should reprove except he first strictly examine his conscience whether he do
it out of Love; I add, that this Love must be made evident by the care that
we show of the reproueds good. The reason is plain; for although the inborne
principles before specified, I mean our natural desire of goodness and
happiness make us capable in our worst case of good counsel: yet whether the
counsel that is given us be for our good we argue oftener from the person,
then from the things; and our jealousy of the person is a prejudice to his
words, and stops us from deliberating upon the truth of his reproof;
whereas on the contrary side the Love of the person does open our ears, and
be his words never so tart, they sink down into our soul, and our most
stubbourne affections are contented to be wrought by them, Let the righteous
reprove me (says the Psalmist) and it shall be a precious balm: and Saint
Austin, Love me and say what thou will; let it appear that they mean our
good, and it shall not grieve us if we be blamed so much as we deserve. I note
this the rather, because I wish that all Ministers would herein follow Saint
John Baptist, and neither smother sin which is no farther hated then it is
known, nor yet neglect Christian wisdom to win a sinner, who seldom
distasteth the Law if it be seasoned with the Gospel, neither murmureth at the
reproof, if it do not degenerate into a reproach; If any thing will reclaim,
it is the prescribing of a good course coupled with the description of a
sinners bad case, Eccles. 12.1^
so the words of the wise will prove as goades, and as nails fastened by the
Masters of the assemblies which are given from one shepherd, they will hasten
us speedily, and couple us most firmly unto the Church, and our Savior Christ.
And thus much of the Inference.

I come now to the Argument of the words, where of the first branch was the
Works, they are two; the first is Gods, He gives repentance. Though the
Author be not expressed, yet is he necessarily to be understood, the Apostle is
clear for it, 2. Tim. 4.
The servant of God must meekely instruct those that are contrary minded,
trying if God at any time will grant them repentance; and were not the Text so
plain, the nature of the Work puts it out of all doubt; for what is
repentance but the Souls rising from death to life, and no man ever quickened
his own soul, he must leave that to God for ever, the same God that made man
after his Image, must repair his Image in man, and therefore in the Psalm and
in the Apostle it is plainly called a Creation.

But because the Author is not expressed in my Text, I forbear further to
speak of him, and come unto the Work, his Work is Repentance.

The Grecians (according to Lactantius) speak better and more significantly
that use the word (...), Lactan. Lib 7.
then the Latins that use Paenitentia. Tertullian before him writing against
Marcion, presses the significancie of the Greek word, and because words do
lead us to the understanding of things, we will a little look into the word,
it may happily make us to sound the things much better. (...) comes from
(...), and (...) does signify properly the first faculty of the reasonable
soul, but by a Trope it is used oftentimes to note the whole: whereupon (...)
signifies a change of the mind, signifies a change either of the
understanding, or jointly of the will also. The understanding of man is the
first moouer in the whole course of his life, because nothing is desired which
is unknown, our Appetite and our Will stir not except they be informed of
some thing which may occasion their stirring, and informed they can not be but
by the understanding. Now the understanding for want either of light or care
does very often mistake, and then the Will that takes all upon trust, must
needs go astray, and we are called to a reuiew of our ways, Men's recitit se
ab insania.
and upon after thoughts alter our judgments, or, as Lactantius speaks in
the place before cited, after a fit of madness we come to our wits again.
This is the first kind of of (...), or changing of our mind. But use has
obtained and the practice of the Scripture which is the best Commentary upon
the words to take (...) in thesecond sense, for the changing of the whole
reasonable Soul, and then it is compounded of (...) and (...), the change of
understanding, and of the will; Inclinatio ^oluntatis st inclinatio totius su
posits (...) intell (...) tot^^ ^uppositi in(...).
and indeed seldom do they go asunder; for as it is true, that whither the
will bends thither the whole man inclines; so it is as true, that our
understanding cannot be resolved, but it carries us with it; which way so ever
either of them incline, they usually earie the whole man, though in a different
manner; the will by compulsion, and the understanding by persuasion; so that we
may not restrain this change to the one faculty but extend it also to the
other, and by them to the whole man. Adbi^ent penitentiam in bonis facti^ sa^^,
and citius ^er (...) delinquunt quam recte faciunt.
But Tertullian does give us a good observation telling us that the Heathen, or
those that are without the Church, often change their mind, and do repent, but
it is of their good deeds, of their temperancie, truth, liberality, fidelity,
and more usually do they change from better to worse, then from worse to
better. He observes it of them that are without the Church, I would it never
had been, or now were not also true of them that are within the Church: how
many Jews have uncircumcised themselves, and how many have vnchristianed
themselves, that were sometimes members of the Church? How many do daily
return like Dogs to their vomit, and like Swine to their wallowing in the
mire? yea how few are there of us that do not oftener sorrow for some thing
which we have done well, then for many things which we have done ill? unto whom
I must remember that of Saint Peter; It were better never to have known the
way of righteousness, then after we have entered it, to turn from it. 2 Epist.
cap. 2.
Tertullian gives the reason, for they (says he) that repent of their
Repentance toward God, by how much they shall be more acceptable to the
devil to whom they come, by so much they shall be more odious unto God from
whom they go. Wherefore we must add one clause more to the definition of
Repentance, and not only hold it to be a change of the mind, but as
Nazianzene, and Theophylact; (...), Naz. Iamb. Non est simplex mutatio animi,
sed mutatio in meliorem sententiam. Romans 12.
Repentance is not only a change of man, but a change from worse to better.
Saint Paul opens the change very plainly, fashion not (says he) yourselues
like unto this present world, but be ye changed by the renewing of your mind,
wherein he shows us that as in sin, so in Repentance, there is a whence and
a whither. Sin is an auersion from God, and a conversion to the world: so
likewise Repentance must shake off the world, and embrace God. Nazianzene
sets it forth in a very fit resemblance, Orat. 40.
comparing the Soul of a man to a pair of writing tables, out of which must
be wathed whatsoever was written with sin, and instead thereof must be entered
the writing of grace; both these are necessary in Repentance, God has
dedicated both parts in his own Repentance; for as when he repentech of the
evil intended against us, he does not only give over to hate us, but also
does embrace us with Love: even so when we repent of our sins against God,
we must not only cease for to hate him, but begin to Love him also.
Secondly, Christ founded both these parts in our Redemption, for He dyed and
rose again; Saint Paul tells us there is a moral in that mystery, it
lessoneth us to dye, unto sin, and to rise unto righteousness; finally the
Sacrament of Baptism, which in the Scripture is called the Baptism of
repentance Symbolically preaches both unto unto us, the dipping into the
water, and the taking out of the water what does it figure but the drowning of
sin, and the recovering of a sinner? The use that we must make hereof is, that
we must not only desire to be rid of the unclean spirit, but also to be
possessed of the holy Ghost; if we do not change one for the other, we are not
changed so fully as we ought to be; and we must fear his doom out of whom
the unclean spirit was cast in the Gospel, whom because the holy Ghost
succeeded not, the foul spirit repossest the person with seven worse then
himself, Matthew. 12.
and made the latter end of that man worse then his beginning. And thus much of
the nature of Repentance, which is the first work, Gods work, which changes
us from bad to good, not only cleansing sin, but also giving grace.

I come now to the second work, which is man's work; in handling whereof we
must consider the Order and the Nature of it; A word of the order. Gods work
goes before man's, man could never do good, if God did not first make him
good; as truly as the dew does first fall from heaven, before there can be
fatness in the earth: Psalm. 1.
even so must Gods grace change man before any alteration will appear in the
conversation of man, the tree must be planted by the Rivers of waters, Ephesians.
2.10.
before it can bring forth her fruits, and we must be Gods workmanship
created unto good works, before we can walk in them. We must not therefore
take such pleasure in beholding the Tree be it never so richly laden with
fruits, as to forget the root which yields the juice, without which the
Tree could bear no fruit; we must so regard man's work that we give the
precedencie always to Gods, and acknowledge this to be the off spring of
that; but enough of the Order.

I come now to the Work, which is bearing of fruits. That which is here
called fruits, Acts 26. is called works, whereby we gather that good works
are fruits; and indeed only good works deserve this name, for if Saint
Austins definition be true, Fructus est quo quis cum gaudio fruitur.
That is fruit which a man may with comfort enjoy, how should sin be reputed
fruits? Who can take any content in it? Not the sinner himself; for though it
be sweet in his mouth (as Job speaks) yet when it comes down into his
maw, Job 20.
it turns into gall of Aspes; Deuteronomy 22.
well does Moses compare it to the fruits of Sodom and Gomorrah, for as the
Book of Wisdom describes that fruit, fair on the out side, but the inside
nothing else but cinders: even so the appearance of sin is pleasant, but the
substance of it is very unsavory. If only our lusts should be judges,
howsoever at first they taste it as fruit, yet even they also loath it, if they
be long used to it; but if they swallow it, and find no offense in it, as too
often they do, yet when it comes to our conscience, and thither sooner or
later it must come, Saint Paul's question will then come seasonably, Tom. 6.21.
What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? Sins
then may not pass for fruits, fruits properly so called; this title belongs
only to good works, they are fruits indeed, they may say as the Vine in the
Iudgess They cheer God and Men; Chap. 9.
God takes delight in them, they are to him a sacrifice of a sweet smell, yea,
he takes as much content in them as if he did feed upon them; we learn it in
the fiftieth Psalm, Think thou (says God) that I will eat Bulls flesh, and
drink the blood of Goats? Offer unto God praise, and call upon his Name; in
denying the former, he acknowledges the later to be his food; not that God is
the better for ought we do, but so is he pleased for to honor our works, as
the Angels that came to Abraham did partake of his me^te, not to refresh
themselves but to do him honor.

As God accepts them for fruits: so are they fruits unto men also, unto others,
and unto our selves, but with this difference, that whereas God was not the
better for them, men are; other men by our good works are either brought to
goodness, or confirmed therein; and as for our selves we grow thereby in
grace and favor with God, and feel more comfortable joy in our own souls;
therefore well may good works bear the name of fruits. And I the very name of
fruits distinguishing good works from bad, contains a good motive to do
well, and forbear sin; for, Who would labor for naught, and spend his
strength in vain, being not to have so much as his labor for his pain? for
he must write upon his wages not only vanity but also vexation of spirit. And
again, Who would be weary of well doing, that knows his labor is not in
vain, but that in good time he shall eat the fruit of his labors; O well is
he, and happy shall he be.

But we must mark that our work is called fruit and not flowers, not but
that the flower goes before the fruit, but it is the hope of the fruit that
makes the flower to be esteemed, and God counts that flower little worth
that never comes to be fruit; we see this in the parable of the seed, where
that ground only goes for good, in which the feed gives not over until it be
fit for the Barn; and he that puiteth his hand to the Plough (says Christ in
the Gospel, Luke 9.6^.
and looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven. I observe this the
rather because here we may see many fair flowers, which in their youth show
good effects of their Governors care and pains, who no sooner are set at
liberty (as too often they are before the flowers become fruit) but they
wither and fail; neither Church, nor Commonwealth, nor themselves are the
better for their breeding; whom I would have to carry this Lesson with them,
That Goodness is not a flower, it is fruit, and they must as well ripen as
blossom; otherwise it will appear that God in them has done his work, but
they come short of their own. Neither is Goodness only called Fruit in the
singular number, but the word is plural, our work is many works, we must
bear Fruits; we must as the Apostle speaks) be fruitful in all good works.
Col 1.10.


The soul of a man is but one, but it quickens a body consisting of many
different members, all which it sets on work, the eye to see, the ear to
hear, the foot to go, etc. even so though the grace of God, which is the
soul of the soul of man be but one, yet does it animate the whole man, and
does as truly communicate good manners to the parts, as the Soul does Life.
Titus 2.
The grace of God which brings salvation unto all m^n, teaches us to deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and
godly, in this present world; Ephesians. 6.
hereupon Saint Paul bids us put on the whole armor of God, and to cast
away all works of darkness, and in another place, Whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are holy, Romans 13. Philip. (...)
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are of good report, think upon
these things. We must have not only a disposition to do well, but remember
that we are to do well more ways then one. The same God that commands one
virtue, commands all, and he will not have any part or power of man exempted
from his service. Which must be heeded by us, because there are few that are
of Saint Paul's mind, Philip. 3 13.
to forget those things that are behind, and make forward; no sooner have we
brought forth one good work but we fall in love with that, and there take up
our rest, and think that may serve instead of all; suffering Gods graces to be
idle, which are as well able to make a chast^cie, as a sober tongue, and an
obedient ear, as a diligent hand. Much more good might come from every man, if
he did not think he did good enough; therefore let us remember that nothing
must be accounted enough that is less then all; and that we set not
straighter bounds to our duties then those which are in Gods Law.

But we have not now to do in general with good works, my text restrains
me to works of repentance; I come then nearer to those. And although I hane
already opened unto you the nature of repentance, yet must I wade a little
farther in it, and branch it (as it were) into its kinds. The Law of God has
two parts, the Precept and the Sanction. The Sanction shows unto us the
danger of sin obliging unto punishment, from which we are not free but by
Justification; and this Justification is attended with Repentance, Repentance
that looks unto the guilt of sin, which cleaves unto the Act thereof. This
Repentance is that which is practiced in the times of Humiliation, when we
deprecate Gods wrath which is upon us, or hangs over us by reason of enormous
sins of the whole state, and of particular persons; (...) 2. Jonah 3.
such is that which is called for in Joel, and whereof we have the practice in
Jonah. The Primitive Church was well acquainted with it, as appears by the
Ecclesiastical story, the Canons of the first Councels, the writings of
Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian and others; our Church takes notice of it in a
part of the Liturgy, and wishes the public restitution of it. Tantae
seueritati non sumus pares.
But it is rather to be wished then hoped for. Notwithstanding, what is not
done in public by malefactors, should be supplied by better observance of
those days which are appointed weekly; and of those weeks which are appointed
yearly to be Poenitentiall; to be days and weeks of Fasting and Praying. We
cannot deny but crying sins are daily committed, and therefore Gods wrath
might daily be inflicted; The way to stay it, is to show that we are not
guilty thereof; and as he is not guilty by the Law of man which had no hand
in sin: so by the Law of God none go for not guilty, except they do
express a penitent sorrow that any should be so wretched as to commit the
sin. You remember how one Achan troubled all Israel, and his sin is laid
to all their charge, Joshua the seventh; and they were all made to sanctify
themselves from that sin; and how the unknown murder was expiated, we read
Deuteronomy. 21. there must be a feeling in us of other men's sins, a religious
feeling, seeing thereby they put not only themselves but us to in danger of
Gods wrath; and therefore though our conscience have no special burden of its
own, yet must it have of others, and endeavor to ease both it self and the
whole state thereof: And how may private men better do this, then by those
solemn acts of Humiliation, the only atonement which by faith in Christ we
can make with God? But Saint Paul's complaint may be renewed; 1. Cor. 5.
It is reported commonly that there is fornication, we may add, Murder,
Adultery, and any other enormeous sin; the seats of Judgment can witness
that our Land is fertile of all sorts; but as Saint Paul said, so will I, all
men are puffed up, and who does sorrow? The emptiness of our Churches upon
Fridayes and Wednesdayes, and other Fasting days, shows how little feeling
there is in us of the crying sins of our State; It were well if we had some
feeling of our own. But where is that Drunkard? where is that Adulterer! where
is that Murderer? where is that Blasphemer! that Usurer? that Oppressor? that
comes into Gods House bathed in his tears, broken in his heart, stripped of
his pride, humbled in his body, and making a real cry for mercy in the
ears of God? No, we come not so far as a vocal; our tongues cry not, God
be merciful to me a Sinner, which is but the voice of man: much less do
our sighs do it, which are the voice of Gods Spirit; we shame not to sin,
Regis admirabilem virtutem fecit multo splendidiorem, etc.
but to repent we are ashamed. Ashamed of that whereof we should glory;
surely Theodoret thought better of King David's repentance, when he pronounced
of it, There were many Heroical virtues in King David, but for none is he so
illustrious as for his repentance; so much more illustrious, by how much it is
a rarer thing to see a King come from his Throne clothed in sackcloth, sitting
in dust and ashes, feeding upon the bread of sorrow, and mingling his drink
with his tears, then to see him in state either uttering Proverbs like a
Solomon, or triumphing over his foes, as at other times he also did; Stultum
est i^e eo statu viuere in quo non audet quis Mori.
or doing any other act in the majesty of a King, But most men are ashamed of
this glory, and chose rather to glory in their shame, unto whom I will use
Saint Austines words; It is gross folly to live in that state in which a man
would be loath that death should take him; he adds; That the man which
dares go to bed with a conscience charged with the guilt of one enormous
sin, is much more desperate then he that dares lie unarmed with seven armed
men that are his deadly foes, for a sinner is less sure of his life then the
other. And yet how many such desperate ones are there in the world, that sleep
securely upon the brinke of Hell? Yea, how many, that inuring not themselves
daily to reconcile themselves to God, make a comfortless end, and are taken
before ever they have thought of making their peace? My exhortation is, that we
presume not so far upon Gods patience, as to neglect this kind of repentance.
But this is not an every days repentance. It has his times appointed by the
Church, if it be public; or if it be private, the times are assigned by a
man's own conscience.

There is another Repentance which attends Sanctification enjoined by the
precept of the Law; unto Sanctification, we make way by Mortification, and
this is an every days Repentance, which does not look to the Act of sin, as
the former, but to the Habit. Were it possible that there were no Act of sin
committed, then we should not need the first kind of Repentance: but yet this
second we should need, because the best bear about them a habit of sin.
Cecidimus super aceruum lapidum and in luto. Bern. Sermon. de Coena Domini.
Saint Bernard sets it thus before our eyes; When Adam fell, and when every
one of us does fall, be may be compared unto a man that falls not only into
the mire, but also upon a heap of stones; he may quickly be washed, but not
so quickly healed, there is great time spent therein, even the whole time of
our life: we must begin our Repentance at Baptism, which we must continue
until our death. As there be many other reasons why the Church is compared to
the Moon, and Christ to the Sun, so one may be, The odds between
Justification and Sanctification; Justification makes Christ's righteousness
ours, and it is from the first moment at the full, not capable of any increase;
but Sanctification is Righteousness in us, which if it have not his waines,
certainly it has its waxings, and will not be at the full, till the day of our
death. This fruit is nothing else but the putting off the old man; (...) 4 ^2.
G^^. 5 24. Romans 6 6.
the crucifying of the flesh with the lusts thereof; the casting away of the
sin which cleaves on so fast; the abolishing of the whole body of sin.
He that neglects this, Rom 12.1.
forgets that a Christian, must offer up his body a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God; that the name of a Christian is the name of Justice,
Goodness, Sincerity, Chastity, Humility; for what else are these but drops
of that Oil wherewith he is anointed? I might amplify this point; Rom 8 22.
but I hasten to that which follows, only observing that of Saint Paul; Every
creature groaneth, desiring the liberty of the Sons of God, and therefore it
is a shame for the sons of God not to bear a part in this mourning, but to
stand still as if they made no haste to Heaven, and had no desire to be that
whereunto they are called. It was not so with Christians of old, I report me
to the Character of the Church (as Epiphanius calls it, and describes it in
the last Chapter of his third Book) but specially to Gregory Nyssenes Oration
of Baptism, where he brings in a baptized Christian thus resisting the
temptations of the Devil; A vaunt thou wicked fiend, I am dead, and can a dead
man be moved with those things which he affected when he was alive? When I was
alive I could riot, I couldlie, etc. can a dead man do these things?
Certainly, when we look upon our selves, and see how common sins are
amongst us, the rankness, the plenty of the fruit that we bear, shows that
the sinful root is not dead in us; and the scarcity of good fruit shows
that the root of grace is not alive. So that our Abrenunciation was but in
word, that it was not indeed it appears by the raritie of our Mortification.
I conclude with the exhortation of Saint Paul, C^^os 3.5.
Let us therefore mortify our m^mbers which are upon the earth, formication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, Rom 13.14.
evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is Idolatry; and let us take no
more care for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.

You have heard what is our work, There remain two things yet, The one is the
Commandment to do it, the other is the degree in which we must perform it,
Men do not light a Candle to put it under a bushel, neither does God give
grace but for the use. But the phrase in English is scant, it seems only to
call for worke^ in the sight of men; but the Greek (...) is of a larger
extent, and may reach those things which can be discerned only by the sight of
God. And indeed the Fruits are inward, or outward; for there is a worke-house
in the inward Closet of our heart, where we must fructify, and lay the
foundation of those works which we do in the outward man; all our outward
deeds should be but deeds of deeds, the deeds outward have no more value then
they receive from the inward. Qu^salu^ mente peecat ^a (...) ven^^ in Gh^noam
de^^^detur. Tertullian. O^^t. de Baptismo.
But we must not be contented only with the inward, we must bring forth the
outward also: He that has an inside for God, and an outside for the Devil,
may with his pardon be cast into Hell; we must therefore show some outward
evidence of the efficacy of grace.

Gregory Nyssen sets it forth excellently; Come on you (says he) which
glory in your Baptism, how shall it appear that the mystical grace has
altered you? In your countenance there appears no change, nor in your outward
lineaments, how then shall your friends perceive that you are not the same? I
suppose no other way but by your manners; they must show that you are not what
you were, when you are tempted with the same sins whereunto before you were
subject, and yet forbear them. It is reported of one of the worthiest of the
Ancients, that before his conversion had kept company with a strumpet, when
after his conversion she came toward him, he sted; she calls after him,
Whither flyest thou? (...) 2.10.
It is (...) his answer was But I am not I: And indeed every one should say
with Saint Paul; I line, yet not I now; but Jesus Christ lives in me; and let
every one that is in Jesus Christ become a new creature. And so I come from the
Commandment to the degree. There must be an answerablenesse between Gods
work and ours, It is not enough to bring forth fruits they must be worthy of
Repentance.

(...) (says a learned Interpreter) has his name from (...) and is a Metaphor
taken from balances when one seal does counterpoize another; the Syriacke
word seems to sound that way also. But Etymologies do not always yield good
grounds of Divinity, It is well if there be a correspondencie, an equality
is more then may be hoped for between Gods work and ours. Which I observe
the rather, because the Rhemish note finds Sacisfactorie works in this word,
forgetting their own Dininitie which makes Satisfaction attend penance, but
not the Sacrament of Baptism. But to leave them, and deliver the truth
concerning Repentance. We must observe that in sin there are two things: the
Guilt and the Act of sin; the Guilt infinite, the Act finite. Nothing can
worthily satisfy for the Guilt, but only the precious death of Jesus Christ,
his Blood only is the propitiation for our sins. But the Act is finite wherewith
we sin and so is the Act wherewith we repent; between these Acts we should
endeavor to show an emulation; so that look what pleasure we took in sin
against God, so much sorrow should we express when we return again unto God;
he that sins a great sin must not think it enough to sorrow as he does
for a small one; Peter wept, but be wept bitterly, because he had sinned
grievously; and King David wore out his eyes, and watered his Couch with his
tears sorrowing for those sins wherewith he had provoked God. But let us
draw this through both parts of Repentance, Mul o firmior est Fides and
Charitas quam repoint I ^enit^ntia Lactantius. Vitque Deo gratior amore ardens
pest culpam vita, quam securitate torpens innocentia. Gregorius.
and see how the degree must appear in them. In the first; of solemn
Repentance, the rule is, If a man slip in his faith or love of God, and
recover, he will cleave faster unto God, and love him mere ardently, and he
pleases God the better when his love after a recovery grows zealous, then
when in innocence it grows lukewarm. As in the body of a man, if an arm
or leg be broken, and be well set again, it grows the stronger. Take an
example from Saint Paul, who as he was a bloody persecutor, so did he prove a
most painful Apostle, and most patient Martyr. Saint Austines Confessions
show, how erroneous in judgment, how dissolute in life, he had been; but
since the Apostles days, never had the Church a better Bishop then was Saint
Austin. But if we should look for this degree in this age, we might happily
seek long, but scarce find any parallel; not but that there are every where
those that exceed them in sin, but of those that imitate them in Repentance
we find none; no Adulterers that so change as to become markable spectacles of
Continency; no Oppressors that turn Deacons, and minister out of their goods
to the necessity of the poor; no Drunkards that pinch their bodies with
Fasting and Abstinence; He that has not committed unlawful things, may be bold
to use the lawful blessings of God, and notwithstanding perform acceptable
works of Piety; but he that has been a Fornicator, an Adulterer, etc. must
go as far in abstaining from the contentments of this life, which are
otherwise allowed him, as he has exceeded in the use of them. (...).
But this Rule is grown too much out of date, and we think that so we repent,
it matters not in what degree we repent; and so we make a real Confession,
that howsoever we do turn to God; yet we are afraid to be too far
estranged from our sin. Wherein God does not obtain so much of man as the
Devil does. For when a good man degenerateth he keeps no mean, but
commonly strives to be the worst, plunging himself most deeply into sin,
and persecuting goodness and good men most bitterly. It were to be wished that
our zeal that turn unto God were no worse in the love of goodness, and the
hatred of sin: But it is rather to be wished then hoped for. The Reason of it
lies in our neglect of that degree which should be in the second kind of
Repentance; for if we did affect that, we would be more apt unto this.

The Degree of the second kind of Repentance, is when a man's outward life
strives to be answerable to his inward calling. It is strange to see how in
worldly state every man strives to live futably to his rank, and is
accounted base if he do not so; if of a Yeoman he become a Gentleman, of a
Gentleman a Knight, as his person is improued, so will he improve his port
also; yea, the excesses of all sorts of men show, that herein every man goes
beyond his rank, in his house, in his fare, in his clothes. But in our
spiritual state it is nothing so; for our house, we can be contented to dwell
in seeled houses, when the Ark of God is under Tents; and who does endeavor
that himself may be a Temple fit for God? As for our Clothes, they should be
royal, our Garments should ever be white, the wedding Garment should never be
off; but we are so far from covering our nakedness with convenient robes,
that it appears not in the eyes of God, as that we take no care to hide our
filthiness from men. Certainly we do not endeavor to be clothed with the
righteousness of Saints. Finally, for our diet, we that are called to the
Table of the Lord, and should be sustained with Angels food, content our selves
with Swines meat; for what else are filthy lusts? Wherein we are so much
worse then the prodigal child, in that he did desire them, and no man gave
them to him, we have our sils; his was desired of necessity, but our food is
voluntary. In a word, we are called to be sons of God, our eye is seldom
upon our Father, to see what beseems his Sons; we are called to be members
of Christ, but little do we care what beseems that Mystical Body; we
rather are in name then in deed either Children of God, or Members of Christ. I
conclude this point with Nazianzens Admonition; we may not counterfeit our
purity, but have it remarkable and illustrious, we must have our souls
perfectly died with grace. Let us walk worthy of that vocation whereunto we
are called.

This lesson belongs to them that are of age; between whom and infants there
is this difference, that (...) Repentance, which is Gods work, is enough for
Infants, but bring forth fruit belongs to them that are of riper age. If time
be granted unto us after our Conversion, it is granted to the end that by our
good Conversation we may set forth the virtues of him that has called us into
his maruailous light. And we should think it enough, if not too much, that we
have spent the time past in those lusts that are unbeseeming Christians; but
we may use that saying of the Apostle; Romans 2.5.
Know you not that the patience and longsuffering of God draws you to
Repentance, but you, after your hearts that cannot repent treasure unto your
selves wrath against the day of wrath. Repentance should be used while we may
sin, for then it will be fruitful and medicinal, because we leave sin
before sin leaves us, but if we will then use Repentance when we can sin
no more, our Repentance will be unfruitful and only penal. And indeed, they
which will not use Repentance in this World fruitfully, shall, will they nill
they, repent in the World to come, but it will be unfruitfully; they will not
weep here for their sins, but in Hell they shall both weep and gnash their
teeth; they will not here manicle and fetter their lusts, but there they shall
be bound both hands and feet; they will not here purge their stubble and dross
with the fire of Gods Spirit, therefore hereafter they shall burn, and their
dross, their chafe shall be endless fuel of the flames of Hell. O then, let
me weep, let me repent, out of the love, and with the comfort of Jesus
Christ, that hereafter I be not driven to repent out of fear, and with the
pain of the fire of Hell.

The conclusion of all is, God by the sight of our evil moves us to a desire
of our good; when he preuenteth us with his grace, we must take care that we
receive not his grace in vain; and this shall we do, if we disparage not our
heavenly Conversion with an earthly Conversation.

LOrd graft in thy Preachers such Charity, that they may aim wisely at their
hearers good; and increase in their hearers that desire of goodness and
happiness which may make them capable of wholesome counsel: So shall the dew
of Heaven work fotnesse in the Earth, and we shall all grow in thy Church as
trees laden with abundance of fruit: when we sin, we shall repent, and we
shall repent also that we may not sin; until the Harvest day come, when thou
shall have reaped all the fruits thou requirest of us in this state of Grace,
and we shall begin to reap those fruits, which thou have premised unto us in
the state of Glory. Amen. The fourth Sermon.
LVKE 3. VERSE 8. And begin not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to
our father; for I say unto you that God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham.


OF the remedy of their Heart, which came to Saint John Baptist I have already
spoken; the next point is the remedy of their Heads, which takes up the
remainder of the Text. In applying this remedy, the Baptist does first open,
then correct their error: he opens it in their objection, and in his own
answer does correct it; their error was this vaunt, We have Abraham to our
Father, this they objected against the first part of John Baptists Sermon. But
the words are ellipticall, they include more then they express; you may gather
it out of the Baptists answer, which is the rust measure of their objection,
for what he corrects, in that they erred. Now he corrects in their
objection, Ignorance and Arrogancy, both double, double Ignorance, double
Arrogancy; double Ignorance, for they first maine, secondly misplace the
truth. They maime it, in that not knowing how much was requisite to the making
up of a child of Abraham, their words meant that they were wholly his, whereas
they were his but in part, and that too the worst part. Saint John corrects
this, he forbids their claim, say not we have Abraham to our father, you
have nothing in you worthy of so honorable a title. As they did maime the truth
through ignorance: so did they also through ignorance misplace it; they did
misplace it in beginning their defense at this claim. For although there be
comfort in being any ways a child of Abraham, yet the trial of our comfort
must begin at our resemblance of not our alliance unto Abraham; therefore Saint
John that corrected their defect in matter, corrects also their defect in
order, Begin not to say, let not this be the entrance to your Apology.

Having thus corrected their Ignorance, he goes on, and corrects their
Arrogancy. Arrogancy is the child of Ignorance; of the good things which we
think we have, the less we know the more we crake; certainly the Jews did,
they were doubly arrogant; first they did appropriate Abraham's family unto them
selves. As they thought them selves to be wholly his, so they thought none his
but themselves only, they held all other Nations vile, the Jews only to be
noble. And this first branch of Arrogancy sprang from the first branch of
their Ignorance, for indeed as they were children of Abraham, so none were
children but they. Saint John corrects this Arrogancy, and tells them that
there is no impediment in Gods power but Abraham may have, yea there is fair
evidence in Gods Covenant that Abraham shall have other children, seem they
never so unlikely to become children, not only besides them, which is enough
to take down their pride: but also, which strikes them to the very heart,
instead of them, though they all fail; this Saint ^ohn means when he says,
that, God is able even of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. The
second branch of their Arrogancy is their scoffing at Gods Judgments, as if,
We have Abraham to our father were armor of proof against them; and they
needed no buckler but their pedigree. This second Arrogancy springs from
their second Ignorance, for where they begin their defense, upon that they
stand; and think their needs no more provision against the wrath to come, so
they put it off, as if, lived they never so inordinately, it did nothing
concern them. This Saint John corrects, he tells them that they are not
so in the Covenant, but they may be cast out, that they must have some worth of
their own, besides that of their fathers: otherwise they must look for (and
that shortly) a total, a final eradication, Now is the Axe laid to the root
of the tree.

You see what particulars remain unhandled; of these by Gods affistance and
your Christian patience, I will now touch at so many as the time will permit.

And first because no defect nor excess (and such are the Jews Ignorance and
Arrogance, the on detracting from, the other adding to the truth) can be
known without the mean which is their measure, in reference whereunto we
judge of them; the truth of Abraham's fatherhood must first be opened, and we
must see what grace God vouchsafed him, that thereby we may conceive the
uprightness of the Baptists censure. I will not fall into the common place of
Abraham's praise, the large Texts which the Scripture does yield thereof has
found most eloquent, most abundant commentaries, there is scarce a Jew or
Christian, Greek or Latin Father that does not write of him, and make a
Panegyricke of his worth; I will cull out of them so much as will illighten my
text. And the first thing that I observe is, that there were Patriarchs before
him, and Patriarchs that came after him, yet none left behind them so
honorable a name. If you look to the Patriarchs that lived before him, they
had the same Covenant in substance, but in ceremonies and circumstances
wherewith God was pleased to cloth his Covenant Abraham did excel them. As for
the Patriarchs that succeeded, though they did partake of all that Abraham had,
yet this was Abraham's advantage, that God first gave these things to him, and
only confirmed them unto them, Gene. 26. In Matthew. ^ap (...) Hom ^ operis
imperfect^ Decimae Deo sacra
and that too for his sake. But to speak more distinctly. Chrysostom observes
that which is clear, 1. Cor. 1. that Abraham was the tenth from Noah, and that
God took him out of that profane age and place wherein he lived, as his own
portion; for the tithe is sacred unto God, Noah was such a tithe before, in
whom God began the new world; Abraham was then a person sacred unto God. Not
only so, but consecrated also by God himself; for Eusebius in his Chronicle
observes that Abraham was the first Prophet to whom the Son of God appeared
in the shape of a man, Cui verbum dei appa^uit in sigura humana
at what time he invested him with the Patriarkship. Now of a person so sacred,
so consecrated, we must look to hear of some thing more then ordinary; and
indeed Saint Austin tells us, that whatsoever the Scripture reports of
Abraham it is Factum and prophetia, Tom. 10 Sermane de tempore 72.
a prophetical fact, it concerns not only the time present, but the time to
come; as well his, as him. But two things principally set forth Abraham's
prerogative: the first is, that his family was to be the depositarie of Gods
Covenant; the second is, that his virtues were to be exemplary to the whole
Church. Touching the first, the Promise is plain, that in his seed all Nations
of the earth shall be blessed, the Prophets usually meaning the Gentiles call
them Israel; Romans 11.
and the Apostle says that the branches of the wild O live must be engrafted
into the true; it is not enough that the partition wall is broken down, but we
must be incorporated into the same body; for God is not pleased that any shall
ordinarily be saved except he be of Abraham's family. Secondly of those which
are of Abraham's family, it is not Gods pleasure that any should be saved that
does not exemplify Abraham's virtues in his life; Tom. ^ Sermon 42 in Gen (...).
John 8
for Abraham's virtues were to be exemplarie: of his virtues in general, S.
Chrysostom observes, that any man might take a pattern of any virtue from
him, for they were limmed with lively colors in him. But of his virtues Saint
Paul does especially insist upon his Faith; S. James upon his Charity; our
Savior Christ upon both; both are saving virtues, and no hope without them of
entering into Abraham's bosom. This may well go for a third prerogative of
Abraham, that the place of Bliss bears his name, and that our best fare in
heaven is to be guests at the same Table with him; to be blessed with blessed
Abraham: but no hope I say to attain this but by conforming our lives to
Abraham's, in such a faith as works by charity. Therefore Gregory Nyssen
calls him viam fidei the path of says, Orat in Basil lib 4. c. 38 De Ciutt
Dei. lib 16 cap. 16.
Irenie says, that his Faith was prophetia sidei, Ambrose that he was Forma
credentium; but Saint Austin observes well that (which comes yet nearer to
my Text) Duplex prophetia facta est Abrahae, carnalis and spiritualis; He was a
most noble Patriarch corporally, but spiritually he was much more noble; yea
whatsoever he was corporally, was but a Type of that which he was spiritually:
observe in the points of his prerogative, the Sacrament a pledge of Gods
Covenant, the sacrifices Types of his virtues, in both the thing corporal was
but a Type of a better thing, of that which was spiritual. The last thing
which I observe concerning Abraham is Gregory Nyssens note; P. 250.
Abraham had a carnal and a spiritual generation or offspring; whereof the
carnal was to continue but during the old Testament, but the spiritual was to
last until the end of the world, It is an error of the Jews to think that
Circumcision must be Catholic both in time and place; for when the spiritual
seed came, then the carnal was to cease, and with the carnal the Character
thereof, so does Epiphanius call Circumcision. In a word, Christ when he came,
changed not the Covenant but the Sacrament, that so although carnal children
cease, yet spiritual might continue unto Abraham.

Having thus far opened unto you the prerogative of Abraham; it is time that
we now come to speak of the error of the Jews. In handling whereof (for more
brevity and greater perspicutie) I will branch by branch carry along the
answer with the objection. Let us come then to their Ignorance. Whereof the
first branch is the mayming of the truth; they understood the prerogative of
Abraham only according to the flesh, and not according to the spirit; (...).
Cyrill Alexand. in Amos cap ^.
Though in their Synagogues they do boast of four things; first their
Birthright, secondly their Circumcision, thirdly their Law, and fourthly
their Country, and mis-vnderstand them all: yet do they glory most in their
Birthright, and that they understand worst. It is true, that even according to
the flesh, no nation may compare with the Jew in Nobility ^of parentage, none
ever sprang from such worthies, as they do; Saint Paul does them but right
when, Romans cap. 3. cap. 9. he acknowledges their preheminences therein; to
say nothing of that which we find in the Prophets. And certainly it is in it
self a great blessing to be borne of worthy Parents, because it is a Monument
of Gods favor to a family: but unto us it is no blessing except we communicate
in their virtues. For there are certain notes by which every living thing
must be known, notes stamped in the body, and notes stamped in the soul,
lineaments and qualities; of which the quality does morally denominate rather
then the lineaments. Take for example a sheep or a Wolf; they have outward
shapes and inward qualities whereby they are distinguished; the quality of the
one is meekness, of the other is rauenousnesse; when we come to consider
whether either of the se be such, as he should be, we find that either of them
may degenerate either in the lineaments or in the qualities: in the lineaments,
for a sheep may happily have the shape of a wolf, and yet retain the
meekness of a sheep; a wolf may have the linearnents of a sheep, and yet
retain the rauenousnesse of a wolf. It is not the lineaments of either, but
the qualities, that will give them their name. Does reason acknowledge this in
beasts, and shall not Religion acknowledge it much more in men? It was gross
ignorance in the Jews to think that the outward Character could denominate
them without the inward, and that they should go for sons of Abraham, who in
Piety, were so unlike Abraham. Therefore Saint John corrects this ignorance
of theirs, and tells them they are not worthy of so Honorable a title; nay
God himself does vilisie them, calling them sometimes Gentiles in general,
sometimes descending to particulars, Amos 9
are you not all as the children of A^thiopia unto me? And as if that parentage
were too good, Thy nativity (says God) is of the land of Canaan, Ezech 16.
thy father was an Amorite thy mother an Hittite; yet this does not villifie
them enough, the worst place of Canaan was Sodom and Gomorra; thither does God
send them for their Pedigree, Deuteronomy. 32. Finally after ye are past Sodom there
remains nothing but Hell, and so low does Christ debase them, Ioh. 8. You are
of your father the Devil, even you that say, ye have Abraham to your father.
I do not wonder why Saint Paul after that he had reckoned up all the parcels
of his corporal Nobility, concludes: I am not the better, I am the worse for
all this, all this is but dung, it recommendeth me nothing unto God; nay it may
make me blush for that I have no inward resemblance of him, with whom I have
this outward alliance. It were good our Nobility and Gentry did learn this,
who have nothing to show that they are the of spring of such worthies as their
fathers were, but only that which Tully yields to Piso, a Genealogy, or an
earthly patrimony. Saint Chrysostom compares such unto froth; and indeed
generous liquor does cast a froth, which froth is insipid, and has nothing of
that taste which is in the liquor: even so are they descended of their Parents,
but their Parents live not in them, and therefore all that they can boast of,
Ignabili^ nobilitas.
is but an ignoble Nobility, as Theophylact speaks, it is not worth the
standing upon. Malo Pater tibi sit Thersites, dummodo tu sis
Aeacidae similis, Vulcaniaque arma capessas:
Quam te Thersitae similem producat Achilles.
The truth whereof Saint Chrysostom sets before us in an excellent Simile,
Behold (says he) Gold comes of the earth, a precious metal of a very base
Element, we esteem the Gold, we care not for the earth; even so, Opaere
imperfect. in Matthew.
if a child be worthy, it skilleth not how unworthy his Parents were; faithful
Abraham is not the worse because the child of idolatrous Sarah. The similitude
goes on; Silver yields Tin, the better, a worse metal; we neglect the
Tin and keep the Silver: so if a child be unworthy, what does it avail him
to be of worthy Parents? What is Ismael the better for being the son of
Abraham? If this rule have exceptions (as indeed it has) in worldly societies,
for many make Idols of rich Nabals, Fil^ De^nulla externa prarogatiua
aesim^n^^^.
and knottie blocks; yet to Godward the rule is true, none can claim
spiritual kindred with Abraham, but they that are new Creatures, dissimilitude
of manners, argues Bastards and no Sons.

You have heard the first branch of their Ignorance; they maimed the truth. The
second is, they misplaced it, for they began their defense against the wrath to
come at this claim, We have Abraham to our father. The fathers note that this
is preposterous dealing, it is not enough for us to take care that we partake
as well of the substance, as of the ceremony in sacred things, we must add a
second rule, which is this. As in knowing God, so in knowing our state to
Godward we must rise from the effects to the cause, that so afterward, we may
from the cause conclude the effects; the evidence is in the effects, whereof
the assurance is in the cause; that we are the children of God, we see most
clearly in our virtues, though the ground whereupon we stand most assuredly
is Gods covenant. Wherefore the Covenant is not the first step where we must
begin our trial, much less may we begin at Predestination; we must by
degrees of reason read the gifts of God in our Faith, Hope, and Charity, to
work which, the Word and Sacraments were ordained; if we find these, they
argue Gods love to us, they prove we stand in good terms with him. And when
we have thus argued from the effects, we may safely make demonstrations from
the cause; and then it will be a good plea, if our Conscience does question
the certainty of our salvation, because the good that we would do, we cannot
do, Romans 7.
to say with Saint Paul, thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord; or
that which is equivalent, I have Abraham to my father. This plea was provided
to keep us in heart in that conflict. Of this the Jews were ignorant, and
therefore Saint John corrects this in them, blames them for putting in their
claim to the Covenant, before they had given some proof of their virtue. We
are not ignorant of the Romish calumnies, and of the distraction of our
brethren in foreign parts about this doctrine; happily some occasion hereof
may be because some deliver Theology more Theoretically then practically. It
were to be wished, that, at least, in so much as must come to the vulgar eye
and ear, this method were changed: lest, as it has, so it prove dangerous to
many; though (I dare say) that, if the parts of the doctrine publicly
authorized by the Reformed Churches be charitably laid together (and otherwise
to construe the writing is against good manners by a rule in the Civil Law)
we shall find nothing but that which may pass for sound and good. But to
leave methods of Books, and come to methods of our lives; when I rip up the
Tracts of this Argument written by those that either would seem to be, or are
indeed zealous of Piety, I find that men's lives opened both their mouths, and
set both their Pens a writing; therefore I think there can be no more
compendious course to silence the slanders of the one, and reconcile the
distractions of the other, Mat. 5.16.
then to Let our lights so shine before men, that they may see our good works,
and glorify our father which is in heaven. And thus much of S. John's answer to
the first part of their error, the correcting of their Ignorance.

I come now to the second part, their Arrogancy, double arrogancy; for first
they appropriate Abraham's family to themselves. As they thought themselves to
be holy, so did they think themselves to be the only children of Abraham. In
their Synagogues it is one of those things for which they give thanks unto God,
that they are born Israelites not Goim Gentiles, of whom they never speak but
with great scorn; Cyril Alexandrinus amplifieth this point upon, Osea cap. 9.
The Israelites looking loftily, and speaking big, boasted we have Abraham to
our father, he adds to our purpose, Cyrill Alex in Oseam ca^. 9. Nouells and
abortiui pu^abantur Hieron. Deus vocand^ Gentiles ^udaeos maxima melestia
^ffecit. Theod in Romans 10.
that they did most insolently despise all other nations. S. Hierome
Ecclesiastes the sixth, that the Gentiles were reputed but vpstarts and
abortiues: yea this pride was so rooted in them, that the crossing of it was
their greatest heartbreaking; Theodoret observes it in Romans cap. 10. for
neither their servitude, nor their dispersion, nor the ruin of their Temple
and Country does so much vex them, as the glory of the Gentiles Church. And
there is good ground for this note both in rule and practice, God foretold it
should be so, Deuteronomy. 32. Because you have provoked me to jealousy by those that
are no Gods, I also will provoke you to jealousy with that which is no people,
by a foolish nation will I anger you. The Gospel tells us it was so; when
Christ went into Zacheus, did they not murmur? Luke 19.
Were they not filled with indignation, when a whole City of the Gentiles came
to hear the Word of God? (...) 13. 1 (...) 2.
Did they not forbid the Apostles to preach to the Gentiles? All these are
proofs in what estimation they had the Gentiles. And do not the Romanists in
the like manner glory now in Saint Peter, and think none built upon the rock
of Saint Peter's confession but themselves? Syrians, Armenians, Ethiopians,
Graecians, Protestants, all are Heretics but themselves; they are not so
eloquent in any argument as in their inuectiues against these; but nothing so
galleth them as the glory of the Reformed Churches, which is a spice of their
Jewish pride, Saint John shall correct them in the Jews: Let us come then to
the Correction.

Saint John disproueth the Jews, appropriating of Abraham's Family to
themselves, showing that there is no impediment in Gods Power, but that Abraham
may have: yea, rather, there is fair evidence in his Covenant, that Abraham
shall have other children: even those that seem unlikely to become chilren,
though all the Jews sail. Both these Propositions are contained in Saint
John's answer, the Fathers observe both, and I will show you what ground there
is for both. But because the latter does presuppose the former, the former must
first be unfolded unto you. Some then take the name of stones properly, though
they also differ amongst themselves; some understand the twelve stones that
were by Ioshuah pitched in the midst of Jordan, when the children of Israel
passed it upon the dry ground; other understand common stones, such as lie by
the Rivers side. But the difference is not worth the standing upon; those which
Ioshuah pitched were common stones, and to the working of the Miracle it
skilleth not whether they were those or any other; for it must be an Almighty
Power that must work this alteration of any. By Gods Power then you must
understand his absolute ability to do what he will, and can there be any
question, but that the same God, which out of the dust of the earth, made man,
of the rib of man made woman, can raise up children unto Abraham? to take away
all doubt from the Jew, and to make it out of all question that God can do
this, see how he speaks in the Prophet Esaias, Look upon the rock from whence
you were hewn, and the pit out of which you were dug; Look upon Abraham
that begat you, and Sarah that bare ye; The Fathers think that Saint John in
his phrase alludeth to this place of the Prophet: And if out of the withered
body of Abraham and Sarah God could draw Isaak, why cannot other children by
the same power be given unto Abraham? There should be no doubt with us; the
first Article of whose Creed is, I believe in God the Father Almighty; and yet
a doubt is made of this, (...) ^nim ^i lapidem r^^ente (...) hom^nem (...)
(...) (...) 11 ca^. 24.
a double doubt, one Impious, another Curious.

The Impious is made by Galen, for thus he says; Were God never so willing he
cannot make a man of a stone, and in this does our opinion and the opinion of
Plato, and other Greek Philosophers which have written aright of the nature of
things, differ from Moses; for God, thinks Moses, is Almighty, and can do
what he will, although it be of Ashes to make an Horse or an Ox. But we
think not so. But afsirme, that there are somethings which nature cannot do,
and that God never attempts any such thing; but of that which is in his power
he chooses to do that which is best. The weakness of so worthy a man's
judgment, I censure not, as it deserves, because it was a fault of his
infidelity; only I answer him as Christ did the Saducees, He erred not
knowing the Scripture, Mat. 21 2^.
nor the power of God, he equalled Nature unto God, whereas God is the God of
Nature, and therefore many things which nature cannot do, Aliud est naturae
possibile, (...) liud naturd. Ephesians. 3.
God often does: the instances are many that may be given hereof in the Old
Testament, and in the New the Apostles Rule is, He can do above all that we
can think: according to which words we must understand those of our Savior,
That which is impossible to men, that is, not only above their power, but also
above their conceit, is possible to God; Potentiae Dei nullus neque numerus
neque terminus. Bern. page 1253.
for as Saint Bernard, There is neither number nor boundarie of those things
that come within the compass of Gods Omnipotency. But here the Papist comes
in unseasonably with his Transubstantiation, thinking this a fair ground to
prove the possibility of it; but they rack Gods power too far. For as God
simply has no Passive Power, because he can fail in nothing: So in his Active
Power he is dissinabled by their own confession unto some things, namely, to
make contradictories; and they cannot with all their sophistry free this their
Tenent from manifold contradiction. But to shut up this first dispute; Romans 4.
Heb. 11.
Abraham had an eye to this Almighty Power, both when he expected, and also
when he would have offered his son; and so must we in our faith and in our
obedience; Gods Almighty Power must make us resolute in both.

The second dispute is Curious, the Schoolmen move it; they inquire how these
men which God by his Almighty Power can make of stones; can possibly be the
children of Abraham? whereas Abraham's children must spring from Abraham's
loins; A question unworthy of Divines: But to the purpose. In hominem Physicum
and Theologicum.
A man is distinguished into natural constitution and supernatural condition.
In this dispute we have not to do with man, as a man, but as a member of the
Church; that it is so, you may gather out of the very phrase, it is not said,
God shall raise children of Abraham, but unto Abraham, they are not to be his
children by Generation, but by Regeneration. Which the rather must be admitted,
because the Apostle tells us, Romans 9. John 1.
They that are children of Abraham, are children of God: and then Saint John
will tell us, that the children of God are not borne of flesh and blood, but of
the will of God. Add hereunto that they are first members of Christ, then
Abraham's seed; and Christ has no Native but Adoptiue members. Finally,
Gregory Nyssen does wittily meditare upon those words of God to Abraham; Look
to Heaven and behold the Stars: so shall thy seed be; Orat. 1. de Paschate.
Haec sydera dico, quae de spiritu nobis orta sunt, and Coelum Ecclesiam rep^^te
fecerum.
I mean those Stars which have their original from the holy Spirit, and
have suddenly turned the Church into a Firmament. The children here meant are
not natural but spiritual; and this cognation excels the other as much as the
soul excels the body. Certainly, Christ did so esteem his kindred, Et tanto
mayor Fidei and Virtutu cognatio; quanto anima praestantior corpore.
when he moved that question; Who is my Mother? and who is my Brother? And God
meant no other when he promised King David of his son, I will be his father
and he shall be my son; he means, that God would take him for his son,
though he be not so by nature.

But this leads us unto a second Proposition; and Saint Ambrose does prefer
the meaning thereof before the former. The former seems to say that God will
work a Miracle rather then Abraham should want children; but the second
Proposition imports a Mystery, in the words the promise is mystical that
supplyeth children unto Abraham; Quia mihi plus p^odest mysteri^^ quam m^^aculu
in praenuntio Christinihil magu quam aedificationem Ecclesiae debe^ agnoscere,
quae non rupeis saxis, sed conuersionibus nostrorum surrex tanimorum
I am more benefited by the Mystery then the Miracle, therefore in the speech
of Christ's Harbenger, I observe specially the building up of the Church, which
was not erected of stones material, but of converted souls. Wherefore the
Fathers for the most part, understand the word stones figuratively for the
Gentiles; and observe a resemblance between the Gentiles and stones; a double
resemblance: the one in regard of senslesnesse, another in regard of
worthlesnesse.

The Senslesnesse is double; Active and Passive; Active, in that they
worshipped stones; and then you know what the Psalmist says; They that make
them, are like unto them: so are all they that put their trust in them.
Quiam^sso sensu ration^s, lap^d^^us putant incsse alicunis rationem d^uinitatis
it si in naturd lapidum non vsu corporis sed mentis habitu vertuntur Revel. 3.
Their passive senslesnesse is that whereby they are incapable of the mysteries
of Heaven, having stony hearts like unto stony ground, whereon whatsoever
seed is cast, is cast away. Besides their senslesnesse, there is in them also a
worthlesnesse wherein they resemble stones; a double worthlesnesse; a Passine,
for they are without ornament; an Active, for they are without fruit; they are
as the Church of Laodicea, blind, wretched, naked, miserable; and what fruit
should they bear that drink not in the dew of Heaven? You see good
resemblance between stones and the Gentiles.

You must also note that the power here meant is not absolute, but limited.
Though Gods Power be equal to his Will; yet is not his Will always as large
as his Power, therefore are there many things which the Scripture says, God
cannot do, meaning not absolutely but upon supposition. Mark 6.
The Angel could do nothing whiles Lot was in Sodom; Ier. 44.
Christ could work no Miracles because of the Jews unbelief; God himself
could no longer forbear the Jews because of their wickedness; the meaning is
that the contrary was decreed, and God would not alter his Decree. Now upon
this distinction arises the question, seeing the Gentiles may be figured by
stones, whether here they be figured by them. Why not? There were before John,
at this time, Publicans, and Soldiers, which for the most part were Gentiles,
and why might not Saint John point at them? Sure I am that when Zacheus a
Publican received Christ, Luke 19.
Christ himself does witness, This also is a son of Abraham; Matthew 8.
and when the Centurion expressed his humble faith in Christ, Christ assigned him
a place at Abraham's Table; 1. Pet. 2.5.
and it is worth the marking that Saint Peter calls Conuerts to Christ,
living stones; and what is that but a Periphrasis of a son of Abraham made of
a stone? There are two things in a stone, Insensiblenesse and firmness; that
must be removed, this must continue, that the parts of the building may be
suitable, Gentium natura habendo institutionem ^abere potest cessationem
Tert^ll. ad^ersus Hermog li^. de Amma cap 21. Cum vniuersorum Deiss vid. sset
se vnum populumer Iudaeis and Gentibus aggregaturum, and is per fidem salutem
praebiturum, vtrumque in Patriarcha Abraham prius descripsit. Theod. in Romans 4.
and we built upon the Rock Christ, may grow up into a holy Temple in the
Lord. The Gentiles then may here be meant, and there is no impediment in Gods
Covenant, but that they may become children of Abraham. Yea, it is so far
from being against Gods Covenant, that it is contained in it; Abraham's name is
a Prophecy of the Gentiles Conversion, it is contained in the Promise that is
made of Abraham's seed, when the God of all flesh saw that he purposed to make
our Church of Jews and Gentiles, and that he would save them by Faith, he
prefigured both in Abraham.

And the Apostles text is clear for it. The Fathers make Thamars children a
type hereof, wherein the Gentile seems to have a prioritie, and to be in the
Covenant before the Jews; for Abraham was a type of the Gentiles being
justified, and receiving the promises in uncircumcision, before he was a type
of the Jews, and had the promises renewed after that he was circumcised. But
as of Thamars children that which first put out the hand, was not first borne:
so fell it out between the Gentiles and the Jews; finally, Galatinus proves
out of the Rabbis, that the Gentiles, as well as the Jews were to be saved by
Christ. To conclude, the Apostles Rule must be held, Romans 9.6.
It cannot be that the Word of God should be of none effect.

But why does the Baptist make mention of Gods Power only, and only say that
God can do this? Chrysostomes opinion is, that he would fear them only, and
not drive them to despair; others say, that taking Gods will for a thing
clear, he did put them in mind that he could perform his will when he
would.

But the time is past, wherefore I will now conclude; Saint Cyril, Saint
Chrysostom, both say that this Text may be applied unto Christians; for even
of them also more then a good many ar^^, ^nted with this Ignorance, with this
Arrogance; they maime the truth in contenting themselves with outward
Characters, little caring for the inward which principally make a Christian,
and how many do enter their names into Gods Book in Heaven, before ever they
look whether they have a counterpart thereof written by the finger of the Holy
Ghost in their souls? And what wonder if this Ignorance breed Arrogancy, and
they that think better of themselves then they should, think worse then they
should of others? But let us take care to be sure of our Resemblance, before
we crake of our alliance; let us find in our selves Faith and Charity
Abraham's virtues, and then hope well that we are Abraham's children; let us so
hope well of our selves, that we despair not of others; Gods hands are not
tied, his power has no bounds, they that seem to be of least hope may prove
more worthy then our selves. But whether we look upon our selves or others, if
we find that of stones we are become the children of Abraham, let us magnisie
God according to his mercy; which we shall the better do, if we call to mind
what we were, and what we are; how senseless we were, how little feeling we had
of Gods either words or works; how brutishly we adored the basest of the
creatures. Neither were we only so senseless, but we were most worthless
also; poor souls indeed, spiritual Lazars, not worth the looking after, but
with contempt. And as we had little: so it was little we could do; we could
do no good either in glorifying God, or edifying the Church, or increasing our
own comfort, we were as barren to these things as very stones. But see now
these stones do live; our hearts are sensible of the influence of Heaven, and
we adore only him that lives for ever; he with a liberal hand has enriched
us, and we with a cheerful heart fructify unto him; we cannot turn our
eyes upon our selves, but we behold his mercies, and we present before his
sacred eyes our most humble duties: Thus should we magnify our God that has
done so great things for us; for us (I say) that are the Offspring of them that
were sometimes very stones.

I end with Saint Bernards Caution, Bernard de Sc^la claust. page 1253.
God indeed can raise of stones children unto Abraham, as sometimes he did
Saint Paul; yet must we not tempt God, and neglecting what is to be done on our
part, presume that Gods hand will work all; we must read the Scripture,
meditate therein, Seek, knock, pray, and then we shall find grace; the
windows of Heaven will be opened unto us, and the hand of God will new mould
us, he will mollify whatsoever is stony in us, and supply whatsoever worth we
lack; what God can do, that he will do; if we be in any part stones, he
will make us even in that part also Children of Abraham, and if Children then
Heirs, Heirs annexed with Jesus Christ.

GOd by his grace make us all Abraham's Sons, and give us all grace to walks
Abraham's steps, that we may all finally meet in Abraham's besome. Amen. The
fifth Sermon.
LVKE 3. VERSE 9. And now also is the Axe laid unto the root of the trees:
every tree therefore which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and
cast into the fire.


SAint John Baptist preaching to the unbelieving Jews, showed them that they
were sick both at head and heart, and therefore applied fit remedies to either
part. Having before, in your hearing, ended the first remedy that is applied to
the Heart; I began, the last time I spoke out of this place, to entreat of the
second remedy, which is applied unto their head. Their head was sick of
Ignorance and Arrogancy, both double: I have spoken of their Ignorance and the
first branch of their Arrogancy, their appropriating Abraham's family unto
themselves; there remains yet one branch of the Text, that which checketh
their second pride, their conumpt of God. They did contemn God, in that they
set light by the Judgments that were denounced from him; mark their ground;
they thought they had such interest in Abraham that, for his sake, God would
spare them; and his wrath should never seize on them. But they hear from the
Baptist, that they are not so in the Covenant, but they may be blotted out, and
if they have not some worth of their own, besides that of their Parent, they
must look for an imminent, total, final eradication: for Now is the Axe
laid to the root of the trees, etc.

These words are a Parable, and therefore they have a Moral. For a Parable is
a Comparison of things spiritual unto corporal; wherein the things corporal
and spiritual do mutually give light each unto other; the spiritual do
guide us in the setting bounds unto the corporal, and the corporal do help
us to understand the secrets of the spiritual; seeing then the spiritual is
the key that must unlock the corporal sense, we can say little to the
corporal, until we have found out the spiritual. But where shall we find it?
It is not here, we must look it else where. We have it, for a good part, in
Saint John cap. 15. where Christ speaks thus; I am a Vine, you are branches,
my father is an Husbandman, Cap. ^.
every branch in me that bears not fruit is taken away and cast into the
fire; Esaias is more full and express to my Text; The vineyard of the Lord of
Hosts is the house of Israel, and Judah is his pleasant plant; he looked for
judgment, and behold oppression, for righteousness and behold a cry;
therefore has the Lord of H^sts revealed this in mine ear, many houses shall
be desolate, fair and goodly houses left without inhabitants, yea hell has
enlarged it self, the mouth thereof is opened without measure, their glory,
their multitude, their pomp, every one that rejoices shall descend into it.

According to this Mo^rall, if we break up the Parable, we must observe the
Persons therein contained, and the Judgment that is denounced; the persons are
two, God compared to a husbandman surueying his Orchard, the Jews compared
unto Trees of the Orchard, Trees planted therein to bear good fruits. Of the
Judgment we have here the Cause and the Parts. The cause is the Jews not
living sutably to their incorporation, which is represented by a Tree not
bearing good fruits. The parts are two; first the Jews are deprived of that
blessed estate wherein they stood, the Axe is put to the root; and by the
root they are cut up: so the Parable does resemble it. Secondly, they are
exposed to the misery which they deserved, they are cast into the fire: A
fruitless tree burning in the fire is the Emblem of a sinner tormented in
hell.

If you lay these two parts together they are a total, a final desolation;
for kill the root, kill the whole tree. What life can he have that is separate
from Christ the fountain of life? Trees that are rooted up for their
barrenness, are not set again; and when do we heareof an Apostata a second
time incorporated into Christ? The Judgment is fearful. And yet as fearful
as it is, our Husbandman does denounce it unto these Trees; God does denounce
it against the Jews, Every tree shall be cut, cut up, shall be cast into the
fire.

Neither does he only denounce it, but bids them also to look for it
speedily, for Now is the Axe laid to the root of the tree; and universally,
Every tree that bears not good fruit, etc.

You hear what particulars are remarkable in my Text, whereof it remains
that you now hear again somewhat more fully, as the time will permit.

But before I come to the particulars, I must point at a stratageme of Satan's,
which he uses to stay men from amending their lives. It is impossible for a
man in cold blood to silence the accusing voice of conscience, Acts 24.25.
not to think on, and thinking, with Faelix, not to tremble at the remembrance
of the Judgment day; now left men should be reclaimed hereby, he has provided
Fig. leaves to cover their nakedness, and persuades them, that if they be
attired therewith, they will not be so cowardly, as Adam was, and fly from
the fearful presence of God; he fills their heads with the holiness,
worthiness of the ceremonies which they use, the parentage from whence they
come, and persuades that these are armor of proof against the heavy stroke
of Gods wrath, they need no more but cry out, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord; Iere. cap. 7.
and we have Abraham to our father. These words (if they had no more to say for
themselves but these words) are able to stay the punishing Angel, and sheath
the sword of God; certainly the Jews put their trust in them, and they were
the rather induced so to do, because they seemed to have a fair warrant for
it.

God himself promises that in their greatest extremity he would remember
Abraham, ^^uis 26.
Isaac, and Jacob, and for their sakes relieve them: And how often does he
divert his wrath only out of the remembrance of his own Name? by his Name
meaning his visible residence in their Tabernacle and Temple, which were built
to put his Name there, even the Cloud that led them out of Egypt, wherein
resided the Angel of whom God said that his Name was in him. Of this kind of
Indulgence, you have a whole Chapter in Ezekiel. Chap. 10.
But they did not distinguish between temporal and eternal wrath. It is true
that the stroke that is but temporal, is often kept off from the children in
contemplation of their worthy Parents; there are many examples in the
Scripture, but no example of any child that escaped eternal wrath out of Gods
regard unto his Parents. There is an example to the contrary; for Christ
sets forth the rich Glutton in Hell torments who being there calls Abraham
his father, and Abraham yeildeth him the name of a child, and yet that child
of such a father did burn in Hell fire; and not he alone; for Christ says,
that many shall come from the East and the West, and sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew 8.
and the children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness; yea,
they shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom
of God, Luke 13.
and themselves thrust out. So far is it off that graceless children should
fare the better for their worthy Parents, that God uses to exaggerate their
sin by comparing them with their Parents, as appears in the doom of
Iehoiakim the son of Iosia, who under the very name of the son of Iosia,
for being so unlike his father, Ier. 22.
is heavily doomed; and in the same form does God proceed against the Levites.
Mal. 2


If God were so much in love with the children of Abraham, and, if they failed,
could not supply others, happily he might tolerate them notwithstanding their
unto wardlinesse, as many a natural father bears with an unthrifty son,
and puts not off his natural affection toward him, because if he do
justice upon him and disinherit him, it is not in his power to have another:
But this is not Gods case; you heard it proved at large in the censure of their
first arrogancy, therefore does Saint John beat them from this hold, and make
way in this Text to the terror of God, which he would have timely to enter
into their souls: Blandimenta delinquentiae de patrum resum^serunt gratia.
Tertull, de pudicitia.
And in them he does warn us never to presume upon like pretense; they made a
Parasite of Gods favor to Abraham, which was ever at their elbow, to sooth
them in their foulest sins; but let no prerogative so blind us, as to make us
think that the Sermons of repentance do not concern us; and we will never
so think, if we think, as we ought, upon the particulars of this text; let us
then come to them, and begin with the Persons, whereof the first is God.

God is here rather intimated, then expressed, yet so intimated that by
resolving of the words we shall easily perceive him to be here; for if the axe
must be laid to the root of the tree, there must be some body to lay it; and
who is that but God? none besides God can give the stroke, that is here
threatened. Men take their first rooting in God according to the maxim; In him
we live, move, and have our being, if natural, much more spiritual; none then
can root us out of him, except he have power over him, and such power has none
besides himself; others have insolently threatened eradication to the Church,
as you may read often in the Prophets; but you may read withal how the Holy
Ghost does scorn them, and how vain their attempts have been, it is only for
God to pronounce it sadly, and effectually to perform it; whereupon it
follows that the person here meant must needs be God.

And God is here compared to a Husbandman surueying his Orchard. The Scripture
that every where speaks of God, does more usually teach us, what he is to us,
then what he is in himself, and describes him rather according to his
Providence then his Essence, because, although the later would more affect our
curiosity, yet the former does work more upon our conscience: and it is our
conscience whereat the Scripture does aim, it desires rather to make us good
then wise, which we shall be, if we learn so to know God, as we may best be
brought to fear him; a knowledge which I the more earnestly commend unto you,
because this, otherwise learned Age, seems not so much as it should, to be
acquainted with it.

But that you may the better perceive this description of God, you must observe
that of his Providence there are two parts, the first is the blessing of his
creatures, especially man; the second is the Inquiry how these creatures use
his blessings; this later point concerns my Text. As then no Husbandman is so
careless as, having planted an Orchard, not to look into it, and see the
success of his pains: no more is God. Esaias will teach us that the Husbandmans
discretion comes from the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and
excellent in working: neither is there any perfection in man, which is not much
more eminent in God. We may not then dream that we hold of God without
account, or impeachment of waste, we owe our appearance both at his Court, and
at his Audit; he takes his times for both; or, not to go from our Parable;
the sons of Adam have no exemption, seeing their Father had none: God placed
him in Paradise, and came into Paradise to survey him; and the Fig Tree that
grew in the Vineyard was surueyed by the Lord thereof. And let this suffice
touching the first Person, and the resemblance that is made of him.

The second Person is Man. But as the description of God does show us rather
what God is to us, then what he is in himself: so in the description of man
the chiefest consideration is, what he is to Godward, not what he is. We have
here then to do with not simply a man, but a member of the Church; the Law
speaks to them that are under the Law: Now of a member of the Church we have
here an excellent resemblance, he is resembled to a tree bearing fruit. (...)
73. (...) 5.
The Church is likened to a Paradise which is full set with fruitful trees. As
God in the Creation made the whole world, but of a part of the whole made
Paradise: so has he selected his Church out of a whole mass of the sons of
Adam, and calls it his Orchard; and of this Vineyard or Orchard the members
of the Church are trees, every member is a tree, though he be called sometimes
by the name of a branch, for every branch is potentially a tree, a tree
growing in a tree. You may perceive it by the little shoots that we take to
inoculate, and many branches that bored, or otherwise planted take root in the
ground, although while they are but branches, they do not immediately root in
the ground: even so every member of the Church, seeing he has no communion
with God but by the mediation of Christ, is but a branch, yet seeing Gods
promises are made both to him and his, (...) Cap. 52.
and others may spring from him, he is not vnsitly compared to a tree.

But it is to a tree that bears fruit; whose inward virtue manifests it
self by outward works. As a tree that sucketh nourishment from the ground,
spends part of it in sustayning it self, and when it is sufficed, therewith
works the rest of the juice unto fruit: so should the members of the Church
themselves be the better for the Grace which they receive, and do good to
others also; they must bear fruit.

Fruit is significantly expressed; (...), etc. Athanas. Tom. 1. Sermon. de
(...)meant. Genesis v. 9.
for the likeness of leaves does often deceive the ouer-seer, but when the
profit of the doctrine does show it self in works; then it appears who is a
sincere faithful man, and who is an Hypocrite.

Add hereunto, that though great is the ornament of leaves, yet their best
commendations goes no farther then (...) pleasure, it does not come so far
as (...) meat; But out of the ground of Paradise God made to grow every tree
that was both pleasant to the sight, and good for sood; and such a tree must
our tree be.

But every tree by nature is a fruit tree; Genesis 1. v. 11. (...).
God that made all made no other. Saint Basil has observed it, and because
some trees make show of the contrary, he gives us a distinction of secret and
open fruit, with one of which every tree is furnished; And indeed seeing
every tree has seed according to his kind, it has fruit, because naturally
the seed is included in the fruit, and follows the condition of it, being (as
that is) either secret or open. Seeing then every tree bears fruit; to bear
fruit is not enough, wherefore there is another word added, it must bear good
fruit; there are trees of the field, and trees of the Orchard, both bear
fruit, but the fruit of the field tree feeds only beasts, and birds, only the
fruit of the Orchard-tree yeildeth sustenance for man. There must be some
difference between them that are within the Church, and them that are without;
as between Orchard and Field trees, the fruit of the one, and the fruit of
the other; they without the Church fructify for the Devil and the World, but
the members of the Church bear fruit to God and good men, as it is intimated
by the Vine, Indges 9.
by the Fig, by the Olive, unto which trees the godly are compared. Mark
then that the difference between the trees of the Field and of the Orchard is
not the bearing, and not bearing of fruit; in bearing fruit the native and the
satiue, both agree, but it is good and bad fruit that does distinguish them.
And this distinction is necessary; because it is possible that trees of the
Orchard should become as bad as the trees of the Field; and why? since the fall
of Adam they are all grafted trees, and you know that a grafted tree may shoot
out, either out of the wild stock, or out of the sweet graft; and it is a
special care of a good Husbandman to cut off still all the shoots of the
stock, that the graft may prosper the better; Origin observes well, we have
inward trees, a Good and a Bad, we have the flesh and the Spirit: Habemus
a^bores internas bonam and malam. ^n^ cuit. Gal. 5.
and Saint Paul tells us that both these have their fruits.

To bear good fruit then is to walk in the spirit; and not to fulfill the
deeds of the flesh; Here is no species of good works set down, neither intend
I at this time to fall into the common place of good works, a former clause of
my text gave me occasion to speak heretofore of them; Nazian Zen has a good
Epitome of that argument, (...). Tom. 1. p 555.
in two words: of good works there must be Variety, and Plenty. But I may
not forget that there were two special trees in Paradise; the Tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, and the Tree of Life; Lib. 2. ad. Autoluc.
God forbad the one and permitted the other. Theophilus Patriarch of Antioch
gives the reason, and it is, that God would have us captiuate our wits to his
wisdom, and for knowledge, be contented with so much as he does reveal; but
we should spend all our time and pains in obedience, and conforming our selves
to Gods Law; (...) H^mil. de Sement. tom 1 Io^l 2.23. Esaias 61. Revel 21 Gal. 5.
Rom 6.
Therefore does Gods Law and a shower of rain come in Hebrew both from one
root, to signify that we should drink it in as fruit trees do rain, to be
the better for it; In Io^l it is plainly called the rain of righteousness;
and of rain Athanasius his observation is good, though the substance of it be
but one, yet does it yield sustenance for diverse fruits. Sure I am that the
Scripture calls us, Trees of Life, Trees of Righteousness; and we should
bring forth fruits of the Spirit, which is called the fruit of Sanctification;
have a man never so much knowledge, if he go no farther then knowledge, he
can deserve no better a name then the Devil has, who from his knowledge is
called Demon, N^mdicit. Qui non se^it, sed non^^cie^^ fruct^m. ^^om^er enim
oportet far (...); Nam! cetheri ^^ser^cors fueris (...) rapin^s sis d^dities,
^on cris bonus.
but the Scripture denominateth a good man from his virtue Chasidh.

But there remains one note more which Theophylact makes upon this
description, He says not every tree which has not borne, but every tree
which is not bearing, for we must always be bearing fruit; though the other
day thou were merciful, if to day thou be an extortioner, thou shall not go
for a good tree; And God himself does justify this doctrine telling us that
all the righteousness of an unconstant good man shall be forgotten; Those that
be planted in the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God,
(...)
they shall still bring forth fruit in their old age, they shall be sat and
well liking. The Tree described, Psalm. 1. and Revel. 21. confirm this truth.

To shut up this description of a member of the Church; out of it we must
learn these few Lessons. First, God expects to behold in us rather our
works then his own, what we yield, then what we receive, and our care must
be rather to do our duties, then boast of our gifts, seeing for those, not
these, we are called to an account. Secondly, we must bear fruit according to
our kind; Men do not gather Grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles; it is
unnatural for Vines to bear hawes, or Figge-trees burres; we betray our
selves rather to be in, then of the Church, if we bear such fruit; and though
we cannot be challenged for being idle, yet shall we be, for being ill
employed. If to bear fruit were enough, the case of the wicked would be
better then that of the godly, for as wild trees commonly bear greater
burdens then the grafted or planted, (you know Aesops reason for it) so do
the wicked commonly abound in works more then the good. But God considers
not How many, but How good, yea, the more of evil works the worse; so that
when we come to cast up our account, we must consider not so much the number:
as the quality of them, remembering to write upon the evil, vanity of
vanities, all is but vanity and vexation of spirit; for what fruit is there in
those things whereof we shall be then ashamed? we must desire to bear that
fruit which may abound to our account. Philip. 4.
And so have I delivered unto you so much of my Text, as concerns the
persons, speaking of them so far, as I have been occasioned by their
resemblances.

I come now to the Judgment, whereof we must consider, first, the Cause;
where we shall see that God observes his own Law, and cutteth up no tree in
this siege, that his vengeance lays to his Church, but such as are no fruit
trees. It is a clause in the covenant, Deuteronomy. 2^.
that as God makes us fruit trees: so we should bear good fruits, if we
fail, he is no longer tied to continue us trees, or perform unto us the
blessing Sanction of his Law, Deuteronomy. 28.
his Justice requires that he make good the second sanction, which curses
sinners, and come to eradication.

But to open this cause a little fuller; we must observe that Gods dealing
with men though it be acted by his Power, yet it is ordered by his Justice;
neither does he use his power until he have examined our deserts; this is
undoubtedly true in plagues, though not in blessings. In blessing he preuenteth
us; but he never strikes until he be pronoked; therefore the Scripture
seldom mentions any judgment of God, but it prefaceth it with some cause
thereof first given by man; you may read it in the doom of Adam, the old
World, Sodom, Genesis 3.6. and 1^. Chron. 2.
and Israel, In this place the not bearing of good fruit is expressed as the
cause of the judgment which follows; the not bearing (I say) of good fruit.
For whereas the Commandments of God are Affirmative or Negative; The
Affirmative are those for which our faculties were given us, the performing of
the Negative are but with standings of such impediments as hinder us therein;
Add hereunto that the Affirmative is the measure of the Negative; so that we
know not how far we must withstand, but by knowing how much we are bound to
do; moreover, the Devil that he might have us at leisure to do what we
should not, makes us neglect to do what we should. Because then we should
strive to the height of virtue, for (homo est animal officiosum, man is made
for virtuous action, and his commendations is well doing, and doing ill is but
a necessary consequent of not doing well, as appears by the Parable of the
unclean spirit; it is impossible for a man to be idle, it would imply a
contradiction to the definition of the soul) therefore the transgression of
the Affirmative Commandments are here called in question, they are alleged
for the cause of Judgment. Si sterilitas in ign^m mittitur, rapacitas quid
meretur? Fulgent Sermon. de dispen. Duplex fructus bonus, Gratiae, and
Poenitentiae. Aust de Contritione cordis.
And if Om^ssions be so punished, what is due to Commissions? It is Fulgentius
his collection. If barrenness burn in hell, what shall wickedness seele? the
deeper men go in sins, the greater is the account they have to give.

But lest men should not well conceive this cause, we must learn of Saint
Augustine, that there is a double good fruit, of Grace, and of Repentance: we
should indeed principally take heed of Omissions: and be filled with the
fruits of righteousness: but if instead of those good fruits we fall into
sins of commission, there is a second good work wherewith we must relieve
ourselves, a work of repentance; in the defect of the first, this second must
succeed. Though God might by the Law punish us for want of the first, yet from
the Gospel we have this comfort, that he will not punish, if we do the
second. And indeed, this being a Sermon of the Gospel, supposes us to want the
first good fruit, and challenges us that we do not supply the second.

The world is very busy in seeking out the cause why so many run he^dlong into
Hell? I doubt not but they which with sobriety enter the Sanctuary of God,
may discern a higher ground of Gods Judgments: But let no wicked man deceive
himself, if he will take the pains but to study himself, he shall find,
that himself is the cause of his own ruin, wittingly and willingly refusing
to bear that good fruit that should grow upon such a tree, as he is vouchsafed
to be; barren, not only according to the Law, but also to the Gospel, and then
what remains, but if the cause be found in him, the Judgment one day light
on him? And so from the Cause, I come to the Judgment, whereof I told you
there are two parts.

As our sins are compounded of Omissions and Commissions: so is our Judgment
either privative or positive; there is some good which we should do, but we
do not, and therefore there is some good which we might have, whereof we
miss; there is some evil we should not do, but we do it; and therefore
there is some evil which we might escape, and yet we shall feel it; the
Omission goes before the Commission in sin, so does the privative before the
positive part in Judgment. I begin therefore with the privative figured by the
laying of the axe unto the root, and cutting up of the tree; What is the axe,
(...). Nazian Tom. 1. page 633.
says Nazianzene? he answers, that which cutteth off an incurable person,
though God has done what was fit for his recouerte; which you may expound by
that of the Poet, Cuncta prius tentanda, sed immedicabile vnlnus; Ense
recidendum est; When milder Physic will do no good, we must come to searing
and cutting off a rotten member. After Gods complaint, What could I have done
for my Vine which I have not done? the next news we hear is the desolution of
the Vine, and the instrument of desolation is the Axe. By the Axe some
understand Gods own hand, some the Army of the Romans; both say true, for
both did concur; Gods hand intelligibly, and the Romans sensibly; but if we
parallel this place with that in Esaias, Chap. 14.
it seems more proper to understand the Romans here. For the Axe is an
instrument, and the instrument is distinct from the efficient. But howsoever;
the word gives us to understand that God wants not means to execute his
vengeance, the Scripture observes variety of them; sometimes his Bow and
Arrows; sometimes his Sword, sometimes his Hammer, but here his Axe, as best
fitting an Husbandman that has to do with barren trees; the axe is laid to
the root of such trees.

What is meant by the root there is some question; To pass by the
tropologicall interpretations of the word, the literal is understood by some
to note Abraham, by other some Christ. And indeed Abraham is immediately meant,
as you may gather out of Saint Paul, Romans 1^.
If the root be holy, etc. and he is termed, The Father of the faithful;
but mediately Christ is meant, who is the root of that root, and therefore does
he make all the faithful branches of himself, who is their Vine.

But wherefore is the Axe laid to this root? to cut it up. The Axe has two
uses; the one to prune, the other to cut up; if a tree bear not so much fruit,
as it should, then it is enough to prune away the rotten, the watrie branches;
but if it bear none, then cut it up; for the tree, that does no good, will do
a great deal of hurt, it makes the ground barren, (...). Luke 13.7.
not only by taking up the room of a fruitful tree, but by hurting above
ground, and hurting under ground, it keeps off the comfortable Sun from
better plants, that is the mischief that comes from the barren trees
boughs: besides which there is another mischief that comes from his roots;
for they suck away the juice that should feed better trees; therefore must the
Axe be put to them; not only to the branch, but also to the root. Behold the
Image of Gods lesser, his greater Judgments; if our devotion be cold, God
corrects us by restrayning our luxuriant affections, and cutting off our
wastfull lusts, he pincheth us in things temporal, that we may have the more
appetite to things eternal; but, if our devotion be none at all, he will no
longer endure us to be the bane of others. But we must not mistake; it is not
meant that the root shall be cut up, but the Tree shall be cut from the root:
the fruitless branches should be cut off from the cognation which they have
with Abraham, Rami iudigni excidentur a cognatione Abrahae. Theoph. John 15.
Abraham shall continue a root still; you heard that proved in my last Sermon;
much more shall Christ continue a root, without whom no tree can be. But the
wicked shall take no root in them, they shall not be partakers of these roots
either sweetness or fatness; they were trees planted in Gods Orchard, the
choicest of grounds, the best manured, on which the Husbandman bestows his
greatest care, but they are not suffered to abide there any longer. To speak
it plainly; see what they were, and judge thereby what it is to be cut off;
Rom 3.9. Ephesians 3. Heb. 12.
it is to be deprived of God our Father, Christ our Savior, the Holy Ghost our
Comforter, the protection of Angels, the Communion of Saints, the inheritance
of heaven; a woeful case to endure such loss. And yet this is the loss which
they endure, which have been members of the Church, and are cut off; Infidels
as well as Christians are shut out of Heaven, yet they that had means shall
be more afflicted with the loss, then they which never had means, shall be
afflicted with the want of Heaven, for Miserum est fuisse foelicem, it is a
double woe to have been happy. He that is borne poor is not so sensible of
poverty, as he that of rich is become poor; neither is he so sensible of
sickness that was never well, as he that has long enjoyed his health; want
is not so bitter, as loss? This we must consider as the chiefest part of the
trees punishment which bears not good fruit.

It is the chiefest, but not the only part; one mischief comes not alone;
there is another part which is more feared before hand, though when we are in
it, it is less felt; and yet the sense thereof must needs be very painful,
the word imports as much; the word is fire.

The curious wits of the Schoolmen misled by their bad Geographie, Deigne
inferni ca usmodi fit, vel in qua mundi vel terrae plaga suturu^ sit, hominem
scire arbitror neminem, nisi forter cui spiritus diuinitus estenderet. Austin.
de Ciuit. Des lib. 2. cap 16. Non quare^dum vbi Gebennae ignis situs sit, sed
magis quo pacto enitari possit. Chrysostom Hom. do pr^mys sanct ^om 1. page 443.
Cyril Alexan^in. p. 710.
and worse Historiographie have delivered a great deal of ungrounded stuff
concerning the nature and place of this sire, but we shall do well to follow
the sobriety of the Fathers, Greek, and Latin, Touching Hell fire, what kind
it is of, and where, in what region of the earth. I think no man can tell
except he to whom God will be pleased to reveal it; says Austine; and
Chrysostom, We must not be curious to know where is the place of Hell fire,
but study rather how is avoid it. Only let us learn of Nazianzen, that there
is a double use of fire, for therewith (...) men are doomed, (...) or they are
purified. We have not now to do with the purgative, but with the correctiue
use of fire: and seeing that fire is the symbol of plagning we must from our
fire learn two properties of fire; it searches most, and spares least, it
leaves no part vnseized upon, and look whereon it seizes, it afflicts to
the uttermost; which Nabuchadnezer knew, that chose that wherewith to torment
the servants of God; yea, God himself does show, who therewith destroyed
Sodom and Gomorra; certainly in the Valley of Hinnom, it was so dreadful,
that the Holy Ghost was pleased to use it as a symbol of the tortures of Hell,
which leave no part of the tormented vnpained, and paineth every part
extremely; Only when we look upon our fire we must observe two differences
between that and the fire of Hell. First, Hell fire goes far beyond it in
degree; well may the torments be like, they are not equal. Secondly, they are
unlike in durance; for ours consumes and is consumed, but Hell fire neither
wastes his fuel, nor is wasted it self, both are everlasting; so that let
ours afflict never so painfully, Sie perit ^t possit saepe per^^e. Horaque erit
tant is vltima nulla mal^^.
it cannot afflict long, but he that is in Hell fire endures an everliving
death. The tree that grows in the field grows for fuel, and it is no wonder
to see it prove so; but a heavy thing it is for a tree to to become fuel,
that grew to bear fruit? But in this case, the case of a barren fruit tree is
worse then a tree of the field; because a tree of the field may be cut down
not for fuel, but for building, but fruit trees are not fit for building; and
nature has made this their ineptnesse a privilege against the Axe; when for
the building of stately Palaces the trees of the field go down, they stand,
and are not cut down until they give ouer-bearing fruit, and then they are
cut down only for fuel; for they are good for nothing else. Ezechiel has a
whole Chapter of it, wherein as in a glass, we may behold the condition of a
sinner.

If you put these parts of the Judgment together, you may easily perceive that
they amount to a total, a final eradication: It is total; for if a tree be
cut up by the roots, there is no hope of the branches, because the branches
have no life but deriuatiue from the root; cut a tree as close to the root as
you will, Job will tell you there remains still hope of him, but it is past
hope when the root is dead.

As the Judgment is total, so it is final; Chap. ^4
we never heard of the second grasting of a tree, certainly not of these trees;
The Parable of the foolish Virgins shows that there is no getting in when the
doors be shut, and that there is no passage from Hell to Heaven, M^t. 25. L^^e
17.
Abraham tells the rich Glutton burning in those flames.

But of this (...) reprobation of, and Bill of Divorce given to to the Jews, I
spoke enough, when I spoke of that which they were willed to fly, which in
former words of this Sermon is called wrath to come; wherefore I forbear to
enlarge this point any farther, only wishing incurable Impenitents herein to
behold what a fear full thing it is to sall into the hands of the living God.

You have heard of the persons and the Judgment that the one of them does
denounce against the other.

But the Judgment is not only threatened, but threatened that it shall come
upon them speedily, and overtake them universally; the speed is intimated in
the first word Now, now is the Axe laid to the root of the tree; all the words
are present, Now is put, Now is cut, which carry with them an Emphasis, and
hasten the repentance of the hearer. Before it was calied Wrath to come, least
therefore they should put it far from them, as the wicked in Amos, and the
bad servant in the Gospel, and grow Atheistical scoffers, as some do in Esaias,
and others, 2. Peter 3: he is instant wiih them, and proposes this Judgment
as imminent.

But this seems to be a Paradox; John was the Harbinger of Christ, and with
Christ began the Kingdom of grace; and how does he then make it the time of
Judgment? so terrible a Judgment? We must therefore observe that God never
did any public remarkable good to magnify his mercy, but he did withal show
the world some notable spectacle of his wrath, therein to magnify his Justice;
when Noah was saved, the world was drowned, and five Cities burnt, when Lot was
delivered; how were the Egyptians destroyed, when Israel was set free? And when
the Gentiles were received into the Church, what a desolation did he bring
upon the Jews? God will have fear and hope still to live in the hearts of the
sons of men.

Add hereunto, that Christ's coming is the last offer of Grace both to Jews
and Gentiles; he that refuses now shall never speed; mark this point pressed
by the Apostles both to the Jews, and to the Gentiles; This is the reason why
the Baptist, Christ, his Apostles begin their Preaching with Repent, A^^ 13
Acts 14 17.
this is, as the greatest, so the last manuring; the tree that proves not now,
must needs down, needs into the fire.

But is not God always putting the Axe to the tree? yea, verily; he makes
daily spectacles of them; but to whole Nations he puts not the Axe every
day, he forbeareth them until they have filled up the measure of their sin;
But if they abuse his patience and longsuffering whereby he labors to draw
them to Repentance, then they shall find that they have treasured unto
themselves wrath against the day of wrath; Rom 2
the Axe shall go unto the root. But in this Iam there are two other
remarkable things, the one is noted by Saint Ambrose, Hine disce quam
Philanthro^os Deus fit, Cu^ et^ira^catur, th^wine^ur, adhuc relinquit locum
aueriendi vltionem.
Hence learn how gracious God is, that even when he threatens irefully, yet
leaves place for mercy. It is not with God as it is with men, men cannot
check their passions nor hold their strokes, God can; and he leaves it to
our choice, whether he shall strike or no; for to that end does he forewarne;
and his messengers so temper their speech, as if they would have us fear, they
would not have us despair. The Axe (says John) is laid to, he does not say,
it is entered into the roots. The second is noted by Saint Chrysostom: A man
would think that the Judgment being so near, the time were too short to
bear any fruit? Non est ta^^^^ f^uctus (...) rationalium, qua^s (...) liuu^,
(...) uimiram t^mpus expecta^s, sed vi^e suntaxat (...) statim (...) e^u^pit in
ger^ina. Eccles. 5. Vrou. 1.
But the fruit of Rational trees is not such as that of Irrational, it needs
not so long time to ripen; be willing, and by and by thou may be said to
fructify. Wherefore we must not put off from day to day, when will we repent,
if not, when the stroke is at hand? Punishments work the more, the more they
are imminent, on themon whom they will work at all; let us be sure that if
we will not turn, God has whet his sword, bent his bow, prepared the
Instruments of death; When the Axe is cutting, thou shall call and I will not
hear, says Wisdom. Therefore we must take advantage of our Iam our Now;
every man must; for the Judgment is denounced universally; Every tree that
bears not good fruit; though he be a child of Abraham. Esaias does excellently
amplify this figuratively; Saint Paul to the Corinthians, and Saint John in
the Revelation expresses it plainly; There is no Prerogative, no respect of
persons, Every barren tree shall bear his punishment; Although there be
difference between fruit trees in regard of quantity, yet fruit of the same
quality will be expected of all.

Neither may we think that the Eradication did seize upon every particular;
Saint Paul has taught the contrary, there were amongst them remainders of
grace; but their state perished irrecouerably; and I think they are much
deceived that think they shall ever become a Nation again. From the beginning
of the Gospel God has evermore as they became Christians mingled them with the
Gentiles, and so (I think) will do unto the worlds end.

But to leave them, and come to ourselves. This Sermon was preached unto the
Jews, this Judgment was denounced against them; But our Savior Christ has
given us a good observation, when they told him of certain persons; Luke 13.^.
Think you (says he) that these were the only sinners? Nay; I tell you, that
except you repent, you shall likewise perish. Repentance then concerns Us no
less then them; and here is a good motive unto repentance, to think on these
things, how great an evil it is to be excluded Heaven, what a miserable thing
it is to burn in Hell; It is a sure way (says Prosper) to make a man renounce
all vice, to refrain all allurements of the flesh; specially if we add
hereunto this Humility, not to presume of any good fruit, excepting that of
Jesus Christ; that will profit us, if we want our own; or rather, that also
prositeth no man in whom it does not work some of his own. When Saint John
had ended this Sermon, the Chapter goes on and tells us that many came to
him saying; Master what shall we do? Quomuis malus nec timore corrigatur,
tamen bonus, nisi timuerit, perihit. Ergo denunciatio irae, etsi in malis nihil
agat, tamen a malis bonos segregat.
Although (says Chrysostom) a wicked man will not be reclaimed no not with
plagues, yet a good man except he fear shall perish; therefore denunciations
that profit not the wicked, do notwithstanding discover the difference that is
between the good and bad. Saint John had diverse kinds of Auditors, his Sermon
did good to some, though to othersome it did no good; the Scribes and Pharisees
were none of them that asked; What shall we do? the Publicans and Soldiers,
the common people were; every one of them had his question, and received his
answer. You perceive whom I wish you like in these days, so like those of
Noah and Lot; O that we knew those things that belong unto our peace; the Axe
has been often put to our branches, if we profit it shall not come to our
root, but it will not fail to strike as deep as the root, if we prove not
more fruitful for the pruning of the branches: Let us inquire into our selves,
before God make his inquiry, and provide that we be not found fruitless,
lest, Fructus in Iudaeis ^^uenire non potuit, vtinam in nobis inueniat.
we that have the honor to be grafted in their steed that are broken off, for
like sin be subject to the like doom, both of Loss and Pain.

I end with Saint Ambrose words. Christ came and could find no fruit in the
Jews, I would he might find some in us. Let us pray the good Husbandman that
he would mediate for us, that space and grace may be bestowed upon us, that the
sentence may be respired, and we again manured, lest we also prove fruitless,
and be used as unfruitful trees.

O Lord who only can correct our nature and dispose our hearts, let the diew
of thy grace so enable us, and thy assistance so stili guide us, that we may so
fructify in this Paradise of Grace, that we may be transplanted into the
Paradise of Glory; there to bear the fruit of Holiness, and reap the fruit
of Happiness for ever. AMEN.
A SERMON PREACHED at Paul's Cross.

Anno 1623. Upon Luke 18. Verse 7, 8.

BY The Right Reverend Father in God, ARTHVRE LAKE, the late L. Bishop of Bath
and Wells.

LONDON, Printed by W. STANSBY for Nathaniel Butter.

1629.



A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS. ANNO 1623.
LVKE 18. VERSE 7, 8. 7. And shall not God avenge his own elect which cry day
and night unto him, though he bear long with them?

8. I tell you that he will avenge them speedily: Nevertheless, when the Son
of man comes, shall he find faith on earth?


THis Scripture does apply a story which is reported immediately before. The
story sets before us the proceeding of an unjust Judge, as a glass wherein
we are to behold the dealing of our most righteous God. The Judge, though he
had no conscience, was overcome by importunity; and at length relieved a poor
widow against her oppressor, only that he might rid himself of a suitor which
would not be said nay: So God, though he forbear long, will in due time repay
the persecutors of his suppliant Church, if her devotion never give him over.
This we are taught in the words that now I have read unto you.

More distinctly to break up this Application; I will observe therein
Argumentum and Argumentationem; What is affirmed, and How it is inferred. That
which is affirmed is in a word this; The Religious devotion of the Militant
Church is very powerful, but is not very lasting.

The Church is here called the Elect of God; but we have to do with no more of
them then are on earth; that limitation is in the end of my text, wherefore no
more of the Church is here mentioned then that which is militant.

The Church being militant is made devout by the Cross; the Elect therein are
(...); being conscious to themselves of their own weakness, they call for
help against their adversaries. The text tells us, to whom, and how; They
call unto him that is best able, and most willing, unto God; and to him they
call earnestly, for they cry; and constantly, for they cry day and night. Such
is the religious devotion of the Church Militant.

And such devotion is Powerful, mark with whom, and to what effect. It is
powerful with him to whom the Church prays; it preuailes with God. And the
effect to which it prevails is vindicatio cum vindicta, the deliverance of
the Church to the utter confusion of her foes. God will avenge his Elect.

But yet in this auenging festinat lent, God makes no more haste then good
speed, for he forbeareth long; and yet he stays not so long as to come too
late; he will avenge speedily. The devotion is powerful.

But it is not very lasting; the rest of the text will teach that,
Nevertheless, etc. though devotion steed us so much, yet become we most
lither when we should ply our help most.

And here mark first how the word is changed. Before our devotion was called
crying, here it is called faith. There is good reason for the change; for
Prayer, if it be religious is Oration fidei; it is endited by, and uttered from
our says.

This crying faith, or faithful cry has a wayning; the nearer the world is
to an end, the older it grows, and becomes weaker.

The end of the world is here meant by the coming of the Son of man; at that
time the dotage (shall I call it?) or rather death of this devotion shall
appear: for it shall be sought for then, but it will not then be found; there
will be then found no such praying as is powerfully devout. These things shall
you find in that which is affirmed.

After that you must see how they are inferred; And we shall find, that the
inference is made strangely, but strongly. Strangly; for whereas God should be
a pattern to the best of men; here one of the worst of men is made a pattern
unto God. And that is strange. But yet the conclusion is strong; for if there
be any sparkle of compassion in stony hearted man; how tender are the bowels
of our most gracious Father? Whatsoever good the best of men will do, God will
do the same insinitely much more.

You have the contents of my text; what remains but that we beseech God that
I may clear them so plainly, and you so religiously entertain them, that
whereas the ends of the world are hastening upon us, our languishing devotion
may so be quickened, that we may come with boldness to the throne of Grace,
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in all our time of need.

The first particular which I pointed out was the Title that is here given to
the Church; it is here called Gods own Elect, which is all one in the
Original Tongue with Ecclesia; the things, as well as the words, have a near
cognation. And if you look upon them well, they are, though a short, yet a
full definition of the Church for the Church does consist of a number of
persons, exempt from the common condition of men; and none can so exempt them
but only God.

More plainly. Men by the common condition of their nature, since the fall, are
children of wrath, a Mass of Perdition; they are without God, without Christ,
without the Spirit, without the Covenant, without hope, without all true life.
To be elected is to be taken, not only out of the number, but out of the
condition of such wretched men; to be made vessels of mercy, a new lump unto
the Lord; to be admitted into Gods house; to be incorporated into Christ's
body; to be possessed of the Holy Ghost; to be made parties to Gods Covenant;
partakers of the Communion of Saints, and heirs of everlasting life. This is
the Exemption or Election here remembered. And such an Exemption, such an
Election, none can make but God. God only can forgive sins, release
punishments, give grace, adopt for sons, finally, do whatsoever was before
expressed in the Exemption; every branch is a Royal Prerogative of the King of
Heaven.

But I must not omit to observe unto you, That if Gods Election (I speak not
of the eternal Decree, but the manifestation thereof in the Church militant)
there are two Acts. The first is the admission of persons into the outward
Congregation, and unto the Sacramental Obsignation; which is nothing else but
the outward profession of man, that he is a party to the Covenant of God;
Deuteronomy. 7. Psalm. 146.
and so Moses tells the Israelites that God has chosen them to be his
peculiar people; which is no more then that God has given them his Law, which
he had not done to every Nation. Romans 9.
Saint Paul adds more particulars of this kind; and in this respect gives
the name of Elect to whole Churches of the Gentiles. But besides this Outward,
there is an Inward Act of Election, and that is the operation of the Holy Ghost
giving unto us spiritual Wisdom and Holiness; making us Gods children; and
members of the mystical Body of Christ. And that Church which we believe in
the Creed is partaker of both these Acts of Election, as well the Inward as the
Outward; and these latter are Electi ex Electis, whom Christ does design when
he says in the Gospel, Many are called, but few are chosen. Because there are
none in this world actually of the Church invisible, but those that are in the
visible; and men cannot distinguish between the persons that partake either
only one or both of the Acts of Election; therefore in my text we will take the
definition of a Church in the widest sense, according to the rule of Charity
which the Scripture observes, although the power of denotion does properly
concern the whole visible Body, by reason of the better part thereof, those
which are as well inwardly as outwardly of the Church.

The use that we must make of this definition of the Church is by the first
word to be remembered of our Prerogative; If we do partake only the outward Act
of Election, how much are we better then the Heathen that know not the true
God, nor the Savior of the world Jesus Christ, and are destitute of all those
means by which they may be saved? But if, looking into our heart, we find
saving grace there, (for Gods Spirit does witness unto our spirit that we are
the children of God) when we contemplate in our selves this second Act of
Election, we have reason to think our Prerogative much more improued, by how
much an inward is better then an outward Jew; the Circumcision of the spirit,
better then the Circumcision of the flesh; to be baptized with the Spirit,
better then to be baptized with water; to eat Panem Dominum eat the flesh and
drink the blood of Christ, better then to eat only and drink only
Sacramental Bread and Wine; finally, to be a doer is better then to be a
hearer of Gods Word; The farther Christians go beyond Christians in these
gifts, the better must they think their state; and these spiritual
differences between man and man, better then whatsoever other differences
there may be found between them. Although the world uses to be little
sensible of this greater good, but most sensible of the lesser; wealth, honor,
etc. wherein every man thinks it a great matter to be advanced above his
Neighbors.

When we look upon the second word in the definition of the Church, that is
God, we see to whom we are beholding for our advancement, and to whom we
must give the glory of it; the glory of the first Act of Election; David
concludes the remembrance thereof with Praise ye the Lord; Psalm. 147.
And of the second Act also, the glory must be given unto Him, for so do the
Angels, the Beasts, the Elders, etc. after they have mentioned it, Revel. 5.
Revel. 5. If the question be moved, Quit te discreuit? Who has differenced
thee? our best answer will be, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord,
and let him that glories glory in the Lord.

I told you I have not to do with the whole Church, but with that part which
is militant, for such are the Elect which are on the Earth; Heaven is the place
for our Crown, Earth for our Cross; where Michael and the Dragon strove,
there must their Angels strive also; and the heel of the woman's seed must be
bruised in the same place where it must break the Serpents head. The Fathers
do wittily observe that the Church came out of Christ's side when he died, as
Eve out of Adam when he slept; Now out of Christ's side when it was pierced
issued Water and Blood, Monuments of our two Sacraments, which remember us that
we must drink of the same Cup whereof Christ drank, and be partakers of the
same Baptism wherewith he was baptized; every one must take up his own Cross
and follow his crucified Savior. Saint Austine is resolute, Ad Bonifacium
Comitem.
Si Ecclesia vera est, ipsa est quae persecutionem patitur, we are bastards and
no sons if we suffer not for Christ; and suffer we cannot but on earth; for
when we part from the earth, we part from our enemies, the Flesh, the World,
and the Devil; flesh and blood cannot enter into Heaven; Satan is cast out
thence, and the world shall then be unto us as if it were not, therefore the
Church Peregrinam agit in terris, she is here a Pilgrim, here she is like the
desolate widow, here she grieueth for the wickedness of the world, and
because she is not alike wicked with them, therefore does the world implacably
work her woe. Read this days Epistle. Wisdom ^.


In this militancie of the Church, the Elect of God become (...), they find
that they need, and they seek for help; the word implies as much; The Church
is compared unto a Dove for her simplicity, and for her meekness she is
compared unto a Lamb; As a Dove she is nothing suspicious, for Vt quisque est
vir optimus, ita difficillime credit alios esse improbos, Good men look to
find plain dealing as themselves deal plainly. As a Lamb the Church is as
apt to be a prey, as she is not apt to prey upon any; she is a fit subject
for the Shearer, and the Slaughterer, though it self be harmless and
useful. Look upon the enemies of the Church, they are the Serpent and the
Lion. The Serpent is full of fraud; fraud which circumuenteth our wits with
sophistry, and transporteth our affections with vanity, colored and blanched
with a show of Truth and Good. The Lion is full of Cruelty, and delights in
blood, watchful upon all opportunities, and never giving over the least
advantage. And the instruments of the Serpent and the Lion (I mean wicked men)
are Serpentine and Lion-like, deceitfully compassing their own end, and
spending their power only in cruelty. This has been the carriage of the
enemies of the Church ever since God put enmity between the seed of the
woman, and the seed of the Serpent. But it was never more remarkable then in
Popish Equivocation, and that which they call their Holy Inquisition, the very
marks of the Beast; and by them they make their nearest approaches to that
Father of L^^s, and that ancient Murderer; sure I am they have cut the heart
strings of all both Civil and Ecclesiastical true Policy.

The Church being thus besteed, when from her enemies she reflects her eyes
upon her self, finds her own inabilite, her need of succor: and as the
Apostles in their peril: so she in hers calls for help, Help Lord, or else we
perish; so said they: so says she. And my text tells us that she has
recourse unto God, Psalm 121.
I lift mine eyes unto the Hills (says David) from whence comes my help; Our
help stands in the Name of the Lord who has made Heaven and Earth; Psalm 46.
and God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble; And see
how full the help is, He that dwells in the secret place of the most High,
Psalm 9^
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty; the whole Psalm is an
excellent commendation of the Churches choice, but specially that Verse, Verse
13.
Thou shall tread upon the Lion and the Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon
shall thou trample under feet; though we be as simple as Doves, yet God is able
to make us as wise as Serpents; and he will make us confident as Lions, though
of our selves we be as meek as Lambs. And why? we have a Serpent to oppose
unto a Serpent, even him that was figured by the Serpent whom Moses lifted up,
Christ the wisdom of God; him we have to oppose to the groueling Serpent that
feeds upon earth and earthly men. If you be stung by this latter Serpent, do
but look to the former, and you shall presently be healed; for he is able to
take that crafty one in his own wiliness. We have a Lion to oppose unto a
Lion, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, to the roaring Lion; and out of the eater
he can draw meat; by death he overcame him that had the power of death; and
being the stronger, rifled that strong man's house: so that we may well say, If
God be with us, who can be against us? if we rely upon his wisdom, we
shall never be circumuented; neither shall we be oppressed, if we rely upon his
Power; therefore the Church does well to make her prayer unto Him.

But how does she pray? First fervently, for she cries. In the Ceremonial Law,
Incensio went before Ascensio, the Sacrifice was set on fire before it yielded
an odor of sweet smell ascending unto God; besides the silver trumpets sounded
aloud, with variety of other Music while the Sacrifice was burning. These
were but types whereof the moral was, that we must not be lither in devotion,
but express a feruencie therein. And we have a good Precedent in our Savior
Christ, who prayed with strong cries; Heb 5.
King David does express his earnestness by many sit Similies of parched
ground, that gapes wide for the showers of rain; Psalm 41.
of a chased Heart that breaths and brayeth after the water brooks; Psalm ^4.
N^^m.
of the passions of Lovers which are very violent; And God likes such
devotion, for sitit sitiri, he longs to be longed after.

But we must remember that there is Clamor Cordis and Oris, a crying of the
heart and the mouth; And as God is specially Inspector: so is he also Auditor
Cordis; as his eyes are specially upon our hearts: so are his ears open
thereunto; Non vox sed votum, non cordula musica sed Cor;
Non Clamans sed Amans cantat in aure Dei.
God does best understand and accept the sighs and groans of our spirit which
cannot be expressed. And yet, Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur, the sire that is
in the heart will not be suppressed; a vehement passion will make a vehement
elo^ution. Psalm 39.
But when we cry, we do it to manifest the earnestness of our affections,
and extremity of our distress, not to rowse God, as if he could not otherwise
hear; that were a conceit fit for the worshippers of Baal, ^. King 18.
Tertull. de Oratione.
whom Elias scoffs for it; for quibus arterijs opus si pro sono audiamur? if
the cry of the voice were the measure of devotion, he that has the most
Stentorean voice should be most devout; but we must know that no cry of the
lips can ascend higher toward God, then it is carried up by the feruencie of
the heart; though the seruencie of the heart can ascend unto God, though the
tongue be mute, for God said to Moses, why cryest thou? when he spoke never a
word. Whether we pray only with the heart, or also with the voice, we must be
remembered by this practice of the Church to be earneest therein; earnest in our
Soliloquies when we enter into our Closet; much more, when we are mustered in
the holy Assemblies, must our devotion offer a grateful violence unto God;
according to that good pattern which we have, Psalm. 130.

The Church prays earnestly; not only so, she prays constantly also; she
cries day and night. The four Beasts in the Revelation day and night cease
not saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty; which is the practice of the
Triumphant Church. Moses was willed to make all things according to the
pattern that was she wed him in the Mount, therefore he instituted that the
Sacrifices should burn day and night; Of the day there is no question; and it
is put out of all question concerning the night also by those words in the
Psalm, Behold, Psalm 134
bless ye the Lord all ye servants of the Lord, which by night stand in the
house of the Lord; 1. Chron. 9 33.
and that phrase which we meet withal often in the Scripture of keeping Gods
watches. The New Testament should herein answer the Old; and we are willed
therein to pray continually. 1 Thessalonians 5.
The Divines have a rule, Precepta affirmatiua tenent semper, sed non ad
semper, the habits of virtue must ever be in us, but we must perform the
Acts when we have just occasion; certain times we must appoint our selves for
Prayer, not only in the day but also in the night; so did David, he remembers
it often; and no doubt but others did it as well as he; for the Church speaks
thus in Esaias, Esaias 26.
With my soul have I desired thee in the night, with my spirit within me will
I seek thee early. Christ spent nights in prayer, Acts 16.
and Paul and Silas prayed and sang praises unto God at midnight. And the
Canonical hours which are mentioned in the old Liturgies were distributed
as well through the night as through the day. To say nothing of the Vigils at
solemn times. But so much of the public old Devotion which was used in the
night, long since degenerated, and is out of use, even in the Church of Rome,
as Bellarmine confesses; though privately men may pray at all hours, and no
doubt but many do, as well in the night as in the Day.

Some not contented with that limitation of affirmative Precepts to congruous
time, do mingle our Meditations with our actions; so Saint Ambrose, Clamant
opera tua, clamat sides, clamat affectus, De Cain (...) Abel.
clamat passiones, clamat sanguis; whatsoever good we do, or cross we
suffer patiently, that is a real prayer.

But to let pass these Observations, which may have their good use, (as may
that also which understands Prosperity by Day, and Adversity by Night, and
tells us that we must pray in whatsoever state we are) I will observe unto
you that which is more proper, and profitable, and which will show you that
indeed the Church Militant does cry day and night; take the words as strictly
as you can.

Observe then that a man prays many ways. First, in his own person; as
David did, who professes of himself that in his adversity he gave himself
unto prayer; we have his practice in the Psalms; and we have Christ's not only
practice but precept, Watch and pray; yea, Matthew. 26. Chap. 6.
and direction too, When thou prayest enter into thy chamber, etc. Finally,
this duty is made a part of our Catechism; no man therefore should be
ignorant of it, no man should neglect it.

Secondly, we pray when any member of the Church does pray, for Christ has
taught every man to say our Father, so to include others as well as himself,
even all that are members of the same body; so Singuli orant pro omnibus, (...)
and omnes orant pro singulis, every man prays for all the Church, and all
the Church does pray for every man. And this is no small part of the Communion
of Saints which we believe in our Creed; for God will that Oration be Insigne
charitatis, that out prayer be a perpetual Badge of our mutual Charity.

Thirdly, every man prays when the Minister serves God, he does not only
pray for us, but we also pray in him; mark the form of his words, they are
all plural, We confess, we beseech, we pray, etc. he is the Minister of the
Church, and it is the whole Churches Devotion that he presents unto God.

Fourthly, whether we pray, or other members of the Church, or the Minister,
we must observe that in all these prayers, there is something transient, and
something permanent; the Act is transient, the Memorial is permanent; 1 Kin 18.
learn this out of Salomons Dedicatorie, Let these my words wherewith I have
made supplication before the Lord, be nigh unto the Lord our God day and night;
but you will say this is but a wish; read the beginning of the next Chapter,
and you shall see that there God granted it, (...) 10.
and the Angel told Cornelius that his prayers were come up for a memorial
before the Lord.

Fifthly, The Church Triumphant prays for the Militant in general as not
ignorant of the condition out of which it self is come, and out of which it
wishes the Militant freed, as appears by that voice of the souls under the
Altar, their crying loud voice, which says, Revel. 6.
How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell in the Earth? This is Pie credibile, we may defend it without
any offense to Piety. But that which the Church of Rome builds hereon, the
Innocation of Saints, because they make Intercession, we may not admit; it
trencheth too much upon divine Attributes, and has too much cognation with
their Doctrine of Transubstantiation; therein they give as it were an vbiquitie
unto Christ's Body, and here to the souls of the Saints. But I will not
trouble you with Controversies, neither is that point so natural to this Text;
only take this Item, that out of the general Intercession of the Saints for
us, we can never gather our particuar Invocation of them; no nor general
neither.

Finally, our Savior Christ does only put sweet odours into our Prayers that
they may come acceptable unto God, Reu^l 8. (...) 8.
but also himself makes perpetual intercession for us unto him, his blood
cries better things then does the blood of Abel.

Put now all these together, Christ the Head, his Body the Church, that part
which is Triumphant, that which is Militant, all the members, all the Ministers
thereof; and you cannot doubt but the Elect do pray day and night.

But every man in his own case must remember a good observation of Saint
Chrysostomes, That Oration propria our own prayers, make all the other prayers
useful unto us; They avail for us by way of Impetration; but if we desire to
be accepted of God, we must contribute our own devotion with theirs; for they
do not pray to make us idle, but to supply the interrupting of our prayers,
which is occasioned by our honest vocation or necessary refreshing; during
which time we need not doubt but that we are remembered as well to God, as of God.

This constancy of prayer favors not the Euchites, who turned all Piety
into Prayer, as if there were nothing else to be done; the Church has long
since branded them, and many of the Friars may go for their Cousin Germans.
Matthew. 6.
Neither does it favor the Heathenish Battologie which Christ condemns. De
Orand^ De^ ad Probam.
Saint Austin helps us out with a distincton; Absit ab oratione multa
locutio, sed non desit multa precatio, si fernens perseuerat intensio; Christ
forbiddeh bare Lip-labor, but Heart-labour he does not condemn; pray as long
as you will, so your heart pray as well as your tongue.

Put now together the Persons and the Devotion, and then we see the Elect must
pray, or else they shall not have what God does purpose them; for as Christ
says; Ask and you shall have: so Saint James says, you have not because you
ask not. How absurd then are they, that make this profane Collection, I am
elected, therefore it skilleth not whether I serve God; Thou vain man, he that
electeth to the end, electeth to the means; yea, the election mentioned in my
Text is unto this Service; for when thou art elected into the Church, thou art
elected to be a Priest; thy person is elected to be a Temple; and prayer is
that Sacrifice which every man must offer in that House of Prayer. Can any man
be more elect then Christ was? And yet the Gospel teaches that he sought for
all things unto God by prayer; yea in our own case, when he was in an agony
he prayed most earnestly, most constantly.

But how can we doubt of this that the Elect must pray, whereas it is most
true, that no Prayers are acceptable unto God but those that come from the
Elect? John 9.
For God hears not sinners but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does
his will, him he hears; The Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the
Lord (says Solomon) but the prayer of the righteous is his delight. There is a
quarrel between us and the Church of Rome, Prou. 15.
whether (...), those things which God offers unto us, do work ex opere
operato, produce their effects out of their inherent or adherent efficacies:
but we are both agreed that (...), those things which we tender unto God are
accepted of God, ex opere Operantis, according as the person is religiously
disposed in acting them. wherefore we must wash our hands in innocence, and so
compass the Altar of God, and pray as beseems the Elect in Faith, Austin.
Epist. 121.
Hope and Charity.

I have dwelt long enough upon the Nature of Devotion; let us come at length
unto the Power thereof; I told you that the religious devotion of Gods Elect is
very powerful; Saint James tells us, that it is (...) very effectual, a
little before my text we read that it will (...) bring under those things
which it has to do withal. In the Law it is figured in Isha, ^euit 1.
that is Ignitio, or a fiery thing, which you know, is piercing, and so
preualent. Chrysostom says it is (...), it is Defensive, it is Offensive, it
has in it all power requisite for preservation of our selves, and confusion of
our enemies, he that can do nothing, if he can pray can do all things,
neither can any thing conquer him that can be vigilant and fervent in prayer.

But to come closer to my Text, that shows us with whom it preuayleth, even
with him to whom the Church does pray, that is with God. We read that Jacobs
name was changed into Israel, to signify a Prince with God, or (as the Angel
himself opens it) one that has prevailed with God, and so by Gods power
shall prevail with men; but mark, the reason of this was because of his
importunity in prayer, for the Text says, Genesis 32.
he wrastled with the Angel, and though the Angel desired, yet he would not
let him go till that the Angel gave him a blessing, and the blessing was this
name Israel, a monument of the efficacy of Prayer.

God in his just indignation was ready to destroy all Israel, Exodus 32.
formaking and worshipping the golden Calfe, Moses set upon him with prayer,
God said to him, Let me alone, Moses would not, God was saine to yield and
pardon his people; Numb. 14.
Aaron made the like experiment, wrath was gone out from God, Aaron made haste
with his Censor, and stood between the living and the dead, and presently Gods
wrath was quenched; 3. Sam 3^.
And did not God command the punishing Angel to sheath his sword so soon as
David sacrificed in the threshing flower of Areunah? and for a perpetual
Monument of that preualent prayer consecrated that place for the Seat of his
Temple, which was to be (according to Gods promise made to Salomons
Dedicatorie) a house of preua^ling prayer. That we have not a second Flood to
drown this world that is as sinful as the former, that the seasons of the
year have continued so long, ^en 3.
Winter, Summer, Seed-rime, Harvest, we owe it unto the powerfulness of
Prayer, for Noah sacrificed unto God, and God promised it should be so. But
beyond all goes the efficacy of Christ's Sacrifice upon the Cross,
Intercession at the right hand of God, which wrought the redemption of man, and
does continually preserve and propagate the Church if there were nothing else,
this shows abundantly how powerful prayer is with God; and the power which
our prayers have with him, we are beholding for it unto this, they prevail
with God only through Iosus Christ our Lord,

But we must not mistake; this preualencie of our Prayer, is not physical but
moral, God is not forced by us against his will, but out of his good will he
yeildeth unto us, as parents use to be overcome by the petitions of their
children. ^eui^ 1. Pr^^. 15.
Therefore is the Sacrifice of God in the Law said to be Ratzon, a thing that
pleases him well, to be his delight, a savor of a sweet smell, a savor of
rest, it is grata violentia, he that rules all, is well pleased to be
ouer-ruled by prayer. Wherefore seeing we know what will prevail most with
him, if we mean to speed of our desires, let us use that most which we are
sure will please him best, let us not be lither therein, but fervent in spirit.
Romans 12


But whereto serves this powerfulness of Prayer? The Text says, ad
vindicationem and vindictam, God upon their prayer will avenge his Elect. And
indeed in the Law God says, Vengeance is mine, Deu^. 22 Chap. 32. Psalm. 93.
and I will repay, the Apostle repeateth it to the Romans, the Psalmist says
as much, O God to whom vengeance belongs, thou to whom vengeance belongs,
show thy self; Chap. 1.
Nahum does amplify this property of God very emphatically, the Chapter is
worth your reading.

The first thing I observe here is, That when in our distresses, and while we
are under crosses we seek for succor unto men, we find that for the most part
they have blind eyes, they will not see our case; deaf ears, they will not
hear our groans; fast hands, they cannot open them for us; and feeble knees
that will not stir toward us; finally, they have hard hearts, they have no
fellow-feeling of our misery; but here is our comfort, there lies an Appeal
from man to God, and they shall prevail with God, which cannot prevail with
man, he will not shut out our petitions, though no body else cares for our
soul. Therefore we must in well-doing commend our case to him that judges
righteously, assured, that as salvation belongs unto him, so his blessing is
upon his people, He is nigh to them that call upon him, to all that call upon
him faithfully.

The word in my Text does signify vindicationem, and vindictam, the
deliverance of the Church, and the destruction of her enemies, which commonly
go together, as appears in all the principal deliverances recorded in the
Scripture; when Noah was saved, the whole world was drowned; Lot was delivered
when Sodom was burnt; when God freed the Israelites, the Egyptians perished;
so did the Babylonians when the Jews were set free; finally, the just shall
go to Heaven, when the wicked go to Hell. The reason why these are coupled
together, is because the enemies of the Church are like savage beasts, which
when they have a prey in their power will not let it go by fair means, they
must be forced to do it, which David insinuates in those words in the Psalm,
Thou have smitten all mine enemies upon the cheek bone, Psalm. 3.
thou have broken all the teeth of the ungodly; or if you will, the ungodly is
made the ransom of the just, and comes in his place when he is delivered,
as teaches Solomon.

But yet, this rule must we observe for guiding of our Piety, that although
vindicatio and vindicta, our own deliverance, and the confusion of our foes
usually go together; yet in our prayer we must desire vindicatione^ propter se,
vindictam propter aliud; our own deliverance with a full and with a direct
affection, we may, we must desire; but we may not, we must not desire the
confusion of our foes, otherwise then if it stand not with Gods pleasure to
convert them, nor to make way to our deliverance but by their destruction. Yea
and then too it stands with the Charity of the Gospel to be compassionate to
them, and to pray unto God for them.

Finally, observe, that whereas the wicked in sinning offend God, and wrong us,
God seems more sensible of our wrong then of his own offense; in that Christ
says He will avenge his Elect, he seems to hold himself wronged in them.
Psalm. ^^^.
And indeed he that said, Touch not mine Anointed, said also He that touches
you, touches the apple of mine eye; he auengeth them as if he suffered in them.

God does so; but yet in auenging festinat lent. First, lent, he makes no
more haste then good speed, for he forbeareth long. You shall find in the
Scripture a double (...), or long-suffering of God; one toward the Sins, the
other toward the Woe of his Elect; and we must be contented as well with the
one, as the other; we must be contented as well to stay during Gods pleasure, as
he stays our leisure until we repent of our sin, he is unworthy to have
the benefit of the latter, that is discontented with the former. The rather,
because it has so manifold a use, and is so beneficial both to our selves and
others.

To our selves, First, ad probationem, to make proof that we are that which
we would seem to be, to be Gods own Elect. The Arc (says Saint Austine) was
made of square timber, which, which way soever it turned, stood firmly: even
so does the Church consist of Saints that always are the same, and like
themselves.

Secondly, Ad preseruationem; war is more expedient for the Church then
peace, for peace makes us effeminate and cowardly, but wars put strength and
courage into us; This the Author of the Tripartite story observes well
speaking of the persecution of the Church. And indeed, Lib. 11 cap 33. Bernard.
In pace amaritudo amarissima, we are never worse to Godward, then when we are
most at ease in the world, free from Tyrants, and free from Heretics.

Neither have we only the benefit of Gods patience, others have it also, facit
ad propagationem, it makes for the increase of the Word. Lactantius handles
this point very elegantly: Lib 5 tom. Instant cap. 23.
Amongst those that are spectators of the Martyrs sufferings (says he) some
wondering at their patience, ask, What that good thing is for the obtaining
whereof they endure such losses and pains? and so come to be informed of the
Gospel. Othersome inquire, What evil that is, the forbearing whereof, makes
them to be handled so oruelly? and they come thereby to learn the vanity of
Idols. Both ways, Sanguis Martyrum fit semen Euangelij, by Martyrdom the
Gospel gets ground, and Idolatry does lose it. Neither only does this
patience propagate the Gospel, it confirms also the Professors thereof; Phil.
1.
Many of the Brethren in the Lord waxing confident by my bonds are much more
bold to speak the word without fear; wavering consciences are settled when
they see Confessors and Martyrs endure so much for Gods Truth, and seal it
with their blood.

Finally, Christ will have that appear in the members, which has been
already approved in the Head, that they can break the Serpents head, and that
they are built upon the Rock, so that the gates of Hell cannot prevail
against them, no winds or waves, though they beat and blow, can beat or bear
down their house, because it is built upon a Rock; Sic defer inagnae est
clementiae, Chr^sostome.
Christ does his Church a favor in so delaying. These are important Reasons of
Gods suffering long.

And yet God stays not so long, as to come too late, for Gods permissiue
Providence is always followed with an effectiue, he suffers not the enemies
of the Church to pass their bounds, he always holds the bridle that is
fastened upon their nostrils; 1 Cor. 10. Psalm ^8.
No temptation befalls us which is not (...), sufferable by man, and with the
Lord are always the issues of death, when the wicked have filled up the
measure of their sin, when the number of the Elect is fulfilled, then is it
seasonable for God to avenge, Genesis 15.
then behold he comes quickly. That is no speed that preuenteth this season,
and we must hold that quick enough which God holds quick, with whom a
thousand years are but as one day.

And this the rather we must think, because the time which we suffer is
nothing to the time wherein we shall reign, for our light afflictions which
are but for a moment, are rewarded with an exceeding eternal weight of glory.
The time in which the wicked revel and riot, is as nothing, in comparison of
the time wherein they shall suffer, for they shall be bound in everlasting
chains of darkness, fed upon by a Worm which never dies, and burning in a
fire which never goes out.

Add hereunto that when God begins, he will quickly make an end; he has
laneos pedes, but ferreas manus, and tarditatem vindictae grauitate compensat,
though God come slowly to it, yet he pays home, and the wicked go down in
a moment into Hell.

And yet see our weakness, Eccles. 8.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the hearts of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil; yea, Psalm
116.
David himself said in his haste that All men are liars, so languishing was
his devotion, and so much did his impatien^i pr^u^nt Gods season. But we must
learn to possess our souls in patience; If God tarry, wait for him,
Habacuck. 2.
for he will surely come and will not tarry; behold his soul which is lifted
up is not upright in him. For the just must live by his faith; which is a
virtue not very lasting, as you must now hear in the next point.

Nevertheless, etc. Though religious devotion be very powerful, yet it is
strange to see how short lived it is, had we a friend upon whom our welfare
depended, how diligently would we attend him? How often would we remember him
of our case? How earnestly would we importune him for his help? And yet the
best men are not always alike kindly affected, neither are they always alike
able to steed us. God is always like himself, Almighty, Al-mercifull; and
yet who plyeth him for his eternal defense, so much as we usually plie men for
their temporal?

But mark here how the word is changed for before it was Crying here it is
Faith; The reason of the change is very good, for our Crying must be endited
by, and uttered from our faith. And indeed, how shall they call on him in whom
they have not believed? H^e that asks any thing of God (says Saint James)
must ask in faith nothing wavering; and Let not a wavering man think that he
shall receive any thing from the Lord.

But Faith is here understood not as it is Scientiall, but as it is
Conscientiall; not as it entertaineth Gods Truth, but as it puts it in
practice, and turns a Sermon into a Prayer; such faith does Christ mean
often in the Gospel, when being sued unto to work a miracle he answers one;
Mark 10.
Go in peace, thy faith has made thee whole, says unto another, Matthew 15.
Mttah 8
O woman great is thy faith; and of another, I have not found such faith no not
in Israel. Of this faith the rule is true, Si defici^ fides, deficit oration,
our devotion and this faith will live and die together. And the point which my
Text, teaches is that this Faith, and so Deuoion is not long-liued.

But here observe two things, first, That it fails; secondly, When it sayleth.

First, That it saileth. We should all hold out, but few do; being under Gods
permissiue Providence, we should expect his effectiue; but Adversity makes
wisemen mad, and in time of adversity many fall away; men do (...) shrink in
the conflict like Cowards both in soul and body. There is not a more sensible
decay in the Great then in the Little World, in our bodies, then in our souls;
there are periods of Piety as well as of Policy, and Conuersions of Churches
as well as of States; witness Arrianisme, Mahumetisme, Papisme, yea, and
Atheism too, which have brought practicke Faith and religious Devotion unto an
irrecouerable consumption. The Papists will needs be an exception to this
decay of faith; but whether you take faith for Scientiall or Conscientiall they
are spectacles to the world of a dying faith, their errors cannot be excused,
and their superstitions are intolerable. Whether we be in our declination or
no, it is worth our inquiry. An old Friar preaching to his Brethren spoke
these words; Fratres, in principio religionis nostrae, etc. Brethren, when our
Order first began we were full of Conscience, in process of time we lost a
syllable, and then retained nothing but Science; we have now lost one syllable
more, and we are nothing but Entia, certain flow Belites good for nothing. I
am sure we have lost one syllable, if we have lost no more, for Conscience to
Godward and toward the world are rare things.

But what talk I of Christian faith? We have ouerliued Civil faith; I am
pridem fugere pudor, verumque fidesque,
In quorum subiere locum fraudesque dolique.
though cases of Conscience be not so corruptly delivered by us as by Jesuits,
Psalm 14.
who teach men artificially to lie, and to murder meritoriously; yet in
practice we are gone very far, and if God should look down from Heaven to
see if there were any that would seek after God, Chap. ^
he should find that all are gone aside, etc. We may read a picture of our
selves in Jeremy, if we do not exceed it. What may we conceive, but that the
Son of Man is coming? Psalm 110.
for toward his coming this degeneration will be most manifest. Not at his
first Coming, for then, the birth of his womb was like the morning deaw, it
suddenly ouer-spread the earth, The Kingdom of Heaven suffered violence, and
the violent took it. Christ's second coming shall be like the days of Noah,
as then, so at Christ's coming, Men will be eating and drinking, marrying and
giving in marriage; then the Flood came, and then shall come the Fire.

Neither shall Faith be only latens lurking, as in time of persecution, but
languens giving up the Ghost, for want of grace.

But let us weigh the phrase; shall he find when he comes? then he comes
to seek this faith; and so indeed be does. For as all Judgment is given to
him as he is the Son of Man, and he shall come to judge in the glory of
his Father: so his first inquiry is, not only What his Church suffers, but
How it is disposed, neither must we look for his relieuing hand, except he
find us busy at our faithful cries. When God sent Moses to deliver Israel,
mark what he says unto him, Exodus ^. Romans 8.
I have seen the affliction of my people, and have heard their cry, and Saint
Paul tells us that they that have the first fruits of the Spirit sigh in
themselves while they look for the redemption of their bodies; Saint Peter, 2.
Pet. 3.
Seeing all these things shall be dissolved what manner of persons ought we to
be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for, and hastening to the
coming of the Day of God. Christ before both, Luke 21.
Watch and pray always that you may be accounted worthy to escape all those
things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man. If God
give us sighs and groans which cannot be expressed, it is a good
prognostication of our delivery, if we be senseless and stupid, it is a sign
of our destruction, either in terra nostra, when he brings troubles upon our
State, and the Clouds gather apace and threaten a storm; Ambros.
or cum orb terrarum at the genetall Day of Judgment, which cannot be far
off, as appears by the general defect of faith, at which time there will be
very few left to be saved.

Finally, observe the phrase: Christ does not doubt, but foretell what shall
be; yea, and deplore also those wretched times, because he is the Son of Man,
that is, has given us so great an interest in him, and himself bears so
great an affection to us: So that the manner of the speech does Terrorem
incutere; and should Torporem excutere, it serves to strike a terror into us,
and to rowse us out of our lethargy.

I have done with the Argument, I have showed you what is affirmed; I come now
to the Argumentation, and in few words will show you, How it is inferred. It is
inferred, First, very strangely; for God in good things should be a pattern
unto man, but man is here made a pattern for God, a wicked man, for a good
God; but it is not in wickedness but in goodness; And Christ's meaning is to
teach us, That we may imitate not only the good, but the bad also in that which
they do well; Christ himself did so, he compares his second Coming to the
stealing on of a thief in the night, Et quod decuit Christum, cur mihi turpe
putem. Yea, he bids us do so, imitate not only the bad Steward in his
Providence, but the Serpent also in his wisdom. Saint Paul. borrows
Sentences out of the Heathen Poets; Saint Austine borrowed a rule of
interpreting the Scripture from Tichonius the Donatist. Truth and Goodnessse in
whomsoever they are, they are Gods, and therefore whether the point be
speculatiue or practicke, if it be of this kind, in whomsoever we find it we
may follow it, and in following it we follow not m^n but God; God (I say) in
that of his which we find in men, for virtus vel in host landatur; and this
imitation is one of the profits we may make of our most deadly enemies.
Therefore it is too much precisen^sse to dislike some things in our Church,
because therein we follow the Church of Rome, as if all principles of reason
and Religion were dead in them: as it is too much malice in the Romanists to
dislike many things because they come from us, though otherwise they cannot
deny them to be reasonable. Christ's Inference teaches us more indifferency
of Judgment.

Though the Inference may seem strange, yet is it very strong, for we may
strongly conclude a minus probabili ad maius; if a corrupt Judge will be moved
with importunity, how much more a just God? If a poor Widow prevail so with
man, how shall Gods own Elect prevail with him? If the Cries of Nature work
so much, how shall the Cries of Grace work? The proceeding of the wicked Judge
may well resolve us of that which we may expect from God. This Parable
represents a strong motive. Maith 7.
If you that are wicked know how to give good things to your children when they
ask you, how much more your Father which is in Heaven? etc. Therefore Christ
does not only move the question, as if it were a Problem, but turns it into a
direct Affirmation: I tell you He will; and Christ's I tell you is a seal of
certainty, for he is Amen, the faithful and true witness; yea, it is He
himself that shall do what he says, as appears, Esaias 63. Who is he which
comes from Edom? and the (...) or Thanksgiving in the Revelation.

But I draw to an end. The conclusion of all my Text is this; If at any time
we be distressed and not relieved; the fault is not in God, it is in us, for
our Devotion is tired ouer-soone, we are all modicae fidei, men of little
faith, and though the spirit be willing, yet the flesh is weak, and the
weakness of the flesh prevails more then the willingness of the Spirit.
Wherefore we must all pray unto God to give us the Spirit of Grace and Prayer.

ANd Lord we beseech thee help our unbelief, and increase our faith, yea,
Lord, pray thou that our faith fail not, and the more thou do exercise our
patience, the more earnest let us be for thy deliverance; deliverance from our
corporal, deliverance from our spiritual foes; that well ouercomming our
Militancie here on earth, we may be Triumphant with the Saints in Heaven,
where we shall turn our Prayers, into Praises, and sing day and night,
honor, praise, strength and power be unto him that sits upon the Throne,
and to the Lamb for evermore. AMEN.
SUNDRY SERMONS DE TEMPORE. PREACHED UPON Several Occasions by the Right
Reverend Father in God, ARTHVR LAKE, D. of Divinity, Lord Bishop of Bathe and
Wells.

printer's device of the brazen serpent, used by Robert Young

LONDON, Printed by R. Young for N. BVTTER. 1629.



EIGHT SERMONS ON THE NINTH CHAPTER Of the Prophecy of ISAIAH.
ISAIAH 9. VERSE. 6, 7. For unto us a Child is borne, unto us a Son is given,
and the government shall be upon his shoulders: and his Name shall be called,
The wonderful Counselor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince
of Peace.

Of the increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no end, upon the
Throne of David and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with
Judgment and Justice, from henceforth even for ever: The zeal of the Lord of
Hosts shall perform this.


THis is the first Lesson appointed for this Morning Prayer; and appointed
fitly: For the Argument well fits the Time. We are now met to praise God for
the Morning of the Church. Zachary, Luke 1. does so call the Birth of Christ,
saying, The day spring (that is, the Morning) from on high has visited us:
Yea, Christ himself (Revel. the last, verse. 16) does call himself The bright
Morning star.

And verily his Birth was the most blessed Morning that ever the Church saw;
whether you respect the Night that went before, or the Day that followed after,
it was the blessedest Morning that ever the Church saw.

The Night was long and dark, a Night of want, of war: so we read in the
last of the former, and the first verse of this chapter: But the Day that
followed was a clear and lasting Day, a Day of harvest, a triumph Day; so we
are taught in the four verses that go immediately before my Text.

A great alteration: Who could work it? who could turn that night into this
day? what Sun shone forth in so great strength? In such a case, man was like
to move such a doubt; therefore the holy Ghost has resolved it, and his
resolution of that doubt is my Text. Lo here is one that can undertake that
work: who he is, How excellent he is, we are taught here, and that in regard of
his Person, and of his State. For of his Person here are the Natures wherein it
subsisteth; here is the People to whom it belongs.

It subsists in two Natures; 1. The Nature of Man, He is a Child: 2. The
Nature of God, He is the Son. The Person subsisting in these two Natures
belongs unto whom? To Us was he borne, he was given to Us, says the Prophet
Esaias, and Esaias was a Jew. Christ then belongs to the Jews; though the Jews
must not be understood according to the flesh, but the spirit. To these Jews
was he vouchsafed by taking and giving. Natus, he took his nature from them;
and Datus, what he took, he with advantage bestowed upon them.

But of what degree was he amongst them? here comes in his State; He was a
King, The Government shall be upon his shoulders. The Government, that was
Royal; for verse 7. it is called The Throne, The Kingdom of David. He shall
sit upon that; and that is the Government that shall be laid upon his
shoulders. And happy are the People that have such a King. You will confess
it, if you consider his Excellency. The Excellency both of his Person, and of
his State. Of his Person; that appears in his endowments: Of his State; that
appears in his managing thereof. The Endowments of his Person are Royal:
Read his Titles, He shall be called (and what he is called, that he
certainly is) He shall be called by those names that express such virtues as
most beseem a King, our King. For a King, over and above the Virtues which are
common to him with his Subjects, must have more than ordinary Wisdom, and
Power. And see, this King is called for his Wisdom, The wonderful
Counselor; for his Power, The mighty God.

But mistake not his Kingdom; it is not of this World. He that is our King, is
The Father of Eternity, that is, Of the World to come.

And as his Kingdom is not of this World: so is not the condition of his
People worldly; it is Peace: and Peace is not the portion of this world, but of
that which is to come. Our King is the Prince of this Peace.

You see how the Person is endowed, and thereby how excellent the Person is.
There is an Excellency in his State also; it appears in the Effect, in the
Cause. The Effect; for of this Kingdom there are no bounds: and the felicity
of the Subjects is also boundless. so says the Text; Of the increase of his
Government and Peace, there shall be no end.

Such an Effect must have an answerable Cause; it has: Justice and Judgment
are the Policy of this State. with these, as a wonderful Counselor, he
does order, as a mighty God, he does support his State.

And he does it incessantly, From henceforth and for ever. As the Effect: so
the Cause; this is eternal, therefore that.

These Truths concerning Christ's Person and State, are not only affirmed in
the body of the Text, but also assured in the close thereof. Much you have
heard, and yet no more than shall be: He that has promised, can do it, such
is his Power; He is the Lord of Hosts. Nay, he cannot but do it, such is his
Love: for his Love is Zeal. So concludes the Prophet, The zeal of the Lord of
Hosts shall perform this.

You have heard the sum of this whole Text, and therein see a most exquisite
picture of our Savior Christ: certainly it is the fullest, the liueliest,
that ever the holy Ghost in so few words expressed in any part of the Old
Testament. For here Christ is not only drawn from top to toe, but drawn also
with those varieties that befell him from eternity to eternity; from the
eternity that was before the world began (for it looks as far back as
his eternal Generation) unto the eternity that shall be after this world shall
cease to be: for it looks as far forward as his Glorification.

Yea, whereas Christus is either Naturalis, or Mysticus, considered alone in
himself, or jointly with his Church, lo, here are both, both are clearly
revealed unto us. So that what is there that you would desire to see in Christ,
that you may not see in this Text?

See it no doubt you do, but yet not so fully as I wish. Wherefore let me
point more distinctly at the meaning of my Text, and follow me (I beseech you)
with a religious eye, and a diligent view thereof.

The whole Text does break it self into two parts: a Doctrine, and a Warrant
thereof. The Doctrine opens the Person and the State of Christ: and of both
these it delivers the substance, and the eminency. I begin at the substance
of the Person. Wherein first we are to see the Natures wherein this Person
subsisteth; The nature of Man, noted by the Child; The nature of God, noted by
the Son. Though the later Jews, in hatred of Christ, whom they will not have
to be their Messiah, mis-apply these words to Ezechias, who was indeed a Type
of Christ, Esaias 32. yet not the Truth it self; notwithstanding the ancienter
Jews (not only the Christian Fathers) refer them to the Messiah, as may be
gathered out of the Septuagint, and Caldee Paraphrase.

The Child then and the Son are plain, but they are solemn words. The holy
Ghost is not curious in paraphrasing them, or setting limitations to them, such
as happily might make his meaning more apparent, and let us know what Child,
what Son he means, because these words were more frequent in the mouths of
the Jews; by them did they ordinarily note their Messiah; from the fall of
Adam were they used to these Phrases. In Paradise Christ was called The seed of
the Woman; which is but the Periphrasis of a Child. Jacob speaks of Shilo
which should come from Judah, and come, when the Scepter, and Lawgiver were
both gone. Acts 15. This appears to be meant of Christ, who (as St. James
observes out of Amos) came to repair the Tabernacle of David, which was quite
fallen down. Touching the Son, most lively is the Prophecy made to King
David, 2 Samuel 7. concerning this seed, of whom God said, He shall be my Son,
and I will be his Father. St. Paul Heb. 1. applies this unto Christ; it must
be understood of him: as likewise that place, Psalm. 2. Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee. St. Luke Chap. 3. fetches his Pedigree from Adam,
from God: The Gospel calls him The Son of David, and the Son of the
Highest. I need add no more places. This you must observe, that by the Child,
by the Son, the Old Testament, the New Testament warrant us to understand
Christ, who was usually called The Child, The Son. These are solemn words.

As they are solemn; so are they necessary also: the Child was not enough,
neither was the Son enough in our case. Supposing Gods decree, we must have
a Person apt, and able: The Child was apt, but he was not able; the Son
able, but not apt: Put them both together, and then you have ability and
aptness to work the Redemption of man. There is aptness in the Child to
obey, to suffer, to undergo whatsoever cannot beseem the Son: But that he
may do, and suffer meritoriously, acceptably, the Child must be enabled by the
Son; from the Son must the Child receive both strength and worth: Therefore
we have both a Child, and a Son; and if not both, none, no Savior: for
neither could alone suffice.

As the words are solemn and necessary: so are they strange. It is strange the
Son of such infinitencsse, the Child of such finitenesse; the Son of such
glory, the Child of such meandness; the Son of such power, the Child of such
weakness, should come so near together, as to make one Person, a deified
Man. And because strange, therefore many have stumbled at them; some at the
Son, some at the Child, severally considered; some at them both, considered
jointly. The Arrians they set upon the Son, the Godhead of Christ, and would
have him a creatitious God, or at the best, but (...). Against them the first
Council of Nice was assembled, and defined, that Christ was (...), truly God,
(...) of the same substance with his Father, God of God, (as it is in the
Creed) light of light, very God of very God, begotten of his Father before all
worlds.

When they were quelled, the Apollinarists set upon the Child, and pared away
the best part of the Manhood of Christ: They granted Christ's Godhead, and so
much of his Manhood as concerned a Body; but a reasonable soul they would not
grant him, they thought that his Godhead supplied that. The Understanding, and
the Will of Man is not requisite (say they) seeing both are found in God.
Against them was assembled the Council of Constantinople, which defined, that
Christ was, not only perfect God, but perfect Man, (...), of a reasonable
soul, and humane flesh subsisting; as it is in Athanasius Creed. And miserable
were our case, if their definition were not true. Damascene his Rule might
strike a terror into us, Quod non est assumptum, non est curatum: And what
shall become of man, if the better part of man, nay that which only makes a
man, for, Forma dat nomen, and esse; be not saved by Christ?

When these Heresies were stopped, which set upon the parts of Christ's Person
severally, then began those which set upon them jointly. Nestorius he
acknowledged the truth of the Godhead, and fullness of the Manhood: but he
brooked not that Union of these two in one person, without which Christ could
be no Redeemer. A friendly and loving association and cohabitation he would
have of two Persons, The Child of Marie, and The Son of God: but he would
not endure, that both should be accounted but one Person, or, that the Virgin
Marie should be called (...), The Mother of God; expressly crossing the saying
of the Angel, That holy thing that shall be borne of thee shall be called the
Son of God: Yea, razing the comfort of many passages of Scripture, which by a
(...) (as the Fathers call it) not real, but verbal, whereof there is no
other foundation but this personal Union; do attribute to the Child in
Concreto, that which springs from the Son; and to the Son in Concreto, that
which springs from the Child. As for example; No man (says Christ) ascends
into Heaven, but he which descends from Heaven, even the Son of Man which
is in Heaven: Take away the personal Union, this speech cannot be true. For
the son of Man was not in Heaven (...), but (...), not in the nature of man,
but in the nature of God, hypostatically united unto man. In the twentieth of
the Acts, God is said, with his own blood to redeem his Church. An impossible
thing, were it not for the personal Union, which makes that to be ascribed
unto God in Concreto, which indeed belongs unto Man. But the reason of the
Phrase, is, God is one with Man. Yea, all the nature of merit is founded in
this Union: Loose the union, and overthrow the merit. For the ability of the
Son closes not with that aptness which before you heard of in the Child, to
perform the blessed Act of Redemption; but by this means of personal Union.
Against so pestilent an Heresy, was assembled the Council of Ephesus, that
defined, that God and Man made but one Christ (...), and that the nature of
man, assumed by the Son of God, was (...), it had no personality, but that
which before was in the Son. And the Reason of it is very clear: For, seeing
Christ came to save, not any one person, but the seed of Abraham, as the
Apostle speaks, Heb. 2. he was to assume, not a person, but the nature of
Man, that so he might be the common Savior of Mankind.

Nestorius being put down, up starteth Eutyches, and he, in stead of a
personal Union of the Natures, forged a Confusion of them: He would so join
them, that two should become one, not Person, but Nature; and so of God, and
Man, we shall neither have God, nor Man; one shall be swallowed up in the
other, at the least, the Manhood, in the Godhead. And this overthrows not only
the apparent Texts of Scripture, which speaking of Christ after the
Incarnation, call him sometimes God, and sometimes Man; and particularly, as
Romans 1. Phil. 2. and elsewhere reckon up either Nature: but it abolisheth all
the comfort of those sweet Texts, which affirm, that the Law was fulfilled in
our flesh, that we were crucified with Christ, that we rose with him, and
that with him we sit in heavenly places; but especially that Text to the
Hebrews, which bids us come with boldness unto the Throne of Grace,
because we have not such an High Priest as cannot be touched with our
infirmities, seeing he is like unto us in all things, sin only excepted.
Against Eutyches was assembled the Council of Calcedon, which provided for the
sincerity of our Faith in this Article, and has defined against this confusion
of Natures, the compounding of the Nature of God and Man, (...). And the
learned Writings of Leo the First, Vigilins, and others, are excellent
Commentaries upon that Council.

But to what end have I opened all this? Surely that you might see the riches
of this first branch of my Text, teaching us what Christians must believe
(maugre all Heretics) guided by those famous General Councels; namely, four
things there are to be considered therein: 1. The truth of the Godhead. 2. The
fullness of the Manhood. 3. The Personal Union of both. 4. and yet without
abolition of either. So that we may in these words read the whole Mystery of
the Incarnation.

But one Caution I must give you, and not I but the Fathers generally, and that
is, You must acknowledge these Mysteries, but you must not pry too far into
them, lest that befall you, which is in the proverb, Qui scrutator est
Maiestatis, opprimetur a gloria: While you will know more than is permitted,
you mistake that which is revealed. In every Article of our Creed, especially
in this, that of Moses holds, The secret things are for the Lord, but the
revealed things are for us. That these things are so, is the revealed part of
the Article; but how they come to be so, is the secret part thereof. Let us
be contented with that which is ours, and leave Gods unto himself: Licet
scire quod natus sit Christus, non licet discutere quomodo natus sit, illud
negare mihi non licet, hoc quaerere metus est. Nam generationem eius quis
enarrabit? says St. Ambrose. And it was this Quomodo, that was the bane of all
the fore-recited Heretics; and I pray God their harms may make us to beware.
Let us be wise unto sobriety, the seeds that they sowed are not yet all dead,
they fructify too much in other parts, and something have they showed
themselves of late in our Country; lest they possess us, this Caveat must be
marked by us.

The last thing which I will note on these words, is, they are most sweet
words. The name of Child and Son make Christ most lovely in the ears, in the
eyes both of God and Man. If man were put to his choice, what nature he would
wish to be used in his Redemption, is there any that he could desire, rather
than his own? And what nature can better content God in the Redemption, than
his own? Look upon the Child, Man has what he would; and look upon the
Son, God has what he would: both cannot be but well pleased.

You hear not all the sweetness of it, look again upon the Child. The
Physicians and Divines druide the life of man into many ages; some after one
fashion, and some after another; but the very first is that which most properly
is noted by this word: it signifies that age which begins upon the conception,
that moment wherein the nature of man takes beginning. No sooner is the Child
quickened, but it is jeled, it is that which is noted by this Child, and the
English word seems to come thence. The love of Christ to children appeared many
ways; when he rebuked his Disciples that would not suffer them to be brought
unto him; when he accepted Hosanna out of their mouths; when he vouchsafed
them to be Martyrs at his death: but never did he express so much love unto
them, as he did in being like unto them, even the youngest and tendrest of them,
lodging in his mothers womb, borne in his mothers arms, sucking at his
mothers breast, and learning to speak from his mothers mouth; could Christ ever
have taken a more gracious course to sanctify their simplicity, plicitie,
their infirmity, and show how dear they were unto him? I wonder not now at
those other words of Christ, The childrens Angels continually behold their
Fathers face in Heaven: and, To them belongs the Kingdom of Heaven: yea, They
that will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven must be like unto them. And who
would disdain to be like unto them, to whom Christ was pleased to be so like?

And is not the Child then a sweet word? Have not Parents therein a great
comfort? Children oftentimes dye in their mothers womb, and often so soon as
they come out of the womb: despise them not, despair not of them, they cannot
be so yongue, but Christ was as yongue; and what he was, he sanctified: they
are holy unto him, and by him to God their Father. The name of Child is sweet
then, sweet in regard of the nature of man; and yet more sweet in respect of
the first beginning (as it were) and infancy of man's nature.

The name of Son also has in it a sweetness: and why? The Son is in
nature nearest, and dearest in affection to his Parents, especially if he be
vnigenitus, then is he vnice dilectus; the only begotten is the only beloved.
This word then shows, that Christ can bring us most near, and make us most
dear unto God. Most near; for the Son is of the same nature: most dear;
for he would be one with us, that he might make us one with God.

This word then looks most cheerfully upon the case of Man. We had been
Sons, but by reason of the fall we were not; and be again that which once
we were we could not, but by the Son. The Recovery then of our state, our
former state, but in a more excellent manner, is promised in this word. The
Son by nature, comes to make us Sons by adoption. this title of the Person
puts us in hope of that recovery. When we hear this, can we but exclaim;
Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of him, and the Son of man that
thou so regardest him! we cannot, we must not: No, we must root our Faith in
this substantial Mediation (as the Divines call it) and comfort our selves
therewith, if ever we mean to have comfort of the actual Mediation.

Therefore was the Sacrament provided as a looking glass, wherein we might
see and partake that Spiritual Manna, that Bread of God, that came down from
Heaven, to give life unto the world. Theodoret in one of his Dialogues has an
excellent parallel between the Incarnation of Christ, and the Condition of the
Sacrament; which withal shows, how unsound the Doctrine of the Church of Rome
is concerning Transubstantiation: Neither indeed can there be a more lively
representation of the one, than by the other. As in Christ there are two
Natures of God and Man: so in the Sacrament are there two Substances, the
Heavenly, and the Earthly. As in Christ these two Natures are truly and
entirely: so are those substances in the Sacrament. As after the Union, the two
Natures make but one Person: so after the Consecration, the two Substances make
but one Sacrament. Finally, as the two Natures are united without Confusion or
Abolition of either in Christ: so in the Sacrament, are the Substances heavenly
and earthly knit so, that each continues what it was, and works answerably
on us. These things we should observe when we come to the Sacrament, and so
shall we reap the greater benefit thereby: the rather, if we not only behold
the one mystery in the other, but possess our selves also of the one, by the
other; as indeed we ought. For if we feed upon the Sacrament aright, we become
thereby what Christ is, Bone of his bone, and flesh of hu flesh: yea, we are
made partakers of the divine nature (as St. Peter speaks.) And what more can
be wished of a mortal man?

But I must conclude.

LOrd cherish in us this Faith, Lord let us (as we ought) acknowledge the
Child, acknowledge the Son, our own Nature in thy Son, and thy Son in our
Nature. Let us never sever that which thou have conio^ned: Let us never
confound that which thou have distinguished: Let us believe without disputing.
So shall our Faith be free from error, and our souls be full of comfort;
comfort in hearing of, comfort in receiving that Child, that Son, which has
so made us Children, that we are the beloved Sons of God. Amen. THE SECOND
SERMON.
For unto us a Child is borne, unto us a Son is given, etc.
IN handling the Substance of Christ's person, we were to consider the Natures
wherein it subsists, and the People to whom it belongs. I began the unfolding
of the Natures, and showed you, that they are two, and that between these two
there is some odds.

The two Natures, are the Nature of Man, and the Nature of God, noted by the
Child, and the Son: Solemn, necessary, strange, sweet words. Solemn;
because received amongst the Jews to signify their Messiah. Necessary;
because they import the aptness and ability which is requisite in a Savior.
Strange; if they be thoroughly considered, the four Mysteries obseruable in
Christ's Incarnation appear in them: 1. The truth of his Godhead: 2. The
fullness of his Manhood: 3. The union of two Natures in one person: 4. and yet
the distinction of these Natures in the Person. Sweet; because they give
contentment unto God and Man. That these things are so, it is plain by the
Text. How it is so, Faith must not enquire; it must only entertain the Union,
as a great honor done to the meannesse of Man, which is assumed by the
Majesty of God; for which we must give glory unto him. Thus far I came, and
farther the time would not suffer me to go.

Let us now see the People to whom he is vouchsafed. He belongs to Us,
says the Prophet. But who are We? whom means the Prophet by Us? of what
Nation? of what condition were We? By Nation Jews: for it is Esaias that
speaks, and Esaias was a Jew. When he says, He is borne to Us, he is given to
Us: it is as if he should say, He was borne to the Jews, given to the Jews.
And indeed so it is: God conditioned to be their God, and that they should be
his people; he entered into a Covenant with them, and placed the seals of his
Covenant in them; they had the Tabernacle, and the visible presence of God with
them; all the types of Christ, personal, real, were amongst them; yea, from
them was Christ to take his Nature. St. Paul, Romans 2.9. shows what
Prerogatives God vouchsafed them: yea, and in the 14. Chapter goes so far, as
to call Christ The Minister of Circumcision. Christ himself in the Gospel
seems to appropriate himself to the Jews, when he says to the Woman of
Canaan, I was not sent, but to the lost sheep of Israel. But this
notwithstanding, the Prophesies must hold true, whereof a brief is delivered
by old Simeon; Christ was to be the light of the Gentiles, not only the glory
of Israel. Christ was borne, and given, not only to the Jew, but also to the
Gentile. The 87. Psalm is excellent to this purpose, showing us, the Christ
was borne, not only amongst the Jews, but among the Gentiles also.

But we must mark, that the Gentiles have no other interest in Christ, than if
they become Jews: The Law is to go out from Sion, Esaias 2. and so to come to
them; the forecited Psalm imports as much. Esaias shows, Cap. 49. and 60. and
44. Romans 11.
that they must become Sons and Daughters of Jerusalem; that they must submit
themselves to her; they must all speak the language of Canaan, as it is Esaias
19. But St. Paul is most plain, who to the Romans shows, that the true
Olive is the Jew, and if the Gentile partake of the fatness thereof, he must
be grafted thereinto, and become a Branch of that Olive. To the Ephesians more
plainly, more fully, he makes the receiving of the Gentiles into the Church,
to be an admission into the Covenant, into the Commonwealth of Israel. Ephesians.
3. a becoming one body with them.

But as the Gentile becomes a Jew: so is it not a Jew according to the flesh,
but according to the spirit. A Son of Abraham he is, but a spiritual Son:
the partition wall is taken down; yea, the Arc it self is removed, Jeremy 3.
and the Ceremonies which cloth the Religion of the Jews cease, they are not
imposed upon the Gentiles. Yea, the Jew himself becomes a Gentile: the Jew
(I say) becomes a Gentile carnally, as the Gentile becomes a Jew
spiritually. Of the ten Tribes it is most clear, that after their Captivity,
they never returned, and there is no such Nation to be heard of in the world;
they are mingled with other Nations, and become Gentiles according to the
flesh. And as for the other two Tribes, that made up the Kingdom of Judah, many
thousands of them were converted to the Christian Faith in the days of the
Apostles, and yet there is not extant any National Church of them, neither was
there long extant any; they also are become Gentiles according to the flesh.
And God that buried the body of Moses, so that it could not be found, lest the
Jews should commit Idolatry with that body, whereby God had wrought so great
Miracles; seems also to have (as it were) buried so many Jews as became
Christians, by mingling them with the Gentiles, lest that superstition which
has besotted the Gentiles to go a Pilgrimage to the Holy Land, should have
wrought more strongly in making them dote upon that holy people. But God has
turned all the world into a Canaan, has of all Nations compounded the Israel
of God. Of a truth (says St. Peter) I see there is no respect of Persons with
God, but in every Nation whosoever believes, and fears God, is accepted of
him: There is neither Jew nor Gentile, Grecian nor Barbarian, bond nor free,
but all are one in Christ: all are contained under this name Us. In the
Prophet, upon this ground Israel seems to note the Gentiles; Ezekiel. 37.
when both Judah and Israel are remembered to be converted to God, and the whole
house of Jacob.

You see of what Nation the People is: now see of what Condition. Borne to Us,
given to Us. And who are we for whom God has done this? Gifts are bestowed
upon Persons, either for their worth, or for their need: For their worth; and
so they are Munera honoraria, they are presented in dutiful acknowledgement of
their worth; whether it be worth of virtue, or worth of degree: For their need;
and so they are Munera eleemosynaria, conferred out of a pitiful compassion of
others wants. This gift is not of the first kind; it cannot be Honorarium:
There was no worth in us which God should honor with this gift bestowed upon
us. Our degree was of no regard, and our virtue of much Iesse: the former was
none in comparison, and the later was none at all. It must then be Munus
eleemosynarium: and indeed so it was; the Scripture so speaks of it. Through
the tender mercy of our God, the dayspring from on high has visited us; so
says Zachary. And St. Paul, Tit. 3. After the kindness and love of our
Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have
done, but of his mercy he saved us.

And indeed it was a work of great mercy. For, whereas there is but duplex
malum, malum Poenae, and malum Culpae; a double evil, of Sin, and Woe; we
were plunged deep in both: deep in Sin, deep in Woe. To pity him that is deep
in woe, is not strange; it seems to be the proper act of Mercy: but pity
toward Malefactors, the Philosophers acknowledge none. No man (say they)
pitieth a Thief when he goes to the Gallows, or a Murderer feeling the
stroke of Justice; how much less would they pity them, if the sin were
against themselves? and that committed by a Vassal against his Lord; a Vassal
that had received much favor, against his Lord from whom he received it. In
such a case they acknowledge no pity. Yet this is our case, and we have found
pity: so great pity, that Christ was borne for Us, and Christ was given unto
Us. So that of this pity, as well Causa (...), as (...), not only the Cause,
but the Occasion must be found in God. It is clear, that the proper Cause is
the goodness of God; and it is as clear, that the occasion also must be
fetched from him. Were there only malum Poenae in us, there might be found in
us an Occasion of Mercy: but seeing there is also malum Culpae, there cannot
but be an Occasion of Justice. Our double Evil works a double Occasion, and
so makes Mercy and Justice as it were to strive in God.

And indeed both take their occasions. Natus satisfied Justice; for a Person
came forth that was able to give full satisfaction unto Justice: but Datus
satisfied Mercy, because this Person was freely bestowed upon Us. So that if we
put Borne for Us, and Given to Us together, we see the sweet Harmony that is in
the Quire of Gods Attributes. None sings alone, they concent together; yet
so, that some one does most loudly speak the praise of God: and in our case
Mercy rejoices over Judgment. For though our sins have occasioned Justice;
and therefore Christ was borne for Us, that he might satisfy that justice that
was too heavy for us: yet our Woe occasioned Mercy, which gave Christ unto Us,
that in our own Person we might enjoy the Blessings of God. We are borne for
our selves, that we may live, and have all the comfort of our life present, and
to come (blessings which we wanted, and by which, when we receive them, our
state is the better.) It is not so with Christ; he was borne for others, not
for himself; and given to others, not to himself: for what wanted he, whereof
he needed a supply? He was in the form of God: and what good is there that is
not in the Nature of God, which is the ouerflowing Fountain of all good? Look
upon the State of Christ, this Point will appear clearly. No man will doubt,
but his Birth was for the good of others, that considers that his glory is
not his own, but ours. He sits indeed at the right hand of God, and is
lifted up above all Angels and Archangels, and every Name that is named in
Heaven and Earth, in this World, and that which is to come: but what gains he
by it, who was from eternity most high in the glory of his Father? Christ
himself affirms it, John 17. Glorify me, O Father, with that glory which I
enjoyed with thee before the foundations of the world were lay^. Himself then
received nothing, which he had not for ever: but in him we receive the honor
to be loyned in one person with God, Christus esse voluit quod homo est, vt
homo esse poss it quod est Christus. Cypr. de vanit Idol.
in that person to conquer sin, death, and hell; after the conquest to
receive all power both in heaven and earth; and possessed of this power, to sit
upon the Throne of God. It is not the Godhead, but the Manhood in Christ: and
so it is We that have received these Blessings. So that we must begin the
observation of Gods favor unto us, at that dignity which our nature has
attained in Christ.

These different words Natus and Datus, Borne and Given, imply, that they were
not both of one time: The Manhood began when Christ was incarnate, but the
Godhead was long before. It was, though it were not manifested until the time
of his birth. So that being, and being manifest, make the difference: for that
the Manhood received then his being, but the Godhead only his being manifest.

And yet we must not make such a difference, without taking heed of Nestorius
his error: For if the words be soundly understood, if they be understood of
the Person, not of the Natures, we may apply Natus and Datus to either of them:
the Godhead may be said to be borne, and the Manhood may be said to be given.
That the Godhead, or rather God, may be said to be borne, it is clear Luke 1.
The holy thing that shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God: And
the Virgin Mary, by the Fathers, is (as you heard) called (...). St. Bernards
observation is true, speaking to the Virgin Mary, as it were in the person of
the Angel, Quod natum est ex ipso Deo, erit tuus, and quod ex te nascetur,
erit eius: vt tamen non sint duo Filij, sed vnus, licet aliud ex te, aliud ex
illo sit; ita tamen non cuiusque suus, sed vnus vtriusque Filius. So that
understand it of the Person, and Natus will agree with Filius; understand it
also of the Person, and Datus will agree with Puerulus: for the Child was
given also, and had a being before, even as ancient as the Son of God, to
whom he is inseparably united. Whatsoever attribute of God may be verified of
Man, so long as we mean no more but the Person. But if our meaning do once
point at the Natures, then Natus is peculiar to the Child which began in
time; and Datus to the Son which was before all time: so the Divines,
ancient, and later, do usually distinguish these words.

Thirdly, note that Natus goes before Datus; Christ is, before he is
bestowed. And the Holy Ghost would have us to consider two distinct Acts of
God: 1. The Constitution of our Saviors Person: 2. And then the Donation
thereof unto Us: And it is requisite, that our meditations confound not Gods
Works. We must multiply our meditations, as Gods works are multiplied: The
Constitution of the Person is as a means which God provides, and provides for
an end, which was his Donation. So that Christ's Incarnation is not to be taken
as a speculatiue, but a practick thing: God therein did not only reveal his
Wisdom, and his Power, which we may speculate with our wits, but thereby
does give us a taste of his Goodness also to affect our hearts. So that we
may not separate Datus from Natus, lest we prove ignorant how useful this
Incarnation is, and so deprive our selves of the comfort thereof.

Lastly, if Datus be the end of Natus, and he that is Borne is Given unto Us,
we must make St. Paul's Conclusion, God that spared not his only Son, but
gave him for us, what is there that he will not bestow upon us? He has nothing
nearer and dearer; he that is vouchsafed this, may presume to speed of
whatsoever else. We cannot have a better encouragement to pray, nor anchor-hold
of our prayer: nay, we cannot learn better how to demean our selves toward
God, than by imitating Gods dealing herein with us. Let Natus, or rather
Renatus, go before Datus in us: Let us first be newborn, before we give
our selves to God. Except we be provided of this gift, we are not fit to make a
Present: and if we be provided, and unfeignedly make this Present unto God;
what have we that shall not be devoted unto him? our honor, our wealth, our
friends? He will never deny ought unto God, that first gives himself to him.
And thus much for the odds between the two Natures, implied in the words Borne
and Given.

Moreover we must observe, that the Child borne, and the Son given, if they
be separated from Us, they make an Article admirable, but comfortable it is
not, except you add unto it Us. When this Clause is put unto that, our Faith
is Faith indeed, and takes place as well in our heart, as in our head; and we
listen diligently unto the Annunciation which the Angel made unto the
Shepherds, Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great joy that shall be to all
the People: for unto you is borne a Savior, which is the Lord Christ. In a
word, you have the true Description of Immanuell, God with us; which then
proved true, when this Child was borne unto Us, and to Us this Son was given.

Finally, mark the Tense of these words, Natus, Datus, it is the Praetertense;
they speak of Christ, as if he were already borne. Christ was not borne in
six hundred years after. The reason is, the style is Prophetical: The
Prophets speak of things to come, as if they were present, or past; they
speak of the Works of God, answerably to the Nature of God. In the Nature of
God there is no time, because it is eternal. When Moses asked after Gods name,
he received this answer, I am that I am. In the Revelation that Name is
resolved into all the parts of time, (...); and it imports, that all parts of
time are together in God: they are all present in him. As it is with his
Nature, so it is with his Works. Nothing falls out in time, that was not
decreed before all time; and whatsoever is in the decree, is ever present to
God. And because present in the decree, therefore as concluded, God may speak
of it as a thing past: because the Conclusion is before his eyes, he may speak
of it as a thing present; and as his hand shall produce it, he may speak of it
as a thing to come. And the holy Ghost uses liberty to speak of such things
so diversely.

But for their speaking of Christ's birth as if it were passed when it was yet
to come, there are moreover two special Reasons: The one is, for that the
efficacy of his birth began immediately upon the fall. As in Paradise Adam was
stung by the Serpent: so in Paradise was he cured by the seed of the Woman.
The Patriarchs in their order, Heb. 11. not only knew, but felt the virtue of
this Child, this Son. St. Paul comprehends it in a short Rule, Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. He was a Lamb slain, not only
borne, from the beginning of world. Neither only did the efficacy of his
person work, but in a sort his presence also was vouchsafed unto the world. It
is an ancient opinion of many of the Fathers, and not a few of the worthiest
late Divines approve it, that all apparitions of God in the Old Testament, were
of the second Person. In the eighth of the Proverbs himself says, that his
delight was to be amongst the Sons of men. Yea, and to say nothing of other
shapes, how often did he appear in the shape of a man? which apparition the
Fathers call, Praeludium incarnationis: It was a fair intimation of that which
in time he should be for ever, after he had once taken upon him the nature
of man, which death it self should never sever from him.

O Lord, that would not only become Man, but also be Gods gift to Man, thou
which were before all time, would be bestowed in time, bestowed upon Jews,
bestowed upon Gentiles, and make them both one Israel of God: Notwithstanding
there was nothing in them to demerit thee, much in them to provoke thee; yet
have thou out of thine own goodness so tendered Man, as to satisfy thy
Justice, that it might be no hinderance unto thy Mercy, but that thy Mercy
might remedy both our Woe, and Sin; We beseech thee, that we may all be newborn by virtue of thy Sons birth, and give our selves to Thee, as he is
given to Us, that so we may be in the number of those which with the Prophet
may say, Tovs a Child is borne, to us a Son is given. Which grace he
vouchsafe us, that is given unto us: To whom with the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, be given all honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen. THE THIRD SERMON.
The Government shall be upon his shoulders.
THe Doctrine of this Scripture contains the Truth and Excellency of Christ's
Person and State: Of the truth of Christ's Person I have already spoken, and
showed you both the Natures wherein it subsisteth, and the People to which it
belongs. The Natures wherein it subsists are two: The Nature of God, and of
Man. which have a most straight union in one Person, and yet without the least
diminution of either nature.

This Person belongs unto the Jews, not according to the flesh, but according
to the spirit, even to the whole Israel of God; which consists of believing
natural both Jews and Gentiles. To this People does Christ belong.

But of what degree is he amongst them? For every company that consists of
many persons, if they be incorporate, has men of sundry degrees by the
Ordinance of God, and the common rules of discretion: there are superiors,
there are inferiors; some which command, some which are commanded. Of which
rank is our Savior Christ? Of the highest; it appears in his State, The
Government shall be upon his shoulders. Although then the Scripture affirm,
that Christ appeared in the form of a servant, and himself said, That he came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister: et must we not mistake; his
Ministry was not of the foot, but of the head; it was not an obeying, but a
commanding Ministeric. The Head ministers, and so does the Foot in our body
natural, but they minister not both alike: The head ministers to the foot by
way of commanding, the foot ministers to the head by way of obeying. Christ's
Ministry was of the former, not of the later kind; his Foes and his Friends
in the Gospel both salute him by the name of Rabbi, or Rabboni, which is by
interpretation, Master. And our Savior Christ tells his Disciples in St.
John, You call me Master, and Lord, and you say well; for so I am. And
elsewhere he calls himself The Heir of the Vineyard, The Lord of the
Sabbath. The Name of Christ or Messiah is a most clear proof hereof; for none
were anointed but to be superiors: and the Acts which Christ did exercise
bear witness hereunto. which were all of them either Prophetical, when he
taught, or Priestly, when he sacrificed, or Kingly, when he wrought Miracles.
These be the things which were done by him, and the Gospel relates no other
kind of acts, or (at least) none in comparison. And all these are commanding
acts; they are acts of a Superior, exercised in the days of his flesh, in the
days of his greatest humiliation. So that the form of a Servant, and the
ministering of Christ, show, that he had not the attendance for worldly respect
that was due to such a Superior: he had not so much as a house to hide his
head in, much less had he any Princely pomp. But they deny him not to have
been a Superior, they deny him not that which was given him in my Text; and my
Text gives him the State of a Superior.

To come then unto it. There are two things to be observed in the words: 1. Of
what sort the Government was: 2. and Wherewith Christ did sustain it. The
Government was of the best sort, it was Regal; it appears in the next Verse,
where Christ is said To sit upon the Throne of David: And this Government he
sustaines by his own careful Power; for it is laid upon his shoulders. These
two Points we must at this time look into briefly, and in their order: I
begin with the Government.

If we look back to the Story of Genesis, we shall find, that when God
promised Isaac, which was a Type of Christ, he changed both his Fathers and his
Mothers name: she was called Sarai, but God new named her Sarah, which is a
Princess; and Abram was new named Abraham, a Father of many Nations. And me
thinks, when I read these words here in the Prophet, and those that follow,
wherein Christ is described, I see the application of those names, to this
Person; I see the Principality, I see the Posterity, I see in Christ the truth
of Sarah, and of Abraham's name. And surely the word which here signifies
Government, has great affinity with the name of Sarah.

But of Governments some are subordinate, some are absolute: Some so command as
the Centurion in the Gospel, I am a man set under authority, though I have
diverse under me, and I say to one come, and he comes, and to another go,
and he goes: But some so command, as Solomon speaks of a King, against whom
there is no rising up, whose Laws must not be disputed on earth, and his
Commandments be obeyed by all that are his Subjects. Christ's Government is
not of the subordinate, but the absolute sort; it appears by the Throne, by
the Kingdom upon which he sits, places of absolute power; especially if
they be Native, and not Elective, they must needs have a most free absolute
Power. And such Christ's is, Natus Rex; it is the express letter of my Text:
And the Wisemen that came to present him, Matthew. 2. asked for him that was
borne King of the Jews. Nay Christ himself, when Pilate asked him whether he
were a King, replied, for this cause was I borne. And Pilate set up this style
over his Cross, Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews: which he would not alter,
though he were much importuned by the Scribes and Pharisees. The places of the
Prophets are very clear, Esaias 32. Ier. 23. but specially Dan. 7. all of them
bear witness to the Kingdom of Christ. So that we must acknowledge in
Christ a Kingly power: such a Power as none must dare to dispute the verity of
his Word, as curious and scoffing Atheists and Epicures do; or resist his
Authority, as proud Pharaohs and Senacheribs: Christ can brook neither.

But as Christ is called a King, so here is an addition unto his Title; his
Throne and Kingdom are termed the Throne and Kingdom of David. And indeed
Christ's Pedigree is by St. Matthew, and St. Luke, fetched from King David.
Himself calls himself in the Revelation, The root and generation of David.
The Apostle tells us, that be was of the seed of David according to the
flesh: And how often in the Gospel is he called The Son of David? In the
Prophets even David himself sometimes; and sometimes The branch of David.
Finally, the Angel in the first of Luke tells the Virgin Mary, That Christ
shall sit upon the Throne of his Father David.

But how can that be, seeing that which David had, Christ had not, and what
David had not, Christ had? Christ had not the Temporal state of David, that
was fallen into the hands of Herod the great; and the Spiritual state of
Christ David had not, His Kingdom was Temporal. How then could Christ be said
to sit upon his Kingdom? Although it were granted, that by succession Christ
was the right heir to the Crown of Israel: yet seeing the Scepter was
departed, and the Lawgiver gone, the Tabernacle of David was down, we cannot
find a Truth of these words; we cannot, if we understand them literally, but
if mystically we may. And St. Paul's rule is our guide, All things (yea and
persons too, if they were eminent) came to the Israelites in Types, 1 Cor. 10.
they had shadows of good things to come. St. Bernards rule is true, This
Throne of David which Christ sat on, was not seeds Typica, but Vera; not
Corporalis, but Spiritualis; not Temporalis, but Aeterna: yet so, that Illa was
huius Imago; the Temporal of the Eternal, the Corporal of the Spiritual,
the Typical of the true Throne, David's state of the state of the Church. And
indeed there is an excellent Analogy between the Person of David and Christ,
as both were Kings: David was anointed to be a King long before he was
possessed of his Kingdom; and so was our Savior Christ anointed with the holy
Ghost, long before he entered into his Glory. For though he did many acts of a
Governor Prophetical and Priestly; yet few Regal acts before his
Resurrection: and those which he did, he did them rather with the efficacy,
than in the Majesty of a King; for his outward Man represented nothing less.
But after his Resurrection and Ascension, Efficacy and Majesty conjoined, and
he sat him down at the right hand of God, and now does he govern in the
glory of his Father.

Secondly, as there was a distance between David's Unction too, and Possession
of the Crown: so was that a troublesome time, few quiet days had he, being
persecuted both abroad, and at home, by Saul, by his Servants. Even so our
Savior Christ entered not into his glory, but by many afflictions; all kind of
Enemies pursue him with all kind of malice: so that his life was a continual
Cross. And as David, so Christ; the nearer he drew to his Crown, the sharper
was his Cross.

Thirdly, as King David first possessed only the Tribe of Judah, and after some
years the ten Tribes: even so our Savior Christ at first possessed only the
Jews, and after some time enlarged his Church unto the Gentiles.

Fourthly, David being possessed of his Kingdom, spent many years in
repressing the Foes of his Kingdom, Philistines, Amonites, Syrians, etc. and
at length fate down in peace, and ruled with Justice and Judgment in much
Prosperity: even so our Savior Christ, though ascended into Heaven, and
reigning there, yet shall he be until the general Resurrection subduing his
Enemies under his feet, and freeing his Church from troubles and calamities.
when that is done, then shall he rule and reign with his Church in much peace
and joy. These, and such like Analogies, are obseruable in comparing of Christ
and David: which are the cause why the Kingdom of Christ is called, The
Kingdom of David.

But yet in the letter of the story, which is the ground of this comparison,
you shall find many Hyperboles: read the 89. Psalm, the 72. Psalm, the 132.
to say nothing of diverse places of the Prophets which seem to exceed the
truth, if they be applied to King David; whereby the holy Ghost gives us to
understand, that they must be applied to a greater than David. And indeed the
phrases that are in these real Allegories or Types, must be understood of the
Corporal part; but Quodammodo, in a measure answerable unto them, the fullness
of their truth appears in the Spiritual. And some Divines observe, Ez^k.
21.26, 37
that The Throne of David is not that which David possessed, but that which was
promised to David for his son: And indeed in 2 Samuel 7. the Promise though it
be made unto David, yet is it made for his son; his son is Christ. It was
not meant of his immediate Son, otherwise than in a Type; but it was meant of
his Son (...), The Messiah, or Savior of the world: As also the Promise made
to Abraham, was made for his Son; which in appearance seemed to be Isaac, but
St. Paul to the Galathians, tells us that that seed is Christ.

Well then, this Kingdom is the Church, and therein Christ sits as in his
Throne; it is the Government thereof that is committed unto him. And here we
may not dream of a corporal Kingdom, and turn the truth into a Type. St.
Paul has told us, that The Kingdom of God is neither meat nor drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy of the holy Ghost: And Christ in the
Gospel, The Kingdom of God is within you. The Parables of the Kingdom, if
you look to their Moral, imply as much; all sound things and persons
spiritual. Gross then is the usurpation of the Bishop of Rome, who, in
Christ's name, contrary to Christ's rules, combines both Swords, the Spiritual
and the Corporal. And they that understand The Kingdom of Christ carnally, as
if all temporal Jurisdiction should be swallowed up in the Ecclesiastical
State, savor not of the things of God, but of the things of this world: yea,
they sow dangerous seeds of discord between Princes and Pastors, and seek to
breed iealousies; upon which what will follow, but that the one will seek to
ruinate the other?

Christ's Kingdom then is of his Church; and it is a spiritual Government of
his Church. Notwithstanding, these words must not be understood exclusiuely,
as if Christ were so confined to his Church, as that he had nothing to do with
those that were without the Church. As King David ruled in Israel, but so, that
the Philistines, Ammoni^es, Moabites, and all the bordering Countries were
subject unto his Scepter, and he laid tribute upon them, and commanded them at
his pleasure: Even so our Savior Christ, not only rules in his Church, but
commands them also that are without it, not only men, but even the powers of
Hell also: He has the keys both of death and hell, and every knee boweth to
him, at of things in heaven, and of things in earth; so even of things under
the earth also. And it is our comfort, that he which is our King has so great
a Power over our Foes: the more power he has over them, the less we need
to stand in fear of them; the more securely may we obey him. And so have you
heard of what sort Christ's Government is.

The next Point is, Wherewith he sustaines this Government; it is here said
that it shall be upon his shoulders. Moral Princes unburden themselves upon
the shoulders of others: the wits, the power of their Officers, in peace and
war, do bear up the greatest part of their state. It is not so with our
King, he bears all himself; even when he uses means, those means are but
Instruments, whose ability and efficacy, are both from him. The Minister
speaks words, and dispenses Elements; but in vain does he both, except
Christ be with him, and his spirit make effectual that which is done by him:
if there be not (...), it will be indeed (...). And what likelihood was there
that a few Fishermen, and those unlearned, should ever have subjected the
crowns of Princes, the wits of Philosophers, the stomachs of the Mighty, the
desires of the Ambitious, finally, all kind of dispositions, unto the Scepter
of Christ, had not Christ's spirit wrought with them?

A second thing that is to be observed in this Word, is, that as Christ is
highest in degree: so is he deepest in care; and so should Kings be. The
Great world, the Little world, both preach this Lesson unto temporal Kings. The
Great World has many parts whereof it does consist, and of them one is placed
above another. The higher any part is placed, the more it labors for the
rest by motion and influence. Witness the Sun, the Moon, the Stars,
compared to the inferior Bodies; all which labor for the Earth, the basest of
all. In the Little World of our Body, is not our Head set above our Hands, and
our Feet? And how painefully does the Eye watch, the Ear hear, and every
sense employ it self for the direction and preservation of the Hands and
Feet? If it be so in the Creatures that are destitute of Reason, between
reasonable Creatures it should be much more so. The Governor must less take
his ease, and less be idle, than those which are governed: nay, his care, his
pain must far exceed theirs; he must partake of every one of theirs. Do
we not see it so in our Body? The hand has his peculiar work, so has the
foot, and every other in feriour part employes it self about some particular
function: but the directive and commanding parts in man are Architectonicall,
they resemble the Master of the works in a Building, whose presence and
guidance runs through all the several kind of Laborers, appointing what
they must do, and caring that they do it well; whether they hew stones, or
lay them, square timber, or co^ple it: whatsoever other work is to be done,
the Master has, though not his hand, yet his head working with them. No
otherwise should the Magistrate carry himself in his charge, nor be less
provident in the Commonweal: the influence of his care must quicken, must
order, must further whatsouer functions of the people, and make them tend to
the common good.

The 72. Psalm compares our Governor (I mean Christ, of whom this Text
speaks) unto a shower of rain: and we see that a shower of rain waters
carefully all the plants of the fields, the rose, the lilly, the violet, the
cedar, and the pine, all of them do fare the better for the watering of the
rain. And the grace of Christ's spirit is no otherwise showred down upon every
member of the Church, every one is nourished therewith. Malachie compares him
to the Sun; he calls him The Sun of Righteousness: And who knows not how
common the warmth of the Sun is? and how effectual it is also. The Rain
yields matter to the earth, but that it may become proving matter, the earth is
beholding to the Sun, which works the moisture, and distributeth it through
the whole body of the herbs and plants. Christ's grace supplyeth both Rain and
Sun; from him we have both Posse and Velle: nay, the Apostle says, He
works in us both to will and to do, even of his own good pleasure. So that
we may well say, The Government lies upon his shoulders.

Upon his shoulders? Princes on earth bear the Ensigns of their Government,
some in their hands, as Scepters; some on their heads, as Crowns: but Christ
wears his on his shoulders. The Fathers generally understand this of Christ's
Cross: some looking to the History related in the Gospel, that Christ was
made to bear his own Cross upon his shoulders, when he went unto his death;
which, they say, was prophesied of in the 95. Psalm, Dicite in gentibus, quia
Dominus regnauit a ligno: So says St. Austin it was anciently read, though it
be not found so read now ordinarily in the Septuagint. The Jews in malice
razed it out, as he thinks. But because the Hebrew Text has it not, we
need not stand upon so uncertain a ground: We may take a better, either from
the type of Aaron bearing the twelve Tribes engraven upon his shoulders, when
he went into the Temple; or from Eliakim, Esaias 22. upon whose shoulders the key
of the house of David was laid; or from the shepherd bearing the lost sheep
upon his shoulders; or if you will have it of the Cross, take it from Christ
himself speaking to the Disciples that went to Emmaus, Ought not Christ to
have suffered these things, and so to enter into his glory? or from St. Paul
also, Christ triumphed over Powers and Principalities in his person, but then
when this Person suffered upon the Cross. So that Christ reigned in his
passion, and because in his passion, therefore had he his Government upon his
shouldeas.

And indeed our Faith in him must begin at that which was endured by him; and
therein must we imitate him, and write Cedendo vincimus. The Church never
triumphed so much over the world, as when it did most resolutely sustain the
bloody malice of the world.

The last thing that is to be noted on these words, is, the exchanging of the
yoke mentioned before, and rod of the oppressor, which lay upon the shoulders
of the People, into this Royalty and Government, which lies upon the shoulders
of the King. Great odds there was between the People and the King: the enemies
had to do with the People, they imposed their persecutions as a yoke upon them;
but when they come to deal with the King, this yoke is turned into a
government. The same God that commanded light to shine out of darkness, so
altered the Cross of Christ, that it became to him the Chair of Triumph. And
this is the cause, why Princes wear it in their Crowns, in token that they
are subject to it; and why it was of old set up where triumphall Arches were
wont to stand, that the world might have so many witnesses (as it were) of the
Triumph of it. Which superstition at length abused; and therefore have they in
many places justly been abolished, though the original of the erection of
those Crosses deserved rather praise than blame.

But we may not omit to observe the seeming Contradiction that is in the
Prophets words: At first it is said, The Government shall be upon his
shoulders, as if he did bear it: afterward it is said, that He shall sit
upon the Throne, and the Kingdom, as if it did bear him. The reconciliation
is easy. The body politic is like the body natural; the foundation of it
stands uppermost, the head stands above the feet: and a man would think that
the feet did bear the head; but indeed the head bears the feet. For were
it not for the influence of sense and motion, which the head deriues unto the
feet, the feet could not sustain themselves, much less could they bear the
body: We see it in a dead palsy, that intercepts the intercourse of the
spirits between the head and feet. We have another Simile also of our Souls
and our Bodies. We would think that our Body did contain our Soul, but indeed
it is the Soul that contains the Body. For no sooner does the Soul part from
the Body, but the heterogeneous parts fall asunder, and this goodly frame
comes to nothing: Even so fares it between the Prince and the People; he
seems to rest upon the people, as the head upon the body, but indeed the
people do rest upon him; and therefore in Greek a King is called (...) quasi
(...); a phrase borrowed from a Building, whereunto the Commonwealth is
compared, and whereof the King is said to be the Foundation. For a wise King,
as it is Wisd. 6. is the upholding of the People: and King David, Psalm. 75. The
earth, and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved, I bear up the Pillars
thereof.

And indeed the parts of every State, were they not united and supported by
the Sovereignty of the Prince, would sooner moulder, and come to naught, than
do the parts of our Natural body when it wants a soul: for there is not so
much, nor so eager natural ambition and coueteousnesse in the elements whereof
our bodies consist, whereby they strive to gain the one upon the other, and to
tyrannize the one over the other, until the one has wrought the others bane;
as there is civil both ambition and coueteousnesse in the Members of every
State: whereby the one strives to get the vpperhand of the other, and each man
would denour his brother: Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses against
Ephraim, and both against Judah, (as the Prophet speaks in this Chapter)
until the Kindome of Israel be laid waste. Whereas then in every State there
are rich and poor, that the rich do not devour the poor; crafty and simple,
that the crafty do not circumuent the simple; strong and weak, that the strong
do not offer violence to the weak; the reason is, There is a King Rege
incolumimens omnibus vna, The King maintains the Concord. By him it comes to
pass that every man sits quietly under his own vine, and dwells safely
under his own roof. Mutiners and Murmurers are therefore justly to be
abhorred, who speak evil of Authority, and would withdraw their necks from
obedience, upon this ground, That superiors live by the sweat of the
inferiors brows, being themselves deuoyd of care. Their quarrel is like that
which in Menius Agrippaes Apologue, the outward members of the body had against
the stomach: They complained of his laziness, and their own painfulnesse,
and therefore conspired to starve him, and ease themselves. They even discovered
their folly; for soon after, the hands began to faint, and the legs to
faulter, and the whole body to pine. Then they perceived, that the stomach
which they condemned as lazy, labored for them, and that they were beholding
to the labor of the stomach, that themselves had any strength to labor: So
is it in the body politic; though the State of the Prince is supported by the
Commons, yet the spring of the Commons wealth is the providence of the Prince;
and soon would these streams dye, if that fountain were dammed up. It is so
in a civil state, but in the spiritual state it is much more so. If a mortal
Prince be so beneficial unto a temporal State, much more is the immortal
King of heaven and earth beneficial to the state of his Church, sustaining and
supporting the same. That which you have heard of mortal Princes, shows
rather what they should do, than what usually they do: But this immortal
King does what he should; he is not so much advanced above his people, as his
people are eased by him. He bears them up on his wings, as an Eagle does her
yongue ones, as it is Deuteronomy. 32. but more amply, Esaias 36. his care, his
providence, and the efficacy thereof are most aptly, most significantly set
down there.

But because of this we shall speak more hereafter, when we come to entreat
of his excellent managing of his State; we will pursue that Point no further,
nor trouble you further at this time.

O Lord who art high in place, and great in care, in thy Person, and by virtue
of thy bitter Passion, exercising thy providence, which guides and supports the
whole frame of, and every member in thy Church; Lord we beseech thee to guide
us, that we be not misled; and that we fail not, to sustain us. So shall
we never repine at thy sitting upon us, thy Kingdom, seeing we rest more upon
thee that art our King. And ever, good Lord, so rule us from Heaven, that we
may rest on thee in Earth: So shall we, being translated from Earth unto
Heaven, fully rest and reign with thee for ever. Amen. THE FOVRTH SERMON.
And his Name shall be called, The wonderful Counselor, The mighty God.
THe Nature and Excellency of Christ's Person are those two Points of Doctrine
which have been observed in this Text: The first I have ended; you have been
taught what Christ's Person is, what is his State: I come now to the excellency
of both. Each has an excellency; there is an excellency of the Person, and an
excellency of the State. The excellencte of Christ's Person, is to be seen in
the endowments thereof, which are contained in his style: but the excellency
of his state appears in his managing thereof.

I begin at the excellency of the Person, which consists in the endowments;
and the endowments are expressed in the style. As mortal Kings, so this
immortal, has his style proclaimed, And his name shall be called; his style
expresses indowments, which are Regal, but Spiritual: Regal they are. Two
virtues are peculiar unto Kings, over and above those which they must have in
common with their Subjects: they are Wisdom and Power; Wisdom to provide
for, and Power to sustain their estate. This King has both: he has Wisdom;
for he is The wonderful Counselor: and he has Power; for he is The mighty
God.

But as his indowments are Regal; so are they Spiritual: for they must be
proportionable to the Kingdom. His kingdom is not of this world; for he is
the Father of eternity: Neither is the condition of his people worldly, it is
Peace; it is an heavenly, not an earthly portion. He is Prince of this Peace.
These be the endowments of his Person, and of these we are to speak
distinctly, and in their order.

And first they are given him in his style: Herein he answers mortal Kings,
in that he proclaims his style, lest his people should fail in their
respect. For the greatness of respect, arises with the greatness of the
style: we use to look upon them with a more awful eye, in whom there are more
grounds of awe. This has made Monarchs in all ages to strain their Titles to
the uttermost; as he that reads the Story of the Assyrian, the Persian, the
Roman Monarchs of old, and the modern histories both of barbarous and
Christian Kings, may easily perceive. But here is the odds, that their styles
do commonly show rather what they should be, than what they are. They are
given them, propter spem, in hope they will prove as their Titles import: or
else they show what they would seem to have done, rather than what they have
done indeed. And here flattery amplifieth beyond truth, and makes mountains
of molehils; yea, substituteth fables in stead of verities: as might easily be
proved, if we would insist upon their particular styles. You may read the
title of Augustus given unto such Emperors as did not enlarge, but diminish
the Empire: of Pater patriae, to those that were so far from being Fathers,
that they were plain Tyrants: of Pontifex Maximus, given to them which were so
far from serving the gods that they did sacrilegiously canonize themselves
for gods: and yet propter spem, the Senate gave them these titles; and by
flattery they did amplify in the rest. He that had but a small conquest,
increased his style, as if he had conquered a whole Kingdom; as appears in
the styles of Germanicus, Illiricus, Brytannicus, etc. To omit the fabulous
styles of the eastern Monarchs, he that will may read them in their stories,
and see how ridiculous they are in claiming kindred of the gods, of the
stars, and of what not, which might amplify their Majesty? In a word, Hope
and Flattery are the best ground, whereupon all men's worldly titles are built,
especially great men's, and Kings most of all. But it is not so with our King,
the truth in him is answerable to the titles that are given him. They are not
given him propter spem, but propter rem: He is that which he is called,
neither is there in them any flattery; yea, his titles do come short of, they
do not exceed those perfections that are in him. So that we may not measure the
style of Christ, as we do the styles of mortal Kings; but conceive rather
more than less, when we hear his style.

Mark also another difference between the style of Christ, and the style of
mortal Princes. Mortal Princes, amongst other amplifications of their style,
are spoken unto in abstracto; you seldom hear of any salutations given to
them, but they are so conceived, Majesty, Dominion, Celsitude, Grace, and the
like; as if they were framed of Plato's Idea, upon which Diogenes played
wittily, Scyathum video, Scythietatem non video: and another, applying it to
Princes, observes, That before this style began, virtues were in concreto, the
Persons and the Virtues met in one subject: but since they have been separated,
and as we hear the virtue abstracted from the subject; so do we commonly see
the subject void of the virtue. But it is not so with Christ: but whereas he
may justly, and does sometimes, not only to note the eminency of his virtue,
but also to note his Godhead, call himself by abstract names, Wisdom, Truth,
Righteousness, Life, etc. yet does he usually receive his style in concreto,
to note, that his Manhood is endowed with these qualities from his Godhead, and
that the subject and the virtues go in him both together.

Lastly, we must not begin Christ's being, this which he is called, at the
time when he is first called; and so, with Seruetus, question the Godhead of
Christ, as if it were no more ancient than this solemn proclamation of his
style. For though then his endowments began to be manifested, and communicated
to his Manhood, yet as God, he had them from everlasting; from everlasting was
he, the wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the father of eternity.

But to leave the preface, and come to the indowments, to the Regal
indowments. The first imports his Wisdom, he is called The wonderful
Counselor. Some sever these words, and make two titles of that which I read
but as one: one title of Wonderful, and another of Counselor; and so it may
be. Wonderful may well be a title of Christ, nay a transcendent title, which
goes through all his titles: for not one of them is there, in which we must
not conceive him to be wonderful; and we cannot have a better preparation to
those meditations which we have on the eminency of Christ, than if we begin at
wonderful. Admiration is but broken knowledge, but it is the seed of perfect
knowledge, so perfect as we are capable of. It makes us when we study upon the
nature of God, and of Christ, and the excellencies of both, to conceive a good
rule, which is, That though God speaks (...), yet we must understand him
(...), and ever rise higher in our thoughts, than we are led by the
signification of the words. We must add a degree of eminency, wherein they
exceed all creatures; such eminency as we must adore, because we cannot
comprehend it, for they are wonderful. Even the name of wonderful be longs
unto them; as appears by the answer that was given to Manoah in the book of
Judges, when he enquired after the name of the Angel which appeared, Why
ask thou after my name, seeing it is wonderful? It were easy to show how
this title fits Christ, by running through the whole story of the Gospel,
which to every part sets a mark of wonder; to his birth, to his life, to
his death, to his resurrection, to his ascension. I will instance only in his
birth, because we now solemnize the memory thereof. In that appear three great
wonders: 1. That natures so far distant as God and Man, should be joined in
one person: 2. That the nature of man should be conceived in a Virgins womb
that never knew man: 3. That she should, being her self conceived in sin,
conceive a Son without sin. Were there no other wonder, these were enough to
style Christ wonderful, and to make it one of his peculiar titles.

But because the Fathers, following the Septuagint and the Caldee, have coupled
these words Wonderful and Counselor together, and made of them but one
title, and their opinion is made probable by the Hebrew Text, and the other
titles which are all compounded, Almighty God, Father of Eternity, Prince of
Peace: I will so join them, and handle them as one title, whereof there are
two parts, Counselor and Wonderful.

Christ is a Counselor. And here also mark the odds between mortal
Princes, and this our King: mortal Princes and their Counsel are distinct
persons; the weakness, and the idleness, or both, of mortal Princes wits,
makes them to use the counsel of others; as it is evident in all States:
whereupon is grounded that proverb of Solomon, In the alundance of
Counselors there is welfare. But here our King is the Counselor also; he
is both King and Counsel: And that which the Apostle has out of the Prophet,
Who ever was his Counselor? may well be applied to him. His understanding is
so large, so clear, that it reaches to all things, and pierces into the
depth of all, as St. Paul describes it: Heb. 4.
and by it he means Christ, as it appears by the close of his speech, The
word of God is sharper than any two edged sword, and enters in to the dividing
of the joints, and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts; all things
are naked before his eyes. And David shows, that the night and the day to him
are all one, and the darkness is as clear as the light.

And as such is his ability, so is his care answerable: His wits are not idle,
He that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep, as it is Psalm 121. His
eyes are upon his charge, from the beginning of the year, till the end
thereof, as it is Deuteronomy. 11. Not a Sparrow lights upon the ground without his
providence. So that he needs no counsel besides his own; he well deserves
the name of (...), of whom Aristotle alleges that Verse out of the Greek
Poet, (...).

But let us come nearer the Point. You have heard, that he is a Counselor,
but whereof I cannot express better, than by two of his usual titles, the
Wisdom, the Word of God. He is Consiliarius ad intra, and ad extra, being
(...) both (...), and (...): St. John comprehends both in that sentence, The
Son which is in the bosom of the Father: and so is (...), has declared
himself unto us, and so is become (...). And our Savior Christ, Those things
which I have heard of my Father, being Consiliarius ad intra, have I opened
unto you, as Consiliarius ad extra: and so Proverbs 8. Wisdom describes her
self as a Counselor both ad intra, and ad extra, with God, and to the world.

But what is the Matter of this Counsel? surely the principal is the Conenant
between God and his Church, which St. Paul, Heb. 6. calls the unchangeable
Counsel of God: and God in the Prophets, speaking of the Kingdom of Christ,
calls it his Counsel, not excluding all other secrets of God; for Christ is
privy to them all: He is the Lamb, mentioned in the Reuclation, that only can
open the sealed Book of Gods hidden Mysteries, especially those that concern
his Church. Now Christ, as the Wisdom of God, was of counsel when this
Mystery was resolved on, before all time he was of counsel with God, and when
God was pleased to reveal it, then Christ also became the Counselor unto
men, as he was the Word of God. These two things are comprehended in his
Counsellourship; and in regard of both these may he be called wonderful. It
was a wonderful course that this wisdom of God found out to work the
Redemption of man, by coupling of these Natures, and satisfying Mercy and
Judgment, and that by Man without sinful man.

And as the course is wonderful, so likewise is the communicating thereof;
seeing the power of God uses such weak instruments. When we behold the
means, we cannot but wonder at the effects; when we see such heavenly
treasures in earthen vessels, and see such efficacy of the one shine through
the infirmity of the other; and behold the evidence of the spirit in the
foolishness of preaching, and see it casting down of strong holds, and
captiuating unto Christ every thought; this must needs make it wonderful. And
wonderful certainly will we acknowledge him to be, if we consider these
things: for that is wonderful which is above the reach of the understanding.

We see the first royal title, and Christ's first royal virtue, which is his
Wisdom.

The second follows, which is his Power. Primo opus est consulto, deinde cum
consulueris mature opus est facto, said the Heathen Orator: for as it is true,
that Vis consilij expers mole ruit sua; so is it no less true, that if
wisdom ^aue not strength to execute her designs, it is fruitless. Therefore
our King is as well armed with power, as furnished with wisdom: So that he is
able to execute whatsoever he does resolve. Therefore his second style is, The
mighty God. El of it self signifies mighty, but it is communicated to others
besides the true God, to Angels, to Men, that are the Lieutenants of God, or
usurp the state of God; all these have a power, but it is but a weak power in
comparison, and it is often times checked and curbed, limited and stinted. The
Angels that are great in power, are no farther powerful than to do Gods will;
much more are men at Gods control: He refraineth the spirit of Princes, and
makes the stoutest of them to know that they are but men. The story of
Nebuchadnezzar in Daniel, who was for seven years cast out of his Palace, to
live amongst Beasts, and upon his acknowledgement of the Lord of Heaven and
Earth was restored again; makes this clear. Canutus, a King of this Land,
when flatterers magnified his power, and did almost deifie him, to confute
them, caused his chair to be set by the Sea shore at the time of the flood,
and sitting in his Majesty commanded the waves that they should not approach
his Throne: but when the tide kept his course, and wet his garments, Lo (says
he) what a mighty King I am by Sea and Land, whose command every wave dares
resist. Though then they are mighty, yet there is much weakness joined with
their might: Not so Christ. It appears in the Epithet that is added unto El,
which is Gibbor, importing that he is a God of prevailing might: In Daniel he
is called El Elim, The Mighty of mighties; whereupon Moses, magnifying his
might, says, Who is like unto thee, Exodus 15.
O Lord, amongst the gods? Which words abbreuiated the Maccabees in their wars
against their enemies, did bear in their standard, and therehence (as the
learned observe) did take their name of Maccabees, Certainly this Epithet is
a lust ground of that which King David persuades, Psalm 29. Ascribe unto the
Lord, O ye mighty, ascribe unto the Lord glory and strength.

But there are two Eminences in Christ's might, by which he is advanced above
all Creatures. The first is, that he is (...), mighty of himself: The second
is, that he is (...), almighty.

(...); other Creatures have their power from him, and therefore their power
depends upon him; so that he can at his pleasure intend or remit theirs; but
his own continues ever the same. Secondly, they can do but every one so much
as is permitted him: and never was there any creature to whom God imparted all
his power (I speak not of the degree, but the parts thereof) some things he
commits to Angels which Men cannot do, and some things to Men which Angels
cannot do; the earth has not the power of the heavens, nor the heavens of the
earth: but God is the fountain of all power; there is nothing done by any of
these, which without these he cannot do. Ier. 23. Nothing is hard unto him:
and the Angel, Luke 1. Nothing is impossible unto God. therefore he has
wrought the same effects without these creatures. What he does by his Angels
ordinarily, he extraordinarily has done by himself: and what does he by Man,
which without Man he has not done? And as for the Sun and the Stars, he
has illightned the air without them; and without the earth, has he provided
both bread and flesh; yea, at his pleasure he has stripped all those of their
power in an instant: in a word, He does whatsoever he will both in heaven and
earth; he cannot will that which he cannot do: nothing resists his will, but
all things readily do serve him.

If this title be carried through the Gospel, every point of the Gospel will
witness the truth thereof in Christ; it will witness that he has a
prevailing power, and that he is therefore worthily called a mighty God. When
God promised him, he promised him in these words, I have laid help upon one
that is mighty, Psalm 89. When God exhibits him, Luke 1.
Zachary proclaims him thus, God has raised up a mighty salvation unto us in
the house of his servant David: Christ himself, Mat. 28.
All power is given to me both in heaven and earth. to say nothing of like
titles that are remembered in the Revelation. But I choose rather to observe unto
you out of both Christ's Regal titles, how well they fit us, what comfort they
do yield unto us. Our enemy the Devil is compared to a Serpent, to a roaring
Lion: he is full of craft, and of great strength, and so are his instruments,
the wicked, subtle and violent; but we are silly, and we are feeble. If we
compare our selves to them, how can we but fear to be deceived, to be
oppressed? See how God has provided for us, see how he has furnished Christ,
whom he sends unto us; He is a Counselor, and it was a Counselor that
we needed, that ^ight discover unto us the Serpents policy in his end, and
Sophistry in his means, wherewith he sets upon us: He pretends that we
shall be like unto Gods, when he means to make us Devils; and by setting an
edge on our desire of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil, he would
deprive us of the Tree of life: but Christ is at hand to discover his purposes,
and to give us timely caueats that we be not abused by them.

Secondly, he still compasses the world, seeking Whom he may devour, and is
mighty to destroy. And certainly none should escape him, were it not that we
have on our side a mighty God, the seed of the Woman, that showed himself so
much mightier than the seed of the Serpent, by how much breaking of the head is
more than bruising of the heel. We have a David for that Goliath, and a
stronger man that has entered that strong man's house, bound him, rifled him,
and divided his spoil. So that if now it be doubtingly asked, Shall the prey
be taken from the mighty? or the lawful captive be delivered? we may answer
with the Prophet, Esaias 49. Thus says the Lord, Even the Captives of the mighty
shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered; for I
will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and will faue thy children:
and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior, and thy Redeemer, the
mighty One of Jacob.

Wherefore seeing Christ is become our Counselor, let us not lean unto our
own wisdom, but be counseled by him. It is the second degree of wisdom,
when we cannot advise our selves, to be advised by others; if we fail
herein, the Philosopher himself will censure us for fools. And remember
withal that of the Son of Syracke, Be in peace with many, nevertheless
have but one Counselor of a thousand, cap. 6. he gives the reason at large,
cap. 37. And well may we rely upon the judgment of this Counselor, who much
better than Elizeus can detect unto us the plots of the King of Aram, of all
our Enemies, that we may provide against them: yea, he can take them all in
their own wiliness, and infatuate their Counsels, as he did Achitophels.
Read Esaias 19. and 8. So did Christ deal with the old Serpent, and with the
brood of the Serpent in all ages; our age, our country has had proof thereof.

As this must encourage us to rely upon his Counsel, so must the other title
encourage us to rely upon his power, his prevailing power. We walk in the
midst of our enemies, and they use the uttermost of their strength to ruin
us; yet though we are in the midst of the valley of the shadow of death, let
us fear none evil: for they that trust in the Lord are like unto mount Sion,
which shall never be removed.

LOrd guide us by thy Counsel, support us by thy Power, that we be neither
circumuented, nor quelled, but by thy direction and protection we may escape
both the craft and the force of all our Enemies. So shall we ever glorify thee
as our admirable Counselor, and our most mighty God. THE FIFTH SERMON.
The everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.
THe Excellency of Christ's Person consists in the indowments thereof, which
are Regal, but Spiritual. That they are Regal, appears in his two first
titles, whereof I have already spoken; and that they are Spiritual, it will
appear by the other two, whereof I am now to speak. Whereof the first shows
that Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, He is the Father of eternity: the
second shows that the condition of his people is not worldly, Christ is
Prince of Peace. To begin with the first.

In the Original, the first of these two titles is so expressed as I have read
it, The Father of eternity. And the words bear a double sense: for either
Aeternity is made the Attribute of the Father, and so by an Hebraisme, The
Father of eternity is no more than the eternal or everlasting Father; so some
Translations read it: or Aeternity may note that which is subject to the
Father, and so the title imports that he is a Father of eternal things; and so
some Translations read, The Father of the world to come. We need not to be
troubled with this variety: for the words will bear either Translation, and
both these things concur in the same person; He that is the everlasting
Father, is a Father of everlasting things. We will therefore handle both; and
first show you, that Christ is an everlasting Father.

The phrase does distinguish between our Father, and our Father: the Father of
our flesh, and the Father of our spirits. of whom St. Paul speaks, Heb. 12.
Of these two the first is Temporal, the other is Aeternall: that the first is
but temporal, we may gather out of the fifth of Genesis, where are reckoned up
the longest lived Fathers that ever were in the world: but of them all it is
said, that they begat children, and then they dyed; they left their children to
the world. And as they, so their posterity come within the compass of that of
Job, Man that is borne of a Woman is but of a short time: or as David speaks,
His days are but a spanne long. When he has served his course, he goes the
way of all flesh, and sleeps in his grave.

Neither is he temporal only in regard that he must dye, but also in regard
that his affection is mutable. Some parents destitute their children enforced
by death; but not a few put off the affection of Fathers even in their life,
and they in that respect also may be termed but temporal Fathers. Our Savior
Christ, speaking of the later times, tells us, that the Father shall rise
against the Son, as the Son against the Father. Saint Paul, speaking of
former times, Romans 1. amongst other wicked ones reckons up persons that were
without natural affection: and it were an easy matter out of Histories to
report, that many have dis-inherited, many have murdered, many have devoured
their own children, so far unnatural have they been.

In opposition unto these two cases, which apparently conclude that the Parents
of our flesh are temporal; temporal, in regard that they are mortal in their
nature, and temporal, in that they are mutable in their affections; our
Savior Christ is termed an everlasting Father, death cannot take him from us:
for even in his death, (wherein, notwithstanding his abode was so little that
he saw no corruption) the hypostaticall Union, which made him a father, did
not cease. And as for his affection, it is immutable, Whom he loves, he
loves unto the end: of the perpetuity of his being, excellent is that place,
Esaias 63. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and
Israel acknowledge us not: Thou O Lord, art our Father, and our Redeemer, thy
name is from everlasting. And touching the perpetuity of his loving, the Church
there speaks also, Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of
thy holiness and of thy glory: where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the
sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercy toward me? (...) 9. ^^al. 27.
are they restrained? No, they cannot be restrained. For as God in this
Prophet speaks elsewhere, Can a Mother forget her child? If she can, yet will
not I forget thee, says the Lord: And King David, When my father and my mother
forsook me, the Lord took me up. This is the reason why our Savior Christ in
the Gospel, bids us Call none father upon earth, for that we have but one
father which is in heaven: he lives, when the other dye; and when the other
hates, he continues his love. and therefore is deservedly called, the
everlasting Father.

Two good Lessons are employed herein: the one teaching Piety, the other Charity.

We are taught Piety, when we are taught that he whom we obey is our Father:
for if I be a Father (says the Lord) where is mine honor? Mal. 1. and Moses
to Israel, Deuteronomy. 32. Do thou so reward the Lord, O thou foolish people and
unwise? is not he thy Father that made thee? etc.

And as the very name of Father teaches Piety, so does the name of Everlasting
teach it much more. St. Paul argues so, Heb. 12. If so be we honored the
fathers of our flesh, which are mortal, as is our flesh, how much more should
we honor the father of our spirits, which is immortal, as is our spirits?
Great reason have we to reverence this Father, that never cease to be our
Father, that has provided, that even when we lose our fathers, we should yet
still have our Father, have him for our Father, which is the Father of Orphans.
It is no small comfort nor weak pillar of our faith, that we never want a
Father: yea, our double birth reads us this Lecture. For as we come out of
our mothers womb by the help of our mortal Parents; so to signify that we
have immortal parents, we are then borne again in the Churches womb.

Neither does this title teach us only Piety, but Charity also; charity one
toward another. For whereas our mortal parents extend their consanguinity and
affinity but to a few, this euerlasing father extends his unto all. Malachy
works upon this, Have we not all one Father? Cap. 2.
wherefore then do you injury one to another? The blood should never be cold,
seeing we are all kin in the first degree; all brethren, sons of one
father, even of him that is here called, the everlasting father.

But how comes Christ to be called father, who otherwise is called our
brother; he being the son of God, and God being his father, as he is ours?
If you respect the Communion of those things whereof we both partake, he is our
brother, but if the Communication or deriuation of them, he is our father; for
he is the second Adam, as the Church is the second Eve: and as we are termed
the sons of the Church, or of Jerusalem the Spouse, so are we also of Christ
the Bridegroom, who begets us in, and by his Church. We bear the image of
this second Adam, as we do of the first, and his children are we whose image
we bear: therefore Christ that says, I will declare thy name unto my
brethren, Romans 14. says, Esaias 8. Behold, here am I, and the children which
thou have given unto me. As he is, so he calls himself, sometimes brother,
sometimes father. And so have you heard, how he is The everlasting father.

But the words bear also another interpretation, which is, That he is the
father of everlasting things. As he is, so are those things that are subject
unto him, both everlasting. And this distinguishes between this world, and
that which is to come, making Christ King of the later. St. Paul tells us,
Heb. 2. that God has subjected unto him the world to come. That temporal and
eternal do distinguish between these two worlds, it is clear in St. Paul,
teaching that those things which are seen are temporal, but those which are
not seen are eternal. And touching the things which are seen, the Preacher
has pronounced peremptorily vanity of vanities, all is but vanity: One
generation passes, and another comes, and nothing abides steadfast in the
world. 1 Cor. 7.
St. Paul bids us use the world as if we used it not, because the fashion of
this world passes away. St. John bids us not to love the world, nor the
things that are in the world; Psalm. 102.
for this world passes away, and the lusts thereof. The Psalmist tells us
that they all wax old like unto a garment: and St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2. Romans 8.
that the heavens shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works thereof
shall be burnt up; they shall be dissolved. For all are subject unto vanity.
But in the very same places where the temporalty of this present world is set
down, there is mention made of the eternity of that world which is to come: you
heard it out of the place to the Corinths: and the words in the Psalm are very
clear, 2 Cor. 4. Psalm. 102. 1 John 2.
The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall stand fast
in thy sight: and St. John, He that fulfilleth the will of God, abides for
ever. St. Peter intimates as much: and so does Solomon in the Preacher. This
our Prophet that in the fortieth is willed to cry, All flesh is grass, and the
glory thereof is as the flower of the field, the grass withers, the flower
fades; is willed also to cry, That the Word of the Lord endures for ever. 1
Pet. 1.
And this Word is the incorruptible seed, by which we are newborn; it is
the food, by which we are nourished, which endures for ever; it is the
riches, which ney there rust can corrupt, nor thieves spoil us of; John 6.
it sets upon our heads an immarcessible Crown, and places us in a
Kingdom that cannot be shaken. All the graces wherein stands the life of
Christianity, they are eternal graces, they possess us of that which is
eternal, and make us eternal possessours thereof. Therefore well does Christ
in this respect also receive this title of The father of eternity.

But eternity must be understood a part post, not a part ante. The eternity a
part ante, is Gods prerogative; to be so eternal, is to be without
beginning. A creature has his beginning, and so far is temporal: but he may
be continued for ever, and so be eternal. And in this sense does the Prophet
in this place speak of eternity, and makes Christ The father thereof.

And well may he be called the father, that was the Author, and is the
Disposer thereof: for in his own Person he first gave being unto this both
grace and glory, and from his person does it stream unto us; we no otherwise
enjoy it, than as we have union with him. And these three interests of Christ
in these things, do make him to be termed, the father of this eternity.

But now this title must look back unto the two formertitles, and then we
shall see the sweetness that is in it. In the Regal titles we heard of that
Wisdom and Power which we may admire and adore: but when I hear that the
wonderful Counselor, the almighty God is my father, this sweetens these two
glorious titles, and makes them the more comfortable to me. For whom does the
wisdom of a father provide, but for his child? and for whom so readily as
for his child, does a father use his power? I presume then of Christ's
pr^uidence, of Christ's supportance, because Christ is my father. He that is
the king is my father, and what I might not presume of a king, of a father I
dare presume, yea, and presume it constantly; for he is unchangeable. My
immortal father is not like my mortal, that his wisdom or his power should
steed me but for a time, they will stick to me for ever; no death can take
them from me, neither will they be estranged upon any dislike. Can there be
greater comfort for a feeble, for a sinful soul, than this assurance of such
an everlasting father?

The comfort is great that appears in the person, but in the inheritance there
appears much greater: for wherein has, or does this my everlasting father
spend his everlasting wonderful wisdom, and mighty power? has he spent them
to provide me a momentany estate? is his inheritance like that which is left by
my mortal parents, such as I may lose, or must leave? No, it is like himself,
his works be are the image of his person, they are eternal like himself. Let
then the world fail me, let all earthly things be taken from me, let them be
unto me as my parents, natural parents were, but temporal: yet shall I not
want. I can as little be poor, as be an Orphan: My father never dies, and the
portion he gives me endures for ever. When I read of what stuff Moses made
the Tabercle, Solomon the Temple, much more when I read St. John's description
of the heavenly Jerusalem, I now perceive Gods meaning; it is to let me
understand, so far as earth can shadow heaven, how much more stable my
inheritance of heaven is, than the best inheritance I can get here on earth, if
it be of earth: though on earth I may have (every child of God has) the
earnest, the first fruits of that which we exspect in heaven. And so have you
the first of these two titles, which teach that Christ's royal endowments are
also spiritual.

I come now to the second, which shows that as Christ's kingdom is not of
this world, because it is as he is, not temporal, but eternal: so likewise
the condition of it is not worldly, it is Peace. Divus Nerua (says Tacitus)
duas res olim insociabiles coniunxit, imperium and libertatem. He spoke with
the most that ascribed so much unto Nerua: but of Christ is may be most truly
affirmed, that where he reigns, there is peace and free liberty for every
Subject. It is too usual with men, the wiser they are, the more to be
turbulent, and disquieters of States, the more power they have, the more to
tyrannize: it is not so with our King, but he that is wonderful for Counsel,
mighty for Power, bends both his Counsel and his Power to work Peace, that
peace which is the portion of his Church, and which none partake beside the
members thereof. This Prophet has peremptorily pronounced, There is no peace
unto the wicked, says my God: Esaias 57.
He compares them to the Sea, still raging and foming, casting out their own
shame: and Solomon unto vanity, adds vexation of spirit. You may see it in the
particular case of all wicked men, that sure they have no rest. They have no
rest ab intra; they never can light upon that which does sistere appetitum,
which makes them range in their desires, in their endeauours, never finding
where to settle: and ab extra too, they are unquiet, for the whirle-winde of
God drives them like chafe, and like a flood it drives them down the
stream. And indeed, how should they be quiet that are compared unto the sea,
which when there is no storm cannot stand still, but has his flux and reflux?
And no wonder: for it is the subject of the Moon, than which, nothing is more
changeable. A fit Emblem of the world, upon which, whosoever depends, cannot
be stable, when the world it self is so unsteadfast.

But no greater argument can be brought for their want of quiet, than that
which is taken from the nature of peace: and the nature thereof is insinuated
in the word, wherewith the holy Ghost in the Hebrew tongue expresses it; no
tongue does so usually fit words to things, and give us a notion of the things
by the words. Now the word Shalom, which signifies Peace, does in the root
contain two significations, the one of Perfection, the other of Retribution:
and these two comprehend the full nature of peace. wherein there is first
perfection.

What perfection is, I will show you corporally, that you may the better
conceive it spiritually. God has made the eye to see, and the ear to hear;
the eye sees colors, the ear hears sounds: that between those objects,
and these senses, there may be quiet, the sense must be in good temper, and the
object such as will give content: if the sense be sound, and the object
pleasing, there grows peace between them; but if either the object be not
proportioned to the eye to please it, and so likewise the sound to the ear; or
if the ear and the eye be unsound, so that it cannot endure the object, then
grows unquietness. As it is thus bodily, so spiritually there is an object
that must be entertained by us, and we must be fit to entertain it; Gods Word
and his Works. If our senses be so sanctified, that we can behold them, and
they do so testify Gods will to us, that we receive comfort by them, then
there is Peace.

Apply this unto the godly, and you shall find, that the things of God do
always give them content, and they delight to solace themselves in them: yea,
though the cross go withal, and they are exposed to worldly troubles, yet
every good man is Medijs tranquillus in vndis: Et si fractus illabatur orbis,
impauidum ferient rumae. As for the wicked, it is not so with them: for either
they want those senses, whereby they should entertain Gods gracious countenance
when it is present with them, and so peace fails in them, for want of that
wherewith they should receive it; or else if God give them senses to see him,
they see nothing but Justice and Wrath in him, and so in regard of the object,
they have no peace: (stupidity, and senslesnesse of Gods judgments, which
sometimes does befall them, especially in prosperity, makes a show of peace;
but indeed it is nothing less;) For if so be the parts of our body, and
powers of our soul, do not work upon their proper objects, and in working
find content, there is not the nature of peace; peace, so far as it consists
in perfection; Which understood spiritually, is nothing else but grace; grace
is the first kind of peace which belongs unto the Church.

Besides this peace of perfection, there is a peace of retribution. Every
Commandment, as it has his precept, so it has his sanction also; and as we
are commanded in the one, so we have a promise in the other: Glory is promised
for grace; and the servant to whom the master says Well done, shall enter into
his Masters joy: he shall have peace for peace, yea peace upon peace; the peace
of heaven heaped upon that peace which he had in earth, which is nothing else
but the reward of godliness.

You see the two branches of peace, perfection and retribution; of both these
Christ is Prince: He is the Author both of grace and glory, the true King of
Salem, Ephesians. 2.14.
the true Solomon, the true Noah, whom St. Paul calls our Peace; Luke 2.14.
Luke 10.5.
at whose birth the Angels sung, In earth peace; whose first Sermon that he
commanded his Apostles to preach, was, Peace be to this house; who taking leave
of his Disciples, Ioh. 14.27.
gave them Peace, when he went to his death, Luke 24.36.
when he rose from the dead; finally, as the Apostle says, Slew hatred, and
set at one all things both in heaven and earth. The Prophets every where speak
of his Kingdom, as of a Kingdom of peace. Read Psalm 72. Esaias 32. etc.

That the inheritance we shall have is eternal, you heard before: But the
inheritance of the wicked is eternal also, Go ye cursed (shall the Judge say)
into everlasting fire; and they have a worm that never dies: but theirs is a
miserable eternity, an unquiet inheritance, hunger and thirst, nakedness and
pain, chains and utter darkness, weeping and gnashing of teeth are their
portion; and where these are, what trouble is there not? But ours is a better
eternity, it is a peaceable one: as we shall ever be, so shall we ever be at
quiet; at quiet passiuely, nothing shall disquiet us; at quiet actiuely, we
shall disquiet none. We shall be pacati and pacifici, sit at rest our selves,
and disturb none. It shall be so in heaven fully, in earth it should be so in
a good measure: for Gods will should be done in earth as it is in heaven; and
we should begin our heaven here upon earth. We should begin to exercise the
Peace of Perfection, and foretaste the Peace of Retribution; that so we might
have a good experiment, and give the world a good testimony that we are the
subjects of the Prince of peace.

I will set God before mine eyes, and I will try how mine eyes can behold God;
and if I find that mine eye delights to behold him, that his countenance puts
gladness into my heart, when I do behold him, I am sure we are at Peace. For,
were we not, either I have no eyes, and do not see him, or when I do, I
shall be confounded with the sight of him. I will open mine ears, and I will
hear God in his Word, and if when I hear him, the Law of his mouth is sweeter
unto me than honey, and the honey comb, I know we are at peace; were we not, I
must needs be like Adam, hear, and fly. And if, in the days of my mortality,
I can attain this Peace of Perfection, I doubt not, but in the days of my
immortality, I shall attain unto that higher peace, the peace of Retribution:
all tears shall be wiped from mine eyes, all sickness from my body, all
blindness from my understanding, all vntowardlinesse from my will. This civil
discord of the flesh and the spirit, and that greater between my conscience
and God, how much more these lesser discords that are between me and other men,
shall fully cease, and be abolished for ever; the Prince of Peace shall
consummate my peace. And so have you those two titles of Christ, which show,
that we must understand spiritually those two former titles, which you heard
before do royally belong unto him.

I should now farther show you, that the Scripture gives Christ many names,
because one or few cannot fully express him, or (at least) we cannot fully
sound the depth of that name when it is given unto him. The name of Jesus, is a
rich name, and so is the name of Christ, the usual names by which our Savior
was called: but the riches of those names are unfolded unto us in these
particular titles, and we must take these as Commentaries upon those: for as
it is in the eleventh of this Prophecy, The spirit which rested upon Christ
was manifold; how manifold, the holy Ghost does there describe in abstracto:
but here to like purpose he speaks of Christ in concreto. The time will not
suffer me to parallel these, and the like places; this is our Rule, That as our
nature delights in variety, so there is a variety in Christ, to give full
content unto our nature; and we must not lightly pass by any one of his
titles, seeing every one of them promises so much good unto us.

O Lord, that being my Lord, art pleased to be my Father, such a Father, as
that I need not fear that I shall ever be an Orphan, and have provided me an
inheritance that shall be as lasting as my self, that when all other fail me,
shall be enjoyed by me; an inheritance most comfortable, because therein
consists my Perfection, and thy Retribution; the Retribution of glory,
wherewith thou do crown the Perfection of grace: grant that I never want
that piety which I owe unto my Father, that charity which I owe unto my
Brethren. Let my heart go where my best treasure is, and let that peace which
passes all understanding have the upper hand in me: Let me feel it, let me
practice it so in heart, that I may have the fullness of both sense and
practice of it, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Amen. THE SIXTH SERMON.
Of the increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no end, upon the
Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it etc.
IN Christ, whom the Prophet describes here unto us, I observed a double
excellency, one of his Person, and another of his State: The first I have
already handled; I come now to the second, the excellency of the State. Which
stands in a boundless growth of the Kingdom, and a constant policy of the
King; that is the effect, whereof this is the cause.

But more particularly in the effect, observe, that there is a growth, the
Prophet calls it an increase, a growth of the government, and a growth of the
peace; both partake of the same increase. And the increase of both is
boundless, there is no end of it; no bounds of place, it ouerspreadeth all; no
bounds of time, it endures for ever: the word bears both.

Of this effect or boundless growth of the Kingdom, the cause is the constant
policy of the King. Which consists in the exercise of his two roy all
indowments: of his wisdom, He shall order, and to order is nothing else but
to employ that wisdom which Christ has as a wonderful Counselor: of his
power, He shall support, and to support, what is it but to employ his power?
the power that he has as he is a mighty God: he employeth them both, his
wisdom, his power.

But they may be employed either well, or ill, according as the rule is by
which they proceed: Christ employeth them well, his rule is good, it is
judgment and justice; he calls all to an account, and measures to all as they
are found upon their trial. This is the policy.

And herein he is constant, he continues it without ceasing, from henceforth
even for ever: So that of the everlasting effect, there is an everlasting cause.

You see what is the sum or substance of this second excellency; but that
you may see it better, let us run over the parts briefly, and in their order.

And first we are to observe, how answerable the excellency of the state is,
to the excellency of the person, one goes not without the other. Christus
naturalis will have Christum mysticum conformable unto him, the body to the
head: Where he vouchsafes an union of persons, he vouchsafes a communion also
in the dignity of the persons.

It appears in the name, he is called Christ, which is, anointed with oil of
gladness; and we are called Christians, we partake of the same oil. His name
is but an ointment poured out, as it is in the Canticles; Cap. 1.3.
poured out like that precious oil upon Aarons head, which ran down to the
skirts of his garment. Cap. 60.
All Christ's garments (and the Church in Esaias is compared to a garment) smell
of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, as it is Psalm 45. This is taught by diverse
Similies, Of the wives communicating in her husbands honor and wealth, The
branches partaking of the fatness and sweetness of the root, The members
deriuing of sense and motion from the head: So that our King is not like the
bramble that receives all good, and yields none to the state: but he is like
the Fig Tree, the Vine, the Olive; they that pertain to him, are all the
better for him, they are conformable to him; if he have an excellency, they
shall have one also. A good pattern for mortal Kings and Governors, who
should herein imitate the King of Heaven, that as when a man sees an excellent
work, he ghesseth that the work man was excellent, though he see him not: so
the eminency of the Governor may be seen, when he is not seen; it may be
seen in the eminency of his people. Surely, the corporal Heaven does not
more declare the glory of God, Psalm 19.
nor the corporal Firmament his handy work; than the mystical heaven, and
the Firmament of the Church, do set forth unto the world the glory of Christ.

But enough of the correspondencie of one excellency to another: let us
descend now to the particulars of the later, and speak first of the growth.

And here we see how Christus mysticus does answer Christum naturalem also. In
describing of the King, the Prophet began at his childhood, of which St. Luke
says, that Christ grew in wisdom, in stature, and in fanour both with God
and man. And what does the word increase intimate, but a childhood as it were
of the Church, from which it grows forward? Certainly, the Scripture does
follow the Simile, and fetches, as Christ out of his mothers womb, so the
children of God out of the Churches womb, by a new birth. And as Christ sucked
his mothers breast, so do these children live at first by reasonable milk,
(as Saint Peter speaks) sucked from the Churches two breasts, the Old, Heb. 6.
and the New Testament. As he, so they come at length to stronger meat, and
both come to the age of a perfect man: Christ naturally, the Church mystically.
Ephesians. 4.
And this doctrine is taught by other Similies also. In the Prophets we read
of Vine-plants which grew, and spread far; Dan. 2.
of the little stone in Daniel, cut without hands, which grew into a great
Mountain. In the Gospel the Kingdom of heaven is compared to mustard seed,
the least of seeds, but not of the least growth, it becomes a Tree; and it is
compared to leaven, and who knows not how that disperseth it self throughout
the whole lump?

But this is plain in the story, Crescite and multiplicamini was a blessing
that concerned as well the spiritual, as the natural propagation of man, both
had a like small beginning. Before the Flood one Adam and one Eve, from whom
sprang all the children of God: after the Flood there was but one Family to
people all the world, and but a piece of that to people the Church. Abraham had
but one Isaac, whose offspring was to become a mighty Nation: he that marketh
how it increased in Egypt, will say that it increased indeed. Come to the New
Testament; what a small beginning had the Church thereof? but what an increment
do we find of it? And when the Gospel was in this later age new planted, how
few were they from whom it spread? It were no great matter to weary you, with
relating out of the Prophets Texts that handle this increase. But it needs
not, the matter is plain. And this is the use, even the comfort of the Church,
that when we see but a cloud, no bigger than that of Elias, we may
prognosticate, that the whole heavens shall be ouercast, there will follow
more, as truly as when a few grains are sown, there will arise many ears,
and each laden with many grains. God somewhere in the Prophet uses that
Simile, and speaking of the Church, he promises that he will sow it with the
seed of men: So that we may use those words of Zachary, Cap. 4.
Who has despised the day of small things? for they shall rejoice, and shall
see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel, with those seven, they are the eyes
of the Lord which run to and fro through the earth. For there is an increase,
and this increase is boundless.

But before I come to the measure of the increase, I must a little observe,
what that is which does increase; it is here specified to be the Government and
the Peace thereof. What the Government, and what the Peace is, you heard
before: at this time I am only to observe, that both of them increase; for it
is remarkable, that they both increase. When mortal Princes enlarge their
Dominions, they are feign withal to increase their garrisons. Witness the
Roman Empire, which never kept so many Armies, as when they had most
Provinces. And no marvel; for what they conquered by the sword, they were
feign to hold by the sword. for, but for fear they were not obeyed by them
whom they held by force. Quem metuunt, oderunt: Et quem quisque odit, periisse
expetit, are too evident, and too much experienced rules. All Nations have had
the trial of it in their conquests.

But it is not so with the Kingdom of Christ; where he enlarges his
Dominions he brings Peace, the inseparable companion of his Dominions: and
why? he makes all his Subjects natural. The Romans in the end found that to
be the best policy, to denizen whole Countries whom they conquered, and give
them the same immunities with the Citizens of Rome. And sure, this was a better
provision for their peace, than the sword could be. But this was but a moral
perswafion unto peace, it could not work the heart, and alter it, that was
still indisposed thereunto; as appears by many rebellions and wars of those
that had these immunities, when fit occasion was offered them.

But our Savior Christ changes the heart. In the eleventh of this prophecy
it is excellently figured, by the cohabitation of the Wolf and the Lamb, the
Leopard and the Kid, etc. Have men never so saluage dispositions, yet when they
come under the Government of Christ, they put them off, and become as meek, as
tame, as the Lambs and Kids in the flock of Christ. He that reads the
stories, how barbarous other countries, yea our own country was before it was
christianed, will acknowledge the truth hereof. I will only instance in two
well known persons. St. Paul and St. Austine, what they were before, they have
each of them registered with their own pens; St. Paul in his Epistles, St.
Augustine in his Confessions; what they became, who knows not that has read
the Writings of them both? The ground of all, is, None comes under Christ's
government, but he is newborn, not so much naturalized, as indeed made a
natural subject: and we see in our own Country, how true the affection is, as
of a natural Prince to his Subjects, so of natural Subjects to their Prince.
This City lodges no garrison, neither does any other, except the frontier
Town that is armed against the foreign enemy, and yet we all readily obey:
even so is it, and much more so in the Kingdom of Christ; where the government
comes, peace comes with it, they both go together, they both increase.

But how far? surely without stint of time or place; of the increase (says
our Prophet) there is no end. Where the Prophets do speak of the increase of
the government, they join withal the increase of the peace. Psalm 72. Esaias
60. Micah 4. etc. The increase is (as I termed it) boundless; it has neither
limits of place, nor period of time. The Hebrew word bears both, and so does
the Syriacke, which Luke 1. is used in the same argument. In the Hebrew Text
the word Marbe has, contrary to the usual orthography, Mem clausum for Mem
apertum; some impute it to the error of the Scribes, but the uniformity of all
copies disproues that, seeing it is not like that all should commit the same
error, especially seeing they wrote not all out of one copy. Whereupon the
Divines suppose, that there is some mystery therein; what the mystery is, they
are not agreed: some would have it to be but a circumstance, a circumstance of
the time when Christ should be borne; Mem understood numerally signifies 600.
and about 600. years after this prophecy Christ was borne: othersome not
content with this circumstance, seek for a mystery in the substance of the
description of Christ; and here their judgments vary also: for some respect
Christum naturalem, and some Christum mysticum. They that respect Christum
naturalem, suppose that the strangeness of the character signifies the
strangeness of Christ's birth, which was not to be after the ordinary course of
man: They that respect Christum mysticum, observe, that the squarenesse of Mem,
points out the four quarters of the world, and the closeness of Mem, the
perpetuity of time; for that you cannot see in the letter where it ends. And if
there be any mystery, this is the likeliest: for seeing this letter falls
out to be in those words, wherein the Prophet speaks de Christo mystico, it
is like the mystery concerns Christum mysticum, and notes the boundless
increase thereof in place and time.

But to leave this mystery. The phrase does plainly observe a difference
between the Church in the Old Testament, and the Church in the New; that had
bounds, this has none. The bounds of the old Church were the limits of the
holy Land, which you may read in Moses, and in Iosuah: the like difference is
observed in the old, and in the new Jerusalem; the old Jerusalem had walls, but
Zachary, cap. 2. says, that the new should be inhabited without walls. And
indeed here we see the truth of the promise made to Abraham, He is a Father of
many Nations. As in Sarahs name we saw the royalty of the King, so in Abraham's,
the amplitude of the Kingdom. We may likewise apply hereunto the story of
Jacobs two sons, Judah a type of the King, and Joseph, of the Kingdom; his
very name sounds the increase thereof: and Jacob describes in his blessing,
this blessing of increaso.

But to come to the plain cuidences; In thy seed (said God to Abraham) shall
all nations of the earth be blessed: And Psalm 2. Ask of me (says God to
Christ) and I will give unto thee all nations for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. I omit the rest of the
Prophets: the Psalms have Texts enough, All nations shall remember themselves,
and be turned to the Lord. read Psalm 45.72.89. Come to the New Testament,
Many shall come from the East, and from the west, from the North, and from the
South (says Christ) and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 8. and 13. He makes the whole world the field
wherein God sows his seed: and speaking of the end of the world, he gives us
the meaning of that Parable, saying, That the Gospel must be preached to all
nations. But most excellent is that, Acts 2. where when the holy Ghost
descended, it pleased God that there should be of all nations under heaven;
some that should hear (...), the wonderful works of God, every one in his
own languagne. So that the Gospel was preached to all nations, before the
Apostles stirred from Jerusalem. And who can tell whether they were not
harbingers unto the Apostles, to prepare a people for Christ against their
coming thither? The place also in the Revelation, cap. 7. is very clear,
where, after the sealing of those that were Israelites, John saw a multitude of
all nations, which none could number, triumphing as members of this Kingdom.
Finally, St. Paul compares the circuit of the Sun of righteousness, Romans 10.
unto the circuit of our corporal Sun; both compass the world, no place is
hid from the light or heat of either of them.

You see it has no bounds of place, neither has it any bounds of time. As it
is the largest Monarchy that ever was (for none of these four notable ones
ever took up half so much ground) so is it the most lasting also, Jesus
Christ yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. You have it in the type of
David, and Saul, whereof the Kingdom of the one was temporal, but of the
other eternal, as it is 2 Samuel 7. The Angel repeateth the same promise, Luke
1. The Psalms do often urge it, Psalm 45.72.89. So do the Prophets, Esaias
especially, they all concur in this, that the Kingdom shall have no end.
Christ's words are short, but they are full, The gates of hell shall never
prevail against it.

And behold here another excellent difference, between mortal Kingdoms, and
this heavenly. Mortal Kingdoms are not lasting; and while they last, they
continue not uniform, they have their clymactericall years, and commonly
determine within certain periods. The Politicians write of it, Bodin by name,
and he out of others: and the Stories are clear that it is so. Justin has
calculated the three first: but Sleidan all four; and we see their beginning,
and their ending.

And as they are not lasting, so while they last, they continue not uniform.
The Planters of great states are commonly Heroical men: but the Proverb is,
Heroum filij noxae, The Parents were never so beneficial, as the children are
mischievous, oppressing by tyranny, or wasting by vanity; worldly peace
breeds plenty, plenty breeds luxury, and luxury breeds war, wherewith
comes ruin. This being the condition of mortal Kingdoms, how blessed is
this Kingdom, that is boundless in place and time? both for government and
for peace. If a man would choose himself an habitation, would he not pitch
there where he might have the most commerce, and the safest harbor? See then
our vanity, that for the most part wrong our selves herein, and prefer the
world before the Church, desire to be of that corporation, rather than this:
where we have less scope, and more trouble, do we rather choose to make our
abode, than where the bounds are wider, and the peace is never interrupted? I
say there is more scope in the Church than in the world; not only more lasting
peace, because though there be few that shall be saved, yet those few are all
at one: But of those that perish, it is true, Quot capita, tot sensus, there
are as many factions almost, as persons, they jar as much between themselves,
as they do with the godly. and in that respect the godly may be said to be
most in number.

But there are two cautions to be observed in this boundlesnesse of the Church:
One concerning the bound lesnesse thereof in regard of place: Another
concerning the boundlesnesse thereof in regard of time. Touching the former,
whereas the Church is said to spread it self over the whole world, we must not
only understand it de generibus singulorum, (not de singulis generum) in all
nations; but also observe, that Christ which has Ius ad omnem terram, has not
at the same time Ius in omni terra: the propriety of all is his, but he takes
possession of it successively, and by parts. As the scope of the Sun is all
the world, and yet at one time the Sun does not shine in all parts thereof;
it begins in the East, and passes to the South, and so to the West; and as
it passes forward bringing light to one place, withdraws it from another: so
is it in regard of the Sun of Righteousness; the eastern Countries, the
foutherne, have had his light, which now are in darkness for the most part:
and we that were more northerly do now enjoy the clearest noontide; but the
Sun begins to rise to them in the West, and it is too plain, that our
light begins to grow dim; it is to be feared, that it hasteneth to their
Meridian, and whether after their noone, it will then set, God knows. The
cause hereof is not (lest we mistake) in the Sun of Righteousness, as the
cause why all have not light at one time, is in the corporal Sun: The
corporal Sun cannot at one time illighten all, the Sun of Righteousness
can: But for the sins of the people the Candlestick is removed, and given to
a nation that will bear more fruit. We interpose our earthlinesse between our
selves and the Sun, and so exclude our selves from the beams thereof.

A second caution concerns the time. The peace and the government are said
to be everlasting: But they may be considered in fieri, or in facto, when they
are once consummated, they shall be continued for ever; but while they are in
fieri, the rebellion of the flesh against the spirit interrupts the government,
and the conscience of sin within, and the cross without, interrupt the peace.

Yet both are lasting pro modo viatoris, in the root, though not in the
fruit; the principles of obedience, which are repentance and faith, by which
we recall our selves, and the principles of peace, which are faith and hope,
by which we pacify our selves inwardly, and patiently sustain what befalls us
outwardly, continue for ever: yea, and disobedience repented of makes us more
obedient, and the interruption of peace breeds us more peace; more peace
inwardly we have, the less we have outwardly; and after our reconciliation
with God, we do more comfortably enjoy the light of his countenance, but when
we are comprehensores, then our Obedience shall be entire, and our peace be
full, and both without end.

The last note is that which is the life of all, to wit, the use, that we must
make of it. Although we cannot say of a body consisting of heterogeneous parts,
that Eadem est ratio vnius and omnium, yet when it consists of homogeneous
parts, we may say it truly: I cannot say, that my hand is my head, or my head
is my hand, or that in the one I see the nature of the other; but whereas of
flesh every part is flesh, in the least part I see the condition of the whole.
The Church has a double consideration, so far as these children are subjects
of the Kindome, they are all homogeneous parts; but as they have several
functions, so they are heterogeneous parts. We have not all the same graces of
edification, but the same graces of adoption we should all have: though we be
not all Prophets, all Apostles, all workers of Miracles, all Pastors; yet are
we all children of God, servants in his house, subjects in his kingdom; every
man so far is a little catholic Church, at least should be. And we should
all try our selves by the rules of my Text, whether we find in our selves the
government of Christ, in our voluntary subjection to him; the peace of Christ
in his comfortable influence into our consciences. We must try how these
things increase in us, how we daily profit in both: And we should profit so
far, as that no part of our body, norpower of our soul, should be withdrawn
from Christ's government: there should be no part or power of either, that does
not partake of the sweetness of his peace. They should do so, and every day
should they do it: as they must exclude Christ from no place, so must they
exclude him at no time.

But alas, many of us are no subjects at all, we are sons of Belial, few of
us growing subjects: but Catholickesubiects there are none on earth; for, how
many holds has Satan in us, in our bodies, and in our souls, out of which we
keep Christ the lawful owner of them? And for Time, it were well if we paid a
tenth part thereof unto Christ; but we afford him not so many hours as we do
years unto the Devil. We are like unto the image in Daniel, which had a
golden head, silver shoulders, brazen thighs, feet of clay and iron, the lower
the worser; and we, the longer we live, commonly the worse we are, the first
time we come to Christ we are at the best. How it is with particular persons,
let every man ask his own conscience. Certainly it is so with whole Churches;
what zeal, what charity, was there in the days of the Apostles? but it was of
no long continuance. The Fathers that write of the persecutions, say, That God
sent every one of them to correct in his Church the decay both of zeal and
charity. When the Gospel revived with us, those that are old may remember, how
religious this Kingdom was, both within the Church and without, and what a
friendly conspiracy there was between true devotion and honest conuerfation.
But may not Christ say now to us, as he said to the Church of Ephesus? I have
somewhat against thee, Reu. 2.
because thou have left thy first love. Nay, rather may not he repeat the words
which he sent unto the Church of Sardis? I know thy works, Reu. 3.
thou have a name that thou live, but art dead. Certainly, true Piety, true
Charity is dead amongst us. I conclude all with Christ's exhortation, Reu. 2.
Let us remember from whence we are fallen, and repent, and do our first
works, lest he come upon us quickly, and remove our Candlestick out of his
place, because we do not repent.

O Lord, that have vouchsafed to place thy Government amongst us, and with
this Government to give thy Peace, we beseech thee that have planted them, so
to water them, that both may grow in us; and let us set no bounds to that which
thou would have boundless: Let not our whole Church, let not any member
thereof withhold ought that should be subject unto thee, either in soul or
body. And let our whole soul, our whole body, be comforted with thy peace:
Finally, let them last as they grow both Government and Peace, in all, in every
one of us, and that world without end. Let neither end in this world, where
they are subject to danger: So shall both last for ever in that world that is
to come, where they shall be free from all danger. Amen. THE SEVENTH SERMON.
To order, and to establish it, with Justice and with Judgment for ever.
THe Excellency of Christ's State stands in a boundless growth of the
Kingdom, and a constant policy of the King. Of the boundless growth I have
already spoken: I come now to the constant policy. This is the cause, whereof
that was the effect: and as the effect is answerable to the cause, so the cause
is not inferior to the effect; it must be such as is likely to produce it,
and so is this. Let us consider it.

The policy is the exercise of the royal endowments of the Kings wisdom and
of his power: of his wisdom, for he does order; and to order, what is it,
but to show himself the wonderful Counselor? of his power, for he does
support; and what is it to support, but to show himself the mighty God? But
both these may be done ill or well; Christ's are well done: for in doing both he
follows a good rule, his rule is, Judgment and Justice. He calls all to
an account, and he deals with all impartially.

And this he does constantly, from henceforth and for ever. For of an endless
effect, the cause must also be endless.

These be the particulars which now we must handle. I begin at the first.

And the first thing that I observe herein, is, That as Christ has endowments,
so he uses them to that end, for which he received them. No creature, though
destitute of reason, but keeps his course, they let us see in their working,
wherefore they were ordained: the Sun gives his light, the Fire his heat,
the Water moistness, the Earth bears fruit; in all creatures you may read
this lesson, Deus and Natura nihil faciunt frustra. And if creatures void of
reason deal so, much more should those that are endued with reason; they
should not be like the vuprofitable servant, that wrapped his talent up in a
napkin, and hid it, but (as St. Peter advises) Every one as he has received
the gift, 1 Pet. 4.10.
so must he dispose it; as a good Steward of the manifold graces of God.
Certainly Christ does so, and he is a good Precedent unto every one of us,
especially unto those of place and authority, be it in Church or Commonweal:
their gifts must not be idle, seeing there was an end for which they were
bestowed upon them.

As they must not be idle, so must each be applied unto his proper end: for,
praestat otiosum esse, quam nihil agere, to busy our gifts, and not intend
that whereat every one must aim, is an unprofitable business. And much
business of this nature there is in the world; which is the cause why St. Paul
does blame certain persons, whom he calls busy bodies, 1 Timothy 5.13. Mark
then, that our Savior does employ his endowments, and employ them fitly.
Wisdom is appointed to order, and he does order by his wisdom: Power is
appointed to support, and he does support by his Power.

But let us look further into either of these. Christ does order, order his
Kingdom: therefore it was out of order. The Physicians medicine does intimate
the Patients disease; and we do not use to set in order that which was not
out of order. And indeed, this Kingdom of Israel was out of order: In the
temporal state it was, when Christ came, as it was when David came to the
Crown. When David came to the crown, he professed, All the Land is dissolved,
I bear up the Pillars thereof. it was much more so, when Christ came in the
days of Herod; as he that reads Flauius Josephus, writing of the life of
Herod, may easily perceive. At what time Jacobs prophecy appeared true, The
Scepter was gone, Cap. 9.
the Lawgiver ceased: whereupon ensued that which Amos foretold, The
Tabernacle of David fell to the ground; It was so with the temporal State. But
Christ meddled not with that, he left unto Caesar that which was Caesar's: his
endeavor was, that God might have what was due to God.

As the temporal State was out of order, so was the ecclesiastical much more:
it appears in the Gospel, where Christ lays open the abuses of the Priests
and of the Scribes, of the Pharisees and of the Saducees; it was their abuses
that he came to reform, to set in order.

Secondly, this word remembers us of the Apostles rule, 1 Cor. 14. God is not
the God of confusion, but of order. Confusion is from the Devil, but order is
from God; especially in the Church: which St. Paul resembles to our body,
wherein the parts are fitly disposed, and every one keeps his place, the eye,
the head, the hand, the feet, one usurps not the function of the other: in
answerablenesse whereunto, the Apostle tells us, that All are not Prophets,
all are not Apostles, 1 Cor. 12. and Cap. 7. exhorts all men, as God has
called them, so to walk. A good rule for these days, wherein the hands, yea
and the feet too, take up the room of the head, and every man thinks
himself fit to be a Teacher, both by his pen and tongue, whose place
notwithstanding is amongst the learners: Christ came to reform such disorders.

But the order that Christ sets in his Kingdom, must be learned from that
order which wise Kings set in their temporal Kingdoms; they do order their
subjects two ways, inter se, and ad bonum commune, they take care that there
shall be a variety of professions, and that all those shall bend themselves to
procure the common good: Even so should it be in the Church, Christ bestows
diverse gifts, but all for the edification of his Church. And as in the
Commonweal a man does not live orderly, if he only follow a Trade, except the
Commonweal be the better for it; no more does he live orderly in a Church,
that does ought by which the whole Church is not benefited.

The last thing that is to be observed in this order, and which indeed is the
chiefest of all, is the ordering of each man in himself.

In the Creation, God set in man an excellent order, subiecting, as the whole
man to himself, so in man the body to the soul, the appetite to reason,
whatsoever inferior faculties to their superiors: But time put all these
things out of order, and man which from his better part should be denominated
spiritual, is from his worser part called carnal; and more usually does the
Scripture call him sensual than rational.

The holy Ghost means thereby to intimate the disorder that is grown by
sin, and the order that we are to expect from Christ, who comes to set us
in frame, and (to use the Apostles words, Ephesians. 4.) to set us in joint, that
every part of man should keep his order, and none in working exceed his
measure. It is one of the curses that God in Esaias threatens to the Kingdom of
Israel, that the vile person shall set himself against the honorable. And it
is no small curse in every one of us, to have the worser part command the
better; and command it will, except Christ do order, except he do use his
first royal endowment.

But as he uses the first, so must he use the second also: for as the Kingdom
is out of order, so is it weak also; and the establishing presupposes this
weakness: yea, indeed weakness is the cause of disorder, men fall to
disorder through weakness. The weakness of the civil State of Israel is
clear in the Story; for the Israelites were become enthralled to the Romans,
and had no power to relieve themselves, though they were exposed to all kind
of ignominy and cruelty, as he that reads Flauius Josephus will confess. It
was bad with them in the Assyrian captivity, but in the Roman much worse: and
it was this weakness that the Jews thought their Messiah should support, who
rejected Christ, because he came not into the World as a likely person to do
this, to crush their enemies, and to make them a mighty nation, according to
the Prophecies, which not only affirm they should be so, but set it out in
diverse Similies, as you may read in Esaias, in Zachary, and in others; that
they should thresh all Nations, as a heavy stone should grind them; should be
as a soporiforous cup, and as fire working upon stubble. These places they
understood literally, which indeed should have been understood spiritually.

Another weakness (for they had another kind of weakness) was disability
to do well, whereby they were carried captives unto sin (as St. Paul
speaks, Romans 7.) and that was it which enfeebled them (as God had threatened,
Deuteronomy. 28.) and gave their enemies power over them; Christ came to remedy this
weakness, Esaias 35.
to strengthen these weak hands and feeble knees, as you may perceive in that
excellent description thereof which Zachary has, cap. 2. where God promises
power to all the house of Israel, and shows, that the feeblest of them shall
be like unto David, and the house of David like unto the Angels. St. Paul,
Ephesians. 6. describes the armor wherewith we are strengthened, and tells us
that it is, The power of the Lord: and cap. 3. he tells us, that therewith we
are strengthened in the inward man: and to the Hebrews, cap. 11. tells us,
that by Faith many of weak became strong, even so strong, that St. Paul says
of himself, Phil. 4. He could do all things through him that strengthened
him, which is Christ. Finally, this is the strength for which he so often
prays, when he prays for the Church; it is the strength whereby we may be
able to encounter our chief enemies, which are ghostly, and to perform the
duties which concern a Christian life. The substance of our faculties was not
abolished by sin, but the sinews were enfeebled, as we hold in the question
of Free Will. Try it in the particulars, and you may perceive it: Our
understanding had proportionable strength to the object thereof (the truth of
God) to apprehend it; and the will to the object thereof (our sovereign Good)
to embrace it: so had all the affections the strength that was expedient for
such attendance upon the will, to further our possession of the object thereof:
But now every one of these is disabled by sin, and it is Christ's grace that
enableth them again, giving us such wisdom, such holiness, such courage,
and desires, as are expedient for a child of God to bring him unto, and keep
him in enjoying of his final end. And this power is that power by which we
must overthrow our enemies, if they be irreconcilable, as the devil, and his
angels are: we foil them when they can fasten no sin upon us; then we break
the Serpents head, when his craft cannot delude us; and his tail too, when we
continue stars in the firmament, notwithstanding his violent striking at us:
and though he roar like a Lion, yet we continue steadfast in the faith; whether
both these be used immediately by himself, or mediately by his instruments.
And if the enemies be reconcilable, then the conquest of them by this power,
is not the foyling of their bodies, or spoiling of their goods, but the casting
down in them of all imaginations, 2 Cor. 10.
and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ: And in this
manner did the Apostles conquer, and the Christians in the Primitive Church;
taking-in all these holds that were possessed by Satan, and imposing the easy
yoke of Christ upon the wits and wills of all Nations. And in this sense should
the Jews have understood the Prophets, and made David's Kingdom a type, not of
historical correspondencie, but of mystical presignificancy; for other power
they meant none, none that should appear in this world. And the Popes of Rome
are Jewish, that herein stand for a temporal power over Kings, direct or
indirect, whereby they may ouer-top the scepters, and dispose of the crowns of
Princes. Christ left unto his Church no other sword, than that which comes
out of his mouth, which elsewhere is called, the breath of his mouth; Heb. 4.
and the Word of God, which is sharper than any two-edged sword; and works in
it by no other power, as it is a Church; though he has not abolished the
civil sword, nor rebated the edge thereof in peace or war, but strengthened
it rather, in proceeding upon lawful and legal grounds. But the civil power
is not to be confounded with the power of the Gospel; the power of the
Church, and the power of the Commonweal, distant in toto genere: and it is
the power of the Church that is meant here, that is the power which Christ
established.

And mark, it is not enough for Christ to order, except he establish. It was
the case of Adam, he was well ordered, but he was not established; and
thereupon the good order became mutable, and all the gifts of God be they not
well rooted and founded in us, will come to naught, and fall to disorder. So
that stability signifies the preservation of that good order which wisdom
sets, and is the principal blessing of the Gospel; wherein stands the
prerogative of Adam regenerated above Adam created: and it is that which Christ
promises in the Gospel, and for which the Apostles do pray in their
Epistles, namely, for prescruation and steadfastness in the truth: and Christ
in his prayer before his passion does specify it expressly. If we consider the
mutability of our nature, which coming of nothing is still prone to return to
nothing, especially being wrought upon by the Devil and the World; you will
not so much wonder that the children of Isreal's garments did not clean wear
out in their forty years passage through the Wilderness, as that the garment
of Regeneration, which we receive in Baptism, wears not out all the days of
our pilgrimage in this world.

But we must not mistake; stability does not exempt us from storms, yea
storms that may shake our house, and peradventure until some part thereof,
and break some boughs off from our tree: but the foundation, the root, are
immovable, the house, the tree, shall never fall. And this is the uttermost of
that stability which we must expect in this world; The gates of hell shall not
prevail: Valere poterunt, non poterunt praeualere. We shall experience that
they had might, but not might enough to ruin us: they may give us wounds, but
none that are incurable: they may bruise our heel, but shall not be able to
break our head; we are so far established in this world: and in the world to
come we shall be established farther, even so far, as to be free from all
storms, and all wounds, we shall not be at all moved.

You hear how Christ does stablish, how he does order. But these things may
be done either well or ill. Many make orders which are not good, and support
their people in doing evil: it is not so with this King, in doing both he
follows a good rule, Judgment and Justice. I will not trouble you with the
diverse significations of, much less with the manifold commentaries upon these
words; I suppose the fairest to be that which points out the two especial
acts of a King, which are, the calling of his people to an account of their
lives, that is Judgment; and to proceed in their trials by an even rule, that
is Justice. Every man is required to have a care of his life, and to be
respective of the society wherein he lives. A Roman Emperor in the Preface
of his Institutions, makes this abridgement of civil conversation, A man must
honest viuere, not do ought disgraceful to his own person; that is not
enough, he must be careful of others also, alterum non laedere, that he
worst not another man's state while he would better his own; yea, he must suum
cuique tribuere, so live, that every man be the better for him. This is the
duty of a Subject, and the King looks that he shall perform it; to this end he
keeps an Assizes, and executes Judgment.

It fares with the body politic, as it does with the body natural; in the
body natural, if the humors keep their proportion, we shall have our
health; no sooner do they swerve from it, but they begin a disease, which
makes way to putrefaction, and so to dissolution; wherefore we apply physic
to reduce them again into a due temper: even so while good Laws sway our
carriage toward our selves, toward our neighbors, each man does well, the
Commonweal does prosper; but no sooner does the subject break these bands,
but a civil putrefaction enters, which makes way to the ruin of a State,
wherein every particular man's welfare is hazzarded with the whole: the remedy
whereof is the work of Judgment. Judgment then is a fit remedy; but it must
be attended with justice also: not the Kings affections, but his laws must
moderate his judgment, and the medicine must be fitted to the disease;
otherwise if the Scales of justice do not first weigh the merits of the cause,
the judgment will as much disquiet the State, as discontent the parties judged.

If you put these words together, to order and to stablish with judgment and
justice, each requires both; ordering is not perfect without judgment and
justice, nor stablishing perfect, except both concur: for stablishing is
nothing but a perpetuating of good order. Therefore to set the subjects right,
the King must use judgment guided by justice; and that he may keep them in
that state, he must persevere in so doing.

These words (as you see) have an evident truth in a Commonweal, and from
thence are they borrowed; but to note a higher truth which concerns the
Church, whereof Christ is King.

And here we must observe an improuement of the virtues, upon which Christ will
pass his judgment: Honest viuere, is not only to live as beseemes civil
men, but as beseems Saints, children of God expressing his image, members of
Christ leading his life, and temples of the holy Ghost, bearing in our
foreheads Holiness to the Lord. And as for alterum non laedere; it is not
enough for us not to defraud others, we must love our very enemies, bless them
that curse us, do good to them that hate and persecute us. Finally, our suum
cuique tribuere, must be to deny our selves, our friends, our life, when we
will testify our duty to God; yea, to lay down our lives also for the
Brethren, after the example of Christ: So dear must their welfare be unto us.

As that which comes into judgment is so improued, so is the judgment it
self also: for Christ's judgment is without prejudice, without partiality;
nothing can be concealed, no person can be exempted, he will bring all, both
persons and things, secret and open, before his judgment seat, all books
shall then be opened, and the secrets of all hearts revealed; he will judge
them all.

But his judgment is ordered by justice, and this justice is of a higher
strain than civil justice can be: for the justice is Evangelical, wherein
God through Christ does so question us, as that he tenders withal a pardon
unto us, and is as ready to forgive, as to discover our faults.

Not only to forgive them, but also to amend us; it suffices not Christ
graciously to cleanse us from the guilt of sin, he also gives us a new
heart, and creates an ingenuous spirit within us, by which we may be held in
from sinning: With such judgment, and with such justice does Christ order and
stablish his Church.

And here must we mark a notable difference between this King of heaven and
Kings on earth; earthly Kings neither give minds unto their subjects to observe
their Laws, neither is it lawful for them in all cases to exempt their
subjects from the stroke of justice, when they have offended: But our King can
do both; he can rectify our conversation, and when we have sinned, he can
comfort our distressed consciences.

Last of all, in using this rule, whereby he directs and supports his State,
this King is constant, he does it incessantly, from henceforth and for ever. As
the growth has an eternity, so must the cause thereof (which is the Kings
policy) have an eternity also. For there could be no eternity in the effect,
were there not an eternity in the cause, especially in effects which are
always in fieri and not in facto, such as is this. It is in the mystical body
as it is in the natural; sense there is in the body, but it is from the head;
intercept the insluence of the head, and you extinguish the sense of the body:
And as it fares with the body in regard of sense, so does it in regard of
motion also.

The like appears in the spirits that have their original from the heart; in
the blood that streameth from the veins. In the great world you have many like
spectacles, the Sun and the Light, the Streams and the Fountain, the Roots
and the Trees; every one of these (you may perceive) endure not, if the effect
be severed from the cause: How much less may we expect any enduring in those
spiritual effects, did they not receive continuance from this spiritual
cause? It is our comfort, that considering there is a mutability in us, this
mutability prevails not, because of the Kings constant influence upon us. We
sin and recover, we are in danger and escape, neither our inward weakness,
nor our enemies outward mightiness destroy Gods gifts in us, or so hinder
their increase, but that they become Catholic: for all which, we are beholding
to the constant policy of the King, who never fails to support us, but
continues ours unto the end.

But the Prophet speaks of this policy as if it began when he spoke these
words; Christ was not borne till some hundreds of years after. The answer is
easy, you had it before. The efficacy of Christ's birth wrought long before he
was borne, not only in the time of this Prophet, but even from the time of
Adams fall.

A scruple there arises, how these words can be true, that our King shall so
rule for ever, seeing a time shall come (as the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 15)
when he shall give up his Kingdom to his Father. The answer is, if we respect
the Kingdom of Grace, That as the effect shall not cease increasing till it
become boundless, that is, have attained all his parts and degrees: so the
cause shall work till the consummation of that effect, till all enemies be put
down, and we are thoroughly perfected. And in this sense both cause and effect
are termed endless, because they shall continue till the worlds end. If you
extend it to the Kingdom of Glory, it has an eternity also, though not of
Restoration, but of Conservation: though he shall cease restoring of us
further, when we are fully restored, yet shall he never cease preserving us,
because we can no longer be than we are preserved.

You have heard the constant Policy of the King, wherein stands the second
branch of the Excellency of the State; what remains, but that if we were
affected with the growth, and desired to be partakers of it, we submit our
selves unto the cause thereof, the Policy of the King; that we yield our
disorderly selves to be set in order by him; and repose our weak selves to be
supported on him, who will prescribe no Laws of order, but those that spring
from Justice, that spiritual Justice which will abide the trial at Gods
bar, and work the highest kind of righteousness in our lives?

Neither does he only prescribe it, but possess us of it also: and lest it
should fail, he supports it in us; his Judgments are as watchful over us, as
his Justice; they rectify us when we break order, and bridle us that we do
not break it. And this he does incessantly, by bringing us from growth to
growth in the state of grace, and prescruing us in this growth in the state of
glory: He will be unto us a lasting blessed cause, that there may be in us no
end of that blessed effect.

O Lord, I am out of order, and I am very weak, thon art that Counselor,
that know how to set me right again, and that Almighty God which only
can sustain me: Lord rule me by thy lustice, and by thy Judgments bridle
me, that I may be conformable to the holy members of thy Church, and ever
continue conformable unto them: Let thy work never cease in me, so shall I
never cease to be thy Subject; if thy Policy fail me not, I shall every day
grow on to the fullness of grace, and shall therehence proceed to the eternity
of glory. Which I beseech thee to grant unto me, that art the fountain both
of Grace and Glory. THE EIGHTH SERMON.
The zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall perform this.
THese are the last words of that Text whereof you have heard often, but have
not yet heard all.

The whole Text was divided into a Doctrine, and a Warrant.

The Doctrine delivered the Substance and Excellency of Christ's Person and
State: both which I have at sundry times so far unfolded as the time would give
leave; it were tedious now to repeat, were it only the heads, whereof I have
distinctly spoken. In stead of that repetition, I only recommend unto you the
laying together the parts, and therehence the gathering of a description of the
Catholic Church. Which what is it but a Kingdom, such as I have described?
growing in grace, without stint of Place, or term of Time; under and by means
of such a Person as, being God and Man, is called to be the King thereof;
royally endowed with Wisdom and Power eternal, to work an eternal good;
both which he employes, ordering and stablishing by Justice and Judgment the
disorderly and feeble members of his Church; and that without intermission,
until he has brought them to the fullness both of grace and glory. More than
this in the nature of that Catholic Church which we believe in the Creed,
there is not; neither is there any thing more that we would desire to be
therein. So that we may take this Text as a full Commentary thereupon, and to
our comfort understand the riches that are treasured up in that Article.

But to leave the Doctrine and come to the Warrant. The Doctrine contains a
large Promise; the Warrant shows that it shall be performed; and shows this
by renewing those impediments that may cross the performance thereof.

The impediments that stay a man from being as good as his word, are of two
sorts, they proceed ab extra, or ab intra, from without, or from within. From
without we may be ouer-ruled; from within we may change our mind. Neither
of these can hinder God: he cannot be ouer-ruled, for he is the Lord of
Hosts: he cannot vary in himself, because of the greatness of his love,
which is termed zeal. So that the remouall of these two impediments from God,
are the principal argument of these words: Let us look into them.

That Gods Word shall stand, That his Counsel is immutable, yea, That heaven
and earth shall pass, and yet his Word never pass, are Maxims in the
Scripture, and therefore have (...), credibility enough in themselves: but yet
so far does the holy Ghost condescend to the weakness of our Faith, as to
point unto these grounds which will content even reason it self. Reason when
it questioneth the word of any man, it bethinketh it self, whether he can if
he would, or whether he would if he can; if it can clear these two, then it
rests secure, but if it cannot be satisfied in either or both, it doubts and
distrusts. Now in both these does the holy Ghost here satisfy us touching Gods
Word, in that it makes God of a mighty power, so that none can resist his
will, he is the Lord of Hosts; and of a steadfast will, which is inseparable
from so high a degree of Love as is zeal.

Touching the first of these Pillars that support Gods Word; I observe upon
this phrase The Lord of Hosts, that there is in God a double Power, an
internal, noted by Jehovah; and an external, noted by the Hosts. The first is
coessentiall to the nature of God, and is as infinite as God is. But though
this Power be, yet it is not apparent; and it is that which is apparent that
must satisfy us: therefore God has manifested his power (as it were) in his
creatures which come within our reach, and whereof we have daily experience;
these are all termed Gods Host. We look upon them, and consider nothing farther
in them, than what they are according to their kind; the Sun we take to be a
Star that rules the day, and the Moon a Star which rules the night; we
think the Air was made for our breath, and the Earth to bear us fruits;
finally, what Creature is there, from which we expect not some such service?
The service they do us we take notice of, and our eye is upon it; but it is
not upon that service which they do unto God, though it should be upon that
principally; and it is that which is intimated by this word Hosts. So that as
Christ is set forth to be a King, so also that he wants not an Army: all the
world is his army, there is no creature in heaven and earth that fights not
under his banner. And this title is very ancient; for even in the second of
Genesis, when the world was made, the whole received this name, it was called
an Host: And God did before hand give man to understand, that it was good for
him to observe his allegiance, otherwise there was no possibility of escaping,
seeing he was environed with the soldiers of God: As likewise that he need not
fear if he did well, because he had so great a guard. These two Lessons should
we read in in this title of the Creatures: which may also be applied to
correct their error, that suppose a confusion in the affairs of this world.
Gods providence so orders all things that they never cease to be a well
martialled Army. True it is, we cannot perceive it, as long as we stand in the
level of the world: but if we ascend into Gods Mount, and from out of his
Sanctuary behold the occurrents of this life, we shall see how every creature
marches under his colors, and every one keeps his rank.

Another thing that we must mark, is, that at first there was but one Army;
for we read Tzebaam, Genesis 2. but after the Fall, then we read Tzeboath,
that one is become two: ever since God pronounced Ponam inimicitias, Michael
and his Angels, have contended with the Dragon and his Angels, and two Armies
have been on foot in the field. But though they be two, and two so opposite,
yet is their General but one; for my Text makes but one Lord of Hosts. The
reason is clear, The wicked may subducere se felicitati, but they cannot
subducere se potestati diuinae, though like Rebels they march against their
General, yet does this General not only retain his right unto them, but also
his power and authority over them; he has his bridle in their nostrils, and
but when he will, and no farther than he will, can they stir or prevail. And
this hand wherewith God so orders and stinteth their malice, is a just ground
why he is termed The Lord of Hosts.

And fitly in this place does he receive this title, because mention is before
made of difficulties which sprang from the enemies of the Church, by which it
might seem unlikely, that the Church being brought so low should ever recover
it self so well: But all of them are not to be regarded, seeing he that
promises is The Lord of Hosts.

The word Hosts may also be referred only to the Church, which though it be but
one Catholic one, yet has it many particulars, parts of that whole one. So
that as all the Roman Soldiers of the Empire were but one Army, in relation
to one Emperor, whose they all were, and by whom they were alike commanded,
though in regard of the particular Generals by whom they were conducted in
several parts of the world, they were named several Armies: Even so does the
Scripture speak of the Church, sometimes as of one, sometimes as of more
Armies; as of one Revel. 12. as of many Psalm 110. or Psalm 48. In the
Leuiticall service it uses the very word Tzaba, and the Apostles continue that
metaphor, speaking of the spiritual service of God. And if you so restrain
the word Hosts, then is this branch of the warrant very apt also; for it
implies a reason of the Churches growth, and of Christ's employing his royal
endowments in ordering and stablishing thereof. And why? every Church is his
Host: and what does a General more delight in, than the perfection of his
Army? the double perfection, as it is both militant and triumphant by grace
and glory.

You have heard the first branch of the warrant; the second branch is the
remouall of the second impediment, to wit, The changeableness of Gods will; he
can no more vary in himself, than he can be resisted from without: and why?
this Lord of Hosts has zeal; and zeal is the height of Love, which Love if
once it possess the will, it makes it an unchangeable will.

Zeal is an affection proper unto men, who over and above their will, whose
object good is, and to which belongs the choice thereof, have two attendants
thereon, the concupiscible and the irascible part; whereof the first is that
which moves toward the object, the other encountreth whatsoever difficulties
hinder our attaining or enjoying of it: when these two come to a height, they
become zeal; for zeal is compounded of them both. The nature of it seems to
be described in the eighth of the Canticles, where the Church desires to be
set as a seal, Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm:
for love is strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave, the coals
thereof are coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame. Many waters
cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: If a man would give all
the substance of his house for love, it would utterly b^ contemned. This
affection being properly in man, is by the holy Ghost ascribed unto God; but
not ratione affectus, but effectus, and in reference to that conjugal Covenant
that is between God and man: God has promised to be our God, and we have
promised to be his People, but either side promises to the other exclusiuely:
God promises to be our God, and the God of none as he is ours; and we promise
to be his People, and to be the People of no other God as we are his. This
appropriation of our selnes unto God, is that which the Apostle speaks of 1
Cor. 8. Though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven or in earth, as
there be Gods many, and Lords many; yet unto us there is but one God, God the
Father, and one Lord, Jesus Christ. This made David to say, Psalm. 73.
Whom have lin heaven but thee? Psalm. 139.
and there is none in earth that I desire in comparison of thee. Yea do I not
hate them that hate thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, as if they were
mine enemies: Psalm. 16.
but all my delight is in thy Saints which are on the earth.

As man in his zeal does so proceed exclusiuely toward God, so does God
toward man: for God takes the Church for his peculiar, Exodus 19. and thereupon
promises Abraham, I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that
curse thee. This is true conjugal Love of each side, and upon this knot
comes in zeal, which is otherwise called jealousy, and is nothing but the
affection of either part, whereby it so desires to enjoy the other, as that
none other either have it, or wrong it: for if either the wife communicate her
self to any other, or be by any other wronged, the jealousy of the husband is
stirred up against his wives enemies, or against his wife. Against his wife; so
speaks God, Ezekiel 16. And I will judge thee as women that break wedlock,
and shed blood, are judged: and I will give thee blood in sury and jealousy.
And as he proceeds in jealousy against his adulterous wife, so does he
against enemies that wrong her: thereupon the Prophets express his anger
against them by jealousy. and the Church, Esaias 62. desiring revenge, says,
Lord, where is thy zeal? In this place the zeal respects revenge upon the
enemies, not upon the Spouse; you may perceive it by the coherence of this Text
with that which goes before, where mention is made of a deliverance, and
Christ is here brought in as the Deliverer; the ground of the work is zeal.

Finally, mark, that whereas Gods glory does as well appear in our
deliverance, as our own good, yet in working thereof, God seems to be moved
rather with his love to us, than care for his own glory. and gives a good
pattern unto us, that we likewise in serving of God must respect, not so much
our own salvation, as his glory.

And so have you heard the Warrant of this Doctrine; what remains but that I
use unto you the words of the Psalmist? Be ye lifted up, O ye gates, be ye
lifted up O everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in. Who is the
King of glory? even the Lord of Hosts, he is the King of glory. You have heard
him described, and have heard the substance and excellency of his Person and
State: Behold, God is our salvation, let us trust, and not be afraid, the
Lord Iohouah is our strength and song, he also is become our salvation:
therefore with joy let us draw waters out of this Well of Salvation.

O Lord, that art able and willing, let me feel the efficacy both of thy
power and will, in making me partaker both of the Person and State of Christ,
and the excellency of both: So shall all my power be set on work by all my
will to make me wholly thine, as thou art pleased to be mine. Grant this
mutual knot may be so knit, that I never break it; so shall I be sure that
thou will ever hold it.
IHS

SIX SERMONS UPON The Second of HAGGAI.
HAG. 2. Verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. For thus says the Lord of Hosts, Yet once it is a
little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the
dry land.

And I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come, and I
will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of Hosts.

The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of Hosts.

The glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the former, says the
Lord of Hosts: and in this place will I give peace, says the Lord of Hosts.


ALthough the fruits of serving God be not his, The first Sermon.
but our own welfare, yet if it were not more furthered by him, than it is
endeavored by us, we should never fare well, because we should never serve
him. Our impediments are two; and they are two extremes, Carelessenesse, and
Curiosity: Carelessenesse keeps us back when we should begin, and when we
should go forward Curiosity slakes our zeal. Sometimes we do not serve God,
because we do not care for him: and sometimes we grow cold in piety, because
we think our best endeauours are not worthy of Gods majesty. Thus the evil
Angel, whether he appear in his darkness, or in his counterfeit light,
both ways gains upon us.

This Prophecy of Haggai does little else but propose an example of either
impediment, and the remedy that is applied thereunto: the Jews yield the
example, but the remedy is from God.

The Jews in acknowledgement of Gods great goodness, should upon their
return out of the Babylonian captivity, have made their first work the
re-edifying of Gods house: but they were otherwise minded, and busied
themselves about their own houses. That memorable speech, King David's
religious meditation, never came into their hearts, which is recorded, 2 Samuel
7. Lo (says he) I dwell in a house of Cedar, but the Ark of God lodges
under Curtains: therefore I will build him an house. But these Jews could
find in their hearts to dwell in sieled houses, and let the Temple lie in its
^uines. Wherefore God corrects and reformes this their carelessenesse: corrects
it with rebukes and stripes; reformes it by his word and spirit. By these
means were they brought at length to begin the work.

They began, but were quickly wearied; and it was curiosity that wearied
them: They were contented indeed to build a Temple unto God, but not except it
might be so goodly a one as was that of Salom^n; and because their ability
would not reach so far, many of them gave over working, and fell to weeping.
Behold a wicked curiosity, which under color of Gods honor, would not honor
him at all. Well, God must remedy this impediment also: and he does it by
teaching the Jews two excellent rules in Religion.

The first is, we must not judge of Gods works, as we do of men's. In men's
works, by the beginning we make conjecture of the ending; and a judicious man
when he sees a foundation, will easily guess what pile of building will be
raised thereon. It is not so in Gods works; Christ told St. Paul that his
strength was made perfect in weakness. 2 Cor. 12.9.
St. Paul taught the Corinthians, that the weakness of God is stronger than
men. For proof hereof, God in this Prophet referres himself unto the
Israelites deliverance out of Egypt, and wills the Jews by his proceeding in
that work, to measure all his proiects. The first encouragement then of the
Jews, is a consideration that God is the Architect of their building; and
where he is the chief workemaster, seem the beginnings never so small, the
work cannot fail to prove glorious. This is the first Rule.

The second Rule is, that they must not set the estimate of the glory according
to the charge spent in the building, but according to his worth that shall
inhabit it: for Non domus dominum, sed dominus domum c^h^nestat, it is not the
house that makes the master, but the master that makes the house honorable.
Therefore the Jews eyes were to be fixed rather upon the grace which God would
do their Temple, than on the expense which they were able to bestow in
building thereof. This is their second encouragement, expressed in a second Rule;
and it is the argument of those words that now I have read unto you. The sum
is, Christ will assuredly make a remarkable, a comfortable entrance into that
Temple, seem it never so mean a Temple, which was now a building by
Zorobabel, Joshua, and the rest of the Jews.

The chief points therein to be considered, are two; Christ's presence in the
Temple, and the assurance thereof given to the Jews.

The presence is Maiesticall, whether you respect the preparation thereunto, or
the description thereof.

This time will not suffer me to pass beyond the preparation: for this, though
the last Sunday of Aduent, is but a preparation against Christmas day, and
therefore it may suffice if I prepare you for that Feast, the rest of the
matter shall be reserved for its due time.

In the preparation we will observe the manner, and the time. The manner will
show us what is prepared, and how* What, both the worlds, the great and the
little: The great is set down in these words, Heaven, Earth, and of Earth, the
Sea and the dry Land: The little world is noted by all Nations; all, not only
contradistinct to the Jews, but including them also. Both the Worlds shall be
prepared: But how? They shall be extraordinarily rowsed, and as it were
summoned to attend and intend the presence of Christ: this is meant by the
shaking of them. Besides this manner, there is a time here also set down, that
does belong unto this shaking. For, hearing of so strange a thing, a man may
demand, how often, how soon shall this shaking be? If the demand be, how
often? the holy Ghost answers, Yet once: once more, and no more but once; for
those two notes are included in these two words, Yet once. If the demand be
how soon? the holy Ghost answers very soon, it is but a little while; this
shaking is very near, it is at hand. You have the particulars which (God
willing) I mean to unfold at this time; I pray God I may so do it, that we
all thereby may be prepared, as we ought, to commemorate the Birth of Christ.

First then of the two worlds that shall be prepared, the greater offers it
self unto us. It is here broken into its parts, Heaven, Earth, etc. Heaven is
in the Scripture threefold; first, that which is called the Throne of God, and
is inhabited by the Angels and Saints which are departed. The second is that
which is called the Firmament, wherein move the Sun, the Moon, the Stars;
they are the Host of that Heaven. The third is the Air, wherein fly the
Birds; for they are called volu^res Coeli, the Foul of Heaven. Heaven in my
Text must not be limited, it extends to all three. The second part of the
world is called Earth; that contains all the inferior Globe, and is here, as
elsewhere in Genesis, resolved into its parts, the Sea, and the dry Land. Also
the word which we translate dry Land, notes a desolate place, and may be
rendered a Wilderness; and so therein and in the Sea may be intimated an
allusiue parallel to the passage of Israel from Egypt into Canaan.

The little world is here expressed by the name of all Nations. To understand the
phrase, we must observe, that after God had chosen a peculiar people, the rest
of people were called Gentiles, that is, Nations; and so properly they signify
in the language of the Old Testament all people and kindreds that are without
the Church. But in this place it must have a larger extent, because Christ came
to be known as well to the Gentile, as to the Jew; as in the next Sermon you
shall hear more at large. Therefore by these words we must understand simply
all people, as well those that were within, as those that were without the
Church.

Having thus showed you what is to be prepared, I must now show you how? God
will shake them, that is, rowse them extraordinarily. Though all Creatures do
continually serve God, yet while they keep their ordinary course, they do
not so evidently serve him, but that Atheists question his providence. St.
Peter shows us what is their ground, All things continue alike from their
beginning. To refute them, 2 Epist. c. 3.
God does sometime, as it were, vnioynt the frame of Nature, Exodus 8.19.
and makes the very Magicians to say, Digitus Dei est hic, this miracle must
needs be wrought by the God of Nature. Joshua 2.11.
He makes the Canaanites to confess, The Lord your God is the God of heaven
above, and of earth below, as Rahab told the Spies. Dan. 3.
The proud King of Babylon, when he saw that the Lions could not touch the body
of Daniel, nor the fire singe the three Children, was feign to give glory to
the true and everliving God. It is none of the worst arguments wherewith we may
stop the mouths of Atheists, and make them acknowledge the Lord of Nature,
if we press them with those many stories found in undoubted Records, for
which in nature there can be no reason; yea, there is evident reason for their
contraries. Such a kind of change or dealing with the Creatures, and putting
them out of their usual course, is here meant by shaking. But let us apply it
to the two worlds, and you will see it more evidently.

I begin with the Heaven, Mat. 3. and 17.
the uppermost Heaven, that was apparently shaken at the first coming of
Christ. God the Father more than once uttered his voice so audibly at the first
coming of Christ, that it was plainly heard by men on earth: Mat. 3.16. Acts
2.3.
God the holy Ghost, he came down in the Dove, came down in fiery tongues;
he became (as Tertullian speaks) the Vicar of Christ unto the Church. John 1.
As for the Angels, they ascended and descended upon him: when God brought his
first begotten into the world, Heb. 1.
that was done which he commanded, Let all the Angels worship him. Mat. 17.
And what did the Saints? Moses and Elias came to him in the Mount, and
conferred with him about his death: many also rose out of their graves, and
appeared in the holy City. There remains only the place where God dwells, and
those blessed Spirits; that also was shaken more than once; for more than once
did it open, as we read in the Gospel, and in the Acts. You do not doubt by
this time, but that the uppermost Heaven was shaken, which was shaken so many
ways. Only that shaking was answerable to the subject, it was without all
corruption.

Come we now to the second Heaven; that also had a shaking, a double shaking:
Mat. 2.
there appeared a Star that was never seen before, at Christ's Birth, which
drew the Wisemen to seek out him that was borne King of the Jews. And at his
death the goodliest Star in the Firmament, I mean the Sun, lost his light,
when the Moon was at full. Which sight was so strange to the Philosophers at
Athens, that (as the Story says) it drew from Denis the Areopagite* that
memorable saying, Aut Deus naturae patitur, aut mundi machina dissoluetur,
either the God of nature is ouercharged, or is disposed to end the world.
Tertullian observes, that the Romans did register this Eclypse in their
Chronicle. I say nothing of the renting of that Heaven too: Acts 7.55.
for the uppermost could not be opened, without opening the second also, that
the Dove might descend, that St. Stephens sight might ascend, and see Christ
standing at the right hand of God.

The third Heaven remains, that also was shaken: for Christ commanded the
winds, and they were calm; he suffered not the air to transmit the Species,
but was invisible; yea he commanded it not to give breath, and to give breath
to men, as pleased him: you find it in the story of those that came to
apprehend him. John 19.
Enough of the Heavens, the first part of the great world. Only observe, Acts
2. ver. 17, 18, 19, 20.
that that which out of Joel St. Peter observes, was in part performed in this
shaking of Heaven.

The second part of the great world is the Earth. The Earth in the beginning
was one confused Globe of Water, and dry Land: upon Gods commandment these two
Elements were separated, and each appeared by it self, as we read, Genesis
1. As then they first were, and as they now are; so are they here mentioned,
and so we must understand them. Touching their shaking, I might in few words
refer you to the Psalm, Let the Sea roar, and the fullness thereof, Psalm.
98.
let the Floods clap their hands, let the Hills be joyful together before the
Lord; for he comes to judge the Earth, etc. But I will show you some
particulars out of the New Testament: there shall you read the Earthquakes
that were when Christ was in the flesh; the cleaving of Rocks; Mat. 27.
the opening of Graves, which made the Jews return from his Cross knocking
their breasts; made the Centurion say, Of a truth this was the Son of God; put
the Scribes and Pharisees, and high Priests to their briberie, Mat. 28.
lest the Soldiers should bewray what they could not deny. As for the Sea,
that apparently took notice of Christ: when he wanted Tribute-money, he
commanded the Sea to supply him, and it did by a Fish: when Peter, James and
John, had labored all night at Sea, and caught nothing, he commanded them to
cast out their net, and the fish came readily, and filled it, to their great
astonishment: at another time when their ship was ready to be drowned, Christ
did but rebuke the waves, Mat. (...).
and presently there followed a great calm. Thus apparently did the Sea
acknowledge Christ come into the World.

But because the word that we render dry Land, does properly signify a
Desert, or Wilderness, it is not unlikely but that these two words do imply a
parallel of that which fell out while Christ conuersed on Earth, and that which
was wrought at the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt; the Sea then divided,
and gave passage to the Children of Israel upon dry Land: it did more to
Christ, it became it self as dry Land, he walked upon it, and made St. Feter
to do so also. And as for the Wilderness, it was to Israel no Wilderness, no
more was it to Christ: they were amongst wild beasts there, and so was he,
and neither was annoyed: the Wilderness yielded them plenty of food, and in
the Wilderness did Christ multiply the Loaves and the Fishes, so that after
many thousands were fed, the remainder was much more than was the first
provision.

There remains one part of the Earth which I have not yet touched, and that is
Hell. Hell holds fast all that come thereinto, but it could not hold him when
he descended thither: and while he lived upon Earth, how did the Fiends
confess him, obey him, come and go at his pleasure.

It is clear then, fully clear, that seeing shaking does signify an
extraordinary manifestation of the Deity, working by, or on the Creature
contrary to their usual course; the great world, and the parts thereof were
shaken at the first coming of Christ.

Let us see now how true this is of the little world, the world of mankind,
here called all Nations: which are distinguished into Jews and Gentiles, both
had their shaking. The Jews, their whole policy was dissolved, I mean that
which was peculiar to them, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil: as Daniel
foretold, Dan 9. Heb. 12. Genesis 49.10.
so St. Paul affirms, both received an end by the coming of Christ. Jacobs
prophecy was then fulfilled, The Scepter departed from Judah, and the Lawgiver
from between his seete: that State was not only shaken, but shiuered all to
pieces.

As for other Nations, they had their shaking; a double shaking, a spiritual
and a corporal: Spiritually their heads were shaken, their judgments were
illightened and amazed, that ever they should be so sottish as to worship
stocks and stones, ^say 2. and cap. 8.
the works of men's hands, yea the Devils themselves: upon this, they threw
away their Idols, and cursed their forged gods. This abrenunciation does
Gregory Nazianzene, Orat. 37. and Austin de Ciuit. Dei, understand by this
shaking.

To this shaking of their head, we must add a shaking of their heart: A
contagious air is not purged but by thundering and lightening, and a corrupt
conscience must feel the terror of Mount Sinai, before it can have the
comfort of Mount Sion. The voice wherein God spoke to Elias was a soft voice, 1
Kings 19.
but there went before it Fire, Wind, Earthquake, etc. the Peace which you
shall hear of hereafter comes not to the spiritual Temple of God without some
terror going before. The Jews were pricked at the heart when St. Peter
preached unto them, Acts 2.37.
and, as perplexed in conscience, cried out, Men and Brethren what shall we
do? before they received the comfort of the Gospel. Saint Paul was stricken
down to the ground from Heaven, before he was converted: The Jailer came
trembling to him and Silas, Acts 16. Esaias 67.
before he was baptized. It is a broken and contrite heart that must make us
capable of grace; neither will the filial fear enter, except way be made by
the servile. This may be the reason, why the holy Ghost, by whose power the
Apostles were to convert the world, Acts 2. Cap. 4.
came upon them at first in fire, and with a mighty wind, and a second time
with an earthquake, which shaked all the house wherein they were. It shows,
how their Ministry should shake the hearts and consciences of the World: for in
omnes terras exiuit sonus eorum.

Besides this spiritual, Luke 12.
the Nations had a corporal shaking. I came (says Christ) to send a sword
into the World: No sooner had he begun the Gospel, but we see how the
Herodians, the Sadducees, the Pharisees, bestirre themselves against him, and
against all the Apostles. The Apostles intimate as much, when in their prayer
they repeat those words of the Psalm, Psalm. 2. Acts 4.25.
Why do the Heathen so furiously rage together, and the People imagine a vain
thing: the Kings of the earth stand up, and the Rulers take counsel against
the Lord, and against his anointed. And how furious was the Dragon against the
Woman, Reu. 12.
because she had borne a Man child? I will not trouble you to reckon up the
Heathenish or Heretical Persecutions of the Primitive Church. Genesis 3.
Ponam inimicitias, I will put enmity between the Woman and the Serpent, and
between their seeds, is the true ground of this shaking, and it holds in
all ages: No sooner is the vanity of Oracles, of Idols, and of false worship
discovered, and deserted, but the Devil in revenge of his quarrel will set
Nation against Nation, Family against Family, Kindred against Kindred, and a
man's enemies shall be those of his own household. We have woeful proof of it
in this age: the bloody wars which have been, and are in these western
parts, whence have they sprung, Gal. 3.1.
but from Christ's coming amongst us in the truth of his Gospel? which St.
Paul to the the Galathians, terms a second forming of Christ in us, and (as
it were) a crucifying of him before us. But the envious man that sowed tares,
cannot be contented that he should be so ouer-topped with good ears of
corn; therefore there will follow a shaking.

I have sufficiently showed you that both Worlds were shaken: but I may not
forget a difference which is between their shaking: though both are rowsed, and
give their attendance at the first coming of Christ; yet the great world does
it only effectu, it serves to the honor thereof, but not knowing what it does.
But the little World attends also affectu, it is sensible of that which it
does. And indeed the shaking of the great World is only to work a sensible
shaking in the little World. Which, as it is wont to be wrought in other cases,
as when upon the sight of Eclypses, and blazing Stars, men are affrighted,
and prognosticate unto themselves Famines, Pestilences, Wa^res, Confusion of
States; which is likewise done by them upon the sight of Earthquakes: So God
would have it also in this case; he would that men should be obseruant and
feeling of his extraordinary Works, wrought upon the Heavens and the Earth, in
honor and testimony of his coming into the world, who is the Savior of the
world.

I have done with the shaking, I will only give you an observation or two upon
it, and so pass on to the Time. The first is St. Chrysostomes. Hom. 14. in
Mat. c. 14 and Hom. 1. ad Romans
God when he does any great Work in the world, non solet subrepere, steals
not upon the World, but gives signification before hand. So did he before he
brought on the Flood; before he delivered his People out of Egypt; before he
gave the Jews over unto the Babylonian captivity: We cannot read those
Stories, but we must needs find in them Gods palpable harbingers. So that if
men be surprised, it is not because men are not forewarned, but because they
will take no warning. The old World, though the Arc was building before their
face, yet were they eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, till
the flood came: Though Moses told Pharaoh what evil God would bring upon him,
yet did Pharaoh still harden his heart: and the Jews mocked the Prophets that
early and late told them of their captivity; neither would they believe it
until they were past recovery. 2 Cor. 4. 3.
If our Gospel be hid (says St. Paul) it is hid unto those whose eyes the God
of this world has blinded that they should not believe: Acts 26.2^.
for (as he told Agrippa) the things which they preached were not done in a
corner. As the corporal Sun does not rise without a dawning of the day, so
Christ came not into the world without some prognostication thereof: Jews and
Gentiles that do not believe are without all excuse, because God has so
plainly shaken both the Worlds. Neither shall we have ought to plead for our
selves, if we neglect, or forsake the Truth which God has brought unto us;
because he has accompanied it with so wonderful deliverances, and comforts us
in honor of it with so many diverse blessings: God has vouchsafed many ways
to premonish us, let us take heed that we dis-regard him not.

The second Observation is this, Mat. 5.18.
No Creature can hinder the performance of Gods will; Heaven and Earth shall
pass, rather than one jot of his word shall be undone. We need not fear any
opposition on the worlds part (notwithstanding it is the common fear of
worldly men) because all the world is in Gods power; he can shake and shiuer
it at his pleasure. Of this God does often put his People in mind by the
Prophets, and bids them be bold thereupon: And we may say, Si Deus
nobiscum quis, Romans 8.31.
yea and quid too, contra nos? Quid? Is it the great World? God can shake
Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and the dry Land. Quis? Is it man? God can shake him
also, he can shake all Nations: therefore we need not fear what either World
can do unto us.

And thus much of the manner of the Preparation; I come now briefly to show you
the time thereof.

When a man hears of such great matters, he will be inquisitiue after this
circumstance, he will desire to know how often? how soon? And the holy Ghost
does here resolve both those questions.

How often, Nazianz. orat. 37. p. 607. and ^rat. 21. p. 388
if you ask, he answers, Yet once. Which word, I told you, imports two things,
that the shaking has been once before; for both Worlds were shaken at the
giving of the Law: St. Paul takes notice of it, Heb. 12. and you may read it
in the Story delivered by Moses. The Gospel, as St. Paul 2 Cor. proves at
large, being much more glorious than the Law, was not to come short of it in
solemnity, when it was to be promulged: therefore, because the Worlds were
shaken then, they were to be shaken now, Once more. Some gather out of St.
Paul's words, Heb. 12. not only the Earth, but also the Heaven, that the later
was much the greater shaking.

But though once more, yet no more but this once: for there is no more new
Doctrine to be broached in the World, no second Messiah to come. We must
observe this, not only against the Jews, but also against the Heretics. The
Montanists thought that as there were three Persons in God, so every one should
have his Time: the Father under the Law, the Son during the Gospel, and then
the holy Ghost, Montanus sending the Paraclete into the World. The Alcaron was
built upon the same ground; whose Author, though he give honorable testimony
unto Christ, as being a great Prophet, yet he would make the world believe,
that God was to send a greater after him, Verse. 3.
and that was Mahomet. But we keep our selves to St. Iudes, Fides semel
tradita, the one Faith that was once delivered to the Saints: 2. Epist. 10.
We obey St. John, who bids us, If any man bring us any other Doctrine, we
should not so much as bid him, God speed: We follow St. Paul's counsel, Gal.
1.8.
If an Angel from heaven bring any other doctrine, we hold him Anathema. The
Church of Rome charge us with nouelty, but we may rather charge them with
many additions to the Truth; they call to us for Miracles to confirm our
Doctrine, but Miracles would argue another shaking of the World, we hold there
shall be no more: And what need there any more, seeing we hold no other
doctrine than that which was confirmed by the shaking of the two Worlds, in the
days of Christ and his Apostles? They have patcht their fancies thereunto,
therefore are they driven to abuse the World with their forged Miracles, and to
counterfeit a second shaking.

When I say there shall be no more shakings, I mean during the militancy of
the Church: for immediately before the Triumph thereof, there shall precede
another shaking; Christ has opened it at large in St. Matthew, Cap. 24.
I will not insist upon it, it is not to my purpose; you may there see how both
the Worlds shall be shaken against that time: Heb. 12.
but then we shall have regnum immobile. And of this last shaking, the world is
now too full of Prophesies and Resolutions; but be ready for it, not rash in
determining it.

I come to the holy Ghosts answer to the second Question, how soon? And we
find here that it shall be very soon; it is but a little while to the time of
the shaking.

But that little time must be understood according to a Theological, not
according to a Mathematical measure. Theology measures our Time in
proportion to eternity, but the Mathematics according to our mortal life. In
regard of eternity St. Peter's Rule holds, 2 Pet. 2.8
A thousand years are but as one day, etc. But in regard of our mortal life,
Omnis mora properantilonga est, patienti vero longissima, the deferring of our
hope, is the languishing of our soul. To support our selves, we must pass
from Mathematical commensurations to Theological, and then we shall find,
that Modicum and Longum may stand together: and Jacobs saying be true, Bernard.
Genesis 47.9
that evil days are but few. From Haggai's prophesying until the coming of
Christ, past better than four hundred years; the holy Ghost calls that but a
little while. And we must inure our selves to this divine Chronology, when
we think of the second coming of Christ: the Apostle tells us, that upon them
that live in the time of the Gospel, the end of the world is come: and these
are the last days, yea the last boure; 1 Cor. 10.11.
the Judge is at hand, he is at the door, yet there have passed 1600. years:
But let us not think it long, let us remember that of Habakkuk, Hab. 2.4.
The just must live by his Faith, patient Faith: and if any man make haste
(says the Lord) my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Wherefore if at any
time our impatient heart, wearied with the tediousness of this life, shall
break out into these words, Tu autem Domine vsque quo? how long Lord do thou
cease to put an end to this miserable World? Reu. 22.
Let us rest satisfied with Christ's answer, Behold I come quickly; and
congratulating the abridgement of our momentany afflictions, and desiring, that
according to his promise, the cloud thereof may speedily be dissolved; let us
put this clause into our daily prayer, Even so Lord Jesus, come quickly.

God so prepare us, that we may have the comfort of the Person that is to come,
comfort of his first and second coming. Amen. THE SECOND SERMON.
And the desire of all Nations shall come.
THe sum of this Scripture (as not long since I observed unto you) is the
exceeding grace which the first coming of Christ should assuredly do unto
that Temple at Jerusalem, which in Haggai's days was building by Zorobabel
the Prince, Iosuah the high Priest, and the rest of the Jews. The general
parts which I pointed out, were, 1. the Presence of Christ in that Temple, and
2. the Assurance thereof given to the Builders. The Presence was to be
extraordinary: I gathered it partly from the preparation thereunto, whereof I
then spoke, and partly from the description thereof, which remains to be
spoken of.

The description is of the Person that was to come, and the good that be
should do. Of the good that he should do, I shall speak (God willing)
hereafter; at this time my purpose is to speak only of the Person that was to
come.

The Person then here meant, is in plain terms our Savior Christ. But he is
set forth here in most comfortable words, words most comfortable to all the
world: for he is styled the desire of all Nations; and what is that, but the
sovereign good of all? That which all desire, the Philosopher could say, is
(...), the chief Good. And again, if it be desired of all, then is it common
to all: for, appetitus non est frustra, there was never any desire engrafted in
the nature of man, but the good whereunto that desire does bend, does certainly
belong unto it. If it be so in nature, it is much more so in grace; the holy
Ghost does never inspire into us any longing, but it does destinate unto us
that good which he inclines our hearts to long for. According to these
Principles, the points which we are to consider in this description are, the
Soueraignity and Community of that good which we must seek, and shall find in
Christ; in Christ as he was incarnate, or first came into the world.

But before I come to these particulars, I must clear my Text from some
ouer-shallow interpretations that have fastened thereon. For whereas in Christ's
first coming two things are to be observed, 1. the principal, and 2. the
accessories; his person, and those things that did attend him: many pass over
the principal, and apply these words only to the accessories. The Prophets do
speak of two remarkable Accessories: The one is, the Munificencie of the
Gentiles, the other is, the Obedience of their Persons; both were to be of the
best sort.

The Psalm touching the Munificencie, Psalm 72.
says, that the Kings of Tharsis and of the Isles should bring presents, the
Kings of Seba and Sheba should give gifts. The Prophet Esaias, cap. 49. and 60.
does particularize the Gold, the Silver, the Jewels, the Plants, the Beasts,
all kinds of choice things that were to be tendered unto Christ: And the Story
of the Church shows that this was accomplished not only mystically, but even
literally. We commemorate on this Epiphanie, Mat. 2.
Day the oblation of Gold, of Myrrh, of Frankincense, which was made by the
wise men unto Christ. In the Acts, cap. 4. verse 37. we read that those
Christians which had possessions sold them, brought the price, and laid it at
the Apostles feet. The first Christian Emperors how open handed were they in
erecting, and providing for Places and Persons dedicated unto Christ's service?
And, as of other Countries, so the Christian Kings and People of this Island
have left honorable memorials of this kind in their magnificent Foundations,
and munificent Endowments thereof. All these followed the rule of Gods Law;
whatsoever they offered unto him it was ever of the best. But by the way, let
me observe unto you, That the flood of our Ancestors liberality rose not so
high, but their Posterities sacrilege has taken it down to as low an ebb;
and the saying of a great, but no good King of this Island, pleases too many
that live on the spoils of the Church, William Rufus.
Christ's bread is sweet. They are far from offering (...), as the Septaugint
do render my Text, the choice Treasure of the Nations; the first of those
Accessories which was to attend the coming of Christ.

A second Accessorie foretold by the Prophet, are the Persons that should
honor him, even the choysest of persons: For although Saint Paul's rule be,
Brethren, you see your calling, not many wise, not many noble, not many mighty,
etc. yet that negative does contain an affirmative, and implies, that some,
even of the best rank, should submit themselves, and be homagers unto Christ;
be nursing Fathers, Esaias 48.
and nursing Mothers of his Church: Where the Prophets speak of the wealth,
they speak also of Persons; read the forecited places, and take notice
withal of a difference in this kind that God was pleased should be before the
coming of Christ, and after. Before the coming of Christ many of the Persian
Kings, as likewise of the Grecians, gave their goods, but not themselves unto
God; they provided sacrifices for the Temple at Jerusalem, but themselves went
on in their Idolatry. After the coming of Christ it was otherwise, great
personages gave themselves first, and then their goods unto Christ; the Wise
men upon this day first prostrated their bodies and worshipped, then they
opened their Treasures and offered unto Christ; Nicodemus and Joseph of
Arimathea, great and rich men, first believed, then bestowed a funeral upon
Christ; the like may we say of all Christian Emperors, Kings, Potentates. And
indeed Christ seeks not ours, but us; and cares not for our goods, 2 Cor. 8.
if we dedicate not our selves unto him: both will do well; and we shall do
well if we deserve the Macedonians commendation, of whom St. Paul says, that
they gave themselves first, and then were bountiful to the Saints.

These were Accessories where with God was pleased Christ's first coming should
be honored: But these do not contain the true, at least, the full meaning of
my Text; for surely these were not the cause of shaking the great, and little
World; neither were these either persons, or goods, improuements of the glory
of Zorobabels Temple: for little of this Prophecy was accomplished while that
Temple stood.

Malachie, cap. 3. therefore gives us a better interpretation, and more
agreeable to the words of my Text, The Lord whom you seek, shall suddenly come
to his Temple; the Angel of the Covenant, whom ye delight in, or desire,
behold he shall come, says the Lord of Hosts. And indeed Christ's Person was
the true attractiue of all other persons, and of their goods also; they had
never come, except he had come first. Therefore the Jewish Rabbis, Galatinus.
though they do not believe that Jesus is the Christ, yet do they understand
this Text of the Messiah. And St. Hierome renders the phrase, Desideratus
Omnium Gentium, The Person that is desired of all Nations, purposing in those
words to point out our Savior Christ. Finally, St. Paul, Heb. 12. if you mark
well his drift, favors this interpretation. Wherefore I take it for a plain
truth, that, if not solely, yet principally, Christ's person is meant by this
phrase, The desire of all Nations. Let us come then at length to the Points
which I observed in it.

The first is the soueraignity of good; that cannot be less which is the
desire of all Nations. And mark, that the word is abstract, not concrete; the
Text calls him, not the person desired, but the desire. Now these abstract
titles when they are given to God or Christ, import two things: The first is,
That all his nature, or whatsoever is in him, is that which he is called: and
secondly, That all whatsoever is comprehended under that title, is in him, and
cannot be had, but by participation of him. In this sense is God and Christ
called truth, righteousness, holiness, etc. these attributes are his nature,
and are not imparted to any but those that have communion with him. To our
present purpose, Christ is called desire: it follows by virtue of the word,
that he is totus desiderabilis, altogether, and in every part desirable; and
totum desiderabile, whatsoever the heart of a man can desire. And if he be
these two, then certainly he is the sovereign good.

Take them asunder. And first see how he is totus desiderabilis. I might send
you to the Song of Solomon, where the spouse limmeth out his amiablenesse from
top to toe: or to the marriage Psalm, which in few words tells us, Psalm. 45.
That he is fairer than the sons of men: or to those words of Saint John, 1
Epist. c. 3.
The Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we saw his glory as the
glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth. But beyond
all is the testimony of God the Father, whether delivered by the Prophet Psay,
Cap. 42.
Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights; or
uttered by a voice from heaven, This is my well-beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased. Mat. 3.17.
For can he be less than altogether desirable that is Gods delight?

But passing by all these, I will insist upon three Titles of his which have
special reference to our good: The first is Immanuel, the name of his Person;
for it signifies God with us: and how desirable is he that has knit that
knot hypostatically in himself, which is the ground of that mystical knot
which is to be between God and us, wherein stands our eaerlasting bliss?
Certainly in regard of this name he is most desirable; the name that so
linketh together heaven and earth, a mortal wretch with the immortal God:
especially if you observe that he is united totus toti, the whole person of God
to the whole nature of Man, that we may be wholly joined; and so does he become
wholly desirable of us.

His second name is Jesus, that makes him as desirable. St. Bernard has
sum^ned up the pleasurablenesse thereof in few, but very sweet words, Nomen
Iesuest mel in ore, melos in aure, and iubilum in cord; all our reasonable
acts are divided into speaking, hearing, and thinking; and lo we cannot speak
of him, but he is as honey in our mouths; and if we hear of him, the talk
does make the best melody in our ears, finally, the greatest joy of our heart,
and the truest also springs from our meditation upon him. The reason of all
which is, this Name sounds nothing but Salvation; and Salvation is the most
wished, most welcome thing to a child of wrath, to him whose sins can
promise no better than a neuer-dying worm, and an ever burning fire. Well may
we term thee sweet Jesus that deliuerest us from these plagues, especially
seeing there is no part of thee that has not borne a part in saving us.

His third name is Christ, a most desirable name: and why? it signifies a
person anointed with no other than that which the Psalmist calls the oil of
gladness. This precious oil, poured upon his head, Psalm. 4^. and 143. and 45.
ran down to us the skirts of his garments, insomuch as we now smell of
Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, and are now through him become a sweet savor to
God, who in the corruption of our nature were loathsome unto him. He that was
Christ, that is, anointed, that he might so perfume us with the sweetness of
his graces, must needs be to us, as he bears that title, wholly desirable.

But for your further insight into the loveliness of this name, resolve it
into those three offices, whereunto he was anointed, and being anointed or
consecrated unto them, was called Christ. First, he was Christ a Prophet, such
a Prophet as we cannot desire a better; he was the very wisdom, the word of
God; grace was poured into his lips; and they that heard him wondered at the
gracious words that came from him: and well they might; for that which he
uttered was Euangelium, glad tidings of good things. His Priesthood was more
desirable than his Prophecy: for he offered the sacrifice of sweet savor
unto God, which expiated all our sins, and propitiated all his wrath; and
upon his cross he prepared that delicate feast that Esaias speaks of, cap. 25.
Fat meat, full of marrow, and pleasant wines, thoroughly refined from the Lees:
His flesh and his blood were made such a feast for us, though in dressing of
them he endured much pain. Finally, he was a King, and in regard thereof he
is most desirable; for his Kingdom is righteousness, peace, Romans 14.17.
and joy in the boly Ghost: He is such a King as makes all his subjects
kings, and that of the same Kingdom which he himself has, even the Kingdom
of Heaven. I need say no more to prove that he is totus desiderabilis,
altogether desirable.

But he is more: for he is also totum desiderabile, all that can be desired;
which is not granted to any Creature. The Scripture labors to make us
understand, that all that we seek out of him, is to be found only in him.
Happy (says Solomon) is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that
gets understanding; Pro. 3.
for the merchandise thereof is better than the merchandise of silver, and her
gain than fine gold: he goes on, and parallels it with all that worldly men
desire. In Esaias, cap. 55. you have the same parallel, Ho ye that thirst, come
unto the waters. Christ himself to the Church of Laodicea presses the same
point, Revel. 3.
Thou think that thou art rich and want nothing, whereas thou art poor,
blind, miserable; come to me and buy etc. When St. Paul, Phil. 3. had reckoned
up all his prerogatives, he concludes verse. 8. I account all these but dung and
loss in comparison of the excellent knowledge that is in Christ Jesus: But
most full is that place of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 1. Christ of God is made unto us
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. Where, observe how he
fitteth us with supply from Christ, as well for the Church Militant as
Triumphant. In the Church Triumphant we must have understanding heads, and pure
hearts, that we may see God, and enjoy him; and Christ gives us such heads,
such hearts: for he is made unto us wisdom and sanctification. As for the
Church Militant, we need therein discharge from our sins, and deliverance
from woe; and Christ is made unto us righteousness, that we may come with
boldness before the judgment seat of God; and redemption, from the curse
which is due to the transgressors of the Law. Wisd. 16.21.
So that what the wise man says of Manna, is certainly true of Christ, he is
unto every man what he can reasonably desire; he serves to the appetite of
every eater, and is tempered to every man's liking. The Septuagint, as if they
had intended to teach us that all things desirable are in him, have used the
plural number (...): wherefore we conclude, that Christ is totum desiderabile;
and we may all say with King David, What have I in heaven but thee? and what
is there in earth that I desire with thee?

To end this point, two things we must learn from this sovereignty of good,
which are concluded in this one rule; Primum in vnoquoque genere est mensura
reliquorum, seeing Christ is the sovereign good, he must season and stint all
our desires. Fire is the original of heat, and the Sun of light; and we see
that other things have neither heat nor light but as they do partake of fire,
or the sun; and their measure of both is answerable to the participation of
those originals: So should it be with our desires, they should look to the
prime desire, the desire of all Nations; take their relish from him, and
relish nothing without him; whatsoever does not partake of him is no
reasonable, is no comfortable desire. If by this we try our selves, we shall
find that for the most part they are but vain, they have little communion
with that from whence they should flow, and which should set right bounds unto
them. And let this suffice for the sovereignty of that good which is in Christ.

I come now to the Community: He that is the sovereign good about all, is
also the common good unto all.

But here appears a paradoxe: for all nations whose desire Christ is said to
be, were divided into Jews and Gentiles: And St. Paul in one (...) sentence
tells us, that the manner of Christ's first coming was, a stumbling block to
the Jew, and foolishness to the Gentiles. Touching the ^ew^s St. John, cap. 1.
says, Christ came amongst his own, and his own (...) not: And St. Paul tells
us of the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man perceives not the things of God; and it is a true rule,
Ignotinulla cupido, No man desires that which he does not know. Cap. 43. verl.
2.
Esaias speaks close to my Text concerning Christ's first coming, He shall grow
up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of dry ground^: he has no
form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we
should desire him. This made St. Deciuit De^ l. 18. c. 35.
Austine think that this Prophecy should not be accomplished until the
second coming of Christ. But the Text will not bear his Commentary; wherefore
we must help our selves with a distinction, Propositidiuini, and Propensionis
humanae. It is certain, that in regard of Gods purpose, Christ was the desire
of all nations: for Gods pleasure was, that the Church should be enlarged unto
all the world, and that even of the choycest persons in the world many should
slock unto the Church. Tertullian has a witty observation, Lib. de (...).
that Christ was therefore called Alpha and Omega, because he brought all
things in the end of the world to that state which they were at in the
beginning: So that Gods favor is as general to mankind at Christ's the second
Adams birth, as it was in Paradise when he made the first Adam. Christ
himself insinuates as much; for whereas the Jews called him the son of
Abraham, the son of David, he delights usually in the Gospel to call
himself the son of man: as if he did not belong to this or that family,
but were common to all mankind. Therefore the Apostle says, Gal. 3.28. that
in Christ Jesus there is neither Jew nor Gentile, Grecian nor Barbarian, bond
nor free, male nor female. The holy Ghost came down in the languages of all
Nations: the Stone in Daniel, cut out without hands, did bring under all the
Kingdoms of the earth. I will not trouble you with the general prophecies
delivered to Adam, Noah, Abraham; nor with those which were delivered by David,
Solomon, Esaias, the rest; let old Symeon speak for all, Christ was prepared to
be a light to the Gentiles, and the glory of the People Israel. So that after
the birth of Christ, it is evident that according to Gods purpose the Church is
to be Catholic.

But what shall we say to the Propension of men? for that also is a requisite
unto this desire. For he that is Lord over all is rich unto all, that is, to
all that call upon him, so says St. Paul, Romans 10. And when St. Peter says,
that there is no respect of persons with God, Acts 10. he adds, that in
every Nation he that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted of
him: Wherefore though in the tenor of the Gospel God excludes none, yet the
enquiry must be, whether none exclude themselves.

To make good my Text, we will search how truly and how far all Nations may
be said to desire Christ. Which that we may the better do, we must learn,
that there is Appetitus implicitus, and elicitus: we are taught the
distinction by the Prophet Esaias, cap. 65. v. 1. God there speaks thus, I am
sought of them that asked not after me: the words cannot be true, except you
understand that there is a silent and a speaking desire.

A silent desire is that which is uttered by our state: the ground when it is
dry is said to thirst for rain; a wound in our body to call for a Physician;
not that they speak, but that their state shows that if they could speak,
they would utter such a desire. The Philosophers call it, appetitum naturalem,
a desire that every thing has of its perfection and preferuation, which
languisheth until it does attain it. There is no man so graceless, but in
this sense Christ is his desire; yea, the more Christ is his desire, the more
graceless he is: for where sin most abounds, there is grace most
behoofefull.

There is a second kind of this silent desire, which is not altogether so
mute. I may call it desiderium semivocale, an halfe-voiced desire: In the
hearts of men there is a natural desire of sovereign good. Adam, when he was
stripped, was made naked; but he had so much eyesight left him, that he saw he
was naked, and thereupon bestirred himself to seek a covering, and a simple
one he lighted upon; it was but fig leaves. His posterity have every one of
them revealed the same consciousnesse of want, and carfulness to supply their
want. The very heathen Epicures, Stoickes, covetous, prodigals, men of all
sects, and all dispositions, have sought after a sovereign good, though in the
nature thereof they have erred. Whence it follows necessarily, that as in
their many god^ they worshipped ignotum Deum; so did they amongst their diverse
opinions of the sovereign good, tacitly confess and affect ignotum benum.

Hitherto you have heard only of implicitus affectus, the dumb, or (at most)
the but halfe-speaking affection; we must not rest here (for this will not
reach home) we must therefore find another desire, which is affectus
elicitus: and this also is twofold. Indefinite, of which you read in Stories,
sacred and profane; and definite, which the Prophet seems specially to mean
in this place.

Touching the indefinite, I might insist upon the sacrifices, the use whereof
amongst the Heathens, what is it, but a perpetuation of the first memorial
that God instituted of Christ to come? And no question but Noah's sons did
spread that tradition. Some think that the Wise men which (as upon this day)
repaired to Christ, were stirred up by the Prophecy of Balaam, who in his
trance said, There shall come a star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise
out of Israel. It may be, that some knowledge of Christ was spread in the time
of the Egyptian captivity. Whence Trismegists works (if those be his works
which we have) savor of so great Mysteries; for he was an Egyptian, and from
the Egyptian Priests had the Platonists their more than heathenish Theology.
But when the ten Tribes were carried into Assyria, and after them the Jews
into Babylon, this mystery was spread much more by the dispersed of the twelve
Tribes, whereof there were some dwehing in all Nations under heaven; as you may
gather by comparing St. Lukes words, Acts 2. with the entrance to the Epistles
of St. James, and 1 Peter. It could not be but that by these the world should
have some notice of a Messiah to come, especially after the Bible was
translated into Greek. Surely the Sybils wrote so plainly hereof, that not
only the Fathers allege them against the Heathens to prove the coming of
Christ, but the Latin Poets also relate what they find in them, though they
mis-apply it: witness that Verse, Iam noua progenies Coelo demittitur alto.
Yea, they so misapplyed it, Baron. apparat. ad Annal.
that sundry did affect a Kingdom in the Commonweal of Rome, only working
upon the common opinion that was in the hearts of men, that a great King about
that time, should be borne into the world. Thus far we find in histories
that there was an indefinite report of a Messiah to come, whom the world
therefore had an indefinite desire to see.

But this will not yet satisfy our Prophet: and indeed his words are a
prophecy rather of that which should be upon the coming of Christ, than a
report of that which should be before. And not he only, but other Prophets
testify that Christ should be no sooner revealed unto, but he should be
received by the world; that the Nations should flock to him, as if they had
formerly longed for him.

The Nations, I say, in opposition to the Jews; Luke 1. Mat 8.
not but that many of the Jews did look for him, and entertain him, but few
in comparison of the Gentiles themselves; therefore he was rather the
expectation of the Gentiles: The Gentiles entertained what the Jews refused,
as appears, Acts 13. Romans 11. and it was foretold, Deuteronomy. 32. Matthew. 8. The
propagation of the Gospel amongst the Gentiles was strangely sudden: the
Psalm compares it unto the dew, Psalm. 110.
The fruit of thy womb is like the morning dew. Malachie, to the rising of the
Sun: And you know, Cap. 60.49.11.
that both of them, as it were in an instant, cover the face of the earth.
Esay's similies are of a Woman that is delivered before she is in travel; and
of the flocking of Doves unto their house. Zachary tells us, that they should
come so fast, that the City could not contain them. Christ, that the kingdom
of heaven should suffer violence. In Apol.
Tertullian reckons up the Nations which in his days believed, and shows,
that Christianity had out-spread the Roman Empire: Which was the more to be
marvelled, because the conquest was made by so mean men; and that not over the
bodies, Justin Martyr Dial. cum Tryphon.
but over the souls of them with whom they dealt: They subdued the souls of
the greatest Potentates, and brought them under Christ, and made the simple
pesants that followed the plow to sing hymns and psalms unto his praise.

And no marvel, for the Apostles were enabled to speak to every Nation in
their own language, and their tongues were tipped with the fire of Heaven, which
suddenly illightned their understandings to whom they preached, and filled
their hearts with a devout zeal: by this efficacy Christ became the desire of
all Nations. And until we come thus far, we have not the full meaning of
our Prophet, though I have brought you hereto by many degrees, all comprehended
under common desire. A common desire there could not be, except God had
purposed that Christ should be a common good; neither could it be, that this
common good should take place, except there were a propension thereunto in men.
And this propension is evident in the misery of man's state without Christ,
more evident in the feeling that man has thereof: the evidence increased, when
men discovered but an indefinite harkening after him; but it is made complete,
when they distinctly discern him, and their affections desire ardently to be
partakers of him.

There is one point more which I may not omit, and that is the strange
construction of the words in my Text; they are desiderium venient, the desire
they shall come; a nowne singular, and a verb plural. There is a mystery in
it: As the Articles of our Faith are beyond the strength of nature, so does the
holy Ghost often times in uttering them, vary from the prescript of Grammar
rules. I will show it you in the two first Articles of our Creed. The first is
of the Trinity of Persons, wherein there is an Unity of Nature; to note this
in the beginning of the Bible, you have a plural nowne joined with a verb
singular, Eloh^m bara. The second Article is this is Christ's incarnation,
wherein though there be but one Person, yet are there two Natures; and to note
these two Natures in one Person, does the holy Ghost use this phrase,
desiderium venient. A significant phrase, and puts us in mind that either
nature in Christ will not satisfy our desire; if he come only as God, his
majesty will be too great for us to endure; if only as man, his infirmity
will be too weak for to relieve us: he that comes must be both God and man.
Again, though the natures that come be two, yet is our desire but one,
because it apprehends them both in one person; and it is the unity of the
person whereupon our desire does finally rest it self.

But I will conclude: This Text does check our cold zeal, and should make us
blush when we try our selves by it, or by them that in the Primitive times did
justify the Truth of it: their early flocking to pray and to hear, their long
perseverance at it, and often returns to it, showed that they delighted to sit
under the tree of life, and that the fruit thereof was sweet unto their soul;
they were even loue-sick with the spouse, and their thirsty souls did with
King David's, Cant. 2. Psalm. 42.
like the chased heart breathe (as it were) and bray after the water brooks.
Even in our Fathers days upon the reviving of Gods truth amongst us, some of
this heavenly fire burned in the hearts of our people; but it is long since
quenched, and our lives manifest the difference between factus, Tertull.
and natus Christianus: when a man first becomes a Christian he is at the
best, and then if ever, his soul will pour out those passionate speeches, In
the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have I watted for thee: Esaias 26.
the desire of my soul is to thy Name, and the remembrance of thee: with my
soul have I desired thee in the night; yea with my spirit within me will I
seek thee early. O ye heavens above drop down the dew, and ye clouds rain
righteousness: let the earth open, let instice and salvation grow forth; let
them both grow forth together. But the longer we live, commonly the worse we
are: aetas parentum peior auis, and our children will be worse than we are, as
we are worse than were our fathers. The Scripture witnesses that Christ's
desire is unto us, his delight is to be with the sons of men; yea he spreads
his love as a banner over his Church to make himself more desirable to her.
And how kind hearted was he, who being to eat the Paschall Lamb, a type of
his bitter passion, and that immediately before his death, could say, Desiderio
desideraui, I have earnestly desired to eat this passcouer with you, (...)?
this indeed argued unspeakable love of Christ to man. And should it not be
answered with the like affection of man toward Christ? it should; yea, and
indeed it would be, if we did know what want we have of him, if we did feel
the burden of our sin, if we did see how little we have of heavenly grace.
This sense, this sight, would set an edge upon our dull appetite, and Christ
which is here styled the desire of all Nations, would be to every one of us our
desire.

But let us take heed, who, when we may have him, do not desire him, lest the
time come when we shall desire him, but may not have him. Christ may remove
our Candlestick and his Kingdom, and then the Jews doom may be ours; and
we may desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and shall not see
it. This God forbid, and that he may forbid it, He pour the grace of his holy
Spirit into our souls, that may so illighten our minds, and warm our hearts,
that discerning clearly, and ardently affecting that sovereign good which God
is pleased should be common to us all, we may not only during this feast, but
ever, congratulating our happiness, sing Hosanna, blessed is he that comes
in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest.

THE THIRD SERMON.
And I will fill this house with glory.
THE description of Christ's presence in that temple which was built by
Zorobabel, Joshua, and others, does set before us, first his Person, then his
Works. Of his Person I spoke last: it follows that I now come on to his
Works. They are two, Bounty, and Security: The Bounty is set forth, first
absolutely, then comparatively. Of the comparison hereafter (if God will,) my
purpose is now (God assisting me) to open so much of the Text as sets forth
Christ's Bounty absolutely: it is comprehended in these words, I will fill this
house with glory.

Wherein observe, what is conferred, and on whom. The gift is glory, the
receiver the house: both are amplified; the house by the meannesse, this house;
the gift by the greatness, I will fill it with glory. Out of both is made
manifest the exceeding grace of Christ, who honored that so much, that had so
little to make it honorable.

That God who is pleased that we all should be his houses, may so honor us:
let us listen attentively, that we may entertain affectionately the honor
which he vouchsafes to us.

Come we then to the particulars: the first is the thing conferred, Glory.

Glory, if it be true glory, is a resplendencie of some Good solid, and
eminent: The foundation of glory must be that which is good; for where there
is no true good, there can be no glory: shame there may be, according to that
of the Apostle, Romans 6. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are
now ashamed? and St. Jude, The wicked foam out their own shame. But of good
things, some are transitory and vain, some heavenly and eternal; not the
former, but the later kind is the foundation of Glory. Caboth. Calal.
The Hebrew (mother of tongues) which speaks of things most properly, by one
word notes waightinesse and glory; as likewise with them one word signifies
things vile and light: The Apostle seems to allude hereunto, 2 Cor. 5. Our
momentanie affliction does work unto us an exceeding eternal weight of glory.
Weight of glory, that is, weighty glory, glory that has some substance or
solidnesse in it: whereunto he opposes light afflictions; though they seem
grievous, yet do they consist of no enduring substance: nubecula sunt, they
quickly pass, and vanish away. Esaias 40.
And indeed of such shadows, or dreams rather, are all worldly things made:
All flesh is grass, withering grass; the glory thereof is as a flower, Psalm.
93.
a fading flower: The sons of men are vanity, the sons of noble men are but a
lie; if they were put in the scales together, they would weigh lighter than
vanity it self. But of faith, hope, and charity, the Apostle speaks
better, Heb. 3. Heb. 11. 2 Cor. 8. 1 Cor. 13.
he gives them the title of (...), of substance; and he tells us that we are
made partakers of Christ, if we hold fast the substance: finally, the Wise man
tells us, that righteousness is full of immortality. So that in those lasting,
not these fleeting things, must we seek the foundation of true glory.

The Apostles rule is, we may not glory in the flesh: not in the flesh as it is
the good creature of God, Ier. 9.
I mean in the mortal state thereof; the strong man may not glory in his
strength, the wise man in his wisdom, the rich man in his riches: how much
less may we glory in the lusts of the flesh, sinful lusts, which are the
workmanship of the devil? No such boasting can be good, 1 Cor. 5.
as St. Paul tells the Corinthians in his censure of the incestuous person:
Psalm. 53.
and David checketh Doeg in those words, why boastest thou thy self thou
Tyrant, that thou can do mischief?

But yet if we look upon the face of the world, we shall find, that not only
transitory things, but also wicked lusts are the foundation of most men's glory:
and we may renew the Apostles words, mourning words, There be many which
walk, Phil. 3.
of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, whose God is their
belly, whose glory is their shame, which mind earthly things. But our glory
must have a better foundation, it must be a solid good.

Neither is it enough unto glory that the Good be solid, it must be also
eminent: An ordinary good may be laudible, it cannot be honorable; it may
make a man accepted, but not admired: no man is thought worthy of glory, that
is not more than an ordinary man. For glory is an attendant upon heroical
virtue, and that is virtue in the highest degree: such as was the chastity of
Joseph, the patience of Job, the fortitude of Joshua, the pictie of David, and
the wisdom of Solomon. A man must partake of the divine nature, and draw as
near as may be to Gods image, before he can deserve to be glorious.

The last thing required unto glory is, that the solid and eminent Good be also
resplendent: A worthy man must be as a well-drawn Picture set in bono l^mine;
neither will be regarded, except they be placed there where their worth may
be discerned. For in regard of glory, Idem est non esse, and non apparere, A
hidden treasure, and wisedoine concealed, are both alike, says Solomon,
Ecclus. 41.14. they lose their praise and glory: the Kinsmen of Christ out of
this principle set upon him, There is no man that does any thing in secret, and
himself seeks to be known openly. The Greeks call honesty (...), because
it calls all men to it: The Hebrews call it tab, because it is beautiful
and pleasant, and makes all in love with it: most languages call worthy
personages Lights, because the luster of their virtue is the pleasing object of
every man's eye. Wherefore our Savior bids us, Matthew. 5. Let our light so
shine before men, that they may see our good works, and glorify our Father
which is in heaven.

I have hitherto opened unto you the nature of Glory, I have showed you what,
and how many things are requisite thereunto: But where shall we find it? what
is the first, or rather proper subject of it? Surely God: cap. 33.
we learn it in Exodus, Moses desired to see Gods glory: God made his
goodness to pass before him; as if his goodness and glory were synonyma's:
certainly they are inseparable. His goodness is solid, it is his very nature,
who is called Iohoua, and is that which he is. Secondly, his goodness is
eminent: for whatsoever is good, is predicated of him in abstracto, wisdom,
truth, righteousness, holiness, James 1, Psalm. 8.19.104.45.
etc. and abstract names note absolute perfections. Finally, his goodness is
most resplendent, therefore St. James calls him, the father of lights: David
has made many Psalms in acknowledgement hereof. For this cause does the
Scripture often times use the name of Glory when it means God: The Jews in
the Old Testament are blamed by the Prophets for neglecting, for forsaking
their glory, that is, God: And St. Peter in the New Testament, 2 Pet. 1.17.
speaking of the testimony which God the Father gave unto our Savior Christ
in the Mount, says, He heard a voice from the magnificent Glory.

Glory then is originally in God, but by deriuation it is communicated from him
unto others; Angels, Princes, Luke 2. 2 Pet. 2.
both are called (...) in the Scripture. But to none does this title so truly
belong as unto Christ. St. Paul, Heb. 1. calls him (...), The brightness of his
fathers glory: When he was to come into the world Esaias says, cap. 40. The
glory of the Lord should be revealed; and bids Jerusalem be bright, because
her glory is risen: and, in the person of Eliakim, speaking of Christ, cap. 60.
he shall be a glorious Throne (says he) unto them, and they shall hang upon
him all the glory of his fathers house. Cap. 6.
Behold (says Zachary) the man whose name is the Branch, 1 Timothy 3.16.
he shall come out of his place, he shall build a temple, and he shall bear
the glory. Finally, seeing our Savior is God manifest in the flesh, he
deserves well that praise which is given him in the Churches hymn, Thou art
the King of glory, O Christ.

But whereas Gods glory does shine unto us in the face of Christ, we must
enquire what manner of glory it is: for in God there is a twofold glory, as
you may gather out of the forecited place of Exodus cap. 33. compared with cap.
34. a glory of his justice, and a glory of his mercy: the solemn and public
manifesting of either of them (I mean his justice, or his mercy) is
manifesting of his glory. Touching his justice, we have an excellent place in
Esaias, in a vision God showed himself in the Temple, Esaias 6.3.
environed with the Saraphims, who cried, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts,
heaven and earth are full of thy glory: this was the glory of his justice; for
verse 9. he denounces the sentence of induration against the Jews: the like
manifestation we find in Moses, Numb. 14. As I live (says the Lord) all the
earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord: but it is the glory of his
justice; for immediately he does doom all those Israelites that had not
hearkened to his voice, saying, Surely they shall not see that Land which I
swear unto their fathers to give them.

There is another branch of Gods glory, I called it the glory of his mercy; it
was figured partly by the Cloud, and partly by the Arc: The Cloud was a type
of Gods mild appearance; for it was seated, not between Seraphims, fiery
Angels, messengers and instruments of wrath, but between the Cherubims, which
had the shape of men, lovely and meek men. Add hereunto, that it rested upon
the Arc, the covering whereof was called the mercy seat. Either of these was
called, the glory of the Lord: The Cloud often in Moses; the Arc in that known
story of the destruction of Elie's sons; at what time the Arc being taken
by the Philistines, 1 Samuel 3. Heb. 9. Psalm. 27. Ier. 14. and 17.
Elie's daughter called her child Ichabod, the glory is gone. For attending
upon these two were the Cherubims called Cherubims of glory, and for
containing them the Temple was called the habitation and throne of Gods glory.
But all these were types, the truth of them was Christ. He was the truth of
the Cloud; in his flesh did God so appear, that he might be endured by the
sight of men: and he appeared for those uses whereunto the Cloud was designed,
for direction, and protection; you may gather it out of Esaias, cap. 4. and St.
Paul speaks plainly, 1 Cer. 1.24. that Christ came into the world as the
wisdom and the power of God. As Christ was the truth of the Cloud, so was he
of the Mercieseate. St. Paul, Romans 3.25. calls him by the very name of it,
(...), God accepts us in him: By him we come with boldness to the throne of
grace, and find mercy in the time of need, Heb. 4.16. The Angels that
attended him were not Seraphims, but Cherubims, they appeared in the shape of
men, and whenever they appeared they came to bring comfort: Christ then did
in his person manifest Gods merciful glory; which is the glory meant in this
Text. Wherefore I will conclude this point with the words of the Evangelist,
John 1. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we saw his glory as
the glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace, and ^^ll of truth.

I have sufficiently opened unto you that which is conferred; we must now see
whereon. The text says, it was the house, the Prophet means the Temple then
building by Zorobabel. Some have thought that the Temple which was standing
when Christ was incarnate, was not the Temple built by Zorobabel, but another
which Herod built. But we must take heed of that opinion: for it has two
evils in it; 1. Flauius Josephus.
it gives the holy Ghost the lie in this place; 2. and it cherishes the Jews
vain exp^ctation of their Messiah. It is true that Herod enlarged that Temple,
and added many buildings to it: but he did not demolish the old, neither indeed
could he, and this prophecy continue true; for God promised that Christ should
come even into this Temple that now was building. And seeing that Temple with
all the additions of Herod, has many hundied years since, according to
Christ's prophecy, been so destroyed, that there remains not one stone upon
another, the Jews do more than vainly yet look for a Messiah: especially,
seeing God has manifested to the world that it was not only totally, but
sinally also destroyed. The Jews had good proof hereof in the days of Julian
the Apostata; when, Eusebius. hist. l. 4. Chrysostom. orat. 2. in Iudaeos.
notwithstanding that wicked Emperor encouraged, and furthered them to
re-edifie it, fearful tempests from heaven destroyed in the night what they
did in the day; God then making good against Jacob what in Malachie he spoke
against Esau, Thus says the Lord of hosts, Mal. 1.
they shall build, but I will cast down; they shall call them, the border of
wickedness, the people against whom the Lord has indignation for ever. But I
will leave them to God, whom God has left to the world as a spectacle of
stupiditie, and a bridle to hold us in from like contempt.

It is plain the place here meant was Zorobabels Temple; upon that place was
the glory conferred. Malachie, cap. 3. said it should be so; he said, that
the Lord should come into his Temple, and he should sit down there and refine
the sons of Leui, and rectify the divine worship. The Gospel teaches us
that it was so: for he was not only presented in that Temple when he was a
babe, and when he was twelve years old a disputant there with the doctors;
but also when he was solemnly inaugurated, he first purged the Temple of
buyers and sellers; then he reformed the doctrine, and the discipline at
several times, when he resorted thither at solemn feasts; there he made his
sermons, and wrought his miracles: so that he might truly say to the high
Priests when he was arraigned before them, I sat daily with you teaching in
the Temple. Mat. 26.
I will add one text more which may serve in stead of all; when his parents
that had lost (...), found him in the Temple, they expostulated with him in
these words, Son, why have thou served us thus? Luke 2.
thy father and I have sought we sorrowing: Christ replies unto them, Why
sought ye me? did you not know (...); we render it, Wist ye not that I must
go about my fathers business? but the words may well bear another sense
also, Wist ye not that it was sit for me to be in my fathers house? for so
he calls the Temple elsewhere: and so speaks St. Paul, Heb. 13. John 2.
Christ as a son was over his own house. Some refer hither that speech of
Christ touching the paying of tribute, Mat. 17.26.
The sons are free; because that money is thought to have been originally a
taxation for the Temple, and by the Romans converted to other uses when they
collected it.

But enough of the place: only take this note out of the conjunction of the
place and the gift, That Christ's coming to be the glory of the Temple, gives
us to understand that his Kingdom was not temporal, but spiritual; he came
not to raise an earthly Monarchy, but to gather a people unto God.

The next point that I observed, is the amplification both of the place and the
gift: of the place in regard of the meannes, which is noted in the word this
house. The Jews had two Temples, one built by Solomon, a glorious one; this
built by Zorobabel, a poor one. The Jews wept when they saw the foundations
of it, and God testifies that it was as nothing in their eyes; and this
nothing (as it were) moved Herod to make those additions before specified, that
it might become like something. Mark, Christ came not unto Salomons Temple,
but unto Zorobabels: so that the Temple which had most of earthly cost, had
nothing in it but the type of Christ; and that Temple that had least of earthly
glory, had most of heavenly: it had the truth, Christ came thither in person.
God regards not outward pomp, neither does he tie his presence thereunto, as
if he would not be where there is no worldly state: nay, commonly where there
is least of the world, Heb. 11.
God is there most; and they have greatest familiarity with him, who have worst
entertainment in the world. Did not our Savior Christ give us an excellent
representation hereof in his own person? Col. 2.9. Phil. 2.7. 2 Cor 4.7.
the Godhead dwelt bodily in him, but that body bare the shape of a servant:
the Apostles carried about the world heavenly treasures, but they carried them
in earthen vessels. An ancient Father observes wittily, that when the Church
was so poor that it had but wooden chalices, it had golden Priests, we may
add People too; and when the ornaments of the Church became golden, then the
Priests and People became wooden: Gods Word was heard more reverently, he was
served more devoutly, when the Church met in caves, in woods, in deserts, than
ever he was in towns, and cities, and these most stately fabrics.

This must be observed in the question of the visibility of the Church, or
rather conspicuity. The Advocates of Rome seem to triumph much against the
reformed Churches, as if the obscurity, wherein sometimes they lay hidden,
Cont. Auxent.
did prejudice the truth which they professed: they forget St. Hilaries
admonition, Male nos cepit parietum amor etc. We are ill advised to measure
faith by multitude of professors, Epist. 48.
or by goodly temples where the profession is made. St. Austine will tell us,
Ecclesia aliquando obscuratur, and aliquando obnubilatur multitudine
scandalorum, The glory of the Church is subject to Eclypses: it was so in the
Old Testament, as appears by Elia's complaint, 1 Reg. 19. They have slain all
thy Prophets, and thrown down thine altars, Cont. Lucifer.
and I am left alone. It has been no better under the New Testament: witness
St. Hierome, Ingemuit totus mundus, and se Arianum factum miratus est,
Arianisme so got the upper hand, that the Orthodoxe faith scarce durst be known
in the whole Catholic Church. In the Old Testament God promised by Zephanie,
cap. 3. I will leave in the midst of thee an humble and poor people, and
they shall trust in me: Christ in the Gospel, Fear not little flock, it is
your fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom, Luke 12.32.

As the Text does amplify the place from the meandness, 1 Reg. 8.
so does it the gift from the greatness thereof; I will fill, fill this house
with that glory. The phrase is allusiue to Gods typical presence in the former
Temple, for therein rested the Cloud, and it filled all the house, all that
part of the house which was called the holy place. When the second Temple was
built, there was no such thing; God was pleased to reserve it for the truth,
that he that is the fullness of all should fill that Temple. And indeed God
was never more there, than when he was there in Christ, if ever, he was then
an Oracle to his Church. I add out of Ezechiel, cap. 43.12. that by his
presence, omnis circuitus Templi was made sanctum sanctorum.

For ought we read, Christ never came into that place of the Temple which was
called sanctum, or sanctum sanctorum, the holy place, or holiest of holies; but
this he did, being borne that holy thing, Luke 1. Dan. 9.
and anointed the most holy, he made all places of the Temple where he came
holy, yea, and most holy, he filled them with the glory of his person, and the
glory of his function. The truth (I say) filled even the worst part of the
Temple, which the type did not. But I shall meet with this point in the next
Sermon, wherefore I will dwell no longer now upon it.

This historical sense which I have hitherto opened, does present unto us a
mystical, which I may not neglect: God does not delight in material houses
built with timber and stone; the Temple was but a type of the Church. Christ's
house are you, says St. Paul to the Hebrews, cap. 3. and to the Ephesians,
cap. 2. he tells us of the foundation, the corner stone. Saint Peter, 1 Epist.
2. shows us, that we as living stones coming unto the precious stone Christ,
make up a house unto God. So that whatsoever blessing is contained in this
text, belongs unto us, and unto the Temple but in reference unto us. A thing
to be observed, because the world has always been shallow-witted in looking
into these intentions of God; they have rested on the types, without due
reflection upon themselves; whereas God therein would only help our memory,
and condescend to our infirmity, and that upon a Principle which prevails
much with us, which is this, Sense is the best informer of our reason, and
solliciter of our will. And did we make as good use of it in things belonging
to God, and our soul, as we do in things pertaining to the world, and
concerning our natural life, Christ should not have been occasioned to utter
that sentence, The children of this world are wiser in their generation than
the children of light.

Well then, let us gather some few such morals as this text will yield.

The first is, That where Christ comes, he brings a blessing: Jacob did so
to Laban, Joseph to Pharaoh, Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar. There is not a good man
that makes not the place whither he comes the better for him: How much more
the chief of Saints our Savior Christ? the very type of him, 1 Chro. 13.
I mean the Arc, made Obed Edoms house to prosper. If the shadow wrought so
much, what good may we expect from the substance it self?

The second moral is, That God in Christ takes upon him to be the glory of
the house, so that where Christ is, there the glory is. The Church of Rome is
plentiful in earthly ornaments of their Church, and we are careful that the
Word of God should dwell richly in ours; it were well if both were joined
together; I wish we had more of their ornaments, and they had more of Christ's
truth. But if they must be kept asunder through the malice of the Devil, our
case is better, that have fewer ornaments and more truth, than theirs that have
less truth and more ornament. For CHRIST is properly the glory of a Church;
where he is, though it be in the wilderness, there is glory; and there is no
glory where he is not, though the temple be as goodly as Salomons.

The third is, the particle this, this house contains the comfort of poor
souls: For though in the sense of our meandness we have all reason to say,
Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under the roof of my house; yet
says the Lord, Esaias 66. Heaven is my throne, and the Earth is my footestoole:
where is the house that ye build unto me? and where is the place of my rest?
has not my hand made all these things, says the Lord? But to this man will I
look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my
Word. And it was the very life of Kings David's penitential prayer, Psalm. 51. A
broken and contrite heart, O Lord, wilt not thou despise.

Wherefore I conclude this point with the exhortation of St. James, Let the
brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted: be he never so mean a
house, Christ will not disdain, even in his glory, to come unto him; he will
come and bring his glory with him.

The fourth is, That he will not only bring his glory, but fill that house.
But it is as the soul fills the body, every part according to his
proportion; some part is filled as the head, some as the hand, some as the
feet: so that every house may be full, and yet one house contain more than
another. As it is most behoofefull for us, so does Christ dispense his grace
unto us.

But this filling may be understood either inhaerenter, or immanenter in
Christ; or transeunter and redundanter to us; that is, either that he which
comes into the house is full of glory, or else that the house whereinto he
comes is by him transformed into glory. Take a simile from the Sun; the
beams of the Sun do fill the air and the firmament, but you easily
perceive that they do it in a different fashion; they fill the air, but so
that the air alters not in nature, but continues the same, only it is the
place wherein the beams of the Sun do appear: But as for the firmament, the
Sun sends his beams into that, so that it makes many a light body of it,
many a star: and St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 15.41.
that they differ each from the other in glory. Christ does fill our house both
ways: if you look to our Justification, he brings glory to us, as the Sun
does the light unto the air; the brightness whereof does grace the air, yet
it remains inherently still in the beams, and is not transfused into the
substance of the air: Even so Christ's righteousness passes not out of his
person, and yet it is the ornament of our person; it is inherent in him, it is
imputed to us, and in the eyes of God does grace and commend us, as if it were
ours. But if you look to sanctification, that redounds from Christ unto us; it
makes us stars in the spiritual firmament, though of unequal magnitude,
and unequal glory. St. Paul is clear for it, 1 Cor. 3. We with open face
behold the glory of God, and are transformed into the same image from glory
unto glory, even by the powerful spirit of Christ. When the Apostles did but
see Christ's transformation in the Mount, though themselves were not
transfigured, yet they thought it so happy a sight; that they cried out, Bonum
est esse hic, Let us pitch our Tabernacles here. And what would they have
thought if themselves also might have been partakers of the same glory? if
themselves might have appeared like unto him? if they might have been as he
was? yet such is our condition in Christ.

The last moral shall be, that whereas other things that fill us, proportion
themselves unto, and take up whatsoever capacity they find; it is not so with
Christ, whatsoever he fills that he enlarges, Aug. Confess.
and the more we have of him, the more capacity we have, the more capacity of
glory, for that is that wherewith he fills; all other things deal worse with
us, they straighten our capacity, or fill us with vanity. Wherefore were we
as wise as we should be, we would suffer no body to take up any room in us
but only Christ; we would leave no corner for the devil, or the world, or our
corrupt lusts. And indeed, who would withold any part from him, to continue
a straight, a dark, a filthy dungeon, that by his presence may be made, a
large, a light, a glorious habitation? And yet so it is; some of us steal our
heads from him, and entertain error; some steal their hearts from him, and
therein lodge sinful lusts: there is no man that does not withold some
part, and keep that part the worse for it. But this should be to every one of
us his votiue prayer, To thee, O Christ, I consecrate totum me, and totum mei,
my whole self, and all that is in me; humbly desiring that nothing may inhabit
me, but thy self, and that which comes from thee.

This is that whereunto I advise my self, as I advise you: And that I advise
not in vain, let us lay this text to the former; there we heard of a desire,
here of a filling. Solomon has a good rule, A desire accomplished delights
the soul: So that if we profited so much by the last sermon as to make Christ
our desire, we may be comforted by this, which assures us that our desire shall
be filled. Yea, whereas desire is sinus cordis, the bosom, or lap (as it
were) of the heart, if we do enlarge it, God will replenish it. But let us be
sure that this sermon does little concern us, if the former took no place in
us. David no sooner heard that Obed Edoms house prospered by having the Arc,
but he was stirred up with a godly zeal to bring it unto Sion, to bring it to
his own City. What shall I wish unto you, but that having heard the blessing
that Christ's presence brought to Zorobabels Temple, every one of you would
strive to lodge him in your Temples, the temples of your bodies, the temples of
your souls? So may he fill these mystical, as he did that typical Temple; so
fill them here with the glory of his grace, that they may be hereafter filled
with the grace of his glory. Psalm. 24.
Wherefore, lift up your heads O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting
doors, and the King of glory shall come in: and 85.
Salvation is near them that fear him, that glory may dwell in their Land.

LEt thy work, O Lord, be seen toward thy servants, and thy glory upon
their children, that in the sensible sweet comfort thereof, we may all now and
ever sing, Glory be to thee O Lord most high. Blessing, honor, glory and
power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever
and ever. Amen. THE FOVRTH SERMON.
The silver is mine, and the gold is mine.

The glory of this later house shall be greater than the glory of the former.


THe bounty which Christ vouchsafed that Temple which was built by Zorobabel,
is by this our Porphet set forth absolutely and comparatively. Of the absolute
consideration thereof I spoke last, I will pass now on to the comparatiue,
expressed in those words which now I have read unto you.

Of this comparison we must observe 1 the preface, and 2 the contents. The
preface will teach us what Christ can, the contents, what he will do. Christ
can in point of bounty do as much as he will: so much the words of the
preface import, The silver is mine, the gold is mine. And he will do more than
the Jews do desire: for they would have been contented if they might have
had a Temple but as goodly as that of Solomon; Christ will do more for them,
The glory of the later house shall be greater than the glory of the former.

But more distinctly.

These points of Christ's power and his will, must be opened first severally,
then jointly.

If we look into them severally, then we shall find that the preface which
sets forth Christ's power, does in the outside of the words entitle him to these
earthly metals, gold and silver; but the inside will inform us that he is
owner of much more precious metals, of gold and silver that are heavenly.

As for the contents, the comparison therein presented unto us, may be
conceived either of fabric to fabric, or furniture to furniture. I will
touch at both, that so you may the better see of whether and how far my text
may be justified.

Having thus opened the points severally, I will join them together, and show
you, that first Christ's power is set down before his will, that the Jews
should not think he does promise more than he can perform: secondly, that
his will bears correspondencie to his power; and he gives gifts not suitable
to the narrowness of our desire, but to the wideness of his own store.

Of these particulars I shall now (God willing) speak briefly and in their
order. God grant we may so listen to, and profit by that which shall be said
concerning Christ's power and will, that it may be his gracious will always to
sustain and bless us according to his all sufficient power.

Come we then to the preface, and first to the outside of the words, The silver
is mine, the gold is mine: If so we read the preface, it does entitle Christ
to these earthly metals, gold and silver; and his title is just and clear. he
that made all is owner of all: now all things were made by Christ, and without
him nothing was made that was made, John 1. therefore we may conclude with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 24. The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, the round
world and they that dwell therein. It is true, that the Devil shamed not to
Christ's own face to say, All the Kingdoms of the earth are mine, and theirs
to whom I will give them, Luke 4. but that was but the vaunt of the father of
lies. Nabals speech was a speech beseeming a Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. Shall I take my
flesh and my bread, and give it unto men whom I know not? the devil
experienced Christ's right, and so did Nabal too; Christ stripped them both of
that which they had: and he threatens no less unto the Jews and Israelites,
Ezekiel. 16. Hos. 2.
when they became so graceless as to derive his title to others, to their
Lovers, as the Prophet calls them, be they idols or men.

I will open this point a little more fully. There is ius ad rem, and ius in
re, property and possession, right to a thing, and power over that thing:
These are many times severed in men; many a man has right to that over which
he has no power, he is kept out with a strong hand; Wisd. 2.11.
and many a man has power over that whereunto he has no right, his strength
is the Law of all his righteousness. It is not so with Christ, property and
possession meet both in him; and he has power over whatsoever he has right
unto, both right and power extend unto all things. His right, John 1. Heb. 1.
for he is the only begotten of the father; therefore heir of all things: In
the second Psalm, he that said, Thou art my son this day have I begotten
thee, said also, Ask of me and I will give unto thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Neither
is Christ an inheritor only, but a purchaser also, Romans 14.
He therefore dyed and rose again that he might be Lord of quick and dead,
that he might be King of kings, and Lord of lords. A double right then has
Christ unto all, by birth, and by purchase.

And his power is as wide as his right: Mat. 28.18.
by birthright he is an all-mighty God, and by purchase, all power is given
unto him both in heaven and earth; therefore Job says, cap. 1. The Lord gives
and the Lord takes: the Psalmist, Promotion comes neither from the east nor
from the west, Psalm. 75.6.
but the Lord sets up one, cap. 2. and 5. Psalm. 115.
and takes down another. Daniel, Blessed be the name of the Lord for ever and
ever: for wisdom and might are his; he changes times and seasons, he
remoueth kings and sets them up; he does whatsoever he will, both in heaven
and in earth.

Out of this which I have told you concerning Christ's right, you may learn
many good Lessons: first, from the property. If he have right to all, in
whosoeuers hand it is, then no man should come unjustly by his goods: for he
that defraudes his brother, defraudeth not man but God: Even as a master that
puts his goods into his servants hand is the principal party that is
wronged, if his servant be either deceived, or oppressed; and as the Master
will pursue his right against the wrong doer: so will God also take vengeance
upon all unjust persons; he will in the world to come, nay he does in this
world: for what Chronicle is there that does not justify the proverb, de male
quaesitis non gaudet tertius haeres, will gotten goods never prosper?

As Christ's property in our goods teaches us not to get them unjustly, so
does it teach us also not to use them unreasonably. A tenant that holds land
from a Lord may not use it otherwise than according to the covenants agreed
upon; if he do, he forfeiteth: even so is it between God and us, the grant
which he makes us of his creatures is but conditional; we may take
convenient food for our sustenance, decent clothing to shroud us from the
injuries of the weather, and we may bestow our money to supply our own and
other folks necessaries. To these ends we may use Gods creatures: but we may
not riot with our meat and drink, we may not be fantastical in our apparel,
neither may we with our wealth grind the faces of the poor; we have no
covenant that warrants any of these, and therefore the doing of any of these is
a forfeit to him that is proprietarie. And how often might Christ re-enter upon
our goods, if he would take advantage of our daily abuses? yea he daily does
re-enter, if we had grace to see it; for what goodly patrimonies daily come to
naught by drunkenness, pride, oppression? I would the world did take as much
notice of it, as every place does give them just occasion to do: for what
country, what shire, what city, yea what village, abounds not with examples
hereof? These lessons Christ's right to our goods does yield us.

His power over our goods will yield us as many: for seeing our goods are not
in our own power but in Christ's, we may not trust in them, but in him. It is
the Apostles rule, 1 Timothy 6. We may not trust in uncertain riches, but in the
living God. Our wealth may be taken from us, as Jobs was, or we may betaken
from our wealth, cap. 1.
as the rich man in the Gospel, who while he was inuiting his soul to eat
and drink because he had store laid up for many years, heard that unpleasing
message, Thou fool, this night shall they take thy soul from thee, Luke. 12.
and then whose shall all these things be? Our selves are not in our own
power, much less our goods; therefore it is good trusting in neither of them,
but in him that has power over both.

Secondly, this power of God over our wealth, must remember us, that to our
honest endeauours we add our devout prayers: for, Psalm. 127.1.
for, except the Lord build the house, they labor but in vain that build it.
We may plant, we may water, it is God that must give the increase; if he be
closehanded, every thing will famish, and he fills every living creature with
his good gifts, when he opens his hand: It is his blessing (as Solomon
teaches, Pro. 10.22) that makes men rich.

Join Christ's right and his power together, and gather what wretches they are,
that for wealth forsake him, who has right to it, and power to bestow it, and
betake themselves unto the devil, who is but a pretender of right, and when by
Gods permission he has done his best for them, he cannot keep them in
possession. And no wonder, the Gospel teaches that Christ with a word did
cast him out, how then should he be able to keep others in?

Secondly, when Gods children are in want, we may not argue therehence that
Christ is unable to relieve: Psalm. 78.19.
Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? was the voice of infidelity; for
God is Shaddai, all-sufficient; it is one of his essential Attributes, and it
is not unlikely that the names Deus and Dives come from thence. But it is not
expedient that God always bestow wealth upon us; the fatness of the earth
does make us less think upon the dew of heaven; the content we take in
things earthly does make us less mind those things that are heavenly:
wherefore God keeps us to a shorter diet in things corporal, that we might
relish things spiritual the better.

To pass here from the outside of the preface to the inside thereof, we must
observe that the holy Ghost means also by these words to correct a carnal
conceit of the Jews: they were much troubled for that they wanted gold and
silver wherewith to make a house for God, as if he stood in need of, or did
primarily respect those things; whereas it is not gold and silver which God
requires of men, but that which was signified by these metals. And who can
tell whether God did not destitute them of these things corporal, that their
hearts might be set more ardently upon those things that were answerable unto
them, upon the things spiritual? Certainly Christ's purpose was so to raise
their thoughts; the phrase in the original seems to import it: For whereas we
read, the silver is mine and the gold is mine, the Hebrew word forword is,
mihi est argentum, mihi est aurum, I have gold, I have silver; the words give
the Jews to understand, that there are more kinds of gold and silver than
they dreamt of, that there are heavenly metals whereof Gods house must
consist: Learn it of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man lay
than that which is laid, Jesus Christ: upon this if any man build gold or
silver, his work will abide. What gold or silver does he mean? that which is
dug out of the mine? St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.19. denies that, saying, We are
not redeemed with corruptible things, as gold and silver, but with the precious
blood of Jesus Christ. It must be gold then suitable to the foundation, and
that is spiritual, such as heavenly Jerusalem is built of, all whose streets
are pure gold, Reu. 21.
and such as the children of God are made of, who (as the Apostle, 2. Tim. 2.
tells us) are vessels of gold. In comparison of these heavenly, those earthly
metals are but vile, as Job, c. 28. Solomon, Pro. 3. teach at large; Wisd. 7.
and the Wiseman has comprehended it in few words, I did not compare unto
wisdom any stone of inestimable price, because all gold in respect of her is
as a little sand, and all silver shall be accounted as clay before her.

What then does the holy Ghost mean by these phrases? Surely because we cannot
apprehend things heavenly, but as they are represented in things earthly, he
speaks (...), in a language familiar to men, but would have us understand him
(...), in a sense beseeming God. As then these metals are things highly
esteemed by men, so must we think that those are not of mean value which God
bestows upon us in Christ; they are as gold and silver, there can be no
better. And see how Gods providence has disposed of words, to work in us the
deeper impression of things: for whereas there is a double valuation of things,
the one as they are considered in se, in themselves, the other as they are
considered ad nos, as we respect them; here are both valuations. If a thing
be considered in it self, so we value it according to the purity thereof,
and as it is freest from dross; and that purity is intimated by the Hebrew
name of gold zahabh, which is as much as mundum: and therefore it is applied to
the northren wind that clears the sky, and to oil that is most bright and
pure.

Ad nos, if things be considered, so are they valued as they most affect us:
and this affection is noted by the name of silver, which is Ceseph, and has
its name from desire, because all men do desire it. So that whether you
consider Christ in himself, or unto us, you see by these words that he is very
valuable; valuable for the purity of his nature, as gold; and for our affection
toward him valuable also, because desirable as silver.

Finally to shut up this note, mark, that mihi argentum, mihi aurum, I have
silver, I have gold, this phrase does restrain these things unto Christ, as if
they were not to be found in any other besides him. Come to me (says Christ
to the Church of Laodicea, Revel. 3.18.) and buy gold tried in the fire, etc.
taxing whatsoever they had besides as beggerie and poverty. To the same sense,
though under another resemblance, speaks Christ in Esaias, cap. 55. Wherefore
do ye spend your money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that
which satisfies not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat you that which is
good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness.

As then God under the name of gold does give us to understand that he has
treasured up all purity and perfection in Christ, so by the name of silver does
he call for all our desires, and command them to be placed upon Christ.

And let this suffice touching the preface, the outside and the infide thereof.

I come now to the comparison whereunto that preface is prefixed; and the
contents hereof open Christ's will, what he will do, as in the preface you had
his power, what he could do.

Now the comparison may be either of fabric to fabric, or furniture to
furniture.

If we compare the fabrics, then certainly Zorobabels Temple came short of
Salomons: you may gather it from these four inequalities. The first is of the
Architects; the plot of Salomons Temple was drawn by God himself, he inspired
it into David by the holy Ghost, 1 Chronicles. 2^.
and he committed it unto Solomon, the wisest Prince that ever was in the
world, and best able to conceive it: to say nothing of the instruments or
workmen that were employed to execute it. The second Temple had no other
Architect prescribing the form but Cyrus, Esra 6.
who delivered it by charter unto Zorobabel, and it was performed by no
extraordinary workmen.

The second inequality is in the number of the laborers. 1 Kings 5.14, 15, 16.
Solomon employed well-nigh two hundred thousand, which is more than three
times as many as returned from the Babylonian captivity. Add hereunto that
they labored at least seven years incessantly about the building of Salomons
Temple: the second Temple was not so long in building, ibid.
if you except the intermissions which were caused by their Adversaries, though
there were fewer workmen upon it.

A third inequality appears in the dimensions: for Cyrus scanted much the
measure that was used by King Solomon: And upon this ground it was that Herod,
willing to get the good will of the Jews, undertook the enlarging of the
Temple to equal it to the first, as Josephus reports.

The fourth and the last inequality stands in the materials used about the
fabric: to say nothing of their qualities, certainly those that were used
about the first Temple, did in quantity far exceed those that were used
about the second. For what comparison could there be between the riches of
poor captive Jews, and of King Solomon that was the most glorious Monarch in
the world? 1 Chronicles. 22.14 2 Samuel 8.
Add hereunto the provision that his father King David made in his time, a
hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver,
and brass, and iron without weight; besides what he gave out of his own
peculium, or private Treasury, (for the former were dedicated out of the
spoils of kingdoms which he conquered) three thousand talents of gold, of the
gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined silver, besides great
abundance of all sorts of precious stones. Whereunto add the offering of the
Fathers of Israel, five thousand talents, and ten thousand drammes of gold, and
of silver ten thousand talents, of brass eight thousand talents, and a hundred
thousand talents of iron, besides precious stones. And put all this together,
and therewith increase Salomons wealth, the total will be a sum of infinite
value, far exceeding that wherewith Zorobabel was furnished, either by the
Persian Kings, or by his own contrymen: yea although you add what
afterward was bestowed either by Alexander the great, or his successors, Kings
of Syria, and those of Egypt: Neither will the additions of other benefactors,
no not that of Herod, make up the sum. I dare say boldly, that if all the
Christian Kings of the West, for so many years as the Temple was a building by
Solomon, should contribute their treasures, they could not raise a sum
answerable to that which was expended upon the first Temple, and reserve to
themselves their Kingly ports, as David and Solomon did. Neither need we out
of the incredulity of the sum (as some learned do) question the
signification of the word talent, as if it signified a lesser sum than
commonly it is taken for. For (to say nothing that it is the same Author that
wrote both the 22. and the 29. of the first of Chronicles, and that it is not
likely he would vary the sense, keeping himself to the same word) they do not
mark that David's offering was the spoil of many Kingdoms; that God promised
that Solomon should be the richest King in the world; that the vessels of gold
and silver used in the Temple were many thousands (as appears by Josephus);
and that there was great store of treasure laid up there besides, 2 Chro. 5.

I need say no more to prove that if we compare fabric with fabric, we
cannot find therein the truth of these words of Haggai.

Let us come then to the furniture; that is either typical, or spiritual:
such parts of the furniture as were figures of divine things, and that by Gods
own ordinance, were typical. Upon Diana's Temple at Ephesus, Apollo's at
Delphi, the Capitoline Temple at Rome, and many other heathenish Temples, there
was much gold and silver bestowed, yea and precious stones also, but they
wanted a typical relation; and therein did the temples of the Jews infinitely
exceed them. In these types, if we compare Salomons temple with Zorobabels,
Galatinus Chrysostom. orat. 3. aduersus Iudaos.
Zorobabels comes far short of Salomons. The Jews confess that five
eminent things were wanting in the later temple which were in the former: 1.
the Cloud wherein God resided between the Cherubims: 2. the Arc, with the
contents therein, whereon the Cloud rested: 3. the fire kindled from heaven,
wherewith all their sacrifices were to be offered: 4. the Vrim and Thummim on
the breastplate of the high Priest, by which he was enabled to give out divine
Oracles, and ordinarily resolve the Jews perplexing doubts in peace and war:
the fifth was the spirit of prophecy, wherewith God furnished diverse other
persons whom he sent as messengers unto the kings and people of Judah and
Israel. Now these five were the chief of all the typical furniture; if
Zorobabels temple came short in these five, there can be no doubt but it was
inferior in types unto that of Salomons temple.

What remains then but that the greatness of the glory here meant, must
consist in the spiritual and heavenly furniture of the later temple? or else
there was none at all. And indeed it is that which we find there; we find
Christ in person, as in former sermons I have showed you, and he is the truth
of all those types. Of the Cloud; for in him God dwelt visibly on earth: Cyril.
l. 4. in Ioh. c. 2. 1 Pet. 2. Romans 8. Ind.
Of the Arc; by him God showed mercy unto men: Of the Fire; for by his spirit
all sacrifices must be offered that are acceptable unto God: Of the Vrim and
Thummim; for he is the word, the wisdom of God: Finally, of the spirit of
prophecy; for he is the Prophet that was to come into the world, and the
Revelation of Jesus Christ is the spirit of prophecy, Revel. 1. What shall I
say of the table of shewbread? Christ is the bread of life; of the golden
candlestick? John 6. John 1. Reu. 5.8.
Christ is the light of the world; of the altar of incense? it is Christ that
puts sweet odours into the prayers of the Saints; of the altar of burnt
offerings? Psalm 40. Heb. 10. John 1.29. 1 John 1.7.
sacrifice and offerings God did not desire, but he opened Christ ear, and
gave him a body: he was the Lamb of God that took away the sins of the
world, and his blood cleanses from all sin. And what comparison between
this truth and those types? certainly no more than between earth and heaven;
therefore when the truth appeared, the type vanished. Ier. 3.16.17.
It must needs follow then, that the glory of the later temple must needs be
greater than the glory of the former. Greater, if we insist only upon Christ's
apparition in the material temple of Zorobabel: L. 3. Epist. 11. De ciuit.
Dei. l. 18.
how much more if with the Fathers, St. Ambrose, and St. Austine, we enlarge
it to the Christian Church in whom Christ abides?

And indeed Zorobabels temple being void of the types did represent the
Christian Church, as Salomons full of them did represent the Church of the
Jews; and then mark what St. Paul says, if these two Churches be compared, 2
Cor. 3. Even that which was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by
reason of the glory that excels: for if that which was done away was
glorious, much more that which remains is glorious; that whole Chapter is a
good commentary upon my text, the Epistle to the Hebrews is much fuller. So
then we must read and consider this text as directed unto us; it concerns
us, for we are partakers of that glory. And see how God deals both with the
Jews and us; we have envious eyes, and ambitious hearts, we would not only be
great, but greatest, we would not willingly that any should be in better case
than our selves. Gods promise then goes very far which he makes to the
Jews, and in them to us, when he says that they shall not only have great
glory, but also great in comparison, in comparison to that which was very
glorious. So that if fertilior seges est etc. and we covet after the best
gifts, 1 Cor. 12.
the very phrase did put them, and does put us in mind how deeply they were,
we are bound to God for the honor that he did them in Christ, 1 Reg. 8.
and does to us. we should both joy more therein than ever the Israelites did
at the dedication of Salomons Temple.

But we must not mistake, and understand the comparison made between the Old
and the New Testament in an anabaptisticall sense, as if they in the Old
Testament had only corporal glory, and they in the New Testament spiritual;
the glory of both is spiritual: But theirs of the Old Testament was veiled
with ceremonies, ours in the New Testament is vnueiled; they had Christ, but
they saw him not but through sacrifices, and dark rites; but we with open face
do behold the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. therefore the Apostle teaches,
Ephesians. 2. that of two we are made but one new man: and Romans 11. we are grafted
into that ^liue from whence they sprang. Secondly, we must distinguish the
means as they are offered of God, and as they are received of men: the glory
of the New Testament is greater in regard of the means offered of God, Blessed
are the eyes that see that which you see (says our Savior Christ to his
Apostles, Luke 10.24.) and the ears that hear that which you hear: for I
tell you, many Kings, Prophets, and righteous men have desired to see those
things which you see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things which
you hear, and have not heard them. But in regard of entertainment of the
means, the glory of the Patriarchs faith under the Old Testament, may well
be thought to have equalled, if not to have gone beyond, the glory of most of
their faiths that live under the New. And why? the darker their means were,
the stronger was their faith that built upon them; and our faith though in
work equal, is in worth unequal, because our means are clearer, clearer
than was afforded any of those Worthies which are chronicled, Heb. 11.
Whereupon will follow a third thing, which is, that seeing in heaven men shall
fare not according to the means which God affordes them, but according to
their use of the means; we may not so advance the glory of the New Testament
above that of the Old, as to think that in the life to come all that live
under the New Testament shall have precedencie of all those that lived under
the Old. Well it will be with many, if not most of us, if we may have a place
in Abraham's bosom, and sit down with him, and with Isaac and Jacob in the
Kingdom of God.

I have done with the points of my Text as they were to be opened severally: I
have showed you what Christ can do, what he will do; it remains that in very
few words I show you what instructions they will yield us, if we join them
both together.

Observe then, that the Prophet does first set down Christ's power, and then
his will: in so doing the holy Ghost does help the infirmities of men. Were we
such as we should be, we would never question Gods promise through doubt of
his power; But the best of Gods children have taken exception to Gods promises,
and expressed their distrust. God promised Abraham a child in his old age; Genesis
18.
Sarah laugheth at that, and objects her dead womb, and Abraham's decrepit
body. God promised Moses that the children of Israel should eat flesh a
month together in the wilderness; Number. 11.
Moses thus reasons against God, The people amongst whom I am are six hundred
thousand footmen, shall all the flocks and the herds be slain to suffice
them? etc. You will not wonder to hear a Prince of Samaria dis-beleeue the
unexpected plenty promised by Elizeus; 2 King 7.
nor Ahaz distrusting the despaired deliverance of Jerusalem from the armies of
the King of Israel and Syria: Esaias 7.
It is not strange to see flesh and blood so backward in believing God, seeing
they which are a good part spirit are not so forward as they should be. It is
not then without cause that the holy Ghost prefixeth Christ's power before his
will, lest the ignorance of the power should make us think that the Prophet
does lavish in expressing his will. Wherefore the holy Ghost, taking us for no
better than we are, encourages us to hope well of Christ's promise, out of the
consideration of his sufficiency: And this is the reason why the first Article
in the Creed is prefixed before all the rest; it preuents the scruples that
would rise in our distrustful nature.

A second instruction that the coupling of Christ's power and his will will
yield, is, that Christ does give his gifts, not according to the narrowness
of our desires, but the width of his own power. St. Paul, Ephesians. 3. tells
us, that Christ is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think; and here the Prophet tells us, that he is willing to deal so. The
Jews would have had a Temple glorious, but they did not wish it more glorious
than that of Solomon. Christ will have the glory of the later house greater
than that of the former. Abraham's wish was, Oh that Ismael might live in thy
sight: God heard him, and promised to multiply Ismael exceedingly; but he added
a promise of an Isaac too, Genesis 17.
in whom all the nations of the earth should be blessed, and whose offspring
should multiply as the sand of the sea, and the stars in the firmament, which
are innumerable. Solomon begged only wisdom, 1 King. 3.11.
God gave him that in the highest degree, but over and above, and that in no
low degree, he heaped upon him honor and wealth. How many came to Christ for
the help of their bodies, and beyond their desire went away cured in their
souls? If we in our prayers make the like trial of Christ, we shall find
no worse success.

I will conclude all with two good remembrances taught us by King David.

The first is grounded upon the consideration of Christ's power. When we
cloathe the naked, feed the hungry, do any good deed, give any thing to any
good use, we must with that religious King, confess, 2 Chro. 29.
Omnia exmanu tua accepta offerimus tibi, We have nothing which we have not
received; and we could not have offered it to him, except he had first bestowed
it on us: for the silver is his, and the gold is his.

The second remembrance is grounded upon Christ's will, and in sense hereof we
may learn of King David thankful devotion. When Nathan brought him a message
of more good than ever he expected, he went unto the Tabernacle, and first
villifieth himself, Who am I, 2 Samuel 7.
O Lord God, and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? then he
magnifieth Gods mercy, This was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord God,
but thou have spoken also of thy servants house for a great while to come: then
he does, as we must all do, turn Gods promise into a prayer, And now O Lord
God, the word that thou have spoken concerning thy servant, and concerning his
house, establish it for ever, and do as thou have said. God did it for David,
he will do it for us; and whereas they that are temples of grace have a farther
hope to be temples of glory, if we believe his power, and desire the
accomplishment of his will, we shall in due time experience a comparison which
is beyond all comparison, we shall be clothed with a later house in heaven,
the glory whereof shall infinitely exceed the glory of the former house of
God, which we are vouchsafed to be while we live here on earth.

WHich God grant us for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with the holy Ghost be
rendered all honor and glory. Amen. THE FIFTH SERMON.
And in this place will I give peace.
THe exceeding grace that Christ would vouchsafe to Zorebabels Temple, I
reduced to his bounty in giving, and the security of his gift. Of the bounty
I have spoken; it follows that I now come to the security, that is expressed in
those words that now I have read unto you.

Wherein we will see first severally by what name the security is called, it
is peace: secondly, where is the resting place thereof, in this place: then
jointly how the place comes to be possessed of that peace. wherein we shall
consider that this work is a free-gift, whereof the only giver is our Savior
Christ, I will give (says he) peace in this place. These be the particulars,
whereof (God willing) I shall now speak briefly, and in their order. First
then of the peace.

Peace is nothing else but a free enjoying of whatsoever good we have: But the
good which we have may be either ordinate or inordinate, full or scant; and so
the enjoying thereof may bring unto us a peace true or false, perfect or
imperfect. If the good be ordinate, the peace is true, and if full, then it is
perfect; but the peace is false, if the good be inordinate, and the peace
cannot be perfect, if the good be scant.

I will speak somewhat of the false and imperfect peace, that thereby you may
the better conceive the true and perfect.

We must know that unto flesh and blood many things do relish as good, which
indeed are nothing so: for the true character of good is a conformity to Gods
will, the warrant whereof is his word; from which all sinful lusts do swerve,
and yet in them do carnal minds place their good, and the enjoying of them
is the worlds peace. For what is carnal security, but a plunging of a man's
self into all kind of wickedness, without remorse of conscience, or fear of
judgment? Amos, cap. 6. does describe such persons as stretched themselves upon
iuorie beds, drank wine in bowls, eat calves from the stall, cheared up
their spirits with music: This was their good, a sensual good, yea and a
senseless too; for they took not to heart the affliction of Joseph, but
approaching to the seat of iniquity, put far from them the evil day: This
is a false peace, grounded upon an inordinate good. Our Savior Christ makes
the like description of the old world, Matthew. 24. they were eating, drinking,
marrying, and giving in marriage, when the flood came, and took away those
ungodly ones. He speaks not of ordinary marriage, Genesis 6.
which is Gods institution, but alludes to the story of the sons of God,
marrying with the daughters of men: And as their marriage was irregular, so was
their eating and drinking too; for they were feasts congratulating their
irregular wedlock; much like the feasting of the children of Israel, when they
worshipped the golden calfe, Exodus 32. The Wise man, speaking of Idolaters,
passes this censure upon them, cap. 14. living in the great war of
ignorance, those so great plagues they called peace. But this is not Gods, it
is the devils peace, qui (...) dum vult cudere cudit (...), he makes men like
bedlems, who gashing themselves with knives, laugh in the beholders face, risu
sardonio, they laugh, and dye. By this security does the devil lull men
asleep in their sins, that they may the better be overtaken with an
unexpected ruin: for when they ^ry peace, peace, then (as the Apostle
foretold, 1 These. 5.) comes sadden destruction: In the midst of their
pleasure they go in a moment down into hell. Job.
I would we had not too many spectacles of this peace: that of the Poet may be
truly verified of us, I am patimur longae pacis mala, saeuior armis
Luxuria incubuit;
the peace which God has granted us from foreign enemies, what has it
wrought but this sinful peace? peace in sin? never did this land by
profaneness, by injustice, by riot, more offend God, and never was it more
senseless thereof: And the Church may well complain in the words of the
Prophet, Esaias 38. in pace mea amaritudo amarissima, this calm of ours is a
very storm, a storm of sin that will bring a storm of woe. The Prophet
Jeremy, cap. 48. has an excellent resemblance of a vessel of wine, which
while it is settled upon the lees has a good taste and smell; but stir the
lees, you mar the wine, it will then become muddy and unsavory. The wicked
think they have no lees, nothing that can interrupt or alter their state; but
when God comes to pour them from vessel to vessel, they will find the
contrary: they will find that Christ's saying in the Gospel is true, Matthew.
13. Voluptuousness and covetousness are nothing but briars and thorns; and
they will justify that saying of the Preacher, Eccles. 1. All is vanity and
vexation of spirit. Gods heavy hand has been long off from us, but it uses
to come upon irrepentant persons with redoubled strokes. Esaias 57.21.
Seeing then non est pax improbo, it is no peace which the wicked have in their
prosperity, and that which they have, they cannot long enjoy; I will conclude
with the admonition of Moses, Deuteronomy. 29. Take heed lest there be amongst you a
root that bears gall and wormwood, and it come to pass that when any man
hears the words of the curse denounced against the breakers of the Law, he
bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the
imaginations of my heart; the Lord will not spare that man etc. You see then
that an inordinate good brings no true peace.

And it is as true that a perfect peace cannot spring from a scant good. By a
scant good I mean that good which belongs only unto a civil moral life.
Many keep themselves within the bounds of natural reason, they exceed not in
meats and drinks, neither in thriuing nor aspiring are they scandalous or
injurious in their carriage toward men: In so doing they do well, but they
do not well enough; they have a peace, but it is only humane, and not divine:
it might suffice, were they only men; but being called to be Christian men
it should not content them; Religion must carry them farther than they can
reach by reason. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. were Worthies of a higher pitch,
than Socrates, Aris^ides, Plato, Aug.
etc. could be. Pecistinos Domine propter^te, and irrequietum est cor nostrum
donee quiescat in te, The full rest of our souls cannot be attained by Reason,
only Religion must bring us to it. And yet when we look abroad in the world,
how many shall we find that think they have done enough if they go so far
as they are led by Reason, but care little for Religion, which is the life of
a Christian? These forget the double communion which they must have, the one in
things of this life, the other in things of the life to come; the first works
peace on earth, a civil peace; but it is the later that works the heavenly
peace, which we should principally affect: the good which will not reach so
far is a scant good, therefore the peace that attends it must needs be
imperfect peace.

Seeing then neither the inordinate nor the scant good can work that peace
which our Prophet speaks of, we must seek out a good which is ordinate and
full, the enjoying whereof is the peace here meant. Now such a good both
ordinate and full is only God, and the participation of him is the peace noted
in my Text. But this exposition is yet too short, and too dark; though I need
speak no more of the good, for that is the glory, which before I opened, and
the desire of all Nations; yet of the enjoying thereof, which is the peace, I
must speak more.

Observe then, that as God is but one, so did he make all at one; and at one
they were by communion with him that is but one. Separate them from God, and by
and by they fall at odds, they fall one from another, yea, and one upon
another, until they are consumed. So that there is no conjunction lasting, no
comfortable union, which is not consolldated and souldered with, and in God.
Apply this in special to men; Gods image in us is the ground of our union with
him: for where there is no similitude, there can be no union; therefore the
loss of Gods image was the cause of our rent from him: and (as the Prophet
speaks) finne separateth between God and us. And this separation interrupted
the peace wherein we were created, by a four fold War. First it arms Gods
justice against us, who provoke him by sin; he whets his sword, he bends his
bow, prepares the instruments of death against such rebels, he has his full
vials of wrath ready to be poured out against the ungodly. Upon this follows
a second war, a war in our bosoms: for, seiudice, nemo nocens absoluitur,
a man's conscience is a thousand witnesses against him, yea and judges also; it
vexes him with accusation, with condemnation, yea, and execution also: caeco
verbere pulsat, it is a hell that goes before hell, a neuer-dying worm.
Besides this we have another civil war; the law of our members rebels
against the law of our minds, and carries us captives unto sin: We are full
of fleshly lusts that fight against our soul, 1 Pet. 2.11.
yea that are such weapons of unrighteousness, as fight against God, against
our Neighbors: Which is a fourth war springing from this third. So St.
James, cap. 4. teaches, from whence come wars and fightings amongst you?
come they not hence? even of your lusts that war in your members? Men that
have unruly affections within them, will suffer none to be at quiet that come
near them: the covetous will dispoyle other men of their goods, the malicious
will bereave them of their lives, the ambitious will supplant them, the crafty
defraud them, there is not an evil root within us, from whence our Neighbor
shall not gather some cuill fruit.

This fourfold war sprang out of our first separation from God; and our
true and full peace must put an end unto this fourfold war. First it must
take away the guilt of our sin, and propitiate God; it must make an
atonement for us, and free us from the curse: for if thou O Lord, Psalm. 130.3.
mark what is done amiss, O Lord who is able to abide it? if he enter into
judgment no flesh can be righteous in his sight: Psalm. 143.2.
But the first degree of our peace is that which turns our Judge into our
Father, and makes the eyes wherewith he beholds us no less gracious than
pure. The second degree of peace is that which kills the worm, and quieteth
our conscience, making it of an accuser to become an excuser, of a condemner an
absoluer, and of a tormenter a comforter; being no longer privy to our selves
of the guilt of sin, we feel not the horrors of hell in our souls. A
blessing to be highly esteemed, because fearful are the examples of those,
who, having felt the sharpness of such horrors, have been so disconsolate
notwithstanding all worldly comfort, that they have been driven to seek a
release of their pain by butchering themselves. The third degree of peace is
the purging of the corruption of our nature, that the conflict between the
worser and the better part may cease: So that though sin remain, yet it
reigns no longer in us, all our powers and parts are brought in subjection
unto Christ; and we yield up our members as weapons of righteousness unto
holiness. Romans 6.19.
Whereupon follows the fourth degree of peace, which abolisheth all
dissension between men and men; it makes them all of one mind, of one heart,
to love together as brethren: and as to have a fellow-feeling one of another
state, so likewise a loving disposition to advance each the others good;
neither covetousness, nor malice, nor any other wicked affection shall
disturb the common good; as much as lies in us, we will have peace with all
men. These be the four degrees of peace, which must concur to make up
Shalom, which is peace in the Hebrew tongue: but such peace as is entire and
perfect; and we understand it too shallowly, if we do not comprehend these
four degrees in it.

Having found out what the peace is, we must in the next place see where it
shall rest; the place is Zorobabels Temple. But that place must be considered
not in its meandness as it was built by the Jews, but as it was furnished
with that glory whereof heretofore you have heard; that house so adorned was
to be the place of peace. Salomons Temple was a place of peace, but his peace
was but a type, it was a worldly peace: Zorobabels Temple is also a place of
peace, but his peace is the truth that answered the former type, the peace
thereof is heavenly: that Temple which had but the type of the glory, had no
more but the type of the peace, and the truth of the peace rested there, where
the truth of the glory was. So that there is an emphasis in the words this
place: the holy Ghost gives thereby the Jews to understand that it was not
the former, but the later Temple whereunto God intended the peace which he
promised to David: 2 Samuel 7. 2 Chro. 22. Isay 25. and 26.
and all the promises of peace in the Prophets were to be referred thither;
this Jerusalem was to answer unto her name, and to be indeed the vision of
peace.

But I told you heretofore that Zorobabels Temple was to be understood not only
literally, but mystically; and so it signifies not only that material house,
but also the Christian Church; peace is annexed unto this peace: Extra Ecclesiam
non est salus, No salvation without the Church, and therefore no peace: he
shall never have God for his Father, that has not the Church for his Mother.
In our Creed we place the holy Catholic Church and Communion of Saints,
before the remission of sins and life everlasting. As the soul does not
quicken other parts than those that are united to the body, no more does the
spirit of God give his blessing of peace to any that are distracted from the
body of the Church. This must be observed against all Schismatics, that do
excommunicate them selves, and disorderly persons that are justly
excommunicated by the censure of the Church: all these, while they continue in
that state, though they do not lose ius ad pacem, yet they do lose ius in
pace, though they do not lose their interest in, yet they suspend the benefit
of that peace; and their state is uncomfortable, though it be not
irrecouerable. And they which follow negligently the assemblies of the Church,
do not a little defraud themselves of this peace: for they must seek it
chiefly by prayer in Gods house, and there does God dispense it by the mouth of
his Ministers. I will give you only two proofs; the one our of the Old
Testament: when the sacrifices were ended, which were typical prayers, Number
6.25.
Aaron is willed to dismiss the people with these words, The Lord bless thee,
and keep thee, the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee, the Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon thee, and give thee
peace. A second proof we have in the New Testament, where the Church does
solemnly use those words of the Apostle, when, after the Liturgy, it
dismisseth the people, The peace of God which passes all under standing keep
your hearts and minds etc. And what better inuitation can we have to repair
often to the Church than this blessing of peace^ fourfold peace, which is
there daily offered unto us, and may be received, if we come, and come
prepared for it. I say prepared: Before you heard that the peace comes to the
house, but as it is furnished with the glory; where there is none of the
glory, there can be none of the peace: therefore we must prepare these
Temples of our bodies and souls, by entertainment of the glory, that they may
be made capable of the peace. The Apostle speaks plainly, Romans 5. We must
be justified by faith, before we can have peace with God. Esaias 32.
If judgment dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness remain in the
fruitful field, the work of righteousness shall be peace, 1 Cor. 2.
and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. God does
anoint us, before he does establish us. St. Austin has a witty conceit upon
the words of the 85. Psalm, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other,
Duae sunt amicae Iustitia and Pax, etc. Righteousness and Peace are two fast
friends; happily thou would gladly enjoy the one, but thou will not be
persuaded to perform the other: for there is no man that would not willingly
have peace, but all are not willing to work righteteousnesse; yet be thou
assured that if thou do not love peace's friend which is righteousness,
peace will never love thee; for righteousness and peace do kiss each the
other. 2 King. 9.
You know what Iehu answered the King of Israel, when he asked him, Is it peace
Iehu? what peace can there be, so long as the whoredoms and witchcrafts of
thy mother are so many? So may we reply to every soul, unquiet soul, that
enquireth after peace, Look for none where there is sin: Well may there be
the enemy assaulting, and daily sounding alarums; but this securing peace,
which is Gods garrison, cannot be there. So long as the Jews served God,
their enemies could not invade their borders; Exodus 34.
but then the Temple was exposed to the enemy, when the Prophets could not
reclaim them from sin. It is a good conscience that is a continual feast.

You have heard severally of the Peace and the Place, you must now hear
jointly of their knitting together, who knits them, and How.

He that knitteth them is God in Christ; God is the God of peace: so the
Apostle calls him, Phil. 4.19. and the Prophet tells us, that he creates light
as well as darkness: and Elihu is so bold as to say, Job 34.
that if God give peace none can hinder it. But as God gives it, so he gives
it in Christ; for it is his work to make peace: the Prophet Esaias, cap. 9.
verse. 6. calls him the Prince of peace; his true members are Sons of peace;
his Apostles, Messengers of peace; and his doctrine is the Gospel of peace:
all the four specified degrees of peace were wrought by him. First, he took
away the guilt of our sin. Esaias 53. The chastisement of our peace was laid
upon him: For he that knew no sin was made sin for us, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. Secondly, he has killed the
worm: for, being justified by faith in him, our heart condemns us not, and we
have confidence toward God; so that we can come with boldness unto the throne
of grace. Thirdly, the Law of the spirit of life that is in Jesus Christ does
free us from the Law of sin and death, Romans 8. It mortifieth, it subdueth the
old man, and makes us walk, not according to the flesh, but according to the
spirit. Finally, he puts an end to that discord that is between man and
man. The Prophets foretold that when he came, the Nations should beat their
swords into plough-shares, Esaias 21
and their spears into pruning hooks; Nation shall not lift up sword against
Nation, neither shall they learn war any more: cap. 11.
the same Prophet by an allegory does elsewhere teach, that where Christ
comes, and is entertained, he does ciuilize the most barbarous Nations; The
Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard lie down with the Kid, the
sucking child shall play on the hole of the aspe, and the weaned child shall
put his hand on the cockatrice den, they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my
holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as
the waters cover the sea. Worthily therefore does the Apostle call Christ our
peace, whose kingdom is righteousness, Ephesians. 2.14. Romans 14.17.
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

Moreover observe, that to whom we owe our glory, to him we owe our peace:
the blessings of God do much affect us, as being good, but except we have
security in the possession of them, we lose most of our content: for it is a
great accession to misery, once to have been happy; and, plus refert vnde,
quam quo cadas, he that takes a downe-fall from an high place is more sensible
of that which he has lost, than of that which he suffers. Therefore the
addition of peace unto glory, does import no small comfort: which Esaias also
foretold, cap. 4. Upon all the glory shall be a defense. The Apostle speaks
significantly, Phil. 4.7. The peace of God (...), shall be as a Court of guard
to keep our hearts and minds in the state of grace, whereunto we are brought
by Christ. They that are rich, and are to convey their goods by sea or land
haunted with thieves and pyrants, do think themselves to be so much more or
less bound to those that will secure their passage, as their goods are more or
less precious. Goods of greater price than is the glory of the house before
specified, there cannot be; how great then is our debt unto Christ, who safe
conducts us with our glory through the wilderness of this world, maugre the
might and malice of the Serpent and the Lion, of all our deadly foes?

You have heard who settleth the peace in the place; you must now hear how.
He gives it. And it is truly termed a gift: for whereas there are two kinds
of peace; one made between parties, whereof each is able to make good his
quarrel against the other; yet they are contented, to avoid trouble, to agree
upon reasonable conditions: the other kind of peace is that which a conqueror,
out of his goodness, vouchsafes to persons subdued, which are at his mercy,
and whom by the law of arms he might make slaves. Our peace is of this later
sort; we all deserved to be captives to the devil: for we were all become
children of wrath by Adams sin, Ephesians. 2.3. When we lay thus weltring in our
blood, no other eye pitying us, then God said unto man, Thou shall live, Ezech.
16. He gave him this peace, therefore is peace a free gift. Neither a free
gift only, but a stable also: they are not induciae, but pax; not a cessation
from arms for a time, that admits a return to war again, but a
reconciliation for ever, a covenant of salt: Gods mercy shall not depart, and
this covenant shall not be removed, Esaias 54.10. Ezech. 37. Prou. 1. v. vlt.

You have heard what the peace is, the place where it rests, by whom, and how
they are joined together; what remains, but that every man enquire whether he
have this peace or not? in this inquiry we must proceed ascendendo, not
descendendo, the lower must assure us of the upper degree. The abolishing of
the guilt of our sin is the darkest branch of our peace; which we know only
by faith: But for the trial of this point of faith, we must have recourse to
our conscience, and inquire what peace we find there. For the peace of our
conscience is the looking glass of that peace which we have with God; if we
find none there, we have none with God; and we may be sure we have it with
God, if we find it truly there. Truly I say: for a man may be deceived in the
trial of his conscience; many have quiet consciences, but it is because they
are seared. Wherefore we must look one step lower, and judge of the second
degree of our peace, by that which we find in the third; we must see it in our
mortification, and subjection of the flesh to the spirit: for justification,
which does quiet the conscience, is inseparable from sanctification, which does
reform our nature. Finally, to remove all doubt concerning sanctification, we
must look to the effects thereof: for, a good tree brings forth good fruit,
and our conversation will testify our sanctification; if our deeds be seasoned
with charity, the spirit of God does rest in our souls. This inquiry is most
behoof full in these days, wherein more talk of peace, than do partake
thereof: partake (I say) of that true and full peace, which here is meant by
Haggai.

Yet lest men stumble by over great curiosity, and dis-hearten themselves (for
the devil is apt to make men as well despair that they have not peace, when
they have it, as to presume that they have it when they have it not) we must
distinguish inter pacem viatoris and comprehensoris, the peace of the Church
militant, and that of the Church triumphant. Touching the Church militant, it
has outward crosses and inward conflicts. We do not always apprehend the
light of Gods countenance, it is often ouercast, and he is despleased with us:
but it is as a father with his child; of whom the Poet, Sit licet in natos
facies austera parentum,
Aequa tamen semper men's est, and amica voluntas.
Therefore the cloud will dissolve, and the light will cheer us again. The
worm is not so dead, but if we sin it will give us a remembrance, a happy
remembrance: for it awakeneth us to repent and believe; which so soon as we
do, the smart is at an end. The law of our members will often times rebel
against the law of our minds, and, carrying us captive unto sin, will make us
cry out with St. Paul, Romans 7. O wretch that I am, who shall deliver me front
this body of death? but the conclusion is comfortable, Thanks be to God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Finally, very often when we speak unto men of peace,
they will prepare themselves to war; for except we will riot and communicate
with them in their sin, they will hate us: so that we must redeem our inward
peace with an outward war. In this case let it be our comfort, that much
happier is the war that keeps us close to God, than that peace which will
separate us from him. Psalm. 23.
Though I walk in the midst of the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I
fear no evil; if thou O Lord art with me, thy rod and thy staff shall
comfort me, etc. In all assaults of our peace we shall at last be conquerors.
And this is enough ad pacem viatoris, to the peace of the Church militant, that
we shall never so be dejected, but we shall have strength enough to rouse our
selves with King David, and say as Psalm 42. Why art thou cast down O my
soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God, for I shall yet
praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my God: and be as resolute
as St. Paul, Romans 8. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is
God that justifies, etc. who shall condemn? it is Christ that is dead, etc.
with the temptation God will make a way for us to escape, that we may be able
to bear it, 1 Cor. 5. We may expect no more than this in the Church militant,
because as Christ came to preach peace, so he came also to send a sword; and
if the work of the house prosper in the hand of Zorobabel and Joshua, Tobia and
Sanballet will impugn it: no sooner does Christ rest gloriously in his Church,
but there will be many that will profess enmity against it.

But the time comes when all enmity shall cease, all enemies shall be put
down, we shall be fitted for, and admitted unto the sight of God, when our
glory shall be consummated, and withal our peace be made perfect, so perfect
as that it shall be everlasting.

What shall we say then to these things? Liuie.
When the Romans by conquest might have given law to the Grecians at Corinth
in the solemn time of the Istmian games, their General by an Herald
unexpectedly proclaimed freedom to all the Cities of Greece; the proclamation
did at first so amaze the Grecians that they did not believe it to be true,
but when it was proclaimed the second time, they gave such a shout, that the
very Birds flying in the air were astonished therewith, and fell dead to the
ground: Ps. 126.
Or if you will have a better story, take that of the Jews, who when at first
they heard of Cyrus proclamation, and that the Lord thereby had turned the
captivity of Sion, they confess that at first hearing, they were like men
that dreamt; but afterward their mouth was filled with laughter, and their
tongue with singing. Now the peace that the Grecians and the Jews had, was but
a temporal, a corporal peace; how much more reason is there that our
affections should be strained to the highest pitch of joy and thanks, when
we hear the proclamation of our peace, which is so true, so perfect peace?
the peace not of our bodies, but of our souls; a peace not of our earthly, but
of our heavenly state; a peace that shall so be begun here, that it shall
endure for ever. Wherefore let us acquaint our selves with God, Job 22.
that he may give us peace; Christ's peace, Job 5.
which makes God at peace with us, reconciles us to our selves, and makes us
at concord with all the world: So may we lay our selves down in peace, and
take our rest, and God, which only can, will make us dwell in safety, Psalm 4.

NOw the Lord of peace himself give you peace always, 2 These. 3.16.
by all means. Amen. THE SIXTH SERMON.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts.
THese words, thus says, or says the Lord of Hosts, have often come in my way
since I first began the unfolding of this Text, and I still past by them; you
may think I did forget, or neglect them: but it is not so, they are of greater
moment than that I should do the one or the other; I reserved them to the
last, because then I thought I might handle them best. For they are the warrant
of Gods undoubted truth; and a warrant is then seasonably opened, when that
whereunto it is annexed has been fully declared. You have heard of the blessed
presence of Christ in Zorobabels Temple, of the preparation thereunto, of the
description thereof; the description of the person that should come, of the
good that he should do; his bounty in giving, set forth, first absolutely,
then comparatively, the security of his gift, consisting in a fourfold peace.
These be many, they be great blessings; lest we should fear that they are too
good to be true, our eye must be upon the warrant, that will ascertaine us
that nothing is promised which shall not be performed.

In opening of this warrant, I shall inform you of two things, What it is, and
Why it is reiterated so often. It is the signature of a most powerful Person:
There is a double power, Internal, External; this Person is mighty in regard
of both: in regard of the Internal, for he is the Lord: in regard of the
External, for he is the Lord of Hosts. As for his signature it is such as
beseemes so great a Person, plain and peremptory, thus he says. And these
words taken jointly, are the full warrant of the preachers message, and the
peoples faith: He says enough to assure and command, if he say only, Thus
says the Lord of Hosts: and they must neither dis-beleeue, nor disobey if he
say no more. The reason why the words are reiterated so often, is the
weightinesse of the matter expressed in the reiteration. The holy Ghost hereby
would work in us a regard answerable to the matter which he has declared to
us, and cause us to ponder it, as it deserves.

Let us then in the fear of God listen to the unfolding of those particulars
which I have pointed at, whereof the first is the power of the person.

The first branch of his power is his internal power, it is noted by the name
Lord. In the original it is Jehovah, and Jehovah is that name which signifies
the first moment of Gods nature: for it notes his being, and being goes
before living: as likewise do the attributes of being go before the
attributes of living; the later do necessarily suppose the former. Mistake me
not, I mean not that Gods nature is compounded, but we cannot conceive the
oneness of all his perfections, therefore we help our selves in our
contemplations by distinguishing them as they are in the creatures, which are a
shadow of the Creator: a shadow like a body, which receives distinct beams
from the Sun; all which in the Sun are but one: for so those perfections
are but one in God, which grow manifold as they come from him to us.

But to our purpose. When Moses was desirous to know Gods name, the first that
he expressed unto him was this, I am, or I am that I am; the meaning is all one
with the title of Jehovah, which is here rendered Lord; and gives us to
understand, that all other things in comparison unto God indeed are not, though
they seem to be: for they have not the two characters which are stamped upon
true being, the one is (...), the other is (...) is a being from it self, and
so is being it self. (...) is a being, all that which has being, and so
stands in need of nothing besides it self. All creatures, as they are from
God, so are they no longer, nor no otherwise, than it pleases him; and it
pleases not him that any one creature should have all the parts, much less
the degrees of all his perfections. The King of heaven deals as kings on
earth; Kings on the earth reserve in themselves the fullness of regal power,
whereof they do impart but some branches, and those limited to their
subordinate officers: after the same manner does the Lord dispense of his
infinite power to Angels, to Men, to other Creatures. Therefore the name
Jehovah is by the Wise man truly called Gods incommunicable name: it notes
that internal power in God which is found in no other, and which gives
whatsoever power any other have. For from this inward proceeds an outward; and
he that is Lord, is also Lord of Hosts.

It is not Gods pleasure that we should pry too far into his inward power;
and, if we would, we cannot: he directs us therefore to his outward, which is
more fitting to our capacity, and may sufficiently resolve us that he is very
powerful, though he were no more powerful than as he appears in his
creatures, in regard of whom he is termed, The Lord of Hosts.

Let us leave then his inward, and come to his outward power.

In the second of Genesis, Verse. 1.
where the Creation is recapitulated, we find mention but of one Host of God;
the Text is plain, God made heaven and earth, and all the host thereof: and
yet it is usual in the Scripture to call God, the Lord of hosts, as if there
were many. Surely it is clear, that God made but one, but Apostasy, of that
one, has made many. First, Apostasy in heaven has made two hosts of
spirits; Reu. 12.
Michael and his Angels, the Dragon and his; then an Apostasy in Paradise
began the distinction of the seed of the woman, Genesis 3.
and the seed of the serpent; and of mankind, part is fallen to the Dragon,
and part is preserved and cleaves to Michael: the truth whereof appeared
presently in Abel and Cain, and although Cain by murder of Abel killed and
destroyed one of the hosts, yet God renewed it again in Seth; and the Armies
went on again in the Children of God, and the children of men. Genesis 4.
A man would have thought the stoud had swept away all the seed of the serpent,
but it revived again in cursed Cham; and the City of God and the City of
Babel will be, and be opposite until the end of the world. But touching these
Apostasies, the first of Angels, the second of men, we must hold this true
rule, Summonere se potuerunt saeliettuti coelest^, non potuerunt se eximer^
porestati diuinae, they might defraud themselves of their blessed communion
with God, but free themselves from his power they could not: God has set his
hook in their nostrils, and his bit in their mouths, so that they cannot
stir without, nor beyond his le^ue. It is plain in the story of Job, cap. 1.
and of Ahab, 1 Reg. 22.

But there is an effectiue, and a permissiue power of God; God is Lord of both
hosts, but he works in them differently: his work in Michaels host and the
seed of the woman is properly effectiue. For though sometimes, to make them
sensible of their frailty, and to make them cleave faster unto him, he leaves
them for a time unto themselves; yet ordinarily the influence of his grace does
direct and support them, unto, and in good works, and they sight his battles.
But as for the Dragons host, and host of the Serpents brood, Gods power in
them is properly permissiue: he leaves them to their own corrupt judgments
and affections, to follow and to execute them; but he does not communicate in
their corruptions, either as author, or abettor of the root, or fruit
thereof. Yet this sovereignty. God has over the most wicked, that they cannot
break out according to their own disposition, but where, and when God will;
and when they break out by his leave, they stop when he checketh, and give
over when he says it is enough. So that Gods permissiue power is always
accompanied with his effectiue, which does stint the wicked in their works,
maugre their gracelessenesse, and without their priuitie directs their
endeauours to his ends: so that even then they fulfill his will, when
transgressing his commandments they seem to be most contrary to his will. And
this is no small comfort to Michaels host, Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil: and this we do, or should mean, when we speak these
or the like words, Our Enemies cannot assail us, except thou, O Lord, permit
them; and if thou O Lord, assist us, they shall assault in vain.

Seeing all the world is compared unto Hosts, every one serves under his own
colors: Even so we, which behold the state of the world with the eyes of
flesh and blood, dim by reason of the weakness of our judgment and
wickedness of our affections, think all things are out of tune, bonis male,
malis been, that the worse men are, the better they fare, and they fare the
worse, the better they are. But we must ascend into the sanctuary of God, and
judge of occurrents by heavenly principles; if we do so, then we will confess
that no army on earth can be better marshalled than is the great army of all
creatures of heaven and earth, yea and hell also: and notwithstanding all
apparencies to the contrary, queniam bonus mundum Rector temperat, ^mnia recte
fieri ne dubites, doubt not but that all is well, and shall end well, because
God is Lord of Hosts.

Again, God is Lord of Hosts, we must make no worse conclusion than the
Centurion did in the Gospel, when Christ promised to come to his house and
cure his feruant; he desired Christ not to take so much pains; mark what
reason he gives, I my self am a man set under authority, and I have
soldiers under me, and I say unto one, Come, and he comes, and to another,
Go, and he goes; and if I a petty Captain, that have but a handful of men
under me, can so easily command them, what may thou do that art General of
heaven and earth? thou may do whatsoever thou will, for all things are thy
host; wherefore only speak the word and my servant shall be whole.

Where, by the way, and yet fitly to our purpose, we may observe that he
reputeth sickness one of Christ's soldiers: before I made the Armies consist
only of persons, I must now enlarge it also unto things; for indeed no less
things than persons are Christ's soldiers: The Sun shines and scorcheth the
Earth, whereupon follows a drought, accompanied with those noisome creatures
which are engendered in a drought; these are soldiers of Christ: And Joel
sets them forth like an Army, The rain falls and glutteth the earth, from
whence spring weeds, the offspring of rain, and undigested moystures;
whereupon follows the diseases of fruit, and corn. these are soldiers of
Christ. The pestilence wastes the city, the sword cateth up the people; these
are soldiers, they come to execute Christ's wrath as truly as the good Angels
do pitch their tents about us for to guard us, or any other good means is
bestowed upon us to do us good. Wherefore we must not consider the Creatures
only as they are in their own nature, but according to that employment also
which they have under God: for they are all soldiers of the Lord of Hosts.

There is one thing more which I may not forget: the whole world is called Gods
Host; but the Church is it in a special sort. Solomon calls it en Army with
banners, Cant. 6. Moses, speaking of the Church under the Old Testament,
calls it the entering into the Leuiticall ministry, ingress^m in militiam.
St. Paul of the New Testament bids Timothy do what himself had done, fight a
good fight, 2 Timothy 2. and cap. 4. the whole body is called a Church Militant.
When we assemble together, then David will tell us, Psalm 110. Thy people, O
Lord, will come willingly at the time ^f mastering thine army in holy beauty:
The Lords day is his muster day, all that are enrolled should then appear
before him, Ephesians. 6.
partly to fur^^^h hemselues out of his armorie, and partly to be directed how
to carly themselves in their several stations; for every man must walk as he
is called 1 Cor. 7. Which they should observe that little frequent the Church,
and take as little notice why these Church meetings were instituted: No wonder
if they be unarmed, no wonder if they offend; were we careful to appear at
the musters, we would be more resolute when we are gone thence, because we
should be compleately armed; and more vigilent against the enemy, because we
should be better instructed.

As the Church is an Army, so it is but one Army, though divided into
several bands: Though there be particular Congregations, yet there is but one
holy Catholic Church; and seeing the Host is but one, there should be no
mutiny against the General: That disloyal speech, Nolumus hunc regnare super
nos, We will not have this man reign over us, Luke 19.14.
received in the Gospel a just reward of treachery. As we must not mutiny
against the General, so must not the soldiers side between themselves: We
should not sheathe our swords one in another corporally, much less
spiritually: there should be no civil, there should be no ecclesiastical
rents between the parts of Christendom; for so Michaels Host does degenerate
into the Host of the Dragon, that of the Woman's feed into the opposite, which
is the Host of the Serpents brood. To weaken them, God is pleased that his
enemies should be as the Madianites, by his providence one of them does ruin
the other: but he would have his children always one man, and be always of
one mind; not to hazard their own lives, nor the lives of others, but in his
quarrel, and against his enemies. This religious, this honorable disposition
of a Christian that is a soldier in Gods Host, is much to be wished, though
little to be hoped for in these uncharitable and bloody days.

I have spoken enough of the power of the person, I come now unto his
signature: which I told you is plain and peremptory. It is plain; for here
are no logical demonstrations, nor rhetorical declamations, but a plain
expression of Gods mind. This is the best eloquence of Kings, or Generals,
they are not bound to yield a reason of their commands, or to use insinuations
into their peoples affections; it is enough for them to express their pleasure
in those things that are of their absolute command; and if they do more, they
do it out of their goodness, and show that they do as much desire to lead
their subjects by reason, as to require their obedience: Much more may the Lord
of heaven and earth do thus, whose wisdom is undeceivable, and his power
most absolute; though he be pleased sometimes to give us a reason of his
command, yet may we not expect it farther than he is pleased to vouchsafe it.

The signature is plain, but it is peremptory: for he that speaks so
plainly, speaks as one that has authority; we may not dispute, much less
resist such commands, because they are the commands of the Lord of Hosts. This
is to be noted both by Pastor and People: for thus says the Lord of Hosts, is
the Pastors warrant for his message; he must bring nothing to the people
without this signature: I speak of things necessary to salvation. For
otherwise, as in the Commonweal, so in the Church, there be many indifferent
things which are left unto the disposition of those that are in authority, who
are referred only unto the general rules, 1 Cor. 14.26. Let all things be done
to edification: Let them be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. But in
matters necessary to salvation, it is with the Church as it is with the
Commonweal, we must distinguish between the Lawmakers, and the
Executioners thereof. They that are the Executioners of Laws may not take upon
them to make new Laws. Judges and Justices in their assizes and sessions,
inform the people what is the Law already established, and by virtue of their
Commissions they doom every man's cause according to such Law: Even so God the
King of kings has decreed the Laws of Christian Faith, and Life, and these
Laws has he committed to the Pastors of the Church; he has committed unto
them the promulgation and application of his laws, and more he has not
committed. The Church of Rome agrees with us in the general rule, that thus
says the Lord of Hosts must be the warrant of the Pastors proceeding: the
Council of Trent lays it for a ground in the entrance to their decrees. But
when we come to enquire where the Lord says so, here we differ: we differ
about the Register of Gods Word; we acknowledge none but Verbum scriptum, the
written Word, they add unto it Verbum non scriptum, unwritten Traditions: but
when we press them with where is that to be found? here they jar between
themselves. To omit smaller differences, this is a maine one, that they cannot
tell in whom the infallibility of relating these traditions is placed, as
likewise of interpreting the written Word. The Council of Constance, and Basil
placed it in the general Council, to whom they gave power even over the Pope
to overrule him, and give Laws unto him: and to this does the French Church
stick, though otherwise it hold the Romish faith. But the Italian faction, and
specially Jesuits, place it in the Pope, and give him authority over the
Council, to control it, to give Laws unto it, and without it to make Laws
that shall bind the whole Catholic Church; and besides the Pope, they hold
that there is infallibility in none, no not in a general Council. Some place
it jointly in both, in a general Council that has its approbation from the
Pope, wherein he presides by himself, or his delegates, and whose Canons he
confirms. But while the Advocates of the Pope strongly overthrow the reasons
brought for the Councels infallibility, and the Advocates of the Councels
overthrow the reasons brought for the infallibility of the Pope; we may fairly
collect from both, that the infallibility is in neither; and if in neither,
then not in both. For as a cipher added to a cipher makes but a cipher, it
makes no significant figure: so if the Pope may err as the one side holds,
and the Council as the other side holds, the fallibilitie of either added to
the fallibilitie of the other, cannot amount to the sum of an infallibility.
But we hold that which they confess, that the Word written in the Canonical
books is undoubtedly signed with Thus says the Lord of Hosts; as for the
Apocryphal Scriptures, not only the Fathers, but their own men have branded
them for Bastards, before ever we challenged them; therefore do not we
recommend them to the people further than they agree with the Books
Canonical. Neither do we burden the peoples consciences with their Unwritten
Word, whereupon themselves are not yet resolved, either Where or What it is.
Wherefore, Thus says the Lord, must limit the Pastors message, and the Peoples
faith must not desire any thing beyond it; for it is a sure foundation, The
best of men speak but in veritate mentis, without simulation or dissimulation,
without equivocation or mental reservation: but God speaks in certitudine
veritatis, no mist of error can ouercast his wisdom, or his holiness; his
Word is tried to the uttermost, Psalm 12, Heb. 12.
as silver tried seven times in the fire: there is stablenesse in his promise,
immutablenesse in his counsel. What should change him? within him nothing
can; for he is the Lord: neither can he be changed by any thing that is without
him, for he is the Lord of Hosts; therefore he speaks thus in the Prophet,
Mal. 1.
Ego Deus, and non mutor: immutability is reciprocal with Gods nature; James 1
With God there is no variableness or shadow of change: God is not as man that
he should lie, neither as the son of man that he should repent; Has he said
it, Numb. 23.
and shall he not do it? Yea, he spoke the word, and it was done; he
commanded and it stood fast: The Lord breaks the counsel of the Heathen, and
brings to naught the devices of the people; Psalm 33.
but the counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever, and the thoughts of his
heart throughout all ages. What need we then fear Iulians scoff, who derided
the Christians, for that they had nothing to say for their faith, but, Thus
says the Lord. Orat. 3.
Nazianzene replieth well unto him, you that allow Ipse dixit in the scholars
of Pythagoras, (and though Suidas think that God was meant by Ipse, yet Cicero
says, Ipse erat Pythagoras) may not except against (...), I believe, in the
followers of Christ. It is more lawful to captiuate our judgment unto the
authority of God, than of man; and if they might do it in the principles of
Philosophy, which are examinable by reason, much more may we do it in the
Articles of Faith, unto the secrets whereof no approach can be made by the wit
of man. Wherefore, Thus says the Lord may well pass for an indemonstrable
principle of our Faith, and an irrefragable rule of life: If there were no more
in the signature, but Thus says the Lord, this were enough to secure the Faith
of a Christian man.

But, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, is enough to stop the mouth of an
Atheist: let Julian himself teach them: he derided Thus says the Lord, but
he had a woeful experience of the Lord of Hosts: for being mortally wounded by
Christ's hand, as himself confessed, he breathed forth his impure soul with
those words, Vicisti Galilaec; O Galilaean thou have ouermastered me.
Secondly, if Thus says the Lord of Hosts be the signature, we are hence to
learn, that the function of the Ministry is not only for promulgation, to
instruct you in Gods will, and in so doing, to open unto you the riches of our
knowledge; but it is for application also: we thereby bind, or loose the
souls of men, and remit, or retain their sins, which the world little
thinks upon. For whereas there are two things considerable in a Minister, his
Sufficiency, and his Authority, the people listen much to his Sufficiency, but
take little heed to his Authority; and therefore come they to Church rather to
judge, than to be judged: forgetting that many may be as skillful, but none
can be as powerful in this kind, as is a Minister. A Judge or Justice of
Peace may have less Law in him than a private man, but he has much more
power; and they that appear before him, regard his acts according to his
power: so should it be in the Church. But men fear the Magistrates that are
under earthly Kings, because the pains which they inflict are corporeal, our
hands, our feet feel their manicles and their fetters. And did our souls as
truly feel, as indeed they should, the Pastors binding and loosing of them,
we would make more account of these officers of God than we do. And it were
good we did so; for they so bind as that they can loose again: but if we
neglect them, when our Lord and Master comes, he will command all contemners
so to be bound hand and foot, that they shall never be loosed again.
Wherefore let the power of the Keys work more upon your souls and
consciences, than usually it does; I speak in regard of your religious
submission to them. If any be otherwise minded, will they, nil they, they shall
one day find, that they have no exemption from them: Thus says the Lord, is
our warrant; regard not our persons, regard that Lord whose Ambassadors we
are, receive the words we speak, so long as we speak his Words, not as the
words of men, but as the Word of God.

Finally, couple Thus says, with the Lord of Hosts; The Lord of Hosts notes
Gods Power, Thus he says, notes his Will: Our souls shall find little rest
on Gods Power, if it be not sure of his Will; for God can do many things which
he will not do, though he cannot will any thing which he cannot do. Luke 3.8.
God could raise up Children unto Abraham of stones, but he would not; but the
many miracles which he has wrought show that he can do what he will. The
coupling then of these words, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, imports Gods
willing power, and powerful will, which amount unto an authority fit to build
our Faith upon, and to give law unto our Conversation.

I have sufficiently showed you, What the warrant is, we must now in few words
see Why it is repeated so often. For (I dare say) you shall not find any
passage in the Scripture, where Thus says the Lord is so often read in so few
lines: The reason is, the weightinesse of the matter whereunto it is annexed.

Mortal Princes use not to sign Bills, the contents whereof are triuiall
matters; many things are done by virtue of their Authority, whereunto their
signature is not used: Even so ordinary matters pass in the Word of God,
without nay special urging of his Authority; when that is prefixed, the point
is of great regard, and if it be often ingeminated, it gives us to understand,
that we must take special notice of every clause of it. What must we gather
here then but the weightinesse of every branch of this Text? And indeed, if
you have not forgotten what has been observed on every part thereof, you will
easily confess, that there is not one of them which is not so weighty, as to
deserve Thus says the Lord of Hosts. Was not the shaking of Heaven and Earth,
the shaking of all Nations a weighty point; and therefore deserved it not to be
signed with, Thus says the Lord of Hosts? If the shaking did deserve this
signature, much more did the Coming of the desire of all Nations, especially
seeing he came to fill the Temple with glory; and as it deserved, so it was
signed with, Thus says the Lord of Hosts. If the giving of Glory were a matter
of great moment, what shall we say of the degree of Glory? Surely it required
a great ability, so great as we would hardly have believed, had we not bin
heartened by Thus says the Lord of Hosts; and it must proceed from so great
bounty, as may be testified by the same, Thus says the Lord of Hosts. Finally,
the peace wherein we possess whatsoever good is contained in Christ's presence,
does so pass man's understanding, that to establish his heart in the belief
thereof, he needs this signature, Thus says the Lord of Hosts.

At length to conclude. You have heard in the former Sermons What, in this Whom
you must believe; you must not separate Whom from What, that which we must
believe does no doubt most pleasantly affect us, because it is our good; but he
whom we must believe, does most firmly secure us, because he is the Author of
that good. As then, when we gather fruit from a tree, we do not fix our eyes
only upon the boughs from whence we immediately gather it, but also think
upon the root which feeds those boughs, and makes them to be fruitful: so
in our religious meditations, we must couple the Author with the Matter of
blessings, that God may be glorified as well as our souls are benefited. If we
say with Saint Paul, I know whom I have believed, then we shall be secure that
he will safekeepe whatsoever any of us commits unto him; he will keep our
souls, keep our bodies, and all that which himself has bestowed upon them,
Grace and Peace. Christ will keep them until his day, his second day, the day
wherein the great and the little world shall receive their last shaking. Then
shall the desire of all Nations, which at first came in Humility, return
again in Glory; he shall return to fill his House, his Church, with glory
conformable to his own Glory. Then he will open unto us all his treasures of
silver and gold, and therewith adorn his Spouse, which being Triumphant, shall
infinitely exceed her self as she was Militant. Then shall our Peace come to
the full, and none shall be able to take our blessedness from us, because none
shall be able to separate between us and Christ. They shall not, if we build
our Faith upon Gods revealed Will, upon his Almighty Power, upon my Text, Thus
says the Lord of Hosts.

Now let us that are a handful of his Host while we are militant, so give
glory unto the Lord of Hosts, that we may hereafter be triumphant; and having
palms in our hands, and crowns on our heads, with harpes and tongues we may
sound and sing jointly and cheerfully Halleluiah, Praise ye the Lord; and with
the whole Host of the Kingdom of Heaven, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of
Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory. Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED Upon the ANNVNTIATION day.
LVKE 2.28. Hail thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee: Blessed
art thou among women.


THis is a part of the Gospel appointed for this day, and this day goes
commonly for the Annuntiation day; whether the day have his right place in the
Calender, I leave to be disputed by Chronologers; what is meant by the
Annuntiation is an argument fitter for Divines, certainly for the Pulpit; the
third part of this Chapter treats thereof, and it is conceived in form of a
Dialogue. In the Dialogue there are two speakers, the Angel Gabriel, the
Virgin Mary; and each of them makes two speeches, the Angel to the Virgin,
and the Virgin to the Angel. The Angel in his first congratulates the Virgin,
whom he informs from God, that she shall be the mother of Jesus Christ.
Good news, but strange; strange that a Virgin should be a mother, this Virgin
the mother of that Child. The Virgin thought so, nay she said so; whereupon
the Angel adds his second speech, importing, that though the thing be
wonderful, yet the means are powerful: these must be thought upon as well as
that; and she must resolve that nothing shall hinder it, because it is the Holy
Spirit that will do it. So spoke the Angel.

The Virgin replies unto him, to his first speech, showing her willingness to
understand the message which he brought; that is gathered out of her question,
Quom^do, etc. to his second, showing her readiness to obey so soon as she
understood it; that appears in her submission, Ecce, etc.

These four speeches contain the whole doctrine of the Annuntiation, of which
I haud pitched only upon the first branch. It is enough for this time, enough
if I only unfold the true meaning of the words; but if I should moreover
encounter the false glosses made thereon, then certainly you would say it were
more than enough: For there are no words in the Scripture so few in number (I
always except the Sacramental words, Hoe est corpus meum) whereupon
idolatrous superstition has so much fastened, as it has upon these. But the
full ripping up thereof is a work for the Schools, here I had rather edify
with truth, than refute falsehood; wherefore well may I touch at the latter,
but I will principally bend my self unto the former; not doubting but a Dagon
compounded of so many impieties, will of it self fall down, and fall asunder
at the presence of the Arc, and they which shall be but reasonably informed of
the truth, will never be perplexed with the opposite gross errors. Let us
come then to the words.

They are gratulatory, in them the Angel shows How and Why he would have
the Virgin affected; he would have her affected comfortably, he signifies so
much in his first word Hail, or be of good cheer; there is good cause why,
consider thy estate, consider it in it self, consider it in comparison, both
ways considered, it shows there is good cause why. Thy state in it self is
good; first, because thou stand in so good terms with God, Highly favored:
secondly, because thou have so good a pledge of that favor, the Lord is with
thee; if thy state be such, it is surely good, good in it self. But good
things, the more peculiar they are, the more are they precious, and thy state
is a prerogative; it is good also in comparison, for Blessed art thou among
women. This is the sum of the Angels congratulation, wherein you easily
perceive, that I must speak of two principal points, the Affection required
in the Virgin, and the Motives working that Affection; they are two, the
nature, and the measure of her state.

That these Motives may work in us no less than they did on her, that blessed
affection which I wish common to us, God grant us all, her ears, her heart in
hearing, though not the Angel Gabriel himself, yet him whom God has
appointed to be unto you as the Angel Gabriels voice. As my Text then, so do
I begin at Hail, the Affection which is required to be in the Virgin.

Hail is a Saxon salutation, it was wont to be more full as the Antiquaries
observe, and to be pronounced Was-haile, corruptly Wassaile; a salutation
answerable to the Greek (...), or the Latin Salve, that is, health be unto
you; the Syriac Paraphrase translates Shelom Leki, that is, Peace be unto you,
which was the Jews common salutation: both translations may stand with the
Angels meaning, because howsoever we vary phrases in saluting, yet is our
meaning still the same, we wish all good to them whom we salute. But yet
neither of the Translations does express the proper signification of the
Evangelists word: for his word is (...), that is, be of good cheer, the
English Cheer is plainly the Greek (...). Wherefore we must note, that of
salutations, some do express the blessing that is conferred upon us, and some
the sense and feeling thereof that must be in us: he that says Hail, wishes
health or good estate of our persons; he that says Peace be unto you, wishes
a happy success in all our affairs; but he that says (...), be of good
cheer, does wish unto us the comfort of them both, of our persons, and of our
affairs. This I note the rather, because my Text does plainly distinguish
between the blessing bestowed on the Virgin, and the feeling that she was to
have thereof, and it is her feeling that he calls for in this first word. The
feeling is Joy, an affection suitable to the blessing; for the blessing is a
Gospel, so the Fathers observe, that what goes before these words, is (...),
but (...) begins here, here begins the Gospel. And where the Gospel
begins, there must joy begin also; we learn it of St. Paul, who relates it
out of the Prophet, Romans 10. yea the word it self does speak it; the Greek
word does, the English word does, the old word Gospel, which is nothing else
but a Good spel, dark English, because old; but we make it plain by an
equivalent phrase, and significant to our purpose, when we translate it Glad
tidings.

Joy then must attend the Gospel. And if you read the Prophets, hardly shall
you find where they mention the one, Psalm 96.
and do not call upon us for the other, Rejoice O heavens, and be glad O earth;
Let the sea roar, and all the trees of the field rejoice: for he comes, for
he comes, etc. says the Psalmist, speaking of this first coming of Christ:
And Esaias, Cap. 9.
Thou have made them rejoice as in the day of harvest, and as they that divide
the spoils; for unto us a child is borne, unto us a son is given, etc.

But what need more places, seeing our Savior Christ in the fourth of Luke
gives a plain intimation, that his first coming was the true year of Iubile;
and that you know began with Iubilation.

This Iubilation or Joy is common to all the Church; so we learn of the
Angel speaking to the Shepherds, Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great
joy that shall be to all the people; for unto you is borne a Savior, etc. If
required in all, then specially in the Virgin; according to her interest in,
ought her joy to be for this Gospel: Her interest was the greatest, as will
appear in her state; therefore is this joy so expressly commended unto her.

There is another reason also why it is commended, and that is, that the truth
may be answerable to the type, Abraham, says Christ, saw my day and rejoiced,
John 8. And when did Abraham see it and rejoice? If we look into Genesis we
shall find when, even then when he received the promise that he should have
his son Isaac, then he laughed, as the Text observes, and for a memorial
that he did laugh, God commanded him to give unto his son this name Isaac,
which signifies laughter. St. Paul, Heb. 11. that pierced deeper into the
secrets of the Scripture, than every reader is able to do, does observe, that
Abraham did (...), Verse 13.
see this object a far off, and as being a far off, did with reverent joy
give entertainment thereunto; he means that he did not only apprehend Isaac
the Patriarch, who was to be born within some few months, and so was at hand,
but our Savior Christ also, figured by Isaac. who was not to come but after
many generations, and so was a far off. And if being a far off his sight
caused joy, being come so near, how much more joy must the sight of him cause?
If the Type wrought so, how must the Truth it self work? And if the Father of
the Type were so affected, ought not the Mother of the Truth to be affected
much more? Certainly, she must needs have Joy.

But what is Joy? Joy is a pleasing evidence of the love which we bear to any
thing which we acknowledge to be good; so that Joy, though it be but one thing,
yet it presupposes two other things, Knowledge and Love, as the roots from
whence it springs. The first root is Knowledge; for where there is no
Knowledge, there can be no Joy. Mark the great and the little world, though
each be (...), a goodly frame, enriched with many markable indowments, yet is
not the great world privy to the indowments it has, no not the eye thereof, I
mean the sum, of whom the Poet long since spoke truly, Per quem videt omnia
mundus,
Et videt ipse nihil.
So that the passage in the 19. Psalm, The heavens declare the glory of God,
and the firmament shows his handy work, etc. is to be understood passiuely,
not actiuely, or to speak it more plainly, they do it as a Scripture, but not
as a Lecture, they are a silent representation. But the little world is not
only passive, but active; he can contemplate whatsoever perfection is in
himself or others, it is the very nature of his understanding to become all
things, and to bear about it self, which it can study at all times in it
self, a map of all the world. Whether therefore we consider the great or the
little world, we may call each of them a book; but such a book as to the
reading whereof none is admitted under the degree of a man. And herein consists
the first excellency of the reasonable soul, this is the first act wherein it
arises higher than the unreasonable; man goes beyond a beast in the knowledge
of perfection, and this knowledge is the first root of Joy.

From hence springs a second which is Love. Knowledge is not unfitly compared
unto a seal, which is graven not for it self; but to set a print upon the
wax, and our heart is as wax, and easily receives the impression of our
knowledge. Now the print which the knowledge of perfection leaves in the
heart, is Love, according to the Greek Proverb, (...), Amor transit in rem
amatam.
known good cannot be long unaffected, because the heart is as transformable
into all good, as the understanding into all truth: the heart, I say, that has
his right temper, and is capable of his proper object, that object discerned
must needs breed love; Love, which is Virtus vnie^s, a Virtue which makes a
match between our soul and perfection: for as Knowledge is the eye, whereby
the soul sees it, so is Love the hand whereby it closes with it. Dua^
civitates distingunt duo amores. St. Austin.
So that Love is the second act of the reasonable soul, an act which
distinguishes between good and bad men, and is the second root of Joy. When
Knowledge and Love have done their part, then comes in the reasonable souls
last work, and that is Joy, which is nothing else but the evidence of love;
for where there is no love, there is no Joy; but we cannot but joy in that
which we love: for Joy is the natural fruit of love, and we cannot love any
thing but the heart will have a pleasant feeling thereof. This third act of the
reasonable soul, puts a difference between happy and unhappy men; for Joy
is the vpshot of all our endeauours, nothing can satisfy till we come to it,
and he that has it rests therein: We study, we love, both, that we may Joy,
but beyond joy we cannot go. And this I think is the reason, why (...) was so
usually received for the common salutation.

But we may not only consider the Nature, but the Power of Joy also; great
power, for it is in the pleasure of Joy, how much we shall be capable of,
whatsoever good we either know or love: the enlarging of our heart more or
less is the act of Joy, and as much as we joy, so much is our heart enlarged.
Mark then; as is our Knowledge, so is our Love: for we can love no more than
we know; and as is our Love, so is our Joy, for Joy is an effect of Love: but
as is our Joy, so is our portion of good; we can receive no more than our
vessel will contain, and the measure thereof depends from Joy.

To come now unto the Angels words, he calls upon the Virgin for this
Affection, the affection of Joy; what means he thereby? Out of that you have
heard, you may gather this, he would have her most sensible, most capable of
that divine object, which in his following words he presents unto her. And what
the Angel commended unto the Virgin, give me leave (Fathers, and Brethren) to
commend unto you, Joy. When we receive the message of grace, certainly it is
Gods pleasure that we should rejoice in his blessings. Lord, says David, lift
thou up upon us the light of thy countenance, Psalm 4. and what follows?
That shall put more joy into our hearts, than they whose corn and wine is
increased. The want of this Joy cost the Israelites dear. Deuteronomy. 28. Because,
says Moses, thou seruest not the Lord thy God with ioyfulnesse, and a
cheerful heart, for the abundance of all things, therefore thou shall serve
thine enemies in hunger, and thirst, and nakedness, and the need of all
things. Wherefore at all times, Let our garments be white, and let not oil be
wanting to our beads, Eccles. 9.8. whenever the Lord does answer the desire
of our hearts, O then be ^oyfull in the Lord, serve the Lord with gladness,
and come before his tresence with a song: for we forfeit Gods favor, if it be
not unto us the very joy of our heart. And no marvel; for to want this
affection in the midst of Gods mercies, what does it argue, but that either we
want the Understanding of men, and discern not our blessing, or else want that
Love that should be in good men, wherewith to embrace the same, or at least we
make not so much use of Gods mercy, as thereby to become happy men? for happy
men we are not without Joy, that affection that is here commended by the
Angel. And thus much of the Affection.

As for that Iowly obeyzance, wherewith the Romanists say the Angel spoke the
word, I think the mention thereof more unworthy your learned ears, than their
superstitious pens that have so childishly observed it unto us. And therefore I
pass from the Affection, to the Motives that must work the same.

In vain should the Angel call for the Affection, except he proposed the
Motives; for our affections stir not but as they are raised thereby. The
Motives are her state, considered first in it self; and that, first, in what
terms she stands with God, good terms, Highly favored.

The word is (...), the very word calls for Joy; (...) and (...) are as near
in nature as in name, Grace is the seed of Joy, we learn it in the 86. and 87.
Psalms, Light is sown for the righteous, and ioyfulnesse for them that are
true hearted. But the Rhemists interrupt us, and quarrel with our translation,
they would have it full of grace. And do we deny it? we do not; our Liturgy
refutes them, in the Gospel we read it, Hail full of grace; we confess
the Syriac agrees with it, and that the Fathers have it so, and did not they
abuse it, still might it go so: but the abuse is gross, and to show that the
advantage thereof is not in the original words, the Church not without cause
has recourse unto the fountains, and therehence does discover how weak the
hold fast is which they take upon their translation. For Full of Grace are
doubtful words; there is Grace of acceptance, and Grace of inherence, whether
is here meant? (...) shows that the Angel meant the former. Neither do we
only say so, but themselves also, yea the very Jesuits themselves, most
devoted to the Virgin Mary confess, that the word so signifies, and must be
so taken here; the more inexcusable is the Rhemists slander.

But you will say they include Grace of inherence also: Do we deny it? God
forbid; we confess St. Austins rule to be true, Vasa quae creatrix sapientia
format vt sint, adiutrix gratia implet ne vacua sint, God that with the holy
oil anointed the Tabernacle before he entered to dwell within it, did no doubt
sanctify the Virgins person, whom he did destinate to be his sacred Temple.
But the question is concerning the Measure. In the measure we say that they
exceed, their Church exceeds. If the Council of Basil, and the Council of
Trent deliver the Doctrine of their Church, they exceed in the measure both of
her grace and glory. Of her Grace, freeing her very conception from sin,
contrary to the judgment not only of the Fathers, but also of their best
Schoolmen; St. Bernard has written a very learned Epistle against it, Epist.
174.
ad Canonicos Ludgnnenses. Neither do they lavish only in their Doctrine of
her Grace, but of her Glory also, and in this much more dangerously; even so
much more dangerously, as the danger of Idolatry exceedes the danger of
Heresy, especially this Idolatry, because it includes that Heresy. They then
having so far advanced the Virgin in the opinion of her Grace, doethereupon
proportion unto her such a degree of Glory, as that seeing Christ is Head of
the Church, she must be the Neck; and as no influence comes from the head
into the body, but by the neck, so no grace is communicated to the Church, but
by the Virgin Mary. Are you not amazed when you hear it? certainly you would
be, if you read the prayers which they make to her; evident arguments that
they do believe it, and foul Idolatry stains all their prayers wherein they
do express it. I would they would behold themselves in the Collyridian
Heretics, and apply unto themselves that doom which Epiphanius passes upon
them. Here Is. 79.
But I forget my promise, I said I would rather edisie you with the truth, than
refute error; wherefore leaving them, let us come to better matter.

Joy is an effect, whereof the Angel will have the Virgin to look unto the
cause; the cause may be looked for, either in her self, or in God, or as I
spoke before, in Grace of Acceptance, or Inherence. It is plain by the word
(...), that the Angel guides her eyes to look on the former, not the later;
to look upon the favor she finds, rather than the indowments which she
has: Angels fall, and Man's also was caused by their desire to joy in
themselves; for self-love bred their Apostasy. And though since the Fall, man
have little cause to fall in love with himself, yet is he not free from
danger, if in himself he will find the ground of Joy; for he is through the
sight of his imperfection as much in danger to despair, as through the sight
of his perfection he was to presume: the perfections of the best, though they
be such as are not void of comfort, yet because they have intermingled many
imperfections, that comfort must needs have a mixture of much discomfort,
entire and solid joy cannot be found there. Wherefore St. Anstins confession
must be the confession of us all, Beata vita est (says he, speaking unto God)
gaudere ad te, de te, propter te; if we will joy, we must lift up our souls
as high as God, and in our joy couple nothing with God, we must be induced unto
joy by no other end but to express our thankfulness for the mercy of God:
this is the true motive of entire and solid joy.

But a little farther to open it: this word does eleuate the joy to that degree
which beseemes a Christian man; there are other objects which usurp falsely
that which belongs unto God. Carnal pleasures are the first usurpers, and many
rest upon them, they relish nothing but their meats, their drinks, and
sensual lusts, whose joy, if it be any, it is but gaudium animalis, there is
nothing that can give content unto a man in such a joy, because these pleasures
are common to us with beasts. Rational indowments either of the understanding
or of the will, furnished with liberal arts or moral virtues, are the second
usurpers; indeed their title unto joy is much better than the former, yet their
plea is but weak; Solomon has censured knowledge as unfit to breed joy, in
that short saying, Qui addit scientiae addit dolori. And as for Moral Virtues,
Eccles. 1.18.
destitute of Grace, what joy can there be in them, which the Fathers have
iudiciously censured to be no better than splendid a peccata? So that the joy
promised by this usurper, if it be any, it is but gaudium hominis, the joy of a
natural man, and therefore as imperfect as is his nature. The third usurper
goes a degree higher, and that is Inherent Grace, whose plea is so probable,
that it perplexeth many a man; and yet it is but an usurpers plea, because of
the rebellion between the flesh and the spirit, and the often overthrows
which the spirit receives in us from the flesh; and what joy can there be in
the midst of so many foyles, in him that daily receives so many wounds? so
that joy, if there be any, it is but the Pharisees joy, that thinks of
himself better than he should, and so doteth upon the little good he has,
that he observes not how much more there is which he should have, but wants.
We must ascend then yet farther; and whither but unto God? from the Grace of
Inherence, to his Grace of Acceptance, to that reconciliation which we have
with him, springing from his own free good will toward us. And this breeds
indeed gaudium Christiani hominis, and it is this that is meant, when the
Angel says to the Virgin, that she is (...), he tells her what is the true
motive of Joy, the free love, the high favor of God, which are comprehended
within the word Grace. And indeed excellent are the properties of this Motive,
wherein it excels all the other: First, it is that which only can make all
the promises of God credible unto us; the Adoption, the Inheritance of a child
of God, the Incarnation, the Mediation of the Son of God, can they find any
credibility in any of the other motives, the sensual, the rational, the
pharisaicall? well may they breed distrust, but faith of these things they can
never make, yea they are all clogged with manifold exceptions to be taken
thereat: but if we come to So God loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, etc. John 3.16. in Gods Jove, free love, we find ground for our
faith, and rest for our souls. As this Motive does make all Gods promises
credible, so it makes them communicable unto all; for other blessings of God
are dispensed in variety: some have one, some another, some have riches and no
honor, some have honor and no riches, some have wisdom which have neither
of these two, some have extraordinary virtue whose wisdom is but ordinary.
But the free love of God is common unto all, to all the children of God; they
that are unequal in graces of Inherence, are in grace of Acceptance all
equal; the grace of Adoption, the grace of Reconciliation, is measured with as
liberal a hand to the poorest Publican in earth, as to the most glorious Saint
in heaven; though not in active, yet in passive righteousness all are matches.
Whereupon follows a third property, this motive to joy is most parable, or
easy to be had; the poorest may keep as great a gaudy day here as the
richest, and the simplest as the wisest, he that is lowest as he that is
highest; for we need none of those things, wherein it pleases God to advance
others before us, to the keeping of this gaudy day; which consideration should
make this motive most welcome to us all, in that it contains a provision that
may be had at all times. And as to be had at all times, so it fails at no
time; for, which is the fourth property, it is as stable, as parable, as it is
easily had, so is it best kept. All other motives have their waxings, and their
wanings, their ebbes and their floods, only Gods free love is that that
stays by us, and recouereth again his other gifts when they fail in us.
Look upon King David, look upon St. Peter, and see what instability there is
even in that which is most likely to be stable, the grace of Inherence; and
when that fails, how comes it to pass that they failed not also? we can
find no other ground, but Gods free love expressed in his promise unto David,
My mercy I will never take from thee, Psalm. 89.33. and Christ's prayer for St.
Peter, his prayer that St. Peter's faith might not fail, Luke 22.32. this is
that that fetched them again when they were gone, and revived them when they
were even dead. How often does error ouercast the best men's knowledge? how
cold does charity grow even in the best? and yet we see how they recover both
their light and heat, whereof there can be no other reason but that they are
(...), such as God does love; Gods love is only that which works this cure.
Whereupon follows the last property, and most natural to my Text, that this
motive is most comfortable. A motive that has all these properties, must
needs be most apt to breed joy. What fools then are we in the choice of the
object of our Joy, if forsaking this we pitch upon any of the other, of which
you have heard how unapt they are to breed Joy? nay, how apt they are to breed
sorrow; so that what Solomon said, we may say unto all their Joy, Thou art
mad, what do thou? (...), Eccles. 2.2.
says Nazianzene, speaking of all corporal pleasures, sufficient unto the
disquieting of the body is the concupiscence thereof. Yea the imborne
concupiscence is sufficient to disquiet both body and soul, we need not have
recourse unto these objects as fuel to kindle that fire, nor pamper that
beast which is so headstrong against reason and piety, and does so often
dispossess them of the sovereignty they should have over us; Certainly, in the
vpshot we shall find, that the more we have to do with th^se objects, the
less true Joy shall we find. And if we may not joy in any of ^hese objects,
whereof not one is able to reconcile us unto God, nor assure us of his love,
the only sure motive unto Joy; how much less may we joy in that which
sets us at odds with God, and argues that there is no commerce between
us: I mean concupiscence, and the sinful fruits thereof. It is true, that
this is (...), that sin may take place with us, Satan does cloth it with a
seeming Joy, even the most vexing affections thereof, as appears in the very
word (...), and did it not promise Joy, men would not be so transported by it;
but certainly this is plainly risus Sardonius, men laugh and dye; the Scripture
elegantly compares it to the crackling of thorns in the fire, whereof you see
a blaze, and hear a noise, but upon a sudden they are turned to ashes; even
so wicked men (as Job speaks) spend their time indeed in a seeming pleasure,
but in a moment go down to hell. Wherefore to shut up this point, let us be
so far from affecting our own corruption, that we do not so much as foster
that which is but the incourager thereof, the incourager, though for a time to
tickle us, yet to sting us in the close; let grace be unto us the only motive
unto Joy, even the free grace wherewith God vouch safeth to accept us; as it
only can be, so let it be only the ground of true Joy, whenever Joy is
desired by us. The Angel did bid the Virgin joy because of that.

But how could she be sure of it? the Angel adds, that she had a very good
pledge of it, The Lord is with thee. Mark how the Angel places his words,
first (...), then (...), and thirdly (...). If he should have said Hail, the
Lord is with thee, the one would never have followed well upon the other; for
though before the fall Gods presence was comfortable unto man, yet since the
fall fear is inseparable from sin, and the very best abhor Gods presence,
being privy to their loss of his resemblance; Adam is the first pattern, and
after Adam we read of many others. So that Highly favored, or freely beloved
must stand between Hail, and The Lord is with thee, otherwise they will never
come together; Esaias could not give his Woe is me, for I am a man of polluted
lips, Esaias 6.
and dwell in the midst of a people of polluted lips, mine eyes have seen
the Lord of glory, till that the Seraphin was sent with a coal from the Altar,
and touched his lips, in token that his sin was removed, and he become
(...); Dan. 10.
neither could Daniel endure the presence of the Angel, till he was heartened
by this message, that he was Vir desideriorum, one in whom God did take
delight; and the best of us will say as St. Peter, Go from me Lord, for I am
a sinful man, Luke 5.8. except the Lord himself be pleased to hearten us, and
say to us as Christ to St. Peter, Fear not; or as God to Moses and Noah, Thou
have found grace in mine eyes.

As we must observe the Order of the words, so must we also the Distance of
these persons, the distance between the Lord and his Handmaiden, and then the
combination will seem strange. Strange it is that persons so distant should
come together, but most happy it is that they do, because the perfection of
the one, can yield so good supply to the imperfection of the other; Gods
Majesty honors the baseness of his Handmaiden, his might strengthens her
weakness, Non sumita vel diuinae ignarus magnitudinis, vel humanae
fragilitatis, vt non magnum putem (...), says Nazianzene; and the Psalmist,
Blessed is he whom thou choosest to come near thee: he shall dwell in thy
courts, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house, even of thy
holy Temple, Psalm. 65.

But the Angel says not Thou art with the Lord, but, The Lord is with thee:
it were much better you would think for us to be with him, than for him to be
with us, for man to ascend to heaven, than for God to come down to the earth.
True it is, that it makes more for our happiness to ascend to God, but it
does more argue Gods love, that he descends to us; to ascend is our
advancement, but to descend is a debasement of God: yea the Psalmist says,
That God does humble himself, whenever being so high, he vouchsafes from
heaven but to behold the things on earth. Add hereunto, that the Lord must
needs come to us before we can come to him, because his coming to us is the
giving of that ability by which we do afterward ascend to him, so that the
Angel being to give the Virgin a proof of Gods love toward her, could give
her no better than these words contain, Hom. 3. super missus est Angelus.
The Lord is with thee. But Deus vbi^ aqualiter totus est per suam simplicem
essentiam, as St. Bernard speaks, and speaks fully and truly of the
presence of God. Were there no other text of Scripture, that did testify the
immensity of Gods essence, as there are many, Job 11. Esaias 66. Psalm. 139.
Dominus tecum is strong enough to refute Vorstius his erroneous conceit,
mistaking certain passages of Scripture, and thereupon limiting Gods
essential presence within the circle of heaven, and admitting only an
efficiency to proceed from him so low as the earth. But this Dominus tecum will
not endure that; for you must understand, that whereas the name Lord is common
to all three persons in the Trinity, as we learn in Athanasius Creed, the
Fathers usually understand here the second person, which was to be incarnate in
the Virgins womb; her womb was to be the Temple of the living God, Quem
totus mundus capere non poterat, acceptura erat quasi in angustum cubiculum
vterisui, so that the Lord was necessarily to be, even in his Essence with her,
that was in his essence to come from her; otherwise she could not be (...), the
mother of our Lord, as Elizabeth does call her, Luke 1. The Lord is with thee,
they are words mystical, and import a maine Article of Faith, even the
conception of our Savior Christ, which could not be without the presence of
his Essence. And yet the presence of the Essence alone suffices not to the
conception, because the Essence is every where, and that presence is necessary;
there must be acknowledged also an Efficiency proceeding therefrom, even such
an efficiency as is arbitrary, for God works according as it pleases him. In
the case of the conception, the efficiency is singular, and the Virgins womb
is the only place where God did ever manifest it, and so we must acknowledge
it. But the Virgin did conceive Christ, not only Corpore, but etiam Cord; the
first was Singular, but the second is Common: for St. Paul tells us, that we
may also conceive Christ, though not in our womb, yet in our soul, My little
children, of whom I travel again till Jesus Christ be formed in you, Gal.
4.19. and St. Peter tells us of the seed of this conception, The immortal
seed of the Word of God, 1. Pet. 1.23. And indeed we could not be called
Christians, were it not that we partake of Christ, 2. Cor. 13.5.
Know you not (says St. Paul) that Jesus Christ is in you except you be
reprobates? So that The Lord is with thee may be spoken to every one of us,
though not in regard of Christ's Incarnation in our bodies, yet of his Union
unto our souls. Yea therefore was he conceived by the Virgin corporally, that
spiritually he might be conceived of every one of us, and so become indeed
Immanuel, The Lord with us. And what shall we say to these things? surely with
an ancient Father, Gratia Dei non potuit gratius co^mendari, quam vt ipse
vnicus Dei Filius in se incommunicabiliter manens, indueret hominem, and spem
dilectionis suae daret hominibus, homine medi^, this is the most sweet
comfort, wherewith God anciently used to sustain his children, each in
particular, Genesis 26. Josh. cap. 1. and cap. 3. and the whole Church in
general, Esaias 41. Revel. 1. yea Christ left this comfort for his farewell to
his Disciples, Lo, I am with you to the worlds end, Matthew. 28. And no marvel,
for as when God is angry he departs from us, so when out of favor he comes
to us, it is the prognostication of some good that is then toward us; so
follows it in my Text, next to Dominus tecum, comes Benedicta.

The presence of the Arc brought a blessing upon Obed-Edoms house, how much
more must a blessing follow wheresoever the truth of the type comes, I mean
the Lord himself; the Spouse in the Canticles confesses that when her beloved
knocked at the door, he left the sent of his sweet odours as a remembrance,
Cant. 5.4.

But blessed is the Virgin, and in being blessed she is a Patient, she
becomes not such but by means of some Agent; this Agent may be either God,
or Man, and so the Benediction be either Real, or Verbal. Some understand
the Real, the Benediction of God, some the Verbal, the Benediction of man;
the use of the word (...), reaches the former, but the signification thereof
imports the latter, both may stand together. And indeed the Verbal
Benediction is but an attendant upon the Real, you may learn it of Balaam,
Number. 23. verse. 8. and verse. 20. How shall Ieurse (says he) where God has not
cursed? How shall I detest, where the Lord has not detested? Behold, I have
received a commandment to bless where he has blessed, and I cannot alter it.
Two things there are which the Verbal Benediction must take heed of, and
wherein it must guide it self by the Real; it must be sure that the person
whom it blesses does partake of the Real; and being sure thereof, it must
proportion the Verbal unto the Real. The Fathers did not without good cause
pen many Panegyricks in honor of the Saints, and they penned them with those
two Cautions, and therefore might they without danger be pronounced even in the
Church to the edification of the people. But the Golden Legend is too palpable
an evidence of the latter Churches neglect of suiting their Verbal Benediction
to the Real Benediction of God; for how many have they blessed whom God has
cursed, and calendred for Saints, such as, it may be feared, are firebrands in
hell? And as for those which are Saints indeed, how lavish are they in
reporting what God never did, either for them, or to them? the whole Legend
being become nothing else but (...), as Epiphanius speaks, a fardell of
forged dreams. Not to go from our present instance of the blessed Virgin, in
whom, if ever in any, they have disproportioned the Verbal and the Real
Benediction. We forget not Epiphanius his good rule, (...), the Virgin must
from our mouths receive no less, nor no more, than her due. The Church of Rome
challenges us for giving her less, but they charge us falsely; for we most
willingly go as far in our Verbal, as we have any fair evidence that God
has gone in his Real; farther we do not go, neither indeed should we.
Epist. 174.
St. Bernard has taught us well, Virgoregia falso non eget honor veris
cumulata honorum titulis, infulis dignitatum, he gives a good reason, Nam non
est hoc virginem honorare, sed honori detrahere. Atheists are encouraged to
eleuate the credit of the whole, if they can justly challenge the truth of any
part of such stories. Job says well, We may not lie for God, much less may
we lie for a Saint, and yet the Legends of this blessed Virgin, how are they
fraught with officious lies?

But I will not trouble you with farther discovery thereof, who cannot forget
their excess in the public Doctrine of her grace and glory, whereof I gave
you a taste on the second branch of my Text.

I come then to the last point which I mean to touch. The Angel does not
only say that the Virgin is blessed, but also blessed in comparison, the
phrase is comparatiue. Amongst other words, this is one wherewith the Hebrews,
which have no formal comparatiue words, use to express the superlatiue degree,
Blessed amongst women, is as much as Amost blessed woman: as if the Angel
should say, Many daughters have been blessed, but thou surmountest them all. And
indeed it is no great prerogative to be blessed above many wretches, but above
many blessed ones to be blessed, is a blessing indeed. The Angel therefore
bids her observe not only the nature, but the measure also of her estate.
Sarah was blessed, and so was Rebecca, Rahel likewise, with Deborah, Iael, and
many others, but their blessing was nothing unto hers, for this phrase alludes
to former prophesies; Moses speaks of a woman, Genesis 3. whose seed should
bruise the Serpents head, but it was Haisha, a special woman that he pointed
at, and that woman was this Virgin. Esaias speaks of a Virgin that shall
conceive and bear a son, whose name shall be called Immanuel, Esaias 7.14. but
it is Hagnalma, a special Virgin, and that Virgin was this blessed Mary.
Jeremy says, The Lord will create a new thing in the earth, and a woman shall
compass a man, Geber, an heroical man, and no woman bare such a son but
this blessed Virgin. Add hereunto that which the Fathers generally observe,
and Sedulius has comprehended in two Verses, Gaudia matris habens, cum
virginit at is honor,
Nec primam similem visa est nec habere secundam.
Never was the like woman before her, neither ever shall the like come after
her; so true is it that she is, and is to be acknowledged superlatiuely Blessed.

Farther comparison than between her and women, the Holy Ghost is not pleased
to make. Others have gone farther, and lifted her higher than all Angels, how
truly I will not dispute, I list not to be inquisitiue where the Holy Ghost is
silent; these things shall better be known when we meet in heaven.

That which only I observe upon this point is, that a Comparison shows the
Eminency of a grace, and is a most feeling motive unto Joy, thereby we are not
only put in mind of our good, but of the greatness thereof. Were there no
baser creatures whereunto a man might compare himself, he should lose much of
that Joy which arises out of the knowledge which he has that he is a man;
were there not many out of the Church which are men, we should not know how
much honor our being in the Church adds unto us in that we are Christian
men: King David makes the 8. Psalm out of his feeling of the first
comparison; and to put us in mind of the second, the 147. Psalm concludes
thus, He has not dealt so with every Nation, neither have the Heathen
knowledge of his Laws. Finally, in comparison of our selves, let us remember a
good observation of St. Austins, Beatior Maria percipiendo fidem, Cap. 3. de
sancta Maria.
quam concipiendo carnem Christi; his assertion is grounded upon Christ's own
words, Luke 12. who when a certain woman cried out, Luke 11.27, 28.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the pappes that gave thee suck,
answered, Nay blessed are they that hear the Word of God and keep it. And
those else where he calls, His mother, his brethren, and his kindred, Matthew.
12.49. where he had both carnal, and also spiritual cognation, he did value
the spiritual more than the carnal. The eminency of the blessed Virgin was
this, that she did partake of both, and therein she has an eminency above us;
but if we do as we ought, value our spiritual state, the eminency is very
great which God vouchsafes every one of us; and that we may joy in it so much
as we should, this degree of Gods blessing must be weighed by us.

But I will pursue this Text no farther, only a general Use there is that we
must make of the whole, and that is taught us by this blessed Virgin her self;
her Magnificat is an excellent pattern thereof: see therein how her words are
correspondent to the Angels. The Angel bids her Hail, that is, be glad;
and what says she? My soul does magnify, and my spirit does rejoice. The
Angel tells her, that she is highly beloved of God, and she does not
magnify her self, she reioy ceth not in her self, but My soul (says she)
does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. The Angel
goes on, The Lord is with thee, and she sings on, The Lord indeed has
regarded the low estate of his handmaid, He that is mighty has magnified
me. Finally, she hears that she is Blessed amongst women, and she gathers,
that because she is so graced of God, not for her own worth, that from
thenceforth all generations shall call her Blessed. A better pattern of
meditating upon Gods mercies we cannot have, nor learn a better use of the
Auemarie. I would the Church of Rome, that are so devoted to the Virgin, would
of her learn this good lesson; if they will not, let us not neglect so good a
pattern.

But I must end. The sum of all is, As the blessed Virgin, so every one of
us, must have a comfortable feeling especially of Gods free Love, that is the
living spring of his gracious presence, of that singular presence wherewith he
honored the Virgins womb, and that common which is vouchsafed to all
believing hearts, the least whereof must be deemed to be no small prerogative.

O Lord, it was thou that shewedst the Virgin light, wherefore with cords of
devotion we bind our sacrifice to the horns of thy Altar; yea thou art a God
to every one of us, therefore we thank thee; Thou only art our God, and
therefore we praise thee, and let us ever set thee before us, that do
vouchsafe to come so near unto us, that our heart may be glad, and our tongue
rejoice in thee, so long as we live here, and when we depart hence, our flesh
also will rest in hope, till we come both body and soul into thy presence,
where is the fullness of Joy, and be crowned with that right hand, whereat
there are pleasures for evermore. Amen. IHS

TWO SERMONS PREACHED in the Cathedral Church at WELLS.
THE FIRST SERMON. On Palm Sunday.

MATTHEW. 26. Verse. 40.41. What? could ye not watch with me one hour?

Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is
willing, but the flesh is weak.


THese words were read unto you out of this days Gopell, (...)
therein you heard that they were uttered by Christ to his Disciples; Christ
out of his own foreknowledge, and out of the Prophet Zachary, gave the
Disciples to understand, that no sooner should himself their Captain fall
into the enemies hands, but they would all show themselves to be but cowardly
followers. St. Peter with the rest, though more forward than the rest,
answered, that they would be so far from flying in his danger, that they
would spend their lives in his just defense. Hereunto Christ replied, that they
would not be as good as their word, nay, that they would shamefully contradict
their words by their deeds; and it fell out even so: for scarce had an hour
passed but they began to betray their weakness. Christ takes them in the very
beginning of it, and from it takes an occasion first to reprove, Verse. 40.
then to advise them, Verse. 41. He reproves them for their present defect,
What? could ye not watch with me one hour? and advises them to prevent a
future revolt, Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation, etc.

More distinctly, in the reproof we must note the matter, and the manner; the
matter is the Disciples drowsinesse, they did not Watch, that is amplified by
the circumstance of time and of persons; of time, they held not out for the
space of one hour. And of persons, the persons of Disciples, and the person of
Christ; drowsinesse was intolerable in them, because they had promised so much,
especially in Christ's company to whom they did owe more than to Watch.

As was the sin, so was the reproof; that foul, this sharp: it is uttered
in few words, but they go to the quick; for the first, (...) What? is
Elleipticall, and implies Christ's wondering at their vnanswerablenesse to their
presumptuous undertaking. The next words, (...) point out their ignorance of
themselves, Could ye not? this is more than you thought on; so Christ reproues.

But he does not leave them so; as he disliked what was past, so would he have
them better provided against that which is to come: you may perceive it in his
advise, which is respective to their disease; they presumed much, but could do
little, Christ bids them therefore be more careful and less confident;
more careful, Watch, less confident, Pray: do the uttermost of your
endeavor, but build only upon Gods succor.

But why need they be more careful and less confident? Christ yields the
reason of both; where there is danger there is need of care, they were in
danger to enter into temptation, Watch lest ye enter into temptation.

But if they be careful, why may they not be confident? there is good reason,
their help stands not in themselves, The Spirit indeed is willing, but their
flesh is weak: therefore they must seek to God, and seek by prayer, Pray.

You see the contents of this Scripture which we must now farther open and
apply unto our selves: I begin with the Reproof, whereof the matter is the
drowsinesse of the Apostles, their drowsinesse is noted by not watching.

It was night when Christ spoke this, and so a time to sleep; add hereunto
that they had newly supped, and had heard the doleful sermon of Christ's
departure, all which serve to increase the heaviness as of their minds, so of
their bodies. But it was the night wherein Christ was to be betrayed, and
wherein themselves were to be exposed to danger; and therefore it was a time to
watch. The care of our duty sometimes, and sometimes of our safety, makes us
forbear many things which otherwise we might lawfully use; sometimes we fast
from our ordinary fare, sometimes we put off robes of state, and cloth our
selves with garments of heaviness, and eat the bread of mourning; so is there
a time when we should deny our eyes their beloved sleep, and then not to deny
it is a sin, a great sin: as great as to fare deliciously when we should
fast, and attire our selves gorgiously when we should mourn; the Scripture
condemns all three, the apparel, Exodus 34. the fare, Esaias 22. both
apparel and fare in Joel, Joel 2. Jonah 2.
and in Jonas the couch is added to them, Amos 6. We must then note, that every
thing has his appointed time, Eccles. 3. and it is not a sin to be drowsy,
for nature requires refreshing; but to be drowsy at an unseasonable time,
when grace does not ouerrule nature, and the body is not made serviceable to
the soul, willing to do her duty to God, this is a sinful drowsinesse. And
such was the drowsinesse of the Apostles, and it was extraordinarily in them;
for the Text does amplify their sin by two circumstances, first of the time,
then of the persons; the time the space of one hour. When God requires that
our bodies should attend our souls, though he did require more time in that
attendance than reason conceiueth can stand with the strength of nature, we
should not stick at it; because the same God that strengthened Moses in the
Mount, twice to fast forty days and forty nights, and Elias not only to fast,
but also to walk so many days without either sleep or meat, can support us,
employed in his service, so long as therein he is pleased to employ us. But if
he limit the time within the strength of our frail nature, what excuse have we
if we fail in our duty? the time required of the Apostles was but an hour,
and who does not upon all occasions of profit and pleasure put off his sleep
more than an hour? The covetous man rises early, and goes late to bed to
increase his wealth; the voluptuous man in gaming and rioting is well content
to add the night unto the day; and though it be a winter night, the ambitious
will be contented to travail in it, rather than miss the preferment whereunto
he does aspire. And does not then the natural man condemn the spiritual, when
the one watches so long, and the other cannot watch so short a time? But why
seek I so far? the Apostles are condemned by their very enemies, Vt iugulent
homines surgunt de nocte latrones, Vt teipsum serves non expergisceris? the
high Priests sat up all this night in consultation, Judas and their servants
were busy all night about the execution of their wicked designs, and the
Apostles cannot watch, no not an hour; will not their enemies rise up against
them and condemn their drowsinesse? They will; especially if this hour were
the very first hour of the night, which might best be spared; for the farther
the night goes on, the more weakness comes on, and less blameable is
drowsinesse in the dead, than in the beginning of the night: now happily (...)
is an Hebraisme, and is put for (...), as (...) elsewhere, so that it notes
not only the space of an hour, but also points out which hour it was; but
howsoever we understand (...), it is out of all question, that the Disciples
drowsinesse ouertooke them the very first hour, which adds much to the
aggravating of their fault.

As the circumstance of time, so also of persons makes to the amplification of
the sin, as well the persons who are drowsy, as his person in whose company
they were so.

First of the drowsy persons, they were the Apostles; all the Apostles were
drowsy, but Christ singled out three, Peter, James, and John, to accompany him
unto that place in the Garden in which himself chose to pray: wherein Christ
showed that he had more than an ordinary conceit of them, and did expect more
than ordinary service from them. And well might it be so, for he had showed
them more favor than the rest; they only were with him when he was
transfigured in the Mount, and saw his glory. As he showed them most favor, so
they were most forward to offer their service: St. Peter, Mat. 16.33.
Though all the world be offended with thee, yet will not I be offended. James
and John, Matthew. 20.22. We (...) drink of the Cup whereof thou shall drink,
and be baptized with the Baptism wherewith thou shall be baptized. Had they
been only Disciples, they were bound to do what their Master commanded; but
the more trust he reposed in them, the less were they to fail him, especially
seeing they were so far indebted for extraordinary favor, and had vowed
their lives in his defense: all these things are included in the drowsy
persons, necessary, voluntary obligations; but neither work; though there was
so much reason why they should, yet did not these Apostles Watch: nothing is
remarkable in their persons, that makes not their drowsinesse more inexcusable.

And if their sin be amplified by their own persons, how much more by the
person of Christ? it was a fault not to watch in danger, a greater fault not to
watch the space of one hour, especially seeing they were Apostles, such
Apostles; but what access is made to this sin, when they neglect to watch in
the company of their Savior? Had Christ sent them alone to the place, then
because of Vaesoli this fall had not been strange; for it is not strange to see
a man disheartened with danger, and overwhelmed with woe: but Christ went with
them, his presence was enough to keep them in heart. Though I walk (says
David) in the midst of the valley of death, I will fear no evil: for thou
art with me, O Lord, thy rod and thy staff shall comfort me, Psalm. 23. and
this good Shepherd was now with the Apostles, why then were their hearts
heavy? Nay he was not only with them, but he was watching and praying; and
was not his example a strong means to keep them from being drowsy? As iron
whetteth iron, so does the face of a friend quicken his friend. Had he been
only a companion in the work their eyes should have been on him, they should
have blushed not to imitate him: but he was their Captain, their Master, and
what a shame for a Servant to sleep when his Master waketh? and when his
Master watches to show himself drowsy? And yet this comes not home enough;
for this Companion, yea this Captain did watch, did pray for them, it was for
them that he stood out; he presented himself to God, and prepared himself for
the Cross, but he did both for them: himself needed neither, we wretched
sinners needed both; God laid our burden upon him, our tears, our sighs,
our groans, our stripes, our death. It is a general rule of Piety, that we
should weep with them that weep, how much more should we be affected with the
like passion if any one be distressed for us? It was a strange stupidity in
Jonas, when God pursued him with a tempest, to get under hatches, and there
sleep securely, while the poor Mariners toyled out their bodies in rowing,
and brake their hearts in praying to their gods to free them from the tempest:
how much more stupid are these Apostles, who lay them down to rest, when God
was reaching unto Christ that Cup of vengeance whereof we all should have
drunk for our sin, had not Christ eased us of that bitter draught? the
preparation for that potion which should have bin our porion, kept Christ
waking and praying; it cast him into an agony, and drew tears of blood from
all parts of his body. While he is thus affected and afflicted for us, the
Apostles are at rest, as if these things did nothing concern them, which their
sins no less than the sins of others poured upon Christ. It might have
been some ease to Christ if he had seen them compassionately devout;
certainly their senselessness added not a little to the bitterness of his
pain; the more he suffered for them, the greater impression should his
suffering have made in them, and they should have had the more fellow-feeling,
the nearer they were vouchsafed to be to his person. You have heard enough of
the Apostles drowsinesse their sin, and degrees thereof; it well deserved a
Reproof.

And Christ does not spare them, spare first to tax their presumption, that he
does in the first word, (...), What? One word, but wherein is implied that the
Apostles answered not that resolution which they pretended, yea that they came
so short that Christ could not but wonder at their drowsinesse. Both these are
implied in (...), What? is all your boasting come to this? is this the courage
that you would show in my defense? did you conceive so well of your selves, and
so liberally amplify your service? all proves but vanity, all argues nothing
but presumption. It is a natural disease of all the sons of Adam, that if
they have but motes of virtue, they think they are mountains, and presume
that their actions go hand in hand with their speculations. Little children
when they begin first to find their feet, think they can go as well and as
far as those that are of riper age, and this conceit makes them take many a
fall. The most of us are but babes in Christ, and our judgment erreth in
nothing more than in taking an estimate of our ability, wherein we come so
short of performing what we promise to our selves, that as we may blush, so
Christ may wonder and break into this question, (...)? What? is it so? so
great words, so small deeds? certainly Man, even the best of men is altogether
vanity, Psalm. 39. his vaunts are nothing but the sparkles of his pride, and he
presumes above his strength. For what is his strength? surely very small; the
displaying of that is a second branch of Christ's reproof, (...), Could ye not?
Your strength is very small, you are much weaker than you suppose, you thought
not of it before, you have now given plain proof of it, your drowsinesse
represents it plainly before your eyes, it tells you how little you are able
to perform. But we must not mistake; for inability is to be understood not
physically, but morally; they were not simply disinabled to watch: for the
instances before given in covetous, ambitious, and voluptuous men, show that
men can (if they will) break their sleep, and what they can that they do,
when the world sets them on work: but when Heaven enioynes them, then how
weak are they? their affections have no vigor, they are soon tired, and give
over at the first onset; so that as the Prophet speaks of the Jews, They
were wise to do evil, but to do good they had no understanding at all: so
may we say of our affections, they are strong to sin, but to do good they
have no vigor at all. Or rather men do not put out their strength, and they
are conquered because they do not resist. And indeed drowsinesse were not a
sin, were it not a mixed action, wherein our willing eelding to our affections
which we should repress, makes us to be guilty, and this Christ means when
he delivers his check with an interrogation, Could you not? as if he should
say, you cannot well excuse your drowsinesse. Behold then an example of humane
frailty, and we must all behold our selves herein; what Christ said to them,
he may well say to us, not one but is more or less touched with presumption,
and has infirmities whereof he need to be remembered: the best voweth more
than he performs, and in the presence of Christ discovers his weakness,
let the time be never so short appointed for our devotion, our ears grow
quickly heavy when they should hear God in his Word, and our eyes drowsy
when we should behold him in our Prayers. And what wonder if we watch so little
out of the Church, if we sleep so much in it? We must therefore every man
take unto himself this reproof which Christ directs unto the Apostles, even
the best must take it unto themselves, seeing Christ directs it unto the best
of his Apostles.

As we must take the reproof, so must we the advice also, which is the second
maine point of my Text; I come now to it. The advice is suitable to the
reproof: for they were reproved for too much confidence, and too little care,
and they are advised to be more careful, Watch; and less confident, Pray.

But in joining of this point to the other, we must first observe, that though
the Apostles gave good cause, yet Christ did not presently reject them; for
unto his reproof he adds advise, giving them to understand that he touched
at their fault, because he would have them take better heed. Wherehence we
may learn how to deal with others; we must neither sooth them when they do
ill, and we must try whether they may be brought for to do well.

Let us now come to the parts of the advice; they are two, first Aperit oculos,
then Ministrat alas, he rowseth them out of their sleep and furnishes them
with help against their danger: First, he does rowse them. The Syriac
speaks fully, Euigilate, and indeed they were asleep, therefore they were to
be awakened before they could watch, to shake off their drowsinesse before they
could take heed. As in natural actions, the impediment must be removed before
the creature can move according to his form; so in moral, we must be freed
from the opposite of Virtue, before we can have or use the habit thereof. But
because Watching is principally intended, therefore the precept runs upon
that. Watching then is compounded of two things, of waking and heeding; waking
is solutio sensuum, the keeping open of the passage, whereby sense may be
informed of his proper object. Heeding is the judgment we pass upon the
object, considering what it does prognosticate unto us, whether good or evil;
and our senses stand sentinel, to give a timely alarm when there is any
approach of danger. But as our senses are of two sorts, inward and outward, so
is the watching also; here is not only a watch set in the outward man, but in
the inward man also. And good reason, for there are many dangers which sense
cannot apprehend, as it is evident in this our present case; Judas came now to
betray Christ, and had many followers which were men; but Satan before had
entered into Judas (says St. John) and when he came, Now comes the Prince of
this world (says Christ) and in St. Luke he tells St. Peter, Cap. 22.32.
that Satan had desired to winnow not only him, but all the Apostles even as
wheat. Seeing then the object is bodily and ghostly, the watch that we keep
must be answerable thereto; as the thief is that will rob our house, as the
enemies are that will besiege our city, so must our care be, lest scaping one
we fall into the hands of another, as usually we do: our eyes are busy enough
to apprehend and decline our bodily danger, but few intend their ghostly, yea
they receive most wounds ghostly, when they are most safe bodily; we watch as
men, but not as Christian men, but it is the Christian man's watch that is
required in this place. Enough of watching.

But watching is not enough to procure our safety, no though the whole man
watch both body and soul; what we see may dismay, if we see no more than may
be discerned by the body, how much more if we see what may be discerned by the
soul? such a sight will make us but like Elizeus his man, who when he saw the
Army of the Aramites, cried, Alas Master what shall we do? to remedy his
fear his Master fell to his prayers, and upon Elizeus his prayers his servants
eyes were opened, and he saw the Army of God ready to assist them.

And indeed to the eyes of our care, that is, our Watching, we must add the
wings of our hope, that is, our Praying; our eyes must still be fixed upon the
Lord, who can pluck our feet out of the snares, Psalm. 25. When we join these
eyes and wings together, we shall experience that in the Proverbs true, Prou.
19
In vain is the net spread before the eyes of every thing that has a wing.

If Christ had said only Watch, he might (says Prosper) seem to have
favored free will, but when he adds Pray, he shows in whom our strength
is placed, even in God, the keeper of Israel, which neither slumbereth nor
sleeps, Psalm. 121. To pray then, is to acknowledge, that we must needs be
swallowed up of danger corporal and spiritual, except the Lord support and
defend us; we may not think our own vigilancie sufficient, but have recourse
to him: for except the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain,
Psalm. 127.1. our own vigilancie is commendable, if we make of it a right use,
and the use is, to make us run to God. And indeed no men seek less unto
God, than they that lost think themselves in danger; dreaming that they are
secure they beg no help, what wonder if then they become a prey? let us
begin then with Watching, and thence proceed to Praying. This Method is most
behoouefull, because we must fit our prayers to our need; we must not pray at
random, but as our wants are, so must our prayers be: we discern our wants
by watching, which by praying we supply; so did King David, so must we, we
read it in his Psalms, and they must be our patterns; cold is the devotion
that is not quickened by vigilancie, and fruitless is the vigilance that is
not relieved by prayer. If every one of us would reflect our eyes upon our
selves, we shall find that we seldom look about us before we pray, and
therefore our prayers are so dull; or if we fail not in that care, we place our
refuge in others rather than God, whereupon it comes to pass that our
success is accordingly. In a word, Praying and Watching both must be used, but
Praying is the casting off of our eyes from our selves, that we be not proud of
our own care whereby we descry our enemies: Yea it teaches us to cast our
eyes off from our enemies also upon God, that we be not dejected with their
power; so that though we begin below, considering our enemies and our selves,
yet must we end above, entreating Gods hand to entermeddle with both. You have
heard Christ's advice.

He is not contented only to give it, but he sets down also reasons that
must persuade us to entertain it, Watch we must, lest we enter into
temptation. And indeed where there is danger, there care is needful, specially
if the danger be our own; Christ's saying, Lest ye enter into temptation,
gives them to understand whose danger it is, willing them, that though they
were not moved with his case, yet they should not neglect themselves. But what
is Temptation? it is a trial made of us, how firmly we will stand to Christ,
how manfully we will abide by his truth. Now as the Tempter is, such is his
Temptation; sometimes God tempts us, and sometimes the Devil. God tempts us
only by calling upon us to do our duty, though he is pleased sometimes to
cloth that duty with difficulties, to see if we love any thing in comparison
of him; that temptation is not here meant. The Devil he tempts, endeavoring
to withdraw us from doing our duties, and persuading us not to hazard our
lives or our livings by standing fast in the fear of God. This is the
Temptation that here is meant, and this is Temptatio ad malum culpae per malum
poenae, solicitation unto sin by the terrors of troubles; Judas came and
Satan in him, Satan aimed at Malum culpae, at the Apostles revolt from
Christ; and to work his will, he used Judas his malice to persecute them that
took Christ's part. Now then when Christ bids them watch, lest they should
enter into temptation, he bids them have an eye as well to Satan as to
Judas; for now both were tempters, and they might now enter into the temptation
of both: who would sleep if he lay near a corporal Lion or Serpent? shall
we sleep that lie so near the spiritual?

But the Fathers Greek and Latin observe precisely the phrase of entering
into temptation; it is not our care that can put off temptations, the Devil is
a Hunter, and will always be following his chase, he is a Fowler, and will
always be setting his ginnes, he will never neglect his care. Our care must be
not to put our selves into the Lions mouth, not to throw our selves into his
snares; Daemoniacum est (says Theophylact) it is a devilish thing to be so
desperate: we may not so much as desire to be tempted. In this very story that
we have in hand our Savior Christ prays more than once, Father, if it be
possible let this Cup pass, giving a secret check unto the Apostles pride,
who so rashly offered themselves unto death, which Christ so earnestly did
deprecate. And how foolish is it for us to affect it? as if the Devil and the
World were not studious enough to ouercharge us with it.

And indeed they may easily ouercharge us as appears in the next reason, the
reason of our prayer, The spirit is wil^ing, but the flesh is weak. I will not
trouble you with the diverse sense that is put upon these words, the best and
the most agree that these two words note the two parts of a regenerate man, the
spirit noting the New, and the flesh the Old man; and so this passage agrees
with the like, Romans 7. the phrases themselves do give us to understand, that
our willingness to serve God is not from Nature, but from Grace, and our
backwardness is not from Grace, but from Nature. If these two parts do not
concur, the spirit and the flesh, the flesh may pluck back as much as the
spirit puts forward; yea and though they do concur, yet the spirit is too
quick for the flesh, and will venture farther than flesh dares to follow.
Tertullians rule is true, that these words import, Quid eui subijci debeat,
whether of the parts should have the command; but all goes not as it should,
because one part is enabled to will, but the other is not enabled to obey:
therefore St. Hierome says well, Quantum de ardore mentis confidimus, tantum
de fragilitate carnis metuamus, we must not suppose we can do all we would,
but we must pray that the spirit that is well disposed may also be strong to
subdue the flesh; as by watching the flesh is dis-inabled to sin, so by
praying is the spirit enabled to rule. But more distinctly.

First touching the willingness of the spirit, there is great difference
between the habit of grace and the use thereof; though we be well qualified
with the habit, yet except God excite and assist we make little use thereof.
Now the willingness of the spirit here meant, is the ability of a regenerate
man without the assistance of God; and we must pray for the latter, because
without it the former will avail but little.

As for the weakness of the flesh, it must be understood with a restraint ad
bonum; for to resist it is strong enough, strong enough to resist the spirit,
but weak to resist temptation. And why? the Tempter offers to the flesh (if
it yield) that which the flesh naturally desires; and if it yield not, he
threatens what the flesh naturally abhorres; corporal comfort is that
whereafter the body does long by nature, as by nature it does Ioath the loss
thereof. The Tempter therefore has an easy conquest upon the flesh, except
Gods hand go with it, in vain is it countermanded by the spirit; many woeful
examples have the Primitive Churches of this frailty of our nature, and every
day is too fertile in spectacles hereof: if the Tempter set upon the flesh, he
will easily carry us away, though not without some contradiction of the spirit.
And here we see the fountain of all our sins of infirmity, the root of them
is this odds between the flesh and the spirit, and this is the whetstone of
Prayer; the best men if they be buffeted with the messenger of Satan (as Saint
Paul was) their best remedy is that which Saint Paul used, Prayer unto God,
whose Grace only can be sufficient for us, 2. Cor. 12.^.
and whose strength is made perfect in our weakness. If this lesson be
necessary for those that have some inward alacrity, how much more for them that
are altogether drowsy? if the best must pray in conscience of their infirmity,
how fervent in prayer should they be, that feel not in themselves that
forwardness of grace? how earnestly should they pray, O God make speed to save
us, O Lord make haste to help us?

I conclude all. This whole Text is a lesson of modesty, and calls upon us to
work out our salvation in fear and trembling, seeing it is God that works
in us both to will and to do; not that we should waver in our faith, but that
we should not presume upon our own strength; remembering that it is an easy
matter to vow much while we are on the shore, whereof we will be little
mindful when we be overtaken at sea: Many fair flowers shoot forth when the
Sun shines, which come to naught if they be nipt with a Frost; we may not
presume that we will be more constant than the Apostles, let their weakness
teach us to be humble, lest if we promise more than we perform, Christ tax
our pride, and vpbraid our weakness; the Tempter will ever set on us,
therefore let us never cease to Watch. But the more we find out our danger by
Watching, the more let us fly to God in Praying, that the same God which has
given us a willing spirit, may also give us obedient flesh, that both may hold
out in the day of Temptation; so shall they both rejoice in the living God,
rejoice here while they stick fast unto Christ notwithstanding the Cross, and
rejoice hereafter when both coming out of all tribulation shall from Christ
receive an immarcescible Crown.

THE SECOND SERMON. On Good Friday.

MARK 14.35.36. And he went forward a little and fell on the ground, and
prayed, that if it were possible the hour might pass from him.

And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee, take away this
Cup from me, nevertheless not that I will, but what thou will.


IN the history of Christ's Cross (which we commemorate this day) there are
two remarkable parts: first, a feeling representation thereof which Christ made
unto himself: and secondly, a constant perpession thereof when it was imposed
by others. The first may be called Propassio, and the second Passio; there
went a Cross before the Cross, a fore-Crosse before the after-Crosse, a
rational before the sensitive: Christ wrought a smart in himself, before he
was stricken by others. This feeling representation, this fore-hand Cross,
this selfe-affliction is the argument of those words that now I have read unto
you.

The whole Tract is conceived in form of a prayer, and indeed it is an
Offertory prayer; Christ by prayer sets the stamp of a sacrifice upon his
death, and turns his suffering into an offering.

In this Prayer we are to observe the circumstances that attend it, and the
substance of it. The circumstances are two; when and where. when, he prayed
timely, he prayed before he suffered, he armed himself before he came unto the
conflict. But where? in a private place; that he might more freely pour forth
his soul to God, he withdrew himself from all company of men.

In the substance of the Prayer we must see, first to Whom it is directed, and
secondly, What is expressed in it. It is directed unto the Father, and there is
reason it should be so directed; by him was the Cross ordained, therefore a
prayer against the Cross must be directed unto him. But as he to whom Christ
directed his prayer is his Father: so in directing of it he does express the
behavior of a Child. The behavior of a child is Reverence; Reverence is a
virtue compounded ex timore and amore, of fear and love; it is either an
awful love, or a loving awe: Christ expresses both these affections in his
prayer; Fear in his humiliation, for he did prostrate himself before his
Father; Love in his compellation, for the words are childe-like, or
childelikely affectionate wherein he speaks to his Father.

But more distinctly, you may observe in them two excellent points of
Rhetoric, (...) and (...), a sweet insinuation in My Father; they are
melting words, and stealingly are able to alter the constancy of a resolute
Father; and an importunate feruency in Abba, Pater, or (as the Syriac) Father,
Father, these are forcing words, the redoubling shows that he meant to make
his way by spiritual force, and break into the ears and heart of his Father
by an acceptable violence. So does he direct his prayer.

But what does he express in it? surely veleitatem naturae, and voluntatem
gratiae; a wish of nature, and will of grace. The wish of nature is against the
Cross, but the will of grace is for it.

More distinctly. The Cross is noted by two words, hac Hora, hic Calix, this
Hour, this Cup, which words import the same things, only the Hour expresses
the time, and understands the Cross; the Cup expresses the Cross, and
understands the time: both contain the determinate Passion of Christ. And
against this determinate suffering is the wish of Nature bent, it appears in
those words, transeat, aufer; the Cup hasteneth to me, Let it pass by: or if
that be not to be hoped, because I have undertaken as a surety, yet aufer,
interpose between it and me, and suffer it not to stay upon me. This is the
wish of Nature.

But it is a modest wish, therefore it comes in with a Si, If it be possible.
Things are possible either to Gods Power, or to his Will; to his Power all
things are possible that are not contrary to his Nature: but by his Will many
things are impossible, which otherwise may be done by his Power. So that
Possible and Impossible must be understood in respect of Gods will, and
therefore does St. Luke in stead of If it be possible, put in If thou will; so
that Christ does not desire to speed if there be any impediment from Gods will.

This appears more plainly in the will of Grace, expressed in the last words,
Not what I will, but what thou will; wherein you must mark a distinction of
Wills, and a submission of the one to the other. There is a will of God, and a
will of Christ; by Gods Will is meant his Decree, and by Christ's Will is meant
his Desire; these agree not, and therefore there must be an yielding: And as it
is meet Christ does here submit his Desire unto the Will of God, Not my will,
but thine be done.

Finally, compare the wish of Nature, and the will of Grace, and mark that the
wish is conditional, but the will absolute; we may not press our desires
without this restraint, If God will: but we must surrender our selves wholly
unto Gods will, without any limitation from our own will.

And so have you such particulars as I apprehend in this Text, I will now (God
willing) unfold them more particularly; I pray God I may do it effectually
also, that we may so hear as to learn, learn to follow those steps which
Christ has trod out before us.

Let us come then to them, and begin at the Circumstances, whereof the first is
when Christ prayed; that circumstance is rather gathered out of the contexture
of the Chapter, than expressed in the Text, yet may it not be omitted. We must
observe that Christ prayed before he suffered; and why? it was the
accomplishment of a Ceremony and a Prophecy. A Ceremony; for the Leuiticall
Sacrifices were first consecrated by prayer, before they were burnt upon the
Altar; and Christ coming to be the truth of Sacrifices, did first deuote
himself unto God, before he was nailed unto the Cross. As he did herein
accomplish a Ceremony: so did he a Prophecy also; Oblatus est quia ipse
voluit (says Esaias) he dyed not of constraint but willingly; and this Prayer
does testify, that his bloody suffering was a free will offering. Neither
indeed could his death have been meritorious for us, if it had not willingly
been undertaken by him.

But the words that Christ speaks as they are a Prayer, so is that Prayer a
feeling representation of the Cross; whereupon this circumstance will yield us
another lesson, and that is of religious policy, Christ put himself into an
agony, before he was rackt upon the Cross, and suffered from himself, before
he suffered from others. Why so? such a preparation did fore-arme him against
his Passion, and he undauntedly took down the draught after he had sowred his
mouth with this foretaste of the Cup; neither do we find after this, he
being taken by the Jews, crucified by the Gentiles, that (till immediately
before he gave up the ghost) he showed any signs of a perplexed man. What
wonder if we be leether when calamities overtake us, and faint in the day of
affliction? In prosperity we think not of adversity, neither do we by
mortification enable our selves to be more patient of mortality. He that
rests his bones daily upon a downe-bed, and pampereth his flesh delicately
every day, he that never pincheth his body with fasting, nor afflicts his
soul with spiritual sorrow, how should he bear hunger, thirst, nakedness,
tortors, anguish, etc. when God leaves him to the will of his Enemies? Evils
feelingly premeditated do less molest; wherefore after the example of Christ
we must still be ready to meet them, and then if they come, we shall be less
distressed with them.

You have heard when Christ prayed, you must now hear where.

As he prayed timely, so he prayed privately in a retired place of the Garden
of Gethsemane, the place was a Garden, that Garden was Gethsemane, and in
Gethsemane he chose out a retired place; every one of these has something
remarkable in it. The place was a Garden; There be many things wherein we may
parrallel the first and second Adam; amongst other things this may go for one;
the first fell in a Garden, and it is in a Garden that the second begins to
suffer; in a Garden did Adam lose Gods image, and incur Gods displeasure, and
in a Garden Christ did sorrow for the loss, and tremble at the danger.

The Place was not only a Garden, but also the Garden of Gethsemane; and
Gethsemane was a Garden at the foot of Mount Oliuet, set (as it seems by the
name) with Olive trees; yea and therein was Torcular an Olive press, wherewith
the oil was strained out of the olives; for these reasons was it called
Gethsemane, and that is by interpretation Vallis pinguium, a Valley of fat
things. Behold an excellent Emblem of our Savior Christ, who is the true
Olive spoken of by Zachary, cap. 4. by St. Paul, Romans 11. and he has his name
from Oil. Yea, and what was his Cross, but the Olive press of Gethsemane,
that so strained him the true Olive, that his name became Oleum effusum? Cant.
1. and the drops of Oil that streamed from Christ have anael'd many millions
of men made Christians. John 18.
Christ took delight to walk in this Garden, intimating thereby that it was
his delight so to be pressed with the Cross.

But there is a third thing which we must mark in this place, in Gethsemane he
withdrew himself from his Disciples, when he gave himself to Prayer; that he
might more freely pour forth his soul unto God, he retired himself from all
company of men: And indeed retiredness is most fit for passionate and
affectionate Prayers. Many things may beseem us in private, which in public
are not fit; the tears of the eyes, the sobs of our tongues, the beating of
our breasts, the interruptions of our affections, the prostration of our
persons, the villifying of our selves, expostulations with God, and such like,
many of these modesty will stifle in company, or they may be abused to vain
glory; but priuacie takes away all hope of the one, as it gives us scope to
be free in the other. Therefore Christ here by example teaches that, whereof
in St. Matthew, cap. 6. v. 5. he gives a rule, To pray in private, to pray in
our closet. And many holy men have not only practiced, Aug. Bern, Anselm. Heb.
10.
but recorded also their soliloquies and private conferences that have passed
between God and their souls. But this is not to be abused to the prejudice of
the Communion of Saints, or public Prayers, they must be observed: St. Paul
blames them that neglected the Assemblies; these private Devotions must be
added over and above the public; Christ that used these, did not forbear the
other, no more must we.

The last thing that I will note upon this Cricumstance is, that Christus
separatus est in oratione, qui separatus est in passione, Christ associated
none with him in this offertory Prayer more than he did in his propitiatory
Sacrifice, or Suffering upon the Cross: he bids the Disciples pray for
themselves, he never bids them pray for him; the glory of the Redemption is so
wholly his, that he suffered none to have the least share therein with him.

And so have I unfolded the Circumstances unto you, let us now come to the
Substance of the Prayer.

Wherein we must first see to whom it is directed.

And we find that the person is the Father; and indeed he ordained the Cross,
and therefore there is reason that a prayer concerning the Cross should be
made unto him. Jews and Gentiles, wicked men and Angels had a hand in it, but
it was but a secondarie hand, the primarie was Gods, they did no more than was
determined by him. And God that determined it, determined it as a Father, out
of the heart of a Father did he ordain it, and he did manage it with a
Fathers hand. Had God been as bowellesse as Adam was graceless, the fall of
man had been as desperate as was the fall of Angels; but God forgot not to be
a Father, when Adam forgot to be a Child; therefore out of his Fatherly
affection did he provide this recovery of his lost child, he provided that
his only begotten Son should dye, that his adopted sons might live. Neither
did he only ordain it out of a Fathers heart, but managed it also with a
Fathers hand; he included nothing in the ransom of the adopted Sons that
tended not to the glory of the only begotten Son; neither was Christ ever so
handled by God, as that God did not show himself a Father unto Christ. We have
our afflictions, and happily we acknowledge they come from God; but that is not
enough, the Heathen did so much: as many as acknowledge divine providence,
acknowledge that from it comes light and darkness, peace and war,
prosperity and adversity. But our Afflictions have this proper name of the
Cross, and when we enquire after the Author of them, we must behold God in
the person of a Father, with this title must we sweeten his sour providence.
Are we left to the will of our enemies? yet he that holds the bridle is a
Father, and they can do no more than he will permit; yea to him belong the
issues of death, and he will suffer no child to be tempted above his strength.
Does God chastise us himself? as what child is there whom the Father
chastises not? and by chastisement shows that he takes him not for a
bastard, but for a son? then paululum supplieij satis est patri, his mercy
will rejoice over his judgment; 1 Samuel 7. Heb. 12.
he couenanted so with David in the Old Testament, and in the New Testament he
warranteth as much by S. Paul. Wherefore whenever we pray against the
Cross, let us not forget to pray unto God as our Father.

As we must put upon God the person of a Father when we pray to him, so must
we not come to him but with the behavior of a Child; Certainly Christ did
not. The behavior of a Child is Reverence, and Reverence is a virtue
compounded ex timore and amore, of awe and love; Christ expressed both these
affections, his Awe in an humiliation, and in a compellation his Love,

His Humiliation was the prostrating of his body, He fell upon the earth,
says my Text; St. Luke, He fell upon his knees; St. Matthew, He fell upon his
face; all agree that he was humble, very humble, Humilitatem mentis habitu
carnis ostendit, the posture of his body made sensible the lowliness of his
soul. The distance between the Creator and the Creature is so great, that it
may well beseem the most glorious Angel in Heaven to fall down low before
his footestoole: certainly the 24. Reu. 5.
Elders cast down not only their Crowns, but themselves also before his
throne where they attend. And if the distance of a Creature from his Creator
call for such behavior, what behavior must a sinner use when he appears
before his judge? what humiliation of Body must true contrition of heart
express? must we not show that we are unworthy to look to Heaven? most worthy
to be reputed no better than vileness? The Son of God in the form of Man
had but sin imputed, and yet we see here how thereupon he is humbled, and how
then should we villifie our selves in whom sin is inherent? We always owe
lowliness, but we should strive to intend it most when we have most need to
deprecate Gods wrath; the greater need we have of mercy, the more show should
we make of our humility. How does this check the stiffenesse of our knees,
the loftiness of our looks, the inflexiblenesse of our bodies? if we be
richer, if we be greater than others, we think we may be, more familiar shall
I say? nay more unmannerly before God; we think we should have less sense
of our sin, because we have in worldly things outstript our neighbors. And
yet if you observe, you shall find that none are more ambitious after caps and
knees, and more moody if they be disregarded, than they that regard God least,
and are least respective of his Majesty. What shall I say then to you?
imitemur Ducem nostrum, let us think Christ's practice worth the imitation; let
not servants stick at that which is done by the Son; let us not be ashamed
to do for our selves that which Christ has done not only before us, but for
us also; when we pray let us pray most humbly.

The second part of Reverence is Love, and that appears in the compellation,
My Father, Abba, Father. But I told you, that we were therein distinctly to
observe (...) and (...); (...) in my Father: so St. Matthew delivers Christ's
words; and they are a sweet insinuation, they serve stealingly to melt the
affection of a Father. As a Father pitieth his child (says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 103. seven so does the Lord pity them that fear him; Esaias goes farther,
cap. 59. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? yea she may forget, yet will not I forget
thee: Our Savior Christ enlarges this comparison, If you being evil know how
to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father
give good gifts to them that ask him? Mat. 7. So then where there is a Father,
there are bowels on earth commonly, in heaven undoubtedly. Lib. 1. de Abraham^
cap. 8.
What then St. Ambrose spoke of the like words uttered by Isaac to his father
Abraham, when Abraham went about to sacrifice Isaac (a lively type of this
intercourse between God and Christ in the matter of the Cross) may I well
apply to this compellation of God, Pulsatur pietatis vocabulis, these be words
that will try his bowels whether they be tender or no; he gives a good reason,
Nomina vita solent operari gratiam, non ministerium necis, what stronger motive
to obtain grace, than for a child by mentioning the word Father, to put him
in mind that he was the author of his life? for can he be so hard hearted as
to further the abolishing thereof by death? St. Chrysostom weighing the very
same words as they were uttered by Isaac, pronounces of them, Sufficiebat hoc
verbum ad lancinanda iusti viscera, Abraham could not digest the words, but he
must offer violence unto his own bowels. How powerful then must Christ's words
be with God, if nature required that Abraham should be so moved with them, when
they were spoken by Isaac? Certainly, if My Father prevail not, I know not
what compellation will work in the bowels of God. And yet here you must
observe, that as Isaacs My Father removed not Abraham from his faithful
obedience, no more did Christ's My Father alter Gods determinate course for the
redemption of man; his Love unto us made him seem to be bowellesse toward his
own Son; at so much the higher rate therefore are we to value our
Redemption.

As there is (...) in the compellation, so there is (...) also; besides the
sweet insinuation Christ expresses a fervent importunity, Abba, Pater, as the
Greek, as the Syriac, Father, Father.

The Greek expresses the language of the Jew, and the language of the
Gentile, to signify that God by Christ's Cross, was to become the Father as
well of the Gentile as of the Jew.

But the Syriac doubleth the same word; while Christ was in his Agony (says
St. Luke) he prayed (...), more earnestly. Cap. 22.
St. Paul, Hebr. 5. tells us, that Christ offered up prayers and supplications,
with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death.
And the passion Psalms how full of this zeal are they, Psalm. 22. and 69. etc.
and how do they (as it were) force a way by Gods ears unto his heart?
Certainly God does not love cold prayers, that bids us ask, seek, knock;
in the Parable of the unjust Judge Christ teaches us this duty, and the
Canaanitish woman is a good example of such acceptable importunity: but beyond
all, this practice of our Savior Christ, for what can be added unto his
compellation? surely nothing, and yet it is little that so much religious
Rhetoric does work. And what do we learn herehence? even this, that
though in praying we do our best, yet we must not look to speed always,
neither must it grieve us, seeing Christ was contented to take a repulse; God
will have us entreat him with the best of our devotion, but the success
thereof he will have us leave to his disposition; wherein I commend no more
unto you than I find done by Christ, as now you are to hear in the following
part of my Text.

Having showed you sufficiently to whom Christ directs his prayer, I will now
show unto you what he expresses therein; he expresses the wish of Nature,
and the will of Grace.

The wish of Nature is against the Cross, the Cross is expressed by two words,
haec Hora, and hic Calix, this Hour, this Cup; the Hour notes the time
prefixed for Christ's suffering, as that which Christ was to suffer is
understood by the Cup, yet so that the Cup includes the Hour, and the Hour
the Cup.

But to handle them distinctly; Haec hora is an Ellipticall phrase, you may
supply it out of the third of the Revelation, where it is called (...), the
Hour of temptation. And indeed the Cross put Christ to it, it tried him to
the uttermost: therefore well may it be called Haec hora, more than an
ordinary hour, for it was a most woeful time. But this word has two additions
elsewhere; for sometimes we read Hora mea, my Hour, Luke 22.53. sometimes
Hora vestra, your Hour, John 12.27. It was a time wherein Christ was to be a
patient, in that respect does he call it His hour; and the wicked were to be
agents, in that respect he calls it their hour: each of them were to act
their parts, and for that they had this time assigned them. But we must ascend
above them both even unto God, who as he is Governor of the world, keeps
times and seasons in his own power; so that nothing is either suffered or done
but in the time which he has prefixed. And if it be true of all times, then
specially of most remarkable times, such as was the time of Christ's Passion,
which being fixed neither himself did prevent, neither could it be prevented
by others; Christ does more than once allege for a reason why the malice and
craft of his enemies took not place, but that maugre all their endeauours he
went on in his Ministry, Hora mea nondum venit, the hour of the Cross was not
yet come.

Put Hour and Cross together, and then this word will yield another note,
which is, that though the time of the Cross be bitter, yet it is but short;
the story of the Gospel shows that it was quickly past over, within the space
of a day was all the bitterness thereof overcome. And as the Cross of Christ,
so that of Christians is not lasting: St. Paul calls them momentany
afflictions, 2. Cor. 5. King David tells us, that heaviness may endure for a
night, but joy will come in the morning, Psalm. 30. and that the rod of the
wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, Psalm. 125.

But enough of the Time, we shall insist longer upon the Cup, and therein
behold the nature of the Cross.

Here then are two words, Calix and Iste, a Cup, and this Cup. Touching the
Cup, I will not trouble you with the diverse conjectures concerning the
original of this phrase, I will deliver that which is fairly grounded on the
Scripture. Esaias 63.8. Revel. 19. Psalm. 75.8.
Observe then that Gods wrath is compared to a winepresse, and the effects of
that wrath unto the wine strained out; in the Psalm it is called red wine,
elsewhere deadly wine, wine that is able to make men drunk, sick, mad, not
corporally but mentally: it surchargeth their wits, and bereaueth them of all
heart that drink it. This wine of Gods wrath is meant by the Cup. But it
notes withal, that as calamities come from God, so he apportions to every
man his part, he gives him to drink as much as he thinks fit. Of this Cup
you may read in the 25. of Jeremy, where the Prophet is willed to send it from
Nation to Nation; and the contents of each of their Cups, or rather draughts
out of the Cup, are foretold by that Prophet, and by others, in whom we read
their several desolations. But we have not now to do with the Cup in
general, but with this Cup, the Cup whereof Christ was to drink, which was
indeed an extraordinary Cup: you will confess it, if I do but touch at the
quantity and quality of the liquor. Touching the Quantity, the Fathers observe
two kinds of ingredients, the Principal and the Accessory. The Principal are
Malum Culpae, and Malum Poenae, Sin and Woe; the Sin of Adam, a rank
root, from whence have sprung many branches, all full laden with evil fruit,
and that of diverse kinds, of diverse growths. These Sins with their plenty
and variety take up a great room in the Cup. And what Sin does not fill, Woe
may; for Woe is the inseparable companion of Sin: God is offended with it,
and if God be offended, then must the Sinner look to be afflicted; the
affliction due unto us is in one word called Death; death temporal, death
eternal, the seuering of the soul from the body, of both from God; and if
from God, then no less from bliss than from grace. To say nothing of the
Harbingers of corporal death that set forward our mortality, and the
companions of spiritual death that aggrauate our misery. All these ingredients
being put into the Cup, if yet any thing be wanting, the Accessories added unto
these Principals will make full measure: I will mention only two, the treason
of Judas, and the unnaturalness of the Jews. Of Judas there is a passionate
complaint in one of the Psalms, where he is typed out in Achitophel, Had it
been anenemy that had done me this wrong I could have borne it, but it was
thou mysamiliar friend, with whom I did eat, of whom I took counsel. It is a
miserable thing to be betrayed, but most miserable to be betrayed by a friend,
a Lord by his Servant, a Master by his Disciple, Christ by an Apostle. Put this
then into the Cup. And besides this the unnaturalness of the Jews; Romans 14.
they were Christ's kindred according to the flesh, and Christ did vouchsafe to
be the Minister of the Circumcision, he preached his Sermons to them, and
amongst them did he work his Miracles; he termed all the world but dogs in
comparison of them, and to seek them whom he compares to lost sheep, he
was contonted to come down from Heaven. And see how they reward his kindness,
nothing will satisfy them but his blood, and that spilt in the most painful,
in the most shameful fashion. And as if that were not enough, they make a
blasphemous and desperate prayer, that the guilt of it might cleave to them and
theirs; certainly this adds not a little to the Cup. By this time (I
think) we have measured out a very large draught, neither is it possible to
conceive a larger.

But as the draught is great in regard of the quantity, so in regard of the
quality it was very bitter: we must then observe that this wine of Gods wrath
is either merum, or dilutum, sheere, or allayed. Others that in this world have
had their cups have had them more or less allayed; never was any man's Cross
without some comfort; if he were afflicted in soul he had some ease in body;
if his honor failed, yet his wealth abode; or if both failed, yet he found
some friend to pity him, at lest he had some refreshing of meat or sleep,
some way or other was his torture mitigated; never did any man in this world
drink of this red wine unmixed but our Savior Christ; comfort from without he
had none, for all forsook him, and he had as little in himself, his body was
tortured from top to toe by the Jews, and his soul was exagitated by the
fiends of Hell; As for his Godhead, though the Hypostaticall union was not
dissolved, yet was the comfortable influence thereof into the manhood suspended
for a time. By all this put together, we may conclude that it was Vinum merum,
there was no allay of that bitterness that was put into the Cup, though it
were poured in in great abundance. Add hereunto that Christ was not ignorant,
nor insensible of this great and bitter Cup; not to know what we are to do,
not to have sense to feel what we do, is such stupiditie as may not be moved
with such a Cup: but if the eye of the understanding be clear to behold it,
and the heart be tender to feel it, then will it move with a witness. Now
none ever matched our Savior Christ, in sapientia and charitate, in a piercing
judgment, and a feeling nature, and therefore the deeper impression did the
apprehension of this Cup make in him: I have a Baptism (says he, Luke 12.)
wherewith I must be baptized, and quomodo coarctor? and how am I grieved until
it be past? But the Evangelists do open his sense thereof more distinctly,
they show how it affected his head; upon the foretaste he began (...), to be
amazed; how it affected his heart, he began (...), to droope, to faint; how it
affected all his soul (...), it was all ouercast with a heaviness to death;
finally how it affected his body, it made it sweat great drops of blood. Put
these together, and you have a fair commentary upon that one word wherewith S.
Luke does express Christ's sense, calling it (...) an Agony, or a sharp
conflict.

And indeed we must confess, that there was much extraordinary in Christ's
Cross, and that it was such a draught as none could take but he. And by this
we must observe in the Cup and Christ's sense thereof, first that God would
have copiosam redemptionem, not only in regard of the person suffering which
was both God and Man, and therefore could to a little suffering add an
infinite worth; but also in regard of the sufferings themselves, which God
would have to be as great as the person of Christ was capable of. And he would
not have it seem strange unto us if we be put to a fiery trial, seeing God
was pleased so far to exercise the patience of his own dear Son; after
his example we must be contented to take not only Calicem, but Calicem hune, to
drink not only of a Cup, but of a very bitter Cup also; as many in the
primitive Church, and later ages have done. Secondly in the liveliness of
Christ's sense we are taught quanti steterit salus nostra, with how great
heaviness and horror Christ undertook and went through the redemption of our
souls; the more he felt of that, the more are we indebted to his love, and
should detest our sin; yea we must learn of Christ's sorrow to sorrow our
selves for our selves, and by his heaviness how to be heavy when we have
offended God. But enough of the Cross.

Let us come now to the wish of Nature. It is expressed in two words, transeat,
aufer, let it pass, take it away. The words import that the Cup was making
toward him; and indeed the word hour, shows that this was the time of
taking it: now death the reward of sin, temporal death fast clasped with
eternal, came to require due satisfaction to be made to God. Christ does not
deny that this is just, therefore let it go on, but yet transeat, let it go
besides me, let not me be the party on whom it seizes. But how can that be,
seeing Christ stood out as the surety of mankind? the execution must come out
upon him that has undertaken the debt; if then God let his judgments ire go
forth, certainly they will not transire pass by the person of Christ; for
they are right arming Thunderbolts, as the Wiseman calls them. Therefore
Christ adds a second word aufer; though of themselves they would seize on me,
yet be thou pleased to take them from me; let thy hand stay them which will not
stay themselves.

But to leave the words, and come to the things that are obseruable in the
Wish. It is an inborne principle of nature for every living thing to desire his
preservation and abhor destruction; but this principle should be more living in
the Sons of men who know that God made not death, Wisd. 1.
and that it is the wages of sin; Romans 5. Ambros and Theophylact. in bunc
locum.
because it is unnatural, because it is penal it may be feared, it must be
deprecated; we put off nature, if our nature be not so affected. Especially if
it be Calix iste, such a Cup as Christ's, an extraordinary Cup, we may not only
deprecate it, but ingeminate our deprecation, as Christ three times prayed the
same words: and St. Paul did the like against the buffettings of Satan. But we
must mark, that though all things were foreseen by Christ and resolved upon,
yet it pleased God that he should permit every power of his soul to do and
suffer what was natural unto it, Chrysostom.
and thereby declare unto the world that he was a true Man. Sermon 1. de
Sancto Andrea.
Yea St. Ambrose and St. Bernard observe, that it was much more glorious for
Christ to do so, than to have done the contrary: that not only the passion of
his body, but the affection of his heart also might make for us: that whom his
death quickened, them his trembling might confirm, his heaviness glad, his
drooping cheer, and his disquiet set at rest. Theophylact observes, that
Christ's Wish is a good warning to us that we do not cast our selves into
temptation. (...). de passione Christi.
St. Cyprian gives the reason, Quis non timeat, si timet ille quem omnia
timent? he prefaceth his words with a passionate Meditation; and they are
foolishly hardy that presume of more than is expressed in the Wish of Christ. And
the Wish is not only Admonitory, but Consolatorie also. It is no small comfort
that it is lawful for us to express our Wishes though they be contrary to Gods
will, yea his known will, for so was Christ's. The more rigid is their Divinity
that are so zealous for Grace that they abolish Nature, and will have a
Christian man forget to be a man.

But though this Wish may be common to Christ and us, yet is there as great
difference between it as it rises in us, and as it rose in him. It rose in
him never but according to the prescript of reason, his reason was never
prevented by his affection; sicut quando voluit factus est homo, as he was not
incarnate but when he was willing: so only when he was willing did his
affections stir within him; Nihil coactum in Christo, Damascen lib. 3 Orthod.
sid. cap. 20.
the objects could not work his affections, but when he saw it fit; therefore
shall you read in the Gospel, that Christ troubled himself when he groaned
in spirit, John 11. But as for our affections, they out-step our discretion,
and we are transported with them before we are advised, which makes us
retract them with our after wits. Secondly, Christ's affections, when they
stirred, never passed those bounds which were set them by reason; but ours will
not so be bridled: seldom are we moved, but we either over reach or come short
of that which we ought to do. Therefore our affections and Christ's are fitly
resembled to two Vials of clean water, whereof the one has a muddy residence,
the other has no residence at all: stir the water that is in the Vial
without residence, and though you trouble it, yet you shall not see any
foulness in it; but no sooner is that Vial that had the residence stirred,
but the mudde mingleth with the water: even so our affections are tainted with
concupiscence; from which, conception by the Holy Ghost did free our Savior
Christ. You have heard the Wish of Nature, and heard how it is bent against the
Cross.

But there is one point which may not be omitted, Christ's modesty in expressing
this: for it is but a conditional Wish; Christ limiteth it with If, If it
possible let this Cup pass. Things are possible either only to Gods Power, or
also to his Will. All things are possible to Gods Power, that are not contrary
to his Nature; for he is (...), and all things are his host, they subsist in
him, and therefore have their strength from his influence. Add hereunto, that
in this very case God could absolutely forgive all sins and abolish Hell,
being an absolute Lord. But Gods Power is moderated by his Will, and when the
Will has set down a resolution, then the contrary is impossible, not simply,
but because God cannot vary his judgment. So that here comes in a second
distinction of Possible and Impossible, in regard of Gods Will. Now Christ does
not put in the condition in regard of Gods absolute Power, but in regard of his
limited; therefore in St. Luke he says, If thou will: as if he did not desire
it if Gods Will were against it, if his Will made it impossible to his Power.
So then Christ doubts not Gods Power, but acknowledges that it is governed
by his Will. This Maxim if it were well heeded, would determine many
differences between us and the Church of Rome, who talk much of Possible by
Gods Power, when we speak only of Possible according to Gods Will, in the
argument of Transubstantiation. But I will not fall into a Controversy. Out of
all that you have heard putting the condition to the desire, you may gather,
that the Voice of Nature is but Veleitas, a Wish, though a reasonable Wish; for
Oration est rationalis actio, Christ could not conceive his Wish in a prayer,
and not guide his prayer by reason; the fore-taste of the Cross did not so
far ouerwhelme him, as that he knew not well what was uttered by him. Though
later Divines, as well Popish as our own, so amplify Christ's agony, that
they seem to conceive otherwise; yet seeing they do absolutely free Christ
from sin, they may not in charity be thought to detract any thing from the
reasonable aduisednesse of Christ in speaking these words; Christ was free in
uttering the lawful Voice of Nature, but lower he did not go. Yea when he
came thither, he soared higher, and in the Will of Grace, surmounted the Wish
of Nature.

God is pleased that Christian men should be men, but being men he will have
them Christians also; he does not deny us the Wishes of men, but he will have
us also have the Will of Angels.

The Schools distinguish between the superior and inferior reason, not but
that reason is one and the same; but the objects are not the same whereabouts
reason is conversant: there are some that are called Rations humanae, such
motives as are presented by the nature of man; some are called Rations
diuinae, such motives as are offered unto us from God. Reason may be an
Advocate for both, so that in favor of the lesser, it do not prejudice the
greater; and in this discretion consists the Will of Grace.

But more particularly: We must observe here a distinction of Wills, and a
submission of the inferior to the superior. First, for the distinction. The
Will of God is his Decree, the Will of man is his Desire. Gods Decree I must
open a little farther; as for man's Desire I need not open it, you have heard
enough in the Wish of Nature. Gods Decree then is in the Acts called (...),
Cap. 2.23.
a determinate Will; he does nothing in time, which before time he has not
determined, especially in this great work of man's Redemption: he decreed how
sin should be expiated, and himself pacified, how the Powers of darkness
should be conquered, and man restored, how Mercy and Justice should meet
together; all this comes under the name of Gods Will. See then how he does
cloth the Cross with this sweet word, thy Will, not so much attentive to his
own pain, as to Gods good pleasure.

The Wills being thus discerned, we must now see how Christ does submit his
Will unto his Fathers, Not my Will, but thine be done. Wherein you must first
observe, that Christ does not desire death propter se, sed propter aliud, not
for it self, as if there were any thing desirable in it, but only to obey his
Fathers Will. Secondly, that to obey it, he does deny himself; his own life
is not dear unto him, so he may do his Fathers Will. John 18. Shall I not
drink the Cup (says he to S. Peter) which my Father has given me? and
elsewhere, John 12. Father, save me from this hour, yet therefore did I come;
I came to do not mine own Will, but his that sent me, Ioh. 6. And indeed to
have a Will subject to none, is the property of God; men must imitate the
Planets that go not their own motions, otherwise than they are permitted per
primum mobile: so should all the motions of our soul conform themselves to
the good pleasure of God. Christ in the Lords Prayer teaches this by Rule, but
here he teaches it by Example. We should be guided by the Rule, and our
neglect is inexcusable, if we do not follow it; but our contempt is
intolerable, if we be not moved by the Example: Si Filius obediuit vt faceret
voluntatem Patris, quanto magis seruus? De orat. Dominic.
(says St. Cyprian) it is intolerable insolency for a servant to be
selfe-willed, when a child does bend to the will of his father; for man to be
headstrong when Christ is so pliable. Intolerable insolency did I say? nay
gross folly; Tert. de Orat. cap. 4.
for Vel eo nobis been optamus cum dicimus fiat Voluntas tua, quod nihil sit
melius Voluntate diuina, We cannot wish better unto our selves, than to submit
our selves unto Gods Will; for that there is no hurt that can be expected from
his Will, no not when he does correct us, or lay the Cross upon us: for
Christ's Cross on earth brought him to the throne of Heaven, and our
afflictions are not worthy of the Glory that shall be revealed upon us. But
from our own will we can expect no good, it can reach no farther than our
understanding, which is but blind, and oftentimes it is overthwart when that
sees right. And therefore as it is happy for the children of men, that being
of weak judgments, and of weaker affections, have parents to whose direction
and correction they are obedient, for their own good: even so should the
children of God think themselves happy, that they have a Father in Heaven that
orders them better than they can order themselves, to whom if they submit
themselves they are sure they shall not miscarry. But durus est hic sermo, it
is hard to work this lesson into flesh and blood, into the voluptuous, into
the covetous, into the ambitious, into the profane, it is hard to make any
wicked man to take this bridle; Christ had so reverent a respect unto the
sacred Will of God, that he endured the sharpest of pains to fulfill Gods
commands: but so insolent, so foolish are the most of men, that they will have
their own wills, satisfy their own lusts, and rather than fail thereof, they
will break Gods bonds, and cast his cords from them. And what Cup can be
bitter enough to purge such peccant humors?

The last note that I gave upon the Text, is the comparison between the Wish
and the Will, whereof I told you the one was conditional, the other absolute,
the one is but as it were a deliberation, the other a resolution. And indeed
that difference we must hold when our Wishes and Gods Decrees are different,
never to present our desires but with a condition; but to take heed of
capitulating with God: for that were to give Law unto the Lawgiver, which
should not be attempted, and will not be endured.

But it is time to end: Tract. 104.
Christ (says S. Austin) being in the form of a servant, might have conceived
this prayer in silence; but It a se voluit Patri exhibere peccatorem, vt
meminisset se nostrum esse doctorem, he would so perform his devotion, as
might make best for our instruction. And Saint Chrysostom notes herein an
extraordinary instruction, Sublimem admirabilis Philosophiae virtutem docet,
etiam Nature a abhorrente and renuente Deum sequendum, It is an high strain of
Christian virtue that is taught us in this pattern of Christ, so far to be
masters of our natural Affections, that will they, nil they, we will do what
God does bid us. St. Cyprian tells is that we are not only taught by Christ
What to do, but How; namely, to imitate Christ's offertory Prayer, prostrating
our selves humbly, inuocating our Father reverently, and not presenting our
desires otherwise than conditionally; if we take this course we shall conclude
with an absolute submission unto the Will of God.

Certainly St. Bernard thought so; for he meditateth thus upon my Text, Noniam
despero, Domine, Lord, I am not out of heart now, be my case never so bad; Let
my tribulation be irksome unto me, and let me have a comardly heart by nature,
let me be forward, when I petition with Transeat, Let this Cup pass, take i^
from me: I have learned of thee to betake my self, not to a carnal, but an
heavenly comfort, Not my Will but thy Will be done, will hold in all murmuring,
and hearten all fainting of my soul. These words then are exemplary words,
they inform us what Christ did, to direct us what we must do; Christ's example
is without exception, because he was without sin, and is of good use for us,
because we may fall into the like case. The like (I say) but not the same; we
may fall, though not into a Propitiatory, yet into a Probatory suffering. It is
sacrilege to affect the one, the other is common to the whole Church. When we
fall into it, if we take Christ for our pattern, we shall find him our patron
also; we shall find that his draught has left little bitterness in ours, and
that which is left is much allayed. When Christ made this Prayer, an Angel
from heaven comforted him, and if we conceive the like prayers, the Spirit of
Christ will not fail to be a comforter to us. Only let us ex non volito make
volitum, give the upper hand to Grace above Nature, and we shall find much joy
in affliction, which will be unto us the pledge of a greater joy, which after
our affliction we shall enjoy in the Kingdom of Heaven.

THis Grace he give unto us, that in this practice has gone before us; that as
his, so by his, our patient obedience may open us a way unto a blessed
Inheritance. IHS

A SERMON PREACHED AT St. PETER'S IN OXFORD Upon EASTER DAY.
1 COR. 15.20. Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of
them that slept.


ANd these words are a part of that first Hymn wherewith we solemnize this
Feast, yea they contain a good and full Commentary upon this days employment.
For this day is spent in historia and Prophetia, we therein renew Christ's, and
foretaste our own Resurrection; that in the Service, and this in the
Sacrament. These two Resurrections are inseparable, therefore St. Paul, willing
to assure us of the later, does first establish the Doctrine of the former; and
he does it by Witnesses, and by Reasons. By Witnesses, because a matter of
fact; and by Reasons, because this fact is an Article of Faith. For Articles of
Faith are not only credenda, but also credibilia, though before they are
revealed, we cannot divine at them, yet being revealed, we may argue fairly
for them; many times out of Nature, but out of Scripture always.

The Reasons here yielded by the Apostle are of two sorts; the first collects
the Absurdities that press all Gaine-sayers; the second those Conueniences
that must be acknowledged by true Believers. This Scripture stand^ in the
midst of these Reasons, and is compounded of the conclusion of the former, and
foundation of the later. The refutation of the Absurdities warrants this truth,
Christ is risen from the dead; and the proof of the Conueniences relyes upon
this ground, Christ is become the first fruits of them that slept.

The Resurrection then from the dead, is the maine point of this Text; and the
Text does occasion us to consider, 1. what it is, then, how applied. What it is
we cannot be ignorant, if we know the terms wherein it is expressed; these two
terms, Dead, and Resurrection. But when we have found them, we must
discreetly apply them: for they have different subjects, Christ, and those that
slept; they belong to both, but unto those by him, for, He is their first
fruits.

These be the contents of this Scripture, and of these shall I, by Gods
assistance, and your Christian audience, now speak, briefly, and in their
order.

And first of the terms, Death, and Resurrection. These terms are opposite,
therefore by the one we must be led to know the other, and because death is
first in nature, I begin at that. All death (if it be antecedent to the
Resurreandion) is either in sin, or for sin: Death in sin is (...), Orat.
7,
as Nyssen defines it, an inabilitie to do good, because we have lost
communion with God. But communion with God simply we cannot lose, and be; for
without him nothing can subsist. It is then communion in that which is his
supreme perfection, in wisdom, and in holiness; the soul that is destitute
of these, that soul is dead, for it can neither taste, nor see how good the
Lord is, whom notwithstanding so to know is everlasting life, and if it be so
senseless, it must needs be liuelesse; It is dead in sin.

But as there is death in sin, so is there also for sin, and this is
double, either only the dissolution of soul and body, or else a penal
condition that follows thereupon. Touching the dissolution we must mark,
that as we exceed a proportion stinted unto us in the use of the Creatures, so
they disproportion the harmony of our bodies that are guilty of this abuse,
and God does in the end separate us from them, because we for them, separated
our selves from God. And this death we call the giving up of the Ghost.

But after these parts are dissolved, there should seize on either of them a
penal condition; On the body, for the grave is not only Sheol, but also
Shacath; it does not only couetously swallow, but digest it also, vere (...),
therein death gnaweth upon this (...), this rotten mouldring house, this
earthly Tabernacle of ours. The Reason of it is, because sin is inherent, and
this leprous house cannot be purged, except it be dissolved, dust it is, and to
dust it must return again. This is the penal condition of our body.

And as corruption seazeth on our body, so should torments on the soul; there
is a worm to bite it, a fire to scorch it, utter darkness to distress it;
finally, fiends that execute Gods vengeance on it, being exiled from the joys
of Heaven, whereunto it was created, and adjudged to the pains of hell which
it has deserved. This is the penal condition of the soul. Of these two
penal conditions consists the second death for sin.

By that which you have heard concerning death, you may easily guess what is
Resurrection, it is nothing but a recovery from death, for this is an
infallible principle, What rises that dyed. Resurrection then is as manifold
as Death: to the double death, the Scripture opposes a double resurrection.
The first Resurrection is from death in sin, and it is (...), Nyssen.
when Grace quickens the soul, and the soul is transformed formed into the
Image of God, the Image of being, and doing good, which the Scripture calls the
Life of God, and the partakers thereof new men. The second Resurrection is from
death for sin, whether it be the dissolution, or the penal condition.
Whatsoever the Heathen thought, it is plain, that after the dissolution there
is an habitude in the soul toward the body, and a natural desire again to
inhabit it; yea it does (...), as it were travail with that appetite, and
appetitus non est frustra, Romans 8.
such a desire is an evidence of Gods purpose: The soul shall again be
reunited to the body.

But to be free from the Dissolution, is not the uttermost of man's desire; he
desires also to be free from the Penal condition, Non est viuere, sed valere
vita, better these parts never meet, than not meet to their mutual comfort:
and therefore the last branch of the Resurrection, is the endless union of
body and soul, in beatitudine plena, and secura, in qua nihil concupiscet,
nihil metuet, so thoroughly, so unchangeably blessed, that they shall have their
hearts desire, and be free from all fear of evil. I insist no longer hereon,
because this point must be resumed again.

Let us come on then, and apply what has been said to the different subjects.

And here first we must take for our guide a received rule, Talia sunt
praedicata, qualia permittuntur esse a subiectis suis. Death and Resurrection
must be limited differently, according to their different subjects.

And the first subject is Christ. Death in sin would not agree with Him, it
will not stand with the grace of his holy unction, much less of his personal
union, he was the Holy one of God, Luke 1. yea the Holy of Holies, Dan. 9. Add
hereunto that a sinner implies a contradiction to a Mediator, neither can they
both consist in one; for such a high Priest it behooved us to have that was
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Hebr. 7. therefore could he
not dye that death.

As he could not dye the death in sin, no more could he undergo all the
death for sin, he could not undergo either part of the penal condition.
Not that of the Grave, his body saw no corruption; and why? though it had sin
imputed, yet had it none inherent, and it is only sin inherent that subjects
us to that part of death. And if his body were free from corruption, much more
was his soul from torment, it left the body to take possession of Heaven
purchased, and Hell conquered upon the Cross; therein his meritorious power
after conflict, brake the knot wherewith the dissolution of body and soul came
fast clasped with the penal condition: and this he proclaimed in his last
speech, John 19. Consummatumest, the passion is now at a full end. There
remains then no part of death for Christ to suffer, but only the dissolution,
the separation of his soul and body, and to that he yielded himself as an
Offerer, that could not be enforced as a Sufferer: When he had triumphed over
principalities and powers, the fiends of Hell, and showed his murdering
crucifiers by the supernatural Earthquake and Eclipse, how he could rescue
himself from death, he laid down his life in testimony of his love to us, and
presented that sacrifice of a sweet smell to God, which only was able to
redeem us.

This being the limitation of his death, the limitation of his Resurrection
must needs be answerable, it must be restrained to the reunion of his body
and soul, (...) Sermon. 1. de Resurrect.
and it is no more in effect, than Quod potestate diuisit, potestate copulauit,
with what power he laid down his life, with the same he took it again.
Though the soul were severed from the body, yet was the Godhead from neither,
the hypostaticall union persisted still, his body continued vitae sacrarium;
Ambros. Romans 1.
he declared himself mightily to be the Son of God, by the Resurrection from
the dead.

But farther to open the Resurrection of Christ. These words seem to be a bare
assertion; and indeed a bare assertion uttered by them that are witnesses
(...), and therefore (...), were enough to warrant an Article of Faith. But the
words imply a manifold proof, and the proof lies in the word CHRIST. Acts 10.
For Christ signifies Anointed, anointed (as the Scripture speaks) with the
Holy Ghost, and with power. This unction is with grace, and that either gratis
data, or gratum faciens, of Edification or Adoption. The grace of Edification
designed Christ to a threefold office, to be a Prophet, a Priest, and a King,
and every one of these implies a proof of his Resurrection.

His Prophecy; for his Resurrection was a principal argument of that, whether
you look upon the types prefiguring, or the words foretelling it, he was to
make both good, or else his Prophecy were liable to exception. As the
Prophecy, so the Priesthood inforceth the Resurrection: How could it appear
that the obligation was cancelled, the Law fulfilled, God pacified, sin
purged, if he had not risen from the dead? What had become of his merit?
Finally, how could his Kingdom subsist without this Resurrection? when could
he have received the keys of Death and of Hell? made all knees bow to him in
heaven, earth, and under the earth, been invested with absolute power, if he
had not risen from the dead. He had never been honored as a King.

The grace then of Edification argues his Resurrection. And so does the grace
of Adoption also; yea that former proves only the (...), but this the (...)
thereof, that resolves strongly that it must be so, but this why it must so be;
for the Resurrection is not debitum carnis, but sanctitatis, it cannot be
challenged by flesh, but by holy flesh, God will not suffer his Holy one to see
corruption, Psalm. 16. The Prince of this world came and had nothing in Christ,
John 14. therefore it was impossible that he should be detained of the sorrows
of death; Holiness and Happiness are inseparable, as in God, so in Christ,
the latter may (...), be for a time suspended, but because of the former, they
could not be long severed.

But the name of Christ does not only note the Truth, but the Condition also
of his Resurrection; for it must be such a Resurrection as does answer his
double unction. First that of Edification; for it must answer the Prophesies,
Bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3. be the death of death, Osea 13. yea by death
overcome him that had the power of death, which is the Devil, Hebr. 2. It did
so, for he led captivity captive, Ephesians. 4. It must answer the Priesthood,
there must need no more sacrifice for sin; with that which he has offered,
he must enter Heaven, and find eternal redemption: He did so; for he sits at
the right hand of God for ever to make intercession for us. Finally, it must
answer his Kingdom, and he must reign as Lord of lords, he must have the Key
of David, shut and no man open, open and no man shut. He does so, in that state
he walks in the midst of the golden Candlestickes, Revel. 1. and cap. 19.
These be things wherein his Resurrection is answerable to his first unction.

But it must also be answerable to his second. Though we have known Christ
after the flesh, yet we must now know him so no more, all mortality and misery
did end at his Resurrection: For (...), Eusebius. de laud. Constant.
was not only (...) but (...), rursum and sursum; he not only rose again,
but rose to an heavenly life, he brought to light life and immortality, Hilar.
in Psalm, 41.
Id quod fuit in id quod non fuit surrexit, nec amisit originem, sed profecit
in honorem, the same body arose, but not in the same state, he retained his
nature, but added glory to it; The Lord showed him the path of life, Psalm. 16.
in whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. Therefore when he did eat and drink after he rose,
and retain the prints of the nails wherewith he was crucified, all this was
but dispensatio, as the Fathers well observe, it served only to settle the
Apostles faith, as also did the concealing of his glory when he appeared unto
them. But to conclude this point, Non magnum est credere quia Christus mortuus
est (says St. Austin) It is not hard to believe that Christ dyed, the Gentiles
and Jews, plotters and actors of his death, do boastingly report it: Sed
fides Christianorum est resurrectio Christi, Christians go beyond them when
they believe that Christ is risen, and risen so. The Priests bribed the
Soldiers to deny it; Eusebius.
the Heathen abolished the Sepulcher that gave testimony of it; the Devil
raised up, even in the Apostles days, Heretics to oppose it: but maugre all,
this truth stands, Christ is risen from the dead. And thus much of the first
subject.

I come now to the second: That is noted by Dormientes, those that slept, which
is equivalent to Mortui, and as manifold; in sin, for sin, as it is
understood spiritually of the soul and body.

I need not put you in mind that the tense is no limitation of the subject; for
in general arguments the Holy Ghost indifferently uses all tenses, because
all times are as one in God, he gives us to understand so much in his word.

But to come to the matter. Mark a sudden change; while he spoke of Christ,
he uses the word Dead, no sooner has he taught that Christ is risen, but he
changes the Dead into Sleepers.

Surely then, Christ's Resurrection made a powerful alteration, it turned death
into sleep; In Marc. lib. (...) cap. 5.
and therefore Mos Christianus obtinet (says Bid) It is usual in the
Christian Dialect, in acknowledgement that we believe the Resurrection, to call
the dead, Sleepers; hence are the places of sepulture called (...), Dorters.

But are Dormientes all, or some? Surely, the word will reach all mankind, and
the Scripture applies it indifferently unto all: take one place for many, Dan.
12. Many of those that sleep in the dust shall awake, which words compared to
the like John 5. appear to be a description of the general Resurrection. The
death then of all is but a sleep.

But we must not mistake, this favors not (...), it cast not the soul, but
the body, into a sleep, and makes the receptacle thereof, not of the soul, to
be but a temporary habitation. The Sadducees of all ages think otherwise,
because they would have it so; you may read their dreams in the Book of the
Preacher, and of Wisdom, together with the refutation of them; I will say no
more to them, but what this word warrants me; (...) there is none, though (...)
there be, their souls and bodies are to continue by Gods ordinance immortally
mortal, and God will unite them again, neither part shall cease to be,
because neither part shall cease to suffer. The body shall not; As the
suggestions and actions of sin were ministered and acted by it, so the
vengeance of sin shall be endured therein. And for the soul, it is
disquieted even with the sleep of the body, while that rots, the soul
forecasts what racks, what tortures are prepared for it, and this has it for
an accessorie to its own pain. Sleep then in this sense belongs to the
wicked. But in my Text by those that slept are meant the faithful. It is of
them only that this Chapter entreats, 1 These. 4.
of those that sleep in Christ; their death is compared unto a quiet, a sweet
sleep, because whereas in this life they are subject to the Cross imposed, or
voluntary mortification, in death they rest from their labors and sleep
without any terrors of evil; so that this word does encourage them to dye,
for who would be troubled when he is called to lay his wearied bones at rest?
But as the word has that encouragement, so has it a better also, and which
does comfort more. For notwithstanding the rest expected, yet the parting of
soul and body is irksome; the rather because we see that this sweet
companion our body, must undergo so different a condition from the soul; The
soul goes to Abraham's bosom there to be feasted with the food of Angels,
but the body must turn to dust, and become the food of worms. And who can
endure this? surely he that remembers that it is but for a moment, the body
does but sleep, it shall awake again, and awake to be of the same condition
with the soul: for so much we are taught in the next word, which is Primitiae,
first fruits, aequiualent to the Resurrection, a phrase well befitting the
season.

To understand it, we must observe that in the Law there were two kinds of
first fruits; One general, consisting of the first of all the Holy Lands
increase, Leuit. 23. Verse 10. and 17.
and those might be offered at any time of the year; another special, that
was restraind to certain seasons, Easter, and Whitsontide. The first season
was Easter day, for the Passover was slain upon Good friday, the day whereon
Christ dyed; the next was to be a holy Convocation, wherein Christ continued
in the Grave; and the day following was the sheaff of first Fruits to be
presented to the Lord, and that was the first day of the weak, the very day
wherein Christ rose from the dead. So that this word Primitiae, is vere
significant, and shows how the Truth did answer the Type; Christ's Resurrection
was meant by that first fruits.

Having found the original of the phrase, let us now rip it up, and inquire
into the meaning of it, and then we shall find that it intimates two things,
Christ's Prerogative, and our Communion. First of Christ's prerogative. Though
the Resurrection belong to Christ, and them that slept, yet first to Christ:
first dignitate and causatione, some add tempore also: but I leave it to be
disputed by the learned; that may pass inter pie credibilia, but these two are
articles of faith: for doubtless Christ had it in a greater measure, and the
measure that we have, we have it from him. First of the digintie.

Vnumquodque recipitur ad modum recipientis; as was Christ's capacity, so was
his participation, his capacity was infinitely beyond ours, his participation
must be answerable. The capacity may be conceived by his Unction, and his
Union: Our Mystical union comes far short of his Hypostaticall; and the
unction of him the Head, far exceeds the drops that distill therefrom into
every one of us that is but a Member; when he rose his glory was without all
comparison. The best of men is but a Star, of what magnitude soever he be,
but Christ is as the Sun, at the presence whereof the glory of all stars
vanishes. Therefore is he Reshith Biccure, the first fruit of first fruits,
as the Law speaks, either word notes an eminency; the first alluding to his
title, The Head; the other to his title of First borne; how much more eminent
then is he when both are joined together. This is his first Prerogative
intimated by his being The first fruits.

But as he is Primus dignitate, so is he causatione also; Scrm. 10. de Pas^h.
for he caused his own, and is the cause of our Resurrection. His own; St.
Bernard so differenceth him from others, Reliqui suscitantur, solus Christus
resurrexit, Well may others be raised, Christ only rose, he only by himself
could conquer death. Therefore though the word be passive, yet must it be
understood actiuely; Christ was so raised that he raised himself, and that not
only merito, but efficacia also; as the Godhead graced the manhood to merit
it, so was the manhood enabled by the Godhead to atchieue it.

But Christ rose, though in se, yet pro alijs, in his own person for our good,
that are (...), his purchase by death. 1 Pet. 2.9.
This is meant in the Law of First fruits, when God tells the Israelites they
shall be presented to make you accepted, and therefore as he was the cause of
his own, so is he the cause of ours also; Primum in vnoquoquegenere est causa
reliquorum, God has given eternal life, but this life is in the Son, He
that has the Son, has this life, and he that has not the Son, has not
this life, Ioh. 1.5. for he only is the quickening Spirit, and has the keys of
death and hell.

But Causa is either aequiuoca, or vniuoca, Christ is Causa Resurrectionis in
both senses, he is Causa aequiuoca even to the wicked; for he is judge, and
therefore shall summon all in the Grave, his Angels shall gather as well tares
as wheat, and the goats as well as the sheep shall he call before him. Yea he
shall not only cause their rising, but their incorruptibilitie also; for it is
by his Almighty power that they shall be supported to endure their torment.

This causation only is not here meant, but causatio vniuoca also; for he is
Primitiae faciens primitias, what himself has, he makes others to enjoy, and
therefore Theophylact observes well, Primitiae ad sequentes respectum habent,
these first fruits have respect to others; as if one of many should begin to
do that wherein he is afterward to be followed by others.

And this appears in our Communion, Communion in name, and in the condition
answerable to the name.

In name: For as Christ, so we are called Primitiae: so speaks Jeremy, cap.
2. v. 3, Israel was holiness to the Lord, and the first fruits of his
increase: and S. James, cap. 1. v. 18. Of his own will begot he us, that we
should be a kind of first fruits of his Creatures: and Revel. 14. These are
redeemed from among men, being the first fruits of God and the Lamb. He is
not so then the first fruits, as if we were left to profane uses: for though
in comparison of us Christ is the First fruits, yet in comparison of the world,
we also are so esteemed; Leuit. 23.
and therefore there is a second First fruits mentioned in the Law, which was
offered at Whitsontide, and represented the Church to whom the Law was given,
and upon whom was poured the Holy Ghost.

But as we communicate in name, 1 Cor. 15.
so do we also in the condition answerable to the name; for, Christus est
Typus Christianorum, As we have borne the image of the earthly Adam, so shall
we of the heavenly also.

To open this Point a little farther: Christus is Typus victoriae, and vitae;
There be two things wherein the first fruits do warrant us communion with
him, Victory, and Life; Victory over all over enemies, they shall all be
subdued, no more tentations, no more foyles, no more reproaches, euea when we
shall fall asleep we may lay our selves down in peace and take our rest, for
Christ which only can, will make us dwell in safety. As securely as himself
rested in the grave, so shall our flesh rest in hope: there is the first taste
of our victory. But when we awake, we shall drink our fill of it; and shall
with the Saints in the Revelation, yea in this Chapter, insult and say, O death
where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? Thanks be unto God which
has given us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord.

But he is Typus, not only victoriae, but vitae also, and that of grace, and
glory. Fulgent. p. 714.
Of grace in Baptism, and of glory at the last day; so the Fathers
distinguish, Resurrectio carnis Christi gratiam nobis and corporalis and
spiritualis resurrectionis attribuit, it raises out of both sleeps, the
spiritual and corporal, and they do it by the direction of St. Paul, for he
makes him a Type of both, but in a different fashion.

Of the first, he is Typus analogicus; of the second, exemplaris: We are
buried with Christ in Baptism, that as Christ dyed and rose again from the
dead, so should we walk in newness of life, Romans 6.3. Christ then in his
Resurrection does first preach unto us rising from sin. And indeed if the
name Christus, did imply the cause of his Resurrection, the name of Christians
must imply the cause of ours: no hope of an answerable resurrection, if we have
not a part in the unction; for the first resurrection does fit us for the
second. If we have (says St. Paul. Phil. 3) our conversation in heaven, we may
look for our Savior which shall change our vile bodies, and make them like
unto his glorious body.

This all should think upon that little intend the first, and yet look for
the second Resurrection, whereas a spiritual body can be the Tabernacle of
none but a spiritual soul; and we must feel the answer of a good conscience
to Godward, before we can be begotten to a lively hope by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ; Nyssen de opif. hom. c. 22.
yea we must (...), foretaste glory by the use of grace. And if a man have
the Spirit of grace, Theophylact comforts him well, Ne angaris animo quod mort
ali corpore cinctus sis, etc. be not disheartened when thou look upon thy
house of clay, the Spirit of life that is in Jesus freeth us from the Law as of
sin, so of death; for if the spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead
dwell in thy mortal body, he that raised Jesus from the dead will also quicken
thy mortal body, by the spirit that dwells in thee, Rom 8.

There is one thing more noted by the first fruits; Leuit. 1.
they were put on the Altar but not burnt; to note, that they were ready for
God without fire. The Cross of Christ has made an end of all affliction,
there remains nothing for us but acceptance, that we be presented unto God
in his Temple, and received into those heavenly Tabernacles.

These be the things that the First fruits do teach, and whereof we may not
doubt; for therefore the Fathers tell us, that Christ's resurrection is not only
Auspex, and Examplar, but also fidei iussor, Theodoret.
yea chirographum nostrae resurrectionis, they make a fair demonstration of
it, Primitiae habent cognationem cum vniuerso eo cuius sunt Primitiae, the
first fruits, and that whose first fruits they are, must needs be of the same
kind.

The cognation then is between Christ's manhood, and ours; in that he opened
unto us the new and living way, Heb. 9.
Non est dubit andum de consortio gloriae, sicut non est dubit andum de
consortio naturae. And therefore the Fathers in the Primitive Church testified
their faith by standing upright this day and many following days while they
prayed; not only to remember themselves whither their desires should tend, but
also to testify that this day is quodammodo imagoventuri saeculi, a
representation of our blessed rising from the dead. It is true that as the
Easter first fruits were presented before those at Whitsontide, so God has put
a distance between Christ's resurrection and ours, we must stay our time; yet
the first fruits wills us to be (...), to be as sure as if we were already
risen.

The last note that I will give upon Primitiae, is, that they are Primitia
dormientium, the first fruits of them that slept; the same flesh awakes which
slept, that first slept in sin, and then for sin. And is not this a
wonderful mercy? This flesh, if you look to the baseness of it, how much
more if to the sinnefulnesse, may seem unworthy of so great glory, but God
does vouchsafe it, and leaves us to stand and wonder at it. He that could have
created new bodies, chooses rather to repair our old; that this our
unworthiness might the more commend his goodness, he will make these quondam
Iustfull eyes, itching ears, bloody hands etc. fit to do him service in the
kingdom of Heaven.

But it is time to conclude. I will shut up all with a few admonitions that
spring from the Text. There is in every man (...), a natural querulousnesse
against death. This Text will silence it, for the remembrance of the
Resurrection (...), (as Athanasius speaks) furnishes us with a shield to
quench that fiery dart, it will make us resolve that death is better than life,
because the passage to a better life. For the Resurrection is Pascha,
Transitus; death is not meta, but via, not our iournies end, but the passage
thereunto: but it is to them that are Christians, that are according to the
inner man Temples of the holy Ghost; for where grace is, Leo de Pasch. Sermon. 13.
there is the passage unto glory; Quare appareant nun^ quoque in Ciuitate
sancta, i.e. in Ecclesia Dei futurae Resurrectionis indicia, and quod gerendum
est in corporibus fiat in cordibus; Let our renewed hearts be unto us a pledge
that our bodies shall be renewed.

But grace must be Paschall, transitus sine reditu, we must so rise from sin
that we return not like dogs to our vomit, 1 Pet. 2.
and like swine to our wallowing in the mire. Sermon 10. de Pasch.
St. Bernard complained of many in his days, Qui sacram Domini Resurrectionem
Paschae priuabant nomine, to whom it was not Transitus, but Reditus, that
though they kept the Feast for a day, and did partake the Sacrament also, yet
after all this turned as good fellows as ever they were before. I would it
were not so with us also: That it is so with the vulgar people, the Tauernes
can witness, that are never better furnished than about this time, I would they
did not witness the like again ^vs also, whose breeding should remember us of
a better course, and teach us that Easter must be transitus sine reditu, as in
Christ, so in Christians.

Whereupon it follows, that this meditation must make every day to be unto
us an Easter day, and if it be to our souls, it will hearten us to hope well
of our bodies also; so that every one of us may boldly say with St. Bernard,
Declam de bonis deser.
Requiesee in spe caro misera, My flesh, frail flesh, be still, and rest in
hope, he that came for thy soul, will come also for thee, and he that reformed
that, will not forget thee for ever.

O Lord that art the life and resurrection, illighten all our darkness that
we sleep not in death of sin, or for sin; let us all awake unto righteousness,
and sin no more: so shall we in thy light see light, and by the life of grace,
be brought unto the life of glory. Which God grant for his Son Christ Jesus
sake, to whom with the Holy Ghost, all honor, glory, might, and majesty be
ascribed both now and ever. Amen.

Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, and Jesus Christ shall give
thee light.

A SERMON PREACHED IN THE CATHEDRAL Church of Wells on EASTER DAY.
MATTHEW. 26. Verse. 26, 27, 28. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and
blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said; Take, eat,
this is my Body.

And he took the Cup, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it.

For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins.

Supply out of LVKE 22.19. This do in remembrance of me.

And out of St. Paul, 1. COR. 11.25. As often as you do it, you show forth the
Lords death till his coming again.


OUR Savior Christ being ready to dye, and by his death to redeem his Church,
the whole Church that began in Adam, and was to continue until the end of the
World, immediately before honored a Sacrament of either Testament; the
Passover that was an annexe of the Old, and the Eucharist that was to be the
annexe of the New Testament. Of the Passover St. Matthew speaks in the words
that go before, of the Eucharist in these that I have read unto you.

The Argument then of my Text is the Eucharist, the original thereof. And of
that (fitting the present The receiving of the Communion.
occasion) my purpose is to give you a very plain, and a very short Exposition.

We may resolve then the Original of the Eucharist into the Author, and the
Institution. The Author is here called Jesus. Touching the Institution, we are
to see, 1. When, and 2. How he did institute it. When; while they were eating.
How; partly by practice, and partly by precept. In the practice we are taught
What Elements were chosen, and What was done with them. The Elements were two,
Bread and Wine: Christ chose these, He took Bread, he took the Cup. In
opening what was done with them, the Evangelist informs us of two works;
first, Jesus his work, and secondly, the work of his Disciples. And either of
their works is double; Jesus work is first to consecrate, and then to
distribute the Elements. In the Consecration we must see, first, How Christ did
it, and secondly, Why. How; he did it by blessing and thanksgiving: blessing of
the Creature, thanksgiving to the Creator. Why; that the Elements might be,
the bread the Body, and the wine the Blood of Christ: so says Jesus after
Consecration of the bread, this is my Body; and of the wine, this is my Blood.
My is a markable word; for it improues the Body and the Blood in that they are
his, which is Jesus.

Secondly, about this Body, the Text instructs us in two other things; first,
How it must be considered, then Whereunto it was ordained. Though they be the
body and blood of Jesus Christ that is glorified in Heaven, yet must they be
considered as he was crucified on earth; the body as it was broken upon the
Cross, and there given for the Church; the blood as it was shed and let out of
his body on the Cross. The body and blood so considered, were ordained to
establish a New Covenant; therefore are they in the Text called the blood of
the New Testament: this was the first end. A second is to assure the Church of
remission of sins; the whole Church: for the blood is shed for many, and the
good that the many were to have thereby, is the remission of their sins.

Besides this first Act of thus consecrating the Elements, Christ performs
another Act, he distributeth that which he consecrateth. In the distribution
we have two things; first, he divides the Elements, he brake the bread; and
the like is to be conceived by Analogy touching the wine; for though not
actually, yet vertually he did divide that, in that he would have every one
drink but a part of the whole. Having thus divided, he delivers the parcels
of the bread and the wine to be drunk by parts: In this sense (says the
Text) he gave the bread, he gave the cup, he gave both, and both consecrated.

Besides this work of Jesus, we have here a work of his Disciples; of the
Disciples, for none might do the work but they, and all of them must do it.
That which they must do, is, they must take that which Christ gives, and what
they take they must eat and drink as it was consecrated; Eat this which is my
body, drink this which is my blood, etc. And they must eat and drink it to
the same end for which it was consecrated: the doing of this is not arbitrary,
it is enjoined by the commandment of Christ, Take, Eat.

I have showed you Jesus his Practice, which was the first mannerof instituting
the Eucharist.

There is a second, and that is by Precept, that precept is here but employed;
for the act being Sacramental, must continue so long as the Doctrine does
whereunto the Sacrament is annexed: the Sacrament of the New Testament until
Christ's coming again; for so long must the Gospel continue. But the precept
that is here only employed, is in Saint Luke expressed, and repeated by St. Paul
with some exposition added to it. The precept is, Do this in remembrance of
me, which words require the Churches imitation and commemoration. Imitation;
Do this, the Pastors, the People, both must perform their work, they must
do. Secondly, that which they must do is this, they must strictly observe the
pattern that is given in this place. Besides their imitation, here is enjoined
them a commemoration, what they do they must do in remembrance of Christ. St.
Paul opens the phrase, They must set forth the Lords death. Finally, whereas
Christ did it now once, and he would have them do it again, we may see a
difference between Baptism and the Eucharist; this may be reiterated, though
the other may not.

And so have I laid before you as many particulars as I think obserueable in
this Text, which I will now unfold briefly, and in their order: First, then of
the Author.

He is here called Jesus, Saint Paul calls him the Lord Jesus. Though
Sacraments be Ceremonies, yet are they Ceremonies of efficacy. Were they only
of significancie, the Church might have some power to ordain them; but being
of efficacy, their ordination belongs only to God: because the efficacy
flows from his Spirit, and of his Spirit none can dispose but himself.

As only God is the Author of Sacraments, so did he institute them by the
second Person, by him that is the Savior of the world does he institute the
Sacraments of saving grace: the Sacraments are his most lively picture,
therefore he was fittest for to draw them. He was fittest, as Jesus for to draw
them, and as the Lord to enjoin the observation of them; therein especially
stands his Kingdom in his Church, to prescribe the means unto eternal Life.

But how does he do it? you shall learn that in the Institution; I therein
observed the time, and the manner. The time; while they were eating (says St.
Matthew) after Supper (says St. Luke) Saint Paul, the same night that he was
betrayed. St. Paul and St. Luke are easily reconciled; for the Passover was
solemnized at the same time, and St. Luke means when they had done with that,
so far as concerned the Paschal Lamb, but were not yet risen; for that there
was another Ceremony to be performed, as the Jewish Ritualls observe: and that
Ceremony was this, The Master of the Family after the Passover was eaten,
distributed with solemn words concerning the deliverance out of the Egyptian
captivity, bread and wine; before that was done, Christ instituted the
Sacrament, and so it might be while they were eating, though it were after
Supper. Where out of St. Paul's addition that it was the night wherein Christ
was betrayed, we may observe, that for the terror of the Cross, which he
foresaw, Christ did not omit to do any thing which concerned his office, and
was to be for the comfort of his Church.

Secondly observe, that they were not at a profane but a sacred Banquet, which
hindered not but they might be meet guests for Christ's holy Supper; while they
received one Sacrament they were not unfit for another.

And this teaches us the reason, why though Christ gave the Sacrament to the
Apostles while they were feasting, the Church commands us to take it fasting.
For their feast was sacred, the Church forbids that which is profane; so does
St. Paul, 1. Cor. 11. yea the Jews were to sanctify themselves before the
receiving of the Passover. How may we then come unprepared to ours? that the
meat of our souls may the better be received, we must not be prepossest with
the food of our bodies.

Where by the way, you may learn how to answer the cavil against our
Liturgy, which says, that the Devil entered into Judas after his unworthy
receiving of the Sacrament. For put the case he were not at the Eucharist,
which notwithstanding will not easily be proved, because the best Harmonists
are against the conceit, and so are the Fathers Greek and Latin. But put the
case he were not there, yet was he at the Passover; that is plain in the
Evangelists, and the Passover was a Sacrament, and so in effect the matter is
all one.

Secondly, observe on these words, While they were eating, that before the
Sacrament of the Old was abolished (for it was not abolished but by the death
of Christ) Christ instituted the Sacrament of the New, that because we have
always so much need of grace, we might never be without the means thereof.
So did he substitute Baptism to Circumcision, the Ministry of the Gospel to
the Priesthood of the Law, the Lords Day to the Jewish Sabbath. Seeing then
Christ has been so careful of us, we must not be wanting to our selves; if we
want grace, the blame must not be laid on him, but on us.

Thirdly, Christ abolished the Ceremonial Law, but not all Ceremonies. We
consist of a body and a soul, and God does convey grace unto the soul by the
body, which cannot be done without Ceremony. But ours are fewer in number than
were the Jews, Austin.
though they are not inferior in power: yea they are much more commodious,
though they be less burthenous. Our charge being easier, and our comfort
greater, our sin is less excusable, and our neglect more challengeable, if
we do not practice such easy means, to compass so great a benefit. Enough
of the Time.

I come now to the Manner of the Institution; where we must first see what
Elements were chosen: and here we find bread and wine. Of this choice the
reason is inquired. Some think it occasional; because the Father of the
Family did after the Passover distribute bread and wine: Some think Christ
took an occasion from that ceremony to institute this, and by this Truth to
accomplish that Type. Others think the reason to be Prophetical; Cap. 1.
Malachy foretold, that from the rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the
same, Gods Name should be great amongst the Gentiles, and in every place
incense should be offered to his Name, and a pure Offering; the word is Mincah,
and so does import an accessory to the ancient Sacrifice, that was made
commonly of fine flower and wine; this accessory might in some cases be a
principal, as appears in the Law. Some rise higher unto the days of
Melchisedech, and because he offered bread and wine, and Christ was a Priest
after the order of Melchisedech; therefore he made use of his Sacrifice, and
perpetuated it to this heavenly use. Now the bread and wine which Melchisedech
brought out when he met Abraham, are by many of the Fathers thought to be a
Sacrifice. I might add a fourth Original, that is, Manna, and the water out
of the Rock, wherewith God sustained the Israelites in the wilderness, St.
Paul calls them spiritual meat and drink, 1. Cor. 10.

But to leave these points which are subject to dispute, I will come to that
which is more clear; and that is, Bread and Wine are the choicest of food,
bread strengthens man's heart, and it is the sustenance of all other
sustenances, the Psalmist gives Wheat as it were kidneys of fat, not only
alluding to the form of the grain, but also to the effect thereof; and God by
the Prophet, when he threatens a famine, expresses it by breaking the staff
of bread, as if without it all food were heartlesse. As for wine, the Psalm
teaches us, that it was made to cheer up man's heart. The Parable of the Trees
tells us it cheareth both God and man, Judges 9. In the Problem, Esdras 3.
What is strongest? wine is brought in as one. Ecclesiasticus has made almost a
whole Chapter of it, and holds that there is no life without it; be we
loue-sicke or sorrow-sicke, Cant. 2. Prou. 31
Solomon will tell us, that wine is the remedy.

As bread and wine are the choicest of foods, so do they comprehend entire
food; for humidum and siccum are all that are required unto food: the bread,
which is dry, as the foundation of nourishment; and the wine, which is moist,
as a necessary requisite unto the concoction of the bread, that it may be
chylus: for except moisture incorporate it self into it, and help the stomach
to digest it, it will hardly be prepared for the Liver, and being prepared, for
want of liquidnesse, it can hardly be dispersed through the body. So that
neither of these parts can be wanting in our sustenance corporal, if either
be, the sustenance will be imperfect.

Finally, the Elements of bread and wine serve to set bounds unto our
meditations upon sacred things. For though the heavenly part be the life of
the earthly, yet would we lose our selves in sounding that great depth, if our
thoughts were not guided and stinted by the earthly. Therefore has God
vouchsafed this gracious help both in the Sacrifices and the Sacraments; by
the Elements he has confined our meditations, that being more distinct, they
might be more profitable.

This being observed concerning the Elements what they are, we must next
observe, that they are chosen, Christ took the bread, and he took the cup,
the taking of them into his sacred hands, was a real choice of them. And
indeed, he only that can institute Sacraments, can appoint the Elements, and
he does both upon the same grounds which I touched before. Only here I note,
that we must keep our selves to his choice, and we may not presume to alter the
Elements.

Some are bold, and think, that as in the Apothecaries shop they have
Succedanea, one Simple to supply the want of another: so in case of necessity,
in stead of the Elements taken by Christ, the Church may use Analoga, such
things as are to the people in stead of bread and wine. But that may well be
doubted, except it be better warranted than by humane conjecture. It is true
that God made Manna Sacramental, and so did he the water of the Rock; but man
may not presume to do what God did. And seeing Sacraments have necessitatem
not Medij, but Praecepti, as it is a very foul fault to contemn the Elements
chosen, when they may be had: so when they may not be had, it were better to
want the Sacrament, than to use Elements of our own choice. God can supply to
our faith rem Sacramenti sine Sacramento in a case of necessity, who happily
will not be so gracious, if we be so presumptuous to prescribe.

If in case of necessity we may not be so bold, much less may we be as the old
Heretics were that corrupted the elements, substituting water when they might
have wine, which therefore were called Aquarij, against whom Saint Cyprian
writes. I mean not those that put water into the wine, which in the East
Countries was used first to allay the heat of the wine, and afterward the
Fathers conceited a mystery therein, of joining the people unto Christ; (which
Ceremony the Church of Rome does pertinaciously defend, and of a thing
indifferent, which may be used as it is found expedient for every Church, they
make it necessary upon their command to be used by all Churches;) but I mean
those that used only water.

As some corrupted the element of wine, so some that of the bread, and that
with so much lewdness, as is fit neither for Christian eyes nor ears to read
or hear.

Whether the bread should be leauened or unleavened is a dispute. The Advocates
of the Church of Rome hold it a thing indifferent, and though them selves use
unleavened, yet do they not condemn the Churches that use leauened; and of the
Reformed Churches, some use one, some the other. Though I may not omit to tell
you, that the bread used by Christ in the Sacrament, though it were
occasionally unleavened, because of the Law, which commanded such bread to be
eaten with the Passover; yet was it made of dough, and not of batter, and so
was that which properly is called bread, and is used with our meat, and not
Wafers, which have not that use. 1. Cor. 10.16.
Therefore the Apostles give it the name of bread, yea of a Loaf; and from the
Apostles days, during the Primitive Church, the Fathers observed that course
of using Loaves of bread.

One thing more I must observe concerning the elements, and that is, that
neither of them must be embeazeled from the people, that neither of them must
be wanting; for Christ took both. Neither may they be confounded the one
with the other, as some put the bread into the wine, Christ took them both
apart.

Having sufficiently showed you what elements were chosen, I now come to show
you what was done with them. And here we find two works: first, Jesus his
work, and secondly the work of his Disciples; both double. I begin with Jesus
works, whereof the former is, He consecrateth the Elements. And his
consecration was performed by two acts: first, Blessing, then Thanksgiving:
blessing of the Creatures, and thanksgiving to the Creator.

Blessing is threefold, as the persons that bless may be of three sorts:
first, only God, then the blessing is real; so he blessed his creatures, Genesis
1. and promised to bless Israel, Deuteronomy. 28. Secondly, only man, so the blessing
is but verbal; thus Isaac blessed Jacob, and Jacob the twelve Patriarchs, Genesis
27.49. so Kings, Pastors, Fathers, bless their subjects, their people, their
children, speaking the words, but reserving the deeds for God. Thirdly,
jointly God and Man, so the blessing is both verbal and real; such was the
blessing of Christ, he spoke the words as man, and made his words effectual
as God, when he multiplied the Loaves and the Fishes, and when he instituted
the Sacraments.

Christ not only blessed the creature, but he gave thanks also to the
Creator. Christ had power enough of himself being God, but he did
ordinarily ascribe the power unto his Father while he did work the Redemption
of man: so was he pleased by his humility to make amends for our pride, and to
supply our forgetfulness by his thankfulness; he acknowledges him the
fountain of all good, and gives him the glory of all his wonderful works:
teaching us that the children of God only by adoption should be humble, as he
is our pattern which is the son of God by generation. The Psalmist goes
farther, and concludes us, if we be unthankful, to be worse than beasts,
seeing the eyes of all things look unto him which gives them their meat in
due season, Psalm. 145.15. Wherefore, whether we eat or drink corporally, 1
Cor. 10.31.
how much more if we eat or drink spiritually? we must follow the Apostles
rule, and do all to the glory of God; we must question with our selves as did
King David, Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord? and we must with
him answer for our selves, I will take the cup of salvation and praise the name
of the Lord: unto this end is this Sacrament called the Eucharist. Thus Christ
conscerateth the Elements.

But why? what good came to the elements by consecration? surely much good; for
they are made the body and the blood of Christ: so says Jesus, This is my
body, this is my blood.

The interpretation of these words is much controuerted, and it is much
disputed, What change of the Elements the words of Christ did make; for that
Christ changed the bread when he consecrated it, we make no doubt. Whereas
then there are three things in bread and wine, 1. the name, 2. the use, and 3.
the substance; we confess a change in the two first, but deny it in the third.

First, we confess a change in the name directed by St. Austines rule; Ad
Bonisa^. ep. 23.
Because of a similitude, Sacraments commonly bear the names of the things
themselves, the Sacrament of Christ's body is after a sort the body of Christ,
and the Sacrament of Christ blood is after a sort the blood of Christ. Of St.
Aducrsus Iudaeos.
Austins opinion in our case was Tertullian, Christ (says he) calls bread
his body. And Cyprian, the signifying elements, and the thing signified, De
^nctione Chrismatis.
are caded by the same name. Our Savior (says Theodoret) changed the names,
and called the sign by the name of his body. Ambrose, Chrysostom, Ambros. de
Sacraments. l. 5. c. 4. Chrysostom. ad (...) sarios ^^^nachos.
and others might be alleged to this purpose.

Secondly, we acknowledge a change in the use of the Elements; for there must
be some ground for which the signs may bear the names of the things
themselves, and that is, The virtue, the power, the operation of the flesh and
blood of Christ, being mystically united to the signs, do in a wonderful
sort manifest these things by the signs through the operation of the Holy
Ghost. This we learn of St. Cyprian, De ^nctione Chrismatis.
to the Element once sanctified not now their own nature gives the effect, but
the divine virtue works in them more mightily, the truth is present with the
sign, and the spirit with the Sacrament: De Sacramentis l. 4. c. 4.
so that the worthiness of the grace appears by the efficiency of the thing.
Ambrose also, If there be so great strength in the word of the Lord Jesus, that
all things began to be when they were not, how much more shall it be of
force that the mystical Elements should be the same they were before, and yet
be changed into another thing? Theodoret. The signs which are seen Christ
has honored with the names of his body and blood, not changing the nature,
but adding grace unto nature. Thus far we go in acknowledging a change of
the Elements by consecration, farther we go not; we acknowledge no change in
the substance of the nature of the Elements, De Sacramentis, l. 4. c. 3.
and herein we are guided by the Fathers also. Ambrose. Thou camst to the Altar
and saw the Sacraments thereon, and wondredst at the very ereature, De Coena
Domini.
and yet it is a solemn and a known creature. Cyprian. After consecration the
Element is delivered from the name of bread, and reputed worthy to be called
the body of the Lord, notwithstanding the nature of the bread still remains.
Ad Coesarios Monacbos.
Chrysostom. The substantial bread and cup sanctified with a solemn blessing
is profitable for the life and safeguard of the whole man.

To prove this the Fathers use to parallel the Sacrament and the Person of
Christ, De ieiunio 7. mensis.
in their disputes against Eutyches. Gelasius. As the bread and wine after
consecration are changed and altered into the body and blood of Christ: Dialogo
secundo.
so is the humane nature of Christ changed into his divine. Theodoret has the
same parallel, and so has St. Austine, as he is cited, de Consecratione,
distinctione secunda, Hoc est quod dico. Now a general Council, not only
particular Fathers, have resolved that both natures continue in Christ's person
unaltered; so do their properties; so do their actions; only this honor the
divine does to the humane nature, that as it has associated it into one
person, so does it manifest her properties by it, and perform her actions:
Even so is it in the Sacrament, the heavenly, the earthly thing are both united
to make one Sacrament, but each keeps unaltered its own nature, properties,
and actions; only the heavenly does work by the earthly, and does not
ordinarily without it manifest its operation. If in the person of Christ there
was no alteration of the divine nature, though the Scripture say the word was
made flesh; much less may we dream of any alteration in the earthly part of
the Sacrament, though it be said, the bread is the body, and the wine is the
blood of Christ.

Out of this distinction of changing of the Elements, you may perceive that
Christ's consecration was effectual, though not effectual to
Transubstantiation. For in a sacramental argument, both substances must
remain, and by reason of the mystical union Disparats may be affirmed, the
one of the other without absurdity. Whether the sacramental union do require
moreover a Consubstantiation may also here be disputed; for some urge it out of
these words. But their answer is briefly this, The earthly and the heavenly
thing may be conjoined really, though not locally. And as they may be
conjoined, so they may be received, seeing the proper Exhibiter of the
heavenly is the Holy Spirit, and the Receiver is our faith. Our faith may
ascend to Christ in heaven, and the Spirit being infinite may unite us unto
Christ though we be as low as the earth. Whereas then the words may have their
truth without any recourse to a miracle, or contradicting any other Article of
faith, or forcing strange senses upon other passages of Scripture; we content
our selves with this mystical relative union, and forbear all other
unnecessary speculations. Although we must needs confess, that the words make
more for Consubstantiation than they make for Transubstantiation.

We confess then that in the Sacrament there is the body and blood of Christ,
and that three manner of ways; though we admit neither of the two false ways
Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation. First in regard of the sign; for it
was not chosen for it self, but with reference to Christ. Secondly, in regard
of the resemblance; it does most fitly set forth the efficacy that is in
Christ, the strengthening, the cheering efficacy; you heard before out of the
104th. Psalm, that those properties are in bread and wine. Strength is either
increased or recovered, and cheerfulness follows either upon the recovered,
or increased strength; we are Babes, and must grow in Christ; we are Soldiers
and lose blood in his quarrel; we must find that which is wanting to both in
him. The conscience of sin does deiect us, and the want of grace slack that
zeal that should be in us; repair of cheerfulness in both cases is to be
sought in Christ. Thus much we are taught by the resemblance. A third reason
why we hold the Sacrament to be the body and blood of Christ is, because the
heavenly thing is conveyed unto us by the earthly; the bread which we break
is it not the communion of the body of Christ? and the cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the the blood of Christ? In a word, the
sacramental union made by consecration serves to make the sacrament fit for
our participation; it was so, it is so, in every Sacrament of the old, of the new
Testament.

The addition of My to the body and blood must not be neglected, for it does
insinitely improve them, when it tells us whose they are. For there is not an
eminency in the person that does not reflect upon this body and blood, be it
eminency of dignity, or of efficacy. The person is Jesus; then it is the
body and blood of the Savior of the world; He is Christ, then it is the body
and blood of the Anointed of the Lord, of the Prophet, of the Priest, of the
King of the Church; he is the Son of God, the only begotten, the dearly
beloved Son; how heavenly, how precious must that body and blood be which are
his? For our better valuation and greater consolation, we may carry My through
all the attributes of this sacred person. But let us go on.

The Elements of bread and wine were consecrated that they might be the body
and blood of Christ. But how are this body and blood to be considered? Surely
not as Christ is glorified, but as he was crucified: for it is that body that
was given (as St. Paul speaks) was broken; and the blood is that blood which
was shed. And so does it best answer the sacrifices of the old Law, and the
Sacrament of the Passover. And no marvel; for the glory of Christ can little
comfort us, except the cross of Christ do first prove that he has merited it
for us. Christ's merit is the pillar of Christian faith, whereunto his birth is
but an antecedent, that he might be able to merit, and his glory a consequent,
witnessing that he did merit. We must therefore in the Sacrament have an
especial eye to this.

And this will not only secure our souls, but settle our judgments against
the Sophistry of the Church of Rome, who not distinguishing between Christ
crucified and glorified, or rather not building their conclusions answerable to
this undeniable Principle, The Sacraments represent Christ crucified, not
glorified, are driven to coin so many new Articles, 1 of real presence
corporal, 2 of a metaphysicall Transubstantiation, 3 of an ill applied
concomitancie. All which easily vanish, if we consider Christ's purpose to
represent himself in the Sacrament, not as he now is at the right hand of
God, but as he was upon the Cross. Not but it is the same body and blood which
is in glory, but it must not be so considered, as it is in glory. Which will
necessarily enforce us to acknowledge, that theynion between the thing earthly
and heavenly can be no more than sacramental, and that respective also to what
was done on earth, not what is in heaven, Was, I say, done formaliter on the
Cross, but is effectiue working in Heaven. For that body which Christ
sacrificed for us, he presents in Heaven to propitiate God toward us: not
continuing the Act of sacrificing, for that was actiua Passio, or passiua
Actio, many others concurred thereunto besides himself; as it is clear in the
Evangelists: but perpetuating the effect of the sacrifice: the Act was but once
done, and that only upon the Cross, but the efficacy thereof continues for
ever, though Christ sit at the right hand of God in Heaven, as St. Paul proves
at large in the Epistle to the Hebrews. And this cutteth up the very roots
from whence springs the Mass, and all Attendants thereupon.

The last thing which I noted in the consecration is, Whereunto the Elements
consecrated, and by consecration made the body and blood of Christ, the body as
it was broken, the blood as it was shed, do serve, and What is intended by
them.

Here are two excellent ends; we must behold therein, first the establishment
of a new Covenant between God and us. We need a new one that have broken the
old, by our mutabilitie before the fall, and since the fall through our great
imbecilitie; so that finding our selves unfit for Hoc fac and viues, we must
rest upon Iustus fide sua viuet. It is our comfort, that we which cannot stand
of our selves, may subsist in Christ; and though the Law be too hard for us
without the Gospel, yet by the Gospel we have a double good: first it gives
strength to perform the Law; and secondly, because that will not reach home,
it assures us that our judge is our father, and contracts with us in no other
person. Of this Covenant God speaks in Jeremy, cap. 31. and St. Paul opens
it in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

Mark that the Covenant is annexed to the blood; and so it was in the Type, the
Atonement was ascribed thereunto, because the burning of the Sacrifice did
rather signify a dedication of the person to God: but the shedding of the
blood did note the death, and it was Christ's death, in virtue whereof God was
pleased to be attoned, and to enter into a new Covenant.

The second end is the remission of sins; the Sacrament is not only unto us
a pledge of a new Covenant, and warrants, Believe, and thou shall be saved: But
lest looking back we should be afflicted with the conscience of our sin,
the Sacrament assures us, that all shall be pardoned that is not, that has
not been performed according to the Law. We come then to the Lords Table not
only for meat, but also for medicine; not only for gold, but also for
eye-salue: this water of the Sanctuary runs into us as into mare mortuum,
it makes us no less whole than fruitful; this is the true poole of Bethesda,
no sooner has the Angel descended into it, but whosoever enters it may be
cured by it. And so have I opened the first Act of Jesus, he consecrated the
elements. The second Act follows.

What he consecrated, that he distributeth. In this Act there are two things;
the first is the dividing of the elements, the second is the bestowing of them.
The breaking may represent either the usage of Christ's body when it was
sacrificing, as in the old typical Sacrifices; the like also must be conceived
of the pouring out of the wine: or else it may fit the Sacrifice for
distribution; as is used in a Sacrament. Christ has the fullness of grace, but
we have every one but his proportion according to our capacity. Even as from
the Sun every man receives a beam of the same kind, though not the same
beam; or from a Tree every man gathers an apple, though not the same apple;
or out of a River every man drinks a draught of the same water, but not the
same draught of water: even so all do partake of the same Christ, but not in
the same measure, and no man whole Christ. Whole, I mean totum Christi, though
every man does receive him whole, that is, totum Christum; every man has
Christ alike intensiue, though extensiue we have him not all alike. And yet
extensiue every man has his full measure. As it was in Manna, He that
gathered more had not too much, and he that gathered less had enough. The
breaking then of the bread does not only represent Christ's passion; but also
his proportioning of himself fit for our participation: For so it follows,
breaking was for giving.

It is a question, Whether Christ himself did communicate in the Eucharist; it
may well be presumed that he did. It is evident that he did in his own person
sanctify and honor both Sacraments of the Old Testament, Circumcision and the
Passover. And touching Baptism, the first Sacrament of the New Testament,
there can be no question; why should there then be any question of this? If
any object the silence of the Holy Ghost in the words of Institution, that may
receive an answer, that it was not necessarily to be expressed, because it might
well be supplied out of the correspondency of this Sacrament to that of the
Passover. But the next words to my Text seem to me to put it out of all
doubt: I will not henceforth drink any more of this fruit of the Vine, until
that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom. Although St. Luke
seem to place those words between the Passover and the Eucharist, which St.
Matthew and St. Mark place after the words of the Institution.

But to let that point pass; Though Christ did partake, yet it was not for any
need that he had of it, but for that by his own participation he would give
virtue unto this; as he has done to other Sacraments. He needed not to dye
for himself, he dyed for us; therefore as he gave himself for us, so did he
give himself to us: for us, on the Cross, to us, in the Sacrament. Here
appears the truth of the Apostles saying; He that was rich became poor, that
we by his poverty might be made rich, 2. Cor. 8.9. He that knew no sin, was
made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. And
let this suffice for Christ's work.

Let us come now to the Disciples work. And here first we must observe, that
they that must meddle with these elements, must be Disciples, that is, professed
Christians. For as none might eat of the Paschall Lamb, but they that were
circumcised, no more might any receive the Eucharist that was not baptized. The
reason is plain: No man can be nourished except he live, and live to God no
man can, but he that is incorporated into Christ, and incorporated he is by
Baptism.

But every one that is baptized is not fit to receive the Eucharist, he must
be of age to examine himself (as St. Paul advises) and to discern the Lords
body. It is true, that about St. Austins time they did put the Eucharist into
childrens mouths, before they could understand what it meant: And this was
done upon the mistake of those words of St. John, Except you eat the flesh of
the Son of man, Cap. 6.
and d^inke his blood, you have no life in you. But that error was long since
deprehended, and the custom discontinued, and none receive but those which are
come to years of discretion, and moreover, are able to give an account of their
faith: Yea, by the laudable orders of our Church, none should receive until
they are confirmed; and great pity it is, that so laudable a custom is not
observed. Were it, many aged ones would not live, yea and dye too so ignorant
of that which they receive, as now they do to the dishonor of our Church, and
discomfort of their souls. Pastors, Parents, Masters, Churchwardens, yea and
Godfathers and Godmothers also, should make more conscience of their duties,
their oaths, their vows, wherein they stand bound to God, his Church, and
their Charge, and take more care to remedy this than for ought I see they do.

It is a question, Whether under the name of Disciples more are understood than
the twelve Apostles? Some think yea: but not one of the Evangelists does
favor their conceit. It should seem by them, that only the twelve Apostles
did now represent the whole Church. And happily they only were present,
because Christ was pleased to teach them the form, and give them the charge of
administering the Sacrament. Surely, that is more likely, although if we do
conceit that other were present, there is no Heresy in it.

But I leave the persons, and come to their work. Their work is double, as
was the work of Jesus. The first is, they must take, Take what Christ gave;
for he therefore gave it, that they should take it. And indeed it were a great
contempt to be present, and not to take part. Certainly the Primitive Church
thought so, whose Councels require scuere censures to be inflicted upon idle
gazers on.

And there is great reason for it; for they abase themselves, and excommunicate
themselves: at least range themselves in the order of Penitents, or (...), who
were not thought meet or worthy, for their simpleness or their wickedness,
to be guests at the Lords Table. Yea and what a wretchedness is it for them,
that know what need they have of the New Covenant, to be careless of
confirming their assurance thereof? and for them that are laden with sins
and iniquities, not to unburden their consciences of the guilt, and purge them
from the corruption, by taking the pledge of remission of sins, and means
which should further the amendment of their lives? He deserves to perish for
want of grace, that has it offered, and does refuse it.

Besides this work of taking, the Disciples had another work, and that is
eating and drinking; what they take, that they must eat and drink also. These
are corporal acts, but they must be understood according to the food. And
seeing the food consists of an earthly and a heavenly part, we must eat and
drink both. And God has provided us wherewith we may do it; for we our
selves consist of an earthly and an heavenly part: We must bring both parts
unto this feast, and there use them both; our bodies must take, eat, and
drink the elements; our souls must take, eat, and drink the body and blood
of Christ. Yea our bodies must in these acts only attend our souls; for the
Feast is not Ventris but Mentis, neither is our corporal feeding used
otherwise than to help forward our spiritual.

Secondly, our eating and drinking must not only feed upon Christ's body and
blood, but upon them, as the one was broken, and the other was shed, as they
were the propitiatory Sacrifice. And then thirdly we must draw out of them,
and digest in our souls the two comfortable ends of the Sacrament, that is,
first, our assurance that we are in the new Covenant; secondly, that our
sins are pardoned. If we do not take all these things in our eating and
drinking, we do not take all that which is set before us, and offered unto us.

And here we must mark a difference between our corporal and spiritual
food. Non ego mutabor in te, sed tu mutaberis in me (as St. Austin brings
Christ speaking). When we eat corporally, our food is turned into us; but when
we eat spiritually, we must be turned into our food: we must be transformed
into Christ. First, into his Grace, we must be lively Images of his heavenly
Virtues, of his Patience, of his Obedience, of his Humility, of his Charity, of
whatsoever other Virtue shined in his mortal life. And then we shall be sure
to be transformed into his Glory, and by virtue of this food, he will change
these our vile bodies, and make them conformable unto his glorious body. And
indeed this conformity do the Fathers make a principal effect of this our
spiritual food.

Whom does this feeding concern? I told you the Disciples; here are two other
words that may not be neglected, and they are all and many: all that are
Disciples and of age, and those all are many; for Christ's blood was shed for
many. Of the Poole of Bethesda it was said, that it could cure but one at a
time, and that one which first went into the water after the Angel had stirred
it: but Christ's Sacraments are like unto his garments; Matthew. 14.
of them we read in the Gospel, that as many as touched them were made whole,
Matthew. 14. and of these it is true, that as many as faithfully partake them,
shall as truly be made whole spiritually, as the other were corporally.

As many. The Sacraments are sufficiently sovereign for all, not so
efficiently, and yet efficiently for many: For although in comparison of
unbelievers, believers are but few, yet considered in themselves, believers are
many, Revel. 7.
both Jews and Gentiles. I will not trouble you with a dispute, Whether in
this place (as in some other) the word many is put for all; I will rather
observe unto you, that this same feeding is not a thing arbitrary, but enjoined
the Disciples, neither may they hope to have any part in the new Covenant or
Remission of sins, except they perform this commandment. And the
commandment is not more than needs; for whereas we need no incitement for to
take our corporal food, yet were we not incited, we would pine away for want
of our spiritual; therefore is God in the Prophet feign to call upon us, Esaias
55. Hoe all ye that thirst come to the waters, etc. and Wisdom in the
Proverbs is feign to send her Maids, and say, Come eat of my bread, and
drink of my wine, Prou. 9. so likewise does the King at the Marriage Feast,
Matthew. 22. and so is Christ feign to importune the Church of Laodicea, Revel.
3. But remember that it is an affirmative commandment; and so does tie semper,
though not ad semper.

I will dwell no longer upon the practice, let us come now briefly and see the
precept. The precept is not here expressed but employed; for seeing here is the
Institution of a Sacrament, it is the Institution of that that must be as
lasting, as the Doctrine whereunto it is annexed. For a Sacrament is an annexe
unto Doctrine, even as a seal is set unto a Pardon. The Sacraments of the Old
Testament were so annexed unto the ceremonial Law; so are the Sacraments of the
New Testament unto the Gospel. As he that takes the Charter of Pardon without
the Kings seal, when he may have it, loses the benefit of his Pardon: so he
will have but little benefit of the Gospel, that is a contemner of the
Sacraments; they must both go together until the worlds end, or as S. Paul
speaks, until the Lords coming again, 1. Cor. 11. This Institution of
Christ, is like that of the Creation, not to be stinted by this present act,
but extended to every of the like; as it does in the other Sacrament of
Baptism; yea and of Ordination and Absolution. The first of every of them was
seminall, and to bring out others according to its kind. Whereupon it
follows, that the words of Christ in his practice, are used by the Pastors
not only as historical, but also as operative. And this is the ground of our
faith and security in the effect of these and other sacred Rites.

But touching this Sacrament, the precept is clear in St. Luke, Do this in
remembrance of me. Wherein there are two markable things which the precept
does require. I will touch them in a word; the first is Imitation, Do this;
the other is Commemoration, in remembrance of me. Do this, that calls for
the work of the Pastor in imitation of Jesus, and the work of the people in
imitation of the Disciples: both must be doing in this Sacrament, and except
they be both doing it is no Communion. Private Masses are a direct perverting
of Christ's Institution, where the Priest only is doing, but the People do
nothing, at least they do not what they should, there is (...), whereas the
precept does not only require that we do, but that we do this; the Priest
must precisely do that which Jesus did, he must take the same Elements, the
same in nature, the same in number, and when he has taken them, he must use
them as Christ did, consecrate them with blessing and thanksgiving, to the end,
and for the uses before specified, according to that of St. Paul, Quod accepi a
Domino, tradidi vobis, 1. Cor. 11.

And what he has consecrated, that must he distribute, and withhold no part:
not the Cup, as the Church of Rome does; Christ gave that, and for many hundred
years the Church imitated him so doing; and now they reserve it only to the
Priest that does execute, or do the honor to Monarchs to give them the Cup.

And that may worse be withheld from the people than the body. For the new
Covenant, and the Remission of sins, is in the Text annexed unto the blood, as
if Christ would have them especially remember it in that. Concomitancy is an
idle shift; for seeing a Sacrament is the participation of the sacrifice, they
confess that they cannot make up the sacrifice without consecrating both bread
and wine; how do they not then defraud the people of a part of the sacrifice,
if they give them the bread and not the wine? or (which is most absurd) the
Priest receives Christ's body as it was crucified, because he receives in both
kinds; and the people as it was glorified, because the concomitancy makes
them receive both in one kind. Add hereunto that they must mock the people
with unconsecrated wine, or bear them in hand that it is arbitrary in the
Church, whether they shall or shall not have it. Their other reasons are
ridiculous: certainly, they agree not with the precept, Do this. No more does
whatsoever they do besides, as their Reservation, their Circumgestation, their
Application of the Host unto many uses, whereunto God never ordained it.

But the most notorious corruption of these words is, that they are made a part
of the Priests Ordination; as if they did give him power to sacrifice both for
quick and dead: For from these words do they derive that part of the
Priesthood; yea upon these words they build the Mass also, as if Hoc facite
were as much as sacrifice, and immolate Christ vnbloudily. But I will not stand
to refute them.

As the Pastors work is enjoined in Hoc facite, so is the Peoples also; they
must do as the Disciples did, take that which was distributed amongst them,
eat that which was consecrated for them; and they must feed thereon with their
bodies and with their souls. Not only with their bodies, as carnal Christians
do; nor with their souls, as the Papists teach their people to communicate
mentally with the Priest (as if a man were ever fit to communicate mentally,
when he is not fit to communicate corporally) but we must communicate with
both, otherwise we are not complete guests of this entire Feast. And though of
the two, better the body be wanting than the soul, because the grace that
possesses the soul will redound to the body; but the food of the body cannot
benefit the soul: yet seeing the body and blood of Christ is the fountain of
life spiritual to our souls, immortal to our bodies, our best course is to
eat and drink with both, that we may live, and live in both blessedly for
ever. As the People must do this, so they must take heed, that beside this
they do not either superstitiously adore the Elements, or Atheistically
profane them in swearing, either by the heavenly or the earthly part of the
Sacrament.

The last Note that I will give, is the Commemoration that is enjoined by the
precept, Do this in remembrance, St. Paul expounds the word thus, Show forth
the Lords death. And indeed the Sacrament is a lively representation of the
crucifying of Christ; and but a Commemoration: For the Popish Mass is refuted
in this very word, and St. Paul's phrase, which show, that Christ is not
crucified again, but the manner of his crucifying Sacramentally represented to
us; and so the Fathers took it.

But as the Pastor must commemorate the sacrificing in his work, so must the
People the sacrifice in taking and feeding thereupon as upon the viaticum
peregrinantium, and militantum.

Finally, that which remembers us, must be often frequented by us: so must
this Sacrament. Wherein it differs from Baptism, which cannot be reiterated;
this may, yea it must. The first Christians thought so, who at first received
it every day; they may make us blush whose devotion is now so cold.

But I end. That death which Christ endured for us, and does offer to us, we
must remember in such signs, and apply to our selves by such means as he has
appointed, if we mean to be benefited thereby.

MOst merciful Savior, that by thy powerful word have consecrated these holy
Mysteries of thy most precious Body and Blood, broken and shed, to be the
undoubted pledges of thy Gospel, and euer-running Conduits of thy Grace,
curing the deadly wounds of all our sins, and satisfying as many as thirst
and hunger after righteousness; grant that we never neglect to receive, and
when we receive, may ever be prepared, prepared both in body and soul so here
by faith worthily to feed on thee, as thou representest thy self veyled in thy
Church Militant, that we may hereafter fully enjoy thee, as thou presentest thy
self vnueiled in the Church Triumphant. And in acknowledgement of this present
grace, and that future glory, let every one of us become a sanctified
Eucharist, that with soul and body we may now and ever sing, Glory be to thee
O Lord, O Lord our strength and our Redeemer. Amen. IHS

THREE SERMONS PREACHED IN THE CATHEDRAL Church of Wells at the Feast of
WHITSVNTIDE.
EPHESIANS. 4. verse 7, 8. But unto every one of us is given grace, according to
the measure of the gift of Christ

Wherefore he says, When he ascended up etc. to the 17. verse.


THe Apostle in former Chapters has opened the mysteries of the Gospel, but
at this he begins to deduce certain rules of life which spring therefrom;
and he does specially recommend unto the Ephesians three Christian Virtues,
Unity, Piety, and Constancy: he would have them all agree in Gods truth, and
express that truth in their lives, and not waver in their lives for fear of
the Cross.

But more particularly touching Unity, he tells them wherein it consists, and
wherefore it must be entertained. Wherein it consists we learn in the verses
that go before; but wherefore it must be entertained we are taught in these
that now I have read unto you.

The Reasons are partly the means whereby, and partly the end for which we
receive the gifts of God. The means are two; one Principal, which is Christ;
the other Isntrumental, which are his Ministers. And the End is twofold,
first, our Consummation in grace, and secondly, our Preservation from error.

These be the particulars which take up so much of this Chapter as reaches
from the seventh to the seventeenth verse. At this time (sutably to the time) I
shall entreat only of the first of our means, of Christ the principal means
whereby we obtain the blessings of God.

And here we are to see first, What Christ does, then What right he had to do
it. What Christ does is set down three ways, but all yield but one sense:
first He gives grace, secondly He gives gifts, and thirdly He fills all
things, that is, by him we have Gods blessings.

But we may resolve them into two points; the Gift, and the Giver; the gift is
grace, and that grace has power to fill, and this is nothing but a description
of the Holy Ghost which descended this day, for he is the filling grace of God.
Of this gift the Giver is Christ, it is here called expressly his gift: and he
gives it discreetly, because according to a measure, and yet universally, not
one of the Church which does not partake it, to every one of us is given grace.

This Christ does, and he does no more than he may; his right to do it is
gathered out of his Ascension, which St. Paul describes to be a deserved
Triumph. The parts of a Triumph (as they know which are read in stories) were
these two: first, the person of the Conqueror was carried in state, and
secondly, the monuments of his conquest did attend his Chariot, and were
disposed at his pleasure. Lo here our Savior Christ his person is lifted up on
high, and it does not ascend single, but leads captivity captive, and
divides the spoil, He gave gifts to men, such an Ascension was a Triumph
indeed. And as it was a Triumph, so was it a deserved one; for Christ descended
before he ascended, yea he ascended not so high, but he descended as low; for
he that ascended above all heavens, descended before to the lower parts of the
earth; the same person did both, and so became the Ascension the reward of his
descension.

And so have you the Contents of the first branch of my Text, whereof I shall
now (God willing) unfold so many as the time will permit.

I begin at the Gift. And the gift is called grace, and grace is a free gift,
it is such a gift as can neither be deserved before hand, nor be required
after it is received. Between men there pass three sorts of gifts: The first
is Salarium, when a man gives that which another has earned; of which the
rule is, The labourer is worthy of his hyre: such a gift grace is not, for
though God impose works upon us, yet are they not, as they ought, done by any
of us: Adam failed, much more do we, we can claim no salarie. The second
kind of gift is Honorarium, it is such a gift as testifies the inferiors
reverent regard of his superiors eminency: such a gift grace is not, for if
the Angels light be darkness in comparison of God, and their perfection is
imperfection (as Job teaches) how vile and base is man, who is but dust and
worms meat? there is nothing which God should honor in him. The third gift is
called Eleemosynarium, the alms which the rich gives to the poor; this comes
nearest to the nature of grace, and yet it comes far short of it. For the
rich are bound to relieve the poor, partly by Gods Law, and partly out of a
consideration reflecting upon themselves, that be they never so rich they may
become poor, and stand in need of the same relief which they afford to
others. But God is bound to none, neither can he possibly need the help of
any; therefore his gift, and only his is properly grace, and comes within St.
Austines definition that tells us, that Non est gratia vllo modo si non sit omni
modogratuita, no gift deserves the name of grace, except it be absolutely free,
and such are Gods gifts. The more are we indebted if we receive them, and the
less proud should we be: for whereof should he be proud whose tenure is
altogether pura and perpetua Eleemosyna, mere Alms, and the most free Charity
of God? Nay, the very word (...) put for (...), the Love of God, for the Gift
proceeding from love, does put us in mind, that our eyes should not be fixed so
much on that which we have, as on him that gave it, and we must not take so
much content in our own state, as in his favor.

But it is moreover to be noted, that grace in the Scripture is contradistinct
to nature, and the works thereof are different from those of the creation and
preservation of the world. It is true, that all the works of God wherein he
does communicate of his goodness unto the world, spring freely from his
favor; for he might have chosen whether he would at all have made the world,
or bestowed such excellent endowments upon any man: but yet the Holy Ghost is
pleased to understand this word of those blessings which belong to the second
Covenant, the Covenant of the Gospel; it is an Evangelical word, and
signifies only those gifts wherein the Evangelical Covenant does consist, and
whereby it is furthered. They are of two sorts; in the Schools the one is
called gratia gratum faciens, the other gratia gratis data: not but that both
are gratis datae, freely given; for in that respect the members of the
Distinction are coincident, but because they are not reciprocal; all grace
that is freely given is not that grace which does recommend us unto God. This
is the peculiar of the grace of adoption, the grace of aedification reaches
not so far.

But that which we must principally note, is the heeding of the Pelagians
Heresy, who confounded nature with grace, and grace with nature; who as they
did too shallowly think of the Fall, so they did derogate much from the favor
which God vouchsafed in restoring of man. But we must learn as to neglect no
gift of God, so to set a right estimate upon the gifts of the Gospel; these
gifts are by an excellency called Grace. And thus much of the nature of Grace,
we come now to the property thereof, which is to fill.

Some refer this word unto the person of Christ, as if that did fill all
places; and indeed it lived on earth, descended into hell, and so did enter
into heaven; it was successively in every of these places. Others strain it
too far, that would have the Manhood to communicate with the Deity in
vbiquitie, and to be at the same time in every place. But as we grant Attributa
(...), that supernatural endowments in the highest degree were conferred upon
the Manhood of Christ: so may we not admit any Attributa (...) therein, we may
acknowledge no Attributes that destroy the nature of his Manhood; the truth of
his Manhood is the greatest comfort of a Christian, whether we respect what
he has done for us, or the blessed conformity that we shall have to him.

It is true that these words of filling do concern Christ's Manhood, or
rather his person as he was no less man than God; for it speaks of some
thing that Christ did after his Resurrection; there is no doubt but he filled
all things with his Godhead before which is ever infinite: but the Manhood
making one person has diverse prerogatives by virtue of the Hypostaticall
union. First, it is every where present, though not with, yet to his Godhead,
and Christus is totus vbique, though totum Christi is not vbique; the whole
person fills heaven and earth, though the manhood be finite. Secondly, both the
natures are associat in their Actions, the Manhood is privy unto, and consents
with the Godhead in all the works of Christ, yea, and the merit of Christ
whereunto the Manhood concurred does moderate all the Actions of the Mediator.
Thus far we may safely speak of an Vbiquity of Christ: but the proper sense
of this place is not of the person, but the work; it is true that he that fills
is Christ, but that wherewith he fills is his grace.

And grace is the only thing that fills. And it fills two manner of ways, first,
sistendo appetitum; for whereas all other things which we desire grow quickly
loathsome and tedious unto us, and we are feign to shift because we find we
have not lighted upon that which should give us content, as we may gather out
of the Preachers censure, Vanity of vanities, and all is but vanity, when we
come to grace there we rest: St. Austine gives the reason of it, Fecisti nos
Domine propter te, and irrequietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te; and
K. David expresses it most passionately, Psalm. 73. Whom have I in heaven but
thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee; my flesh and my
heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.
And no wonder; for nothing can give constant content but that which is verum
and summum bonum, that which is good indeed, and is our sovereign good: these
are found only in God, none find them but they that partake of him. Secondly,
the same grace that does sistere appetitum, does also explere; as it does give
us content in that we desire no other thing, so of that only we may have our
fill. Other things are not only worse than that we principally desire, but
they are less; and we therefore do loath them, not because they are not good
at all, for they are the creatures of God, and they are made for our use, but
because they bear not proportion unto our desire; when we have them we find a
great want of something else besides them: let a man have all the riches in the
world, all the honor, yea all the wisdom, they will not satisfy him; yea
let every power have his distinct object, yet they will not satisfy him: There
is a common object that they all desire, and which only can fill them, the
desire of them all, and that is Grace, Grace is the fullness of God, (as the
Apostle calls it, Ephesians. 3.19.) and the Prophesies of grace do promise
fullness, Jeremy 21.
God will not only prepare a table for us, but our cup shall ouerflow, Psalm.
23. here we hunger and thirst for a time, but if grace be our portion, we shall
be satisfied, and we shall be admitted to the tree of life, and drink our fill
of the rivers of Gods pleasure.

But I told you that this which you have heard is nothing else but a
Periphrasis of the Spirit; for the filling grace is nothing else but the Holy
Ghost: This day (as we read, Acts 2.) when he came he filled, and filled not
only with the Type, but also with the Truth. That you may understand this you
must observe, that as Christ our Passover was sacrificed just at the time of
the legal Passover, and as he became the first fruits of them that stepped,
rising that very day that the first fruits were offered: even so the Spirit was
given upon the very same day when God with his own mouth pronounced the Law in
the hearing of the People, the mystery whereof was this, that man can never
have the benefit of the Law, but by the grace of the Spirit justifying him by
faith, and making him a new man.

But by the Spirit we must understand not only the grace, but the person also,
or else it will never fill: For as the corn that is sown is but a small
grain, but being watered with the dew of Heaven, and comforted with the
Sun, it comes to a full ear; even so grace when it begins in man it is
very scant, there must be some body to foster and cherish it that it may come
to perfection, and that is the Spirit. And herein appears a difference
between Adam created, and Adam restored. Adam created was furnished with
grace, and being so furnished was left to himself, whereupon he quickly
became an unthrift, and brought to naught that portion which he received of his
heavenly Father; but being restored he is better provided for, he has the
person of the Spirit bestowed upon him as a living root: so that although he
have his Winters and his Autumn, he does not always spring, nor is always
laden with good fruit, yet he has life in the root which will shute forth
again, and he that seems to be dead, will revive, and like corn that stocks
better when it is nipt with frost, will afterward bear the more fruit.

You have heard the Gift what it is, now hear of the Giver; and the Giver is
Christ. Christ is the Giver of the Spirit duplici iure, originis and meriti; in
that the Spirit does proceed from him, so he is said to bestow him, because
ordo ad extra is answerable unto ordo ad intra: He has also a right by merit,
he deserved in doing the work of a Redeemer to have the bestowing of the
Spirit; in this later sense must we understand it in this place, and of this
sense in the next part of the text.

And here we must consider the difference between the Hebrew of the old
Testament and the Greek of the new; Accepit dona, says the Psalmist; Dedit
dona, says the Apostle: They are easily reconciled if you mark Christ's second
power of giving the Holy Ghost; for, Accepit quae daret, accepit ex merito,
quae daret ex arbitrio; therefore St. Austine says well, Vtroque verbo altero
Prophetico and Apostolico altero plenissimus sensus redditur? The Apostles are
the best Commentators upon the Prophets, and when we parallel texts that are
found in both, we must not oppose the one to the other, but expound the one by
the other; which we may safely do, because in vtroque est diuini sermonis
auctoritas, as the same Father speaks.

Seeing then Christ receives what he gives, receives of his Father what he
gives to us; these words must be understood of Christ incarnate: as God he
could not receive, because he had all things; wherefore if he receive, it must
be as he became man; so indeed he was Christus anointed, and his name was as an
ointment poured out, Cant. 1. the precious ointment poured on his head ran
down unto the very skirts of his clothing, he was made the Son of
righteousness and became the father of lights, precious promises are given
unto us by him, and of his fullness we all receive grace for grace.

Finally, we must mark, that though he received as he was Incarnate, yet he
gives as he is God; for though Accipere be meriti humani, yet Dare is
potestatis diuinae; though in neither giving nor taking we must sever the
person, yet must we in either observe which nature is principally respected.

As Christ is the giver of the Spirit, so does he give him discreetly and
universally; discreetly, for he gives (...), he keeps a measure in his
giving. There is this difference between the Head and the Body of the Church,
the Head has the Spirit without all measure, but the members of the Body have
it in measure; neither does this argue any impotency in Christ the Giver, but
his wisdom. It is true, that as it is in Christ's power to give or not to
give, so he may give as much or as little as he will; for he may do what
he will with his own: but he does not only follow his Will, but the
counsel of his Will, as this Apostle teaches us; Occumenius.
and the counsel of his Will or his Wisdom, does respect (...), in the
endowment of the Church.

As in our body natural, God has joined beauty and commodity in framing the
limbs, so that every one has that proportion as is most comely and useful:
so the Church, though vna, yet is varia; though it be but one body, yet has it
diverse members, and though the one body be quickened with the same spirit, yet
in every member the spirit does vary his gifts, and the Church thereby is the
more beautified and benefited; so that no man is (...), sufficient of himself,
but he is thereby urged to desire the Communion of Saints, wherein stands our
mutual comeliness and comfort.

Seeing then Christ gives as he thinks meet, every man is bound to thank
him for that which he has, and envy must not make him murmr for that which
he has not. It is absurd for a man to dislike with the dispensation of
Christ, it is as if the members of the body should grudge that they have not
the endowments each of the other; wherein if God should satisfy them, the
deformity and discommodity which would follow, would quickly make them weary of
their desires.

Though Christ be thus discreet in giving, yet is he kindly bountiful also;
for he gives to every one. St. Ambrose has a good rule, In donis officiorum
diuer sitas est, non Naturae, all drink of the same spirit, though they drink
not the same draught: As in our natural body there is no member that lives not
by the soul, no more is there in the mystical Body any member that lives not
by the Spirit; Christ will have every one have some token of his love, and will
have every one stand the Church in some stead.

The Church (I say) for the particle All is limited by Us. There are gifts that
are bestowed upon all the world, as we acknowledge in our daily grace, The
eyes of all things look up unto thee, O Lord, and thou give them their meat
in due season, thou openest thy hand, and fillest with thy blessing every
living thing, Psalm. 145. but the graces here meant are the peculiar of the
Church, you heard it in the Gospel this day, The spirit is such a thing as the
world cannot receive, but the Church sees and knows him, and he shall abide
with her for ever; for it is only the Church that can say, The Let is fallen
to her in a fair ground, she has a goodly heritage.

But the gifts, that as upon this day descended on the Apostles; were visible
gifts, and they had corporal effects, speaking in diverse languages, casting
out devils, curing of diseases, treading upon serpents, etc. these gifts we
have not, how then have we the spirit that descended this day? Gregory the
Great answers well; Thou have it, though it appear in another sort: Thou
can not speak diverse tongues, but of what Nation soever thou art, thou can
speak the language of Canaan, and it is as great a miracle that all Nations
understand the same heavenly language, as that the same person should speak
all languages: Thou can not cast out Devils out of men's bodies, but out of
their souls thou may, and cure the diseases of their soul, though thou
can not the diseases of their body; yea and bruise thou may the old
Serpents head, though thou can not safely tread upon a Snake. In a word, thou
may do many things inuisibly and spiritually, which are not inferior to
those things which the Apostles did visibly and corporally, and doubt not but
if thou bear the fruit of the Spirit, the Spirit of Christ does rest upon thee.

And if we do solemnize the memory of Saints, how much more should we
solemnize the memory of the Sanctifier? we are all bound to keep this day holy
to the Lord, because this day the Lord gave that gift which does concern us
all. Wherefore let us all say,

BLessed be the Lord God, even the God of our salvation, he daily loadeth us
with his gifts, even the spiritual gifts of Grace: He that gives them, fill
us with them, that as we are called to be, so we may be indeed comely and
profitable members of the mystical Body of Christ, and live for ever
conformable to our Head. Amen. THE SECOND SERMON. On Trinity Sunday, at an
Ordination of Ministers.
EPHESIANS. 4.11. He gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers.


THE passage of Scripture contained from the 7. to the 17. Verse, does inform
us of the reasons which persuade Christians to agree in Gods truth. These
reasons are two, drawn the one from the means whereby, the other from the end
for which the Church receives the spiritual gifts of God: The means is Christ.

And touching Christ, St. Paul teaches us in this passage what he does, and
what right he has to do it. That which he does is expressed three ways, but
all yield but one sense: 1. He gives grace, 2. He bestows gifts, 3. He fills
all things; that is, his gift is a filling grace. Grace is a free gift; a gift,
Donum, non salarium, not an hyre of our labor, but an argument of Gods favor.
And this gift is free, it is grounded upon no obligation; all gifts of men are
in part due, as the reciprocal between equals: for love challenges love, or
those that are not reciprocal between unequals, be they Honoraria or
Eleemosynaria, whereof the inferior owes the former to his superior, in
acknowledgement of his eminency; and the superior owes the latter unto his
inferior, out of a fellow-feeling which he must have of his wants: but Gods
gifts can neither be deserved nor requited, neither does he find ought worthy
his regard in us, neither does any danger of his move him to commiserate us:
His gift then is absolutely free.

But this is common to the gifts as well of Creation as of Redemption; but the
Scripture restraines the word Grace unto the gifts of Redemption, which are not
only non debita, but indebita, whereof God owes us no one, but he owes us the
contrary, that is, plagues: and therefore he does give not only non dignis, to
those that are without all merit of good, but also indignis, to those that are
full of the merits of sin. The word then is plainly Evangelical, and
signifies such blessings as accompany the New Testament, those blessings are
most properly termed Grace.

This grace has a power to fill which no other thing has, and it fills
sistendo and explendo desiderium, it fixes our wandering desires, so that we
desire no other object, and this is able to satisfy to the full, and satisfy
the whole man. Now this filling grace is nothing else but the Holy Ghost. But
by the Holy Ghost we must understand not only his gifts, but also his person,
both are bestowed on us, the gifts to qualify us, and the person to continue
and increase these qualities in us.

And herein stands a great difference between Adam created, and Adam redeemed;
Adam had rich gifts, but he had not the promise of the Spirit to perpetuate
his gifts; but we have in Christ. And indeed Christ is the Giver; St. Paul
says so, but the Psalmist makes him a Receiver: they are easily reconciled;
for he received that which he gave: Therefore Christ here is understood as he
is (...), God and Man; he received as Man, that which he gave as he was God.

And he gave this discreetly, according to a measure; not his power, but his
wisdom moderated his gift, and his wisdom had an eye to the comeliness and
commodity of his mystical Body the Church. And although he gave discreetly, he
gave universally, to every one is his grace given; every member has a mark of
his favor, and has some gift wherewith he may stead the Church.

And thus far we came the last Sabbath in opening what Christ does, we must
now go on, and see another point herein contained in this 11. Verse; Christ
gives grace, but he gives it not without means: for he gives Ministers. And
of these Ministers this Verse does show us the different degrees, and the
common original; the different degrees, for some are Apostles, some Prophets,
some Evangelists, etc. the common original, for Christ gives them all. Of
these points (God willing) briefly, and in their order.

First then, Christ that is our means uses means himself, and gives grace
before he gives grace. To understand this, we must observe a distinction of
grace: There is grace of Adoption, and grace of Edification; the first makes
Christians, the second makes Ministers, Christ gives the latter, that by it he
may give the former. The Ministers Calling then stands in grace of Edification,
that is, in ability to bring others to the state of Christians; Christ could
do it of himself, he that at first made man after his Image, could repair
that Image again in man.

And that he can do it, he shows plainly in those whom he first calls, and
makes means to call others; of these we have patterns, Adam, Abraham, the
Apostles. So that though causa salutis be coniuncta, yet it is arbitraria, the
use of means in our salvation is not necessary but voluntary: no Minister may
dream that Christ does use him, because he needs him, he must rather
acknowledge how much he is bound to Christ, that he vouchsafes to use him,
though he has no need of him. He does honor him with the name of a Co-adiutor
and fellow laborer, in the whole course of man's conversion; Ministers beget us
to Christ, they nourish us in Christ, they bind and loose our souls, they
open and shut Heaven, and in a word, they save. All these things Christ does by
them, and the people must acknowledge causam coniunctam, the cooperation of
the Minister with Christ: St. Paul does excellently express it by the
resemblance of an Epistle written, whereunto he compares the Corinthians, 2.
Cor. 3. and makes the author thereof the Spirit and himself: He uses another
similitude of Husbandry, 1. Cor. 3. whereunto concurreth God and himself; The
foolishness of Preaching, and the demonstration of the Spirit go together,
and Faith is wrought by Gods Word, but as it is heard from men. The people then
may not sever these, they may not look for inspirations from heaven without
preaching on earth, nor think that preaching on earth will prevail without
inspiration from heaven.

But causae coniunctae are either coordinatae or subordinatae, they are both of
equal power, or one has sovereignty over the other; Christ concurres with
man, and man with Christ: But far be it from us, to think that their power
is equal in this business; no, Dominium est Christi, Ministerium hominis,
Christ is Lord, man is but the servant: and therefore whatsoever man does, he
must do according to his instructions, he may not presume to do more or
less, Balaam could tell Balaac so, and St. Paul delivers nothing but what be
received of the Lord. We may not make new Articles of Faith, nor institute new
Sacraments, we may not publish any other Covenant between God and man, than
our Master is pleased to enter into, nor set to any other seals than his. The
Angels behold Gods face always, to direct their service, and Christ did not
his own, but his Fathers will when he was on earth; and shall man arrogate
more unto himself? No, he must still remember his subordination, and venture no
farther than he has commission.

I have not yet opened enough the inequality between Christ and us in this
work; for indeed a Minister is not only a subordinate cause, but also no
better than an instrument: the efficacy of all that he does, proceeds from
him that uses it. Other Sovereigns give their charge, and leave their
servants to use their own faculties in dispatch of their business, and the
work is no greater than their faculties can compass: the Ambassadors and
Commissioners of Princes bear witness to this truth; according to their
weakness or wisdom does their errant speed: But it is not so in that work
wherein Christ and the Minister concurres; it is true, that the Minister must
use the uttermost of his endeavor, and husband his talent to the best
advantage, but his planting, his watering, his watching, his building is of
little force, except the work be set forward with a stronger hand, except
Christ give increase; there is an inward influence which is soly Christ's, and
produces the Heavenly light and life. In regard of this, Ministers are but
Imagines (as Saint Ambrose speaks, in Psalm. 38.) they do but outwardly
delineate, and represent in the Word and Sacraments, what Christ does
powerfully work by his Spirit. So that the Minister sees how far he is
employed, and how short he comes in this work of equality with Christ. And
seeing Christ will have our ministry usher (as it were) his efficacy, and will
have the people to reverence our words, if they mean to be partaker of his
works, Chrysostom speaks not amiss, when he says that we do in potestate
seruire, so serve our Master, that we have authority over the Church, and so we
need not be ashamed, nor may be contemned whose service is so honorable.

And thus much in general of the calling of the Ministry; I come now to speak
of their degrees.

And here we must mark, that they have all a degree above others, but yet they
differ in degrees between themselves; grace of Adoption is common to all the
Church, not so grace of Edification, the Apostle implies it in these words
(...), restraining the later grace to some few. And indeed if all should have
it, the gift would be contemptible; for who cares for that which every one
has? and the distribution would be unreasonable; for how shall one member
further another when all have the same gift? But in calling some and not the
rest God does provide that his gift is mag is augustum, more reverend, and the
body of his Church is mag is ordinatum, better proportioned; all then do not
partake this Calling.

It was a mutinous speech of Corah, Dathan, and Abyram, when they said to Moses
and Aaron, You take too much upon you seeing all the Congregation is holy. It
is true that all are holy in that they are Christians, yea, in that they are
Christians they are anointed Priests; so the Scripture calls them, 1 Pet. 2.
Reu. 1.
and they have spiritual sacrifices which they must offer: but it is one thing
to offer Sacrifice, another thing to offer public sacrifice; it is one thing
to offer for themselves, another thing to represent the whole Church unto God;
this public function is peculiar to some, the other is common unto all. The
like must we think of the other part of the Ministry; every one may read
Gods word unto himself and to his family, and may instruct himself and them
therein; but in Gods house, and in the presence of the whole Congregation to
dispense the Mysteries, or to take upon him any where to set to Gods seal of
the Sacrament, is so peculiar to the Stewards of his house, that others may not
presume to meddle therewith. But yet this is the honor that God has done unto
all men, that they are de genere Sacerdotali, every one is capable of holy
Orders; every man, I say, (for St. Paul upon good reason has excluded women)
if he be fit, he may be called to serve in the Sanctuary of God, and
administer in sacred things. And this is no small honor though the world
think otherwise, who think not that so to minister to God was a prerogative
of the first borne; the Patriarchs made it their chief employment; our Savior
Christ did not disdain it, and they are basely proud that think themselves
too good for it. But enough of the first difference, the difference between
the Minister and his flock, and the degree they have above it.

As the Clergy do all differ from the Laity, and have a degree above them;
so do they differ between themselves, and have each degrees above others: it
is clear by the division that St. Paul makes in my text, some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, etc.

It is true, that the Gospel is but one that is committed to them all, and all
agree in this, that they are but Ministers: but the same ability is not given
unto all to publish the Gospel, neither are they all trusted with alike ample
charge. And yet this distinction is not such as that diverse of these degrees
may not meet in one person; though the gifts differ formally, et may they
meet in the same subject. A vegetable soul differs from a sensitive, and a
sensitive from a reasonable, and yet notwithstanding they all three meet in
the soul of a man: even so though it be one thing to be a Pastor, another
thing to be a Doctor, etc. yet may one man sustain all these persons: you will
perceive it when I open the particulars.

Of these degrees then some be extraordinary, some be ordinary; the three first
are extraordinary, and served for the first plantation of Christian Religion.
Of those three the Apostles had plenitudinem Ministerij, the fullness of
Ministerial power; for their calling comprehended all the other degrees. And
why? they were to lay the foundations of the Church; so the Apostle teaches us
in this Epistle, and St. John calls the twelve Apostles the twelve foundations
of the heavenly Jerusalem, Revel. 21. they had infallibility of knowledge,
because they were to set down the Canon of the Scripture; their Diocese was
all the world, they might plant Churches every where; their flock were not
only all Nations, but all Pastors; they had power not only to ordain them, but
also to enable them; never was the like Ministerial power given unto mere
men. As for the other two the Prophet and the Evangelist, they had each of them
a piece of the Apostles power. The Prophet of the new Testament was he that was
so well seen in the Prophets of the old, that he could discern the new
Testament in the old, and show how the one is confirmed by the other. This was
his proper gift, though he had some other accessory; which was, to foretell
future things, to advise in perplexed cases answerable unto Vrim and Thummim,
and to discover the secrets of men's thoughts, which were occasional works of
the Spirit of Prophecy; but the ordinary was that which I first specified. The
Evangelist delivered the new Testament only, and in doing that was assistant to
the Apostles, following their directions, and supplying their place
whithersoeuer they were sent. This was their principal work, whereunto some
of them had an accessory, which was, to record the sum of the Gospel indicted
unto them by the Apostles; so did Luke and Mark. Besides these there were
other gifts extraordinary, as of speaking with strange tongues, curing of
diseases, working of miracles, but they served rather for to raise attention
than to confer the grace of adoption, and therefore they are not here
specified; these here specified are those which serve properly for that
principal end, and therefore they are only specified.

The other two degrees are ordinary, Pastors and Teachers. Some of the Fathers
make these different, some take them to be but one degree. They that make them
different hold the Doctor or Teacher to be that person whose care is only to
deliver truth, and the ground thereof whereby it is confirmed, and maintained
against opposite errors: such as were the Catechists, or Lecturers in
Cathedral Churches in the primitive times; of whom we read often mention in the
Ecclesiastical story, and the Chancellors of Churches were founded for this
use. But now it is apparent in the Universities, where therebe special
Professors appointed to train up youth in the knowledge of the truth: and this
is the principal use of those Nurseries of learning; a blessed use. The Pastor
is he that resides upon his Cure, and takes care of the people to instruct
them in the knowledge and fear of God, and recall them when they go astray,
and comfort them in perplexities of conscience.

As it is true that there must be Nurseries of learning, and the testimony
there of does much recommend the Pastor to the people: so we must know, that
none may be a Pastor which is not (...), able to teach, though many be able to
teach which are not Pastors. Therefore many of the Fathers understand one
degree by these two names; and the observation is, that the names put the
Minister in mind of his duty, he must feed by teaching: Man lives not by
bread only (says Moses, Deuteronomy. 8.3.) but by every word that goes out of the
mouth of God; Gods word is the bread of life, and it is that wherewith Pastors
are trusted. Neither may any man in the Church take upon him the name of
Pastor, be he never so holy, except God has furnished him with some part of
this provision: how should he be a guide that is blind? how should he be a
steward that is not stockt?

But more particularly. If a Pastors knowledge must be food, it is not enough
if that which he preaches be true, he must preach nothing but that which is
profitable; the Pulpet is neither for curious, nor idle questions: St. Paul
has censured both, and it were to be wished, that all Pastors of our Church
were so discreet as they did not need such a censure.

Secondly, whereas of food some is wholesome and some is unwholesome, it is not
enough for the Pastor to bring food, he must look that it be wholesome food;
errors and heresies must be heeded, and he must deliver nothing for which he
has not good warrant, he must feed the Israel of God with no Manna which
comes not down from heaven, and they must drink of no water but that which
flows from the spiritual rock, which rock is Christ. Young Students take up
much Divinity upon trust: but whom do they trust? promiscuous Authors both
modern and ancient; they should be advised in making their choice, and
whomsoever they read try before they trust, try it at the touchstone of Gods
word, and weigh what is said in the scales of the Sanctuary, which while they
do not, they mistake them selves, and misleade others.

Thirdly, it is not enough that the food be wholesome, but it must be
convenient; for there be babes in Christ, as well as strong men: so that the
Pastor must have milk and strong meat, and it is absurd to feed either men
with milk, or babes with strong meat; each must be provided for according to
the power of his digestion. And here appears much indiscretion in those that
fit not their matter to their auditors, being more careful either of their
own praise, or ease of their pains, than of their good to whom they speak.
In a word, a Pastor must neither starve, nor bane, nor neglect reasonably to
satisfy his flock; and blessed is the servant whom his master when he comes
shall find so doing; yea, and blessed are the people, for God has given unto
them Pastors according to his own heart, Ier. 3. if they so feed with
knowledge and understanding.

But it is not enough that the Pastors deal so, the people also must carry
themselves answerably unto him; they must not only hear Doctorem, but
Pastorem, they must not only be the wiser, but the better for that he says:
the knowledge which they do treasure up in their head, must as good food be
digested also in their heart; and as good food if it nourish, shows it self
in the vigor of our body; so good Lessons, if they do work as they ought,
will show themselves in our life and conversation.

Finally, as the degrees are partly extraordinary, and partly ordinary; so must
the ordinary keep correspondencie with the extraordinary; Ministers now are
not Apostles, yet they must be Apostolic; they are not Prophets, but they
must be Prophetical; they are not Evangelists, but they must be Evangelical,
that is, they must imitate them in doctrine and discipline. And indeed what is
a Doctor but a Prophet? for both search out the true sense of the Scripture;
the one did it by revelation, the other must do it by meditation. And what is
a Pastor but an Evangelist? for both feed the flock of Christ, though both be
not enabled thereunto by the same means. And if the Evangelist and the Prophet
do share in the Apostolic function, then the Pastor and the Teacher coming
so near them, must needs have good cognation with the Apostles, in the
substance of their calling, though not in the amplitude, in that which they
do, though not in the ability to do it. And as the extraordinary differ in
degree, even so do the ordinary also, and so have they ever done in the
Church; the Bishops have succeeded the Apostles, though in a smaller model,
yet in this, that all orders are included in the sphere of their calling; and
as Evangelists and Prophets do share in the Apostolic function, so
Presbyters and Deacons have some parts of that higher calling which is in a
Bishop; and they strive to be wiser than the Holy Ghost, that call for an
equality, the mother of confusion; as if the same reasons did not still hold,
which moved the Apostles to subordinate Pastors. All may no more now be trusted
with government, than they might heretofore, and schism is a weed that will
spring in all ages: yea, the latter times are the worser, and therefore they
more need the remedy. So that though the ground were only humane, which
cannot be proved, the change of Ecclesiastical policy will be very
dangerous; and others have made so ill trial of equality, that we shall do
well for to continue the inequality, especially considering the Original,
Ipse dedit: Nazianzent infers Ne contradicas, observe and reverence the
distinction, considering the Author, and the Author is Christ.

Leaving to speak further of the degrees, I will now then come to speak of
the original.

Ipse dedit; two words which yield two notes, the person that gives, He; and
the title of his Ordinance, 1 Cor. 12. Acts 20.
it is a Gift. He, the person is Christ. It is true that the ordination of
Ministers is ascribed sometimes to the first Person, sometimes to the second,
and sometimes to the third. And indeed, seeing the ordination is by the gift of
the Spirit, all that can give the Spirit may be reputed the original of holy
Orders: this being a work ad extra, of those we must pronounce (...) every of
the persons has a hand in them. Eccumenius
In all such works we must acknowledge the Trinity in Unity, Unity in the
action, representing the unity of the essence of God, and a Trinity in the
efficients, representing a trinity of the persons in God.

And indeed this mystery of Trinity in Unity, the memorial whereof we
solemnize this day, cannot better be studied than in the effects that give us
a glimpse of it; and of all effects none more comfortable than those of our
Redemption, and the means whereby we are made partakers thereof, wherein
every person is pleased to show his love to man. But yet, as in other works,
so in this, they keep an order, and that order the Greek Fathers call (...),
the Latin Fathers dispensationem; though with consent and concurrencie of the
other two persons, some one shows himself principally in the work. In this
work, the second Person; He as head of the Church, Master of the Assemblies,
and chief shepherd, and high steward of Gods house, appoints all under
officers; He sent the Apostles, and by the Apostles others.

And this his sending is called here a Gift: and well it may be so called; for
God might have left us in the dregs of our corrupt nature, or after we are
called, suffer us to relapse; but he is pleased to appoint means of our new
birth, and to recover us when we fall; which we may well call a Gift.
Secondly, it is such a gift as men desire. In the fifth of Deuteronemie it
appears that when the Israclites had once heard God, they desired to hear him
no more, they desired a Moses, and God was pleased to yield to their desire,
and has ever since fed them by men. Thirdly, this dedit is not restrained
only to the Apostles time; for they had semen in speciem, the Church has still
the same commandment and the same promise, and must propagate these functions;
and what we do Christ does by us. Fourthly, no man must take it before its
given; no man must take this office before he is called, seeing it is a power,
no man must usurp it without his leave to whom God has given all power,
especially seeing the sinews of it are the assisting Spirit, of whose presence
no man may presume without imposition of hands; for he breathes where he will,
not where we will; Christ though he be gone from the Church, does not
destitute his Church, if the Church will follow his Ordinance. Finally, holy
Orders are a Gift, therefore not to be bought; Symony is opposite to the nature
of them; Precio res nulla Deiconstat. Tertul. apolog.
This general Rule is specially true of holy Orders, and therefore (I think)
the Schools call grace of Edification gratis datam; I am sure these things
must be freely received and given.

I conclude; when we look upon holy Orders we must observe two duties that
are required, Reverence, which is called for by the Author, and Obedience by
the use.

ANd God grant that we may both Pastor and People so be affected to these
means, and so be wrought by them, as that God may have his glory, and we may
reap our good. Amen. THE THIRD SERMON.
EPHESIANS. 4. Verse. 8, 9, 10. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high,
heled captivity captive, and gave gifts to men.

Now that he ascended, what is it, but that he also descended first into the
lower parts of the earth?

He that descended, is the same also that ascended up, far above all Heavens,
that he might fill all things.


THE Church is but one, and therefore the members thereof should live at one;
two special reasons moving hereunto, the Apostle in the second part of this
Chapter alleges: the first of which is drawn from the means whereby, the
second from the end wherefore the Church is endued with manifold graces. Of the
means I have begun heretofore to speak, and told you that the means is
Christ, and touching Christ, the Text does teach what he did, and what right he
had to do it: Of these two points I have handled the former, at several times
I have showed you what Christ did; it follows that I now go on, and show
what right he had to do it.

And the Apostle will show us, that Christ did no more than he might, he
gathers it from Christ's ascension, for that ascension was a deserved Triumph.
In a triumph (as they which are read in stories do know) there were two
obserueable things, the person of the Conqueror was carried in state, and the
monuments of the Conquest did attend his chariot, and were disposable at his
pleasure: behold these things in the Ascension of Christ; first, Exaltation of
his person, He ascended on high, far above all Heavens: secondly, the
Attendants upon his exalted person, He led captivity captive, and gave gifts
to men, such was his Triumph. And this Triumph was deserved; for he was not
exalted before he was humbled, that he ascended, what was it, but that he
first descended? yea he ascended not so high, but he first descended as low;
as he ascended far above all Heavens, so he descended into the lower parts
of the Earth: The same person is the subject of both, He that ascended, is the
very same that descended.

These are the particulars, whereof I shall (God willing) now speak briefly
and in their order: and first of the Exaltation of his person.

And the Exaltation was the ascending thereof on high; Ille triumphato
Capitolia ad alta Corintho
Victor agit currus.
On high (says St. Hierome) that is, to an high place and state. First, to a
place; Localis Homo, etc. says Fulgentius ad Thrasimundum, Christ being man,
wheresoever he is, he is in a place; and St. Austin, Toll spatia corporibus
non erunt, Christ could not have a body, and that body not contained in a
place: whatsoever devices the Vbiquitaries have to color their conceits of the
illocality of Christ's body, by that rule of St. Austin, and St. Austins rule is
grounded upon the nature of bodies, they cannot avoid a contradiction.

Into a place then Christ ascended, and it is behoofefull for us so to think;
for as Christ's Ascension was, so shall ours be: Christ speaks it expressly,
Where I am, John 17. 1. Cor. 5.
there (says Christ in his prayer) I will that all that believe in me be also;
and St. Paul does distinguish between our presence and absence from the Lord,
which could not be if Christ's body were every where.

Where the place is whereinto Christ ascended, we may gather out of the word
(...), which does often signify Heaven: God on high, is as much as God in
Heaven; but St. Paul here puts it out of all doubt, when he says he ascended
far above all Heavens: meaning the visible Heavens; and so pointing at the
place which he elsewhere calls the third Heaven, 2. Cor. 12.
which is a place appointed to be the receptacle of Saints. What manner of
place it is, we need not curiously enquire, we should rather strive to come to
the place; of this we may be assured, that being the place which God has
assigned wherein he will have Angels and men enjoy blessedness, it must
needs be a blessed place: it is resembled to Paradise, wherein grow the
trees, and run the waters of everlasting life; it was shadowed by the holy
Land, flowing with milk and honey, it was represented to St. John in that
glorious heavenly Jerusalem that came down from Heaven; it is called Gods
House, Gods Sanctuary, the City of God, and the Kingdom of Heaven, the
pleasures thereof we find touched in the 16. and in the 36. Psalms. This must
be observed concerning the place, because it is the first step of felicity;
this earth is the valley of tears, and they that live here are in condition
answerable to the place, mortal in a mortal place, and Christ having put off
his mortality, was no longer to abide in a place of mortality. But enough of
the place.

Christ ascended not only in place, but in state also; in a blessed place he
had a blessed state, and his state is reduced to two branches, Glory and Power:
for he sat down on the right hand of God, and the right hand of God
singifieth both; first glory. They that come near in place to the person of a
King, come near also in glory and dignity unto him. St. Paul says he was
received up into glory. David, Psalm. 8. he was crowned with glory and worship:
The Author to the Hebrews, he is set down at the right hand of Majesty, far
above all powers and principalities, having a Name given him above all names.
And this is opposed to the form of a servant, which Christ took in the days
of his flesh; while he was in the world, he emptied himself of glory, and
made himself of no reputation, becoming as the scorn of men, and outcast of
the people, not a house to hide his head, but after the Resurrection he
appears in another habit. In the first of the Revelation, and other passages
of that Book, John saw him as the King of Glory, and the Fathers interpret
those words in the Psalm, Be opened O ye gates, and be ye lifted up ye ever
lasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in, of the Ascension of
Christ, and entering into his glory; for then did he lift up himself above the
Heavens, and his glory above all the Earth.

As his state was full of glory, so was it also of power; for all power was
then given unto him both in heaven and earth, and all knees bowed unto him, all
things were put under his feet, and he became King of kings, and Lord of lords;
Heb. 4.
yea he hears up all things with the word of his power, it usharper than any
two-edged sword. The Psalmist compares it to sharp arrows, Psalm. 45. he has
an tron scepter in his hand, wherewith he breaks the wicked as a Potters
vessel, finally, he reigns in the midst of his enemies. And this power is
opposed to that weakness wherein he appeared in the days of his flesh; the
condition of that time is amply set down, Esaias 53. wherein you shall see
nothing but passion and subjection; and the Gospel confirms that Prophecy,
wherein you shall find, that from the day of his birth, until the moment that
he gave up the ghost, Christ endured as if he were the subject of every wicked
man's blasphemous tongue, or bloody hands: but the case is now altered; for his
enemies are now the patients, and he the agent, they are subject unto him, and
he can, as he will, bridle and crush them; for his Kingdom is over all. This
is the sum of the Exaltation of Christ's person, and our nature in his person;
for he made us sit with himself in heavenly places: that will appear better
in the second part of the Triumph.

Wherein I noted two particulars; the first was, that the monuments of the
Conquest did attend the chariot of the Conqueror, Incedunt vinctae longo
ordine gentes, Quam vartae linguis habitu tam vestis and armis; to this allude
these words, He led captivity captive: and indeed, (...) notes that which is
taken by force, (...); Christ was the Lion of the tribe of Judah, and Esaias cap.
63. he is described as a glorious Conqueror; Shah the prey be taken from the
mighty? or the captivity of the just be delivered? Thus says the Lord, the
captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall
be delivered, Esaias 49. Christ the stronger man, entered the strong man's house,
he bound him, he rifled him.

But St. Austin on these words observes a distinction of captives and
captivity; In Psalm. 67.
Austin on these words observes a distinction of captives and captivity; there
is inuolunt aria captiuit as and voluntaria, whereof the former is misera, the
later faelix: the fiends of Hell were taken captives, Christ triumphed over
them, and made a show openly of them; and the children of God were taken
captives; Col. 2. 1. Pet. 2. 2. Cor. 10.
for they are (...), a purchased people: And St. Paul tells us, that the weapons
of his spiritual warfare are mighty through God to the pulling down of strong
holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ. The children of God are delivered from captivity, but to
continue captives still; for they must take upon them Christ's yoke, and they
must account themselves not their own but his; The very same does St. Paul
mean, Romans 6. when he says, that of servants of sin we are made servants to
righteousness; for servus and captivus are Synonoma's. But between these
captives there is this difference, that the first are unwillingly captives, and
in their captivity are miserable; for they are reserved in chains of darkness
for the judgment of the great day, and they take little content in this
thraldom: But as for the children of God, they are glad that they have so
changed their Master, and well they may be; for they are made happy by the
change, for their service is perfect liberty, and what can our heart more
desire? In this difference captivity being understood of both sorts, it is true
that they attend Christ's chariot; the wicked vincti, as Prisoners, the godly
coronati, as being Conquerours; for what Christ did, he did for them, and
there is a sense thereof in every one of them.

But how is this true, that either the one or the other are so captives? seeing
this our Apostle in this very Epistle does tell us, Cap. 6.
that we strive not with flesh and blood, but with powers and principalities,
and spiritual wickedness in heavenly places. We must therefore observe, that
Christ has taken away from Satan two things, ius in nos, and dominium in
nobis. His right unto us has Christ taken away absolutely in his own person;
for Christ has the keys of death and hell, and Satan cannot stir, but
when, and as far as Christ gives him leave. As for dominium in nobis, Christ
has taken that away, by putting his spirit into us, and thereby mortifying the
old man; but yet so, that we still consist as well of the old as of the new,
the flesh rebels against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: Thus
Christ is pleased to exercise us, that we may imitate his Triumph, and by
experience of our trampling upon Satan, be undoubtedly assured, that Christ
has bruised his head. St. Paul was buffeted by a messenger of Satan, he
prayed, and Christ answered him, My grace is sufficient for thee, my strength
is made perfect in weakness: If we would but resist the Devil, he would fly
from us, if we would resist, I say, steadfast in faith; for the shield of faith
is able to quench all siery darts of the Devil. The Martyrs tried it, who
neither were circumuented by the Serpent, nor dismayed by the Lion, but
overcame by the blood of the Lamb, in that they loved not their lives unto
death; and therefore with Crowns, with Palms, and Harpes they sing the
triumphant song of Moses. And we must all be resolved, that as Joshua, when he
had overcome the Kings of Canaan, brought them, and made the Heads of Israel to
set their feet upon their necks: even so Jesus, that has spoiled the powers
of darkness, will have his members with like confidence to insult upon them.
Yea it is a part of that just and glorious revenge of Adams cowardice: in his
great strength he yielded himself a prey to Satan, when he had full power to
withstand him; to blot out that shame, he will have the sons of Adam, that
are much weaker, to encounter and trample on that mighty Hunter, and serpentine
Lion. And we much neglect the honor that Christ would do us, and the
manifestation of that power which he is pleased to vouchsafe us, if so be we
have no testimony from our own conscience, that we have in our own persons
experience of this Triumph. Tertullian has a good rule, that oftentimes men
are foiled, not because he that set on them was the stronger, but they did not
know or use their own strength that did resist. It is the case of most men; I
need no other proof than their enormous falls: the reason why they become
Satan's prey, is their cowardice or their negligence, either they do not at
all resist, or they pray not for assistance unto God; if they did, they might
confidently say with Saint Paul, I can do all through him that strengthens
me, Philip. 4.16. and that is Christ. But howsoever, we fail in doing what we
should, this is sure, that this conflict is no disproofe of the Triumph, seeing
the intent of it is to be a perpetual evidence, or rather an evident
perpetuation thereof.

And so have you the first attendant upon the Triumphant Chariot.

The second is the disposing of the spoils, He gave gifts, and he that rifled
the strong man, distributed whatsoever he found in his House. Touching the
nature of the gifts, I need not speak now, former words of my Text occasioned
me to open them; here only you must mark originem and mensuram donorum;
though they were given often before, yet tho dispensation depended upon Christ's
Ascension. Cap. 7.
In Saint John we read, that the Spirit was not given because Christ was not
yet glorified: And Acts 2. Saint Peter tells the Jews, that Christ being
exalted poured forth the Spirit; yea Christ himself, Acts 1. when he was
ready to ascend, bids his Disciples stay at Jerusalem, until they were
endued with power from above. And no wonder that it depends upon his Ascension,
seeing it is an effect of his Kingdom, and his Kingdom began properly at his
Ascension. And as this is true of the Original, so is it also of the Measure
of the gifts; though he gave them before, yet he never gave them in that
measure, whether you respect the number of persons that partake them, or the
degree of the gifts which were bestowed on them. Saint Peter, 2. Pet. 1.
compares the gifts of the Prophets unto a candle, the Gospel unto the day
light; a great odds between the lights, and as great odds is there between
the Spheres of their actiuity; for it is no great room that a candle can
illighten, be it never so great a candle; and the Prophets went not out of the
Holy Land ordinarily, and that was but a corner of the world; but the Sun
goes out from one end of Heaven, and the circuit thereof is unto the end of
it, and there is nothing hid from the heat of it, Psalm 19. even so the Sun
of Righteousness shed his beams over all the world, and Christ, after his
ascension, made his Church Catholic; even we that are assembled here, are
beholding for this our sacred assembly unto the Ascension of Christ, from
thence it is that this light is come to us. And as often as in our Creed we
remember his ascension, let us thankfully remember that we owe this our
spiritual condition unto it. And let this suffice for the opening of Christ's
Triumph.

My Text does not only tell us of a Triumph, but tells us also that that
Triumph was deserved; Christ by virtue of his Hypostaticall Union was able to
do all that is specified in the Triumph, to ascend in place and state, to
lead captivity captive, and to give gifts. But he would not attain it only
by power, he would receive it by merit, and why? he stood out for man, and
therefore would observe the Articles of that Covenant which God did enter into
with him: and the Covenant was, Hoc fac and viues. Though Adam being created
holy, was immediately fit for Heaven, yet God would not have him come unto
Heaven, but by use of his Holiness in obedience to God: even so Christ would
fulfill all righteousness, and undergo the Cross in satisfaction for our
sin, before he would enter into Glory. And we must not deceive our selves,
and dream of any other course; for though we cannot equal Christ's Cross,
yet by mortification and tribulation we must resemble it; though we cannot
fulfill the Law, yet must we do our uttermost endeavor. And this course must
be unto us, though not causa, a merit, as it was to Christ, yet via regnandi,
the means unto the Kingdom of Heaven, without which no man shall ever have
access unto the blessed presence of God.

But more distinctly: We must mark that the Descension went before the
Ascension, and that the degree of the Ascension bears correspondencie to the
degree of the Descension.

First, the Descension goes before the Ascension, and it must needs do so in
Christ, you will acknowledge it, if you know what the Descension is: The
Descension is the incarnation and the passion of Christ, in respect of these
the Son of God is said to descend. And indeed, he fell below himself, when
he submitted himself to them, by so much as a man is below God, and so to be
used being a man, is little answerable to the Majesty of a God. Had he not
thus descended, he could never have ascended; for whither should he ascend
that was in the form of God? and so as coaequall, as coaeternall, what state,
what place could he be advanced unto, that as God was highest in both? But
his pleasure to descend, made it possible for him to ascend, it was possible
for him to ascend, in regard of that wherein he did descend, he might
glorify his manhood in which he was pleased to be humbled.

Secondly, as the Descension must needs go before the Ascension, so does the
Ascension keep good correspondency with the Descension; Christ ascended high
far above all Heavens, and he descended low into the lowest part of the
earth, not only to the earth, the lowest part of the world, but even to the
lowest part of the earth: for we say in our Creed, He descended into Hell, he
took his rising from the lowest place, to ascend into the highest. And herein
does Christ read a good Lecture to us; he teaches us that Humility is the
way to glory, and the more we are humbled, the more we shall be exalted. Adam
and Angels were both ambitious, both did desire to climb; but they mistook
their rising, and so in climbing took grievous falls. If we would climb
without a fall, we must learn to climb of Christ; so shall we be sure to
tread the steps of Jacobs Ladder, which from earth will reach as high as
heaven.

I may not omit to observe, that the Apostle speaks significantly, when he
says, that He that ascended, is the same also that descended; Non ascendit
alius licet aliter. Nestorius was condemned for an Heretic, who distracted
Christ's two natures, and made of them two persons: but as it is Gods truth, so
it is our great comfort, that the person is but one, and these are the works
of one and the self same person, they both concern the same person in the
nature which he took from us; He that was humbled, is the same person that
was exalted. And so will God deal with us, crown no other person than him
that does conflict, and in the depth of our Humiliation every one of us may say
with Job, Chapt. 19. Though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my
flesh I shall see God. Non alius.

Sed aliter, though the same person of Christ ascended which descended, yet he
ascended otherwise than he descended: for he descended Metaphysically,
ascended Physically, he descended not by changing of place, but of state; the
Godhead that is infinite, could change no place, but it could exinnanite it
self, and become of a worse condition than it was. But in the Ascension the
person changed place, the manhood removed from earth to heaven; he that in his
Incarnation being only God became man, in his Ascension went into heaven God
and man; he that to make way to his passion, suspended the influence of his
Godhead into his Manhood, did in his Ascension permit the one to indowe the
other, so far as a Creature was capable of the influence of his Creator. And
we shall ascend though not other men, yet otherwise than we descend; we
descended morally, but we shall ascend physically: in our descending we put
on other affections than before we had, we exchange our natural pride for
Christian humility; but in our Ascension we shall change our place, remove out
of this wilderness into Canaan, from earth to Heaven, and the same God that is
pleased here for a time to make us sow in tears, will then yield us a
plentiful harvest which we shall reap in joy; we shall then see the
fullness of his love toward us, which too usually we misdeeme by reason of
the Cross, which hardly can we conceive, that it can stand with his good will
toward us: Castigo te, non quod odio habeam, sed quod amem, is a proposition
more true than evident, the combination is so strange, that it is no wonder if
we be hard of belief; but God will then clear it, and we shall confess we
had no reason to discredit it.

One Note more, and so an end. Before you heard of Grace, now you see that
grace is a spoil, a spoil taken from that enemy that tyrannized over us, and
this is no small improuement of grace. Before you heard, that grace did fill
us, but now you see that we were captives, and the condition of captives is to
endure hunger, nakedness, all kind of misery, and how welcome is that grace
that fills such empty persons? Before you heard, that this grace was a gift, but
here you find that Christ paid dearly for it; the more it cost him, the more
precious should it be in our eyes. What shall I say then to you? but wish you
to couple this third Sermon with the first, that you may be more feeling of
the love of God in Christ.

O Lord, that would descend before thou did ascend, grant that we may
make our way through Humility to Glory, give us grace to consummate thy
Triumph, by manfully resisting and conquering of Satan; Let us not fear to
tread on him whom thou have disarmed, yea, enrich us we beseech thee with the
spoils which thou have taken from him, and make us ever willing and devout
captives of thine: Let it never grieve us to serve thee, who have so mercifully
saved us; Let us now ascend in heart whither we hope to ascend in place, and so
prepare us on earth by a holy conversation, that we may partake with Christ of
a happy condition in the kingdom of Heaven. Amen.
IHS

A SERMON PREACHED IN WESTMINSTER BEfore his Matie. the Lords, and others of
the upper House of Parliament at the opening of the Fast. Iulie 2. 1625.
1 KINGS cap. 8. verse. 37, 38, 39, 40. If there be in the Land famine, if
there be pestilence, blasting, mildew, locust, if there be Caterpillars, if
the enemy besiege them in the Lund of their Cities. Whatsoever plague,
whatsoever sickness there be.

What prayer and supplication soever be made, by any man, or by all thy people
Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his own heart, and spread
forth his hands toward this House.

Then hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do, and give
to every man according to his ways, whose heart thou know. For thou, even
thou only know the hearts of all the children of men.

That they may fear thee all the days that they live in the Land which thou
gave to our Fathers.


THese words are a Clause of that Prayer wherewith King Solomon did dedicate
the Temple, and express that use thereof which comes very near our present
case. Our case is twofold; we suffer from Gods wrath, we are suppliants to
Gods mercy. And lo two like cases are presented in these words; the case of
Sufferers, verse 37. and in the three next verses the case of Suppliants.

But more distinctly to rip up the Text: We will consider therein, first, the
manner of the delivery, and secondly the matter that is delivered. The Manner,
it is a Prayer; the words are conceived in that form. In the Matter we shall
see 1. Whom these words concern, and 2. Wherein they do concern them. Those
whom they concern are the inhabitants of Canaan, the children of Israel, the
People of God: this you may gather out of the 37. and 38. Verses. And they
concern them in two maine Points; for they show, first, that they may vnderlye
the heavy hand of God, secondly, that they must then have recourse unto the
Throne of Grace.

The heavy hand of God is here set down; first definitely, it may afflict
Israel, either only in their persons, by famine and pestilence; or only in
their possessions, by blasting and mildew, distempers of the Air, whose
corruption breeds also vermin to work the same mischief, Locusts and
Caterpillars; or jointly in their persons and possessions by the sword, when
the Enemy does besiege them in the Land of their Cities. Definitely thus is
the heavy hand of God expressed.

It is expressed also indefinitely; lest Israel should think that these be all
the instruments of Gods wrath, Solomon adds a more liberal phrase,
Whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness there may be, it may be in the Land;
God has many more ways to afflict Israel than are expressed. This is Isreal's
first case; a bad one.

It has another, and a better. When Israel does vnderlye the heavy hand of
God, then must Israel have recourse unto the Throne of grace. And here we will
observe; first, that God which sends calamities provides his Church of a
remedy. Secondly, though the calamities be many, yet the remedy is but one;
the only remedy of all calamities is penitent devotion, my text calls it
Prayer and Supplication.

Touching this devotion we shall learn here, the Performance and the
Acceptance of it. Unto the Performance two Acts concur; one inward, Penitents
must know every one the plague of his own heart; the other outward, the
Penitents devotion must be attended with convenient Ceremonies; here are two
specified, the one of the hands, they must be strecht out, the other of the
eye, that must look toward the Temple of Solomon. Thus must the devotion be
performed. And it must be performed by every Israelite in particular, any man
that will be penitent must perform it so, and all Israel must perform it so,
if they will be penitent; the text is plain for both.

The penitent Devotion that is thus performed, God will accept; and touching
his acceptance, we are here taught, Wherein it consists, and whereat it
aymeth. It consists in two things; God will give Access to penitent Prayers,
Then hear thou in Heaven the place of thy dwelling. Secondly, he will give
redress unto the sufferings of the Penitent; a redress to the cause of them,
that is, he will forgive sin; a redress to the effect of sin, that is,
Woe; He will do what they desire, and give ease to their pain.

But mark; God dispenses his double grace discreetly; He will give to men,
but according to their ways: and those ways not outward, but inward, He will
give according to their ways whose heart he knows; and this heart, though
unknown to all others, cannot be hid from him; He he only knows the hearts
of all the children of men. As God dispenses discreetly, so universally; He
dispenses vnicuique, to every man of either sort according to his ways. Well,
God does accept penitent denotion. But Whereat does he aim in this Acceptance?
Surely at the Amendment of Israel; He does it that Israel may fear him, and be
constant in this Amendment, fear all the days that they live. And the place
where they live puts a double Obligation upon them: first, it is Ha Aretz,
Ha Adama, a very eminent Land: secondly, their Tenure is francke Almoine; He
whom they must fear gave it to their Fathers.

You see (beloved) that the particulars which I have pointed out are many; and
they are pertinent; yet fear not that I will be over long; I remember the
mortality of your hearing and my speaking; it shall therefore suffice that I
moderately touch at them; only God vouchsafe by them to touch us all to the
quick. Let us then begin with the Manner of the delivery.

My text is conceived in the form of a Prayer; but in the next Chapter this
Prayer is made a Promise: So that I shall not mistake if I turn the words into
several Assertions: and you shall lose nothing; for in the Close I will return
them into a Petition again. This is all I will say of the Manner of delivery.

In the Matter delivered we must first see Whom these words concern; and the
Text tells us that they are the inhabitants of Canaan, the children of
Israel, the people of God; if I say no more, this were enough to notify them,
but it is expedient for my purpose that I moreover dignifie them; they were the
peculiar of God, Exodus 19.
his Jewel of Men, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, Romans cap. 2. and cap 9.
trusted with Gods Oracles; Depositaries of his Covenant; they possessed the
Arc, and Christ according to the flesh, was the offspring of that Nation;
Ier. cap. 3. and cap. 12. Ephesians. 2.
you may find more of their Honors in the New Testament, and in the Old; but
these may suffice to show how near they came, and how dear they were to God.

And yet may this people vnderlye the heavy hand of God; Israel may be made as
Egypt, a Theater of Plagues; the Paradise of God may become like Sodom and
Gomorrah, a monument of vengeance; the Holy Ghost foretold it, and the event
has justified it. The Church has no privilege from Gods judgments, God
spares sin in none, He will visit it with scourges wheresoever he finds
it. Yea so far is the Church from being privileged, that it is, though a
strange one, yet a prerogative of the Church, to drink first of the cup of
Gods wrath. Judgment (says St. Peter, cap. 4. v. 17.) must begin at Gods
house. God in the stripes of his children lets the world see what it must
expect. And indeed the persuasion would not be forcible, if the argument ran
thus; God strikes his enemies, therefore he will strike his friends; who would
be moved with it? But if it run thus, He strikes his friends, therefore he
will not spare his enemies, the Conclusion is unavoidable.

What then is our Lesson? Be not high minded but fear, Romans 11. and, Let him
that stands take heed lest he fad, 1 Cor. 10. For he that falls into sin,
will fall under wrath: the Israelites are to us Types of moral
correspondencies, what befell them may befall us. And it is happy that it may;
for nulla poena, maxim a poena, a man is never in worse case than when he is
most at ease; such ease temporal is the harbinger of eternal pain; neither
do men much intend their salvation, who are not quickened thereunto by some
temporal affliction. A stray sheep will never return into the way except it
be forced by the shepherds staff, and God neglects them as bastards, Heb.
12.8.
who never feel that rod wherewith he uses to correct his children. You see
then that the Prerogative of the Church which I fore-specified is not only an
undoubted Truth, but whatsoever flesh and blood may think to the contrary, it
is a great blessing, it is a blessing that the Church may vnderlye the heavy
hand of God; it was Isreal's blessing, and it is ours, that we may vnderlye
Gods heavy hand.

May; nay do. It cannot be doubted that we may, seeing it is evident that we
do; the next point in the text will confirm that, wherein we shall see the
heavy hand of God which we vnderlye. It is set forth, first definitely, then
indefinitely, both clauses make up an abridgement of the 28. of Deuteronomie, a
Chapter which was read but even now unto you, a Chapter which he that will be
penitent cannot read too often, and if he read it feelingly, it will make him
penitent indeed: I am sure the holy Ghost thought so, that does borrow into the
other Canonical books many passages hence to work this pious affection.

But you will say, what is this to Christians? it was spoken of the Israelites:
Yes, it concerns Christians much, for in the new Testament our Savior Christ
in his Sermon Matthew chap. 24. (...).
speaking of the end of the world, says, there shall be famine, and
pestilence, and war, the very plagues mentioned in my Text. St. John in the
Revelation, cap. 6. commenting upon that Sermon of Christ, does tell us of the
like plagues which should follow in the world after his time; they have bin in
other ages before us, and they are even now in ours, yea they are come upon us.
Come and see the black horse, he is gone forth, whose Rider has balances in
his hand, and proclaims a measure of wheat for a penny, and a measure of
barley for a penny, and use wine and oil thriftily, Revel. 6.5. the words
denounce a famine, in phrases respective, and agreeable to that Country, which
I will not now stand to expound: only thus much let me tell you, that the
unseasonable weather which has continued long with us, may make us fear that
God this year will break the staff of our bread, send us cleanness of
teeth, and pinch us by the belly. And this plague is not a little aggrauated by
the Circumstance of time. Naz. Orat. 26.
It is a pitiful thing when we have seen a fair spring, and the fruits of the
earth in a good forwardness, when harvest comes, Deplerata colonis
Votaiacens, longique perit labor irritus anni.
to have a great deal of grass and little hay; a great deal of straw, and
but a little corn; and surely if God send not better weather, the Husbandmans
hopes and pains will prove but vain and fruitless. If any man desire to know
the fearful evil of this first plague, famine, let him read in the 28. of
Deuteronomie, the holy Ghost has there so described it, that his heart must
needs bleed that reads it. 2 King. 6.
Surely a King of Israel, a wicked King, could not but be moved when he did
but hear that there was a proof thereof in Samaria; and how passionately does
the Prophet Jeremy lament the like proof in Jerusalem? Lam. 4.
Let us in our humiliation pray God that we be never driven to experience the
like. You may call this plague the plague of Luxury.

You have heard the first plague, a grievous plague, but not the only plague;
for we may say in the Prophets words, Esaias 9. yet for all that his wrath is not
turned back, but Gods hand is stretched out still. And that because of another
yet, which we find in the Prophet Amos, cap. 4. Yet for all that have ye not
turned unto me, says the Lord. If the first plague do not rowse men, God
has a second to send: the first is a plague of poor men; he that has money in
his purse will say, if there be no victuals in England, I have wherewithal to
fetch them from beyond Sea, I will not starve; God has a plague in store for
such, which their purses cannot keep from them. I would therefore have them
come and see the pale Horse and his Rider, his name that sat thereon was
Death. By death St. John means Pestilence, he speaks in the Dialect of the
Septuagint, who render the Hebrew Deber, by (...), both in Moses, Deuteronomy. 28. and
in my text; the reason is, because the Pestilence is indeed a mortal disease.
The Hebrew Deber signifies a word, a word gone out of Gods mouth against all
sorts of men. In the book of Wisdom, cap. 18. we read that when the first
borne of Egypt were destroyed, they were destroyed by the Almighty word of God
that leaped down from heaven as a mighty man of War: Certainly it imports
that wrath is gone out from God, and by Gods commandment the punishing Angel
has the sword put into his hand. You may call this Plague the Plague of pride
and disdain. For how can God better answer it in his judgment, than by
bringing men to such a case, that not only their bodies are filled with a
loathsome disease, but also that their nearest and dearest friends stand aloof
from their sore, Psalm. 38.
and they cannot in reason desire that they should come near them? in so
desperate a danger they are in a most disconsolate condition.

I might out of Histories describe the misery of this disease; out of our own
Chronicles I might show you, Regno Edw. 2. and Edw. 3.
how desolate it has made many places in this Land. But to what end should I
spend time? whereas it is not so long since the last great Plague, but that the
most of this Auditorie may well remember the evil of it; and I doubt not but
every one of us will fear it, though he be not admonished. Only let me
advise you to correct one wicked phrase which is too frequent in men's mouths;
whether in jest, or in earnest, thus they use to curse others with whom they
deal, A Plague, or The Plague of God be on him or on his: And God has heard
us, though not to satisfy our wicked desire, yet to punishout wicked tongues.
I will say no more of this second Plague, the second of those plagues whereby
God afflicts only our persons.

But Gods judgments are not confined to our Persons; Yet for all this his
wrath is not turned back, but his hand is stretched out still. And why?
because yet for all this plague we return not unto the Lord; therefore God
has another Plague in store whereby he does afflict our possessions, Blasting
and Mildew, distempers of the Air, proceeding sometimes from too much drought
the cause of Blasting, sometimes too much moisture the cause of Mildew; at
leastwise the words in the original do point out an excess in these two
qualities. God promised to Noah that there should be winter and summer, seed
time and harvest, Genesis 8. but this promise must be understood of Gods general
providence over the world; and no doubt but in many parts of the world the
parts of the year have that seasonable temper. But God has not tied himself
to every particular place, as if he may not for sins make (as he threatens
in the Law) their heaven brass, and their earth iron: so that neither the
heaven shall drop down his usual fatness, nor the earth show forth her
usual fruitfulness; if we disorder our lives, God will disorder the Seasons
of the year; and we should reflect our eyes from the great heaven and earth,
upon the heaven and earth of this our little world, see the correspondencie of
the one to the other, and rectify this, if we desire that the other should
be rectified.

From the distemper of the Air proceed the vermin here specified, second
afflictors of our Possessions, Locusts and Caterpillars, which have their
names, the one from being a great deuourer, the other from coming in great
swarms, so great, that sometimes they have darkened the Sun, as Stories
report; both lay all waste wheresoever they come; the Scripture makes them
Godshost, Joel 1. and surely when they set upon a Nation the greatest armies of
the mightiest Potentates are more easily rectified than they can be. We are
not, God be thanked, so much troubled with those Creatures as hotter Countries
are, and yet we are not free from them altogether, they have sometimes done
much mischief in this Land. There is a kind of Metaphorical Locusts and
Caterpillars, Locusts that came out of the bottomless pit, I mean Popish
Priests and Jesuits; and Caterpillars of the Common weal, Proiectors and
Inuentors of new tricks how to exhaust the purses of the subjects, covering
private ends with public pretenses. But I will not now trouble youwith them.
Only let me tell them, that in well governed States they were wont to be
called Pestes Reipublicae, Plagues of the Common wealth.

But to go on; Neither does this Plague exhaust all Gods wrath, it is not
turned back, but his hand is stretched out still. And that because that yet
for all this we do not return to God.

Come therefore and behold the red Horse, and him that sits thereon, to whom
power is given to take peace from the earth, that men may kill one another, and
to him a great sword was given. And indeed this was the plague of the sword,
which is a manisold plague, Plaga complicatissima.
it seizes not only upon our persons, nor only upon our goods, but upon both;
it spares neither a man's own person, nor his family, nor his goods, it
contains in it famine, and pestilence; especially if it be a besieging sword,
such as is specified in my text. The rich may provide against famine, great men
may shift their dwelling to escape the pestilence; who can fly from the sword
which bears down Kings and Kingdoms, Princes and Principalities? Let us go
no farther than a Royal Branch of this Kingdom, who has long been a pitiful
instance of this plague of the sword; we now labor for the recovery thereof,
and let it be none of the least importunities of our Humiliation, to solicit
God that we may happily effect it. To point out the miseries of war, were too
tedious a work for this time, I refer you to the Prophecy of Joel, cap. 2.
where you may see the image of it, especially to Ieremies Lamentations, which
are able to make even a stony heart lament it; bitterly lament the impiety,
the impurity, the iniquity that follows the sword.

We read indeed in the Gospel of a Centurion that built a Synagogue for the
Jews, Luke 7. but how many Centurions do we read of that have spoiled and
ruined thousands of Churches? We read of a Centurion which gave much alms,
Acts 10. but how many Centurions are there that make all prey that comes to
hand, and grow rich and mighty by the destruction of whole Countries? Happily
you read of one Scipio that tendered the honor of Matrons and Virgins; but
what more common with Soldiers, the greatest Commanders amongst them, than to
ravish Wives and Daughters? Soldiers (for the most part) fear neither God nor
man. We may then well conclude, that the sword is a fearful plague.

Behold now in these definite strokes of God, how Gods judgments answer our
sins; we starve our souls through neglect of grace, and God pineth our
bodies with want of food. We disperse the vernome of our wickedness, and
infect others out of the malignancy of our nature, which is maliciously
ambitious to spread it self; and God he sends a venom into our bodies that
is most contagious, and poysoneth all that come near us: the pestilence of the
body is herein very like to the pestilence of the soul, they are both alike
malignant unto others. We fight against God by our sins, as if we would
dethrone him, and usurp his Kingdom; we attempt it foolishly and in vain,
but God sends those against us, that shall not only assault, but subdue,
triumph over us, and trample us under their feet. Finally, we undervalue and
dis-regard God, and he makes the basest of his Creatures to confound us, and
lay our State waste.

Secondly, consider how the wrath of God comes on by degrees; God is compared
to a consuming fire: now you know, that in fire there is first smoke, a flame,
and coal; the first onset of Gods wrath is but like unto smoke; if that do
not move us, we shall feel the flame; and if we be not the better for the
flame, Nazianz. Orat. 26.
then the coal shall burn us. This gradation of judgment is excellently set
forth by Moses, Leuit. 26. where chaining a following to a foregoing judgment,
he brings God in speaking thus, If ye will not for all this hearken unto
me, but walk contrary unto me, then will I walk contrary to you also in
fury, and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins.

I have sufficiently opened unto you the heavy hand of God, as it is
definitely set forth by Solomon. Lest we should think, that God has no more
instruments of vengeance than these commonly known ones, which are in the
Scripture by an excellency called the Plagues of God, Ezech. 14. Solomon adds
an indefinite clause, Whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness, importing that
God has many more in store. And indeed, Deuteronomy. 2^.
Moses in the Chapter read unto you this day, specifieth many more; yet has he
not specified all that God can send; and of late there has hardly past a
year, wherein we have not heard of some new disease.

But there is one plague which I may not omit; I have called you to see three
Horses, the black, the pale, the red, and the Riders thereon; there is in the
same Chapter of the Revelations a fourth Horse mentioned, a White Horse, and he
that sat thereon had a bow in his hand, a crown on his head, and he went
forth conquering. It is commonly conceived that this is the Gospel of Christ
prevailing in the world; we miss that White horse now; as it did in the first
Age go on planting: so it did in this last hundred years go on restoring of
the Gospel. But now for many years together this Conqueror does not appear,
and the Orthodoxe Church is much straightned. And we should count it a greater
plague that this Horse is missing, than that the others are so visible in the
world, considering that spiritual plagues are much more heavy than corporal;
and we should in our humiliation join our cries with those souls under the
Altar, that were slain for the Word of God, and the Testimony which they held,
saying, How long, O Lord holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell in the earth? Revel. 6.10.

The Use of all this first part of my Text that is the case of Sufferers, is
this, That we know not God to halues: God describes himself to be Just as
well as Merciful, Exodus 34. and the son of Syrach tells us, Ecclus. 5. that
God is as mighty to punish, as to save; therefore we must not look upon only
Gods Mercy, but upon his Justice also, which is so palpable in the plagues.

And yet must we not so plod upon Gods Justice, as not to carry our eye from
thence to his Mercy; for as in the first case expressed in my Text, we have seen
the Church suffering from Gods wrath: so now in her second case we must behold
her as a Suppliant, having recourse unto the Throne of grace. And here first
we must observe, That though God for sin be pleased to humble his Church,
yet does he afford her a means of relief, whereby she may come out of her
greatest distress. And why? God is not (...), but (...), not a Destroyer, but
a Savior of his Church; he does not punish her but to recover her, as anon you
shall hear more at large.

But though the Church be subject to no more calamities than she has remedy
for, yet of her manifold distresses the remedy is but one; Penitent Devotion is
the only remedy of all distresses. And this Devotion is here called by two
names, Prayer and Supplication. The words in the Original are fitted to the
argument; the first is Tephillah, which is such a prayer as a prisoner makes
to him before whom he is arraigned: you may interpret it by those words in
Job, cap. 9. I will make supplication to my Judge. And indeed, a Penitent must
so come to God, as if he came to the Bar, he must suppose himself to be an
indicted person. And being such, the second word will teach him what his plea
must be, even a Psalm of Mercy; for so Techinnah signifies: he must come
unto God with Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great mercy, Psalm. 51. and
he must pray with Daniel, cap. 9. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee,
but unto us confusion of faces.

In the Primitive Church they had stationary days; Tertullian says their name
is borrowed from warfare, and Christians upon that day putting on the whole
armor of God, did stand upon their guardes against powers and principalities,
Sermon. 36.
and spiritual wickednesses in heavenly places. St. Ambrose more plainly
says, stationes vocantur Ieiunia, quod flentes and ieiunantes in ijs inimicos
repellamus. These were the weekly fasting days, Wednesdayes and Fridayes,
whereon Christians repaired to the Church, and therein quasifactamanu, like an
Army with spiritual weapons of fasting and praying, weeping and lamenting of
their sins, they put to flight all their ghostly enemies, and removed all the
heavy pressures of the Church. We keep the days, but have lost the truevse
of them: It is much to be wished that they were restored again, and that
thereon we did, as our Forefathers were wont, plye God in these sinful and
woeful times especially with Tephillah, and Techinnah, the Prayers of guilty
ones, and Supplications for the mercy of God.

But more fully to rip up this Devotion, so far as we are led by my Text;
observe that it consists of two acts, one inward, and another outward. The
inward is a lively sense of the Penitents evil case, and an expression of his
devotion out of that sense, Every one of them must know the plagues of his own
heart. Where first observe, that the plagues inflicted are corporal, but the
sense required is spiritual. And why? the original of sin is in the soul,
whereunto the body concurres but as a pliable instrument; therefore God would
have the body serve by his smart to awaken the soul, make it apprehensiue of
Gods displeasure, and tremble at his judgments.

The word which we do render plague, does signify a wound; now in the heart
there may be a wound of sin, or a wound for sin. The wound of sin, 1.
Pet. 2.
is that which sin gives to the soul: St. Peter tells us, that our sinful
lusts fight against the soul, and in fighting give the soul many a stabbe;
the son of Syrach expresses this excellently, All iniquity is as a two-edged
sword, the wounds whereof cannot be healed, Ecclus. 21. And what mean we
else, when we say that sin is mortal, but that it gives mortal wounds?
Besides this wound of sin, there is a wound for sin; you know that when a
man in fight has received a wound, the Surgeon must come with his
instrument and search that wound, scour it, and put the wounded man to a
second pain: even so when we have wounded our souls with sin, we must
wound them a second time for finne, if we mean to be devoutly penitent; we
must be pricked at the heart, we must rent our hearts, we must break our stony
hearts, we must melt our hearts, we must pour forth our souls, our spirit
must be wounded within us, and our heart must be desolate. This is that which
God commanded the Jews, Leuit. 16.31. when he bid them afflict their souls
in the day of their solemn Fast: This is that godly sorrow, which St. Paul, 2.
Cor. 7.10. speaks of, sorrow not to be repented of; Animae amaritudo est
anima poenitentiae, this vexing of our souls is the very soul of repentance.

As a penitent man has these two wounds, so he must know them: but we come
very short of this; all this mortal life of ours is nothing else but a mass
of plagues, full of temptations, John 7. and trauelleth with vanity of
vanities, and vexation of spirit, Psalm. 38. all the sons of Adam do daily
suffer from the wrath of God in some thing or other, and every one of us may
say, as Augustus the Emperor sometimes said, that he sits inter lachrymas
and suspiria, between sighings and tears. Certainly, as the Christian world
now stands, we are encompast with lamentable spectacles both abroad and at
home. But many men are so hardened, that they feel not their own disease,
much less others; yea so far they are from feeling the ordinary plagues of
man, that they do not feel the extraordinary ones wherewith God does rowze
sinful men. Wherefore we must hold it for one of the gifts of grace,
wherewith God does endue his children, that they recover again the sense of
godly sorrow. And we may well conclude, that he that is senseless is
graceless, and they which have no sense bear the heauiest plague.

The word does carry with it not only knowledge but acknowledgement: Knowledge
without acknowledgement is of little regard with God, and auailes us but
little; he knows his wounds as a penitent, that by searching sindeth what
cuill he has done, and though to his own confusion, yet lays it open before
the tender eyes of God, and so qui addit scientiae addit dolori, Eccles. 1.
the penitents knowledge is the fountain of his forrow. Saint Austin wittily
wresteth those words of the Preacher to this purpose.

Mark moreover the word his own: for men are most willing to know and make
known other men's wounds, but vt nemo in sese tentat descendere nemo? Men love
not to be known to themselves, yet many a man has inward plagues, which none
knows but God and himself. But it is an absurd thing to pass over our own
wounds, and inquire into other men's. It is much to be wished therefore, that we
would translate this scrutinie, and spend it upon our selves, take pity upon
our own selves, Nazianz, Orat. 26.
and let the sense of our own ill deseruings, open a passage to the relieuing
bowels of our most merciful Father, who relieueth none but those which know
the evil which they have done and suffer. Esaias 26.
When we come according to the Ordinance of the Church, to make confession
either at the entrance to common Prayer or the Eucharist, every man should have
premeditated his own sins, and acknowledge them unto God in the secret of
his heart, and crave pardon for them.

But though a man must have this passion in regard of his own case; yet must
he not be without compassion toward the ill case of others. If it be but a
private man's case, we must be compassionate toward him, because he is a member
of the same body: We know the Parable of the man that went from Jerusalem to
Ierico, and fell amongst Thieves, who stripped him and wounded him; the Priest
and the Leuite are taxed for want of compassion toward him, as the Samaritane
is commended for having it. And if we must show compassion toward private men's
cases, how much more toward the public? It is a grievous complaint that God
makes against the great men of Israel, Amos 6. who stretch themselves upon
Iuorie beds, eat the Lambs of the flock, etc. but were not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph; if the whole feel the distresses of every part of our
body, should any part be so senseless, as not to suffer for the whole?
especially seeing if the whole perish, every part perishes; whereas the whole
may subsist, though this or that part do perish and fall away. The miserable
estate of Christendom, especially the Orthodoxe Church, and our own general
calamities, importune me to recommend this compassion unto you, and beseech
you to include it in this days Humiliation; and to let the one be as long
lived as the other; to let neither of them decay, much less dye, till God
return to his Church and this State, in his wonted mercy, and with his wonted
blessing.

You have heard the first inward act of a Penitent. There is another act here
specified, which is outward: Penitent Devotion must be accompanied with
convenient ceremonies; here are two mentioned, one of the hands; they must be
stretched out: this is a natural ceremony; for mark a child when he has
offended his parents, as he falls upon his knees, so he lifts up his
hands; so does a servant to his master, a subject to his Sovereign, and the
conquered to the Conqueror, and it imports as much as Do victas in tua
vincla manus, Sir, I am at your mercy. The word Supplicium has its name hence,
because it humbles the weaker under the hand of the stronger, the inferior to
the superior, and makes him supplicare, submit unto him.

From hence it is translated unto Prayer, and made a ceremony thereof, both in
the Old Testament, let the lifting up of my hands be as an evening Sacrifice,
Psalm. 141. and in the New Testament, I will that men pray in all places lifting
up pure hands, 1. Tim. 2. This is the first meaning of this ceremony, when it
is applied to penitency. As God stretches out his hand to strike: so the
Penitent stretches out his hand for mercy. Though I am not ignorant, that it
may also signify the correspondency of the inward to the outward man, that as
the heart lifts it self up to God: so must the body also by the hands. This
is excellently set forth in the Psalm, I stretch forth my hands to thee, my
heart thirsts for thee as a thirsty Land, Psalm. 143. and in this sense Moses
in the war against Amalecke, Solomon in this Dedicatory, and others may be
thought in their prayers to have stretched forth their hands unto God. The
former sense does not exclude this.

The second ceremony is of the Eye, and that is mystical; the Eye must look
toward the Temple of Solomon, that is the place where God put his Name, and
where the cloud representing God resided between the Cherubins upon the Mercy
seat. This brings it home to that which before I told you was to be done by
the Suppliant, who has recourse to the Throne of Grace; and as Tephillah, the
prayer made unto the Judge, did require a ceremony of submissiue stretching out
of the hand: so Techinnah, the prayer of Mercy, requires a cast of our eye upon
the Mercy seat: the ceremonies fit well the Devotion. The riches of Gods
nature are infinite, but we use to single out such of Gods Attributes as are
most fit for our Devotion to behold, not excluding the rest, but desiring that
the rest may not hinder, but further rather that Attribute upon which we lay
hold. Salomons Temple is long since ruined, there is now no typical Mercy
seat whereunto we should look, according to the example of Daniel and
others. But the truth abides for ever; God that was in Christ reconciling the
world, does accept our prayers if we offer them though Jesus Christ; where
Christ then is, thither must we bend our eyes, even to the right hand of God,
whereat he sits to make intercession for us.

Out of both ceremonies jointly, gather, that the place whither we direct our
Devotion, shows from whom the plagues come, and that is, from God, and he
sends them for sin; the confession thereof is plain in the acts of the
Devotion: the plagues come not by chance, neither are they sent without a
cause. The Heathen did acknowledge the Author, and therefore pacified God with
their solemn Supplications; Christians knew him, and propitiated him much
better, as appears by the ancient Letanies. To say nothing of the Law and the
Prophets, which are plentiful in teaching that all plagues come from God.

As God sends them, so he sends plagues for sins; being offended with our
crying sins, he pours upon the world grievous plagues; Maledicta terra
propter te, the first Curse was for man's sin: The Law runs in the same
tenor, and so do King David's Penitentialls; God commands wicked servants to
be beaten, Deuteronomy. 28. I will conclude thi^ point with two short admonitions,
one out of the Prophet, Hear the rod, and who sends it, Micah 6. the other is
out of the Psalm, As the eye of a servant looks to the hand of his master,
and the eye of a maiden to the hand of her mistress: even so our eyes look
unto the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us, Psalm. 123.

Other ceremonies were used by Penitents in the Old Testament, and in the New
especially, who were wont to humble themselves vsque ad inuidiam coeli, as
ancient Writers do Hyperbolize, but with no ill meaning; they did so far
afflict themselves for sin, that the very Saints in Heaven might envy their
deep Humiliation. But tantae seneritati non sumus pares, those patterns are
too austere for these dissolute times: only let me observe this unto you,
that Repentance must be an Holocaust, all our inward our outward senses should
concur to testify our godly sorrow for sin, we should suffer not one of
them to take rest themselves, or give rest to God. By this you may perceive,
that Penitential Devotion is an excellent Virtue, but not so common as the
world thinks.

The last thing that I noted upon this Devotion, is, that it must be performed
by every one in particular, and by the whole Congregation in general: for the
same remedy serves both; the public must take the same course which every
private man does, and every private man must take the same course that the
public does. The reason is, because the Church is corpus Homogeneum, and
therefore eadem est ratio partis and totius; in the peformance of those
religious duties, no man must think himself too good to humble himself,
neither must any man think himself unworthy to appear before the Throne of
grace. In our private occasions we must come by our selves, and we must join
with the public when the public wounds call us thereunto: as now we do, and
we have comfortable Precedents for that which we do, in the Prophet Joel and
Jonas. Behold how good and joyful a thing it is for brethren to dwell together
in unity, can never be more comfortably sung than at these religious meetings,
when, as one man, with one voice and heart, we present our devotions before
God, I doubt not but as hopefully as humbly.

It is true that God in Ezechiel, cap. 14. threatens that if Noah, Daniel, and
Job were in Jerusalem, as I live (says the Lord God) they shall deliver
neither son nor daughter, they shall but deliver their own souls by their
righteousness, when I send but a pestilence into the land; how much more when
I send my four plagues? The like is threatened in Jeremy, cap. 15. But we must
observe, that then God was risen from the Mercy Seat, and in punishment of
their many contempts had given the Jews over to their own hearts Just. But
God be thanked this Assembly shows that we have not so far forsaken God,
neither has God who has put these things into the mind of the King and State
so forsaken us, but we may hope for Acceptance. Which is the next part of my
text. What Israel performs, that will God accept; for he is as merciful as
just. Blessed are they that mourn (says Christ) for they shall be comforted,
Matthew. 5. for Christ came to heal those that were broken in heart, Luke 4. You
ask (says St. James, cap. 4.) and have not; he adds a reason, because ye
ask amiss; but if you ask aright, then Christ's rule is true, Ask and ye
shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you,
Mat. 7. He that shall confess to Gods name, and turn from his sins shall
find Acceptance with God; for (...), the tears of repentance are not only not
displeasing, but pleasing to God as incense.

But Gods acceptance consists of two Acts; the first is, God will give
access unto their Prayers, Hear in heaven his dwelling place: The prayers
were to be made toward the Arc, but God hears in Heaven. And what is the
cause of this change why God should not hear there whither we direct our
prayers? Surely we must ascend from the Type to the Truth, that is but a
manduction to this. It was a maine error of the Jews to divorce them, and
have in most esteem the least part, rest in the Type, passing over the Truth.
Heaven is the place of Gods habitation, only because the place of his
manifestation: The Septuagint render the words (...) a place fitted for God, to
distinguish it from the Church below, which is but a place a fitting. The
Chaldee renders it domum Maiestatis, a maiesticall house: And surely the place
of Gods dwelling is locus amplus et angustus, a large and a stately Palace,
adorned with holiness and glory.

And when we think upon God, we must not conceive of his state by things
below, but by things above: the earth is but as a point unto the visible
heavens, much more in comparison of the Heaven of Heavens, and they though they
are the goodliest place created, yet are they not a worthy habitation for the
infinite majesty of God, only he vouchsafes there most to manifest himself.
The Church that is resembled to heaven, and called Gods dwelling place, must be
remembered hereby, that God must not dwell therein or in any member thereof
anguste or sordide. We must enlarge our hearts to receive God, and purify them
that they may somewhat beseem the Residentiary therein, which is God. Finally,
it is no small favor that God does vouchsafe to hear, that being in heaven
he does vouchsafe to hear us that are on earth: for sometimes he hides
himself as it were with a Cloud, Lam. 3.
so that our prayers cannot have access unto him: and our sins separate
between him and us, and he is as if he heard not; not that the ear of
jealousy hears not all things, but he is not pleased to give a gracious
signification that he does hear. But the spiritual clamor of the contrite,
expressed from the secret closet of the inward man, has the power of a loud
voice and piercing, which can enter the heavens, and approach acceptably unto
God. God will not only hear, and give access to the Prayers of the penitent,
but redress their sufferings also. Quando non geniculationibus nostris and
jeiunationibus etiam siccitates sunt depulsae? says Tertullian; what calamity
was there ever which we have not diuerted by our penitent devotion? The Prayer
of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent, James 5.

But God does redress the sufferings of Israel orderly: first he redresseth
the cause, which is sin, and then the effect, which is woe; He will forgive,
and then He will do and give; neither may a sinner look for peace, except he
first speed of mercy. First then God forgiues: Exodus 3^.
it is one of his properties so to do, to forgive iniquities and
transgressions. And without all doubt, God ceasing from anger which is contrary
to his nature, will embrace mercy, which is agreeable to his nature, if we
repent; neither would he ever have given Christ to death for us, if he had
desired our death. But our God is merciful, and has appointed us Ministers to
be sponsores misericordiae, to give assurance of his mercy to penitent sinners;
and our message what is it but the Gospel? that is, glad tidings of the
Reconciliation of God and man. Neither does he only redress the cause, but the
effect also, that is, the Woe: for Woe is the effect of sin, and where God
remitteth the guilt of sin, he will also remove the punishment thereof,
either wholly, or he will at least, irae merum clementia diluere, by clemency
much allay the severity of his wrath; where condonare goes before, there
donare follows after, giving does accompany forgiving.

In the text there are two words, God will do and give: which are not put in
vain; for the first signifies that God will do that which we request, that
is, as the Psalm speaks, Psalm 145. He will fulfill the desire of them
that fear him, he also will hear their cry and will save them. In our
extremities we call only for ease of our pain, and God will do that. But
that is not the uttermost of his favor, he will also give us many good things;
he will (as the Prophets speak) delight to do us good, and as if he did
repent of his vengeance, he will multiply his blessings, and redeem as it
were the time of our affliction with an extraordinary measure of peace and
prosperity. Such promises and such performances we read in the Scripture, and
our hope may entertain them as belonging to our selves, if we be devoutly
penitent.

Yet must you observe, as it follows in the text, that God does dispense this
double grace, grace of forgiving, and grace of giving discreetly, according to
men's ways. As all men are not alike devout, so God intreates them not all
alike; He rewards every man according to his works, as the Scripture
speaks, Romans 2.6. Faber est quisque fortunae suae, Men shall find God, as God
finds them; surely Gods providence proceeds so, if you look upon the
second causes; touching the first, and St. Paul's maxim, 1 Cor. 4.7. Quis te
discernit? a point that much troubles the world at this day, it is no time now
to dispute; the plainest and shortest resoluion is that of the Prophet, Hosea
13.9. Perditio tua ex te Israel, exme salus. They that perish must blame
themselves, but they that are saved must give the glory thereof unto God.

But the ways, according to which God deals with men, are either inward or
outward; God deals with men according to their inward ways, for God sees
not as man sees, neither judges according to the outward appearance, but
according to the inward disposition. The reason is twofold, 1. because vera
bonitas and malitia sunt tantum in cord, true goodness and malitiousnesse are
only in the heart; in the outward actions they are not farther than they are
derived from thence, according to the rule in the Schools, Our actions are so
far virtuous and vicious, as the will has a hand in them. A second reason is
this, The knowledge of the heart is the strongest proof that can be produced
in judgment; and because Gods judgment is the most infallible, the evidence
produced therein is the most undeniable; his evidence is such, and none but his,
for He, and He only knows the hearts of the children of men, as Solomon
adds. He is called (...), the searcher of the heart and reins, he is more
privy to our secret thoughts than we our selves are; and as St. John says, 1
John 3.20. greater than our heart. Therefore God in judgment non facta
numerat, sed corda, when he comes to reckoning, look how many good hearts he
finds, so many good men, and so many ill men as he finds ill hearts. Men
in their judgments cannot proceed so exactly for want of this knowledge of
the heart; they are feign to rest upon weaker proofs, which though they
satisfy in humane cognizance, yet may they possibly be false, and the person
arraigned may be mis-deemed and mis-doomed.

Two things follow out of this Doctrine, the doctrine that God only knows
the hearts. The one is, that God often takes not off his heavy hand,
notwithstanding we humble our selves, because we do not turn to the Lord
with all our heart. The second is, that God takes away many a man in the Act
of his Repentance, lest he should relapse, and malice change his heart. We
must therefore not be out of heart if God should take away any of us even in
the midst of this good work.

As God deals discreetly in dispensing of his grace, so that supposed, He
deals universally, He dispenses the grace with every man according to his
ways; as every man is sensible of his own ill case or not sensible, so God
applies, or applies not a remedy thereunto, no penitent man but may speed of
the grace, no impenitent man may look for it; for God will deal with every
man according to his ways.

You have heard what Gods Acceptance is; It remains that you now hear
whereat it aymeth, it aymeth at the amendment of Israel, God vouch safeth
Israel grace, that Israel may fear him. Psalm. 130.
And so says the Penitential Psalm, With thee, Lord, there is mercy that
thou may be feared: Gods judgments are not only penal but medicinal,
therefore are they called Corrections, because they set us straight that went
awry; Eruditions, because they ciuilize us that were grown wild;
Castigations, because they make us spiritually chaste that went awhooring. And
what is Repentance but renascentia animae, a renewing of our mind, by putting
off the old man, crucifying the flesh, becoming new men? Tertullian says
right, Penitentia sine emendatione vitae vana, quia caret fruclu suo cui eam
Deus seuit, In vain is that Repentance which is not followed by a better life,
because it bears not that fruit for which God planted it, that is the
salvation of men, or it brings not forth the peaceable fruit of
righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.

Mercy is showed propter spem, for hope of amendment; so Parents spare their
children, Masters their servants, Princes their subjects, and we may not expect
that God will spare us upon any other condition; therefore when we underly Gods
heavy hand, we must say with Ephraim bemoaning himself, Thou have chastised
me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; turn thou
me, and I shall be turned, thou art the Lord my God, surely after that I was
turned, I repented etc. Ier. 31. God spares us not that we should continue in
sin, but that we should return and fear him, fear him walking in his
ways, as it is in the parallel chapter, 2 Chro, 6.
and becoming more wary, that we provoke not his wrath. Out of all this you
may gather that the fear is not servile but filial; we must fear not so
much to smart from God, as to offend him, it must be fear that does not only
hold the hand, but change the heart; it must be that fear that is the beginning
of wisdom, of which the Psalmist, a good understanding have all they which
do thereafter; it is a well doing fear.

And such a fear do I commend unto you at this time of humiliation; give me
leave to show you how you must practice it. The first plague which before you
heard of was Famine, God, if he remove that, does it that we might show our
fear of him by repressing Luxury. Now Luxury is represt two manner of ways,
1. by the voluntary sobriety of every man; and it were to be wished that every
man would be a Law unto himself, and out of his own detestation of
sensuality enjoin himself the diet of mortification, that he would bring his
own body under, and by his endeavor thereof testify his unfeigned sorrow for
former excesses.

But this is not to be expected that sobriety will be so forward if men be left
to their free will; therefore a compulsory course must work us unto that, from
which we are by nature too auerse. The rather, if long peace, and plenty of
Gods blessings make the way easy to our sinful Lusts. Sumptuarie Laws
therefore, if ever, are in these loose days most requisite, they are most
requisite to set bounds unto our back and belly which are even mad with
vanity; whole books might be written of our many metamorphoses, both of diet
and apparel: and not to flatter you, we are the most infamous moral
changelings that are in the world; prodigal, yea prodigious are the expenses
that our Nation is at to make it self the byword of other Nations. Add
hereunto that many good and great Families are so exhausted with this vanity,
that in these times of public supplies, they that by their rank should, are
least able to help the State. Wherefore lest the Common weal be not able to
support it self by reason that the private weal is vainly profused, and that
the poor may have some comfort of that which is saved from riot; let the State
put a remedy to this politic consumption, lest the whole perish by the waste
of every part.

Mistake me not, I know that there are Requisita personae, as well as naturae;
Reason and Religion as it rangeth men into sundry degrees, so does it
proportion their expenses, and the greater men are, the more costly may their
apparel be, and their fare the more dainty. But two things great men must
do; the one is, they must learn from moral Philosophy to distinguish
Majesty and Magnificencie, from Luxury and Vanity; the one is ordered by
discretion; but they are brain-sicke that entertain the other. Secondly, we
must remember that there is a time for every thing, a time to fast, and a time
to feast, a time to weep, and a time to laugh; we must take heed therefore of
Dives example, who fared delitiously every day, and every day wore fine linen
and purple: you know what became of him; if we fear his end, let us not
imitate his life.

Our second Plague was Pestilence; if God spare us, and stay that infectious
disease, we must take care to stay the contagion of sin; crying sins spread
far, and every day poison many; they are grown so rise, that they are grown
past shame, and Gods ten Commandments are become ridiculous; we are thought
but weak men, when we remember the sons of Belial of their obedience to
them. Whether Laws be wanting advise you, it is certain that if there be
any, they are as if they were not, when justice sleeps both in City and in
Country, and enormous sinners pass commonly uncontrolled; Magistrates would be
awakened and quickened to stop this moral Pestilence, that so by Gods mercy
the corporal Pestilence may be stayed also.

The next Plague was the Sword: If God spare us from the slaughter thereof, he
does it that we should testify our fear of him in fighting his battles
against sin, the world, and hell; he does not remove the sword from our
throats that we should fly at his; fly at him we do in vain, but it will
betray the malignitie of our will, when we open our mouths against heaven, and
become (...), Rebels against God, send him this message, We will not have this
man reign over us, but we will do what seems good to every man in his own
eyes. That God may turn our swords into plowshares, and our spears into
mattocks, let us turn our members that have been Instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin, into members that became instruments of
righteousness unto God, Romans 6.

I told you that there is a Plague that lights upon our Goods or Possessions;
if God remove that plague, he does it that we should testify our fear of him
in that fashion as Daniel taught Nabuchodonozer; Dan. 4.
in his words will I speak unto you, Let my counsel be acceptable unto you,
and break off your sins by righteousness, and your iniquities by showing
mercy to the poor, if it may be a continuing of your tranquillity: Let our
charity, who are yet free, extended to those poor ones upon whom God has laid
his hand, beg mercy for us, and hold off Gods heavy hand from our Goods; for
there is nothing that can sooner prevail to make the earth bring forth her
increase, and God, even our own God to give us his blessing; and if we make
friends of our wicked Mammon, this may be our comfort, if we should fail in
these perilous times, they wilreceiue us into everlasting Tabernacles. Luke 16.


The last Plague which I specified was the great diminution of the Orthodoxe
Church: And what think you is the best way to repair the decays thereof? No
doubt but politic unions of States is a very good means, and warlike
preparations the useful instruments of those unions; if they be timely, if
they be competent, they are fit means to bring them to reason perforce, with
whom civil Treaties, and brotherly Entreaties cannot prevail. But the best
means is to make much of Gods truth while we have it, and to make a saving use
for our eternal comfort, which God knows hitherto we have not done as much
as we should, and we do every day less and less: And what wonder, if that
be weary of us, seeing we grow weary of it? Neither is it enough for us to
make much of it for our own good, but also we should propagate it to others.
And here let me tell you, that there lies a great guilt upon Christian States,
and this amongst the rest, that they have not been careful to bring them that
sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to the knowledge of Christ, and
participation of the Gospel. Much traveling to the Indies, East and West, but
wherefore? some go to possess themselves of the Lands of the Infidels, but
most by commerce, if by commerce, to grow richer by their goods. But where is
the Prince or State that pitieth their souls, and without any worldly respect
endeauours the gaining of them unto God? some show we make, but it is but a
poor one; for it is but (...), an accessorie to our worldly desire, (...) it
is not, it is not our primarie intention; whereas Christ's method is, Mat. 6.33.
first seek ye the kingdom of God, and then all other things shall be added
unto you; you shall fare the better for it in your worldly estate. If the
Apostles and Apostolic men had affected our salvation no more, we might have
continued till this day such as sometimes we were, barbarous subjects of the
Prince of darkness.

Those of the Church of Rome boast of their better zeal for the Kingdom of
Christ, but their own Histories show that Ambition and Covetousness have
been the most predominant Affections that have swayed their endeauours, and
they have with detestable cruelty made their way to those worldly ends, and in
stead of saving souls have destroyed millions of persons. We should take
another course for their conversion, yea the same that was taken for ours; and
if we do, it is to be hoped God will continue us his people, and add daily
to his Church such as shall be saved.

For Popish Recusants let me speak a word; their case is mixed, consisting
partly in ignorance of the truth, and partly in the seed of disloyalty. We
have made many good Laws, if not to root out, at least to keep down so much
of their corruption as is dangerous to the State; it were to be wished that
greater care were taken for informing their consciences; and indeed there
should our Laws begin with them, under a reasonable pain to urge them to
conference; for why should we doubt but that God would bless the honest
endeauours of the Ministers of the truth, who permits the Seducers to steal
away so many hearts from God and the King? Of this we may be sure, that either
God will work that which we wish, the recovery of those which are seduced; or
at least their obstinacy will be without all excuse, and the punishment
thereof by sharp Laws will be no more than is just in the sight both of God
and man. The neglect of this care of infidels and recusants is no small cause
of that great distress which at this day is fallen upon the reformed Churches,
and God thereby calls upon us to amend these defects.

Let us use our punishment well, and let Gods chastisement provoke us to a
better life; though it seem grievous to vnderlie Gods heavy hand, yet it is
much more grievous to be never a whit the better for the plagues, for it is a
second refusing of grace; the same God that does at first recommend unto us
piety, by sweetning it with temporal blessings; when that course speedeth
not, tries whether we will bethink our selves if we smart for our
vntowardlinesse: and certainly his case is desperate who is the worse for his
stripes, as you may read in Gods complaint passionately expressed by Esaias, Cap.
1. Cap. 5. Cap. 4.
by Amos; and Jeremy has illustrated it by an excellent simile of reprobate
silver, which is molten in vain, because the dross cannot be separated from
it. Amend then we must. That is not enough, we must be constant in our
amendment, we must fear God all the days of our life; that is true
Repentance, when a man so turns to God that he does not return again like a
dog to his vomit, or a sow to wallow in the mire; Relapses are dangerous, (as
Saint Peter teaches, 2 Pet. 2.21. and our Savior Christ tells the recovered
lame man in the Gospel, John 5. Behold thou art made whole, go thy way, sin
no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee. I will hearken (says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 85.) what the Lord will say unto me, for he will speak peace
unto his people, and to his Saints that they return not again unto their
folly. We should all remember Lots wife, who for looking back was turned into
a pillar of salt, Animae in vitia relabentis accusatricem, a visible indictment
of relapsing souls. Most men are to Godward like Planets, sometimes in
conjunction with him, sometimes in a more or less aspect, too often in plain
opposition: but let us take heed we be not in the number of those wandering
stars, of whom St. Jude speaks, to whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever. To begin well, and not to go on, is as if a man should put
a sovereign plaster to a dangerous wound, and after a while tear it off
again; think you that man would be the better for his salve, or the worse
rather? you heard before our sins are wounds, and although repentance be a
sovereign salve, yet proves it not such unto us except it be lasting. There
is a good reason given by St. Bernard, Cecidimus in lutum and lapides, our sias
are like unto falls into the mire wherein there are stones; the mud does soil
us, and the stones bruise us, we may soon wash away the mire, but we cannot so
soon recover our bruise: even so the guilt of our sin is sooner remitted than
the corruption can be purged. Therefore Repentance takes time to restore our
spiritual health, and does not compass it but with much fasting, watching,
praying, almesdeeds etc. and is watchful over us that second wounds make not
the first more dangerous; in a word, being delivered from our enemies, and the
hands of all that hate us, we endeavor to serve God in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life.

Here are added two motives unto this constant amendment, taken from the place
wherein they live. It is true that wheresoever they lived they were to fear
God all the days of their life, because God is every where a knower of the the
heart, and a rewarder of men according to their works. But the place of their
abode put no small obligation upon them; first, because it was an eminent
place; eminent corporally, a good Land, a Land flowing with milk and honey;
eminent mystically, for it was the seat of the Church, and a type of heaven;
and who should be fruitful in good works rather than they that dwell in a
fruitful Land? and holiness beseems Gods house for ever. But to sin in the
Land of Immanuel, in the Land of uprightness, is no small improuement of sin;
and he that is barren of good works in a fruitful Land shall have the earth
that brings forth her increase rise up in judgment against him. Our Country
has both these prerogatives, and therefore it preaches unto us that which
Canaan preached to Israel, Amendment of life, and constancy therein.

The second Motive which the place does yield, is, the tenure thereof, God
(says Solomon) gave it to our fathers, they held in franck Almoigne, and God
tells us in the Psalm, that he gave it them to this end, that they might
keep his statutes, and observe his Laws. And should not men be dutiful unto
God, when God is so liberal unto men? We may think happily that this does not
concern us, because we came otherwise by our Lands. If we think so, we plod
too much upon the second causes; but we must know, that whether we come by them
by purchase, or by gift, we are beholding unto Gods blessings for the money
wherewith we purchase, and for their good will which bestow it on us; and the
same God that could have hindered us of both, can strip us of both at his
pleasure. But to shut up the matter of my Text. You see the end of Gods
plagues, and of his mercy; They do solicit us to return in time; This does
call upon us not to be weary of well-doing.

Wherefore let us entertain Gods chastisements prudently, let us not contemn
them, because they are fearful, and the contempt of this temporal will but
procure us eternal wrath; at least in this life God may rise from smaller unto
greater plagues: Nor let us despair, because God is merciful, yea he has
showed a great deal of mercy, in that multi corriguntur in paucis, in
presenting before us some few men's harms, he bids us all beware; and what
should our prayer be but Domine ne in supplicijs nostrie alios erudiamus, Let
not us by thy heavy hand be made examples to others, cum liceat nobis aliorum
cruciatibus emendari, whereas if we have grace, other men's corrections may be
our instructions. To you of this assembly let me say boldly, That the greater
we are in place and power, the greater share should we have in this work of
Repentance, by our example we should teach the people compunction for sin,
correction of life, the two most prevailing folliciters of Gods mercy, and
preseruers of a State; God forbid that it should be with us as it was with
Israel, Ier. 5. Amos 6.
that God should find the great men more sons of Belial than the meaner sort,
it would be a shrewd prognostication of very evil days to come. This day
promises better things. I pray God the continuance be answerable, and that we
repent not that we have resolved to repent; but that every day sin may more
and more dye in us, and grace live more and more: if we do so, we may be sure,
that though for a time we sow in tears, yet in due time we shall reap in joy.

Nothing remains now that I have for your greater edifications opened and
applied the pious assertions that are contained in my text, but that we should
return it again into that form wherein King Solomon conceived it, and make
it our common petition unto God.

LOrd there is great fear of a famine, the pestilence has entered already far
upon us, by the enemies of thy truth and our peace we are forced to prepare for
war; we knowing every man the plague of his own heart, cast our selves down
before thy Throne of Mercy, deprecating thy wrath, and supplicating for grace;
beseeching thee to take off thy heavy hand from us, and fight for us against
our enemies, because without thee vain is all the strength of man: Hear thou
in heaven thy dwelling place, forgive, do, and give to every man of us
according to his ways, Thou which only know the hearts of all men, that we
may fear thee all the days which we live in this good Land which thou have
given to our fathers, And be vouch safed after this life to attend thy Throne
with thy blessed Saints in the Kingdom of Heaven. Amen.

TWO SERMONS PREACHED in WELLS at the Ordination of MINISTERS.
THE FIRST SERMON.
MATTHEW. 28. Verse. 18, 19, 20. All power is given unto me in Heaven and in
Earth.

Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: And lo, I
am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Amen.


THese words contain one of the last solemn acts which our Savior Christ
performed immediately before he ascended into Heaven, and that was, his sending
of his Apostles to convert the world. In this act our Savior Christ does
inform them, first of his own right to send, All power is given me both in
Heaven and in Earth; then of the errant whereupon they were to be sent, Go ye
therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc.

But more distinctly. About Christ's right our first enquiry must be, of what
sort the power here mentioned is, and we shall find that it is heavenly, and
my Text will teach us that this heavenly power of Christ is lawful, because
given unto him; and full, because in it self unlimited: it is All power, and
extends to every place, it works both in Heaven and Earth. Upon this power
of Christ is grounded the Apostles Embassage; that must you gather out of the
Illatiue, Therefore. In the Apostles embassage or errant, we will consider
their common charge and comfort. In the charge we shall see 1. What they must
do, they must Go, Ite: 2. To whom they are sent, and whereabout. They are
sent far and wide, Go ye to all Nations. That which they must do is to
win them unto Christ, teach them, or as the Original has it, make them
Disciples. If they prevail with any, if any entertain the Gospel, then they
are to consecrate their persons unto God, Baptize them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and to work their obedience
wholly conformable to every one of those precepts which themselves had received
from Christ, Teach them to do all things whatsoever I have commanded you. This
is their common charge.

Their common comfort stands in the powerful and perpetual assistance of
Christ: Assistance, He is with them, and this presence is powerful; for he
that is present, is Ego, I that have all power both in Heaven and Earth; and it
is perpetual, He is with them always unto the worlds end: Always without
intermission; unto the worlds end, therefore not only with their own persons,
but also with their successors.

Upon this common comfort they must all fix their eyes, Ecce, Behold it, and
their faithful prayer must hopefully expect it; so much is meant by the close
of all, Amen.

These be the particulars which offer themselves in this Text to our
consideration, I will (God willing) speak of so many of them as the time will
permit. Consider you what I say; and the Lord give you a right understanding in
them all. I begin with Christ's right.

We are first to enquire of what sort it is. (...), the word used by the
Evangelist does signify an Eminency; now that may be either in Ability, or in
Authority: in men these are often times severed; some have abilities that have
no authority, some have authority that have no ability; some have good gifts
that are in no place of government, and some are in place of government, that
have no suitable gifts. But in God and Christ it is not so, both concur in
them, and in them both are equal; the Authority to the Ability, and the
Ability to the Authority. And it should be so in those that serve them; it is
pity but that those which have good gifts, should be set in good places, but
it is a shame for them that are set in good places, to be without good gifts.
Wherefore let this be your sacred ambition, who are now to receive holy Orders,
never to let your preferment out-steppe your indowments; labor to be as able
to serve, as you are willing to be employed.

Something we have said of Christ's power; but not that which is principally
intended here. To make you see that, I must remember you of a Logic Rule,
Talia sunt praedicata, qualia permittuntur esse a subiectis suis, when any
attribute or title is given to a person, it must be conceived in such extent
as the person is capable of. Now in Christ there are two capacities; for he is
God, and he is also Man. If we look upon him as he is only God, so he has
an infinite and an eternal power; he is as Almighty a Governor as Maker of
all things. This is potestas innata, not data: But becoming Man he had
another capacity, and power proportioned thereunto; a power fitting to a
Mediator, a Mediator that should recover man fallen, and reconcile him unto
God, gather a Church, and establish a Kingdom of Heaven. Of this power our
Savior Christ speaks, when he confesses unto Pilate that he is a King, but
adds, My King dome is not of this world, John 18. and St. Paul, the Kingdom
of Heaven is not meat and drink, it stands not in any earthly thing; but in
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. The Scepter
of this Kingdom is the Gospel, the seat of it is the Conscience of man, it
is as Christ speaks in St. Luke, chapt. 17. Regnum Dei intra nos, a Kingdom
of God within us, a spiritual Kingdom managed with a spiritual power. Such
is the power of Christ the Mediator.

But this power does not in Christ's person exclude the other power of a
Creator, nor the Deriuatiue therefrom, the power of Scepters and Crowns which
are all subject thereunto; they are by Christ's Ordinance, and he that is
Mediator has power over them, and does dispose of them as is best for his
Church. But he does not do this as a Mediator: Kingdoms are founded upon
another ground, a ground that went before the Fall, upon Paternall Authority,
though in time it has received many variations, yet did not the Mediator
intermeddle with those humane policies, he erected no power over those powers,
but left them to the former Providence of God, neither would he have them any
way prejudiced or impeacht by the entertainment of the Gospel. This Christ
testified in his time, the Apostles in theirs, the Primitive Church for many
hundred years, as our Writers have clearly proved against the Usurpation of
the Bishop of Rome, who claims by some of his Advocates directly, by other
some indirectly a power, at least over all Christian Scepters and Crowns: But
this is to confound that which God has distinguished, the power which the
Church deriueth from a Mediator, which is a spiritual power, with the power
which Kings derive from the Creator and Founder of humane policy.

Observe then in few words, how Princes and Pastors are superior and subject
in several respects one to the other. In Foro Poli, in cases of Conscience,
and things that belong to ghostly counsel and comfort, those things that
belong to the salvation of the soul, the Prince must be ruled by the Pastor,
so long as he is a faithful Minister of Christ. But in Foro Soli, in the
Jurisdiction that is annexed to the sword, the Pastor must submit to the Prince,
and obey his command. This you may learn out of the Titles which are given
them: For as Princes are Children of the Church, and Pastors reputed their
ghostly Fathers: so Pastors are Children of the Kingdom; Ezechias calls the
Levites his Sons, 2. Chron. 24. and the Prophet calls Princes nursing
Fathers and nursing Mothers of the Church, Esaias 49. Constantine the Emperor
distinguished well in his speech to the Prelates, Vos estis Episcopi ad intra,
ego ad extra, you are Bishops serving for the administration of sacred things,
and mannaging of the Keys; but I also am a Bishop of the Church to see it well
governed, countenanced, and protected: While they serve God, Princes are as it
were Sheep of the Fold, but they are Shepherds also, and must see God well
served.

This I observe the rather, because that you seeing the fountain of your
Calling, may keep your selves within the Boundery thereof; and not with either
Papists or Schismatickes encroach upon the Princes Sword, deny unto him his
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, or usurp upon his Temporal; two diseases which
reign much in this age, which a man may more wonder at, that reads the New
Testament, wherein the Jews dream of their Messiah worldly Kingdom is so
plainly discovered, and the ambition of the sons of Zebeaee, James and John,
who would sit one on Christ's right hand, and the other on Christ's left hand in
his Kingdom, is checked so discreetly, and that general rule given, Matthew.
20. the Kings of the Nations bear rule, and they that are great men exercise
authority, but it shall not be so with you, you shall receive a spiritual, but
no temporal Jurisdiction; you shall have power not of the Sword, but of the
Keys, not over men's bodies, but their souls, in them must I reign, and you
must erect my Kingdom there. And thus much of the kind of Christ's power.

This power of Christ is lawful, because given to him, given by his Father as
elsewhere we learn. And here we must first observe, that if data, John 3.
Daniel 7. Esaias 49. Psalm. 2.48.13. Romans 14.
then it is not rapta, that which is given is not usurped; the Prince of this
world has power even in the consciences of the children of disobedience, and
their souls are captiued to his pleasure: God has permitted this, but he has
made him no grant of this power; only he is contented to leave men to his
will, by reason of their sin; though the Devil be so arrogant upon this
permission, that he told Christ himself, The Kingdoms of the earth and the
glory thereof are mine, and theirs to whom I will give them, Luke 4.6.
notwithstanding he is but an Usurper. Neither is Antichrist any better, who
sits in the Temple of God, and carries himself as God, 2. Those. 2. taking
upon him that power over the consciences of the people, which Christ never gave
him; the particulars are many, you may meet with them in the Casuists, and in
the Controversy Writers, I will not trouble you with them.

Our Savior Christ's power is just: For it was given unto him. But when? First,
in his Incarnation; for no sooner did he become man, but he was anointed with
the Holy Ghost and with Power: therefore the Angels that brought the news of
his Birth to the Shepherds, said, that to them was borne a Savior, which was
the Lord Christ. No sooner did the Son of God become man, but he was
invested with this power, the eternal purpose of God and Prophesies of him
began to be fulfilled; the Godhead communicated to the manhood this power, not
changing the manhood into God, but honoring it with an Association in his
works; the manhood is of counsel with the Godhead in his government, and
Christ from the time of his Conception wrought as God and man, who before
wrought only as God: Of this gift speaks the Psalmist, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee; ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen
for thine Inheritance, etc. Psalm. 2. and in Daniel, chapt. 7. one like the
son of man is brought unto the Ancient of days, and to him was given a
kingdom, etc.

But though this gift were bestowed at Christ's Conception, yet was the
execution thereof for the most part suspended until his Resurrection; some
glympses he gave of it, and showed his glory in his Miracles; but for the most
part he appeared in the form of a servant, and his Humiliation was requisite,
that he might go through with his Passion; his power though it were not idle
before, yet was the carriage of it veiled, and therefore acknowledged but by a
few. But after his Resurrection, God gave him this power manifestly, and the
world was made to see it clearly; for Christ did then not only cloth his
person with Majesty, but showed himself wonderful in the government of his
people: Therefore the time of the gift is by the Holy Ghost limited to the
Resurrection, and declared to be a reward of his Passion; so says the Psalm,
Thou have made him a little lower than the Angels, that thou might crown him
with glory and honor, Psalm. 8. St. Paul applies it unto Christ, Heb. 2. Romans
14,
and tells elsewhere, that Christ dyed and rose again, that he might be Lord
both of quick and dead. The same he teaches the Ephesians and the Colossians,
Cap. 1. Cap. 2.
but especially the Philippians, Christ being in the form of God, took upon
him the form of a servant, and did exinanite himself, and became subject to
death, even the death of the Cross; therefore God exalted him, and gave him a
Name above all Names, etc. This gift or manner of giving is properly meant in
this place, the gift of power in reward of Christ's merit; for by this merit did
he enter into his Glory, and into his Kingdom. And from this must Ministers
derive their power, which Christ has right to confer upon them, not only by
the gift of his Conception, but also by the reward of his Passion.

As Christ's power is lawful, so is it full also; for he has all power, a
plenary power. The word (...) does note sometimes a passive power, sometimes an
active; a passive power, as in those words of the Gospel, to them that
received Christ he gave (...), power to be the sons of God; John 1.12.
active, when Christ sent his Disciples he gave them (...), power over unclean
spirits, Matthew. 10.1. that is, to cast them out. According to this double
acception of the word, is the fullness of Christ's power diversely expounded.
Some say it is full passiuely; before Christ's Resurrection Christ was obeyed
but per nolentes, by those that served him against their will, and so he was
served but to halfes; but afterward he gathered Populum spontaneum, an
ingenuous willing people, Psalm. 110. a people that should serve him readily,
not with a mixed will, halting between two, or between willing and nilling, but
with all their heart, and cheerfully, not like luke warm Laodiceans; for the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it, Matthew. 11. This
is the Interpretation of some; true in it self, though not so proper to my
Text. Therefore we must understand it of an active power, that power which by
allusion out of the Prophets words is specified in the Revelation, Cap. 3.
He has the Key of David that shuts, and no man opens, opens and no man
shuts; he has both Keys of the Church, Clauem Scientiae, and Clauem
Potestatis, the Key of Doctrine, and the Key of Discipline; he gives all men
their Talents, and calls them to an account for the use of them: It is he
that separateth the Sheep from the Goats, and from his mouth proceeds as
well Go ye cursed, as Come ye blessed.

But if you will have it to the full, it is comprehended in those three offices
whereunto Christ was anointed; he was anointed to be a Prophet, a Priest, and
a King, all by an Excellency, all Heavenly; and what power is there belonging
unto spiritual government, which is not reduced unto these three? And they
were all three in him without exception, without restriction, and so he had all
power, or, as I told you, a power unlimited in it self.

And yet mark the phrase; it is omnis Potestas, not Omnipotentia: though in
Christ as he is God, there is Omnipotency, yet that power which he has as
Mediator is of a middle size; it is greater than any Creature has, Angel or
Man, but yet not so great as is the infinite Power of God, that extends ad
omnia possibilia, to all that possible may be: But the power which God has
given to the Mediator, is proportioned not to scientiae simplicis
intelligentiae, but visionis, it extends as far as the Decree which God made
before all times, of all that shall be done in due time; especially concerning
the Church, it has an hand in mannaging all that Providence, and mannaging it
in an heavenly manner.

As the power is unlimited in it self, so it extends to all places; He has
all power in Heaven and in Earth. Heaven and Earth are the extreme parts of
the world, and in the Creed are usually put for the whole; but in the Argument
we have in hand, we must restrain it to the Church, which consists of two
parts, one Triumphant in Heaven, the other Militant on Earth: Christ has power
in both; for both make up his body, and he has reconciled both unto God. In
Earth he gives men Grace, in Heaven he gives them Glory, here he commands
our service, there he gives us our reward; in Earth he binds and loses by
his Ministers, and what soever they bind or loose here, himself does ratify
in Heaven; he reigns in Heaven in glory, and by his Spirit he rules on
Earth: therefore the Angels and Saints adore him in Heaven, no less than the
faithful do here on Earth; both are recapitulated in him, as the Apostle
speaks; he is that Jacobs Ladder, one end whereof reaches to Heaven, and
the other to the Earth, upon him continually do the Angels ascend and descend
unto these two places. Finally, the Angels at his Birth congratulate both
places, Glory be to God on high, that is in Heaven, in earth peace, good will
toward men, Luke 2. and the Apostle says, it is the fullness of Him that
fills all in all. And thus much of Christ's right or power to send.

Come we to the Errant he sends them on. This is grounded upon that power of
Christ whereof you have heard; the Illatiue Therefore imports as much. And
indeed, a Kingly power has good right to send Ambassadors, and the Dignity of
the Ambassador is answerable to the King from whom he comes; he that looks
upon the persons of Ministers only, will not much esteem either them or their
words, but add whose Ministers they are, and that requires reverence to be
yielded to their persons, and obedience to their doctrine. Especially, if we
consider, that all those to whom they come are at his mercy from whom they
come; for he has power over them all; and such power he must have that sends:
so it is not a message sent by a King to a neighbor King, but by a King to his
Vassals; the more are they to be respected, and their words heeded. But let us
come to their Charge.

Ite, Go ye. They were not to abide still at Jerusalem, after they were
endued with power from above, they were presently to be walking; their names,
Apostles, Angels, Ambassadors, all sound a walking life. But in the word take
notice of two things: First, the Apostles do not go before they are sent; it
is the mark of a false Apostle to be so forward. Hebr. 5. No man should take
unto himself this honor except he be called by those to whom Christ has
given authority. It is an Anabaptisticall dream, that every man may thrust
himself into this work, as he finds himself moved by the Spirit; and it is
an impious attempt of some vagrant Scholars, that make up a poor living by
exercising this Function, whereunto they were never ordered: how far are both
these from that modesty which was in Moses, in Jeremy, and others? who were so
far from going before they were called, that they held back when God would
send them, and pleaded their insufficiency; so did Chrysostom, Nazianzene,
other Lights of the Church. And indeed, Quis ad haec idoneus? He is over well
conceited of himself whosoever he be, that does not think it to be an
ouer-weighty burden, a burden that will crush the strongest shoulders, if he
bear it as he should. Notwithstanding, when God comes to Quid statis hic
otiosi? Why stand you idle as many as are fit to work? we must yield our
pains, and do as well as we can, though we cannot do so well as we
should; it is no less a fault to be too backward, than to be too forward:
and yet there are many such, whether because they think the calling unworthy
their gifts, and below their birth, or because they will not undergo the
pains and danger that does accompany the same; men that will never be
Laborers, except they be thrust into the Harvest, thrust not by the Lord of
the Harvest, but by their own necessities or advantages.

A second Note in this word Ite is, that whereas the world should come unto God
out of a sense of their own want, God is feign to send to them; this word
justifies that saying of God in the Prophet, I am found of them that sought
me not, I am made manifest to them that enquired not after me, Esaias 65. Never
would Adam have returned to God, if God had not sought him out, and the sons
of Adam would perish in their sins, did not he seek them likewise. The
Marriage Feast would hane no guests, if the King did not only inuit them, but
send his servants also to call, yea compel them: Therefore this Ite should
remember us to magnify the goodness of God, which is so indulgent to us
careless men.

But let us come to the particulars of the Charge, and first see to Whom they
are sent, They have a great Journey to go; for they must go to all Nations.

In the first Mission the Apostles were restrained to the lost sheep of
Israel, and forbidden to go into the way of the Gentiles, or into a City of
the Samaritanes; that Commission is here recalled, and the partition Wall is
broken down, and their Circuit is enlarged, they are taught that in Jesus
Christ there is neither Jew nor Gentile, Grecian nor Barbaria^, bond nor free,
male nor female, all are one in him (as St. Paul says) and St. Peter warned by
a Vision breaks out into this confession, I perceive of a truth, that there is
no respect of persons with God, but in every Nation he that fears God, and
works righteousness, is accepted of him; the Prophets foretold it should be
so; ^^ay 2. and 49. Psalm. 2. and 71.
and now the Apostles hear from Christ, that they must make good those
Prophesies, their sound must go out into all the world, they must be the Light
of the world, or rather carry the Sun of Righteousness round about the
world; and they must be the Salt of the earth, that must season all mankind,
which Christ sanctified in his person: Romans 10. compared with Psulmo 19.
and though by others he were called the Son of David, yet the name which
he commonly gives himself is the Son of man.

And here see a difference between the Typical and the true Redemption; the
Typical extended to one Nation, and Moses Law went no farther; the true
reaches all mankind, and the Gospel must be carried as far. But here we
must take heed of a mistake: the Nations are oftentimes opposed to the Jews;
so we find it in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles: But it is not so
here; for the Apostles are willed to preach unto all Nations, beginning at
Jerusalem; and so says St. Paul, To you ought the Gospel first to be
preached; but because you make your selves unworthy of it, lo we turn to the
Gentiles. And here also we must not mistake; for from the contempt of the Jew,
occasion was taken of preaching sooner to the Gentiles, not simply of preaching
to them; had the Jews entertained the Gospel, the Apostles would have spent
more time with them, and they spent the less time with them, because they did
not entertain it. The truth then is, that all Nations comprehend both Jews
and Gentiles; and in the Prophets, the reunion of Judah and Israel so often
mentioned, means no other than the knitting of the Jews and the Gentiles
into one Church, and making one Flock of these two kind of Sheep: The Olive
Tree will bear both branches, Romans 11. the Seal of God is to be set upon
both, Revel. 6. and both make up one peculiar purch^sed people of Christ, one
Household, one Kingdom, Ephesians. 2. all are Christ's by the merit of his Passion,
and therefore the Apostles must go to all; even to all that sit in darkness
and in the shadow of death, Luke 1. and none are in any better case, as St.
Paul proves to the Romans, they were dead in their sins, and destitute of
the glory of God. All need the Gospel, and therefore it must be preached unto
all: And that it might be preached, the Apostles were endued with all
Languages.

The world is much troubled now about Universal Grace, the Resolution in short
may be this, that (forbearing to be ouer-busie with Gods Predestination, who
is not pleased to acquaint us with his Counsel in his distinguishing persons,
in a Ministers Commission Grace is Universal; we should labor the conversion
of all and every one: neither should any man except himself, but labor to be
in the number of that all to whom God sends.

One Note more before I leave this point. This large circuit was one of the
Perogatiues of the Apostles; they were not restrained to any Diocese or
Province, as Bishops now are: but as the Spirit led them, and they saw cause,
they might every one plant and water the Church every where. It is true, that
for conueniency and expedition of their message, they divided themselves into
several Quarters, but without excluding each the other; in this sense was
Peter the Apostle of the Jews, Paul of the Gentiles; yet did Peter preach to
the Gentiles, and Paul to the Jews. The power of Orders in their successors is
not limited in it self actually; all that are ordered are enabled to exercise
their Function in any part of the world, and they may be sent to convert any
Nation; and it is but for the more orderly government and edification of the
Church, that the exercise of every man's Orders is restrained to a certain
charge; and without leave, or a case of great necessity, those that break
these Canons offend grievously: and there be not a few that offend that way. I
hope that you which are now to be ordered will not prove such.

Having competently been told Whither the Apostles are sent, it follows that
ye now hear Whereabout.

They must teach; (...), says the Text, make Disciples. And indeed, it is not
a bare Historical narration that they must make of the Gospel, they must
seek by moral instruction to win the people unto Christ; so teach, that
their hearers may become the followers of Christ.

And here observe first the wonderful goodness of God. The Jews and the
Gentiles conspired both to crucify Christ, they put him to a shameful and a
painful death, would not you fear least, and look that he should send
messengers against both with fire and sword to take vengeance on them, and
work their utter desolation? But see, our sweet Jesus came not to destroy but
to save, Luke 9.
he forgets and forgiueth not only Peter's denial, and the rest of the
Apostles forsaking him, but also the impious blasphemers of his holy Name, and
barbarous murderers of his sacred Person; he is ready to receive them unto
Grace, and admit them to be his Disciples. A goodness so wonderful, that all
the world may stand amazed at it.

Secondly, all the world was rent into Sects; the Jews into Pharisees,
Sadducees, Herodians, etc. the Gentiles they were distracted, not only in their
Philosophy, but in their Divinity also, and had as manifold devotion, as they
had opinions: the word (...), shows that the time was now come that they
should all grow into one, and in point of Religion speak one and the self
same thing, and serve one and the self same God, All Nations should remember
themselves, and be turned to the Lord, Psalm. 22. the Prophets foretold it; Esaias
44. One shall say, I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the Name
of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname
himself by the Name of Israel; so speak the Jews: but not the Jews only;
for in Zachary, chapt. 8. the Prophecy is delivered thus, The Inhabitants of
one City shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the
Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts, I will go also: Ten men shall take hold
out of all Languages of the Nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him
that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you; for we have heard that God is
with you. And that they go up to be Disciples, it is plainly affirmed by Esaias,
chapt. 2. Many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the
Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us
of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. In Micah you shall read the
very same: All comes to that which our Savior Christ speaks, Be ye not
called Rahbi; for one is your Master, even Christ, Matthew. 23. And the weapons
of the Apostles warfare were mighty through God, to bring into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ, 2. Cor. 10.

But those weapons were not carnal but spiritual. It is for Mahumetans to
make their Muselmans (as they call them) that is, right Believers (if he
believe aright that believes in the Alcaron, a sink of all senseless and
sensual dreams) by the sword. But such a manner of making Scholars is fit
for the matter they shall learn. And I would too many Christians were not too
near followers of them in this barbarous course; who pretend the reclaiming of
Heretics (so they call the Orthodoxe) but indeed would propagate their own
Heresies, and what they cannot do by the Word, that they endeavor by the
Sword. Of this we may be sure, that the Apostles never made Disciples that way;
neither would Christ have Scholars come to him by constraint: Teaching is the
Heavenly means of Conversion; those that are Gods Scholars are (...) taught
of God, and his Law is Thora, a Doctrine; Christ went about teaching, Matthew.
10. and it was by teaching that the holy Ghost led the Apostles into all Truth,
John 14. and 26. And indeed, this is the most noble kind of winning men, to
win their understanding and win their will; win his reasonable faculties,
then you win a man. Not so if you force his body; that may make him yield
against his conscience, but at best he will be but an Hypocrite, and you have
gotten but the worser part of him; not a man, but his Vizard, which can never
prove good, either to the conqueror, or the conquered. Well then; seeing
Teaching is Gods method of converting, you see whereof you must take care; the
Word of God must dwell richly in you, especially, you must arm your selves
with the sword of the Spirit, Colos. 4. Ephesians 6. 2. Tim. 4. Tit. 2.
which is the Word of God, that you may be able to instruct the ignorant, and
refute those that are contrary minded. And this care does St. Paul commend
earnestly to Timothy and Titus. And you know, that it was a very bitter
reproof which Christ used unto Nicodemus, Art thou a Master in Israel, and
know not these things? Ier. 3.
If you will be Pastors according to Gods own hrart, you must feed his people
with knowledge and understanding. And let this suffice concerning the manner of
bringing men to Christ; In the next place we are to see what must be done to
them that entertained the Gospel.

First, they must consecrate them unto God, Baptizate, Baptize them. This is
not the first Institution of Baptism; for not only John the Baptist, but the
Apostles also baptized, as it is in St. John, chap. 4. And howsoever there is a
question, Whether the Baptism of John the Baptist, and of Christ's Apostles be
the same? (for Christ baptized none in his person) and of the same efficacy:
yet there is no question but that the Baptism is the same, and of the same
efficacy which the Apostles administered both before and after Christ's Passion.
So that Christ in this place extended the Baptism unto the Gentiles, but does
not of new institute it.

To baptize is properly to dip into the water; in that fashion were they wont
to baptize, except in case of infirmity, wherein the Church allowed springling
in stead of dipping: But nicitie has almost worn out the old form, at least
in many places; And yet the old form does most lively represent that which St.
Paul makes the life of Baptism, that is, our conformity to Christ: Know you
not (says he, Romans 6.) that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ,
were baptized into his death? therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead to the glory of the
Father, so we should walk in newness of life. And indeed, to baptize is not
only to dippe into the water, The word dibaphum which signifies Scarlet, as it
were twice dipped and dyed, retaine^ the steps of that signification.
which is immergere, but it is tingere also, to dip as it were into a
dye-fatte; so that a person dipped in, comes out of another hue than he went
into the water, though not physically, yet morally. Go to (says Gregory
Nyssen) thou that art baptized, thou art become another man, it does not
appear in the lineaments of thy body, it must appear in the lineaments of thy
manners; thou must be dead unto the sin whereunto thou did live, and live
unto God, unto whom thou were dead, thou must have put off the Old, and put on
the new Man; Mortification and Vivification, Remission of sins, Adoption to
be Gods sons, Justification and Sanctification are the Blessings that we
reap by being put into that Bath of Regeneration: Which is also the very gate
of salvation, and makes us capable of all other sacred Rites of the Church,
which they call Sacramenta, or Sacramentalia, Sacraments, or things that have
cognation therewith. And indeed it is called Sacramentum initiationis, the
Sacrament of initiation, or our Admission into the Church. All Religions have
some ceremonious Form whereby they admit Professors into their society;
Austin cont. Crescon. Gramaticum. l. 3. c. 25.
the Jews had Circumcision, the Gentiles had several kinds of Purifyings,
though herein the Gentiles were but the Apes of the Jews; the same God that
annexed Circumcision to the old Testament, was pleased that Baptism should be
annexed to the new, and by that toadmit all the world into one body of the
Catholic Church. But let us come to the Form.

They were to baptize in the name of the Father, Son, and the holy Ghost. And
here we meet with the first and greatest fundamental Principle in Religion,
which is, Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; In Nomine, in the Name
notes the Unity of the Godhead against Arius; for were there more Gods than
one, the holy Ghost would say, in Nominibus, and not in Nomine.

Secondly, in the phrase in Nomine, Note, that where no one Name is specified,
all the Names of God are comprehended; for all note but one and the self same
nature, the riches whereof we cannot comprehend but under diverse names; which
help our weak understanding, but do not divide it. The mention of the
Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost, refutes Sabellius, and shows, that though
the Nature of God is but One, yet in that One there are three Persons, whereof
no one is the other, neither is one ever called by the name of the other, when
they are considered in relation one to the other; but in relation to us, they
communicate in the Name Father, and Spirit is their common attribute, because
God is a Spirit. Saint Basil has a short, but a good note, (...); We must
observe the Form of Baptism which is delivered in the Gospel, and we must
believe in them into whom we were baptized, and we must glorify as many as we
believe in, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. And indeed without the
true knowledge, and acknowledgement of the Trinity, we cannot reap the
comfortable fruit of our Baptism; for we owe it unto all three persons,
though to none but to them three. St. Jerome says right, Vna diuinitas, vna
largitio, the Deity in all three is One, and therefore all three bestow the
same gift upon us; we have the same Author of our Regeneration, as we had of
our Creation; all three persons concurred to work it, and all three to put us
in possession of it. Which that we may the better perceive, Lib. 6. cent.
Donatist.
learn of St. Austine, that this Form of Baptism does contain the whole
Creed; for the Creed is is divided into three parts, every part does express
one of the three persons, and the benefit which the Church reapeth from that
person; for so in the Catechism we teach children to sum up the Creed: when
we ask them what they learn therein, they answer us, they learn three
things; first, to believe in God the Father that made them and all the world;
secondly, to believe in God the Son, that redeemed them and all mankind;
thirdly, to believe in God the holy Ghost, that sanctifies them, and all the
Elect of God: Mark then St. Austins conclusion, Symbolum igitur profitetur
quis, eo ipso quod baptizatur, the receiving of Baptism is a Profession of the
Christian Faith. And this is a principal reason, why the Sacrament of Baptism
was (as St. Austine tells us) called Sacramentum fidei, the Sacrament of
Faith.

A little more distinctly now to open this Form, you must take notice of these
useful Observations.

First, to baptize in the Name of the Father, Son, and the holy Ghost, does
signify to do it by their warrant and commission; for as God only is the
fountain of grace, so none can appoint the means of conueying grace, but only
God. This checketh the presumption of the Bishop of Rome, in multiplying
Sacraments; and we must be warned to do nothing in Gods service without his
warrant.

Secondly, to baptize in Nomine, is to baptize in the person of the Trinity; a
Minister is a public person, whatsoever he does in the Church, he does it in
another Name; the parts of his Ministry being two, to administer (...), to
present the peoples devotion to God, or to minister (...), to bring Gods
message to the People, he should offer no other Prayers to God, but such as
the Church appoints, because he speaks in her Name; and so when he brings
any thing from God, he must remember, that he does represent his person to the
Church. This must warn us to come with holiness to perform sacred Acts,
because we sustain the person of God; the Levites washed their hands and their
feet, and we must wash our selves in the blood of Christ.

Thirdly, to baptize in nomine, is to ascribe the efficacy of Baptism to the
Trinity; the Minister must remember himself to be only an instrument, as St.
Peter confesses when he wrought the Miracle upon the lame man, Acts 3. We
baptize with water, but the gifts of the holy Ghost come from God. Wherefore
let us give the glory of whatsoever success we have in our Ministry to the
principal agent, that is God.

Fourthly, in Nomine Trinitatis, is to baptize unto their service, and to
dedicate unto them the original, (...) notes as much. And therefore the
Ministration of Baptism is accompanied with an Abrenunciation; those that are
baptized; by themselves (if they be of age) or if children by their sureties,
renounce the Diuill and all his works, the pompes and vanities of the wicked
world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh; then they deuote themselves
unto God to believe the Articles of the Creed, and to live according to the
ten Commandments. To this end we should baptize, and we must put the people
in mind of this morality, and let not their thoughts dwell upon the ceremony,
as if when that were past, all were done. Finally, inuocatur nomen Trinitatis
super nos, from the time that we are baptized, we must acknowledge that the
Lord is our God, He has made us, not we our selves, we are his people, and
the sheep of his Pasture; or as the Apostle speaks, We are not our own,
because we are bought with a price; wherefore we must glorify God with our
bodies, and with our souls, for they are his. We that are Ministers then, as
we do not baptize in our own name, so must we not denominate Disciples from
our selves, as the Corinthians; some held of Paul, some of Apollo, some of
Cephas, we must teach them all to hold of the same Lord, of him into whose Name
they are baptized.

As the Baptizer, so the Baptized should make use of every of these
observations; they must 1. beediscreet in not admitting more Sacraments than
God sends; 2. reverence the Minister in regard of his person whom he
sustaines; 3. give the glory of the grace which they receive unto God; 4.
appropriate their service unto him; and 5. let him be their only Lord.

One scruple there is about this Form; for in the Acts, cap. 8. v. 16. it
should seem that some were baptized only into Christ; and some have thought
that the Apostles at pleasure did vary the Form: But the constant practice of
the Church in all parts of the world retaining this Form, permits us not so to
construe the words in the Acts: The meaning seems rather to be this; That
those persons confessing their Faith in the Redemption wrought by Christ, were
baptized after the usual Form. Some difference there is also between the
East and West Church; for in the West Church the Minister speaks thus to him
that is baptized, Ego baptizo te; in the East Church thus, Baptizetur iste; but
the difference is confessed on both sides not to be material, therefore I pass
it over.

You see here none of those many Ceremonies which the Church has multiplied,
whereof many are very ancient, and might be continued, if they had not been
corrupted; by the Church of Rome especially. Themselves hold them not to be of
the essence, but of the solemnity of Baptism, they cannot, they do not deny
but that we keep the essence entire: of those things which belong to the
solemnity our Church has retained so much as is thought fit for edification,
the rest it has cut off, not without cause, and out of that liberty which
every Church has in such things.

One thing I may not omit to remember you of that are to be ordered; That these
solemn words, In the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, are used in your
Ordination, and therefore what instructions I have given unto you upon the
Form of Baptism, you may make use of every one of them, when you meditate
upon your Ordination. And I wish you so to do.

Now lay together teach and baptize, and then you see the Method of your
Ministry; you must first catechize and bring your hearers to believe, and then
dedicate them unto God; because without faith it is impossible to please God,
Heb. 11. so St. John baptized; so baptized the Apostles; and the rule is, Non
potest corpus Baptisma recipere sacramentale, nisi Anima accipiat fidei
veritatem; Hieron.
and Baptism saves no man, but Faith is that which makes a man partaker of
grace; and this Faith does not rest upon the Water, but upon the Word; Accedat
Verbum ad Elementum, and fit Sacramentum, non quia dicitur, sed quia creditur.

But as Faith has Necessitatem medij, so Baptism has Necessitatem praecepti;
we may by no means neglect Baptism if it may be had, and the contempt
hazardeth salvation, Except a man be borne again of water and the holy Ghost,
be cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, John 3. But Faith in no case may
be wanting. Mistake not; Tertullian, and Nicetus upon Nazianzen, orat. de
Baptismo, mis-construed these words, and thought that Children, except it were
in extreme danger of death, should not be baptized, because they could not be
taught. The Anabaptists out of this place, and Mark 16. prove, that no child
must be baptized until he comes to the years of discretion. But they
grossly mistake; for Christ is here and in St. Mark to be understood de
adultis, none without the Church were to be received in, except they were first
catechized, and could profess their Faith. The Ancients write much de
Catechumenis worth our reading and imitating in the same case; and of those
adulti, or Persons come to the years of discretion, must you understand all
those rules in the Scripture, which require those acts of the reasonable soul,
Faith, Hope, and Charity, before admission into the Church; of whom ye may
require one, you may require all, and of whom you may not require all, you may
require never a one. But Christ does not here prescribe who shall be baptized,
but How. At least Christ does not forbid them to be baptized which are not
taught, but commands them that are taught to be baptized: Children of the
faithful must be baptized upon another ground; they are not increduli, they
have no actual unbelief, neither can they Ponere obicem, resist the grace of
the Spirit, or make themselves incapable thereof. Secondly, they are foederati,
they are in Gods Covenant by means of their Parents, whom when God received
into the Church, he received them with this Promise, Ero Deus tuus, and seminis
t^ui. So then there is an obligation that lies upon children, by a native
allegiance unto God; the Vow that their Sureties make for them is not arbitrary
but necessary, and he is bound to make it good; as well as a child under age is
bound when he comes to age to satisfy his Tutor for whatsoever he
reasonably does expend upon his health, food, apparel, and whatsoever else
the child did owe himself by the Law of Nature, and of Reason. See then; is
the child on his part so bound unto God in his infancy, and is not God bound
unto the child by his Promise, even in the same infancy, to give him the grace
of his Covenant? and the Minister in his Name to seal unto the child the
assurance thereof by the Sacrament? Surely he is, otherwise the stipulation is
not mutual. And take away this, what is the prerogative of a Christians child
beyond the child of a Turk or Infidel? To think there is none is impious,
and besides this, they can name none. As then Kings give unto their natural
subjects even so soon as ever they are borne, the benefit due unto subjects,
though they expect their personal Homage, till they come to years of
discretion: so does God deal with the newborn subjects of the Kingdom of
heaven. And as it were very hard for a King to put a child borne under his
allegiance out of the protection of his law, till he is of years to do his
own Homage, and take his Oath: so stands it not with the goodness of God to
withold the benefit of the Sacrament, from him whom he has taken to be his
child, till he can with his own voice profess that he does vow himself to
be such. Nay, as in the Primitive Church, many together with holy Orders
received the qualities fit to discharge the calling, though others were
qualified before they were ordered: even so in Baptism, some receive the grace
of Faith, Hope, and Charity by the Sacrament as infants, though those which are
come to years of discretion must be in some sort seasoned with them before
they are baptized.

But the time bids me end, and reserve what I have farther to say upon this
Text till some other time. Wherefore

LEt us pray God, that the Pastors may so teach, and the People so learn, that
both doing their duty in the Kingdom of Grace, may receive their reward in
the Kingdom of Glory, from him that has all power both in Heaven and Earth.
This he grant into whose Name we are baptized, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost; To this one God in three Persons, be rendered all honor and glory
now and for ever. Amen. THE SECOND SERMON.
MATTHEW. 28. Verse. 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you: And lo, I am with you always unto the end of the world. Amen.


THis Text, with the former Verse, does contain Christ's right to send, and his
sending of his Apostles; He had good right to send, because he is Sovereign
Lord of all the World. He sends them with a common charge and comfort. Their
charge is, to go through the whole world, and to endeavor to convert all both
Jews and Gentiles unto Christ. If in doing their errand they speed with any,
they are first to consecrate them unto God by Baptism, and then to conform
their lives unto the Gospel. This is the sum of the common charge.

Their common comfort stands in the powerful and perpetual presence of
Christ; Christ promises to be with them, He will be with them, that has all
power hoth in heaven and earth. And he will never forsake them, he will be
with them always, or with their successors, He will be with them until the
worlds end. Upon this comfort they must six their eyes, Lo, or Behold; and
their hopeful prayer must desire this, Amen.

These be the particulars whereinto heretofore speaking unto you upon a like
occasion, I brake this and the former Verses; I then handled Christ's right to
send: I have opened unto you the large Diocese over which the Apostles were
set, you have seen how they must endeavor their conversion, and last of all,
I opened unto you the manner of consecrating believers unto Christ; farther I
could not go at that time, except I would trespass too much upon your
patience: I purpose now (God willing) to go on, and go through with the
particulars which remain untouched.

Of the Charge then there remains one point to be handled, and that is, the
conforming the lives of believers unto the Gospel of Christ. The Apostles are
willed to teach believers, to keep all things whatsoever Christ had commanded
his Apostles.

In which words I will observe unto you these two things; first, whereunto the
service of a Minister is resembled, to the office of a Schoolmaster; the word
(...) alludes thereunto: and they must proceed in this manner, they must
praeire verbo and exemplo, by word and by deed; Christ's word, for they must
teach them to do all whatsoever Christ has commanded: but the deeds must be
their own; for Christ has laid his commandments immediately upon the
Apostles, to do all things which I have commanded you.

But let us open these points a little more fully; first, the resemblance of a
Minister to a Schoolmaster.

The resemblance is very fit: The first name that ever was given unto
Christians, was the name of Disciples, that is, Scholars; we find the name
in the former Verse employed in the word (...), make Disciples: Now if the
believers are Disciples, then the Pastors are (...). Masters of those
Scholars; they are appointed to instruct them: and so the most renowned of the
Fathers, are in the writings of the Fathers, oftentimes termed.

But that which I will observe unto you that are to be ordered, is, from
Schoolemasters to learn a point of discretion; they range their Scholars into
Forms, and though themselves be never so learned, yet they read unto their
several Forms no deeper points than they are capable of: if they should do
otherwise, well might they show their learning, they would show no discretion,
neither would the Scholars be the better for that which they should teach
them. And you must remember that it concerns you so to distinguish your
Auditors, feed some with milk, some with strong meat; you must catechize the
youth, plainly, 1. Cor. 3.2. Hebr. 5.12.
briefly; the elder, that are riper in years and judgment, must be built on
with more learning, and more full instruction. This is that our Savior
means, when he says, that the Steward of the Lords House who is faithful
and wise, will give to every one of the Family his portion, Luke 12.42.
and that in due season: In due season; not only speaking Verbum Dei in die
suo, opening such passages of Scripture, as are suitable to several Times and
Feasts (a thing which discreet Ministers should look unto, and think that the
Church has therefore disposed the passages of Scripture in the Liturgy
agreeable to Times, that the Minister should therehence learn what Arguments
he should choose for his Texts.) But this is not all that is meant by giving
the believers each one his portion in due season; it is meant also, that they
must so breed all that are committed to their care, that the old shall not
need to come back again to learn their rudiments, wherein they should have
been thoroughly instructed when they were young. If this were done, so many
discontents would not grow between pastor and people, while they contend which
of the Flock should be, or should not be catechized; neither should Ministers
have cause to complain of the gross ignorance which they find in many that
are well stricken in years. But this comes to pass, for that the wholesome
Ordinance of the Church is neglected, which requires, that you should call upon
children to perform in their own persons that vow which was made for them by
their Sureties, and not suffer them to partake the Communion, and other sacred
Rites, till they can do it so well, that you may upon your knowledge present
them to the Bishop, and the Bishop upon try all confirm them, and admit them
to the other privileges of Christianity; But as foolish Schoolemasters, that
ignorant people may think their Scholars are very forward, read Greek to
them when they scarce understand any Latin: so do many unadvised Ministers
teach the people great mysteries of Religion, who understand not the elements
thereof, and their catechizings are more profound than their preachings should
be. I wish you would, I hope you will take heed of this error, and show your
selves more skillful Schoolemasters in breeding your Disciples.

There is another error, and it is some kin to this, and that is, to teach
them that are present the duty of some that are absent, teach the people what
is the Pastors duty, and the Pastor what is the peoples duty; in a Country
Parish to speak of their faults that are in authority, and at an Assembly of
Judges, of Justices, to discourse at large of those things which concern the
duty of a Country man, etc. I will not deny, but that the Moralities are so
intermixed in Scripture, that occasion may be given to intermingle Instructions
concerning different Auditories; but discretion requires that we should then
pass by, or at least lightly pass over what concerns others, and insist upon
that which is fitting to the present Auditory; otherwise we shall but feed a
corrupt humor which is natural to us all, and that is a desire to hear other
men's duties, especially their faults, and in the mean time to be careless of
our own duties, and to be puffed up with the conceit, that our selves are the
better, because we hear others are so bad: thus many are brought to sigh for
other men's sins, who might better spend their grief about their own. It
were well if it were no worse, it breeds an ill conceit of others, which
proceeds to uncharitable and undutiful both words and deeds; the world has
had too much proof of it, it is a seed of sedition, your precise Preachers
have sown too much of it. But surely, this is not (...), to imitate discreet
Schoolemasters in teaching of the people.

But Pastors must not only be (...), they must teach the people (...), to
keep that which is taught them, or observe it in their lives and conversation.
A discreet Schoolmaster does not only teach his Scholars Grammar Rules,
whereby, for example, true Latin may be made; but he teaches them also to
make Latin according to those Rules, neither does he think his pains
bestowed to any purpose, before his Scholars can do that. Even so a discreet
Minister must teach his people, not only to know, but to do their duty, to
turn their Science into Conscience, so to learn Christ, as to become
Christians, Christians in that sense which St. Paul speaks of to the
Galathians, Cap. 5.
My little children, with whom I am in travel again till Jesus Christ be
formed in you; which you may farther interpret by his words in the first of
that Epistle, I live (says St. Paul) yet no more I, but Jesus Christ lives in
me. To the Corinthians likewise thus he writes; ^. Cor. 3.2.
that they are his Epistle written by the Spirit of God, in the tables of their
hearts by his ministry, so legible, as that it might be seen and read of all.
And elsewhere he says, that to learn Christ is to put off the Old man and put
on the New. And certainly, James 1. Psalm. 19.
he is a very truant in the Schole of Christ, whose life does not express his
learning, that is not as well a doer as a hearer of the word. It is a gross
conceit, that true believing without godly living will advantage a Christian;
and yet it was an ancient conceit: St. Austin was occasioned by it to write his
Books de fide and operibus; yea before him the Apostles in every Epistle
forget not to correct that error. And indeed Baptism, which is Sacramentum
fidei, the obsignation of our faith, does it not represent unto us our dying
unto sin, Romans 6.
and rising unto righteousness? and if we do not make this use of it, non
prodest, sed obest, they that are not the better by it, shall fare the worse
for their Baptism: for the indelible character which we receive in it will
testify against us in the day of judgment, that we have not only transgrest
Gods commandments, but also broken our vow of obedience; which will add to
our guilt, and increase our pain; for the servant that knows his Masters
will and does it not, shall be beaten with more stripes. Luke. 12.47.
and you know in the Gospel, that of the two sons, he was the worse that told
his father he would go work in the Vineyard, and did not.

But keeping does signify not only observing of that which we learn, but the
increasing thereof also, we must not think that the first step is the
highest, but we must grow in grace, and from virtue to virtue; there is a
perfect age in Christ, whereunto we must all contend to come. We must keep
that which is taught us, as the earth keeps seed corn; the earth keeps the
seed to multiply it into one or more ears, laden with many grains: the
unprofitable servant kept his talent, he was punished because he did not use
it to increase; and surely we must not look to be approved of Christ, if we
are not the better, the longer we live. Of this truth, if we were well
resolved, we would profit more than usually we do by the pains of the
Minister.

I have dwelt long enough upon the resemblance of your calling; let us now see
how we must proceed. We must praeire Proecepto and Exemplo, we must lead the
people by a good Rule. A Schoolmasters that will make good Scholars chooses
good or classical Authors, which he reads unto them; and Christ the chief
Master of the great School of the Church, leaves not Ministers, which are but
vnder-Masters, to read what they will unto their Scholars, but tyeth them to
Quae ego praecepi, that which himself has given in charge. Whereupon St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 11. uses those words, Quae accepi a Domino, tradidi vobis, what I
have received of the Lord, that have I delivered unto you. The Apostles (as I
told you on the former Verse) were Ambassadors of Christ, and so are all that
succeed them in the Ministry; now you know that Ambassadors deliver not their
own mind, but the mind of their Master, the words that they speak are his
words: even so the Ministers of Christ must deliver Christ's message unto his
Church, it is to his will, not their own, Mat. 23. James 4.
that they must require the peoples obedience; the only Lawgiver is Christ,
and he the only Master.

This I would have you take notice of, because one of the crafty insinuations,
wherewith Popish seducers work upon simple people, is this; You are baptized
into the faith professed in the Church of Rome, at least as many of you as
lived in Queen Mary's days, in Henry the Eights days, and before; and if in
your own persons you were not, yet your Ancestors were, and if they or you
were, you have vowed obedience then to the Bishop of Rome, you ought then in
conscience to be reconciled unto him. Thus plead the Seminary Fugitives in
their Apologies. But though they have stained baptism with many superstitions,
yet have they not therein, or in the form thereof set out by Authority of the
Council of Trent, so far countenanced their forgerie, as to bind Christian
people in their Baptism to any, but to Christ; They that are baptized (says
the Apostle) put on Christ, and in Baptism are adopted to be children of God,
to obey the voice of their Father, to hear the command of Christ their
Savior. True; says the Papist, we require no more. But the Pope is Christ's
Vicar, and Gods Deputy; from him we must receive Gods pleasure. We will,
provided he always show us his Evidence; if upon trial it appear not to be
counterfeit, we will submit to it: but this the Papists have not done, neither
indeed can they, and therefore what without good record they obtrude to the
Church, Christian people may refuse without breaking their vow they made in
Baptism.

The Baptizer and the baptized are the one to deliver, the other to receive
(...), whatsoever Christ gives in charge to the Church; Christ requires them
both, not to take from, nor to add to that which he commanded. We must not
take from it ought. He that will obey of Christ his charge some part, and omit
some other, does not follow Christ's will, but his own; for he takes what he
will, not what Christ will have him take: but he must know, that tota
obedientia is copulatiua, as the Schools speak, all the Commandments of God
are knit together with a conjunction copulative; consider them asunder you may,
you may not sever them. The Philosophers held that the cardinal Virtues are so
knit together, that he that has one must needs have all, and he that has
not all has never a one. This is more true of the theological Virtues, Faith,
Hope, and Charity; he that has Faith, must have Hope, and Faith and Hope
will not be without Charity. So that no one branch necessary to salvation can
be kept, at least be kept salubriter, but in communion with the rest: St.
James therefore tells us, cap. 2.10. He that is guilty of one, is guilty of
all, because he that commands one, commands all. The Law runs in
general terms, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed is he that abides not in every point of
the Law to do it. Christ will have us resign our selves wholly to his
pleasure: the Pastor must not conceal ought from the people; Christ delivered
to his Disciples whatsoever he had heard of his father requisite for their
salvation; and St. Paul opened to the Ephesians all the counsel of God, Acts
20. faithful Pastors must imitate these good patterns, neither for fear nor
favor must they spare to deliver any part of the truth of Gods Word; that were
to humor men, or rather to foster corrupt humors in them to their
destruction. And People must not be like unto those that have queasie
stomachs, who must choose their meat, else will not feed on that which is set
before them; they must use their stomachs to all spiritual sustenance, and
learn to digest whatsoever God speaks to them by his Ministers, not doubting
but that though many things relish not pleasantly to flesh and blood, yet the
things are wholesome which Christ commends unto them.

This All is exclusive, they that must keep all that which Christ commands,
must do that only, they must add as little to, as they must take from it: Do
all (says God unto Moses, Exodus 25.) according to the pattern showed in the
Mount; the Prophets, the Apostles kept themselves strictly to their charge. And
you know that it is dangerous for an Ambassador to patch any device of his
own to his Masters instructions. What Balaam answered unto the Messengers of
Balaac, may well beseem every faithful Pastor, If Balaac will give me his
house full of gold, Numb. 22.18.
I cannot go from that word which I receive from the Lord, to do more or
less. What this same All is, it would be too much to open distinctly at this
time. St. Mark, cap. 16. calls it in one word the Gospel: and indeed that
is properly Christ's charge. St. Luke, cap. 24. resolves it into the doctrine
of Remission of sins, and of Repentance. We may reduce it unto that which is
represented in Baptism, which is a conformity to Christ dying, and rising
from the dead: In a word, all Christ's commandments are either affirmative or
negative; In regard of the affirmative we must imitate David, a man after Gods
own heart, Acts 13. who did facere omnes voluntates Dei, do all that which
God would have him do; And touching the negative, we must imitate the same
David, who says of himself, that All wicked ways he did utterly abhor,
Psalm. 119. If thus we live, we shall do as we pray, Gods will in earth as it
is done in heaven.

But who can do so? it is more than is possible for this frail life;
wherefore we may understand All two manner of ways; secundum parts, and
secundum gradus. According to the parts of our duty, we must omit no part,
but must exercise our selves in every thing which Christ requires: As for the
degrees, though we must strive to attain the highest, yet if we reach not so
far we must not despair: Austin.
Quisquis non potest implere quod iubet Christus, amet eum qui impleuit, and in
illo implet; that which was impossible for the Law by reason of the weakness
of our flesh, Romans 8.
God sending his son in the similitude of our flesh, for sin condemned
sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in
us, Cap. 19.
which walk not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit.

Hitherto you have seen how the Minister must praeire praecepto, lead the
people by good Instruction; now see in a word how he must lead them by good
Example.

The commandments that Christ gave, he gave to the Apostles, meaning that they
should make use of them themselves, as well as persuade the people to it: St.
Paul understood it so, who says of himself, 1 Cor. 9. I beat down my body,
and bring it under, lest when I preach unto others my self become a Reprobate,
and bids Timothy be an example to his flock; we must not be like Scribes
and Pharisees, Mat. 23.
that bound heavy burdens and laid them upon the peoples shoulders, whereat
they would not lift with one of their fingers. It is too foul a reproach for a
Minister so by his living to contradict his preaching, as to deserve to be
replied unto in that Proverb, Medice, cura teipsum, and so destroy more than
he can build. This dishonor I wish you to avoid.

And so at length I have done with the Charge, come we now to the Comfort. That
I told you stands in the powerful and perpetual presence and assistance of
Christ; Christ's presence is noted by Ego vobiscum, I am with you, which does
show us the truth of Christ's name Immanuel, God with us; Mat. 1. Esaias 8.
the Holy Land was called Terra Immanuel, the Land of God is with us, and
because that was but a Type, look into the place where God put his name.
Ezekiel in the vision of the new Jerusalem tells us, that the name of that
City is Iehoua shamma, Cap. 48.
Dominus ibi, the Lord is there: both in the new Testament and in the old, that
saying of Wisdom in the Proverbs, cap. 8. is received, My delight is to be
with the sons of men.

But how can Christ which is ascended into heaven, be with them upon earth? the
name of Christ contains the Manhood as well as the Godhead; now the Manhood
is finite, and therefore cannot be both in Heaven and Earth. True; the Manhood
cannot, but the Man may. No man (says Christ, John 3.) ascends unto heaven,
but he that descended from heaven, the son of man which is in heaven; this
Christ spoke when he was upon the earth. If the son of man could be in
heaven while Christ was on the earth, surely the son of man may be on the
earth while Christ is in heaven. We must understand it of the Person which is
but one, though two Natures subsist therein; and both natures concur in the
production of the several works of the Mediator, in a manner which we cannot
conceive. But we must take heed of the Lutherans racking of this conceit, who
would make the Humanity of Christ to have a double existence; one finite,
which they call Physical, the other infinite, which they call Hyperphysicall;
which distinction is such as I think themselves do not understand, I am sure
they do not express it so that it may be conceived: no more do Papists,
that to bear out Transubstantiation have coined the like.

But to leave them; Christ that is man is present every where; though not in
his Manhood, yet in his Godhead. If this be too obscure take a plainer manner,
his Presence by his Holy Spirit; Misit Vicarium spiritum sanctum (as Tertullian
speaks) If I go not away (says Christ) the Comforter will not come; John 14.
but if I go, I will send him to you from my Father; and where the Spirit is,
there is Christ; St. John teaches us so, By this we know that he abides in
us by the Spirit that he has given unto us. 1 Epist. 3.
But it is not a bare presence that we have to do withal, I told you it is a
powerful presence; the word Ego, I, must be understood with an Emphasis; I
that have all power given me both in heaven and earth, that have overcome the
world in my own person, and in my own person cast out the Prince of this
world, that have all judgment given unto me from the Father, whom all the
Angels do worship. And indeed the Presence of such a person was behoofefull,
whether you respect those to whom they were sent, or that which they were to
do; the Apostles, though they carried heavenly treasures, it was but in
earthen vessels, themselves were but plain men, of no great parts nor parentage
in outward show, likely not only to be scorned, but also to be persecuted when
they had delivered their message; the Dragon and all his Angels were like
fiercely to oppose them; ea, Christ told them, that he sent them as sheep
amongst wolves. And how unlikely might they think themselves to prevail with
all sorts of men, and persuade them to forsake their Idolatry, and turn to
God, to believe in Christ crucified, take up their cross and follow him? The
undergoing of such a danger, the compassing of such a design, require a
powerful Presence, without which the Apostles would never have ventared to
undertake their charge. When God bid Moses go to Pharaoh and command him to
let Israel go out of Captivity; how does he excase himself? dis-inable
himself? what ado has God with him? nothing could put him in heart but Ero
tecum, I will be with thee; Exodus 3.12.
that so emboldned him, that being but a single and a silly man, at least the
company that he took with him were of no great regard, yet they ventured
into Pharaohs Court, into his presence, and without fear of him, or his
greatness, delivered their message plainly and roundly, and renewed it more
than once: so resolute did Gods presence make them. Whereas afterward, when God
threatened to withdraw his presence, by reason of the vntowardlines of the
Israelites carriage, Moses speaks plainly to God, If thou will not go with us,
send us not hence; and yet then he had 600000. men with him and more;
notwithstanding all that aid, he had no heart to enter upon Canaan till God
promised again that he would go with him; as also his being with Joshua made
Joshua valiant, and of a good courage. To pass over the like promise made to
Gedeon and others, not so pertinent to our purpose, though showing how
available Gods presence is: Cap. ^. Cap. 3.
Jeremy and Ezekiel that were Prophets had an employment in nature much like
unto this of the Apostles; and we find, that both of them startled at their
message, and held back, till God drew them on with a promise of being with
them. But of all promises that is most markeable which is made to Zorobabel,
Zachary 4. Who art thou, O great Mountain? before Zorobabel thou shall become
a plain; he shall bring forth the head stone thereof with shoutings, crying
grace, grace, unto it. This is the work that Zorohabel shall do; but what is
the means? not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, says the Lord. Mat.
10.
In this sense our Savior Christ when he sends the Apostles he bids them
not to take care what they should speak, for that not they, but the spirit of
their Father should speak in them; and Christ promised to give them such a
mouth and wisdom, Luke 81.
as all their Adversaries should not be able to gainsay, nor resist, By this
you may perceive that it is not a general presence that is promised, which is
common to the good and the bad, but a special, and that a gracious Presence; a
Presence which he to whom it is vouchsafed may well joy in, and be comforted
by: for what good shall he want, what evil need he fear, with whom Christ is
so present?

But you may resolve Christ's presence with his Apostles into the Protection of
their persons, and Cooperation in their work. Prosp. ib. 2. de wocat. Gent.
The protection of their persons; Non vt nihil patiantur, sed vt non
superentur; Christ did not protect them so, as that they should not suffer the
Cross, but that they should conquer by it, as himself had done; their
Martyrdom was their conquest, and they most advanced the Gospel when they
sealed it with their blood. As for Christ's Cooperation, it is plain, that the
conversion of the world was Mutatio dextrae Altissimi; that in such a moment of
time the Gentiles in all known parts of the world should be so brought to
entertain the Gospel, was a work of no weaker power than that of the
Almighty; it was his work Qui facit mirabilia magna solus, that only does
great Wonders.

But what is this to us that are Ministers now? we are not Apostles. True; but
we are the Successors of the Apostles, and Christ promises not only a
powerful but a perpetual Presence, he promises to be with them always unto
the worlds end. I might tell you that the Apostles live in their writings, to
which all succeeding Pastors are tied, and the miracles which they wrought are
to Posterity the warrant that their work was Christ's, and so Christ in us is
with them. But more distinctly. If he had said unto them only always, we
might have understood it as of a personal Promise, a Promise proper unto them,
but when he adds, to the worlds end, others are comprehended also, even the
succession of Pastors; we also must comfort our selves with the promise of
Gods protexion; we shall never want crosses in the world, but we must hope that
God will make perfect his strength in our weakness. And we must comfort our
selves with the Cooperation of Christ, and acknowledge, that wheresoever Paul
planteth and Apollo waters, it is God that gives the increase; it is not we,
but the Grace of God with us, that does produce these supernatural effects in
the people, their Regeneration, their Absolution, their ghostly Consolation,
etc.

Under Vobiscum, With you, you must comprehend not only Pastors, but People
also, for Where two or three are gathered together in my name (says Christ) I
am in the midst of them; and in the Revelation, Christ appears walking in
the midst of the golden Candlesticks. In regard of protection, Zach 12.
he promises to be a wall of fire unto his people; and in regard of
cooperation, he promises that they shall be (...) taught of God, and they have
an Unction that teaches them all things.

Finally, the phrase I am is not to be neglected in this perpetuity; for it
does not only suite well with Christ who is always the same, and changes
not; but it notes also the constancy of his operation, whether he defend or
work by the Pastors, and in the People. Oh would to God we did all
acknowledge this presence of Christ in his Church; it would make us carry our
selves more holily, and more readily do our duty; and in so doing continue
always the same.

Before I leave this point of Perpetuity, I must refute a Calumny of the
Church of Rome, and correct their Arrogancy. First, to meet with their
Calumny. They charge us that contrary to this text, we hold the Church has
failed, and may fail; but certainly they can name no Author of ours that ever
delivered such an opinion; we believe and confess that Christ has built his
Church upon a Rock, Matthew. 16.
and that the gates of bell shall never preuatle against it; that there shall
not want Christian Pastors and People in the Church, Ephesians. 9.
until Christ shall come to Judgment. But this we say; that there is no
branch of the Church Militant which is not subject to corruption in opinion,
and in conversation; yea, many degenerate so far herein, that they may be
lopped off from Gods Vine, and cease to be a Church: we have many woeful
examples hereof in Africa, in Asia, in Europe, long since swallowed up by
Mahumetans; yet the body of the Church has continued still, though it have
lost many of its branches. God was never pleased to suffer corruption so far
to prevail, but that he provided a new Plant to shoot out before he forsook
that which degenerated. You see how the Church was continued till the flood in
Noah, who succeeded the Patriarchs that descended from Seth; and after the
flood God preserved a Sem at the least, until the Church was settled in
Abraham, in whose posterity he did continue it until Christ came in the
flesh; neither did he utterly forsake the Jews till the Church was rooted in
the Gentiles; and amongst the Gentiles he has continued it notwithstanding
Tyrants, Heretics, etc. but not without the spiritual husbandry; cutting off
those branches which were past recovery.

This is true will the Romanist confess of all particular Churches; the Church
of Rome is more, that is the very trunk of the Tree, it is more than a branch;
the other Churches may fail, she cannot fail, she, and she only, has a
privilege from erring, from falling from the truth derived from St. Peter. But
I told you when I brake up the Text, that the charge and comfort were common to
all the Apostles. St. Crprians Rule is true, the Apostles were sent, Pari
consertio potestatis and honoris. Cypr. de simplicit. clericorum. And that
their successors are all equal herein is clear, because both charge and
comfort are common to them all until the worlds end. Were there no other Text
in the Bible, this is plain enough to refute the vanity of their privilege.
Does not Christ here speak to all the Apostles, yea and their Successors too,
as themselves confess, and promise to be with them to the worlds end? and yet
we see that many Apostolical Churches have long since failed. They might,
says a Romanist, but we cannot; read St. Paul to the Romans, and read there,
that St. Paul does not only repute them but a Branch of the Church grafted in
the old stock, Romans 11.
but bids them Not to be high minded, but fear; for they are not so
grafted in, but they may be broken off again, no less than the Jews, if
they give God the same cause. Nay, St. Paul goes farther, and insinuates to
the Thessalonians, 2. These. 2.
that the Romans will fall away, and their Bishop be the man of sin, who
shall sit in the Temple, and undermine the Orthodoxe Faith.

But I will trouble you no farther with this point, only observe two errors of
the Romanists. One, that they appropriate to themselves the common Promises
made unto the whole Church; the second, that they understand them absolutely,
whereas they are meant conditionally. This difference they would have us
observe between the promises made to the old Testament and the new. In the old
Testament they say, that God promised indeed a perpetual Residence, but it
was, if the Jews performed their obedience: And they say true in it; the
Promised of Gods being with the King, with the Priest, with the Nation, all
were made upon such a condition; Take for example the story of Joshua; in the
first chapter God promised he would not leave him nor forsake him; yet we see
that not many Chapters afterward he did forsake him, offended with Achans
sacrilege. But observe, that this condition is not always expressed in the
Promise; it is understood then when it is not expressed. It is no better with the
new Testament; the forecited Chapter of the Romans confirms this truth, and
the event has proved it true. For though touching the Elect it is true that
God will preserve them, and it is true absolutely, that God will ever have a
Church wherein those Elect shall be; yet no man, nor congregation must
understand the Promises of God made unto them, but with condition of their
performance of that which God requires: If they do, they do but vainly
flatter themselves, and woeful experience will make them spectacles to the
world of this vain presumption.

To conclude this point; The Apostles had a Charge and a Comfort; the comfort
was to encourage them to perform their charge, and the one must not go
without the other; and as the Apostles, so we must entertain them.

St. Chrysostom bids us take notice that Christ mentions the End of the
world, that he may thereby hearten his Disciples, and preserve them, preserve
them from being besotted with any worldly hopes; seeing they are transitory,
and must have an end, they have nothing in them for obtaining whereof they
should forgo their calling: And as for the Cross which they are to suffer,
they should not be troubled with that, that also must have an End: wherefore,
doing their duty, Christ would have them mind that Proverb, Non si male
nunc, and olim sic erit, this world shall not last ever: yea, this worlds
coming to an end brings us to a world that shall have no end; Persecuters
and Unbelievers shall find another world, wherein, stripped of all their earthly
comforts, they shall have misery without end: and the faithful servants of
Christ, they also shall come to another world, where they shall enjoy the
reward of their pains, a blessed life for evermore; So that the End is not
only an End of consumption, but of consummation also, both to good and bad,
Whereupon follows another Note, that the word donec until, does not mean
that after the end of the world Christ will be no longer with us; that sense of
the world, condemned by St. Hierome writing against Heluidius in the case of
the Mother of Christ's Virginity, must also receive the same sense here. Christ
shall be with the Church then, but in another manner than now, not modo
mediatorio, as mediating to God for us, for then God shall be all in all; but
he shall be with us as he is with the Angels that are confirmed in grace, the
enjoying of his blessed presence shall be no small part of our eternal
happiness.

I have opened unto you the Charge and the Comfort that are expressed in my Text:
Two points remain to be touched very briefly.

The first is contained in the word Lo, which tells us whereon we must
place the eyes of our mind. We are apt to busy them about disheartning
objects, and plod upon the difficulty of our charge, and our own disabilitie,
and thereupon to shrincke back, and be unwilling to be employed in such
services of God; we can, with the cowardly Israelites, object the sons of
Anak in comparison of whom we are but grasshoppers, the high walls which we can
never scale, and so give over our journey, our warfare. But God takes off our
eyes from these bugbeares that so affright us, and bids us look upon him,
Ego vobiscum, I am with you. If God be with us, who can be against us? Rom 8.3.
he can cowardice all the hearts of our enemies, and can curb all their
fierceness, and can crush all their might: nay, he can turn a Laban or an
Esau that deadly hate us, at least into seeming friends, so far as to salute,
to entreat us kindly, even then when we expect they will do us mischief: He
can do more, turn even Saul into a Paul, make him a convert when he is hot
in persecution: Finally, he can make his, Sampson-like, conquer more dying by
the hands of the enemy, than when he lived to encounter them. Whenever God
puts us upon any hot service, Ecce, look upon this, let this be in our
eye, it will suffer no fear to dismay us. For seeing it is not our strength
that must withstand them, but Gods power sustaining us, and there is no
proportion between the power of a Creator, and all the Creatures, what is
there that should trouble us? Therefore let us keep our eyes on him, and we
shall be undauntedly patient of any disgrace or danger that we must pass in
performing our charge.

Again; though we be naturally proud, and think our selves worthy of high
preferment, and sufficient for great employment; yet when we are called to
these supernatural Acts, we are far from being ambitious, yea we are plain
incredulous that ever such things can be done by us, or that we are fit to be
used in doing them; we can then plead our imperfections, the imperfections of
our head, the imperfections of our heart; it is strange then to see how vile we
will be in our own eyes, and be glad that any one should have the honor of
this service rather than our selves: we see this truth in Moses, Jeremy, and
others. But this is a mis-placing of our eyes, Christ takes them off from this
contemplation, and places them upon himself, Behold, I am with you; it is my
spirit, my wisdom, my grace that produces these heavenly effects, I do you
the honor to make you my Instruments, but I will be the principal Agent,
regard not your weakness but my power, and doubt not but that I will do by
you whatsoever I shall give you in charge. Let this be your encouragement,
Christ would never send us to baptize with water, but he means to baptize
with the holy Ghost; he will never send us to dispense bread and wine, but he
will be present to give unto believers his body and blood; if he send us to
bind and loose on earth, himself will bind and loose in heaven; finally, the
foolishness of Preaching which he utters by our mouths, himself does
accompany with a demonstration of his Spirit; Ecce, Behold this, Behold how I
am with you, how I cooperate with you.

The last particular which I observed is contained in the last word Amen, and
this must second Ecce, Behold. So soon as ever our eyes are upon the right
object, and we see what shelter, what succor we have, who does support us,
who does work by us, we must fall to our Amen, we must undoubtedly believe the
truth of Christ's promise, and heartily desire the accomplishment thereof; the
word Amen implies both, and we must say Amen both ways: Christ does promise I
am with you, I will not leave you, nor forsake you, whenever, or
whithersoeuer you go in my service; we must answer Amen, Lord I am assured it
will be so. I am sure it will be so also when thou say, Lo I am with you, by
you to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
and guide their feet into the way of Peace. And seeing what thou Lord say
shall be, what is my desire but that it should be? Da Domine quod iubes, and
inbe quod vis, Lord be thou with me, and I care not what charge thou do
impose upon me; thou biddest me go into all the world, Amen, so be it, I will
go; thou promisest to be with me wheresoever I go, Amen, so be it. Thus
should Ecce, Behold, set a-work Amen, and Amen, So be it, should ever attend
this Ecce, Behold.

I have done with my Text, and with the particulars which I pointed out
therein; lay those particulars together, and see how many things there are to
be observed by you that are to enter into Holy Orders.

Here you may see that the Original of your calling is from Christ; that
Christ calls you to be his Ambassadors; the errand whereupon you are sent
is the gathering of Gods children into his Church; He trusts you with the
seals of his Covenant, his Sacraments; He makes your mouths his Oracles unto
the people; his presence makes your persons secure and sacred; whether he be
pleased that you be Patients or Agents, his presence shall make you conquerours
under the Cross, and conuerters of sinful men. And this he will do by
you, and those that shall be honored with the like calling, until the number
of the Elect are fulfilled, and we all meet comfortably, after our service is
happily ended, to reign with him for ever in his Kingdom of Glory.

He that gives you this Charge, grant you this Comfort, and make you so
behold it, that you may say Amen unto it. Amen. Amen. IHS

A SERMON PREACHED AT A VISITATION At BATHE.
ZACHARY 11. verse. 7. And I took unto me two staves, the one I called Beauty,
and the other I called Bands, and I fed the flock.


THis Chapter contains the last and worst destruction of the Jews, the manner
and the cause is contained herein.

The Manner is most woeful, for it is Libellus Repudij. God will have no more
to do with them, and they were to be Lo-gnammi, no longer the peculiar people
of God; no degree of person was to be exempted from this plague, neither were
they ever to recover their state again.

Of so woeful a manner the cause was most just, Curati noluerunt curari, God
gave the Jews over, Pastors and People, to a total, to a final desolation,
because in their day, the last of their days, they would not know, they did
not regard those things that belonged unto their peace. What those things were,
for the most, for the best part, we are taught in these words that now I have
read unto you.

The whole text is a Parable, wherein a ghostly shepherd is resembled to a
bodily, and the care of the one is represented in the others care. This is the
sum of the whole text. But more distinctly.

In moralizing the Parable we are to make two enquiries; first, Who it is that
speaks these words; secondly, What that is which he means by this speech.
By laying together the parts of this Chapter, you shall find that he that
speaks is our Savior Christ, it is he that says, I took to my self two
slaves, etc. As it is he that speaks, so that which he speaks concerns
himself, the contents of his words are his own exemplarie pastoral care.

In opening this care the text will teach us 1. how he did furnish himself
sutably to his calling; 2. how he did employ his furniture to the good of his
charge. His furniture was Authority and Ability; Authority, noted by the
staves; for Padum insigne Pastoris, a Shepherd is designed by his crook, and
the crook is an emblem of Authority.

Authority is not enough, he has Ability also; his Ability is noted by the
property of the staves. The properties are two, and so the ability grows to
be twofold; the first is noted by Beauty, by which is meant Veritas Euangelica,
a Shepherds skill in the covenant of Grace; the second is noted by Bands,
whereby is noted Charitas Christiana, the Shepherds care of the Churches
peace. With these does the Shepherd furnish himself, so he says, I took
unto my self; I took, he received this furniture from his Father, so I gather
out of the fourth verse, and what he took, therewith he qualified himself,
it fitted him for the charge which his Father imposed on him.

As the Shepherd was full furnished, so was he well employed, he employed his
furniture for the good of his charge. His charge is noted by the Flock; a
short, but a fair description of the Church is intimated in this word; for a
Flock is Congregatio Ouium, an assembly of Sheep; every member of the Church is
resembled to a Sheep, and as Sheep, so are these members sociable. Of such a
society Christ took care, he fed them, he wrought the properties of his
Statues into them, he instructed every Sheep in truth, and united them all in
peace. This was Christ's pastoral care, a care which we must hold exemplary,
and if exemplary, then other Pastors must exemplify it; it beseemes us to be
conformed to the chief Shepherd of our souls.

I have laid before you the Contents of this Scripture, I will now begin to
enlarge them, and fit them to this occasion.

Qui pascit pastorem; the Master Shepherd that feeds the under Shepherds, so
feed me, that I may herein be the better able to feed you, and both of us may
prove duetifull obseruers and followers of his Pastoral care.

The first inquiry that must be made is, Who he is that speaks these words;
he is not expressed, therefore the Interpreters differ. Of those that speak
probably, some will have him to be Zachary our Prophet, some our Savior
Christ; they are easily reconciled. It is an undoubted rule; that there are
as well real as verbal Prophecies, and not only persons but things also were
Typical in the Old Testament; the Prophets did often times act their persons
whose stories they related: certainly Zachary in this Chapter does personate
both good and had Shepherds, the bad in the end of the Chapter, and the good
in this seventh verse. And this good Shepherd is our Savior Christ; St.
Matthew puts it out of all doubt; for in him we read that certain words in
this Chapter were fulfilled when Judas sold Christ unto the high Priests; now
he that was sold was he that spoke these words, that is plain by the
contexture, therefore he that speaks these words must needs be our Savior
Christ. Neither is it strange that he should be resembled to a Shepherd; the
Prophets, the Apostles do so compare him, and least they should seem to do
it with disparagement, Christ is pleased in the tenth of St. John to warrant
their doing by doing the same himself.

But that which I work hereout is, that this Shepherd is Non seruus sed
filius, he is no servant, but the son of God, there is eminency in his
Person; and indeed seldom is he remembered without some addition importing
his worth, (...), the Shepherd of special note, the good Shepherd, the great
Shepherd, the chief Shepherd of our souls, are his honorable titles. The
higher his person, the more regard is due unto him; St. Paul argues so, Heb.
2. Contempt cost the Jews dear, and it is to be wished that other men's harms
make us beware.

Secondly, if the son stoop to this calling, what servant (without
intolerable pride) may think himself too good for it? No man can undervalue
it, but withal he must needs disgrace his blessed Savior. I note this the
rather, because it checks the Gentry, the Nobility, that think so well of
their birth, that they think scorn to be of our Coat. In the beginning of
the world for many hundred years, the Kingdom and the Priesthood did concur
in the same person, when they were severed they were divided between two
brethrene Moses and Aaron; yea at this day Christian Kings have somewhat of the
Clergy conferred on them at their Coronation, and they disdain not to be
reputed mixed persons. I will not remember those Senators and Officers of State
that in the Primitive Church became Clergy men, nor the Princes that in the
Church of Rome at this day undergo our calling, though according to the
fashion of that corrupt Church with more policy than piety. Only this I will
say, that seeing our calling in the state of grace is to be Kings and Priests,
he is unworthy as a private person to have this honor that scorns it in a
public one, which has an addition not a diminution, and makes them Fathers
which were before but Sons; the enlarging of the Prerogative should vindicate
it from contempt, especially seeing therein we have communion with Christ. And
let this suffice for the first Enquiry.

The second Enquiry must be into the meaning of the words. I told you they
mean nothing but the pastoral care of Christ. In the delivery whereof the
first thing that I observed in the text was the Shepherds furniture, and
thereof the first part appeared to be his Authority, for it is his Authority
that is noted by the Staves.

The Original of this phrase is partly historical, and partly mystical, the
history is briefly this. The first Patriarchs (as it appears in Genesis)
were for the most part Shepherds, and yet to them being such, God did commit
both ecclesiastical and civil power. In an honorable remembrance hereof,
when the Church of domestical became national, the title continued still, the
Priest, the Prince, both were called Shepherds, and each is said to have his
Shepherds staff, Moses no less than Aaron, and Aaron no less than Moses;
though in time the Princes Staff was changed into a Scepter, and the Priests
into a Crocier, yet are both monuments of the old Shepherds staves. This is
the Original of the phrase which we find in the Rituals.

But I may not conceal from you a later birth of the Crocier; we read it in
that part of the Civil Law which is intuitled Consuetudines feudorum, there
you shall find that after the translation of the Roman Empire unto the
Germans, the form of inuestiture of any person with Office or Land was per
traditionem baculi, the party doing his homage was invested by receiving of a
Staff. As our original is from those Nations, so are their customs retained
amongst us; when the great Officers of the Court, of the Crown, are created,
they have a staff delivered them, and Copie-holders in Court Barons are
admitted by the delivery of a Wand: Bishops holding large Temporalities did
homage for them, and were invested with them for many years per traditionem
haculi and annuli, by receiving a Staff and a Ring from their Sovereign from
whom they held their Temporalities. About this manner of Inuestiture the Popes
never left wrangling with the Emperors, and with other Kings, until by Peter's
keys, and Paul's sword, excommunicating them and vncrowning them, he wrested
it from their hands, and exempted the Clergies person from the Oath of
Allegiance, farther than it was subordinate unto him, and made himself Master
of all such Inuestitures, to the prejudice of all Christian Kings and States.
But we must learn to distinguish the old Symbolicall Staff from this
Historical, and not confound the power spiritual which a Pastor has from
Christ, with the temporal which he deriueth from Princes; the confusion has
shed much Christian blood, and we must take notice of this, that we never be
engaged in the like unjust quarrel. But enough of the History.

There is a mystical meaning which the holy Ghost aymeth at in mentioning the
Staff, and that is the Analogy between the care that is taken for
irrational sheep, and that which must be taken for the rational; God that
trusts Princes and Pastors with the government of his people, will have them
to set before their eyes a Jacob feeding Labans sheep, or a faithful
Shepherds care, and thereof does he put them in mind in this phrase.

But I forget my principal Note; I told you that the Staff is the
Hieroglyphick of power, and indeed power is here meant, Virga potentiae, as it
is called in the tenth Psalm, it is a Rod of power; the titles that are given
unto Pastors they all sound superiority; Episcopus, Oeconomus, Bishop,
Steward, Leader, Architect, Ghostly father. This cannot be denied unto the
Pastor, of whom this Text speaks, who (as you have heard) is not Seruus but
Dominus, is Lord of the house, and therefore rules (...), with sovereignty and
with power.

Touching the Servants there may be some question, because to them is
committed only (...), they are only Ministers. But their Ministry must not
be mistaken; for it is (...), they do administer indeed, but it is the power
of Christ that they administer, so says Christ himself, As my father sent me,
so send I you. A Steward is a servant in a house, but such a servant as under
the master commands the whole family; we are Stewards, the Keys are
committed unto us, we are to rule, not to be ruled by the people.

But this Power brancheth it self into two parts; for there is baculus
directionis, and baculus correctionis, the Pastors power is first to teach the
people their duty, they must receive his words as the words of God, and Gods
words are commanding words, and they are binding Laws; it is not left unto the
peoples choice whether they will or will not obey them, they proceed from the
staff of direction, that directs in foro Poli not Soli, the consciences of
Christian people.

As the Power is of direction, so is it of correction also; not civil. It Is
true that the Bishop of Rome has patcht such a power to his pastoral Staff,
but we can claim none such from Christ; our Censu^es are spiritual, we bind
or loose men's souls, we remit or retain their sin^es, open or shut the
Kingdom of Heaven unto them. But though the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but spiritual; yet are they mighty (through God) to the pulling down
of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.
and to revenge all disobedience. Justly therefore is this branch of Power to
be awed that is contained in the Staff, the staff that is the emblem of the
power of Correction.

I will observe no more upon the first part of the furniture, the Pastors
Authority that is noted by the Staves. I come on to his Abilities, which are
gathered out of the properties of the same Staves, whereof one is the Staff of
Beauty, the other of Bands.

I might tire out both my self and you if I would scan the several
conjectures of the learned commenting on these words; some by them
distinguishing the Sheep, either into the Families of Noah and Abraham, or
into the Nations of Jews and Gentiles; some distinguishing the Shepherds into
good and bad; some the furniture of the good Shepherds which they will have;
some to be the Law of Nature, and the written Law; some restrain it only to
the written word, and find in these words the sweetness of the Gospel, and
the severity of the Law. The grounds and mistakes of these several opinions I
list not to discuss, the truest Commentary is that which we find in this
Chapter. At the tenth verse then we read that when the Shepherd brake his
staff of beauty he disanuld with that fact his Covenant that he had made with
all people; And what was that but the Covenant of Grace* At the fourteenth
verse where he breaks the staff of bands, he adds, that by that fact he
did dissolve the brotherhood between Israel and Judah; And what is that but the
band of Charity? Whereupon it fairly follows, that these words do note the
properties of the Shepherd; the properties of the Evangelical Shepherd, who
must be well seen in the Gospel, and keep Christians at one; Verity and
Charity are meant, the one by the beauty, the other by the bands of the Staves.

And indeed these are the two grounds of a blessed Church; Veritate nihil
pulchrius, nihil fortius Vnitate, there is nothing that allures more than the
Gospel, or that holds faster than Charity; the loss of either of these will
much distress a Church. For it will thereupon be either deformed, or
distracted; deformed with heresy, if it want the truth, and distracted with
Schism, if it want charity; it will become Tohu (...) Bohu, without shape,
and void, return to its former Chaos. Christ the great Shepherd was
Melchisedech, King of Righteousness, and King of Salem also, that is, King of
Peace; he not only beautified his Church with Righteousness, but fortified
it with Charity also. And whatsoever Pastor under him does not herein resemble
him, he is too like the Idol shepherd mentioned at the end of this Chapter,
and has either his arm dried up, or his right eye darkened, he wants a staff
of beauty or of bands, and so will be the cause through defect of his
Abilities, that the Church be either despised by Schism, or with Heresy
disfigured.

But let vs^ake these Abilities asunder, and look into them severally. First
into the staff of beauty.

The word in the Original signifies Pulchritudinem and Suauitatem, Fairness
and Sweetness, whereof the later is a consequent upon the former; for the
fairest persons, if they degenerate not, are most commonly the sweetest
natures. Certainly it was so in our Savior Christ, who was the fairest of the
Sons of men, and grace was poured in his lips; and so the Gospel that
comes from him bears both the characters of his nature, fairness, and
sweetness. Touching fairness Cyrillus Alexandrinus on this text gives this
Note, (...), the doctrine of the Gospel is eminently beautiful; but he adds
well, (...), we must not mistake, it is no corporal but a spiritual beauty,
for the Kings Daughter is all glorious within.

But the corporal may teach us what to observe in the spiritual: Corporal
beauty consists of figura and forma, proportion and complexion; every member
of a body must have his just lineaments, and his proper die, and then the body
is beautiful. Something answerable hereunto there is in spiritual beauty, in
the beauty of the Gospel; it teaches how all men should be ranged in their
orders, and rest contented with their measure of gifts; it teaches the true
reference between parents and children, masters and servants, magistrates and
subjects, pastors and people; yea between pastors, it notes the inequality,
which it makes good by the Analogy which is between our natural body and
the Church. As it does thus teach proportion, so does it complexion also; the
blood of Doctrine, as Tertullian calls it, is defaecated, cleansed from all
earthly dreggs and dross, it endures no earthly and grouelling affections, no
melancholy or dismal cogitations. As no humor more than melancholy does
deforme the beauty of complexion, no more is any thing more opposite to the
truth of the Gospel, than sour and hellish desires and thoughts. But unto
beauty it is not enough that the blood be purged from melancholy, the color
will not be viuidus and floridus, fresh and cheerful, if the blood be either
dilutus or sublimatus nimis, too watery through phlegm, or too fiery through
choler, the one makes a fallow complexion, the other too high colored. And
verily the Gospel does not humor men, nor feed their raw and undigested
vanities whereunto our adle heads, and evil hearts, while we affect commerce
with this world, are prone. As it does not humor the carnal wantonness of
men, no more does it make them Enthusiasts, nor carry their thoughts into the
closet of Gods secrets, there to read what he has not revealed in his word,
it teaches them not to seek the things that are too hard for them, nor to
search rashly things that are too mighty for them; it clippeth the wings of
such soaring spirits with the admonition of the Apostle, Romans 12. Let no man
presume to understand above that which is meet, but that he understand unto
sobriety. The Gospel that works such spiritual proportion and complexion
is justly termed a staff of beauty. (...) (says an old Philopher) no painter
or caruer can limme or grave any picture or statua that in any sort can
represent the exquisite beauty that is in truth. He spoke it of philosophical,
it is much more true of theological truth. The Son of Syrach compares Simon
the son of Onias the high Priest ministering in the Sanctuary, unto the
Morning star in the midst of a cloud, ^cclus. 50.
unto the Moon when it is at full, to the Sun shining upon the Temple of the
most high, to the Rainbow bright in the fair clouds, to the fairest flowers,
the goodliest trees, the richest jewels; he concludes, Wisd. 8.
when he put on the garment of honor he was clothed with all beauty; so
likewise (says the wise man) in the long garment was all the ornament, or (as
some read) all the world, as if all the beauty of the World were concluded
therein: Yet all this was but a transitory Type; Types come short of their
Truths, and things temporal of those things which are eternal: If those were
so beautiful, how beautiful are these? learn the inequality from St. Paul,
If the administration of condemnation were glorious, much more does the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory, for even that which was
glorified was not glorified in this point, that is, as touching the exceeding
glory; for if that which should be abolished were glorious much more shall
that which remains be glorious, 2 Cor. 3. This is excellently represented in
the image of the Church, which we have ^euel. 12. with the Moon, that is, all
mutable and transitory things under her feet, her self was clothed with the
Sun, and had upon her head a crown with twelues stars.

I will not trouble you with the portraiture of the Church: which is made,
Cant. 4. where every limb of her is set forth in its proper beauty. That which
I will only note is, that this beauty came by the Gospel; Cap. 60.
so Esaias foretold, Arise O Jerusalem, be bright, for thy light is come, and
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; and the Apostle confirms it, when
out of another place of the same Prophet he congratulateth the time of Christ's
coming, Cap. 62.
and the publishing of the Gospel by his Ministers with those words, Romans 10.
How beautiful are the feet of them which bring glad tidings of peace? surely
that was the time wherein Christ came to make his Church sine macula and ruga,
without spot or wrinkle, to make heavenly Jerusalem, the perfection of beauty,
as it is called in the Psalm, and described in the end of the Revelation. I
do not now wonder at David's exclamation, O how amiable are thy dwellings? etc.
Psalm 84. and his, One thing have I desired etc. Psalm 27. for he cannot but
be ravished with love that has a sight of this heavenly beauty.

The word does not only signify beauty, but sweetness also; and indeed
Christ was wholly delectable (as we read in the Canticles) his fruit was sweet
unto his Spouses mouth; the Gospel is sweeter than honey, and the honey comb:
the Prophet Esaias compares it to a banquet of sweet wines, of meat full of
marrow; the Gospel, to a marriage feast; his spirit is the spirit of Adoption,
and of Liberty, his burden is light, his yoke is easy: St. Paul, Gal. 4. does
amplify this by the opposition of Mount Sion to Mount Sinai; In a word, Christ
has his name from oil, even sweet oil, to signify the softness and
pleasantness of his nature; Zachary foretold he should come meek unto his
Church; himself bids his Disciples Matthew. 11. Learn of him, because he is
meek; and St. Paul exhorts the Christians by the meekness of our Savior
Jesus Christ. St. Bernard found much sweetness in the name of Jesus also, when
he conceived that it was mel in ore, melos in aure, iubilum in cord, honey in
the mouth, music in the ear, and the very joy of our hearts; so that Christ's
first staff was a staff not only of fairness, but of sweetness also.

And this is for our imitation that are Pastors. At the delivering of the
Crocier we find in the Ritualls, that the Ordainer speaks these words to the
ordained, Accipe baculum Pastoralis officij, vt sis in corrigendis vitijs pie
seuerus; our staff inableth us to strike at sin, but we must never strike
but with tender compassion toward the sinner; in curing of spiritual sores
we must imitate good chirurgions, have Lions hearts, but Ladies hands. This is
that we must learn from the staff of beauty.

I come now to the other staff, the staff of bands, or the second Ability
that must be in a good Pastor. As he must be well skild in the Covenant of
grace, and furnished throughout with Evangelical truth, which is the sweet
beauty of the Church; so must he also be provided of Chariti^, and tender
Christian peace, taking care that the parts fall not asunder the one from the
other; Greg. Nyssen.
(...), when men are come so far as Gods truth, there is nothing they should
prize so much as Christian peace. And this peace depends much upon the
Shepherds staff; Philo Iudaeus.
for (...), it depends much upon the Pastors government whether the people
shall live at peace or no, it depends upon his exemplarie and doctrinall
charity. For Charity is (...) (as Nazianzene speaks) it is loving, nay it
is the mutual love of men; St. Paul speaks more closely to our purpose, when
he says it is (...), Col. 3.
the band of perfection, or the knot of those that are initiated in truth.

And well may it be called a Band; first, quia adhibet impedimenta. There are
two impediments which stay the dissoluing of Societies; the one is, if a man
do no wrong, the other is, if he be not ouerfeeling of wrong done unto him.
Now Charity has both these properties, it is innocent and patient, it does no
evil, and it is long-suffering, it couers a multitude of sins, and takes
heed that it gives no offense; you shall find these properties in the
thirteenth of the first to the Corinths. As it is accompanied with these
impediments, so is the nature of it to work Society; for Charity is virtus
vniens; as the soul knits together the heterogeneous parts, even so does
Charity different persons, and makes them all as one, by it is wrought the
communion of Saints.

But the staff is not of a band but of bands, which implies that the Charity
is manifold. And indeed so it is; there is the love of God and the love of our
Neighbor, each is a band: St. Chrysostom compares one to the body, the
other to the soul; the body without the soul, and the soul without the body
cannot make a man; no more can the love of God without the love of our
neighbor, nor the love of our neighbor without the love of God make up a full
Charity; if the love of our neighbor be wanting, we want the body of
Charity, and we want the soul, if there be wanting the love of God: put
both together, and then the Charity becomes vincula, bands.

Some observe a threefold love in Charity, Amorem honestum, iucundum, vtilem.
It is true that these three are reckoned in Philosophy for distinct, and may
go asunder, as the vegetable, sensitive, and reasonable souls do; yet as
none has a reasonable soul but he that has all three: so does Charity
contain all three kinds of Love; 1. honest love, because of virtue, without
which there is no charity; 2. pleasant love, because of familiarity, for
Charity is sociable; 3. profitable love, for none of them that are in Charity
thinks any thing of that which he possesses to be his own, but they have
all thing common, Acts 4. common quoad (...), though not quoad (...), for their
mutual use, though without prejudice to their distinct propriety. This is the
second reason why Charity is called bands.

A third reason is, because as Chrysostom wittily observes, by Charity,
(...), he that is but one becomes many; look how many friends a man has,
so manifold is he, he has so many bodies, so many souls, so many pair of
eyes to watch for him, so many pair of ears to hear for him, so many tongues
to speak for him, so many feet to go for him; finally, so many pair of hands
to fight, or to work for him; so may Charity make a thousand to be but as
one, and one to be a thousand times himself; worthily therefore is Charity
called bands, and reckoned the property of one of Christ's staves. And indeed
Christ came especially to recommend this unto the world; it is the new
Commandment that he gave unto his Church, that we should love one another, and
tells his John 13. that by loving one another all men shall know that they are
his Disciples; for the spouse of Christ is as an Army with banners, Cant. 6.
and Jerusalem is as a City that is compacted in it self, Psalm. 122. she is
vna in vno, one Church under one head Christ; so much these compounds import,
(...), Ephesians. 2.3.
etc. they note all the effects of the staff of bands. Let this suffice
concerning the second Ability.

Having thus unfolded the meaning of the Staves, I must now show you, how
Christ furnished himself with them, for so he says, I took unto my self.
Which words look back unto the fourth verse, where the Father lays the
Commandment upon him, saying, Pasce oues, feed the sheep appointed to the
slaughter; here he professes his obedience to his Father; signauit Pater, the
Father designed him, and he came into the world to do his will that sent him,
John 6. St. Paul gives the rule, No man takes the honor of Priesthood but he
that was called of God as was Aaron, therefore Christ took not unto himself
this honor to be made the High Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my
son, this day have I begotten thee, Heb. 5. gave it to him. And if Christ did
not take this honor before it was given, much less may any other without a
lawful calling intrude into this sacred calling, and entermeddle with these
holy staves.

Secondly, Christ took unto himself; though this phrase may be here (as it
is elsewhere) Pleonasticall; yet is it not amiss to observe that Christ did
qualify himself with the Staves before he did exercise himself in his
calling. Many venture to be heads before they are worthy to be hands or feet,
(...) (as Nazianzene speaks) purify others being impure themselves; (...),
such men may rather go for stage players than grave teachers of the people:
for a grave teacher must first have the staves before he use them; secondly, he
must work the effect of the staves into himself, before he endeavor to work
others by them. But many (says Nazianzene) (...), wrangle like Artisans, to
make their party good, rather than like grave Divines keep the people at one.
Thirdly as a Pastor must have both the staves, so must he take them in their
order, the staff of beauty before the staff of bands; for the holy Ghost
goes before the Catholic Church, 1 Timothy 3.
and communion of Saints, yea the Church is (...); so that he is not in the
Church that is not for the Truth; there can be, there may be no unity where
there is not verity.

There can be none; the History of Heretics in Epiphanius and Irenaeus
testify as much; there may be none, for what communion has light with
darkness? the enmity between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the
serpent is (...), a sacred war, neither may the Church entertain any peace
with those that have war with their Savior Christ.

You have seen how Christ did furnish himself sutably to his calling; it
remains that I show you now in few words how he did employ his furniture to
the good of his charge.

His Charge is called by the name of a flock, which I told you is, though a
figurative, yet an implicit definition of a Church. For a flock is a
congregation of sheep, and every member of the Church is a sheep; so they are
often called, and all true members are so indeed. But we must remember a
distinction of St. Austins, Lib. 4. de Baptism 9. cap. 5.
multae oues foris, multi lupi intus, there be many wolves in sheep
clothing, and many sheep in wolves skins; both in time will appear in
their proper hue, and a sheep shall be only he that is a true member.

I will not enter upon the manifold analogy that is between a member of the
Church, and a sheep; I will keep my self to the words that go immediately
before my Text, wherein they are called grex occisionis and pauperes terrae,
they are appointed to bear the cross, that is their portion in this world;
and the world thinks it cannot be better occupied than in slaughtering of
them. Neither are they thus used only by their enemies, but by their own
shepherds also; God complains hereof in this chapter, as also in Jeremy 23.
Ezekiel 34. the stories of the Maccabees and Josephus confirm this truth; to
say nothing of the Ecclesiastical story of the New Testament. As they are
appointed to the cross because sheep, so are they pauperes terrae, poor, not
so much corporally, though that often follows the cross, but poor in spirit,
lowly in their own eyes, humble out of the conscience of their own
unworthiness, tractable under ^he hand of their shepherd, and pliable to his
staff; such are sheep that pelong to the fold.

Of such sheep the Church is a flock. Solitariness is a note of saluage^esse
in beasts; for those that are tamed heard and flock together. It is no less
true of rational than irrational sheep; true sheep do fold together, and if
any stray, his complaint will show his propension to the fold; and if any do
stray and not complain, it is to be doubted whether he have the true nature
of a sheep. Which they should observe, that can be contented to live and dye
either excommunicating themselves, or being excommunicated by the Church; a
shrewd argument that they are no sheep. But I must go on.

As this was his Charge, so Christ bestows his furniture upon it; He fed he
flock. I cannot better expound the phrase than to say, he wrought the
properties of the staves into the sheep. Of Jacob a good shepherd, it is
observed, that when he would have speckled sheep, he pild certain wannes,
and laid them in the watering troughes, and when the sheep ^ame to drink, and
were in heat before the rods they brought forth young ^f party colors. And no
doubt but Christ's sheep, if they be spiritually warine, when they come to
drink of the water of life in Gods Church, they would be altered by the
Shepherds staves: Certainly St. Paul says as much of the efficacy of the
Gospel, We all with open face behold, as in a mirror, the glory of the Lord,
and are changed into the same image from glory unto glory even by the spirit
of the Lord.

There is a special reason why Christ is said to feed the flock; because he
made himself food for it: His flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink
indeed, John 6. and with what he fed, with the same must we feed; we must
desire to know nothing amongst our people, but Christ and him crucified. But as
we must so feed, so must we do it discreetly and constantly; the sheep are
not all of one growth, some must have milk, and some strong meat. Secondly,
we must remember that grace is like meat, it must be supplied, otherwise the
sheep will starve; certainly never come to their full growth. Last of all,
neither must the Pastor administer, nor the people expect any better pattern
than that of this great Shepherd; we can have no better furniture than the
staff of beauty and bands; and the people can learn no better Lessons than
Truth and Peace.

WHerefore let us all pray God, that we that are Pastors in our several
places, may execute the judgment of Truth and Peace in the gates of our
Jerusalem, and the People that hear us may profit in the knowledge, and in
the love of God. So shall not these Staves be wanting to us, and we shall be
conformed unto them, and both Pastors and people shall truly and comfortably
sing the three and twentieth Psalm, The Lord is my Shepherd, therefore do I
want nothing, he makes us to rest in green Pastures, and leads us by the
still Waters, he restores our souls, and leads us in the path of
Righteousness for his Names sake. To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
be rendered (...) honor and glory etc. Amen.
A SERMON PREACHED AT A VISITATION At BATHE.
1 COR. 15. verse. 10. By the grace of God I am what I am; and his grace which
was bestowed upon me, was not in vain: But I labored more abundantly than
they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.


SAint Paul testifying to the Corinthians the Resurrection of Christ, and
ranging himself amongst the select witnesses thereof, does at verse the ninth
meet with an exception that might be taken to his former life, and remove all
prejudice to his testimony that might grow herehence. For as he does
ingenuously confess, that he was most unworthy of his sacred calling; so does
he also thankefully acknowledge a wonderful alteration that God had made of
him. And this alteration is the argument of those words that now I have read
unto you.

Touching this Alteration the text will teach us whence it sprang, and wherein
it stood. It sprang from a Cause powerful and merciful; powerful from God;
merciful, for the prevailing Attribute was Grace; from this gracious power, or
powerful grace, the Alteration sprang.

But wherein stood it? in St. Paul's Indowment and in his Employment; in both
we shall find something common to the whole Church, and something proper to the
Clergy.

The Clause that expresses the Endowment is short and dark, I am that I am;
you must resolve and clear it thus, I am a member of Christ, that is an
endowment common to the whole Church; I am also a Minister of the Church, that
is proper to the Clergy. But what I am, I am by grace; by the grace of
Adoption I am a member of Christ; and I am a Minister of the Church by the
grace of edification. Such was St. Paul's Endowment.

Touching his employment the text teaches us two things: first, that he did
not neglect Gods gifts; as he was not empty, so he was not idle, Gods grace
bestowed on him was not in vain: not the grace of Adoption; he was not
careless of a holy life, of the common Endowment: not the grace of
Edification, the proper Endowment, he was no unprofitable servant, neither
stood he in the market place idle when he should labor in his Lords Vineyard.

Secondly unto his use of these gifts there concurred more workers than one;
He tells us Who they were, and What was either of their pre-eminence. They were
two; Himself, I labored; and Gods grace, that labored also with him. Either
of these workers had their pre-eminence; St. Paul had, He labored more than
all; and that in either grace, He striued to exceed all in holiness of Life,
and in the painfulness of his Ministry.

As St. Paul had a pre-eminence in working, so had grace also, it had a
pre-eminence above St. Paul's pre-eminence; yea St. Paul does confess, that
he does owe all his pre-eminence in working to the preheminent working of Gods
grace, I labored more than all; yet not I, but Gods grace that was in me.

When we have thus considered the particular branches, we shall point at two
good observations that arise out of the whole body of the text, they are St.
Paul's Sincerity, and his Modesty. Sincerity, in giving God his due glory;
he ascribes unto God the original, the gifts, the use of whatsoever was good
in him, or was done well by him. And there can be no greater Modesty used by a
man in speaking of himself, than St. Paul expressed here in his extenuating
and correcting speeches; He was a member of Christ, a Minister of the Church,
he mentions neither, he contenteth himself with this commendations, I am
that I am. And for his use of Gods gifts he attributes no more unto himself,
than that which was next unto nothing, Gods grace bestowed on me was not in
vain; so he extenuateth his worth. And because he was to say something more
of himself to stop the mouths of his maligners, I labored more than all,
he presently corrects himself as if he had ouer-reached, he drownes all the
conceit of his own eminency in the contemplation of the much greater
pre-eminence of the grace of God.

I have opened the contents of this Scripture, (which God willing) I shall now
farther unfold, and have an eye in unfolding of them unto this present
occasion. And because they will concern both Pastors and People, I shall
desire both to follow me with their religious attention.

First then we are to see whence the Alteration of St. Paul did spring. I
might in a generality tell you it sprang from Heaven; so we find in the Acts
of the Apostles, De great. and (...). arbitr. cap. 5.
and St. Austine has observed it. And indeed it is no fruit that springs
from the earth; the earth may make men of better become worse, by reason of
man's mutabilitie, and the kingdom of darkness; but if of worse men become
better, the cause thereof must be sought in heaven. Especially, if as St.
Paul, of wolves they become sheep, of blasphemers believers, of persecuters
preachers of the Faith.

But I told you, this heavenly cause is powerful and merciful; powerful, God
is the Cause. And the cause cannot be less than God; for the Alteration is a
Creation, so it is called by St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5. Every one that is in Christ is
a new Creature. Now Creation, as we read in the entrance of our Creed, is a
work of an Almighty power. And indeed it must be so; for it produces things
either ex non ente simpliciter, out of nothing at all; or else ex ente non
disposito, out of that which in nature has no possibility to become that
which it is made: yea St. Paul meaning to shadow our new Creation by the old,
chooses the branch wherein the subject was so far from being disposed, that
it was directly opposite to that which it was made; God which commanded light
to shine out of darkness, is he which has shined into our hearts to give us
the light of the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. St.
Paul, Romans 11. uses another similitude of graffing a branch of the wild Olive
into the true, but contrary to nature: For nature advises to set sweet graffs
into sour stocks; and though it be natural for the stock to be vehiculum
alimenti, to convey the nourishment to the graffe, yet naturally virtus
temperamenti, the quality of the juice is from the graffe, not from the
stock. But in our supernatural graffing it is far otherwise; the branch of
a wild Olive is made partaker not only of the root, but of the fatness also
of the true Olive. Being then a work so contrary to nature, it must needs be a
work of the God of nature. And indeed we learn in St. John, cap. 1. that the
Sons of God are borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God; He of his own will begets us by the word of
truth, that we should be the first fruits of his Creatures, James 1.

As the Cause is most powerful, so is it also most merciful; for the
Attribute that prevails with God in this work is grace. All good gifts
before the fall vouchsafed Angels and men proceeded from his goodness: but after
the fall his favors are ascribed to his mercy, which mercy the Scripture
usually understands in the name of grace; for mercy is nothing else but
saving grace. Now grace then imports free love; Tit. 2.
for it excludes all merit: for, Quis prior dedit? Who ever prevented God in
well doing, that God should make him amends? Grace gives not merenti, to one
that deserves, rather it gives immerenti, to an unworthy person; to man
polluted with his own blood, grace says, Thou shall line, Ezekiel. 16. Yea, dat
contraria merenti, grace is indulgent even before a man is penitent; God
sets forth his love in that when we were enemies Christ dyed for us, Romans 5.
And such was the grace that altered St. Paul (as St. Austin observes) vt tam
magna and efficacissima vocatione conuerteretur Paulus gratia Dei erat sola,
quia eius merita erant magna sed mala; St. Paul does very justly ascribe the
change that was made in him to this powerful and this merciful Cause.

And seeing we are all by nature children of wrath, we must all ascribe our
Regeneration to the same Cause, Tit. 3. It is worse deceit than that of
Alchemie, for a creature to assume unto himself the transforming of a sinner;
God only can change as earthly metals, so earthly men; of vessels of dishonor
make vessels of honor, of vessels of wood make vessels of gold, and of vessels
of wrath make vessels of mercy; Who is found of them that seek him not, and
manifested to them that enquire not after him, Esaias 65. This destroys the
error of the Pelagians: And let them that are received into grace, remember to
whom they are indebted for it, it will make us modest, and not to insult upon
others that have less.

Having found the original of the Alteration, we are now to see wherein the
Alteration stands. I told you the first thing wherein it stands is St.
Paul's Endowment; the phrase that expresses it is, I am that I am: where first
I may not omit the phrase, lest it be mistaken, I will show you the true
meaning of it. For I am that I am, is the style of God, and contains (as the
Jews well observe) the force of his incommunicable name, his name Iehoua;
which gives us to understand that all his Attributes are his nature, that all
in God is God, which cannot be affirmed of any creature; for all are
compounded, and consist of many things besides that which is their nature, yea
whereof they may be stripped, and yet their nature remain; such as are in man
the many qualities both in body and mind. How then does St. Paul usurp a
style that is peculiar unto God? mark the addition wherewith he does qualify
the phrase. The addition is by grace; this differenceth the words, as they are
applied unto St. Paul, from them, as they are applied unto God. God says
absolutely of himself, I am that I am, he is (...), he has his being of
himself: St. Paul also says of himself, I am that I am, but he adds, by
the grace of God; so that to the grace of God he owes his being, and it is he
that has made us, and not we our selves, we are his people and the sheep of
his pasture.

But man has many beings; for he is a little world; he has abodie made of
the elements like the stones upon which you tread; he has a vegetable being,
like the graffe and plants that grow in the field; he has sense and motion
like beasts; he has understanding and a conscience, as all men have in the
world. But none of these beings are properly here meant; there is a being that
goes beyond all these, the being of home theologicus, the being of a man as
Divinity considers him; and Divinity considers him as he is a part of the
Church.

But I told you that the clause is short and dark, I must therefore resolve it,
and clear it, that you may the better understand it. St. Paul then had a
double being in the Church; the being of a member, and the being of a
minister; and he had both these beings by the grace of God. The first was
common to him with the whole Church; I will speak of that first.

Arbor Scientiae spoliauit Adamum arbore Vitae; no sooner did Adam taste of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, but presently he lost all his being
to Godward, or the life of God, his being holy, and his being happy. Now Grace
does properly repair this being, without which it were better not to be than
to be: In which respect by an excellency this communion with God is termed
our Being. Wisdom (says Solomon, Proverbs 8.) causes them that love her to
inherit flesh, that is Substance. Circumcision (says St. Paul, Gal. 5.) is
nothing, nor uncircumcision, but a new Creature: and the Preacher, Eccles. 11.
Fear God, and keep his commandments, this is a whole man. When God then
quickneth us that are dead in sins and trespasses, he calls those things
which are not (...), as things that then begin to have a being.

This is the cause why the three theological Virtues wherein consists the true
being of a Christian, have given unto them in the Scripture, expressly or by
implication the name of substance. First, Faith. We are made partakers of
Christ (says St Paul, Heb. 3.) if we hold fast (...) the beginning of our
substance, that is, our Faith in Christ; for he infers it upon this
exhortation, Take heed, Brethren, lest there be at any time in any of you an
evil heart of infidelity to depart away from the living God. Secondly,
Charity. If I have no charity I am nothing, 1 Cor. 13. if without charity
there be no substance in man, then charity is his substance. Thirdly, Hope.
St. Paul describes that by the word (...), in that phrase (...); 2 Cor. 8.
for Hope is a joyful expectation of Gods performing what he has promised; so
that substance of rejoicing and joyful Hope are all one. Cyril Bishop of
Alexandria opening those words of the Apostle, Lib 4. Comment. in Esaias. ora^. 2.
My little children of whom I am in travel again till Jesus Christ be formed
in you, says, Formatur in nobis Christus Spiritu sancto diuinam quandam formam
per Sanctificationem and Iustitiam indente; Sic enim in omnibus nostris elucet
Character substantiae Dei; which is all one in effect with that of St. Peter, 1
Pet. 1. By grace we are made partakers of the divine nature. Aben Ezra a Rabbi
of the Jews has a witty conceit of the Hebrew names that signify man and
woman, Ish and Ishah; they have in them, says he, some letters that are part
of the name of God (Jehovah) which if you take away there will remain no other
letters than those that make up the word which signifies fire; the moral of
the conceit is, that their subsistence is in God, and they will both come to
ruin, if they be severed from him. St. Paul, Phil. 3. (with whom we have now
to do) speaks more plainly; though he had many worldly things to stand
upon, and which might seem to make him some body, yet he professes, that he
accounted them all dung and loss^ in comparison of the excellent knowledge of
Jesus Christ our Lord. I would we did all learn of him whence to take, and how
to make the estimate of our being; we would not so ouer-value our nothing, and
undervalue that which only can make us something, as commonly we do. Our true
being stands in our union with God, and communion in his grace; if any man
without these think himself to be any thing, he is indeed nothing, but
deceives himself in his vain imagination; be he worldly noble, or rich, wise
or mighty, if he measure his being by these things, he deceives himself in
his vain imagination. And let this suffice touching the part of St. Paul's
Endowment, which is common to him with all the Church, of his grace of Adoption.

He had another Endowment which is proper to the Clergy, the being of a
Minister; And this was the gift of grace, the grace of Edification; and is,
though not solely, yet principally intended in this place. That it is a grace
St. Paul observes, Romans 1. Ephesians. 3. He received grace and Apostleship; he does
not usurp, he was neither (...) nor (...). Yea in that he was an Apostle St.
Austin calls it abundantiorem gratiam, an extraordinary grace; a special
trust was reposed in him, a weighty embassage was committed to him, he was made
steward of Gods house, a disposer of the secrets of the Kingdom of God, an
Oecumaenicall both Steward and Disposer; Et ad haec quis idoneus? No man that
is not qualified by grace, and by grace not only called, but enabled thereunto,
as St. Paul was, that was not only an Apostle, but had also Apostolical gifts.

But I said I would have an eye to this present occasion; wherefore I will
enlarge this point as fitteth the present Auditorie.

The grace of a Minister is either inherent or assistant, the first gives
Ability, the second Authority; by grace inherent he understands the
Scripture; by grace assistant he has power to retain and remit sin. Of
these two graces both are requisite to the being (as it were) of a Pastor;
there should be a sufficiency in him unto whom authority is given, and hands
should not be imposed on them which have not a competencie of gifts. And yet it
falls out too often, that through the ambition of ignorant men, and
ouer-facilitie of those that have power to lay on hands, many weak, yea wicked
ones, are honored with that sacred calling, whereunto themselves are no mean
dishonor; who in regard of the grace of inherence cannot say with St. Paul, by
the grace of God I am that I am; inward grace in this kind they have plainly
none. I would they would redeem this shame, and not live to be scandalls of
our Church.

But the sin of such does not impeach their power; they are true, though they
are not fit Ministers. Which must be considered by those which factiously
refuse, or scrupulously forbear to be Sheep under such Shepherds, or to
communicate with them in sacred things; although he come short in regard of
grace inherent, yet God is not wanting to him in regard of grace assistant,
whether he dispense the Sacraments according to Gods ordinance, or present
according to the ordinance of the Church the peoples devotion unto God.

And let this suffice touching St. Paul's Endowment; I come now to his
Employment.

And here I told you, first, that St. Paul did not neglect Gods gifts, Gods
grace bestowed upon him was not in vain. Vain is either empty or idle;
empty is that which has a show but no substance; idle is that whose efficacy
is not answerable to its ability. The grace that St. Paul had was neither way
vain; for he had Gods spirit indeed, not in show only, and his deeds did
bear witness that Gods spirit was in him. In this place the Apostle means
not so much emptiness as idleness; for though whatsoever is empty must needs
be idle, yet whatsoever is idle is not empty; otherwise there could be no
sin of negligence, whereof notwithstanding there is too much in the world.
Negligence of both kind of graces; of the grace of Adoption which is common to
all the Church: for how many be there whose understanding God illightneth with
the knowledge of the truth, that never make use of it in ordering of their
lives, but live as if they knew neither Creed nor ten Commandments? how many
good motions does God kindle in the hearts of many a man, who (notwithstanding)
lives frozen (as it were) in the dregs of his own impure lusts, and those
good motions set him not a whit forwarder toward heaven? Nay, as water that
has been warmed is apt to be bound faster with the frost: so after-lusts are
the more violent by reason of former good motions. But this is a foul neglect
of Gods good gifts. Wherefore let me remember you all in the Apostles words to
follow his good example, not to receive the grace of God in vain: St. Paul did
not, the more grace he had, the better he lived, and so must we; if there be
light in us it must shine forth from us, and they must feel the heat of our
inward zeal, that converse with us outwardly in the world. In a word; we must
all walk in that spirit by which we live: they that boast of Gods gifts let
them show the effects of them; for I have chosen you (says Christ) that you
may go and bear fruit. Gods grace that makes us other men, must make us also
profitable men.

As none of the Church must neglect the grace of Adoption: so must not the
Ministers neglect their grace of Edification; they must not hide their talent,
consult with flesh and blood, be disobedient to the heavenly visions; they
must (...) stir up the grace of God, blow off the ashes that would ouer-cast
it, sound the trumpet, and give timely Alarums, be instant in season and out of
season; being salt, we must ever be seasoners of the world; being light, we
must ever be dispelling the darkness of men; being Architects, we must ever
be building of Gods house; being Husbandmen, we must ever be laboring in
Gods field; finally, being Shepherds, we must ever be attending on Christ's
flock: so was St. Paul, so must we. Otherwise Gods grace is bestowed on us in
vain; our conscience cannot yield us this good testimony which St. Paul
gives here unto himself, it will rather challenge us of our neglect, and the
grieuousnesse of our neglect will be answerable to the gifts which we receive
from God. And God knows there is too much of this neglect of our calling in
many; at whose hands God will require the blood of many perishing souls.

But I will dwell no longer upon this first branch of St. Paul's employment.
St. Paul did not neglect the gifts of God, but unto his use of them there
concurred more workers than one; he does specify them, and the preheminencie
of either of them.

The workers are two; St. Paul, and Gods grace. And here I must put you in
mind, that though in our first conversion we are only passive, yet being
converted we become active also; God only makes us new men, but being new, he
will have us make use of our new understanding, and our new will, and our new
affections, he will have us use them all. And it were gross for us to neglect
our selves when God has given us abilities which we may employ, yea honored
us so far, as to enable us to work out our salvation, and walk the ways
that lead unto eternal life; neither does he ever deserve to come there,
that will not set forward that way. And yet many such wretches have you, that
leave themselves to be carried to heaven by God, while they give themselves
ouer-securely to fulfill their own wicked lusts, that hope well of God, but
themselves do no good at all. And as there be such careless Christians, so
are there careless Ministers also, who presuming upon dabitur in illa hora, do
all things extempore, preach, pray, and what not? as if premeditation and
study did not concern them, but the spirit of God would always supply them,
and give them an extraordinary ability. But this is gross presumption, and
dangerous also, even the high way unto Enthusiasme, Anabaptisme, and all those
mischievous Sects, the banes not of Learning only, but of Religion also.

St. Paul is one worker, but there is another also, which is, Gods grace; God
does not endow us, and then leave us to our free will, if he did so, our
endowing grace would quickly perish or do nothing; therefore he gives a
second grace, to the operant he adds a cooperant. That must work also. The
reason is evident whether you cast your eyes upon the common works of piety,
or else upon the special works of the Ministry. See it first in the special
works of Piety.

If our understanding, and our heart be left in their pure naturals, the one
will never perceive, the other will never savor the things that are of God;
therefore must the one be lightened, the other must be purged by grace;
otherwise they will never comprehend their object, they will never be able to
do any supernatural work: How much less will they be able to do it, their
naturals being corrupted, as by sin they are? But before in the endowment we
found a man endued with grace, and here we find mention made of grace again;
wherefore we must observe, that God vouchsafes a man a double grace, an
habitual, and an actual; a grace that gives him ability, and a grace that
sets his ability on work. Touching habitual grace that is true which St.
Basil has, De Spiritu sancte. c. 26.
it is semper presens, but not semper operans, it may be in us, and yet be
idle; he expresses it by a similitude of the eye sight, wherewith a man may
see oftener than he does see. De Natura and gratia. c. 26.
St. Austin uses that simile more fully to our purpose, vt oculus corporis
etiam plenissime sanus, nisi candore lucis adiutus, non potest cernere, etc. as
the sharpest eyesight can discern nothing except it have the help of outward
light; no more can a man perfectly justified, live well, except he be helped
from above with the light of the eternal Justice. Neither is this cooperation
of grace a transeunt, but a permanent Act; so the same Father teaches. Sicut
Aer praesente lumine non factus est lucidus, sed fit, quia si factus esset non
fieret, sed etiam absente lumine lucidus maneret; sic home Deo sibi praesente
illuminatur, absente autem continuo tenebratur; Gods grace in man is like the
light of the Air, the one steeds our bodily eye so long as it is maintained by
a perpetual influence of the Sun, and the other steeds our souls so long as
it is excited and helped by the holy spirit, and grace will be as unfruitful
without this help of the Spirit, as the light of the air will be fading if
you intercept the influence of the Sun. So that a man's soul must be like
unto the Land of Canaan, upon which the eyes of the Lord were from the
beginning of the year to the ending, to give it the former and the later
rain, Deuteronomy. 11. our sufficiency and our efficiencie must be both from God.

Neither is this second grace needful only for the work of Piety, but for the
works of the Ministry also; the Lamps that burn in the Temple must
continually be fed with oil; St. Paul though he calls us Laborers, yet
he calls us (...), there is another Labourer with us. And indeed, as Moses
told God, If thou will not go with us, send us not hence; so uncomfortable
were the work of the Ministry, were it not for Christ's promise, Lo I am with
you until the worlds end; if he did not hold the stars in his hand, they
would quickly become wandering, quickly become falling stars. Besides our selves
therefore we must acknowledge another Worker.

Having found the two workers, we must now see what was either of their
preheminencie. First, the preheminencie of St. Paul, He labored more than all;
the word all must be understood not collectiuely but distributiuely. He was not
so arrogant as to equal himself to the whole either Church or Ministry, but
to any one he might well equal himself; he might well affirm that not any one
did equal him in labor. But it is a question whom he means by All, whether
only false Apostles, or also true. There is no doubt but he went beyond all the
false Apostles, if he went beyond the true. And he went beyond the true; it is
evident, if you consider the circuit of his travel, which is described Romans
15. and in the Acts; especially, if you add that he planted Churches
wheresoever he came, and enlarged the Kingdom of Christ, (...) as himself
speaks. Add hereunto his many Epistles sent to so many remote places and
persons, so profoundly opening the mysteries of salvation, and resolving the
hardest knots thereof. But above all things take notice of the two Supporters
of his pains, with which no man ever bore himself out more resolutely, they
are the prouerbiall, Sustine and Abstine. How did he despise all profit, all
pleasure, that would take no salary for his pains, but labored with his own
hands that he might make the Gospel of Christ free? that when he might lead
about a Wife, a Sister, as Cephas, and the other Apostles did, made himself an
Eunuch for the Kingdom of heaven. You see what his Abstine was, or despising
of profit and pleasure. As for his Sustine, enduring of afflictions, that was
no less remarkable; read but the eleventh of the second to the Corinths,
there we find them collected to our hands; and what kind of Affliction is
there, which we do not find there? if you read it you will say he was a
manifold Martyr. I cannot dwell longer upon this point; only this I observe,
though no man can suffer or abstain more than he should, or labor beyond his
duty (supererrogations of any of those kinds are Popish dreams, as they
expound them) yet may one man go far beyond another, and some there are
which are Miracula hominum, they may rather be admired than imitated; And such
was St. Paul.

Neither was he such a Pastor only, but such a Christian also; and indeed his
Sustine and Abstine must be referred to his grace of Adoption, though they did
attend his grace of Edification. But if that will not suffice, see how he did
buffet his body and keep it under, lest while he preached to others, himself
should become a reprobate, 1 Cor. 9. when he was buffeted with the messenger of
Satan, 2 Cor. 12. he never left importuning Christ with his prayers, till
Christ answered him, My grace is sufficient for thee, my strength is made
perfect in weakness: his constant care was to keep an inoffensiue conscience
toward God and men, Acts 26. But above all places, read and exemplify those
two memorable descriptions of a true religious heart, striving against sin,
Romans 7. and making toward heaven, Phil. 3. you cannot better see his Piety,
and learn to bring your own to a commendable highth, than by profitably
reading of those places. You shall learn thus much also, that factus
Christianus, is much more pious than is natus; he that out of a forlorn state
is by the mercy of God brought to the state of grace, when he is come to the
years of discretion, does abound much more in the fruits of righteousness,
than he that is borne in the state of grace: and so will every true converted
sinner abound more than he that never took a grievous fall.

But I must hasten to the preheminencie of Grace; a preheminencie beyond St.
Paul's preheminency, even by the testimony of St. Paul himself, Not I, but the
grace of God that is with me, he corrects himself as if he had presumed too
far. Where mark, that though a man work with grace, not only per effectum,
but also per consensum, not only to the producing of the effect, but also
understanding and willing it (for he is instrumentum rationale, and God does
not deal with men as with blocks and bruit beasts) yet is a man but (...), an
Instrument, the principal Agent is the grace of God. And although there be two
workers, yet must they not be reputed coordinate but subordinate, neither does
man work otherwise than as he is moved by grace; and the children of God are
led by his spirit. Whereby you may gather how wicked a doubt that is which now
does perplexe the Church, Whether (forsooth) our will determines Gods grace, or
Gods grace determines our will, in the point of justification; Certainly St.
Paul thought the point out of question, when he used this correctiue, Not I,
but the grace of God that is with me; mecum, or quae in me. The grace of God
does not cooperate with our free will except it be first regenerated by grace.
Therefore the defense of free will is idly gathered hence, seeing Papists mean
it in actu primo, and St. Paul speaks here de actusecundo.

He is most unthankful then, and so unworthy of grace, that does not give the
pre-eminence to the grace of Adoption cooperant in all his works of piety.
And so to the cooperant grace of Edification must we give the glory of all the
works of our Ministry; Paul planteth, and Apollo waters, it is God that
gives the increase; we have heavenly treasures, but we convey them in earthen
vessels; the foolishness of preaching is ours, the demonstration of the Spirit
is from Heaven; Non vos estis qu^ loquimini, sed Spiritus Patris, Matthew. 10.
we speak the words, God opens the heart; we wash with water, Christ with
the Holy Ghost; we give the bread and wine, Christ his body and blood; Ros
coelestis sacit messem terrestrem, we may not think better of our selves than
of Ministers, the power of whose work depends on the Spirit of our Master;
we are (...), but Christi, a second grace is the cause why our first is not
frustrate: so was it before the fall, much more is it so now.

I have done with the particulars of my text; two things I gathered out or the
whole body of it, which I will note in a word. The first is St. Paul's
sincerity, who gives the glory unto God of the original of the gifts, and
of the use of the gifts wherewith he was endowed; condemning all sacrilege of
this kind. What God told Zorobabel re-edifying the Temple of the earthly
Jerusalem, the same is fulfilled in the restoration of our heavenly, neither
by army, nor strength, but by my Spirit (says the Lord of Hosts) men shall
bring forth all the stones thereof with shouting, crying grace, grace, Zach. 4.
Therefore let us say, Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give
the praise; for of thee, and through thee, and for thee, are all things; all
things that belong to the being of thy Church, the being both of Pastor and
People; Let him that glories, glory in the Lord.

As St. Paul deals sincerely in regard of Gods glory, so does he also
modestly in regard of himself; as he extolleth God, so does he abase himself;
witness the extenuation of his endowment, of his employment, and the
correction of that speech wherein he might seem to value himself at too high
a rate. I cannot stand to amplify this virtue of his, though the pride of our
nature deserves to have it amplified, that it may be admonished thereby; I will
only commend unto your meditation King David's Psalm, Lord I am not high
minded, I have no proud looks etc. and Christ's exhortation to us to become as
little children; he that exalts himself shall be humbled, and that
humbles himself shall be exalted. Let us not therefore be ashamed to cast
down our selves, that the Lord may lift us up; and seeing our help stands
in the Name of the Lord, and without Christ we can do nothing; for quis te
discreuit? and what have thou that thou have not received? because it is he
that works in us both to will and to do, let us continually pray, Lord make
speed to save us, Lord make haste to help us, save and help both Pastor and
People, that both may truly say with St. Paul, By the grace of God I am that I
am, and every one may have this sweet repose of conscience, Gods grace was not
bestowed on me in vain.

Finally, the Apostle ascribing before his sins to himself, and his virtue
to God, does teach, that we are sufficient to our own ruin, not so to our
rising, according to that of Hosea, Destruction tua ex te, etc. Therefore the
Minister must with meekness teach the contrary minded, 2 Timothy 2.

I have set before you an exact pattern of a good Pastor and Christian, we
should all endeavor to conform thereto; but this is rather to be wished than
hoped, because of the frailty of our nature. Wherefore a timely survey of the
Church is requisite; to make such a survey is the reason of this meeting. The
world has many Saules, blasphemers, oppressors, wicked livers, but you use to
present All as Paul's, you say All is well, when every man may see that much is
amiss. Remember that this is Iudicium ante iudicium, a medicinal Judgment
before a mortal, the judgment of man to prevent the judgment of God, Do not
by cruel indulgence exempt any from the just censure of the Church, to expose
your selves and them, to the intolerable vengeance of God. Rather let us all
join, of Saules to make Paul's; that so we may repair the decays of the
Church, and hear a comfortable doom when we all come before the Tribunal
seat of Christ.

THe Lord give us all this effectual grace, the undoubted pledge of eternal
glory.

He that has begun in you a good work, perfect it till the day of the
Lord. Amen.


IHS

A SERMON PREACHED IN TRINITY CHVRCH IN WINCHESTER AT An ASSIZES. 1610.
EZRA 7. verse. 26. And whosoever will not do the law of the Lord thy God, and
the Kings law, let him have judgment without delay, whether it be to death, or
banishment, or confiscation of goods, or imprisonment.


THese words that I have read unto you, are the close of a Commission, granted
by Artashasht King of Persia, at that time also King of the holy Land, unto
Ezra a religious Priest, and learned Scribe of the Jews.

This Commission consists of many branches; the last commands the creating
of Judges in the Territory of Iewrie: concerning whom it is expressed How they
ought to be qualified, and Whereunto they are authorized. Their quality is set
down verse. 25. their authority is the argument of my Text; a great authority,
because it is of the Sword, the King gives this power that biddes them give
Judgment.

But that their power may be as good, as it is great, they must use it against
malefactors; so says the King, against them that will not do the law: and
against them they must use it so, that, first, they frustrate not the end of
the law. A judgment unseasonable, is unprofitable, they must therefore give
judgment without delay. Secondly, they must not sway the indifferency of the
law; to have respect of persons in judgment is not good, they must then give
judgment against whomsoever, whomsoever will not do the law.

But there are laws divine and humane; the Judges must proceed against the
violaters of both, against them that will not do Gods law, against them that
will not do the Kings law; but with two cautions: they must take heed that the
God be the God of Ezra, the true God, they must no: maintain false religion;
and they must not forbear to give judgment against them that violate the
kings laws, though he be a king of Persis; a false religion does not hinder
him from being a lawful Sovereign, the Judge must not foster seeds of
rebellion. They that violate the laws of that God, of this king, the Judge
must draw his sword against them.

But how far may he draw it? and how deep must he strike with it? Surely so
far as the Magistrate is Gods instrument for the peoples weal, so far may
he be his instrument for their woe. His providence reaches to their lives,
livings, and liberty, so far may his vengeance reach also; thus far he may
draw his sword. But he must give no deeper wound therewith to offenders, than
offenders give to the law; the degrees of punishment must answer the degrees of
offenses, some must dye, some be fined, some restrained, every one as he
deserves.

You see the substance of this Scripture, and withal conceive that thereon we
must consider of these two points; The power, and the use of the sword, and the
use twofold, lawful, and full: I speak to them that have understanding,
therefore need I touch these particulars but briefly; but that I touch them not
unprofitably, I beseech you in the fear of God to judge what I say.

And first some may demand, why being to speak in the name of God unto Judges
sent from a Christian king, I remember unto them the instruction of a king
indeed, but a heathen king, such an author as may much lessen your regard of
the matter. It may, but not except it be mistaken. For besides that it is
correspondent to the like in Moses, and the Prophets, Ezra acknowledges in the
next verse that this Commission was indicted by divine inspiration, God put it
into the heart of the King. And were it not so, yet it is of no small moment,
to hear reason concord with religion. The use of this power is the more
obseruable, when it is enjoined by the pen, not only of God, but also of man;
yea the less likely a Heathen King is to write it, the more faulty a Christian
Judge, if he set light by it. Hear then what is your power, it is to give
judgment.

But judgment is either of Discretion, or Jurisdiction, the first is common to
all, the second belongs but to a few, all may discern right from wrong, but
all may not right them that suffer, or correct them that do wrong. He that
takes the sword vngiuen, shall perish with the sword, as Christ told Peter,
Mat. 26. and told it him when he was too busy with his sword; it is not given
to every man. And it is well that it is not given; our affections do with such
a false light delude our judgments, that where there are scarce moates, we see
great beams in other men's eyes; but beams in our own are so insensible,
Matthew. 7.
as if they were not so much as moates. And as we apprehend, so would we
proceed; Our strength would be the law of unrighteousness, Wisd. 2. and as
Tacitus well notes, Malice the more unjust it is, the more violent: How many
Cains would there start up in the world, that would kill their own brother
Abel, only because his deeds were good, and theirs evil? And if some would
not be so unnatural, yet would they be so unreasonable, as Simeon and Leni, of
whom their own father pronounced, Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce; and
their rage for it was cruel, Genesis 48. we are so partial and impotent when
we have the law in our own hands, and may satisfy our own lusts, that we
will proceed without cause, or at least above measure.

God knowing this vnbridlednesse of our nature, has laid this charge upon all
private men, Avenge not your selves, but give place towrath; for vengeance is
mine, and I will repay, says the Lord, Romans 13. Whatsoever therefore they
pretend of the laws of honor that apologize for Duels, in a civil, in a
Christian common weal, they should be reputed no better, and it were good if
they did fare no better, than murderers; they would not be so common, if they
were branded with their true name, and had their just reward. Private men may
not revenge.

But who may? It is only his right that is the Lawgiver, or theirs that hold
from him, to recompense every man according to his deeds, Gods law is, Deuteronomy.
19. that when two strive together they shall stand before the Lord, even before
the Judges, where the Judges are, there the Lord is, Psalm. 82.1. God stands
in the assembly of Gods, he judges among Gods, the Apostle therefore calls
them the Ministers of God, Romans 13. So that a Judge does not only represent the
person of a King, but is in part with him the Deputy of God. When the burden
was too heavy for Moses, God assisted him with the Seventy, but mark how he
inaugurated them, He took of the Spirit of Moses, and conferred it on the
Seventy, intimating his immediate presence, and concurrence with them.
Wherefore what Shecaniah spoke to Ezra, cap. 10. when he lamented the
disordered lives of the Jews, that must I say unto you, Arise, for the matter
belongs unto you, be of good comfort, yea and courage too (for this age
moves more than tears) and do it, Give Judgment; God and the King are your
warrant, you may take the sword. But your power must be put in practice, you
must use it against Malefactors; Peccare and peccantes non cohibere iuxta
putato (says Agapetus to the Emperor) the proper sin of the Magistrate, is,
not to repress sinners, and sinners are they that do not the Law.

Judgment has two works, as the law has two parts. The parts of the Law are
Proeceptum and Sanctio, the works of judgment are, Conviction and Execution.
The King follows this method in his commission, he will not have any
executed, before he be convicted. St. Basil in an Epistle to Eustathius Bishop
of Sebastia, does excellently describe the manner of the Judges proceeding in
his days, Quirerum potiuntur in hoc mundo quando facinorosum aliquem sunt
vindicaturi cortinas obducunt etc. The Judges in temporal causes, when they are
to sentence a malefactor, retire themselves, desire to hear what the wisest of
their assistants can say in defense of the arraigned, they pause long,
sometimes beholding the prisoner, sometimes reflecting their eyes upon
themselves, as communicating with him in the same nature, and feelingly bemone
his case whose life they must cut off, not moved thereunto by any passion of
their own, but performing that service which is undeniably imposed upon them
by the Law. The Law then must speak before the Judge, and not the Judge before
the Law; for iudicium legis is iudicium solius rationis, but iudicium hominis
est iudicium rationis and libidinis, no man murmures if his doom be evidently
the voice of the Law, though it be a very grievous doom, but let it be never
so light if it be only the voice of a man he is very patient that does not
murmr at it. The King therefore does wisely subject his people to the Law,
and wills the Judges to use that for their rule, and try therewith who deserves
the stroke of the sword: and all Judges must subscribe to Ireneus his note,
Indumentum iustitiae leges habet Magistratus; if a Magistrate would be reputed
just, he must refer every man's case to be ordered by the vnaffectioned Law.

Secondly, mark that a malefactor is described, not by doing against the Law,
but by not doing of the Law; the reason whereof is, The first intention of the
Law is the working of the common good. It should be in the world of men, as it
is in the world of other creatures, every thing furthereth the felicity of
the whole, he is not worthy to be a member of a State, by whom the State is no
whit the better. The Romans well understood it, when they instituted their
Censors to inquire into every man's course, and to note them with infamy, that
could not give an account of some good use of their life. It is pitiful to
consider how many there are in this Land, whose glory is their shame (as the
Apostle speaks) the Chronicle of whose life was long since summed up by the
Poet, Nos numerus sumus and fruges consumere nati, etc. no better than ciphers,
if you respect the common good they do; but if you look unto the common
evil, they are the vipers of the State. Surely they do not the Law, which
they should; but which they should not, they do against the Law; they are
daily seen, and who does not know them? I mean riotous swaggerers, and
masterlesse vagabonds; but (by whose default I know not) few are challenged,
fewer punished, and so they swarm because they feel not the sword, and yet
they are the proper object of the sword. For whereas St. Paul, Romans 13.
expresses two uses of the sword, one the laud of them that do well, the
other the terror of them that do evil, this commission remembers only the
later; the reason whereof is given by Ireneus, Quoniam absistens a Deo homo in
tantum efferauit, imposuit ei Deus humanum timorem, vt moderentur ad inuicem in
manifesto positum gladium timentes. Had there been no fall, there should have
been a power indeed in man over man, but it should have been only directive;
it is now coerciue also, we need now, not only correction for doing ill, but
coaction also to do well; and this is the principal employment of the sword;
whereunto accords that of St. Paul, Lex non est posita iusto, if all men were
good, every man would be a law unto himself, but there are few that can
guide themselves, too many that will not be guided by others; Aristotle.
and those the Philosopher calls fools, of whom you know Solomon says, Arod
must be for the back of fools. The Magistrate must use the sword against
them.

And he must use it without delay. Sero medicina paratur, cum mala per longas
conualuere moras, is no less true in the politic than in the natural body,
whether we consider the corrigiblenesse of the delinquents, or the
preservation of the State; both should be intended by judgment, but both grow
desperate through delay. In the heart of every man there are principles of
honesty, which when first lust casts into a slumber, the Magistrate may awaken
to check sin, by holding him in that was running riot; but if the Magistrate
wink, Consuetudo peccati obducit callum conscientiae, by impunitie men will
grow senseless, and shameless; the Preacher confirms it, Because sentence
against an evil work is not executed speedily, Eccles. 8.
therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in them to do evil,
Secondly, sin is like a contagious disease, it will spread like a leprosy,
especially where the law of leprosy is not in force, and where the wicked are
not forced by the stroke of the sword, to cry unto the sound that approach
them, I am unclean, I am unclean, Leuit. 14. And so in time conniuencie
breeds vitia adulta and praeualida (as Tacitus calls them) and a State
becomes like Rome (of which Liuie speaks) Neque vitia, neque remedia far
possumus: though the sins be so strong that they vuioynt the whole State,
yet the patient grows so tender, that it will sooner dye, than endure the
setting of the joints again. How near we are to our Climactericall year, I
leave it to the Statesman to consider; only this I will remember you, that a
Judge which is a Father in his Country, must be a loving Father, and of such a
one Solomon speaks, Pro. 13. He that loves his son corrects him betime.
Or if a loving Father be too mean a precedent, imitate a good King, King
David, Betimes (says he, Psalm. 101) will I rise to root out the wicked. Or if
you will go higher, learn of God, who speaks thus unto Cain, Genesis 4. If
thou do ill, in foribus peccatum, that is, (as the Son of Syrack speaks,
Ecclus. 35.) The Lord will not be slack, the Almighty will not tarry long,
till he has smitten in sunder the loins of the unmerciful, and avenged
himself of the heathen. This I press the rather, because (...) as Nazianzene
speaks) It is a very dangerous thing to be over prodigal of mercy, for it is
nothing else but an occasion of cruelty, when rank sins will not be cured
without letting of great quantity of blood; a little severity in time would
prevent a great deal of cruelty, I will not say, but somewhat that will
resemble it, which the iniquity of the times does hasten to wrest from you,
or, which is worse, to bring upon the State. You see the admonition that
arises from this place, is, that your feet be not nimium lanei, lest your
hands prove nimium ferreae, you must strike soon, that you may not strike too
often, or too deep.

But it is not enough that you proceed timely, except you proceed
impartially; you must proceed against whomsoever. Gods Law is, Deuteronomy. 1. Leuit.
19.
I^^ magnum and paruum iudicabis, Thou shall not regard the poor because he
is poor, nor the rich because he is rich; there is no respect of persons in
God, neither should there be in his Lieutenants: A Judges sentence must be like
a true looking glass, it must represent every man's case, as the glass does
his countenance, neither embellishing, nor deforming it. And no marvel, for
seeing they are Physicians of the State, and sins are the diseases of it,
what skils it whether a gangrene begin at the head or the heel, seeing both
ways it will kill, if the part that is diseased be not cut off? Except this be
the difference, that the head being nearer the heart, a gangrene in the head
will kill sooner, than that which is in the heel: even so will the sins of
great ones overthrow a State, sooner than those of the little ones. But yet I
know not how we are more provident for our natural body, than we are for the
politic, curing in that first the principal parts, and in this the less
principal, if we cure them. The vanity of which course Sigismund the Emperor
well observed in the general Council, when upon the motion that it was fit to
reform the whole Church, one said, Then let us begin at the Minorites, nay
rather (says the Emperor) at the Maiorites; for if the great ones be good,
the mean ones cannot easily be ill: but be the mean ones never so good, the
great will be nothing the better. John 7.
I end this point with the saying of Christ, Nolite iudicare secundum faciem,
sed iustum iudicium iudicate: and I wish you the zeal of Phyneas, Numb. 25.
that spared not Zimri, or Cosbi, though the one were a Princes son of
Simeon, and the other a Princes daughter of Madian; so may it be imputed to you
for righteousness, and to your seed after you.

And thus leaving the conditions to be observed in the use of your power; I
come to the limitations of the power it self.

The limitations are two; first, of the laws. There are divine and humane
laws, the Magistrate must proceed against the violaters of both; against them
that will not do the law of God, against them that will not do the law of the
King: Prou. 24.
he must be Custos vtriusque Tabulae, and look to the observing of Salomons
Fear God and the King; or Christ's, a greater than Salomons, Give unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar's, Matthew. 24.
and unto God the things that are Gods; he must conioyne both, and acknowledge
Dominum, and Dominum, my Lord God, and my Lord the King. But with this
difference, that, the one is an absolute Lord, the other but subordinate; the
one commands as in his own right, the other but in the right of God.

Secondly, as are the Lords, so are their laws; Gods must have the first
place, the Kings but the second: And no marvel, seeing Gods laws are
primitive, the Kings but deriuatiue; nay, the substance of every law is from
God, it is but the determination of some circumstance that is left unto the
power of the King. In laws merely moral, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not
steal, etc. the King has power only in regard of the Sanction, not that God
has left it in his choice, whether these sins shall or shall not be
punished; but to his discretion he has left it how, and how far the good of
the State requires to have them punished. In things merely indifferent,
(because many things are lawful in regard of that liberty which we have from
God, which are not expedient, in that society whereof we are parts with other
men) the Kings laws may impose precepts, and that under pains; but still
providing that the law of nature, yea and of grace too, may stand with them,
and be not impaired by them; nay, nature and grace must in a Christian
Commonweal give the first light unto them. Add hereunto, that Gods laws
bind the conscience immediately, as having power in themselves to make things
good or evil; but the Kings laws bind but mediately, as the King has
authority from God, and is in the promulging of his laws the Minister of God.
So that although you must look to both, yet must not your care be of both
alike, for both are not of like worth; there must be an eminency in the care of
Gods laws, above the care of the Kings. Yea, there is a necessity too, for as
Nazianzene speaks of Iouinian the Emperor, (...), It was Princely wisdom in
him to protect the truth, because the truth could best support him; Kings laws
are never so readily obeyed, as where the people are religiously disposed, and
Magistrates which neglect the care of Gods laws, do but teach the people how
to vilify theirs.

But you must be sure that the God be the God of Ezra, the true God, this is
the first caution; so were these Judges, and so must you be; you must not
maintain false religion, or persecute the true; unto the service of this true
God you may lawfully compel, St. Augustine observes it in the Parable of the
Marriage Feast. And that it is profitable, you may perceive also in the same
Parable; for of many that were compelled, we find but one that came without
his wedding garment, the rest had their part in the Feast. God himself in Osea
says, Cap. 2.
That he will hedge the Jews way with thorns, so that they should not break
through to follow their spiritual fornication, but withal prick themselves;
and mark what follows, the Jews bethought themselves thereupon, and said, I
will return to my first husband; (and that was God) for it was then better
with me, than it is now. Nazianzene, a man of a meek spirit, as appears in
his writings, had obtained some patience to be used toward the Apollinarists,
but when he saw how ill it succeeded, he wrote back to the President of the
Country, (...), My intercession was unseasonable, for these wicked men will
not make so good use of your indulgence, as to be ashamed and reclaimed.
Wherefore as St. Jude observes, you must save some with fear, and pluck them
out of the fire wherein they would burn themselves; you must compel them to
learn and obey the law of the God of Ezra, the true God: whereupon follows
also the next point, which is, they will the more easily be brought to do the
Kings law.

Of observing laws in general, I need say no more than I have, but the
iniquity of the times wills me to remember you, that laws must be obeyed,
though they be the laws of the King of Persia; this is the second caution. The
Proctors of Rome, though they dare not flatly deny it, yet so sophystically
handle it, that what with subiecting the scepter of Kings to the command of
Popes, and exempting of such persons and cases, as seem good unto him, they
undermine what they would seem to yield, and the most they grant is no more,
nor no longer than their Holy Father does, that's too much, or hereafter will
allow them. If he will abrogate all, they must acknowledge none; no laws of a
King of Persia, a King that is not of their religion. Others have learnedly and
sufficiently shaken their grounds, and my Text is an argument of no small
force, to resolve the consciences of such as doubt, whether a different
religion does euacuate the power of a lawful Sovereign. It does not, though
it be a false religion, how much more when it is the true, and the King, our
King, commands only for the God of Ezra, the true God, and enioynes no other
worship of him, than according to his own laws, the undoubted register
whereof is the sacred Word of God? Wherefore you must be as the earth
mentioned in the Revelation, cap. 12. and swallow all those waters that the
dragon casts forth to drown the woman; you must crush these seeds of
rebellion, which aim at nothing but the overthrow of true Religion.

And how must you crush it? even by punishment. And so I come to the second
work of judgment, from the precept to the sanction, which contains the
second limitation of the power.

Wherein I observe, first, how far the Magistrate may draw his sword; Look
how far his providence does reach, so far may his vengeance reach also. The
reward of sin is death, eternal death; to violate Gods Laws or the Kings,
is no less than sin, it should therefore be revenged with eternal death.
But behold here unspeakable mercy; God would have us judged here by men, that
we be not condemned hereafter by him. This is the proper end of the keys, and
the sword, of the power that is in the Prince, and the Pastor. The occasion
draws me to speak of the Sword; yet let me give you this Item touching the
Keys, that malefactors must remember, that for every of their offenses
challengable by the Law of man, they owe a repentance unto God, and the greater
their offense the deeper should be their repentance. Which I the rather note,
because there are too many of them that scarce give glory unto God, when they
suffer by the Law; and if they escape, make no conscience at all of their sin,
as if how soever they speed at the judgment seat of men, they were not to take
heed that they be not cast at the bar of God; which the first Council of
Nice well corrected, when imitating Gods law without prejudice to the civil
sword, it appointed sundry years penance according to the grieuousnesse of
sin. Sed pristino rigori non sumus pares; the Liturgy of our Church says,
that it were to be wished, but the iniquity of the times, that it is not to
be hoped.

Secondly, seeing your power should touch men with a loss temporal, to keep
them from a loss eternal, you see what wrong you do them when you suffer
them to spend their days in looseness, and in a moment (as Job speaks)
though from their beds, they go quick down into hell; how much better were it
for them, if with one hand, or one eye, they might go into heaven, than having
both to be cast into hell? O then let the righteous rebuke them, yea smite
them, rather than that your precious balmes should break their heads, yea slay
their souls; spare nothing that is temporal, so you may preserve them from
the pain which is eternal.

You see how far you may draw the sword. But when you strike your strokes
must be proportionable to their sins; but the proportion must not be
Arithmeticall, but Geometrical, they must be secundum merita, but not aequalia
meritis, you may punish intra, but not vltra medum; so does God, who
notwithstanding does punish in number, weight, and measure, Semper aliquid
detrahit de poenae atrocitate, as Nazianzene speaks (...), he does temper
mercy with judgment; In the hand of the Lord there is a cup, the wine thereof
is red, and it is full mixed, whereof though his children offending drink, yet
only the incorrigible wicked drink the dregs thereof. And the same Father
writing to the Emperors Deputy, reckoning up his virtues, demands this (...);
what shall I say of your clemency? (...), here you decline something; but he
adds, (...), I cannot much blame you, you have God for your pattern, who in
Hosea speaks thus of himself, How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? how shall I
deliver thee O Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as
Seboim? my heart is turned within me, my repentings are rouled together, I
will not execute the fierceness of my wrath etc. You must wisely then temper
judgment and mercy, but so that mercy do not hinder judgment, and yet that
of the two, mercy rejoice against judgment.

And thus have you heard what a Judge may, and must do; he may take the sword,
and must use it against malefactors, but with the conditions of the use, and
limitations of the power specified in my text. The conditions are two, he must
use it timely, and indifferently; the limitations also two, he must extend it
to all transgressions of both Tables, and intend it according to their
transgressions. And the end of all must be, by a temporal punishment to save
the wicked from eternal pain, or if that will not be, that the blood of all
cursing Shimei's, and factious Ioabs, and irreligious Abiathars also, may be
upon their head, and the head of their seed; but upon David, our David, upon
his house, and upon his throne, upon this whole Church and Common weal, may
be peace for ever from the Lord.

MOst mighty, most merciful Lord, who to preserve sincere piety, and secure
peace in the Church and Common weal, have put the sword into the hands of
mortal men, and for the use thereof have advanced them above their Brethren:
we humbly beseech thee, so to sanctify them with thy grace, whom thou have
armed with thy power, that with a watchful and single eye they may observe,
and repress with a severe, yet a tender hand, all unsound Believers, and
inordinate livers, that Church and Common weal may bless them as happy
Supporters of this Christian State, and themselves may with comfort make their
last account to the impartial ludge of quick and dead, and now and ever both
of us may give glory unto thee that art our most mighty and most merciful
Lord. Amen.

Blessed are they that keep judgment, and do righteousness evermore, Psalm
106.


A SERMON PREACHED IN OXFORD AT AN ASSIZES. 1613.
PSALM. 75. Verse. 2, 3. When I shall receive the Congregation, I will judge
uprightly

The earth and all the inhabitants are dissolved, I bear up the Pillars of it.
Selah.


THis Psalm was penned, if not by, surely in the name of some worthy Judge;
the people bless God for the comfort they received by him, and he promises
to redress the disorders of the people: put both their speeches together, and
you have a good Commentary upon the title of this Psalm.

The title is Ne perdas, or rather Non perdes, the Hebrew Al-tasheth will bear
both, and it imports, That a good Judge yields the best hope that a disordered
State may recover, although it be far gone.

Who this Judge is all are not agreed; some guess at him by one part of the
Psalm, some by another, and according to their different apprehension, give
the Psalm, some a mystical, some an historical interpretation; both may
stand true, as elsewhere so here. But being to fit this present occasion, my
purpose is to pass by the mystical, and insist only upon that sense which is
historical.

According to the history, the person that speaks seems to be the king of
Israel; and that king, as it is most likely, is king David. He speaks here
first of his own Tribunal, the Tribunal of a king; but because that was set
at naught by many insolent ones, he calls them to an higher Tribunal, the
Tribunal of God, and tells them, that it is God which from time to time
appoints those that shall judge here on earth, till by Christ he call that
great Assizes, and fit Judge of all the world.

This is the effect of the whole Psalm; my Text contains so much thereof, as
concerns the Tribunal of the king, the Dignity, the Necessity, the Vtility
thereof.

To unfold it, I beseech you to mark therein The person, and His work: the
person is the king, whose work is to judge; I will judge.

But of the judgment we are farther taught, When it shall be executed, and
How. The time is at an Assizes, When I shall receive the Congregation. The
manner is, according to the law to try the uprightness of men's lives, I will
judge uprightly; and that of men's uprightness, the word Mesharim reaches so
far.

As if this were not enough, here is a several reason added to each of these
branches, a reason of calling an Assizes. It is no more than needs, there is
much amiss in the people; The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are
dissolved. And a reason there is, why the king must judge uprightly, and of
uprightness; because if any go awry, if any swerue, he must set and keep
them strait, so says the king, I bear up the pillars of it.

These be the points that are to be considered on this Text, and that they are
to be considered seriously, you may gather by the last word Selah, the
character of a remarkable sentence; it signifies an extraordinary elevation of
the speakers voice, which calls for a more than ordinary attention of the
hearers ear. Consider then I beseech you in the fear of God, the particulars
that I shall deliver thereon, and God grant you a fruitful understanding of
them all.

The first is the Person, and this person is the King; to Judge is his work. At
Jerusalem are Thrones set for judgment, says another Psalm, and those
thrones belong to the house of David; therefore in the Scripture is the kings
throne called not only the throne of Glory, but of Judgment also: yea
therefore of Glory, because of Judgment, the Glory is given to countenance the
Judgment. So that the plaintiffes speech was, though not very courtly, yet
very true, which he uttered to a king denying him justice, Si non vis
iudicare, noli regnare, implying that it is the proper work of a king to be a
Judge: And indeed, God commits the power of judgment immediately to the king,
and to that end sets him upon his own Throne.

But you know what Iethro observed to Moses, Exodus 18.
and what Moses himself in his complaint to God confessed to be true, A king
in his own person cannot bear all this burden, if he attempt it, he vainly
tireth out both himself and his people; wherefore it is Gods pleasure that so
much as he cannot do by himself, he shall do by his officers. Whereupon
arises a good distinction of a kings person; It is either natural, or
politic; and under the politic are contained the Judges. This is clear by
Gods own fact; for when he called the 70. to be assistants unto Moses, and to
that end did qualify them, he says not, that he will take of his own
spirit, though that which he took was the spirit of God, but God is pleased
to call that the spirit of Moses, which he took and gave to the 70. Numb. 11.
giving us to understand, that they were always to be reputed a part of
Moses. Yea, and they communicate also in the same divine title; for I have
said, ye are Gods, contains not the peculiar title of a king, it extends to
every Judge, as Moses teaches in the Law, if it be not plain enough in that
82. Psalm. So then when a king sends Judges, he sends his own ears to
hear the complaints of his people, his own eyes to look into their causes,
and his own mouth to pronounce according to that which is heard and seen. The
person then in my Text, though at first sight it seem to be only the king,
yet now appears to be moreover the Judge, and by I, it is most plain,
(Honorable and Beloved) that you are understood.

The Use of this point for the people, is made by St. Peter, 1. Pet. 2. We
must be subject to every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be
unto the King as supreme, or to Governors sent from him, such as are the
Judges; the improuement of their persons must make them reverend in our eyes.

But there is a Use also, which (Honorable and Beloved) must be made by you;
you may not mistake your ears, your eyes, your mouth: you have of two sorts,
private and public; the private you may use about your domestical affairs,
but to the Bench you may bring none but the public; you must hear there with
none but the kings ears, and you know that a king is Abimelec, my Father the
king, and being Father of his Country, does hear like a Father, that is, most
tenderly; you must see with none but the kings eyes, and you know that My Lord
the King is as ^n Angel of God, discerning good and evil, 2. Sam. 14. you
must speak with none but the kings mouth, and the wisest of kings has
observed, that There is a divine sentence in the mouth of the king, P^ou 16.
his lips shall not transgress in judgment. Nay, whereas even the kings
ears, and eyes, and mouth, are not his own, as he is a king, but Gods, you
must look for your quality yet higher, even to that which is observed in God;
Gods ear, as the Wise man has well abridged that which the Scripture sets
down but in many words, is an ear of jealousy, Wisd. 1. and jealousy is the
best whetstone of feeling attention; The eye of the Lord, as Habakuk speaks,
chap. 1. is a pure eye, it can behold no iniquity. Finally, of the mouth of
God, wisdom it self has observed, All his words are truth, and wickedness
is an abomination to his lips, Prou. 8. I conclude this point with the words of
the Apostle, wrested I confess to our purpose, yet the wrest is not much
amiss; You are not your own, you sustain another person, wherefore
glorify, shall I say the king? if I said no more, it were enough to move you;
but I must say more, glorify God, with your ears, with your eyes, with your
mouth; glorify the king, glorify God, they are the kings, yea they are Gods.

But wherefore are you trusted with them? the work will show; the kings work,
and yours under the king is to Judge. And to Judge, what is it but to Measure?
the Original Shaphat has that for his first signification, as appears in
Mishpot, which signifies a rule; and the Holy Ghost, author of that
mother tongue, does significantly express, that the principal work of a
Judge is to measure, yea, this very word Measure, which is by use English, is
by birth Hebrew, the plain Hebrew Mesurah, whose original is from Sur, which
is, Principem esse, as if to measure were the proper work of a Prince; and the
Imperial definition of justice, Iustitia est constans and perpetua volunt as
ius suum cuique tribusndi, what is it, but a real definition of this measure?
which Solon the renowned Lawgiuer of Athens aimed at also, in the witty
analogy by him observed between coin and laws, making both measures, but
the one in the hands of private men, the other of the Magistrate.

A Prince then, and so a Judge is a measurer; and what wonder? seeing he is the
lieutenant of God, even in that respect wherein God himself is termed a
Measurer. The Heathen Philosopher could say (...), whose words you may expound
by those of the Wiseman, wisd. 16. God does all things in number, weight, and
measure. Nay God himself has witnessed it under his own hand, the hand that
wrote Baltassars doom upon the wall, Mean, Mean, tekel, Thou art numbered, thou
art weighed; and how often in the Prophets do we read of the line, and the
plummet, in the narration of the works of Gods providence? God then is a
Measurer, and under God the King, and under the King the Judge, their judgment
is a measuring.

And the work is most behoouefull; for every man is partial in his own case,
out of self love apt to stretch or shrink a case, as it shall make for or
against him, and out of malice moved either without cause, or above measure; so
that it would go ill with a state were there not a measure, whereby to try how
far men ouerlash or come short in those quarrels that artise. There was no
King in Israel, and every man did that which was right in his own eyes, but
that right was in the eye of the Law plain wrong, it was idolatry, adultery,
robbery, murder, as it appears in the book of Judges. God therefore deals
mercifully with us, that commands there should be a public Standard; as in
the market, that we be not deceived in our provisions, so on the Tribunal,
that we be not wronged in our eases. It is the express letter of the Law,
Deuteronomy. 25. If a controversy arise between man and man, they shall both come to
the Judge; he is to measure their case.

The use of this point for you (Honorable and Beloved) is, that the saying
which Plato caused to be engraven at the entry of his School, is worthy to
be set on the front of your Tribunals, (...), it is pity any should sit upon
that seat that has not (I say not skill; the providence of the King is not so
careless in the choice of your persons) but, a care to discharge that
wherewith he is put in trust, and to be indeed the measure of all cases; a
party not interested in either side, but carrying himself indifferently
between them both. That is your use. And ours is, we must not be sons of
Belial; We may not usurp the sword to right our selves; we may not displace
the indifferency of the Law, to give sovereignty to our intemperate
affections. I conclude this sentence with the words of the Apostle, Brethren
avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath; for vengeance is mine and I
will repay, says the Lord. He will repay one day by himself, but until then,
he will have his payment made by Judges, upon which warrant, the King spoke
these words, I will judge.

But When? At the Assizes; when I shall receive the Congregation. Some read
when I shall take a set time; both Translations are ancient, the later as
ancient as the Septuagint and Caldee Paraphrase, you may read it in them; the
former as ancient as Aquila and Symachus, St. Basil reports it out of them, the
later Translators incline some to the one side, and some to the other; if you
join them both together, you have no more than the full sense of the word; for
Mogned is not only an Assembly, but an assembly made at a solemn time.

But to leave the words, and come to the matter. Men have houses of their own,
and domestical employments according to their means, but the instinct of
nature, and their manifold wants incline them to be sociable, and to entertain
commerce with others; hence sprang Societies: But society cannot be
maintained without a rule of fellowship which commands to give every man his
due, and bends private endeauours toward the common good. To frame this rule
Kings call one kind of Assembly, which is a Parliament; and to see whether
this rule be observed, they call another, which is the Assizes. An Assizes is
nothing but an assembling of the People, to enquire whether every man so
temper the love of himself, as not to wrong his neighbor; whether he take no
other course to thrive than such as may further the Common wealth. And indeed
in vain were Parliaments, were it not for Assizes, you may see it in your
private families; to what end should a man give instructions to his household,
if he never meant to take account of their conformity thereto? But all this is
no more than a civil ground, it deriues an Assizes, only from the light of
reason; my text goes farther, it makes it also a sacred Assembly, Mogned
signifies such a one: And indeed how can it be less? does not God stand in
this Congregation? and are not they that sit upon the Bench called Gods? Psalm
82. The Lawyers that plead at the Bar are even in the entrance of the civil
Law called Sacerdotes iustitiae, they have a kind of Priesthood: the Jurors,
and all persons of necessary service, are bound Iuramento Dei, with the Lords
oath; so the Scripture calls it, the work, as Solomon speaks, Proverbs 21.
is more than a sacrifice; finally, the place is Mogned a Synagogue, a holy
place.

I observe this the rather, because I would raise the estimation of that place
to a higher rate than it commonly passes at with the vulgar people. The Judge
when he passes from the Church to the Bench, does but pass from one sacred
assembly to another, only with this difference, that sitting but as a sheep in
this fold, in the other he sits as a shepherd. Wherefore the Judge when he
sits there must remember the saying of Natianzene, (...), Thou art the Image
of God, and they with whom thou dealest bear his image also; if any stains
have blemished that image, purge them, but never forget so to deal with the
people as those that bear Gods image. The Lawyers must remember that the
Judges Bench is Gods Altar, and being Priests thereat they may not sacrifice
with either polluted tongues or hands. The Jurors that have bound themselves to
God, must deal as in his sight, they must take heed of that wherewith they are
too usually charged, that (...); private men, the common weal, are not so much
abused, they are not abused so cunningly by any thing, as by their oaths; The
words are significant, give me leave to open them. Sins are compared to
debts, he that breaks a Law becomes a debtor thereby; the Judge comes to
enquire after those debts, that satisfaction may be made for private, for
public wrongs, the Jurors are trusted with the relation and taxation of these
debts, they are to bring in, who is in debt, and how far, and their oaths are
credited herein; but their oath is become a sophister, and cunningly private
wrongs, at the one bar, and public, at the other, receive an acquittance;
and yet the debtor makes no payment, or surely no such payment as in equity he
should. If their oath were Iuramentum diaboli, their sophistry were tolerable,
but I beseech them in the fear of God to consider that sincerity is the
attribute of the oath of God, and let them take heed, lest obliging themselves
to God, and doing service to the Devil, they descend not into hell, when they
hope to ascend to heaven. Finally, whereas the ground whereupon the Assembly
stands is holy ground; let every man put off his shoes, put off his corrupt
affections; so shall the work be an acceptable, a profitable sacrifice, which
may yield a sweet savor unto God, and a savor of rest unto our whole Land; it
shall so be, and it shall do so, if the Judge having called this assembly,
judge according to the rule, if he judge uprightly. I come then from the time
to the manner.

Some take the word Mesharim for a Nown, some for an Aduerb, whereupon arise two
interpretations, one respecting the person of the Judge, the other that
whereupon the Judge works. If you respect the person of the Judge, then the
words are, I will judge uprightly, that is, according to the Law. Before you
heard of a public standard, whereat men's causes must be tried; the Judge is
not fabricator, but adhibitor mensurae; Jupiter ipse duas aequato examine lances
Sustinet;
the King himself, much more the Judge, is put in trust with it, not to make
it, but to use it; and as St. Augustine speaks, Non iudicat de legibus, sed
secundum leges, he must not confound a Parliament with an Assizes. That is the
first thing that must be noted.

A second thing is, that the word signifies straight, or right lines, which is
the proper attribute of a Law; and you know that recta linea est brenissima
inter eosdem terminos, and if men's causes be judged according to Law, the
handling of them must not take the next way about, the proceeding must be, as
even, so speedy.

And yet, which we must note in the third place, the straitness of the Law is
not a mathematical, but a moral straitness; It is not inflexible, but it is
so far to be bent, as the mind of the Law giver did intend. A Judge must not
insist upon the words of a Law, but put on the mind of a Lawmaker, and a
Lawmakers does follow medium, not arithmeticum, but ge^metricum, not rei, but
rationis. The circumstances of quid, quantum, cui, quando, Heb. 7.
do vary the proceeding, and yet the rule is still even. Provided always that
the King and the Judge be as Melchisedeck, (...), so righteous a King and
Judge, that he has no consanguinity nor affinity, but only the common weal;
If a Judge follow such a rule, he then judges uprightly.

But I told you though Mesharim may beevsed Aduerbially, yet is it a Nown; and
so the Ancients did take it in this place, as appears by their translating it
(...), recta, and I think it is most natural here, to refer it to that
whereupon the Judge works; He calls an Assembly to see what uprightness
there is in men's carriage. God, as the Preacher speaks, made man straight,
the word is iashar, that is, set him in a straight way; the holy Ghost does
much delight to resemble Laws by ways, and that resemblance is implied in
this word, but man being set so straight sought out many inventions etc. The
Rule is as true in policy, as in divinity. S. John Baptist the harbinger of
Christ according to the Prophefie of Esaias, crying unto the people to prepare
Christ's way, and to make his path straight, does reduce all the obliquitie
thereof unto four heads, saying, that every hill must be brought low. You
shall find some men through pride, to swell like hills, like mountains,
lifting themselves above their rank, and usurping more power than belongs unto
them; such are the violent oppressors of the poor. And I add unto them those
that are mountainous also, the supporters of the man of sin dwelling upon the
seven hills, who usurped spiritual power of old, but of late is grown more
eager for a temporal; he has many Proctors for both in this Land, and they
should all be brought low. Besides these Mountains you shall find Valleys,
men that by base qualities fall below their rank, the rank of men, such as
are Epicures; yea unto the rank of devils, such as are professed Atheists; this
Land swarmeth with too many of them, they are not ashamed, so graceless are
they, yea so senseless, that they do not tremble to name themselves the damned
Crew; such valleys would be filled up; if it might be, by discipline they
should be reclaimed; if not, by the sword they should be cut off, lest they
prove bottomless gulfes, and swallow up the whole Land: it is to be feared, if
they be long tolerated, God will pursue with vengeance the whole Land for
their blaphemies. Besides these, you shall find some serpentine ways, S. John
calls them crooked ways, the ways of subtle foxes, that wilily circumuent
young ones, and simple ones, and strippe them of their goods, of their lands;
they would be set straight, and that craft which preuailes elsewhere, should
not serve when they are pierced into by the direct eye of a Judge. Finally, you
shall find ruff ways, the ways of scandalous persons, that are exemplarily
ill, and make many weak ones to fall; they must be made smooth: if their
hearts cannot be altered, yet their deeds must be bridled, that they cause not
others to offend; such are the corrupters of youth by gaming, by drinking, and
other loose living. In a word, (...); you must apply your measure to them, and
spare no obliquitie that is in any of them; then shall the way of all the
people be via librata, as Esaias speaks of the way of righteous men, it shall
be straight, or level.

There is one thing more which I may not omit. This word is never read but
plural; and the reason thereof may be manifold, the worst is worth your
marking. If you look upon the persons on whom a Judge works they are good or
bad; he must withhold justice from neither of them, and justice requires that
one have proemium, the other poenam, each receive according as he deserves; and
judgment is not full except both parties have their due; so says the Law, The
Judge shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked; You may not
violate this Combination. There is another Combination in the Rule by which you
judge, and that is of commutatine and distributive Justice; you have two
Bars, one for nisiprius, and the other for criminal Causes; my text requires
that the measure be even at both Bars.

Add hereunto that you are Custodes vtriusque Tabulae, and must have a care as
well that God be served as the Common Weal, keeping your self to the
discreet limitation which Constantine the Emperor set unto himself, leaving
Episcopatum ad intra unto us; (I mean the defining of sacred things) and
taking unto your selves no more but Episcopatum ad extra, the compulsiue
commanding of those that are refractarie, unto the good Ordinances appointed by
the public authority of the Church, that so the slanders of the Romanists
may be refuted, and yet that duty that you owe to Gods Church be discharged.
You must take care of this second Combination.

There is a third also that looks to your own persons; here must be a
Combination of your head, and your heart; you must judge not only rectum, but
recte that the sentence be upright depends upon you skill, but it is your
heart that makes it a virtuous sensentence: And surely the Holy Ghost means
something, when in the sixteenth of Deuteronomie it is said, Thoushalt follow
Justice, Justice, he means the Justice of the head and the heart. Yea seeing
you are not only Magistrates, but Christian Magistrates, there must be in
your sentence not only Equity, but Piety; your Religion must raise your
moral virtues unto an heavenly pitch, and what you do, you must do in Faith,
and to the Glory of God. This is the last Combination, and for you the best;
the former two do rather benefit others. I conclude this Point with a wish,
that you would imitate Job, who when he came to the Tribunal, reports of
himself that he put on righteousness, and it covered him, judgment, and it
was a robe, and a crown unto him, Job 29. And I pray God, that righteousness
may go before you, and set your steps in the way. And thus much of the
manner of dealing.

It follows now that we come unto the Reasons; which are two: The first is
the reason of assembling the people, or calling an Assizes: there is great
reason for that, for there is much amiss, The earth and all the inhabitants
are dissolved.

Were we immutable, though we should need directive, yet of correctiue
instice we should have no need. A Parliament were enough to set us in a good
way, it would be superfluous to examine our ways at an Assizes; but our
condition was mutable in Paradise, it is much more so now; It appears in that
we may be dissolved, or, as the word in the original is, melted. But there
are two kind of meltings, according as the parts of the body melted are of
two sorts, homogeneous, or heterogeneous: If homogeneous, as gold and silver,
then though they melt, yet do they not loose their holdfast; cast gold into the
fire, melt it will, but so, that in running the parts do hold fast together:
But if the parts be heterogeneous, then not only the whole melts, but the
parts fall asunder, and are loosed the one from the other. The melting whereto
we are subject is of the later sort, and therefore the Interpreter, intending
the meaning rather than the signification of the word translates it are
dissolved; that is, so melted, as that one part hangs not to another. But let
us look a little farther into this kind of melting.

As in our body natural, so in the body politic, melting grows from some
outward heat which extracteth the inward, and so dis-inableth the parts which
were strengthened thereby to hold together. There is a fire of charity and
justice, by which the society of men is fostered and cherished, so long as
they hold, we hold together, and when they fail, we fall asunder; now they
fail not except they be extracted, extracted by a fire, and that is the fire
of Hell: the Devil that could not endure that blessed society that we enjoyed
in Paradise with God, with Angels, each with the other, but loosed all the
bands, and set us at odds; cannot endure so much as the continuance of civil
societies, but he is still at his forge, and is blowing of his coals, and we
are too apt to come near his fire; the fire of concupiscence which is a
melting fire. Saint Austine fitly on this place moves the question, and
answers it himself, Si defluxit terra, vnde defluxit nisi a peccatis? he
adds, cupiditate superiorum roboratur, and quasi liquescit cupiditate
inferiorum; if we will find out the true cause of melting, we must find it
in sin. And sin what is it but the inclination of our heart unto these base
and earthly things, which should be carried toward heaven and heavenly
things? while our thoughts do so stoop, we approach that fire of which Saint
James speaks, that it sets the tongue on fire; and we may well say, that
the whole frame of nature is set on fire thereby, so set on fire, that it is
melted, so melted, that it is dissolved. There is a threefold band, 1. between
GOD and Man; 2. between superiors and inferiors; 3. between those that are
equals. In those that come near this fire they are melted all; there
continues no communion between God and us, for want of pi^tie; no communion
between superiors and inferiors, neither respects the other as it ought; nor
any commerce between equals, each does endeavor to devour the other.

But to open this a little plainer; From our body natural we must learn
what an evil this melting is in the body politic. In the body natural if
a joint be dissolved we find a double evil, the part grows weak in it
self, and troublessome to the neighbor parts, as you may see in an arm out
of joint, it is weak it self, and a burden unto the next part whereupon it
rests, being not able to sustain it self; the same falls out in the
policique melting. Men through disorder grow weak themselves, and they are
troublesome to others; weak they are, though their lusts be strong; because
that strength is not of the man, who should be a reasonable creature, but it
is of a beast, of the sensual part of a man. He that rides a fierce horse,
let the horse keep what pace he will, so long as the rider commandes him by
the bridle, we say, he rides strongly; but if the horse get the bit in his
mouth and run away, the faster his pace the weaker the rider, because he
cannot check him: Our affections are as that fierce horse, and our reason
should be as a strong bridle; stir they never so much, if reason command,
we are strong; but if reason have no power, and they run loose, then
certainly the more violent they are, the weaker are we. We speak
significantly when we say, that a man transported by his passions is an
impotent man; and we therein imitate the phrase of GOD himself, who by the
Prophet reproouing Judah for her insatiable spiritual fornication; says, How
weak is thy heart? Drunkards, and murderers, adulterers, and all kind of
dissolute livers, think themselves very strong, because they have their full
forth in sin; but let them not deceive themselves, they are melted, they are
dissolved; this is but a weakness, they have lost that strength not only
wherewith God created them unto virtue, but even that strength wherewith humane
policy does strengthen them unto civil society: they are unprofitable
therefore.

But that is not all the evil. A member out of joint is not only unserviceable
it self, but also painful to the other parts: And whosoever grows
disordered, as he weakeneth himself, so is he mischievous to others;
adulterers to other men's wives, murderers to their persons, robbers to their
goods, slanderers to their good name; it is the condition of all sins, they
disorder policies.

That which I observe unto Judges herein is, that they should not only take
notice of the facts, upon which they sit Judges, but to stir up in themselves
the zeal of justice, should diligently consider these two things which cleave
unto every such fact, the weakness and the annoyance of the malefactor; he
is not what he should be, serviceable to the State; and what he should not
be he is, mischievous unto others. So much is employed, when he is said to
be dissolved.

But let us see of whom this melting or dissoluing is affirmed. The earth and
all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved.

Some take these words according to the figure (...), and resolve them thus,
All the inhabitants of the earth are dissolved; as if the melting and
dissoluing did concern only the persons, yea and point out also such persons
as are apt to be dissolved, namely, those that have their thoughts and
affections grouelling upon the earth. We have a distinction in Saint Paul of
the two ADAMS, The first was of earth, earthly, the second was the Lord from
Heaven; as is the earthly, so are they that are earthly, and as is the
heavenly, so are they that are heavenly, 1. Corinthians. 15. they are so in this,
that the earthly is easily dissolved, but the heavenly is not: if we did set
our affections on things above, and not on things below; if we had our
conversation in Heaven, and would be, though in the world, yet not of it, we
need not fear melting, we should not be dissolved; but while we grow more
like the old Adam than the new, while we set our affections on things below,
and savor only the things of earth, no wonder if we melt, if we be
dissolved. The Admonition for us all, is to keep us to the example of CHRIST,
yea to let CHRIST live in us; let our hearts be possessed with the love of
Heaven and Heavenly things, so shall we not prove melting or disordered
members of the State.

But the words may be taken as they lie in my Text, and the dissoluing may be
applied no less to the earth, than to the inhabitants thereof; both may be
dissolved, both may melt. But then we must observe a distinction. There is a
penal, and there is a sinful melting; the earth is subject to a penal, but
the sinful is that whereunto men only are subject, and being subject
thereunto, cause the earth to be subject to the other. A fruitful land may
become barren, and a healthy Country become contagious, yea a Country that is
like the Garden of GOD, as Sodom was, may become a salt, a dead Sea, as Sodom
is, which is the penal melting or dissoluing thereof: But this befalls not,
except the people sin; and the cry of their sin come up unto God;
Maledicta terra propter te, has a constant truth, there is never any penal
melting, where a sinful melting has not gone before.

The Use that I would make hereof is, That when we see plagues, we should
thereby be put in mind of sins; the Magistrate should bestirre himself
thereabout especially, he should inquire after crying sins. GOD taught this
lesson to Joshua, when the Israelites fled before the men of Ai: Joshua rent
his clothes, and fell to his prayers, and so did others with him; a good work
you would think in such a case to deprecate the wrath of GOD; but GOD tells
Joshua that he should intend another work, Up, says he, what make thou
here? Israel has sinned, therefore they cannot stand before their enemies, Go
thou and correct that sin; and that sin was but the sin of one, how much
more must he do it, if as in the Text, All the inhabitants be dissolved? The
more sinners, the more speed must the Magistrate make, and there can be no more
than All.

But All may be understood either of singula generunt, or genera singulorum;
it cannot be understood of singula generum, God never suffered sin so far
to prevail, but he ever had a Church in the world, and some true children;
the world could not continue if it were so bad as to have none. Though the
times when David came to the Crown were very bad, yet not so bad; there lived
Nathan, and Gad, and Sadoc, and many thousands too no doubt were there in the
days of Saul, as in the days of Ahab, which lived in the fear of God, and as
orderly members of the State: but denominatio sequitur maiorem partem; the
greater part was the worser part; and therefore the complaint is bent against
the whole. A complaint which may well fit our days, wherein, though GOD has
preserved many as living members of CHRIST, and profitable inhabitants of this
Land, yet can it not be denied, that all sorts of sins do reign in all
sorts of persons: We may renew Esayes complaint, Chapt. 1. From the sole of
the foot unto the head there is nothing whole therein. And Chapt. 3. The
people are oppressed one of another, every man by his neighbor; the children
presume against the ancient, the vile against the Honorable; what State is
there that is not dissolved? Honorable and Beloved, I will not wrong your
wisdoms so far as to particularize, only this I observe, that when you
give your charge, you do nothing but relate the lives of the people; they
yield instances of all those sins which you so profitably dissuade, and I
would the Grand-Iurie, that have their ears open to hear your charge, would
have their eyes open also to behold the peoples lives, and make a conscience to
present what, if they wink not, they cannot choose but see; and if they
present, there remains nothing but that you, Honorable and Beloved, do your
part as carefully as they perform theirs faithfully. And your part is set
down in the next point of the text, in these words of King David, I bear up
the Pillars thereof.

This is the second reason, the reason why you must judge uprightly; because
when things are amiss, the redress of them lies in you, you bear up the
pillars thereof. The Pillars of a State are good Laws, and good men; good
Laws are the Pillars that bear up men, and men being so borne up by good
Laws, do bear up the whole state of the Land. The reason why this title is
given unto Laws, is either historical or moral; The historical is the
ancient custom of ingrauing Laws in brass, and fastening of them to pillars
in public places, as we use now the Kings Proclamations; it were not hard
out of diverse Authors to confirm this custom. I will allege but two, and
they are two feeling authorities; the one to be heeded by a Judge, which is
the saying of a Poet, Fixit Leges pretio atque refixit; the other is also the
saying of a Poet, but it looks unto the common people, Hae (he means Laws)
miserae ad parietem sunt fixae clauis ferreis, vbi malos mores affigi nimio
fuerat aequius. Saint Paul seems to allude to this custom, when he calls
the Church The pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.

But to leave the historical reason; there is a moral reason of it also. Our
wits and our wills do both stay themselves upon the Laws; while we read
Philosophers writings de aeque and bono, what is meet to be done, and what is
not meet, our judgments do waver through unresolved discourse, so soon as a
Law has defined, men cease to dispute, we captiuate our judgment to the
wisdom of the State, and hold their resolution not to be excepted against.
As a Law fixes our judgment, so does it settle our will also; though good be
lovely, yet the love of good is but weak in us, and were there not a Law that
threatens the transgressors, how little we love good it would too soon
appear? When our affections would melt with sin, they are held together, and
held unto their duty by the bridle of the law; the law stays, the law holds,
and therefore Saint Basil does well understand by these Pillars (...), those
Laws which with power and authority settle every man in his orderly course
of life. Lycinius the Emperor spoke barbarously, when (as Eusebius reports)
he said, that Iuris cognitio was virus and pestis Reipublicae, and the Jews,
who (as Ambrose observes) said, that Leges were Crimina, spoke but as Jews,
that is, as a rebellious people; And the Anabaptists that hold Laws to be
contrary to Christian liberty, do but by their doctrine give us to
understand, the qualities of their lives; which is Epicuricall licentiousness.
But Christians must give Laws their right, and repute them as they are, the
Pillars of the, State.

They are immediately the Pillars of the inhabitants, and the inhabitants
being qualified by them become Pillars of the State. Therefore good men are a
second kind of Pillars; and indeed so they are called; St. Paul gives that
name to Peter, James, and John, Galathians 2. Nazianzene says of Athanasius,
that he was (...), and of Attalus, Nicephorus says, that he was (...).
Neither is this true only of the Worthies of the Church, but of the Common
weal also; Joseph is called not only Pastor, but Petra Israelis; as much is
to be understood of Eliakim the son of Helchia, of whom God says in Esaias,
cap. 22. I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place, and he shall be for a
glorious throne to his fathers house, and they shall hang upon him all the
glory of his fathers house, etc. the meaning is, they shall all rest upon him.
And indeed there is no good man upon whom the Land does not rest; for as the
world was made for them, so they bear it up, and when GOD remooues them, the
world grows so much the weaker: yea the wicked themselves do grow the
weaker; for that they do enjoy their states they are beholding to the good;
they think, when they break Laws, and persecute good men, themselves fare
the better, and their posterity is the greater; but fools they are, and
therein prove their own foes; for they ouerturne the Pillars whereupon both
themselves and the whole State do lean. There is that care in unreasonable
Creatures of the preservation of the whole, that every part will hazard it
self to prevent the common ruin; only men, forgetting that themselves must
perish when the Common weal goes to wrack, to satisfy their own lusts
continually push at, and would ouerturne both kind of Pillars, and Sampson-like
though not with so good a mind as Sampson, nor in so good a cause, (for
themselves are more like Philistines) endeavor the ruin both of others and
themselves. What is the remedy? surely the remedy lies in you, in you that
are the Pillars of the Pillars; In vos domus omnis inclinata recumbit. Good
Laws and good men are like unto a Vine that bears grapes yielding pleasant
liquour to cheer both GOD and men: But a Vine must have a prop, or else it
will fall to the ground, and there all the grapes will rot. Of the Laws we
do quickly perceive that same of the Poet true, Mores trahunt leges in
potestatem sui; every man would be a Law unto himself, a Law of
unrighteousness; and as for good men, the better they are, the worse they
should fare, they should not be thought worthy to breathe; but (...), it
never appears how powerful a law is, till a law is in the hands of a good
Judge; then all stand in awe of it, and good men, if they have a sunctuarie to
betake themselves unto, (and a good Judge is such a sanctuary) dare boldly
profess and practice goodness: wherefore what in Aeschilus is said of Atlas
(...), that may be affirmed of good Judges, on whose shoulders the Pillars of
the Church and Common weal do rest, They bear them up, So we translate; but
the word is more significant, it is borrowed from architecture, and has
reference to Mesharim that is gone before, a term of the same art also, and
imports that a Judge so soon as ever he has applied his rule, and finds a
Pillar to incline, he falls to setting of it straight; no less than a good
surgeon, must a good Judge iustissimas facere luxationum compositiones, never
leave moving of the bone, till he has set it in his just place; no more must
a Judge leave reforming of a person, till he is come into good order. No doubt
but it will fall out, that as in setting of a joint the patient will be
impatient; so austere reformation will be impugned with much murmuring; for
exitium suum mali prona cupiditate desiderant; yet must you have a Lions heart,
which is commended in a good Surgeon or Physician, and as Julius Firmicus spoke
to Magistrates, so do I unto you, Subuenite miseris liberate pereuntibus,
melius est vt liberetis inuitos, quam vt volentibus concedatis exitium; and you
shall find the saying of Solomon true in the end, that he that reproues a man
shall find more thanks at the last, than he that flattereth him with his
lips; and they will say with Saint Bernard, Homil. 55. in Cantic.
Bonum indicium quod me illi districto diuinoque subducit. We have good cause
says Saint Austine to thank GOD that himself does not strike so soon as we
sin, but expects our repentance, and thereunto calls us by many means; and
no small one is the tribunal of the Judge; he has the rectifying of all
crooked Pillars, to set them straight, yea and keep them straight also; the
awe wherein they must stand of you, must make every man careful to keep his
place, and if you fail, we have just cause to fear, Ne collapsa ruant
subductis tecta Columnis. For if the light be darkness, how great is that
darkness? and if the salt be unsavory, wherewith shall it be seasoned? and
what will become of the Common weal, if our eyes see that which Salomons did
under the Sun, The place of judgment, that wickedness was there, and the
place of righteousness, that iniquity was there? It is much evil that the
State shall fare so ill, but it is an evil that must be feared by you; for a
Judge is guilty of whatsouer he might and did not reform, and your account
will be the heavier, the more you suffer to escape unpunished. Wherefore seeing
GOD has done you this honor to be (...) (for I told you that you are a part
of the politic person of the King, yea as CHRIST is lapis angularis, the
corner stone of the Church, so you are also of the Common weal) falsify not
your names, fail not the Pillars, bear out and up both Laws and good men,
deliver him that suffers wrong from the hand of the Oppressor; and be not
faint hearted when you sit in judgment; be as a Father unto the fatherless,
and in stead of a Husband unto their Mother, so shall you be the sons of the
most high, and he shall love you more than your mother does, Eccles. 4.

The last point is that which calls for your attention to every of these
former points, Selah; I told you it is the character of a remarkable sentence.
There be diverse conjectures at the meaning of this word, but the likeliest is
that which judges of it by the matter whereunto the Holy Ghost commonly does
apply it. Some take it intensiuely, as if it did note a superlatiue degree;
some protensiuely, as if it did note a perpetuity of time; I will join both:
surely this sentence is such, as you cannot think upon it either too much or
too long, yea, every branch of it deserves a constant deep meditation. Your
person does, for it represents the King, yea GOD himself; and deserves not
that a Selah? your office, you are the common measure of all men's causes, and
overrule all men's partiality; deferues not that a Selah? your assemblies are
sacred, many ways sacred; how can you look on them without a Selah? and that
which you enquire after in them, what is it but uprightness? how conformable
they are in their lives unto the Laws; surely that deserves a Selah: but when
you find how much men have gone astray, and swarued from that even rule, that
will raise your Selah to a higher pitch: Finally the benefit expected from you
to set right what is awry, does deserve the highest Selah; there is not an
ordinary point in the text, therefore must you entertain it with more than an
ordinary regard.

I must end. The sum of all is; Judges are sacred persons, trusted with the
allowed standard of the Common weal, to call the people to it, and by it to
examine their lives, that finding how far they have declined, they may set
and keep all upright.

O Lord that have vouchsafed this honor unto men, and art pleased that such
trust should be reposed in them; give them grace to tender their honor, in
being careful of their charge: Bless this sacred Assembly that all triacts
therein may pass (...) now teach us? Surely, first, discreetly to distinguish
times, then to solemnize extraordinary times religiously. These two points are
amplified throughout the whole Psalm, but we have a good taste of them in
those words that now I have read unto you.

Here we shall learn first to distinguish times; All times are not alike,
there are nights as well as there are days, the time here remembered is a day, a
remarkable day, it has the two marks of a Festival set upon it.

To the making of a Festival, two things must concur; Operatio diuina, and
Recognitio humana; there must be some extraordinary work of God done thereon,
and man must make a special acknowledgement thereof. Both these are evident in
my text; First, Gods Work, Deus fecit, God made the time a Day; Secondly, Man's
Acknowledgement, Haec est dies, the Church does Calendar it for a high day.

As we must learn thus discreetly to distinguish times, so we must also learn
to solemnize them Religiously; In performance whereof the text will teach us
What we must do, and How.

That which we must do is reduced to two Heads; we must take full comfort in
such a Day, we must rejoice and be glad in it; Rejoice with our bodies; Be
glad in our souls, both body and soul must express a comfortable sense.
Neither must we only take comfort in it, but pray also for the happy
continuance of it: for the continuance, Save Lord; we may be deprived of it:
for the happy continuance of it, Prosper Lord; it may be in vain bestowed on
us.

These be the things that must be done; But How? that is, When? and by whom?
When? Now; at the very same time that We have ioyed in the Day, must We also
be praying for the continuance thereof. And whom does the Psalmist mean by
We? Look unto the beginning of the Psalm, and you shall find the parties thus
specified, Israel, the House of Aaron, all that fear the Lord; the
Commonweal, the Church, the Clergy, the Laity, all whom the Day concerns
must take notice thereof, and express this duty thereon.

You see the sum of this Scripture, which I will now (God willing) enlarge
farther, and apply unto our present occasion. But before I enter upon the
particulars I may not forget to let you understand that this Psalm has a
double sense, an Historical, and a Mystical; the Historical concerns King
David and the Kingdom of Israel; the Mystical touches Christ and his Church.
The Mystical has warrant from the Gospel, wherein Christ does apply some
branches, of this Psalm unto himself: the the Historical is clear in the
Books of Samuel, which entreat of the advancement of King David. If we follow
the Mystical then the Day here remembered is Easter day, or the Day of Christ's
Resurrection, and that was a Day indeed; the Sun of Righteousness, then
shone forth in great strength, and brought life and immortality to life. But
if we follow the Historical sense then was the Day here remembered the Day of
K. David's succession unto Saul; a very Festival Day to Israel, though not so
high a Feast as is our Easter day. The Fathers Commentaries run most upon the
first sense, our occasion is better fitted with the latter, wherefore (without
prejudice to the former) we will insist thereon; leaving the Mystical we will
insist only upon the Historical sense of these words.

The first point therein is, the discreet distinguishing of Times. All times
are not alike, there are nights and there are days, the time here specified is
a Day. Saint Basils Rule must guide us in understanding this word; he tells us
that when the Holy Ghost speaks of a Day in this and many other places we
must not plod upon the course of the Sun, but look unto the occurrents of
the time; the occurents are of two sorts, prosperous or adverse; the former is
usually called Day, and the later Night. We have not then to do with a
Natural, but a Metaphorical Day. But Metaphors have their reasonable grounds,
and because they are Implicitae Similitudines, close couched resemblances, we
must unwrap them, that we may see the resonablenesse that is in the use of
them; If we do this in our present Metaphor, the reason will be apparent, why
a prosperous state is termed a Day. For a Day is caused by the Sun rising,
who by his beams sends to the earth Light and Heat; Light by which all
things are discerned, and may be distinguished, and Heat by which they are
quickened and cherished: Even so in a prosperous State there is something that
answers to the Sun, and that is a good King; and well may the King be
termed a Sun in the Common-We^le, as the Sun is termed a King in the
midst of the Planets. A good King then like the Sun ouer-spreads the
Commonweal with Light and Heat: Light; all things do appear in their right
hue; flatter^e or tyranny does not blanch or bear out falsehood as truth, and
good as evil; every one bears his proper name, and is reputed no better then
he is; which is no small Blessing of a State, if we take notice of that which
is occurrent in every History, That the best men have been branded as the
vilest, and the vilest have been commended for Worthies; so far has
darkness ouercast the judgment of the World: seek no farther then the story
of Christ, and his Apostles, the Scribes and the Pharisees. As a good King does
remedy this perue^snesse of judgment by a truer light: so does he by a
vegetable heat put heart into those that deserve well, and further their well
fare; it is no small blessing; you may gather it out of the 72. Psalm, where
the cheareful face (as it were) of the State does speak the comfortable
influence of a good King: you may amplify this point by that difference, which
in the 104. Psalm you find between a day and a night. The night is a time
wherein the savage beasts do range abroad, men retire and appear not; but in
the day men go freely abroad to their labor, and the savage beasts retire:
even so in the time of an ill governed Commonweal, all sorts of beastly men,
as filthy as Swine, as greedy as Wolves, as cruel as Tigres, as deceitful as
the Crocodile, these and such like riot and control, and without shame
satisfy their lust, and then it is dangerous to be just, to be merciful. But
the countenance of a good King chaseth such vermin away, and none unlike unto
him, find Grace with him, or appear before him; the 101. Psalm has no other
argument but this very point; and Solomon has expressed it in several Proverbs.

This blessing of Light and Heat, of distinguishing and cherishing the good
from, and above the bad, springs from a good King, if he be only a Head of
the Commonweal; many Heathen Kingdoms enjoyed such Days; under their
Augustus, Traians, Adrians, and the like; But if the King be also a member of
the Church, a King of Israel, as King David was, then does he yield unto his
State another Day, unto the Civil he adds a Spiritual Day; for as
Constantine said well, A good King is, Episcopus ad extra Ecclesiam, as the
Pastors are ad intra; though he may not administer sacred things, yet must he
command them to be administered; to be administered sincerely that no Errors or
Heresies dim the heavenly Light, and to be entertained reverently, that the
people may feel the sweet inflaence of Grace; Epistola ad Bonifacium,
he makes Laws for the promulgation of the saving truth of God, as Saint
Austine teaches, and by wholesome Discipline brings the people to be as well
religious, as loyal; no less dutiful children of God, then obedient subjects
to their Prince.

By this that you have heard, we may learn how to reckon days; we must not
put into our moral Calendar all times for Days, we must look whether the
Sun be up, not the Sun which runs in the corporal Firmament, but the
Sun of the Politic or Ecclesiastical State; we must see how much Light,
how much Heat is derived into either of them, how much the King does advance
our temporal, our eternal prosperity; so we must measure days. And if we
do, we shall find how much the world does oftentimes mistak, and we shall
find them children of the night which think themselves children of the day,
we shall find that they are covered with gross darkness when they think
they do partake of the Light; This is the case of the Turkish Monarchy, if
we look to a civil day, and Kingdoms that are enthrawled to Antichrist, if
we look to the spiritual day, the time of neither of these Governments may
properly be called a Day. But when we look upon a fair Sunshine day, and see
how welcome it is to the earth, we must be put in mind thereby of Gods
blessing vouchsafed us, and learn to illustrate our Metaphorical by such a
natural day.

Certainly, the time wherein we now live is a very clear Day; the Civil
State has long enjoyed abundance of Peace, and the Gospel has free passage in
the Church, every man sits quietly under his own Vine, and boldly do we
assemble in this place to hear Gods Word; these be plain evidences of a Day;
a double Day; such a Day as few Nations have enjoyed; for either the Sword
rages amongst them, or the light of the Gospel has not shined unto them. It
is then worth the marking that our time is a Day.

But there is something more which I may not omit; This Day began such a Day,
as our Chronicles for many generations do not report the like; When we read
the story of Joshua who commanded the Sun to stand still, and stretched
forth one day to the length of two, we all wonder; and well we may; for it was
a great wonder to see two days come together, and never a night between; But
had not we as great a wonder? have we not had so long a Day? has not our
Metaphorical matched that Natural? Yea, it has gone so far beyond it as
the Metaphorical exceeds the Natural; read our Chronicles, and you shall
find how seldom we have had two such Days together as Queen Elizabeth has
made with King James immediately succeeding; both double Days, Days of Church,
and Days of Commonwealth. Look beyond; Queen Mary's time was at least a
spiritual Night; King Edwards time a short though a Spiritual and a Civil
Day also; King Henry the Eighth his time was neither Night nor Day, Henry the
Seventh his time was a spiritual Night but a Civil Day; Richard the thirds
time was a Night both Spiritual and Civil; if you go yet more upward you
shall not find it much better, only by comparing, this you shall find, how
short their times come of ours, to whom God has vouchsafed this double Day;
we may fitly call it duplex Festum, such a Day must needs be a Festival Day;
a double Day, a double Feast.

And indeed it has set upon it the marks of a Festival; thereunto I told you
must concur two things, First, Operatio diuina, Secondly, Recognitio humana;
Gods work and Man's acknowledgement; Gods work must go before; Deus fecit is
the first character of an Holiday. Why does one day excel another, says the
son of Syracke, Chap. 33
Seeing the light of the days of the year comes from the Sun? the
knowledge of the Lord has parted them asunder, and he has by them disposed
the solemn times and Feasts, some of them has he chosen and sanctified, and
some of them has he put amongst the days to number.

But this is not all that is to be observed in Gods making of the Day, the Lord
does not only appoint such a time, but do something thereon for which it
deferues such a title. Observe then, that a time of adversity is called the
day of the Lord, but yet God is not said to make it a Day but rather he makes
that day a night, one and the self same time is called in the Scripture both
day and night. In the fifth of Amos, Mich 3. Ze^^. ^^
we read; Is not the day of the Lord darkness, it is darkness, and there is
no light in it; Micah and Zephanie accord therewith. A strange composition
there is, when the same time is called both Day and Night; A Day it is called
only in regard of the evidence; all shall see plainly what it is, and therefore
it is called, the Revelation of the just judgment of God. Gods judgments are
always just; but they do not always appear so to all, but God has
appointed a time wherein he will so clear it, that the wicked themselves shall
not be able to deny it; in regard of this evidence that time is called a Day.
But if you look to the substance of things that do befall them in that Day,
then sure it is not a day, but a night; they are dismal and dreapfull things
either corporal or spiritual; and in these two points stands the substance
of a metaphorical Night.

A second reason why God is said to make the time a Day is, because he is the
sole cause thereof; It is true that God creates darkness and woe, but he does
it not but as he is provoked by man; man does sin, if God send plagues; but of
light and prosperity, God is causa (...) and (...) also; the occasion and the
cause of blessedness are both of God; moved only by his own goodness does
he do good unto men; especially the good of this double Day, such as was the
Day of Israel.

For if you look upon the people, they were most sinful, if upon the enemies
of King David, they were most malicious and violent; so that had not Gods
goodness and his power, the one past by the sin, the other represt the
malice of King David's Adversaries, the Day could never have dawned, King David
had never sat upon that Throne: Well may God then be termed the Author of
the work which had so little probability of being, if you look upon all
other things excepting God.

In a word, the very phrase teaches this lesson; That when we see alterations
in the World, we must no more doubt of the Author of the Metaphorical, then
we do of the Natural Day; God is the Author of both, and of both with like
facility, He lights our candle, and makes our darkness to be light; Psalm.
18. Though we may not neglect second causes, yet must we ascend as high as the
first. It was Heathenish Idolatry when the Gentiles saw the benefits that came
from the Sun in lightning and warming the earth to make the Sun a God, and
give the price of the Creator unto his creature; whereas they should have
argued from it unto him, and conceived the eminency of his goodness from whom
such good things did proceed. And we shall not be far from Idolatry, if the
comfort of peace and Religion affecting us, our hearts ascend no higher then
the immediate cause thereof which is our King, and we do not give glory unto
God, which out of his love to us has set him upon the Throne, if we do not
discern that The Lord has made our Day.

What our sins were that might have hindered it, I need not tell you, the
Pestilence that did attend the dawning of the Day was an intimation from God,
how unworthy we were; but his pleasure was, that we should fall into his
hands, not into the hands of our enemies. For as we were unworthy, so they
were enraged, witness their treason that immediately was discovered, manifold
plots of treason but all defeated by the providence of God. Wherefore we must
say not only that we have a Day, but also that the Day which we have was made
by the Lord; and conclude, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name
be praise.

Deus fecit is not enough to the making of a Festival, the Church must come in
with, Haec est dies; when God goes before in working something in the Time,
the Church must not be behind in giving the due estimate to the time; we must
not esteem all days alike, when God does not work alike upon all. But
nothing is required of us to the making of a Festival, but only acknowledgment
of Gods Work; take a view of all the Festiuals of the Jews, you shall find,
that they did no more, no more then commemorate that on such a day God did do
such a work. And the Christian Church has trod the very same steps, and has
not thought it fit to suffer any of the remarkable works of God to pass
unregarded, whether they concern the whole Church or any particular State;
they have stamped upon the time of those works, Haec est Dies, This is not a
day to be forgotten, and therefore have enjoined the Anniuersarie
Commemoration thereof. Yea, and every private Family and person that has
received any extraordinary blessing from God, may make unto himself such an
Aniuersarie, and refresh the memory of that time wherein God has done him
some great good. And let this suffice for the discreet distinction of times;
Let us now see how religiously we must solemnize them.

Though to the making of the Day no more be required of us then this
acknowledgement, Haec est Dies, This is the Day, yet to the using of it more is
required; here we must consider What must be done, and How. That which must be
done I reduced to two Heads; First, we must take full comfort in the Day; and
secondly, pray for the happy continuance thereof.

In expressing the comfort the Psalmist uses two words which are fitted to the
two principal parts of man, his body and his soul, so the use of them in the
Original Language teaches, and Venerable bede does so distinguish them,
Exultemus corpore, laetemur animo, let the body, as it were, dance for joy,
and the soul rejoice. Both partake of the Day, the body principally of the
Civil Day, and of the Spiritual Day, the Soul is the principal partaker;
yet so, as that each in either does congratulate the other: if the Day be
Civil, the soul congratulates the body, the body which is exultant for his
day; if the day be spiritual, then the body congratulateth the soul, the
soul that is gladded at the heart for her Day. So then the body cannot exult
but the Soul will be glad, neither can the soul be glad, but the body will
exult, there is a (...) and the word Nos let Us Exulte, let Us rejoice notes,
that what is proper to either part redounds to the whole person. And the Holy
Ghost in coupling of both these words does put us in mind, that neither part
must be wanting in performing of this work, because either part does share in
the Day; and so you shall find that King David does oftentimes rowse his soul,
and rowse his body also to perform this Eucharisticall Sacrifice, he
remembers Carnem and Cor, his flesh and his spirit, his glory, that is his
tongue, and all that is within him. And no marvel; for he would recommend
himself as well to God as to men; and we must think that our works of
Piety are imperfect if either part be wanting.

But as when the Moon and the Sun do meet above the Horizon, and each does
contribute his light to the making of a Day, the light of the Moon is not
sensible in comparison of the light of, the Sun so should the impression
which is made by worldly things which are as changeable as the Moon, be dim
or darkened as it were by the impression made by spiritual things, which are
more constant then the Sun. And the joy of our bodies must so be tempered as
may not hinder the predominant gladness of our soul; all the world must see
that though we prize both the Days the civil and the spiritual, yet the
rate which we set upon the spiritual does infinitely exceed that which we set
upon the Civil. If this lesson were well learned, the world should not have so
many woeful experiments of those who being put to their choice whether they
will lose, had rather enjoy the civil day with the loss of the spiritual,
then by sticking to the spiritual hazard the civil; but we must choose rather
to be glad in soul, then exult in body, if we cannot do both together.

But whether we do express our comfort by one; only by the body, or also by
the soul, we must keep both parts unto their proper Object, that is to the
Day; though we express our affections by meats, drinks, triumphs, and other
solemnities, yet may we not while we signify our joy by them, exulte, or joy
in them: And yet behold the most part of men little think on the Day, their
thoughts and senses are taken up for the most part with the Accessories,
eating, drinking, etc. they do these things more freely, and are more frolic
then ordinary; the state of the Commonweal or of the Church comes little
into their thoughts, it is not much remembered at their Feasts, To remedy this
the Church has appointed that we should begin this solemnity in the Church,
there first hear in how good case we are, and break forth there into
spiritual praises and thankesgiuings, and make a religious acknowledgment of
our blessed Day. Of our blessed Day, but not forgetting the Author thereof, God
that has made us such a Day; No, he must be the principal Object of our
rejoicing; If we exclude him, or give him not the first place, we shall not be
far from the sin of the Angels and Adam who fell: They were contented to
rejoice in their Day, but not in him that made it, and so when pride made them
unthankful, Justice bereft them of that wherein they ioyed; And we may
forfeit our Day, if we make them patterns of our joy; King David is a better
example, who in all his Psalms of thanksgiving does more remember by whom
then how happy he was.

The last thing which I observe on this point is, that joy must gee with the
day. The Philosopher can tell us, that pleasure is an adiunct of felicity;
upon this principle is Saint James his rule built, If any man be merry let him
sing; the neglect of this taking comfort has a heanie doom in Moses, Deuteronomy. 28.
Because thou did not serve the Lord thy God with ioyfulnesse and a good
heart for the abundance of all things, therefore thou shall serve thine enemies
in hunger, thirst, and nakedness, etc. It was not then without cause that
Nehemias did reprove the Jews for weeping when the time remembered them of
feasting; and indeed, what a senseless thing is it when God takes pleasure in
the prosperity of his servants, when Angels do congratulate our happiness,
and the rest of the world does either admire or envy it, for us to be
senseless, and give no token of our thankful remembrance of it? And if such
neglect deserve blame, what blame deserves the murmuring, libelling,
slandering malecontent, that makes a Night of our Day, and confounds the
bright Sunshine with an ominous Eclipse? Such spirits, as they are unworthy of
the Day, so it were good they were made more sensible of it by experience of
the opposite Night.

Out of all this that you have heard touching our comfort, we may learn, that
Saint Chrysostomes rule is true, Non est parua Virtus gaudere de bonis, there
is more required unto full comfort then every one either heeds or performs;
if we will take comfort as we ought, we must not omit any one of those
branches which I have expressed.

But enough of the comfort, I come now to the Prayer.

As we must take full comfort in the Day, so must we pray for the happy
continuance thereof; first of the continuance Save Lord. The words are
Hoshingnana, which in the Gospel is rendered Hosanna; solemn words used by the
Jews at the Feast of Tabernacles. When they were in their passage to Canaan
they had no other Houses but Boothes, or Tabernacles; God was pleased to figure
the Church Militant in the form of a Camp; when they came into the Holy Land,
and possessed Cities, God would not have them think they cease to be Militant,
and therefore commanded them once a year to dwell in Tents, and thereby
remember, that they must be always ready to betake themselves again to such
moveable Houses; and that they wanted not enemies that would put them to it.
But mark in what place the Tabernacles were to be pitched; even at Jerusalem,
which signifies The Vision of peace, there were they to have a spectacle of
war. Neither were the Tents only pitched at Jerusalem, but also round about
the Temple, to let them understand what that was which was maligned; not only
their Civil, but also their spiritual Day; for both they were to pray
Hoshignana, Save Lord; let not their wicked imaginations prosper, that have
evil will either at Jerusalem or at Sion.

The point implied herein is, that both our Days are changable; the Civil
Day, though it be as glorious as the Day of Salomons reign, yet may it have a
rent as great as Salomons Kingdom had when he lost ten Tribes of twelve; yea,
when all twelve were carried away in captivity. Neither may the Civil Day
only be changed, but the spiritual also, the Temple may be burnt as well as the
City; the Priest destroyed as well as the City; the Priest destroyed as well as
the Prince; the mists of Idolatry yea and Infidelity may ouercast the Church;
It is plain in the story of the Jews, who at first were Idolaters, and now
are become plain Infidels. Neither has the New Testament any exemption from
this change, the Eastern and Western Churches show that all are subject to
the same condition; Therefore whilst we stand we must take heed of a fall, and
the best heed is to pray Save Lord.

As we must pray for the continuance; so must we pray that that continuance may
be happy. We see that though the Sun be above the Horizon, and so apt to
make a Day, yet many so gges and mists rising from the earth ouercast the Sky,
and intercept the comfortable influence of the light: even so though God
vouchsafe never so good a Prince, a Prince under whom we enjoy abundance of
peace, and the free passage of the Gospel, such may be our gracelesnesse that
we shall be the better for neither of them: not for the peace; that will not
make our times a Day, if we abuse it in riot and luxury, extortion and imurie,
diseases that the malignitie of our nature has made almost inseparable
companions of civil peace and prosperity. As our vntowardlinesse may hinder
the Civil Day, so may it the Spiritual also; if we loath the heavenly food
as many profane persons do, or as many ouer-curious take an occasion from it
to rent the seamelesse Coat of Christ, and fall to Sects and Schisms, and how
many Churches that might have been happy, have been by these means most
unhappy? We have not wanted Gauls of this kind which have fretted our
Spiritual Day; as our Civil is much dimmed by the voluptuousness of our
times. You see then there is good reason of the second branch of the Prayer,
Prosper Lord; let not thy blessings, O Lord, be received in vain, let either
sort his blessed effect, Religion in the Church, and peace in the Commonweal.

I have showed what you must do in solemnizing of a Festival, there remain
two things which I will touch in a word; the first is, When this must be done;
then by whom; both these contain the manner How we must do this duty; these
things must be done jointly, and they must be done universally. Jointly, that
is noted in the word Now; Save Now, send Now Prosperity; we must fall to our
prayers, even when we are singing praises. Chap. 11.
It is very true which the son of Syracke observes. In the day of
prosperity there is a forgetfulness of affliction, and in the day of
affliction there is no remembrance of prosperitte; this is the usual course of
men; Psalm. 118.
but he gives a good admonition, when thou have enough remember the time of
hunger, and when thou art rich think upon pouerne and need; let us not forget
our prayers, when we are at our praises, When the Church is Triumphant there
shall be then only Joy, and praise shall be our only work, but while the
Church is Militant, Dolor and Voluptas inuicem cedunt, there is a vicissitude
of fair and foul weather, prosperity and adversity; therefore as we must
praise God for the one; so must we pray against the other; at the same time
we must do both. But who are they that must do it? the text has no more but
We, but if you look unto the beginning of the Psalm you shall find a
Commentary upon that word, you shall find that this must be done universally;
Israel must do it, The House of Aaron must do it, all must do it that fear
the Lord; if all be the better for the Day, the duty of solemnizing the Day
belongs unto all, to the Ecclesiastical to the Civil State; both must
acknowledge what they receive, both must acknowledge the Day whereon they did
receive it. The Day wherein the blessed Sun did arise unto us all; the fruits
of whose Reign are this great calm from storms of war, and plentiful
publication of Gods saving truth, we must all acknowledge both these
blessings. As we must all acknowledge them, so must we all take full comfort in
them; we must not defraud the Day of our joy, seeing the day brings comfort
unto us; it brings comfort to our body, and comfort to our souls, therefore
our bodies and souls must rejoice in it. In it; but not forgetting him that
made it, that is God; As for the Day we are most beholding to him, so in him
must we joy most.

But our comfort must not make us forget our danger, danger from without,
danger from within, danger from our own vntowardlinesse, danger from the
maliciousness of our enemies; this double danger must make us seek to him
that made our Day, that he would make it a perpetual Day, that he would
hinder whatsoever impediment we may justly fear from our enemies, and not
suffer us to be an impediment of our own bliss.

I shut up all with the very words of my text. Our times are such, as that we
have good cause to use the first words, This is the Day which the Lord has
made; and if we must say this, this must draw from us that which follows the
religious solemnizing of the day; we must exhort each the other, and be
persuaded by our mutual exhortation to vow the expressing of our comfort, We
will rejoice and be glad in it, and deprecate whatsoever imminent danger, with
Save Now we beseech thee, O Lord; O Lord we beseech thee send us now
Prosperity. AMEN.

A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT MARY'S IN OXFORD ON THE fifth of November, 1614.
LVKE. 9. VERSE. 53, 54, 55, 56. 53. But they would not receive him, because his
face was as though he would go to Jerusalem.

54. And when his Disciples James and John saw it, they said: Lord will thou
that we command that fire come down from Heaven and consume them: even as
Elias did.

55. But Jesus turned about and rebuked them, and said; ye know not of what
spirit you are.

56. For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.
Then they went to another Town.


FAthers and Brethren, Reverend and Beloved in the Lord; We solemnize this Day
in a religious acknowledgement of the King and his Kingdoms, our Church and
Commonweals unspeakable deliverance from an unmatchable Treason. In
furtherance of this common Piety, to refresh our memory, and quicken our
devotion, I have chosen this story, which contains an impartial censure of
an inordinate Zeal; inordinate Zeal in two Apostles, who are therefore
impartially censured by our Savior Christ. And this story have I the rather
chosen at this time to speak of in this place, because here is the hope of
Church and Common Weal, the Seed as well of the Gentry, as of the Clergy. And
it is for such that the Factors of Rome do trade, to make Advocates of the
one, and of the other Actours of their holy Fathers most barbarous Designs.
Wherefore it is very behoofull, that they above others, be not only inured to
detest, but informed also upon what ground they should detest, such savage,
such hellish counsels and attempts.

Now better informed they cannot be then if they be furnished with sound rules
of a good conscience, which they may oppose to all deceitful Romish ones,
wherewith the unlearned are ensnared, and they perverted that are unstable. The
Romanists boast of their manifold studies of Divinity, and indeed they have
manifold, I would they were as good as they are many; But their Cases of
Conscience are that upon which they principally rely, and wherewith their
Kingdom is most supported; And no marvel, for they are even for the Lay-mans
study, and their Power of the Keys is chiefly managed by these Cases. It is
most true, that all parts of their Divinity are full fraught with sophistry,
but when we come to this part, over and above, what impiety, what iniquity,
what impuritie do we find? Others occasionally may under take other points, I
wish they would, provided always that they do it soundly, discreetly,
considering what a precious, what a tender thing, a good Conscience is; It is
not every man's skill aright to handle it.

But I have now to do with a point of Iniquity, with an unlawful revenge of
persons afflicted for Religion. We have here a Revenge proposed by such
afflicted persons, and we have Christ's doom passed thereupon, that such
revenge is unlawful; See it in the Text. First, the Affliction; The Samaritans
would not receive Christ; And this Affliction was for Religion; Christ was not
received, because his face was as if he would go to Jerusalem. It was great
inhumanitie not to entertain a stranger, but the reason improues it as high as
Impiety, if we therefore fare the worse at the hands of men, because we are
well disposed to serve God.

Being so far urged, Zeal cannot hold; surely James and John could not, as
was their name, so were they: Sons of Thunder were they called, and the
Exhalations they breath are very hot.

And yet mark, though they are bold to propose, yet are they not so bold as to
resolve; They propose their Desire, their Reason. Their desire is Fire, a
cruel weapon, and they would not have it spare a jot, it must consume their
enemies; make a final, and a fearful spectacle of these ungodly Samaritans.
A sharp desire. And yet they stick not at it; and why? it is not singular,
they have, though not a Rule, yet an Example for it; Elias did so, that is the
reason; He dealt so with the old Samaritans when they wronged him; and shall
these new Samaritans escape better, that thus wrong Christ? This they propose.

But they do not resolve, as if they were conscious to themselves that they
may err, they submit their desire to God and to Christ. They desire Fire,
consuming Fire, but it is from Heaven, they would have no other then God would
send; Nay, they would not have that except Christ be pleased, Master will thou?
if thou say, Nay, we have done; Behold Nature and Grace, and how Grace does
stop the fury of Nature.

Grace does somewhat, but the Fountain of Grace does it much more; They put
the Question to Christ, and Christ gives them an answer, a cooling answer;
for he reproues their Zeal, and disproues their Reason; and he does both in
Word and Deed.

He reproues in Deed; for He turned about, his gesture was angry; not only in
Deed, but also in Word, and his Word commented upon his Deed, he checked them.

But to reprove and show no cause, is to hold the Hands, but not to rectify
the Heart; Christ does not so, he will not only have them forbear, but also
to be persuaded that they ought so to do. Therefore he confuteth their Reason.

Their Reason was Elias his Example, Christ tells them that Example is
misapplied; you know not of what spirit ye are; Every man's temper must be
according to his Calling, you are called to be my Apostles, therefore must you
take your temper from me; and my temper is answerable to the ends of my
Incarnation; well might Elias answer his Name, it signifies the Power of God,
and he showed Gods Power in taking vengeance; he came to destroy men's lives;
but Jesus must answer his own Name, and his Name signifies The Salvation of
the Lord; therefore is he become the Son of Man, that he may Save the lives
of men. So Christ refuteth their Reason in Words.

But not only in Words, He does it in Deeds also, he that gave them a good
Rule, gives them a good Example; He went unto another Town* yea, partly, the
Rule, and partly the Example put these hot Disciples into a better mood, for
not Christ only, but they also left that, and went into another Town.

You see the contents of this Scripture, and withal that they may be reduced
unto two Heads; The Revenge and the Censure; Of the Revenge there are two
parts, The Preuocation of the Samaritans, and the Passion of the Apostles. And
in the Censure Christ first reproues, and then disproues, not only in Words,
but also in Deeds.

The particulars are many, therefore you may not expect that I speak much of
any one; so much may suffice as will serve this present Occasion, thereon to
ground a sound Case of Conscience, and thereby to stir up due thanks for our
wonderful Deliverance. To this end will I resume the points, and touch at them
briefly, and in there order. And first at the Affliction. The Samaritanes would
not receive him.

The persons that afflicted were, Samaritans, and the Samaritans were ancient
enemies of the Jews; from the days of Rehoboam whose Kingdom was rent into
two, that of Israel, whose Metropolis was Samaria, and the other of Inda, these
Kingdoms were at odds, and in the Israelites did the first quarrel begin
against the Jews. After the Israelites were carried away captives by the Kings
of Assyria, and a Colonie mixed of many Nations succeeded in their room, the
quarrel was inherited together with the Country. It appears immediately upon
the Jews return from the Babylonian captivity; for then the Jews would not
admit the Samaritans to build the Temple with them, because they held them for
Gentiles; and the Samaritans in revenge did their worst to interrupt the
building of the Temple, and although to partake of the Jews prosperity they
were contented to be reputed of their kindred; yet in time of their adversity
they disclaymed them, and were Suitors unto the Kings of Syria and Egypt, that
they might go for Gentiles; though indeed they were neither Jews nor
Gentiles, but Mungrels, mixed no less in Religion then in Nation, taking
somewhat of the Gentile, and somewhat of the Jew, as appears in the
Samaritanismus described by Epiphanius, as impious a Chaos as is the Turks
Alcoran. These were the men that offered the indignity unto Christ. Being so
bad men they make the indignity the worse, though of it self it is bad
enough. Let us see what it is.

It is a sin compounded of Inhumanitie and Impiety, there is inhumanitie in
the fact; but the reason does improve it unto Impiety. The fact was they would
not receive Christ, great inhumanitie not to receive strangers, especially for
Samaritans, who as (Epiphanius reports) received the five Books of Moses,
wherein Hospitality is taught both by Rule, and by Example. The example of
Abraham and Lot are remarkable in Genesis, who were (...), as Saint Paul
wills Christians to be, Romans 12. given to Hospitality. Origin first, and out
of him Chrysostom, observe the significancie of the phrase, which imports,
that we should be so hospitable, as not to stay till strangers seek to us, but
prevent them by our inuitation. And indeed so did Abraham, and so did Lot.

Neither had they only these Examples, but the Law also, Leuit. 19. Thou shall
not wrong a stranger, but love him as thy self. Eumaenes in Homer presses the
reason of it. (...).
(...), all strangers are of Gods Family, the whole World is his House, under
whom every man holds but a small Territory, and although in regard of our
own Tenure, they that have another are strangers unto us; yet are we all
Tenants of the same Landlord, yea of the Household of the same great Master,
and therefore no man should esteem another a stranger. Surely our Savior
Christ shows, Matthew. 25. that this reason which Nature it self taught the
Heathen, is true also in Divinity, in that, Come ye blessed, for when I was a
stranger ye lodged me; and Solomon to the same purpose, He that gives to the
poor lends to the Lord. In Iambic.
But if this Reason go too high, Nazianzene has another more plain to
reason; (...), No man can deny harbor to others that thinks upon this that
himself is a stranger, he has his ground from Gods Law, who therefore bids
the Israelites be good to strangers because themselves were strangers in
Egypt. Chap. 31.
It was no small comfort unto Job, that he could say, The stranger did not
lodge in the street, but I opened my house to him that went by the way. ^il, 5.
de Here Is.
I end this point with Saint Austines exhortation; Disce Christian sine
discretione exhibere hospitalitatem, ne forte cui domum clauseris, cui
humanitatem negaueris, ipse sit Deus; Certainly, he against whom the Samaritans
shut their gates, was Christ; They were so far from inuiting him, that they
would not be entreated by him; If they had been but as dainty as the
Egyptians who held it an abomination to eat with the Hebrews, it had been too
much, but not to receive them under their roose, was plainly against the Law of
Nations.

It was so, But happily they had some reason for their fact; They allege one;
And see, Quomodo cum ratione insaniunt; Christ's face was as if he would go to
Jerusalem; The fact was bad, this reason makes it worse. Some do think that
the Samaritans did always deny entertainment to the Jews, but it is most
certain that they did it when they went to the Feasts. To understand it we
must know, That although God chiefly respect the substance of his worship, yet
in the Old Testament the Jews were tied to a circumstance of place also, God
commanding that they should there sacrifice, where he put his Name, and that
was finally, the Temple of Jerusalem.

After the return from the Babylonian Captivity, when the Law was urged of
diuorcing such wives as were Jews, neither by nature, nor by becoming
Proselytes, Joseph. Ant. l 11. c. 7. and l. 12.6.1.
Manasses a brother of the High Priest was put to his choice whether he would
be excluded from the function of his Priesthood, or forsake his wife; He
consulted Sanballat, a Prince of Samaria, whose daughter he had married, and by
his advice became an Apostata. In recompense whereof, first by the leave of
Darius, and afterward by the approbation of Alexander the Great, Sanballat
built a Temple upon the top of Mount Garisim, the highest Hill of Samaria,
Joseph. l 23. c. 15.
in emulation of the Temple upon Mount Sion, which stood until the days of
Johannes Hircanus, infamous for robbing of King David's Sepulcher, who, together
with Samaria, raised that Temple; and although Herod new built Samaria, yet did
he not the Temple; Notwithstanding the Samaritans esteemed the place in the
days of Christ, no less then if the Temple had been standing. Of this Temple
Manasses was made High Priest, over all the Sect of the Samaritans.

This being the original of their Temple, erected contrary to the Law; yet
did they in time affect it for the reputation of Antiquity, stiling themselves
Pertinentes ad montem benedictum (as Postellus observes) and therein they
allude to the Story, Lib. 12. de lingu^. Deuteronomy. 27.
where we read that the Benediction was pronounced upon Mount Garisim. You have
a touch at their humor, John 4. where the woman of Samaria tells Christ; Our
Fathers worshipped in this Mountain; But most ample to this purpose is that
famous contention between the Samaritans and the Jews that dwelt in Egypt,
heard and determined by the King of that Country; you may read it in Josephus;
And although then their forged Antiquity was discovered, and condemned, (as
the same Josephus reports) yet ceased they not to stand to it, and be bitter
to all that denied it. I might trouble you with relation of the bloody war
between them and the Galileans about a passage through their Country unto
Jerusalem; Joseph. l. 20 c. 5.
But it will suffice to observe that the Samaritans quarrel against the Jews
(for Theophylacts conceit why Christ was not entertained at Jerusalem is
clean opposite to the truth) was de loco cultus, Videtur appropinquasse festu^
Scenophagiae.
which was a necessary Question then, though not now; (...) (as Chrysostom
observes.) But being then a necessary Question it was fit, that Christ should
deliver his judgment, and he does it openly; His face was as if he went to
Jerusalem.

There is a figure in the phrase, in that the Face is said to go; but there is
significancie in the figure, because it notes Christ's plain dealing, and
constancy therein; which is also intimated in the former words (...);
Simulation is a real lie, as a lie is a verbal dissimulation; both sins
alike hated by Christ, and Christians, Saint Paul's rule With the heart man
belieueth unto instification, Apol. 2.
and with the tongue he confesses unto salvation, was observed by our Savior;
And Justin Martyr observes in the Primitive Church that they were so far from
impugning their adversaries, that they did not endeavor so much as to deceive
them, but aperte confitentes mortem adiba^t. The same does Tertullian
obseruewriting ad Scapulam. But the old Heretics were of another mind, I might
instance in sundry, of whom read Danaeus Comment upon Saint Austine de
Haeresibus; I will only mention the Priscillianists of whom Saint Austine;
Habent etiam in dogmatibus, Iura, periura, secretum prodere noli, Trust rather
God with thy soul, then men with either thy body or goods. And how like unto
them are the Jesuitical Equiuocators, that with a nice distinction of Veritas
Iuramenti and Iurantis have learned themselves and others infamous Hypocrisy,
and having separated the Serpent from the Dove show whom they resemble Christ
or the Devil? I will say no more to them, then what Jerome said sometimes to
Johannes Hierosolymitanus; Ad ^ammachium.
Nolo verborum ambiguitates, nolo m^hi dici quod aliter intelligi possit,
retecta facie gloriam Domini intueamur: If we will not have Christ deny us
before his Father, Romans 10.
we must not deny him before men; for Cord creditur ad institiam; we must
learn of Christ constantly to confess the truth; yea though thereby we
incur danger, as Christ did. For as Christ's Confession was open: so you see
it was not well taken, the Samaritanes had no personal quarrel against him,
the National was enough, he approved not their Place of worship, and they
would therefore have none of his company.

Men that are of diverse Nations hardly sort, more hardly if they be of diverse
Religions, the degree of hatred arises to the height of that for which they
hate, and higher matter there cannot be then Religion, therefore the Devil
intends that Quarrel specially, because it is the root of all Enmity; He
knows, if that take place, there is nothing whereat malice will stick, it
will set the Father against the Son, and the Son against the Father; where
there is unity in Religion, Religion is some stay to malice, but there is
nothing to stay it, if Religion set men at odds; for their inhumanitie they
suppose they have a fair excuse, Orat. 12. and Orat. 14. p. 199.
if they can make God a party to the Quarrel. Nazianzene has handled this
point excellently, showing that men being ashamed of their villainy fly (...).
And what cloak have ambitious, covetous, malicious massacres at this day,
Ambros. l 10. Epist. 82.
but the specious name of the Catholic Choose? I urge this point no further,
but remember you that this quarrel between the Jews and the Samaritans was
the cause of that War, wherein the Romans did utterly destroy them both. And
how much of Christiandoome became a prey many hundred years since unto the
Sarizens, and of late years to their heirs the Turks, he has read little
that does not know: God grant that the continuance of this malice bring not
that which remainueth into the same bondage, which the Kingdoms already lost,
do miserably endure. But enough of the Samaritans Provocation.

I come now to the Persons of the Apostles, and those were James and John. I
will not dispute whether they were the persons that were sent to prepare for
Christ, the Scripture is silent; I will not define it. Let it pass for a
probability, because some of the Ancients have thought it likely. But that
which I rather observe is, These two Disciples above the rest had a strong
conceit of Christ's earthly Kingdom, which made them carnally both ambitious
and zealous: Of their ambition we read elsewhere, where One of them desired to
sit on Christ's right hand, and the other on his left; here they show themselves
zealous: But their indignation is carnal, and so is the weapon where with they
do express it.

My Observation is; One gross conceit breeds another: It did so in them: It
does so in the Church of Rome, who dreaming of a temporal power which Christ
has given unto his Church, is forward to execute temporal pains upon
whomsoever is not conformable unto her will.

But I leave the Persons, and come to their Passion. Wherein notwithstanding
mark that though they are bold to propose; yet to resolve they are not bold.
They are bold to propose their Desire, their Reason. Their desire is Fire, a
sharp weapon, (especially seeing Saint Paul for dissension in Religion
prescribes other) which they would not have to spare, they would have it
Consume their Enemies. Rom 16.
Fire is their Weapon: Quid mirum filios tonitrus fulgurare? (says Saint
Ambrose) It may be the very place put them in mind of the Element, because it
was in the Region of Samaria that God executed a fearful vengeance by Fire.
2. Kings 1. Or happily because this Element is in the Scripture made the ordinary
attendment upon Gods Judgment, therefore they especially affect that weapon
Johannes Magnus reports that Carolus an ancient King of the Goths, amongst
his great Laws, ordained this for one: That if any man were thrice convicted
to have denied entertainment to strangers, his house should be set on fire, Vi
aedibus proprijs just priuaretur, qui earum vsum inhumaniter negavisset.
Surely whereas there are four Elements; the Earth, the Water, the Air, the
Fire, every one of the three first are hospital; the Earth entertaines beasts
and men, the Water fishes, the Air birds; only the Fire is inhospitall, and
therefore though they might have wished for an earthquake to founder the
Village, or a flood to drown it, or a venomous Air to poison the Inhabitants
of it; as that King thought: so did these Apostles think that the other 3
Elements were too compassionate, and only this unmerciful Element ^i^ to take
vengeance on these merciles men. Sure they would have no mercy showed them, for
they would not only have fire, out Consuming fire. Li 2 (...).
Seneca observes well: Non vt in beneficijs bonestum est meritameritis
compe^sare, ita in iniurijs: illic vinci turpe, hic vincere inhumanum; and the
rule of the Law is; Fauores ampliandt, restringendaodia; and God is the
Pattern hereof: whose mercy does indeed permit him to do us good Vltra
condignum, but his Justice never strikes us but Citra condignum. (...) 81.
(...). 40. (...) 131.
God is more admirable in sparing then punishing, because Cedit iure suo in the
one, Exigit in the other: read Hosea 1.6. Wisd. 12. It is our riches to exact
our debts, but Gods to forgive his. What bowels then had these Apostles that
would so repay wrong with revenge? a Iesse wrong with so sharp a revenge; for
it was but a common discourtesie which for many years the Samaritans bad used
toward all the Jews, and that out of no other malice then such as proceeded
from a rooted ignorance, they were then rather to be p^tied for their
ignorance, then thus to be hated for their malice. But I see now the truth of
King David's answer to the Prophet Gad when he was offered his choice of three
plagues, Famine, (...)
Pessilence, or the Sword: I am in a wonderful straight; Let us fall now into
the hand of the Lord, for his mercies are great, and let not me fall into the
hands of men, for men are bowelles even James and John, which asking fire, show
themselves to be worse then fire: for (as Chrysostom observes) Fire can stay
it self, if God command, though it be the nature of fire to burn, as
appears in the case of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; but men though it be
contrary to their nature, (as appears in that it is painful) to be furious
and rage, cannot hold, though God lay his commandment upon them. The voluntary
Agent whose property it should be Statuere actiont suae modum, becomes a
natural, Et agit ad extremum potentiae suae. Unto whom I say no more but this:
Would thou O man that God should so deal with thee, and send fire, such a
fire, so soon as thou deniest entertainment unto him? Thou would not; see
then how every man desires mercy for himself, the tenderest mercy, but for
his enemy Justice, the extremest Justice; and because it is so, Seneca's rule
is good, Irascenti tibi nihil volo licere, quia dum irasceris omnia putas
licere. In a word; the Apostles offend twice; first, in that being Pastors they
desire a corporal revenge: Secondly, in that being Christians they desire so
sharp a revenge. Nazianzene thinks they wished for the fire of Sodom.

Sharp it is, but it is not singular; though they have no Rule, yet they have
an Example for it; Elias did so. In this Chapter is report made of the
Transsiguration of Christ, wherein appeared Moses and Elias; ^ Moses the
meekest of men, Elias a severe man; they saw them both, but see whom they
remember; they might have remembered Moses, and so have entreated Christ not to
take just displeasure at so bad usage, if he had been feeling of his own
wrongs; but while he is calm, they storm, and they color their passion by
Elias his example: So prone is our nature to imitation, and in imitation to
pitch upon the worst. The knowledge of Rules is too painful, few will study
them, and know good and evil by them; men take a shorter course, and think
that well done wherein they are like unto others: So lives the most part of
the world, and cares not much for any farther enquiry into their actions. But
when they fall upon examples according to which they square themselves, their
lives commonly are exemplifications of the worst. It is the observation of a
very lewd Writer, but herein he has delivered a remarkable truth: When men
read the lives of good men they read them with content, and cannot without
detestation read the lives of those that are bad; yet when they are but to
express whom they will be like, they forget their own upright judgment, and
yield themselves to their inordinate Passions. Certainly these Apostles, not
so much out of judgment, as out of rage, chose rather to be li^e Elias then
Moses; and wherein are they better then the Samaritans? For the Samaritans
ran upon the same ground that they did; they called for fire because Elias
did, and the Samaritans had the same argument, They would not receive Christ,
because their Fathers had not used to to do it: Certainly in the 4. of John,
the woman of Samaria alleges: Our Fathers worshipped in this Mount; in defense
of Mount Garisim, against Sion: But this is but apish imitation on all hands,
and not the true use that is to be made of Stories.

You have heard their Desire, and the Reason thereof which they are bold to
utter unto Christ. But they that are so bold to propose, are not bold to
resolve: It was but (...), it was not (...) that was in them; you may gather it
by the voice of Grace, wherewith they correct the voice of Nature. There are
but two means whereby men may accomplish an action; Potentia and Potestas;
Ability and Authority; they deny themselves both. First Ability: They will have
fire, but it is from Heaven, they will have none but such as God can send, and
such works of wonder, they acknowledge to be his works, and though they be
performed at the word of man; yet he works by his own finger, and therefore
it is not to be doubted, but if he do it, it shall be well done; and if it be
not well, he will not do it. Neither do they only deny that they have
Ability, but Authority also, which they refer to Christ; Master will thou? As
the ability is Gods; so they know that God works not but Mediante Christo,
and therefore have they recourse unto him: Though they confess whether their
own heart carried them, yet they doubted of the goodness thereof, as they had
cause, for immediately before they were chid because they forbid one to work
miracles, that did not follow Christ: that they did out of zeal, as they did
this; they saw they erred there, they thought they might err here also;
wherefore they come in with Lord will thou? Iusta voluntas hominis, quae ea
tantum vult quae Deus vult eam velle; iniusta vero quae vult illud quod Deus
non vult eam velle: And Saint Bernard; Quid odit, Sermon de Resur.
aut punit Deus praeter propriam voluntatem? cesset voluntas propria, et
Infernus non erit. We may not take in hand corporal, no nor spiritual
weapons without this preface: Lord will thou? and we must pray; Psalm. 143.
Teach me O Lord, to do thy will for thou art my God. The two means whereby
the Apostles qualify their speech, will teach us to qualify ours.

They put the Question to Christ, and Christ shapeth them an Answer; and his
answer consists of a Reproof of their zeal, and Disproofe of their reason;
and he does both in Words and Deeds.

First, in Deeds. He turned about: His Observation will not hold, that says
this phrase is never taken but in bonam partem, it signifies sometimes the
evidence of Christ's displeasure, Christ, as he was truly man: so was he
herein like unto him, that those Objects that wrought upon his soul, gave some
signification in his body of sorrow, when he wept, of exultation when he
rejoiced, and of displeasure when he was wrath; but his passions were free from
Concupiscence, wherewith ours are defiled: our Passions are like water that
has a muddie residence, which when it is stirred every part grows foul with
mudde: but Christ's like clean water in a pure vessel, which is never the
fowler for the motion. This being observed, Christ's turning to them might well
be such as gave notice that he was offended with them.

Neither did he reprove them in Gesture only, but in Words also, his words
commented on his gesture, and they were words of reproof; vere diligit
Christus suos, sed severe; as well as he loves them, he spares not to let
them know their faults; he is far from King David's indulgence, of whom it is
observed that he never said to his son Adoniah; Why do thou so? But
Christ, as when there is cause, he comforts: so when there is cause he checkes
also. Neither must we look that the light of his countenance should always
shine upon us, except there be in us constant obedience.

But Reproof without Disproofe is to hold the hand without mending the heart;
Christ intends the good of his whom he reproues, and therefore disproues that
which misled them, that when they see their error they may not only forbear,
but also be willing so to do when they see there is good reason why they
should. Christ then disproues their Reason; their Reason was, Elias did so;
therefore why not we? Christ tells them the Example is ill applied; You know
not of what spirit you are. And indeed Examples are tickle proofs, and
conclude nothing except both agree in the same common Rule or Principle. Now
that they never examined, Christ therefore tells them, They know not of what
spirit they are.

The spirit does often signify not only the Person of God and Devil, but also
the motions that in us are wrought by either of them; so the first meaning of
Christ's words may be; You do not observe who stirs you to this work, you
think it is God, but it is the Devil. Or if you will take the word Spirit
only for an holy Spirit, then Christ's meaning is; You do not consider that
every ones temper must be suitable to his Calling; Elias had one Calling, you
have another; Elias was to go before Christ, and turn the hearts of Fathers
to their children, that when Christ came he might not smite the earth with
cursing, and he went before in the person of John Baptist, who was a sower man.
But they, as if Christ were to be Elias, would have him to break forth in
fiery wrath. Which is the more blameable in them, because when Christ sent
them abroad, he willed that if any City refuse to entertain them, they should
only shake off the dust of their feet, and leave the rest of their punishment
unto Gods Judgment, who will in time handle them worse then the Apostles
wished, for it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorra, Matthew. 5.
which perished by fire, then for that City. And could they forget Christ's
Sermon which he made on the Mount, wherein he willed them to love their
enemies, to pray for them, etc. The reason whereof is because they know not how
soon of wolves they may become sheep; The Samaritans (whom they would have
consumed with fire) were the first strangers that received the Gospel; they
were the first in the days of Christ's flesh, as appears in the story. John
4. And after Christ's Ascension they were the first likewise, as appears in the
Acts. Chap. ^.
It is for God who only knows who will convert, and who not, to give such
doomes as Elias did, and till his pleasure is known, our vocation that are
Christians, especially if we be Christian Pastors, is to incline rather to
mercy then to judgment, and because these Adostles did not so, Christ
challenges their zeal of ignorance, Nescitis cuius spiritus.

Though the Passion came immediately from the heart, and so was zelus amarus,
which Saint James condemns; yet Christ blames their understanding, because it
did not guide their heart aright, wherein he implies, that they are ill
advised, and that they would not have done it, i^ they had better considered of
it; by which it appears that Estis is taken for Esse debetis; you are is put
for you ought to be, for they were not what they should be.

That will appear better in Christ's more distinct Reproof; The Son of man
is not come to destroy but to save men's lives; which words may have a threefold
sense.

The first is to distinguish Jesus from (...); each answers his name; The one
destroys, the other saves; The Apostles must not turn the Savior into a
destroyer, that is to parallel Christ and the the Devil. And this sense is
employed in the word (...) and (...), which are Coniugates with (...) and (...).

A second sense there is wherein this phrase distinguishes between Christ's
first and second Coming, and shows that though (...), Christ shall come for
to destroy when he comes to judgment, yet (...), he was not already come
but to save; Therefore they were not to confound these two Commings, and to do
Acts of the later at his first Coming, when he comes not only to give
himself for men, but expects their repentance also.

The last sense is an opposition of Christ to Elias; each is to answer his
Name; Elias his name signifies The power of God; and indeed all the time of
his Ministry, what was it but a manifestation of Gods wrathful power in
executing vengeance upon sinners; his words, his deeds run all that way; But
Christ's Name was Jesus, and Jesus is a Savior; God has not sent his Son to
condemn, but to save the world; and it is a true saying, That he came into the
world to save sinners; Therefore as King David answered the sons of Zeruia
when they would have had him slay Shimei, 2. Sam. 19.
because he cursed the Lords Anointed: What have I to do with you ye sons
of Zeruia that ye should this day be unto me as Satan? Shall there any man
die this day in Israel? So does Christ cool his Apostles, and show that their
desire must be correspondent to the end of his Incarnation. Yea, the very
phrase Filius Hominis imports a tenderness in Christ; Chap. 2.
Saint Paul observes it in the Hebrews, He became man that he might be a
merciful High Priest. And this sweetness of his nature, and mildness of his
spirit was signified both by the title of a Lamb, which was given him at his
death, and the shape of a Dove, which lighted on him at his Baptism.

And indeed what likelihood that he would burn a Town of the Samaritans for
not receiving him, that prayed for Jerusalem even when the Jews were ready
to crucify him? yea, Father forgive them was his revenge, when they scoffed
him hanging on the Cross. Christ that came to save all sorts of people, was
pleased to suffer wrong of them all, that so none should think they deserved
better then other. There were then but three sorts of people in the world; two
extremes, Jews and Gentiles, and one composed of them both Samaritans; The
Jews and Gentiles evil entreated him at Jerusalem, the Samaritans upon his
way thither; Christ was bitter to none of them, but let them all have proof of
the meekness of his spirit; though his Disciples were not so. Peter was busy
with his sword at Jerusalem, and James and John are desirous to have fire at
Samaria. But as at Jerusalem he showed Peter: so here at Samaria he shows
James and John the error of their zeal, and learneth them this lesson, which
Nazianzene has in his Tetrasticks; (...).

Most sweet is this assertion of Christ, and it is the chiefest comfort of our
souls, for if thou Lord mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who shall abide it?
Surely, if our Master were as apt to smite as his servants; Chrysostom. de
Anathemate.
our Lord, as his Ambassadors; if Christ's Anathemaes were as quick as men's,
what would become of the world? what combustions? what destruction should we
see? But, God bethanked, it is not so. And we shall do well to learn of him,
especially Pastors must learn to be like the great shepherd of our souls.

Christ does not only disprove in Words, but in Deeds also; They went unto
another Village; He taught his Disciples before so to do; If they persecute
you in one City fly to another; The Precept wrought not, In Tetrast.
he gives them a Pattern; Facile est verbis philosophari, doce me vitae tuae
exemplo, for as Nazianzene (...).

And indeed, whereas Christ was not ignorant before he sent how the Samaritans
would use him; yet was he pleased to have a repulse that he might teach his
Disciples how to bear it; for Christ's life, no less then his doctrine was a
Gospel, and he instructed no less by his Deeds, then he did by his Words; and
he taught no lesson more then he did Patience.

But I have stood long enough in opening the meaning of this text; Let me come
now to the principal use which I intend to make of it, which is twofold; The
first is to ground thereon a good resolution of conscience. The second to
stir us up unto thankfulness for our wonderful deliue rance.

For the Case of Conscience we must observe, That generous minds undertake not
detestable facts, except their Conscience first be poisoned. Secondly, that the
Devil is not contented that we sin in Passion, for so in cold blood we
might retract and take a better course; he desires therefore that we may be
wicked habitually; so he shall be sure to have us his at all times, and that
we will never stick at the most hellish attempts. For if the conscience be
once so seasoned that it will take evil for good, and good for evil, the
Angel of darkness rule therein transformed into an Angel of light, this
false light will so possess our understanding that the most hellish darkness
of our affections shall never be discerned by us; yea the worse we are, the
better we shall please our selves; for every man rests secure in the
testimony of his own conscience, and he questioneth no farther then to
resolve that.

The Gunpowder Traitors before they were deliuerered of that Monster, had
scruples whether it were lawful. They consult their Ghostly Fathers, for it is
a common rule; Histiaeus vestem consuit, quam induit Aristagoras (as the
Persian in Herodotus speaks of the Samianes revolt) no treachery without a
Priests head, who works notwithstanding by other men's hands) they are put out
of all doubt that such attempts are so far from being sinful, that they are
meritorious. If any man doubt that this is their doctrine, let him read either
Bellarmine or Suarez, or, which is more authentical, Bulla Coenae Domini, and
he shall see in what state they hold all that come within the compass of their
Censure.

To try the uprightness of this Censure, I have chosen this Story, wherein
you shall have Christ himself sit Judge, and guiding our Conscience in
conceiving of this case aright. In the Revenge you may see the Traitors
Passion, but with remarkable difference; But in the Censure the Sophistry of
their Ghostly Fathers, which resolve them of the lawfulness of such revenge.

And although the story may seem less pertinent, because herein they which
afflict are good, and they evil that are afflicted; yet indeed the argument
holds more strongly; for if it be not lawful for the good in this case to
persecute the bad; much less it is lawful for the bad to persecute the good;
If James and John that were Pillars of the Church no less then Saint Peter,
are disliked for desiring such vengeance against the Samaritans, that were
otherwise execrable people, much less may Samaritans desire it against James
and John.

Let us then suppose that these Traitors were as Catholic as Christ and his
Apostles, and we as Heretical as the Samaritans, you see Christ's carriage in
this case; Whereby you may apprehend his Judgment of this Treason; He would
not allow a Prayer for fire; would he then allow the consumption it self? He
would not allow Fire from Heaven, and would he allow fire from Hell? He would
not allow, Oculum charitatis perturbatum, passionate Revenge, or revenge in hot
blood; and would he allow Oculum charitatis extinctum, advised hatred, and
revenge in cold blood? He would not allow it in James and John whom he dearly
loved, and would he allow it in Jesuits, in Rebels, persons hateful to God and
men? He would not allow it against Samaritans, and would he allow it against
Professors of his Truth? It cannot be doubted, he would not allow it.

And now I must briefly let you see that Papists are most like unto Samaritans,
though they would fasten that infamy upon us.

Two things I observed in the Samaritans: First, that their Temple was but of a
later Edition, much younger then that of Jerusalem, and built without any
lawful warrant, and yet notwithstanding they did countenance it with the Names
of greatest Antiquity; and what do Papists offer to the Church but new devices
many hundred years younger then the Truth? and yet would they out face the
World, that they have their Original from Christ, and the Apostles; Their
Pedigree is as true as was the Samaritans.

As for our Church, this is our comfort, that though we are not matches for
Christ and his Apostles; yet we profess our selves their followers, and for
the truth thereof refetre our selves unto their writings, by which only we
desire to be tried. And yet these Samaritans deadly hate us that are Orthodoxe,
but blame our Doctrine; as they that have weak eyes or deaf ears accuse the
Sunshine of darkness, Na^^^^.
or Music of vntunablenes; (...). And if they could be contented to call for
Fire from Heaven, we are contented to endure it; God we desire may be Judge
between us, and if in dislike of our Doctrine, he will send a fire, we refuse
it not, though it consume us. But they dare not trust God, they will trust
themselves, and not expecting help from above, they will seek it from
beneath. And yet it is markeable that whereas they boast of Miracles, and the
Wonders of their Saints that make the blind to see, the deaf to hear, the
lame to go, and dead to revive (as their Legends tell us) yet of all their
Saints not one ever would work a Miracle to destroy us Heretics; here they
leave their Idolaters to do what they can forge and perform by their hellish
heads and hearts, whereof we have had many woeful experiments, Nazian. Orat.
3.
the Gunpowder Traitors, as Julian, comparable to Aetna. But let them take
heed; the same God that has here reproved James and John, will not spare for
to censure them; he has done it in our eyes, by bringing to light (and that
strangely) what they thought hidden only in the depth of their own hearts, and
has turned their mischief upon their own pates. And that the rather because
their Guides abuse his name, and calling themselves Jesuits are plainly (...).
They are a snare on Mizpah, etc. Hosea 5. and Build Syon with blood. Micha. 6.
and would have made Westminster a Mare mortuum. I cannot tell ^o whom to
parallel them except to the Zeloti remembered by Josephus, who gave themselves
that Name, even as the Jesuits have given themselves theirs; and both upon the
like pretense of maintayning their Country, their Liberty, Learning,
Discipline, and what not that was good? whereas notwithstanding the same Author
observes that never were there worse Miscreants in a City, and that did more
contrary to that which they professed; He observes also their end, that by Gods
just judgment they were brought to as great extremity, and tortured with as
manifold misery, as may befall wicked men. I will not prognosticate, only I
wish them grace that tread their steps to take heed of their Ends, which is
rather to be wished them to be hoped for, so little remorse appeared in them
upon the detection of so foul a fact. King David when he had rashly vowed the
utter destruction of Nabal and his family, and that in a case to this, For
denying entertainment: when he was pacified by Abigail, and his Passion
ouerpast, thus recalled himself; Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that has
sent thee unto me, and blessed be thou that have stayed me from shedding
innocent blood, and revenging my self with mine own hands. And these Apostles
when Christ she wed his dislike werequiet, and went unto another Town,
sparkles of grace which show that the eye of their Charity was not extinct,
though it were troubled; and that though they were moved beyond measure, yet
they could come unto themselves again. And indeed it is a Rule that the
longer a good man pauseth upon his sin, the greater it seems unto him, because
the mist of Concupiscence that blinded his eyes is more and more dispelled, and
the more he sees, the more he sorroweth, for his sorrow for sin is
proportionable to his sight thereof. But in the wicked it is clean contrary,
an unexpected calamity ouer-taking them in their sin, may happily open their
eyes, and they may have a glimmering sight thereof, and make Pharaoh's or Simon
Magus his confession, Confess the sin; but no sooner is the calamity
ouer-blowne, but their Lethargy casts them into a dead sleep again.

Some of these Traitors were so dead in their sin, that they awakened not at
all, and of those that did, the sense was quickly gone. Certainly their
Advocates that now Apologize for them, extenuating the sin of the Actors, and
excusing by the seal of Confession, the Aduisers, show how little grace there
is in that Sect, how unlikely they are unto King David, and unto James and
John. Howsoever they did; let us be of the old Patriarch Jacobs mind, and say
of them, as he said of his sons Simeon and Leui, they were Brethren in
iniquity; My glory enter not into their secret, and my honor be thou not
united to their Assembly: Let us not avenge our selves, but give place unto
wrath, knowing that vengeance belongs unto God, and he will repay: But if
we have bitter zeal, let us not boast, We lie against the truth, as Saint
James speaks. Hoc nomine ijs a quibus iniurias accepimus sublimiores simus,
ostendamus quid illos daemones doceant, quid Christus nos erudiat. In a word;
Nazian^^^
Let every man be slow to wrath, seeing the wrath of man does not accomplish
the righteousness of God. And thus much of the Case of Conscience.

A second use that we should all make of this Story thus applied is to be
stirred up hereby unto hearty thankfulness for our Deliverance. If we did
congratulate our first restitution to the Gospel by Queen Elizabeth, how must
we also, our continuation thereof, and preservation therein in the days of
King James; that he has not suffered the Destroyer to have his will against
us, he has saved our souls, and saved our bodies; the Destroyer aimed at the
ruin of both. Their first intent was to make us drink of their golden cup of
poison, to make us fall down and worship their Idol: But not speeding of
that, because it pleased God to continue our Sovereign a constant Defender of
the Truth, they attemped a second ruin, the ruin of our bodies. But Jesus
has Saved us from both; he has saved us from being corrupted with their
Heresies, he has saved us from being Destroyed by their malice. So that we
may say; Blessed be the Lord which has not giuiug us as a prey unto their
teeth. We can never more feelingly receive the Eucharist then upon this
occasion; there is present our Jesus, he inuiteth us to partake of him; And we
that have Seen, let us also taste how good the Lord is, and praise him because
we find that all are so blessed that put their trust in him I end.

The sum of all is. The Church is subject to the Cross and Christians must
look to suffer, and must not be ashamed to suffer for Christ; But in suffering
they must remember not to recompense evil for evil; but to overcome evil
with good; So did Christ: so must Christians, both in Word and Deed.

O Lord, that by thy Words and by thy Deeds have taught us to spend the heat
of our zeal in the constant profession of thy Truth, not in the bloody
persecution of our foes, give us grace to possess our souls in patience and
let the blood of our deadliest enemies be precious in our sight; So shall we
bear the character not of the Destroyer, but of the Deliverer; and having
happily escaped all plots of our destruction; in thy House with songs of
praise, bless thee, O Jesus, the only constant Author, no less of our
temporal then of our eternal Salvation. A SERMON PREACHED AT St ANDREWS IN
WELLS ONE DOING PENANCE FOR JNCEST.
PSALM 50. VERSE 21. These things have thou done, and J kept silence: thou
thoughtest that J was altogether such a one as thy self: but J will reprove
thee, and set them in order before thine eyes.


THE Argument of this Psalm is an heavenly Assizes, whereof we have here the
Appearance, and the Indictment: the appearance made at it, and the indictment
read in it.

The Appearance is great, whether we respect the Judge, or the judged; the Judge
GOD, the judged the Church of the Jews: both are set forth, GOD in Majesty,
whether you respect his own Person, or Attendants; the Church with her
prerogatives, as she is consecrated to GOD, and has couenanted with him: And
the conclusion is, that this Church notwithstanding, yea the rather for her
prerogatives, shall be arraigned before that Judge.

But what is her Arraignment? Surely the transgression of the Law, so much of
the Law as contains GODS service; for this she shall be arraigned, and
receive judgment also as we are taught in my Text.

In my Text then we are to observe two things: First, how far the Jews are
guilty. Secondly, how GOD proceeds against them. How far they are guilty,
appears in the first words, These things, etc. which are relative, and repeat
the enormous sins that are distinctly specified in the words that go before.
For these sins GOD, proceeds against them, after much Patience, which the
Jews abused, unto such Vengance as against which they shall have nothing to
except. GODS Patience is gathered out of his silence, I held my tongue: the
Jews abuse hereof, GOD testifies to their face, thou thoughtest that I am
altogether such a one as thou art. This abuse is insufferable, therefore GOD
threatens Vengance, I will reprove thee: such Vengance as against which they
shall not be able to except, I will set thy sins in order before thine eyes.

You have heard the substance of these words which I must now enlarge, and
apply as this present occasion does require.

The first point then is the Indictment, which shows how far the Jews were
guilty, it is expressed in the first words, These things have thou done,
whereof every one is remarkable. These things are relative words, and repeat
the Challenge that is made unto the Jews in sundry former verses, the sum
whereof is, That they were guilty of transgressing the Law. The Law so far
as we have to do with it, is partly Ceremonial, and partly Moral: within
these two is concluded the service of GOD. The Ceremonial cherishes the
Moral, and the Moral quickneth the Ceremonial; yea, the Ceremonial is a
sensible description of the Moral, and the Moral is a discreet limitation of
the Ceremonial: when they go together they work both a sincere, and a sober
service of GOD; sober in regard of the Ceremony, sincere in regard of the
Morality.

But we must mark that the Ceremonial and the Moral Law differ as the Soul
and Body of man; the body is of small use if it be severed from the Soul, so
is the Ceremonial Law if it be severed from the Moral. Secondly, the body is
inferior to the Soul, even so is the Ceremonial Law inferior to the Moral,
so that if it be a fault to neglect the Ceremonial, it is a much greater to
break the Moral Law.

Lo then the Indictment stands upon two Branches, a Separation, and a
Transgression; a Separation of the Ceremonial Law from the Moral, and which
is worse, a manifold Transgression of the Moral: with these two sins GOD
charge the Jews. Both are great sins: The Separation is; for GOD in his
service commanded that our Souls should concur with our bodies, that our
Affections should speak unto him as well as our tongue, that we should bow
before him the knees of our hearts no less then the knees of our bodies, when
we lift up our hands unto GOD, we should lift up our Souls also, and our eyes
should not behold Heaven, but our faith should pierce unto the Throne of GOD.
Finally, there is no Ceremonial Law which should not attend some Moral, as
the shadow does the body, or the body should the soul; the Son of SYRACH
has made a whole Chapter that teaches this Lesson. But the Jews put a
sunder, what GOD had conjoined; Cap. 35
they showed much zeal for the Ceremonial, but were careless of the Moral
Law; expressed much submission of their bodies, but little devotion of their
Souls, and drew near with their lips, but their hearts were far from God.
Of this GOD complains ESAIAS 1. and does passionately vary terms to express
his dislike thereof, they solemnized their Feasts, and offered Sacrifices, and
assembled themselves in his House; Esaias 1
But what says GOD? To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices? Who
required your presence to tread in my Courts? I hate your solemn Feasts. The
cause of all is, Your hands are full of blood. In the last of ESAIAS, GOD is much
sharper, He that kills an ox is as if he slew a man; Cap. 66.
he that sacrifices a lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck; he that offers
an oblation, is as if he offered swines blood; he that burns Incense, as if
he blessed an Idol. Mark the Reason, They have chosen their own ways, and
their soul delighted in their own abominations.

You see then that in serving GOD we may offend him grievously, if we sever
those things which he has coupled, for our service then will be plain
hypocrisy, and Hypocrifie is, by a Proverb noted to be, double iniquity. And
justly is it so noted; for therein we do first Interpretatiue deny that GOD is
the Searcher of the heart, in that we do not approve our heart to him.
Secondly, we do expressly prefer the Devil before GOD, in that we give the
better part (I mean our Soul) to the Devil, and reserve only the worser
part, that is our bodies, for GOD. This should all that present themselves in
GODS House seriously think on; especially you that make show of a solemn
Penitent, but such a show as betrayeth that there is no broken heart within
you, nor contrite spirit, seeing there appears so little evidence thereof in
the outward man. Be you assured, that so repenting for sin, you do but add
unto your sin, you are a transgressor of the Law in regard of your Separation
of the Ceremonial from the Moral Law.

But there is an other transgression of the Law, which is the direct and
immediate violation of the Moral part thereof: This is the greater sin, and
does more apparently deserve such a name: for the former though it be a sin,
yet it is a cloaked sin, it makes some fair show in the eyes of men, how
ugly soever it is in the eyes of GOD; but this walks unmasked, and appears
as it is. Secondly, the former is Malum quia prohibitum, evil upon no other
ground, but because by a positive Law it is forbidden, it is only
extrinsically evil; the other is prohibitum quia malum, by no means to be done
though there were no positive Law that did forbid it; the evil thereof is
intrinsicall; for it is the violation of the Image of GOD, according to which
man was made, and according to which he should live.

In the particular Case that concerns this Penitent, GOD that gave a rational
faculty unto the soul of man, whereby he should order the sensitive, in the
use thereof, would have a man show himself to be better then a beast: And how
does a man differ from a beast, that has unbridled lusts? and neglect not
only sacred wedlock, but the degrees of Affinity and Consanguinitie within
which GOD and Nature require that his lusts be stinted? This should you that
are the Penetent seriously think on, and measure the grieuousnesse of your
sin by this, these things, as well the transgression of the Moral, as the
separation thereof from the Ceremonial.

But the grieuousnesse of sin is argued not only from what is done, but also
from the doing of the same. Aliud est peccare, aliud peccatum facere (says St
AUGUSTINE) It is one thing to sin, another thing to be given over to sin;
and his distinction is not idle, for it is grounded not only upon St JOHN'S
phrase, 1 John 3.
but also upon St JAMES his gradation, Men are first enticed by their lusts,
Cap. 1.
then lust conceaueth, and brings forth sin, and sin being perfected brings
forth death; and this perfecting of sin is properly the doing of sin: All
men sin, but they that have grace take heed of doing sin; fear and shame
are both shaken off by those that go so far, they endeavor not so much as
to hide their sins. Of these Jews our Psalm says, They sat, they spoke,
they ran, they wrought evil, they consented one with another, and were
professors of a wicked life. And little better is the case of this Penitent,
who for many years has openly in the eyes of the world (notwithstanding the
clamor of many that justly did detest it) lived in abominable Incest, which
does much aggrauate his sin.

There is a third Aggrauation in my Text taken from the Person that does commit
the sin, Thou have done these things: And the circumstance of the Person does
much improve the foulness of a fault. No man should sin against GOD, but
they that are most bound, should forbear most. Now the Jews had a double
Obligation, one by Nature, the other by the Covenant: They were GODS Creatures,
and GOD vouchsafed to contract with them. Not to perform the duty which we
owe, especially when we have solemnly vowed it, makes us guilty in a high
degree. And every one within the Church if he do sin is so far guilty,
his Vow in Baptism, will press him no less then the Condition of his Nature.
And this must you that are the Penitent ponder in your Soul, that you may
answerably hereunto feel the burden of your sin.

I do not amplify these things without Cause; they must be the rather marked,
because the deeper the Jew was in guilt, the greater was GODS Patience.
Notwithstanding their double offense, their Separation and Transgression; their
double Obligation of Nature and Vow; their double sinning in that they did not
only act, but profess sin, yet did GOD hold his peace, he proceeded not
against them but with great Patience. GODS Patience is noted by his Silence;
the word signifies to be deaf, and dumb, and puts us in mind of a double
voice, a voice of sin, and a voice of Judgment. That sins have a Voice you
may read Genesis 4. where ABELS blood does cry: and in the Story of Sodom, Genesis
18.
the voice of whose sin came up to Heaven: In HABAKKVK the stones and timber of
the King of Babylons house built with blood do cry: Finally, James 5.
in St JAMES the wages of the hireling kept from him do cry and come into the
ears of the Lord of Hosts. Cap. 6.
And as sins so judgments have a Voice: MICAH has a notable place; The
voice of the Lord cries unto the City, the Man of Wisdom will see thy name;
hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it: And the Lord is said to make his
judgment to be heard from Heaven. When then GOD says, I was deaf and dumb,
he means, that though the cry of the sin were loud, yet he did not hear it,
he was deaf; neither did they hear from him, though there was just cause, he
was dumb: In these two points stands the Patience of GOD.

Where-hence we learn, that when we are free from plagues, we must not
conclude, that we are without sins, crying sins: The cause of our peace is
often times not our own innocence, but GODS patience; it is not because our
sins hold their tongues, but GODS judgments hold theirs; notwithstanding our
guilt he is silent.

And here appears a great difference between God and Men; Men are as soon
moved as they are provoked, few can hold their hands, scarce any their tongues,
so sensible are we of wrongs, and so reuengefull according to our power: Not so
GOD; it is one of the characters of his Nature to be long suffering, even when
he is grievously offended he can hold his Tongue not only his Hands. Behold an
evidence hereof in this Penitent, whose incestuous life GOD has forborne so
many years; though he might have rewarded him according to his deserts, when
he first fell into this foul offense, yet has GOD lent him many years, and
expected his repentance.

But what use do men make of GODS patience? Surely the Jews did but verify
the old saying, veterem ferendo iniuriam inuit as nouam, the more GOD
forbeares, the worse we wax: GOD holds his peace, that we might speak; is
deaf, that we might hear; Romans c. 2.
but enormous sinners make use of neither, they abuse the patience, and long
suffering of God: and like IESABEL, though GOD give space to repent, they
repent not. Revel. 2 21.
We should hear our sins, that GOD might not hear them; we should hear
them speaking to the ear of our Consciences, whereinto if they did enter, they
would not ascend higher, into the ears of GOD. And seeing GOD is dumb that we
might speak; we should speak to GOD by repentance, and then GOD would not
speak unto us by vengance; according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.31.
If we did judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord.

But what does the Jew? He grossly abuses this patience of GOD; in stead of so
hearing, and speaking, he thinks that God is like unto himself. Behold the
world turned vpside down. GOD made man after his own Image, and see, man
would feign square GOD after his Image; whereas the creature should resemble
the Creator, the Creator is drawn to resemble the creature. An absurd conceit
is it in reason, how much more in Religion? When (...) is turned into (...),
the Pattern into the Exemplification: but yet might it be excused, if so be
man were understood as he was made of GOD; for we use in Divinity out of the
observation which we make in the nature of man, to draw descriptions of the
nature of GOD, because whatsoever is in the effect, is, but much more
emminently in the efficient: so we talk of the Truth, the Righteousness, and
Holiness of GOD, guessing at them by those sparks of virtue which appear in
man. But the conceit of these men is not so good, for thus must the words be
knit, Thou thoughtest that I was like unto thee which have done these things;
and such a thee, is a sinful thee: so that GOD is not only resembled unto
man, but unto a sinful man; outrageous blasphemy! It was a great sin which
ADAM committed when he affected to be like unto GOD, though it were in an holy
attribute, the attribute of his Knowledge: How fearful a sin then is it, not
only to debase GOD to be like unto men? but also to be like unto him in a
hellish Attribute, the Attribute of sin. There are three steps of Atheism;
Psalm. 94.7.
It begins with Tush God does not see, and is there understanding in the
Highest? It goes on to Tush God does not care; Scilicet, is superis labor est,
ea cura quietos solicitat? The Lord will do neither good nor evil (as the
Prophet speaks.) It comes at length to We account the proud blessed,
Malach. 3.15.
and they that tempt God are exalted. Of these Atheists, the first turn God
into an Idol, giving him eyes that see not, and ears that hear not. The
second make him an idle or careless God, as if he did only look on, and
leave every man to shift for himself. The last do plainly turn God into the
Devil, for their blasphemy is not only privative, denying GOD to be what
indeed he is, but also positive, fastening upon GOD what is clean opposite to
his Nature so that it is not without cause, that our vulgar English has, Thou
thoughtest wickedly, for it is a most wicked thought.

We must then take heed how we entertain sin, seeing we shall grow worse and
worse by degrees. There are inborne principles of honesty, and piety, which
are sensibly felt when we first fall to sin, the further we go, the less
are they felt, and when we grow senseless of them, then fall we to apologize
for sin, and there can be no stronger apology, then to make GOD our consort:
for it is a principle stamped in our nature, That God is the sovereign good;
whatsoever then is either from him, or in him, must needs be good: so that if a
wicked man can make GOD either the Author, or Pattern of his sin, he need no
sayrer color, nor stronger argument wherewith to resolve either himself or
others that bitter is sweet, darkness light, death life, and good evil. And
the Devil knows that we will sin securely when we are resolved that by
sin we do GOD good service: he that reads the stories of the Heathen gods
shall find that one of the greatest prouocations that the world has had unto
sin, has been the worship of such gods as their own Poets describe theirs
to be, stained with all kind of sins. The Fathers that wrote against them,
IVSTIN MARTYR, CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS, EVSEBIVS, LACTANTINS, ARNOBIVS, and Saint
AUSTIN insist much upon this point when they defend Christian Religion against
the Gentile. And who can tell whether GOD in this place does not tax such
Gentilisme in the Jew? And intimate that their Idolatry was a cause of their
impuritie; for it is plain in the Prophets, that they worshipped Idols of all
Nations: You may read enough in the life of SOLOMON to justify this point.

But this was not the sin only of the Old Testament, it quickly entered upon
the New; no sooner had the Apostles planted the Christian Faith, but impure
Heretics poisoned the Religion at the root, and by wicked notions of God and
Goodness seduced many simple ones unto all dissoluteness of life, as we read
in IRENIE, and EPIPHANIVS. Yea no sooner was the Gospel restored in these
latter days, but Anabaptists and Libertines trod the very same steps, and
turned Heaven into Hell, and God into the Devil.

As for our selves, Beloved, our Positions are sound and good, but our
Conversation should be answerable, otherwise the Apostle will tell us, That we
deny God, even when we profess him; deny him in deeds, when we profess him
in word: yea, whereas GODS Image is not Verbal, but Real, if we will go for
GODS Children, and do the works of the Devil, how far are we from this
sin of the Jews?

You that are the Penitent should especially lay this to your heart, for this
brings your sin unto his height; and if you think how profane it is to
bear our Incest with Perjury, you may have grace to acknowledge your guilt;
guilt of supposing GOD to be like unto your self, for such doing can hardly
go without such thinking, especially, if a man continue long therein.

When a sinner is come to this pass, GOD can hold no longer, he cease his
patience, which the Jews abuse, and proceeds to vengance against which they
cannot except. He that touches GOD in his Wisdom (as does the first kind of
Atheist) touches him near; but GOD bears it. He that touches him in his
Providence (as does the second kind of Atheist) touches him nearer; yet can
GOD endure that also. But he that touches him in his Holiness (as does the
third kind of Atheist) touches him nearest; his wrath for such a touch must
needs break out. As the Will is the supremest faculty of the reasonable
Soul; so Holiness, the perfection of the Will, is the chiefest of virtues,
therefore man should be, certainly GOD is, most tender of it; if any impeach
that, he will certainly reprove them.

Reprofe is either verbal, or real; GOD reproues verbally, or in word by his
Ministers; of that we hear as often as we hear from them the doom of sin,
for it is Praeiudicium ante iudicium, they tell us what we are, and how we
shall fair, and GOD will make good their words, when he enters into
Judgment. But when we are not the better for the Verbal, then GOD comes to
the real, Ps. 29.
and then we shall find that Dei dicere is facere, The voice of the Lord is a
glorious voice, mighty in operation, it breaks the Cedars of Libanus, Hebr.
4.
and divides between the sinnewes and the marrow, it not only rips a man up
to the very heart root but is able to crush him all to pieces: King DAVID
describes the effects of it, Psalm. 39. When thou o Lord with rebukes do
chasten man for sin, thou as a moath make his beauty to consume: This he
utters more at large in the 90 Psalm: yea, read all the Psalms that are
Penitential, and you shall find upon the rebuke of GOD, what a comfortless
Soul, what a healthlesse Body King DAVID had. And if the Children of GOD,
feel such effects at GODS rebuke, which notwithstanding have ever some sparks
of comfort; how does it crush, nay grind forlorn wicked ones? If the voice of
Sion, the rod of a man, the correction of a father be so terrible, that DAVID
cries out, O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, ^s. 6.
neither chasten me in thy heavy displeasure; how dreadful is the voice of
Sina? the iron rod? the destructive wrath of GOD? to whom shall wretched man
fly? what shelter shall he take? there is no vmpier to qualify the doom, nor
any defender to bear off the stroke, certainly it is a fearful thing so to
fall into the hands of the living God. You that are the Penitent are yet but
under the verbal, you are not come to the real reproof; happy shall you be
if you make so good use of this, as to prevent that: But be sure that the
neglect of correction, does undoubtedly prognosticate destruction to a sinner,
such destruction as shall not only be just, but also take away whatsoever
exception, for God will set man's sins before his eyes.

The Hebrew has nothing, but, I will order or marshall before thy face; the
Septuagint supply out of the first clause (These things have thou done) (...)
thy sins; St HIEROME out of the second clause (thou thoughtest me like unto
thy self) supplies, Thy self, Proponam tibi te, I will set Thee before thy
self: they are easily reconciled, for the person is understood in regard of
his sin, so that Thee, and thine iniquity is all one. In professed wicked men,
there is not the distinction that is in the Regenerate of Ego, Rom ^.
and Peccatum, the Old and the New man; such a one is not a double, but a
single man.

But to come to the point; the word ordering, or marshalling does give us to
understand, that we delight in doing of sin, but not in beholding of it;
behold we can the seeming profit and pleasure that does accompany it, but the
breach of the Law, or wound of our Soul we endure not to behold; because there
is pleasure in the act, and remorse in the remembrance thereof: But what we
cast behind us, GOD will set before us.

The word marshalling imports two things: First, that the sins are many,
but confused; so that we do not discern either the great number, or the
unequal measure of them; whereupon it follows, that we cannot judge either
how grievous, or how ugly they are; but GOD will so dispose them, that we shall
take notice of every one, and every one according to his pitch. Good things
well digested are the better discerned, and yield the more content; and evil
things displayed, will the more undeniably convict us of folly, and more
uncomfortably distress us with our want of grace: These two, conviction and
confusion do necessarily accompany the marshalling of our sins: and if one
sin of murder wrought so upon CAIN, one sin of treason upon IVDAS, that the
one could not rest, the other hanged himself; in what case think we shall the
wicked be, when GOD shall set all their sins before them.

It is good then for men to unburden themselves as near as they can of all
sin, seeing there is so much evil in the sight of any one sin; and we
cannot avoid the fight of any, especially, if it be such as this Penitents
sin, an enormous sin, and a crying sin. See it therefore now, and let
repentant tears wash out the characters thereof, least remaining of record,
you be forced to see it when there will be no means of blotting it out.

A second thing that this word imports, is, That the sins which we entertain
for friends, shall suddenly turn to be our foes, they shall appear as an Army
furnished with the instruments of Death: So we learn of St PETER, Brethren, I
beseech you, 1 Pet. 2 11.
as strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against
the soul. We think that by them we sight against GOD, but GOD is
impenitrable, the arrows that we shoot rebound back, and wound our selves.
And no marvel; for sin is the sting of death, and we cannot commit sin,
but we receine that sting; and when GOD shall come against us, as I^HV against
IEZE^EL, and call, who is on my side? who? Our own sins, 2 King. 9.
as her Eunuchs shall stand out, and at his command, cast us down to be
trampled under feet, and to be made meat for Dogs, to be insulted upon by the
Fiends of Hell, and to be gnawne on by Death.

But where shall this martialling be? Surely in our own bosom, in our own
conscience; that shall then be a true, and a clear glass, representing our
sins, and representing them armed against us. And this shall add much to our
misery; it shall not be then with us, as it is in this world; here we behold
our natural face in a glass, James 1.
and by and by go away, and forget what manner of person we were: but this
glass shall still be before us, and our eye shall still be on it. And why? It
is nothing but the worm that never dies, we can no more be rid of it, then we
can be rid of our soul: the Conscience is an essential power of the Soul,
and this worm by an irreuocable decree is made a perpetual companion of a
guilty Conscience; the wicked shall carry it with them from the
Iudgement-Seat, and shall keep it with them so long as they shall burn in the
flames of Hell.

This is a powerful Motive, and should work in you that are guilty, a care
to disarme so powerful an Enemy; to pluck out the sting before the wound be
incurable; so many sins as remain unrepented of, are as so many treacherous
Soldiers, howsoever they do now speak friendly to you, yet when they are
least feared they will give deadly strokes; you shall fear them, when you
shall have no remedy against them.

What I say to you, I say unto all; nay GOD himself says it in the close of
this Psalm, Hear this all ye that forget God, Jews and Gentiles, whatsoever
you be, if you be adulterers, drunkards, usurers, blasphemers, any way wicked
livers, Consider this (says GOD) least I suddenly take you away, and there be
none to help you, for if we be guilty of such sins, and encourage our
selves in them by base conceits of GOD, GOD will not fail to reprove us, and
marshall such wickedness before us, to convict us thereof, and confound us
therewith.

God give us all timely repentance, that we may prevent so fearful a
vengance. Amen. Pntote dxa THe.
A SERMON PREACHED AT St ANDREWS IN WELLS, A WOMAN DOING PENANCE FOR INCEST.
GALATH. 6. VERSE 1. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, you which are
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy
self, lest thou also be tempted.


WE are all compounded of the Old and New man, and every one feels the
solicitations of both. These solicitations exercise both our head and our
heart; our head to discern between them, our heart to make a good choice upon
a right judgment. And that we make such a choice, it should appear in our
works they should argue the death of concupiscence, and the life of grace, in
that we bear fruit not to the Flesh, but to the Spirit. Now the fruit of the
Spirit is either piety, or charity, it testifies that our selves are
careful to be good; and being good we are not vnrespectiue of others. Not of
them that are good, for it keeps us from being ambitiously insolent; not of
them that are bad, for it makes us compassionately merciful. The exercise of
this last branch of charity, the opening of our tender bowels toward such as
offend, is the Argument of these words which I have now read unto you.

Here we have Offenders described, and Compassion enjoined: Offenders not of
all sorts, but such as ought to be the subject of Compassion, Offenders that
are overtaken in a fault, we are enjoined to show Compassion to these, to
restore them in the spirit of meekness. And touching this Compassion we are
moreover taught, First, who must show it; and secondly, what must move them
thereunto. They that must show it are here called Brethren, and spiritual, each
name imports a reference they have unto the Offender; the first, a reference
of their persons, they are their Allies, and therefore may not shut their
bowels against them; the second, of their gifts, the better they are, the more
good they must do: such are the persons that must show compassion. And they
must be moved thereunto out of an apprehension of the common danger, danger is
common to all, Thou may likewise be tempted, and no man must be vnobseruant
hereof, he must consider his own self. So have you the contents of this Text,
which I mean now farther to enlarge as this spectacle does occasion, and shall
be most behoofefull for us all.

I begin first at the description that is here made of an Offender, where you
shall see, first, his fault, and then the cause thereof. The fault is (...) a
fall, a fall taken by stumbling. The fall is not corporal but moral, yet by a
corporal you may understand a moral fall; for he that falls in regard of
the sight of his body comes lower, and withal ordinarily takes a bruise:
even so is it in a moral fall; GOD by Creation made a man dominum, and socium.
If you look to this visible world, he made him dominum, as it appears,
Genes. 1. where Sovereignty is given over the Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and
every other Creature made for the use of man. But if you look to the
invisible world, then was he to be Socius, a confort with the Angels in the
blessed state of Heaven. Yea in this Microcosme, the Fabric of the nature of
man, which is as it were an Epitome of these two other worlds, the better part
had the guidance of, and commanded over the worse, the Soul ruled the Body.
But so soon as man sinned, he came down, domintos became servus, and these
base creatures began to tyrannize over us, who were ordained their Lords: hence
goods, meats, drinks and other corruptible things are become Idols, and we
fall down, and worship them: and what will not a man do transported by the
vanity of this world? As for the society we had with Angels, the blessed
Angels of Heaven; we have lost that, and are become the Serpents brood, not
only Beasts, but also Devils. Finally, Earth has gotten the upper hand of
Heaven, the Body of the Soul, and we serve every one his several Lusts; so
that though we consist of a Soul and a Body, yet the Scripture calls us
carnal, as if so be we had no Spirits. In our worldly state every man
labors to range himself with the best, and we account them base that being
of noble blood affect not the company of their equals: but in our spiritual
state we are not sensible hereof, we are not ambitious, but base; every one
stoopes below himself, and loves to grouell rather then stand upright, we love
coming down.

But this coming down is not all the evil of our fall, it is accompanied
with a bruise, our nature by it does not only become more base, but more
feeble also: for every sin gives a wound, it impayreth grace in every
power, our understanding grows more dim, our will more impotent, and our
affections less capable of controwle. Sins are like rebels, that not only
revolt, but also keep castle against their Sovereign, whence they are not
easily removed: every man's experience yields proof hereof, and warrants this
truth, that sin does not only disgrace, but also disable a sinner.

But sins are not all equal, and therefore produce not all equal effects:
the Stoics paradoxe is long since condemned, and whether we look to that
wherein we sin, our duty to GOD or our Neighbor; or that wherewith we sin,
I mean the degrees of our wills that concur in our acts, we shall find great
odds, and confess that one sin is greater then another, and that all falls
are not alike, whether we look to the disgrace of the person, or the weakening
of our nature. Not to go from my Text, or rather from this present occasion,
Incontinencie has diverse degrees, Fornication, Adultery, Incest: all
communicate in Incontinencie, but so, that Adultery is worse then Fornication,
and Incest worse then Adultery. Fornication violateth the good order that
should be between single persons, through unruly Lusts; Adultery adds
thereunto a confusion of Families, and takes away the distinction of Heirs,
and Inheritance; but Incest moreover abolisheth the reverence which is ingraued
by nature, to forbid that persons whom nature has made so near should one
uncover the others shame, as speaks the Law; and not only that, but adds,
that for such incontinencie, the Land did spue out the Canaanites. Leuit. 18.
So that when you come to consider your fall, you must consider not only the
nature, but also the degree of it: and your repentance must be answerable unto
your fall: look how far you have debased your self, so far must you be
humbled; and be afflicted with sorrow as deeply as you have wounded your self
with sin. Thus much you are taught in that your sin is a fall.

But it must farther be learned whence these falls come, and we find in the Text
the occasions and causes of them. The occasions are employed in the word (...),
which signifies a stumbling at some thing that lies in our way: we are apt to
fall by nature, because we are mutable; but we do not commonly fall, except
some occasion be given. And the world is full of occasions. The Devil has
every where his stumbling blocks he knows whether our corrupt nature
bends, and works accordingly; he has a wedge of gold for covetous ACHAN, a
crown for ambitious AESOLON, a DINA for SHECHEM: finally, he knows what will
work our affections, and our dispositions: with that he plyeth, and with that
he wooeth our consent to sin: and these things the Scripture calls stumbling
blocks, and are the occasions of falls. We all walk in the midst of them, and
are to take good heed unto them, but yet so, that we do not conceive otherwise
of them, then they are: strong motives they are, but they are but motives,
persuade they may, compel they cannot, therefore they are not enough to give a
fall, except the true cause be added to the occasion, and we may not so dwell
on the occasion, as not to look forward to the true cause, we may otherwise
blame others, while we should be blaming of our selves, and we are too apt to
excuse our selves, by making others guilty of our faults. But we must pass on
from the occasion to the cause, and the cause will tell us who does most
deserve the blame. The cause appears in these words, If a man be overtaken:
whereon St HIEROME gives a good note, Praeuentio dici non potest, cum quid
praemeditato fit, so that this phrase imports a difference of sinners,
whereof some fall through malice, some through frailty. Through malice they
fall, in whom the principles of conscience are corrupt; who wittingly and
willingly commit sin with greediness: neither before the fact feeling any
reluctance, neither after the fact conceiving any sorrow: Esaias 5.
these account evil good, and good evil; light darkness, and darkness
light; sweet sower, and sower sweet: these are not within the compass of my
Text, for they are not overtaken. This phrase reaches only those which sin
Dum aut latet veritas, aut compellit infirmitas, as BEDE speaks, either they
are sophistically circumuented, or unawares transported, and so take a fall. We
should weigh the validity of the persuasions, and bethink our selves what we
do before we set our selves a doing; we should enquire what GODS Law does
forbid or allow, before we give or withhold our assent. But our affections
usually outstep our discretion, and bring either false or rash intelligence,
whereupon we yield, and slip very often dum latet veritas, for want of making
diligentenquirie: but more often dum vincit infirmitas, while we are too
indulgent to our affections. And indeed, howsoever in errors of Faith, and
mistakes of truth, those that are without the Church, or being within are not
Orthodoxe, Romans 1.
become vain in their ratiocination (as the Apostle speeketh) and their
ignorance is apparently the child of negligence. Yet in the default of manners,
and breach of the moral Law, we have little color of ignorance, all the blame
lies upon the impotencie of our affections; the thief, the drunkard, the
liar, the blasphemer, all must yield that they knew what they should do, but
obeyed their corrupt lusts in doing the contrary. And no other plea has this
incestuous person: though her tongue should be silent, yet her tears do
speak that this is her plea: for the sacrifice of her broken and contrite
heart, sacrificed for that which she has done, testifies that she knows
well that she has done amiss, but did it being overtaken: for sorrow after a
fact, is the judgment that the penitent passes upon his own fact, in weeping
for it, she does condemn it. Our lesson is, that we must be watchful over
occasions, lest by them we become causes of our own fall: and if we sin, GOD
grant us grace to sorrow, lest otherwise as we displease, so we despise GOD:
Such despisers are not to be accounted in the number of those that are
overtaken, and so they can be no fit object for compassion, which is the next
point of the Text.

Touching which compassion, we are here taught that it is a restoring of a
Penitent in the spirit of meekness. Meekness is (...): Arl. Eth. lib. 4.
cap. 5.
and a meek man is not (...) but (...): the Apostle does not forbid Anger, but
commends indulgence; there is a rod and a spirit of meekness: that for the
impenitent, but for the penitent this. And certainly without meekness there
is little good to be done with Penitents, for generosus est hominis animus,
magis ducitur, quam trahitur, especially in reformation of the inward man,
where not so much coaction as persuasion prevails: therefore if any thing
will win the wayward, it is meekness; so thought St AMBROSH, Toll hominem a
contentione, and audacia, et habebis eum subiectum; by meekness the prince of
this world is soonest overthrown: (...), he is likely to recover a patient
soonest, that handles him gentlest. Now if it be so in reclayming of a sinner,
that meekness is so requisite; how requisite is it in dealing with a penitent
sinner? If St BERNARDS practice be commendable in judging of sin, either to
excuse the fact, or say the temptation was very strong: how tenderly must we
respect the humiliation of a sinner? And take heed of a pharisaicall pride
which satiateth its own uncharitableness under pretext of censure, and
proceeds contrary to GODS rule, vltra rather then citra condignum, with the
most, when it should be with the least. St PAVL did remember, and so should we
all, that we are the servants of that GOD which desires not the death of a
sinner: Members of that SAVIOVR which will not break a bruised reed, nor
quench smoking flax: Finally, Temples of that Holy Ghost which is termed in
my Text the Spirit of Meekness And indeed, this virtue is a graffe not of
nature but of grace, and it argues the Spirit dwells in us, when such fruit
springs from us. Yea, our whole soul must become meekness, and this virtue
must take up every power thereof. For such phrases are emphaticall, and note
not only the original, but the extent of a virtue: it does argue that the
whole inward man should be seasoned with it, and concur to the acting of it.

But the Spirit of Meekness must not be severed from restoring, for
compassion should not cherish sin, but rectify a sinner; otherwise it is
curdelis misericordia, it is, as if you should take a man that with a fall has
broken a joint, and lay him down upon a soft bed, but not take care to set his
joints, this were to leave him in perpetual torture, or at least a maimed
creature: the righteous must smite, but their stripes must be a precious balm;
the Church must censure, but it must be for correction, not destruction: a
sinner must be restored to that from which he is fallen. It is an error long
since condemned in the Nonatians who thought that the Church had no power to
restore believing Penitents, to restore them to that state wherein they were
before their fall: the very words used in my Text refuteth them, which coming
from (...) signifying complete and perfect, and (...) coming from (...)
nuper, shows that it signifies a perfect restitution unto that which the
person was before. The fall did disgrace and disable, so the restoring must
recover, inwardly and outwardly; inwardly in the peace of conscience, and new
strength to resist sin; outwardly in the Communion of Saints, and the
participation of sacred things, and charitable society in the course of life:
In regard of all these, the person must be as if he had never fallen.

Finally, this restoring in the Spirit of Meekness, must be without respect
of persons, and without exception of faults; so says the Text, (...) if he be
a man that has fallen. Happily we can be contented to show meekness to our
kindred, our friends; not to strangers with whom we have no such acquaintance.
But we must exclude none that may be overtaken, and any may be overtaken that
is a man. Saint AUSTIN and other of the Fathers work upon the name man, and
show that implies frailty, according to the Proverb, Genesis 6.9.
Humanum est errare; and indeed the Scripture is clear for it, the frame of
the imaginations of the heart of man is evil, and that from his youth
continually.

As we may exclude no person, so must we except against no sin; If a man be
overtaken (...) in any kind of sin, our bowels must not be straighter then
Christ's merits; what his blood has cleansed, the Church may not hold
unpardonable: therefore over great austerie was well condemned in the Council
of Nice, which left power in the Bishops upon just cause to mittigate the
penance, which was enjoined by Canons with great severity to the terror of the
wicked.

You have heard what compassion must be showed, the Text moreover teaches, who
must show it, and upon what ground. Touching the party that must show it, St
HIEROME has a good rule on this Text, Homo potest se in voraginem perditionis
conijcere, non potest sine auxilio se eripere, we may cause our own ruin of
our selves, but unto our restitution we need the helps of others; of others,
amongst whom we must acknowledge an Agent, and the Instruments; the chief
Agent is GOD, he only blotteth out all our offenses (as himself speaks in
ESAIAS) and it is, He that heals all our infirmities; Ps. 103.
yet he is pleased to use means or instruments, and they are of two sorts,
medium impetrationis, and medium operationis; that, is the Church offended;
this, is the Minister. In public scandals GOD over and above the tears and
sighs of the penitent, will have the whole Church to mediate, and deprecate
his wrath: and he will have the Minister spondere veniam, to promise pardon,
and absolve in his name: so that this Text implies a power which GOD has
given both the Pastor and People, inabling each in his order to forgive sins,
according as we are taught, Math. 18.

But mark here the words whereby these persons are described, least they be
proud, and suppose their compassion to be arbitrarie, which they may show or
withhold at their pleasure: they are taught the contrary by their names, which
testify that it is necessary for them to show compassion. The first name is
Brethren; Esaias 58.7.
this name implies an argument of compassion, for a man may not turn away his
eyes from his own flesh; this is true if he were but a natural man: but the
spiritual cognation is greater, and therefore binds more strongly, by how
much we owe more regard to our supernatural, then to our natural Father. Add
hereunto, that their is no show, no pretense of uncharitableness in our
supernatural cognation: Natural brethren malign each the other, either
because the affection of Parents is unequal, or because they shall not have
equal part in the Inheritance; but GOD embraces all his children with the
same love, and they are all called to be heirs of the same Kingdom, therefore
they should all have alike tender bowels one toward another. As the name of
Brethren calls for compassion, so does the name of spiritual also: by
spiritual is meant he that is strong in Faith, and has not yielded to
temptation; he that is led by the Spirit, and has not fulfilled the lusts of
his Flesh; the more he is so spiritual, the more compassionate he must be,
Greg. Mag^
Vera iustitia compassionem habet, falsa indignationem. It is a shrewd argument
that our righteousness is pharisaicall and not Christian, if we rather insult,
then show pity: who more spiritual then GOD? then Christ? then the Angels?
The best of men cannot match the meanest of them in the holiness of Spirit, and
yet the Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner; Luke 19.7.
and how does Christ the good Sheepeheard take comfort in the recovery of the
lost Sheep? And as for GOD, you read his disposition in that countenance and
cheer, wherewith the Father received his prodigal child. Where there is less
kindness, there is less of the Spirit; as in the Devil who calumniateth,
amplyfieth sins, aggrauateth Judgments; and we are too like him if our
bowels be cruelty. You see who must show compassion, and read their duties in
their names.

But if their names will not work enough, the ground that the Text adds
enforcing this duty, does more strongly press them, and the ground is,
considering thy self least thou also be tempted. (...), our eyes happily are
watchful, but are more fixed upon others then upon our selves; we take delight
to pry far into other men's faults, and a pleasing thing it is to flesh and
blood, to be learned in such arguments. But it is but a property of Vultures,
and Ravens that quickly sent carrion and have unto it: the Holy Ghost here
takes off our eyes from other objects, and fastens them upon our selves: we
are the book which our selves should most study, we should know none so well as
our selves. But when we are brought so far as to study our selves, we study
like the Pharisee, read nothing in our selves but our own perfections; if GOD
has given us any gifts, we need no spectacles to read it, the characters are
always of the largest sise; yea we oftentimes read more then is written, and
give thanks to GOD for that which he has not bestowed, or not bestowed in
that measure which we suppose we have. Because of our over great docilitie to
study this argument, the Scripture passes by it, and reads us another lesson,
the lesson of our infirmities; look we must upon our selves, yea and to our
selves also, but that which we must behold and heed is, least thou also be
tempted: Consider, Quia homo es habens naturam mutabilem, says THEODORET, No
man in this world is so spiritual, but he is also carnal. St HIEROME with
this Text censured the Heretics of old, and we may censure some that live at
this day, who think that a righteous man is such a tree as can bear no bad
fruit; but posse peccare is the portion of every mortal man, and he that
stands may fall, for we all walk in the midst of snares; Aut sumus, aut
fuimus, aut possumus esse quod haec est: even he that has overcome temptation,
knows how hard a thing it is to be tempted. And if it be hard, then should not
we be hard hearted toward them whom it foyleth. Which observation is not
unnecessary; because our nature is as prone to rigor; as it is to sin; we
are to have an eye to both: and indeed nothing will make us sooner avoid the
temptation unto rigor, then the acknowledgment that our felues are prone to
sin: it is St AVSTINS rule, Nil sic ad misericordiam inclinat, ac proprij
periculi cogitatio; he that knows he may need mercy, has a good inducement
to show mercy. Wherefore as to the comfort of the Penitent I may promise her
that her tears are (...), though she sow in tears, Basil.
she shall reap enjoy: so let me advise you to forgive, and it shall be
forgiven unto you. He that is merciful does good to his own soul, says
SOLOMON. Prou. 11. Ecel. 8. Ephesians. 4. Colos. 3.
Wherefore despise ye not a man returning from his sin: be courteous one
toward another, and tender hearted, forgiving freely, as God for Christ sake
forgiueth you.

St PAVL does teach us this lesson in this Text: the Text is documentum, and
exemplum, the matter of it informs us, yea, the phrase is a good pattern
unto us: in delivering an argument of mercy, he uses not a word that does not
savor of mercy. Homo, noting the pronesse of our nature to sin; (...), the
occasions of sin, praeoccupatus, the surprisall: all in favor of the
Penitent. And what means the name of Brother, Spiritual, the Spirit of
Meekness, Consider thy self, Thou may be tempted? Are they not as water
cast upon the fire of our zeal to temper it if it grow too hot? Then look we
on the words, all call upon us, that as we are eye witnesses, and ear
witnesses of this Penitents confession, contrition; so we should let GOD and
the Angels see how full we are of compassion: Compassion that must move us all
to pray to GOD for her, that God by the power of the keys may loose her from
those bands wherewith her sin, her crying sin has tied her.

God hear us, and work by us, and in us, that she may be fully restored, and
her fall may make us all to beware. Amen.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall find mercy.
A SERMON PREACHED IN THE CATHEDRAL CHVRCH OF WELS, AT WHAT TIME A MAN DID
PENANCE FOR INCEST WITH HIS WIVES DAVGHTER.
1 CORINTHIANS. 5. VERSE 1, etc. 1 It is reported commonly, that there is
fornication amongst you, and such fornication, as is not so much as named
amongst the Gentiles, that one should have his fathers wife.

2 And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that has done
this deed, might be taken away from amongst you.

3 For J verily as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already,
as though J were present, against him that has so done this deed.

4 Jn the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my
spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,

5 To deliver such a one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.


THE present occasion led me to this Text, and this Text that I have read unto
you well fitteth the present occasion; for we have to do with a sin, and a
censure; even such a sin, and such a censure as is contained in this Text.
The sin is first expressed, then it is amplyfied. It is expressed, first, in
regard of the kind, it is fornication; secondly, in regard of the degree, that
fornication is Incest; yea it is Incest of the worst sort, that a man should
have his fathers wife. The Incest being so bad, it is not only expressed, but
also amply fied, in respect, first of the haynousnesse, it was such as was not
so much as named amongst the Gentiles; secondly, in respect of the
notoriousnesse, the fame thereof spread far and near, it is commonly
reported. Now sins call for censures, great sins for severe censures: they
do, but the Corinthians were deaf, they heard not, they were not moved with
the cry of this sin, though it were very loud; they sin in not reforming
sin: St PAVL therefore tells them whence their sin sprang, and wherein it
stood. It sprang from too much self-conceit, they were puffed up; and too
little fellow-feeling, for they sorrowed not: from these roots sprang their
senseless carelessness, they put not away from them the man that had done the
sin. But St PAVL had a more quick ear, and a more tender heart; as a
lawful superior he supplieth their negligence, and censureth the incestuous
person whom they spared, as it appears in the rest of the Text: wherein we see
what the censure was, and whereunto it serves. The censure was
Excommunication, but it is set out in very high terms, for it is called a
delivery unto Satan, the words imply more then they express. Excommunication
consists of two parts, a privative, and a positive; an excommunicate person is
excluded from the Communion of Saints, and subjected to the Prince of
Darkness, the latter part is here expressed, but the former is presupposed, and
is therefore omitted because it was mentioned before in the Corinthians fault:
this is the censure which St PAVL inflicted. And the inflicting of it is
performed by two acts; the first is St PAVLS, he does iudicially pronounce it
in his own person. But here is some thing markable in his person, which is
said to be absent, and present: wheresoever he was, as an Apostle he was never
out of his Dioces; neither was any of his Dioces any where out of his reach:
for though he was absent in his body, yet was he with them in his spirit. Upon
these prerogatives of his person, though he were as far off, as Ephesus is
from Corinth, yet did he give sentence against the incestuous Corinthian, so
says he (...), I have already judged. What he pronounces iudicially, that
does he require the Corinthians to denounce solemnly: this act is employed, when
as St PAVL would have the man excommunicated at Corinth: he would have it there
denounced that himself had excommunicated him. And he would have it denounced
solemnly: First, In regard of the place, for he would have it done in the face
of the Church: the Corinthians being gathered together and his spirit with
them. Secondly, He would have it done solemnly in regard of the proceeding, for
he would have it done with the authority, and by the efficacy of our Lord
Jesus Christ; with his authority, in his Name; by his efficacy, by his Power.
So that although St PAVL have a hand in this censure, and the Corinthians also,
yet would he have neither of them reputed other then Delegates from, and
Instruments of Christ, he gives the warrant, and he makes good the censure.
Lay all these parts of the doom together, and you will find that it is
tremendum iudicium, a very dreadful sentence; for how dreadful a thing is it
for a man to be cast out of the Church? To have him that hates him made Lord
over him, I mean Satan? To have this done by an Apostle? In the assembly of
the whole Church? Authorized by Christ, and by Christ enabled to inflict this
censure? Certainly this must needs be a most dreadful Judgment, you would
think him that is under it to be a most forlorn wretch. But yet despair not
of him, the last clause of my Text will tell you that the sentence is not
mortal, but medicinal. Now you know that a medicine has two properties,
first it does pain, then it does ease, and if you will believe the Proverb,
Nulla medicinat'am est salutaris quam quae facit dolorem, the more it does
pain, the more it will ease. Certainly it fares so with a ghostly medicine,
it does pain, it serves for the destruction of the flesh; but it will ease,
thereby the spirit shall be saved. And this salvation you shall then feel when
it is most behoofefull, in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ. We believe that he
shall come to judge both the quick and the dead, and thrice happy may an
enormous sinner think himself, if he can have boldness then to stand before
the Son of Man. And herein stands his hope, that this Judgment will
preserve him from that; this lesser from that greater; this temporal from that
eternal: if an enormous sinner make that use of it which Christ intends. So
that these last words must be marked as a mitigation of that sharpness which
was in the sentence, and a consolation of the true Penitent. And so have you
the brief of my Text. That we may all be forewarned, and this Penitent
recovered, let us in the fear of GOD listen to that which shall now be
farther, but briefly, observed and applied out of this both sin and censure.

I begin with the sin, the kind of it is fornication; Fornication though it
be often used to note the unlawful conjunction of single persons, which
otherwise may lawfully marry; yet does the word import properly the general
nature of all incontinencie, or unlawful conjunction: the sinfulness whereof
that I may the better set before you, I must first acquaint you with certain
undeniable principles. The first is, one flesh; for propriety is the whetstone
of love and care, neither of which would be so great as they should be, except
they were grounded in wedlock, in which is a mutual appropriating of the wedded
bodies each to the other: whence it is that their love is so intense, and their
care so provident of, and for each other, pactum Dei, it is founded in
Religion: man and woman were at first matched by GOD himself, and he matched
them as his children bearing his Image; finally, Mal. 2.15.
he matched them that they might bring forth an holy seed, such as might be of
his Church, and as the Parents, consorts with Angels: so much did Religion add
unto Wedlock before the fall. But after the fall, Christian Religion added
much more: whence arises a fourth principle, fornication. And then you shall
find, first, that it debaseth the bodies of men, and rangeth them with beasts:
for wherein is his body better then a beasts, whose sensual acts are not
guided by reason? Secondly, It abolisheth the greatest civil propriety that
is in a state: for wedlock lays the foundation of a state, and gives the
first beginning to society, (...), etc. Thirdly, it robs the fruit of our
bodies, as much as lies in us, of the best birthright, which is to be the
holy off spring of holy Parents, which is the pledge of GODS covenant, and the
childrens hope that they have a right thereto: neither are we excused from this
guilt, though GOD in mercy do otherwise provide better for our children.
Finally, It renteth us from the body of Christ, and dispossesseth us of the
Holy Ghost, if not defacto, at least merito: it is more of GODS mercy then our
desert, if it prove not so: seeing Christ abhorres all impuritie, and the Holy
Ghost will not abide the desiling of his Sanctuary. Romans 1.24.
Well therefore may fornication be called (...), a dishonoring lust, then which
no other heapeth so many indignities upon our bodies, and by consequence upon
us. In regard hereof it is that St PAVL says, All other sins are without our
bodies, but he that commits fornication sins against his own body:
Fornication strippeth it of all the forenamed prerogatives directly, which no
other sin does, neither is their any carnal sin more opposite to Reason,
Policy, Religion. This must you the Penitent mark, and from this take the
first measure of your sin.

But my Text does not only speak of fornication in general, but of a degree
thereof, and that degree is Incest. Though no conjunction is lawful without
marriage, yet may not all persons be joined together in marriage: Leuit. 18.
GOD has set down certain degrees both of Consanguinitie, and Affinity,
between which there may be no matches: MOSES gives the reason, because there
is a reverence due unto these persons, and we pass the bownes of religious
modesty if we match with them. And indeed, had not GOD imprinted this
reverence, the necessary cohabitation of Parents and Children, Brethren and
Sisters would yield too much opportunity, and be too strong an incentiue unto
this unlawful conjunction: especially if you add thereunto the authority
which Parents have naturally over their Children. De Ciuit. Dei lib. 15. cap.
16.
Saint AUSTIN yields another reason, Habita est rectissima ratio charitatis,
we naturally love our kin. But GOD would have charity spread farther, which
would be kept within very narrow bounds, if we were not by this restraint put
to make matches with more remote persons, and forbidden to multiply the ground
of love in one and the self same. But amongst all these degrees which GOD has
forbidden, they are principal which are in the right line, the prohibition of
them is the most ancient, the most strict, the most universal: First, the most
ancient, for it began immediately upon the Creation of the woman, for having
made a woman to join with the man, GOD gave this rule, Therefore shall a man
forsake father and mother, and be joined unto his wife. Genesis 2.
It is true, that we commonly understand that Text of the near conjunction of
man and wife, and that sense will well agree with it: but the Caldy paraphrase
adds to our purpose, that a man must forsake his fathers and his mothers bed:
St AUSTIN and others have so understood it, as if it did forbid matches in the
right line; and I think the word therefore does import as much; for therefore
did GOD create a woman to join her to the man, because he would not have them
couple which are procreated one from another. Secondly, It is the most strict
prohibition; for though GOD forbid as well the collateral degrees, as those
that are in the right line; yet has he dispensed with the collateral in two
cases, one of necessity, when there were none but ADAMS children, brothers and
sisters must needs match, and then did GOD dispense with the first collateral
degree of consanguinitie. The second case is a mystery, if a brother dyed
without issue, the next of kin was to raise up seed unto the deceased brother;
and this was a dispensation in the first degree of Affinity. Such
dispensations in collateral degrees GOD has granted, but dispensations with
persons in the right line, he never granted any, therefore I called it the most
strict prohibition. Thirdly, It is the most universal prohibition; for that of
collateral degrees in GODS Law, reaches but unto the second, the Civil Law
goes a degree farther then GODS Law, the Canon Law now reaches to the fourth
degree, it has forbidden to the seventh: and further no Law that is extant
ever went in forbidding collateral degrees. But in forbidding those in the
right line, Divine and Humane, Civil and Canon Laws forbid them without any
stint: no degree be it never so remote can make the conjunction of such persons
lawful; therefore they say truly that if ADAM did reuine again, he could
join with none of mankind, except EVE revived again; no more could EVE except
ADAM revived. Whatsoever you have heard of Consanguinitie, is true also of
Affinity: because by wedlock man and wife become one flesh and so their
parents, their children, their brethren, their sisters, are as near to the one
as to the other: Affinity makes them as near as if they were of one blood.

Take one rule more which comes near this Penitents case, by analogy it is
all one for a son to take his fathers wife (as the Corinthian did) and for a
father to take his wives daughter (which you the Penitent did,) both couples
are alike near kin, and so in true judgment your case is as his was: neither
skilleth it, that you took her not to wife, but abused her body only; for if
you abuse her body whom you may not take to wife, your fact is nothing the
less Incest: your marying would have argued a resolution to continue the
Incest. You have committed complicatissimum peccatum, a very manifold sin,
there is in it Fornication, you knew her body without marriage: Adultery, you
knew her your wife being living: Incest, you knew such a person as you could
not match with by any dispensation from man, neither from GOD was there ever
any granted. Wonder not then that the Apostle does not only express, but
amplify also this sin.

The first amplification is in regard of the haynousnesse of it, it was not so
much as named amongst the Gentiles. Mistake not the words, it is not meant that
the Gentiles never were infected with this sin; in the entrance, and close of
the 18 of Leuit. it appears that the Egyptians from whom Israel then came,
and the Canaanites whose Country they were to possess, were foully stained
therewith, and thereupon did GOD take an occasion to lay the prohibition
thereof upon the Israelits, Leu. 20.23.
that they might not follow the corruption of those Gentiles. But Saint PAVL
means that even such as were but only Gentiles, have out of the light of
reason, detested, and forbidden it; which appears in their Morals, Laws, and
Histories: the iniquity thereof being evident, not only out of the Law of
MOSES, but of nature also, otherwise the Canaanites could not in equity have
been punished for being guilty of it. And no marvel if the Heathen detested
it, when the very beasts do abhor it. Lib. 9. cap. 47
ARISTOTLE in his History of living Creatures has written of a Camel, and a
Horse which were brought to their dammes: but no sooner did they discern them
by falling off of the clothes, which had been cast upon them to conceal
them, but that the Camel was presently so enraged, that he killed his keeper:
and the Horse left not running until he had broken his neck. The phrase of
the Apostle is remarkable, that which was not so much as named amongst the
Gentiles, was done by a Christian: whereas the rule of piety is, that those
sins should not be so much as named amongst Christians, which are done by the
Gentiles: Christians should not walk as other Gentiles do, because they know
GOD, and are brought so near to GOD, as to be heirs, by hope, of the Kingdom
of GOD: finally, they have as many ties laid upon the lusts of their flesh, as
they have prerogatives vouchsafed to their bodies: whereas the Gentiles they
know not GOD, theyare aliens from his covenant, yea they worship the Devil
which is an impure Spirit, and therefore no such wonder if they be given over
to filthy lusts: but Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se
Crimen habet, quante mayor, qui peccat, habetur.
It is verily a pitiful case when sin grows to that height in the
children of GOD, Ezech. 16.
as that Judah justifies Israel, and both justify Sodom: when Christians
become worse then Heathens in their lives, and conuersations. You that are the
Penitent take this to heart, and measure the burden of your conscience thereby.

The second amplification of the sin is, from the notoriousnesse thereof, it
is commonly reported: the sin is so public, that it cannot be colored, that
it needs no proof, all the world takes notice of it. This is a fair ground
of a censure: secret sins the Church does not judge, it leaves them to GOD,
and to men's consciences: but notorious sins must not escape unpunished, they
are ripe for Judgment when their infamy draws them to light. Cap. 20.
Sins in general are called Works of darkness, but especially the sins
of Incontinencie: IO^ observed it; and the more foul the Incontinencie, the
more closely uses it to be carried, and the more it fears to be discovered.
So that for a work of darkness to be notorious, argues the impudency of the
sinner: Esaias 3.
it was that for which GOD challenged Israel, They declare their sin like
Sodom, they hide it not: shame and fear are both cast off, when sin has an
Harlots forehead. Because you the Penitent have committed a grievous sin, and
the cry thereof is come into the ears not of GOD only, but also of his
Church, it was meet you should be made a penitential spectacle; meet that your
sin should be not only expressed, but amplyfied also; and that in regard of
the haynousnesse, and notoriousnesse thereof; otherwise we should deserve the
blame which St PAVL lays upon the Corinthians that did neglect to censure the
Incestuous person in their Church.

Of their neglect in censuring such an offender, let us see first the cause,
and then their fault; the cause was first too much selfe-conceipt, they were
puffed up. Instatio is presumptae, either innocertiae, or scientiae; men are
puffed up with a presumption either of their own holiness as the Pharisee, I
thank God I am not like unto other men, etc. or of their gifts of
edification, as here the Corinthians, which you perceive by former Chapters.

The first kind of presumption makes men too forward unto separation;
ouerweening of holiness will bid men stand farther off, I am more holy then
thou; but ouerweening of other gifts is ambitious of followers, it will bear
with all faults, so it may be admired. Certainly this puffing up breeds much
confusion in the Church, our own times testify. But because that point is not
to this Penitents case, I pass it over, only giving this note by the way,
that none are more proud then they which know themselves least; they boast when
they have cause to blush: yea, and GOD does often permit grievous falls in them,
or amongst them, to take down such vain men's pride.

This first cause which I called selfe-conceipt bred another cause, which I
called too little fellow feeling, they sorrowed not. Seldom shall you have a
proud man compassionate, he is so taken up with the contemplation of his own
worth, that he does not heed other men's cases: no wonder therefore if he mourn
not. But it beseemes Christian piety to bewail other men's falls, First,
because of our reference to them, they are members of the same body with us,
and how should one member not feel the wound which is given to another? The
mystical body of Christ ought not to be worse disposed, then is the natural
body of man. Secondly, because of our danger from them; for at least their
guilt touches us: a murderous hand makes the whole man go for a murderer:
and one wicked member of the Church, makes all the Church go for guilty,
until it have cleared it self, as we learn by the expiation of the unknown
murder. Thirdly, there is a scandal that their sin brings upon all of
their profession: GODS Name is blasphemed by it. And lastly, Iosu. 7.
vengeance by the sin of one man comes upon a whole Church: one ACHAN
troubles all Israel. Ier. 9.
These considerations should draw tears from every man's eyes, it should make
us wish with JEREMY, that our heads were full of waters, and our eyes a
fountain of tears. Ps. 11 9.
Our eyes with DAVID'S, should gush out with rivers, because men keep not Gods
Laws. Neither should private men only so lament, but the whole Church also:
you have a pattern in the story of NABOTH: 1 King. 21.
it was pretended that NABOTH blasphemed GOD, and the King, and thereupon the
whole City proclaimed a Fast: the like we read Esdras 9 and 10 of a public
lamentation for the sin of some of the people. These reasons and examples
must work in us, and force us to weep for the grievous sin of a brother.

We must weep: yet here we must not stop: not weeping was the cause of the
fault, but it was not the fault of the Corinthians: their fault was, as St PAVL
tells them, that they did not put away the incestuous person. Christians as
they must be sorrowful to see grievous offenders, so must they be zealous for
their chastisement, if they have sufficient power, and fair proof; otherwise
they make the sin their own. But if so be the proof be not full, Ambr.
or they have no lawful authority to chastife, then it is sufficient for them
to mourn. I shall fall upon this point again when I come to the censure,
therefore I will say no more of it here. Only I must put you that are the
Penitent in mind, that if others must be so sorrowful for you, then must you
be sorrowful for your self: and you must be as careful to rid your self of
sin, as we must be to rid the Church of a sinner.

But let us come at length to the Censure. St PAVL (as I told you) had a more
quick ear, and a more feeling heart then the Corinthians had: he proves it
true, which elsewhere he affirms of himself, Who is weak; and I am not
weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? ^ Cor. 11.
Yea he seems to disprove the common Proverb, Segnius irritant ammos dimissa
per aures, quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus: for what the Corinthians
neglected having it in their eye, with that he was much disquieted, though he
had notice of it only by his ear: and therefore does he censure it, as
appears in the last part of the Text, where you shall see, what the censure
was, and whereunto it served. The censure is Excommunication; but it is expressed
in very high, and fearful terms, it is called a delivery unto Satan. The
words imply one thing, and express another; for Excommunication consists of
two parts, a privative, and a positive: the privative is that which seperateth
from the Communion of Saints, and separation presupposes a former Communion.
The Article of our Creed teaches us that there is a Communion of Saints: there
is an inward and an outward communion: inward, by Faith, Hope, and Charity;
outward, in the participation of sacred things, in the visible assembly. From
the inward none is separated but by himself, falling from his Faith, Hope, and
Charity; and so depriving himself of the bond of Union which is the Spirit of
GOD. From the outward none should be separated except he first does separate
himself from the inward: and does also manifest that separation to the
scandal of others, and dishonor of Religion: The man that goes so far in
separating himself by sin, the CHVRCH must separate him by censure: Jude 2
These. 3. 1 Cor. 5.
We must hate the garment spotted with the Flesh. We must not keep company,
we must not eat with those that are inordinate, we must not let the world
think that Christianity does allow of such sins. The Adversaries are apt
enough to traduce us without a cause, how much more if there be a cause? The
impurities of old Heretics were laid to the Christians in general; and now
the Anabaptists, and Familists are made our stains: there may be some color
of casting such shame upon us if we endure such persons: therefore we must put
them away from amongst us, they must undergo the privative part of
Excommunication.

Besides this privative part which is employed in the censure, because mentioned
before, there is a positive part which is here expressed, it is the delivery
unto Satan. The phrase has in it some thing proper to an Apostle, and some
thing common to all Bishops. It was proper to the Apostles, so to deliner unto
Satan as that he should have power over the incestuous persons body to torment
him: and such power the Apostles not only had, but executed, as appears in
the stories of ELYMAS, ANANIAS, and SAPHIRA: They could strike men with death,
they could possess them with, as well as dispossess them off foul Spirits:
And of this power do many of the Fathers understand these words, and the like
which we read, 1 Timothy 1. But besides this power, there is another common to all
Bishops with the Apostles, which is to expose the Souls of those which are
obstinate sinners, to the malice of the Prince of Darkness, by suspending them
from the preservative against it, which is the visible Communion of Saints; for
the invisible will not hold long, if the visible be justly withheld, because
extra Ecclesiam non est salus: Satan reigns and rages in them, and on them
that are excluded from the Communion of Saints. A word here to you the
penitent; consider with your self how bitter banishment it is to him that
dwells in a goodly Country, has a good house, fair possessions, and those
well stockt and stored; yet he must part with all these: And hereby guess you
at the evil of the privative part of Excommunication; for a Christian within
the CHVRCH is in the Kingdom of Heaven, he is of the Household of GOD, he is
Owner of those green pastures, and waters of comfort which are mentioned,
Psalm. 23. he is provided plentifully of all ghostly food, and raiment: If the
loss of those corporal things be grievous, how grievous must the loss of
these spiritual be? And touching the positive part of the Excommunication,
suppose that he that were banished were also put into the hands of a Tyrant,
and he that hated him should be made Lord over him, should have power to use
him as a Slave, and afflict him with tortures, you would think his case much
more miserable; and yet is it not so miserable as his, which is delivered over
to Satan, used by him only to serve filthy lusts, and daily to breed new
matter for the vexation of his own Soul: yet this was to be the case of this
incestuous Corinthian; And you deserve that it should have been your case, both
of you being such impure persons, to whom should you be committed, but to the
unclean Spirit?

I go on. This censure which you have heard of, was inflicted by St PAVL, and
the Acts of inflicting it are two, first, it is pronounced by himself
iudicially; and then he requires that it be solemnly denounced by the
Corinthians. First, touching his own judicial pronouncing, here is something
remarkable in his person, for he was absent, and present; absent in body,
present in Spirit. There is a moral rule contained in these words, and a
miracle. The moral is this: distance of place does not extinguish the relation
that is between persons, though a King and his Subjects, a Master and his
Servant, a Husband and his Wife, a Father and his Child be far a sunder, yet
may they give order one to another concerning their affairs; so may a Pastor
to his CHVRCH. Especially an Apostle might, who wheresoever he were, was never
out of his Dioces, for his Dioces reached over all the world, and so St PAVL
being at Ephesus in Asia, was in regard of his relation at Corinth also, which
is in Europe; thus was he present even when he was absent.

These words contain also a miracle, Papae quanta est virtus doni? (says St
CHRYSOSTOM) What a strange gift of the Spirit was this? which makes men that
are a sunder to be together, and informs men of those things which are done a
far off? so that none of his Dioces could any where be out of his reach. Such
an assistance of the Spirit had ELIZEVS, 2 King. 5. and 8
who being in Israel could tell what was done in the King of Syria's
bedchamber, and being in his own chamber, saw GEHEZI take bribes of NAAMAN
when he was far out of his sight. Such a gift had St PAVL, and thereby could
be present where he was absent, as he speaks here: and he tells the
Colossians, Cap. 2.
that when he was absent, yet he did he hold their order, and steadfastness of
their faith in Christ; as his knowledge, so also his power reached to any
distance for the punishing of offenders.

This being observed concerning his person, we are now to see his work; he
does pronounce iudicially, I have judged already. Where we must first observe
that when Jurisdictions are subordinate, if the inferior be careless, the
superior must take cognizance of the disorder, and supply the others
negligence, otherwise Churches, and Commonweals will come to confusion: this
is the course that St PAVL takes in his place.

Secondly, the word judging does import that he did not deal passionately, or
rashly, but advisedly, and as beseemed a Judge, he tried the cause by the Law
of GOD, and doomed not, what he found not forbidden therein. And indeed, Apud
Deum non sacerdotis sententia, sed reorum vita quaeritur, there must be some
general Law which men are bound to obey, and men's lives must be tried by that
Law, and as they are found, so they must be censured otherwise GOD does not
regard, he does not approve the censure.

Last of all mark that St PAVL does not only say, I have judged, but I have
judged already; he does not put off his judgment until he comes to Corinth,
but proceeds without delay: you shall find the reason in the Preacher, cap. 8.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil: a timely
chastisement of one, is a sovereign preservative of many.

You have heard how iudicially St PAVL pronounced the sentence, the next thing
that you must hear, is, that he requires the Corinthians to denounce it
solemnly: he will that they have a hand in it, partly to redeem their
negligence, and partly to express their detestation of sin: in both respects
it was behoofefull that they should denounce what he had decreed, denounce it
by the mouths of their Pastors: as what is decreed by us in the Consistory,
is published by the Minister of the Parish where the sinner dwells whom our
Decrees concern.

But to denounce is not enough, they must denounce it solemnly. First in regard
of the place, it must be done in the face of the CHVRCH, You being gathered
together, and my spirit with you; that is, in the presence of the chief
Pastor, and all his Flock at Corinth: Notorietas facti must have notorietatem
iuris; Deuteronomy. 29.
a public sin must have a public doom, that others may behold and beware.
But this is done, tantum conscia Ecclesia, the Congregation is but witness to
the doom, not Judge of the fact: the power of the Keys is given to the CHVRCH
quoad (...), not quoad (...), that it may have the benefit of them, not the
managing: the managing is committed only to the Pastor, as appears, Math. 16.
and Ioh. 20.

As the denouncing must be solemn in place, so must it be in proceeding also;
for they must proceed cum potestate, and potenti a, with the Authority, and
Efficacy of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. St PAVL does pronounce, the Corinthians do
denounce; neither of them must arrogate more to himself then is committed to
him; in regard of Authority they are but Delegates, in regard of Efficacy
they are but Instruments of CHRIST: he is the Author, and Actor of the Censure,
so that the proceeding must not be in man's name, or with man's power, but in the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with the Power of our Lord Jesus Christ.
This makes the proceeding to be solemn in deed: CHRIST is present at it, his
Commission is our warrant, and his cooperation makes good our censure. Whose
soever sins ye remit, John ^^.
they are remitted unto them, and whose soever sins ye retain, they are
retained. Whatsoever ye bind on Earth, it shall be bound in Heaven. So that we
must do all ad nutum summi Pastoris, as we are directed and authorized by the
chief Pastor. And you that are the Penitent must hear, and fear the
sentence, as if it came from CHRIST's own mouth, and were to be performed by
CHRIST's own hand. Put all the parts of the censure together; and you will
confess that it is horrendum iudicium, for you must set before your eyes,
Heaven and Hell, the blessed state of those that are in the one, the woeful
state of those that are in the other: then behold a man taken out of the bliss
of the one, and thrown into the woe of the other, by an Apostle, and in the
presence of all the Saints; nay by CHRIST himself, by his voice, by his hands:
you must suppose that all this is done. Contra Aduer. sarium legis. Lib. 1.
cap. 17.
St AUSTIN when he considered it, thought it was grauius quam gladio feriri,
etc. much more grievous then to be beheaded, burned, stoned, etc.

Many evidences there are of GODS severity against impure lusts, Deuteronomy. 23.
as namely, he would not that a bastard should come into the Congregation of
Israel, until the tenth Generation; but against Incest he is more severe,
Deuteronomy. 271
for he would not only have a general curse pronounced against it, whereunto
he commanded all the people to say, Amen: but touching the Moabites and
Ammonites, the first spawne of Incest that we find in the Scripture, though
they were the posterity of LOT, whom GOD loved for AERAHAM's sake: Deuteronomy 23.
yet does he command that they shall not enter into the Congregation of Israel
for ever: Israel is forbidden to seek their peace at any time. RVBEN is a
second example, mark what his own Father JACOB said of him when he blessed the
Patriarchs, Ruben thou art my first borne, my might, Genesis 49.
the beginning of my strength, the excellency of digni^^^, and the excellency
of power; these were the preeminences of his birthright, but he forfeited them
all for Incest, as appears in the very next words of his Father, Unstable as
water, thou shall not excel, because thou wentest up to thy Fathers bed: then
defiledst thou it. He went up into my couch. A third example is ABSALON, he
abused his Fathers Concubines, therefore he came to an infamous end; he was
hanged by the hair of his own head, he dyed childlesse, and so his name did
rot. Leu. 8.
The Land of Canaan spued out the old Inhabitants for Incest, and GOD
threatens the destruction of Israel for that a man and his son would go in
to one maid. Amos 2.
By GODS Law no less then death was the punishment of Incest. Leu. 10. The
Laws of the Land are more merciful unto you the Penitent, that suffer you to
breathe, and leave you to the censure of the CHVRCH. But if you mind what you
have heard touching that censure, and drink in St AVSTINS conceit thereof, you
shall find cause enough to fear: and freedom from death may seem unto you
worse then death.

But yet your case is not desperate: for there yet remains one point in the
Text, which may yield a mitigation to your fears, and a consolation to your
Soul. The censure is not mortal, but medicinal, as appears in the end
whereunto the censure serves. Now a medicine, you know, does first pain, then
it does ease; yea, it does therefore pain, that it may ease: so does this
ghostly censure, it serves for the destruction of the flesh, there is the
pain; but there follows ease upon it, the spirit sha^ be saved.

First of the pain. As the flesh signifies sometimes the substance, sometimes
the corruption of the outward man: so may the destruction signify either the
mortality, or the mortification thereof: mortality, if the censure proceed
from the power which is proper to an Apostle: but if it signify the power
which is common to Bishops with the Apostles, it notes mortification, it
signifies the crucifying of the flesh with the lusts thereof, the putting off
the old man, and the dying unto sin. And indeed this we intend by our
Ecclesiastical censures, We intend that you should root out the sin for
which you do penance, and so destroy your flesh. This is painful to flesh and
blood, but vt valeas multa dolenda feres, you must brook the pain, that you
may enjoy the ease that follows thereupon, the spirit shall be saved.

The spirit notes the soul, or the grace thereof, the saving of the soul, is
the preserving of grace therein: if the soul loose grace, it loses it self
in regard of all well-being: and it were much better for it not to be at all,
then to be without grace; so that the salvation of our spirit is no small part
of our happiness. Which must the rather be esteemed, because if our spirit
fare well, it will make even the flesh that is destroyed in regard of the
corruption to be far better in regard of the substance: for it shall be
purged from dead works to serve the living GOD.

But when shall we reap this eas^ out of pain? In the day of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Though a peniten even in this life shall find some case in his
Conscience, yet the full benefit of Ecclesiastical censure is reserved to the
day of the Lord: because all this life we must be mortifying our flesh,
especially, enormous sinners must be so employed; the greatest of their ease in
this world must have a mixture of pain, but in the day of the Lord they shall
have ease without all delay. But what day of the Lord is meant here? Every
man's particular day of death? or the general doomes day? An account must be
made at both; and if we use the Ecclesiastical censure well, we shall find
that this Judgment preuents that; this temporal the eternal. For as CHRIST at
his first coming, came not to destroy, but to save; so his Ministers that
dispense the Gospel, use their power not to destruction, but to edification.
But I think the day of the Lord signifies properly the last day: CHRIST will
publicly manifest before the CHVRCH tryumphant the effect of the Keys which
he has committed to his Ministers to be exercised publicly in the CHVRCH
militant: he will then reveal how all stand bound in Heaven which were never
loosed on Earth: and all whom the CHVRCH has loosed in Earth, shall then
appear to be loosed in Heaven.

I end. The success which St PAVL had when he inflicted this sentence was,
that the Corinthians became very sensible of their fault, and the Incestuous
person of his; St PAVL himself does witness this, 2 Cor. 7. where he
amplyfieth both their godly sorrows, and his congratulating indulgence toward
them both. Oh that like success might bless my pains, that I may give as
good a testimony to this Congregation for their hatred of sin, as St PAVL
gave to the Corinthians: and to this Penitent the like mittigation of his
Censure, as St PAVL to that Incestuous person.

So may this penitential sheet of his be turned into a white robe of
righteousness, his tears into joy: and all we that are humbled for him in the
Church militant, be with him exalted in the Church tryumphant. Amen.
A SERMON PREACHED IN THE CATHEDRAL CHVRCH OF WELS, AT WHAT TIME TWO DID
PENANCE FOR INCEST A MAN AND HIS WIVES DAVGHTER.
LEVIT. 20. VERSE 14. Likewise if a man takes a wife, and her mother, this is
wickedness: they shall burn him and them with fire, and there shall be no
wickedness amongst you.


NO sooner do you hear this Text, but I am ure you understand this spectacle,
you understand what sinners these persons are, what doom this Law does pass
upon them. And indeed, their sin, and Gods doom are the maine parts of my
Text.

But more distinctly. In the sin we must note, first, the fact, then the
haynousnesse thereof. The fact is, unnatural adultery; Adultery, because one
man takes more women then one; that is plain adultery. And this adultery is
unnatural, because there is the nearest reference between the women, the one
a Mother, the other her Daughter: to take two such women is very unnatural;
it is no less then Incest, Incest in the highest degree. Such is the fact. And
verily such a fact is most heinous; it is wickedness.

Wickedness is a common name to all sin, but it must here be understood in a
special sense, for abominable, for intolerable wickedness.

Now such as the sin is, such is the doom; the sin is heinous, and the
doom is grievous.

But in the doom take notice of two things: First, it is impartially severe;
impartially does GOD deal, he spares neither man nor woman, neither him nor
them. And he deals severely with them both, they shall burn him and them
with fire; and you know fire is a painful tormenter, and an utter destroyer of
that which it tormenteth.

Great severity: and yet no greater then was necessary to keep the State
from being guilty, that there be no wickedness amongst you.

No wickedness: not absolutely none, that is impossible in this world; but no
tantum nefas, (as the Vulgar expresses the sense well) no heinous wickedness
must be amongst you; amongst you, that is, suffered by you, which will make the
State guilty, and provoke GODS wrath against it.

You have the brief of my Text, which I purpose (GOD willing) to enlarge: GOD
grant that what I shall say thereon, may make these Penitents truly sorrowful
for their fault, and us that behold them, careful not to be overtaken with the
like fall. Come we then to the particulars.

But before I distinctly unfold them, I must in few words clear the phrases,
wherein the fact is expressed. Observe then first, that to take a woman in this
Law, is to uncover her nakedness (as MOSES expresses himself, verse. 17.
Cap. 18) or (as we commonly speak) to have carnal knowledge of her.
Secondly, Isha in the Hebrew tongue signifies as well a woman, as a wife: and
therefore some translate it, if a man take a woman, some, if a man take a wise;
It is not material which way you render it, because it is an undoubted truth,
that whom a man may not marry with, he may not know carnally out of marriage;
if he do, it is incest, no less Incest if he make her his strumpet, then if
he took her to be his wife. Thirdly, It is all one for the daughter to be the
wife, and the mother the strumpet, or for the mother to be the wife, and the
daughter the strumpet, the Incest will ever be of the same degree, because the
persons are both ways of the same neernesse. I note these two last points the
rather, because these Penitents may happily think they are not within the
compass of my Text; whereas, if it be understood, as the truth is, and I have
showed you, my Text speaks directly of them, and the fact here mentioned is
their fact.

The fact is but one, but there are two sins in it, whereof the first is
Adultery: it is adultery for one man to take more women then one. As GOD made
but one EVE of one ADAM; so in marriage he coupled but one EVE to ADAM: and he
coupled them so near, that they two should be one flesh, that is, that the man
should not have power over his body, but the woman; nor the woman should have
power over her body, but the man; and the observance of this is the keeping of
Pactum Iehouae, the Covenant of the Lord, which had accompanying it magnum
benesicium, and magnum mysterium; a great blessing, for their seed was semen
sanctum, a holy seed, and GOD promised to be the GOD of those children which
were borne of such parents. The great mystery was, that living in such
wedlock, they were a perpetual monument unto themselves, of the heavenly
marriage of CHRIST and his CHVRCH.

Mark now, especially you that are Penitents, what the sin of Adultery is;
First, It makes them two again whom GOD made but one; for a man cannot be one
with two women, because whose he is, he must be hers entirely; and he cannot be
entirely more then one woman's: so that his first sin is, that he divides
that which is indivisible: I mean conjugal affection. Secondly, He bestows
that which is none of his own: for his body in this respect is his wives, she
only has right unto it, and to this use of it. Thirdly, In breaking GODS
Covenant of wedlock, he defraudeth his children of the covenant of grace. For,
observe it in the story of ABRAHAM, he had children by two wives, SARA his
first and his lawful wife, AGAR his second and unlawful wife; but what says
the Scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her child, Gala^. 4.30.
for the child of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the child of the free
woman.

Besides the great mystery, you may there-hence gather this moral, that
although GOD may out of his mercy receive that child whom the parents as much
as lies in them cast away; yet GODS covenant is made with the parent for no
children but those that are begotten in lawful wedlock. Finally, Adulterers
defraud themselves of that blessed memorial of CHRIST's eternal conjunction
with his CHVRCH, the contemplation whereof should be our greatest solace,
seeing we have a blessed interest therein.

There were evil enough in the fact, if it were only Adultery, seeing
Adultery has so manifold evil in it: but there is a greater sin, which is
Incest; for the women are of very near reference, the one is a mother, the
other is her daughter; nearer kin they cannot be; and being so near, it is
unnatural that they should be known of the same man: he that knows them
both, commits Incest in the highest degree.

But I will somewhat more open unto you the nature of Incest. Know then that
GOD purposed by wedlock, not only to multiply mankind, but also to preserve
charity. Natural charity is founded in Consanguinitie; but consanguinitie
the farther it spreads, the more does charity grow cold. To repair, and as
it were quicken it, GOD instituted Affinity, which does (...) make domestics
of strangers, and naturalizing those that are forreiners to our stock. And
indeed it is much like graffing: for as in that art, the Sien is taken from a
sweet Cherie or Apple tree, and entered into another grown wild; for example, a
Crab-tree, or wild Cherietree; and art does work as nature in making them one:
so is it in Affinity, it makes persons as near as nature it self does; and
charity out of this reunion should grow as strong as if the persons were of
one blood; even as beams of the Sun, which growing weaker the farther they
go, by reflection into themselves recover their former strength: so does the
charity of consanguinitie when it is waning, wax again by the help of
Affinity. Where by the way note, That whereas we call persons fathers-in-Law,
mothers-in-Law, and so brothers and sisters, we must not understand it of mere
positive Law, but it is a secundarie Law of nature, unalterable, saving only
by GOD; and this Law of GOD is grounded upon it, and affinity does in some
sort equal consanguinitie, as grafted branches do those that are natural.
But because, where consanguinitie is a good ground of charity, there needs
no repair; neither will GOD have any: therefore has he forbidden marriage
within certain degrees, some collateral; more in the right line; and they
that match within these degrees, are said to commit Incest.

Add hereunto, that GOD would have a distinction kept between persons, he
would not have the same person a Father and a Son, an Husband and a Brother,
etc. in regard of the same persons; such perverseness in matches can never be
approved of reason, much less of GOD.

See then your fault, you that are the incestuous persons: you have first gone
against GODS Ordinance, which provided for the propagating of charity, and your
sin is injurious to the society of mankind; and, if it might prevail,
Families must needs continue strangers each to the other, and they must confine
their wealth and their love every one to their own House.

Secondly, In confounding Consanguinitie and Affinity, you have made a
perverse confusion of a Father, and an Husband, and of a Daughter; you have
made a Wife, at least a Strumpet. And this is your second sin: and of this
and the former consists your sinful fact, and heinous sin. It is
wickedness.

Wickedness is a word common to all sins, but it must be here understood in
a special sense, as the word sinner is often in the Scripture; in the Old
Testament, the Amalekites those sinners; 1 Samuel 15.18.
in the New Testament, the Gentiles are also called sinners; as also Publicans
and Harlots: not so much because they had sin in them, as for that their
sins were enormous. All Incontinencie is wicked, but Incest is wicked (...)
in the highest degree.

But to open the word here used by the Holy Ghost a little more fully. The word
is Zimmah, which signifies any act of our mind, or thought of our heart; but
because the thoughts of the imaginations of our hearts are commonly evil,
therefore an evil thought, or purpose is often intimated unto us thereby.

Thirdly, Because he that is a slave to his affections, can hardly be master of
his actions; for (...), out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth will
speak; therefore it signifies a revealed thought, a thought revealed in our
actions.

Finally, the word being put without any limitation, does signify an
execrable, an intolerable wicked both thought, and act: and so it is here to
be understood.

But mark, that though the sin be an act, yet it is denominated from the
thought; And why? The principal part thereof, lies in the purpose of the
heart, not in the outward performance by our body, which may also be observed
in the story of the Deluge, all flesh had then corrupted his way, but GOD
points at the fountain of this corruption, in these words, Gou. 6.
every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart were evil, Act. 8.
and that continually. SIMON MAGVS offered money to the Apostles that he might
by them be enabled to give the Holy Ghost to whom soever he laid his hands
upon; but mark what St PETER says to him; Pray that the thought of thy heart
may be forgiven thee, for I perceive thou art in the gall of bitterness, and
the bond of iniquity.

Men that do that which is right in their own eyes, are commonly drawn
thereunto by following the counsel of their own heart: we must therefore
listen to the advice of SOLOMON, Pr^u. 4.23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life and
death.

A second note that this word does yield, is, that we must be so far from
acting, that we must not so much as purpose sin, not suffer our selves so
far to be baited by our own lusts, Athanas.
as to conceive sin in the inward man, (...), sin in the privy closet of
our soul. Excellently NAZIANZENE to this purpose (...), let no man set up
Idols of wickedness in his soul, (...) nor carry about him pictures of
wickedness in his heart, for (...), the inward lust is the greatest part of
fornication and incest, and therefore does the Holy Ghost so often forbid the
lust of concupiscence. In a word, laudantur homines and vituperantur, (...), as
men are inwardly disposed, so are they morally reputed, good or bad: and herein
does morallitie differ from policy.

But I have not yet touched at the haynousnesse of this sin. Incest then must
be reputed in the number of the most enormous sins, a sin that has his
original from the impure Spirit, which is antiquus adulter, the ancientest
Adulterer, not only spiritual but corporal also, and takes delight no less
in the corruption of our bodies, then of our souls; you may see it in the
confessions of sundry Witches, who report the manner of their festiuitie at
their impious meetings, and read it in the description of their Mysteries,
wherein they do initiate their followers. TERTVLLIAN in his Apology, and
other Fathers, make mention of it. And how many impure Heretics did he raise
in the Primitive CHVRCH? This, and the 18 Chapter does tell us that the
Egyptians from whom the Israelites came, and the Canaanites into whose
Country they were to go, were Nations ouergrowne with this heinous sin; but
mark what it adds, God did detest them for it, and the Land did spue them
out.

And no marvel: ^ozomene.
for it is (...) a man that is given over to this degree of lust, has lost all
sovereignty of reason, and is become a very beast, yea worse then a beast;
for beasts abhor this conjunction, as heretofore upon a like occasion I
showed you out of ARISTOTLE. And therefore although these extrauagant lusts did
reign in the Heathen, who learned them of their impure gods, yet was not the
light of reason so far exstinguished in all of them, Ovid.
but that many acknowledged the haynousnesse of them, the Poet did; Dira canam,
procul hinc natae, procul este parents, said one of them, Lab 8. De Legibus.
when he was to speak of a Daughters lying with her own Father: The
Philosophers did; PLATO says that by an inward unwritten Law, the sacred Law
of Conscience, men do abhor these unnatural mixtures of mankind. The Civil
Law calls it a funestation of a man's self, and indeed, the persons are dead
in sins and trespasses that make such a conjunction. And how can that be but
abominable in GODS judgment, which the blind reason of unregenerate man has
acknowledged to be so abominable?

I will conclude this point with two aggrauations of the sin, which arise
from the persons of these offenders: The man is a Father, and a father should
be a good example to his children, and by his authority should hold them in,
when they would run riot; if he do not, he offends grievously: How grievously
then does that father offend, which gives an ill example to his child?
Allureth her to such detestable sin? Yea, does act the sin with her? If
Incest be of it self heinous, your fatherhood makes it much more heinous. And
as for you that are the daughter, no small access is made unto your sin by
being the daughter of your mother; for sins are improued by their persons
that act them. If it had been an enemy that had done me this wrong, I could
have borne it (says DAVID) but it was thou my familiar friend, etc. Whosoever
had wronged your mothers bed it had been a wickedness, but to be thus wronged
by her own daughter, wherein it is hard to say, whether she have more cause to
lament in regard of her own, or of your person, it cannot but add much to
your sin. These things should you that are the Penitents take to heart, and
add them to the measure of your sin, for of heinous, they make it much more
heinous.

I pass at length from the sin to the doom, giving you by the way this
note, That GOD adds doomes to sins, grievous doomes to heinous sins, that
we may be held in by the fear of the one, when we would not forbear upon the
fight of the other; for such is our weakness, that though a sin be
represented unto us as most ugly, most odious, yet sensuality does so
prevail, that we are carried away with the pleasure, without any regard of the
filthiness thereof: if any thing stay or stagger us herein, it must be pain,
which often makes us to bethink our selves, and take heed when we are even
ready to rush into sin.

But touching the doom here in my Text, we must first take notice that there
is no respect of persons with God, both must be punished, the man and the
woman, and punished alike. You would think that the case of the one were more
favorable then the other, the Temptedst more favorable then the Temptors: The
daughter may plead the power which her father had over her, whom she durst not
resist, and thereby seem to deserve favor. But this is no Plea at GODS Bar;
for children must remember, that they have an heavenly, as well as an earthly
Father, and that they may not offend the one to pleasure the other.

A second thing obseruable in the Doom, is, that both the women are subjected
to the same punishment, which may seem very rigorous: For what has the
lawful wife deserved? Therefore some understand the words by a Synecdoche, and
by the women understand either of them that shall be found guilty, whether it
be the mother that defiles the daughters bed, or the daughter that defiles
the mothers bed. But it may be that both may well deserve death: If the mother
be the wife, and consent that her daughter should go in to her father, or if
the daughter be the wife, and consent that her mother should go in to her
husband; such consent, yea if it be but conniuency, and patience, it is
abominable wickedness.

How far the mother was privy to this daughters sin, I know not, but if
she were in any sort, she deserves to be punished no less then her child: and
the child with the father are to be punished most severely, they are to be
burnt with fire.

And here consider first, how well the doom is fitted to the sin; the doom
is fire, and so is the sin also. If I have been deceived by a woman (says
JOB) this were a fire that would burn to destruction: Cap. 31. Prou. 6.
And SOLOMON speaking of adultery, moves this question, Can a man take fire
in his bosom and not be burnt? He that is a fornicator in the body of his
flesh (says the son of SYRACH) will not cease till he have kindled a fire.
Cap. 23. 1 Cor. 7.9.
Finally, St PAVL gives this rule, It is better to marry then to burn, burn
in the lust of Incontinencie. Seeing then this lust is a fire, GOD does punish
a sier with a sier, a sinful with a painful fire.

But the Jewish Rabbis, or Antiquaries do observe that the Jews had two
kinds of burning of malefactors; one was by opening their mouths, and pouring
in moulten Lead; this was called Combustio animae saluo corpore, it took away
the life of the party, and yet left no mark of the fire in the outward
lineaments of his body: The other, was by laying of fuel round about the
body, which set on fire, did presently consume it into ashes, and is the
burning meant here in my Text, for it says they should be burnt with fire.

And indeed this kind of burning of Incontinent persons is very ancient. Genesis
3^.
Before the giving of MOSES Law, IVDAH would have practiced it upon his
daughter in Law TAMAR: The Prophet MICAH alludeth hereunto in his first
Chapter, and EZEKIEL in his 16. St JOHN in his Revelations speaking of the
Whore of Babylon, Cap. 17. and 18.
prophesies that she shall perish by fire: So that fire seems to have been
the punishment of Whores, not only if she were the Priests daughter, but
whosoever she were; the allusion else would not be so frequent. And yet we read
that adulterers were to be stoned to death; whether after stoning, they were
also burnt, is worth the inquiry, for sometimes they were both practiced upon
the same malefactors, as it is clear in the story of ACHAN.

In the former degree of Incontinencie specified before my Text, the Holy Ghost
is silent, and does not specify any particular kind of punishment, by means
whereof Interpreters doubt what punishment was to be inflicted: Some conceive
that stoning, mentioned in the beginning of the Chapter must be extended to all
that follow; the Jews they limit it thus, where the Law says, they shall dye
the death and their blood shall be upon them, there stoning is meant, but if it
be only they shall dye the death, then the party was to be strangled.

But I will not trouble you with these Antiquities: only this I will observe
unto you, that the specifying of a particular punishment here, and not in the
former degree of Incontinencie, may well import some extraordinary
haynousnesse in this sin; especially if you consider the sharpness thereof,
they shall be burnt with fire. Viui comburentur (says the Vulgar) they shall
be burnt alive; now you know that fire is a bitter tormenter, and an utter
consumer, it afflicts extremely while the party lives, and it utterly
abolisheth the being of the body, together with the life; both which prove the
punishment to be very sharp, very severe, it gives no rest while we are,
and abolisheth us as if we never had been.

But this was a politic Law of MOSES: what is that to us? We have no such Law,
and that Law does not bind our State: True, it does not; and happy is it for
you that are the Penitents that it does not; you should not be here to do
penance if you had such doom as GODS Law requires; you are therefore bound to
thank GOD for the clemency of the State, and make good use of this time of
grace; remembering that though you escape the corporal fire, there is another
fire which you have cause to fear, which St IVDE tells us was figured out in
the perpetual burning of Sodom and Gomorrha, the fire of Hell; and assure
your selves, that if the Land of Canaan spued out those impure persons, Heaven
will receive no such; and if they that transgressed MOSES Law perished ciuilly
without all mercy, most woeful shall their destruction be that are reserved
for that fire which shall devour the adversaries; the fire of Hell.

You shall do well therefore to quench that fire before you come at it, and
there are three waters with which you must quench it: The first is the water of
your tears, you must imitate King DAVID, who all the night long washed his bed,
and watered his couch with his tears; there he sinned, and there he bathed
himself: so must you.

But man's tears are too weak a water to wash away either the guilt or stain
of sin, which are the fuel of that fire, you must therefore moreover use
two other waters, the water of CHRIST'S blood to wash away the guilt, and the
water of his Spirit, to purge out the corruption of your sin. If you make
good use of these three waters, that fire will never seize on you: otherwise
assure your selves, that though we spare you, GOD will not spare you, he will
one day punish you most severely.

And it were good, that our Law did not spare so much as it does, considering
the growth and ouer-spreading of impuritie: It were to be wished that our
temporal Sword did strike as deep as the Sword of MOSES did; it may when it
pleases the State, and it shall not do it without example of other Countries.

Or if that may not be obtained, at least it were to be wished that the old
Canons of the CHVRCH were revived, and ghostly discipline exercised more
severely: for certainly the scandal is great which such sins bring upon the
CHVRCH: and they that slander us without a cause, when they have just cause,
how will they open their mouths against us?

Our care then should be to stop their mouths, but principally we should
provide that there be no wickedness amongst us, which is the end of the doom,
and the last point of my Text. I will touch it briefly.

The Judgment was severe, but it was necessary. Necessary for the State,
which is, to preserve it self free from guilt, there must no wickedness be
amongst you.

No wickedness: that is impossible in this world, for viuitur non cum
perfectis hominibus, they that have most of the Spirit, have somewhat of the
Flesh, and the Field of GOD till harvest, will have Tares as well as good
Ears, and the good ears will have chafe as well as good grain, and the good
grain will have bran as well as flower. We may not look then for any State
wherein there is no wickedness. The Law therefore requires only that there
be Nullum scelus, no heinous wickeduesse, no tantum scelus (as the Vulgar
speaks) enormous transgressions, there must be no crying sins; the State
must have a vigilant eye upon such sins, and execute vengeance upon notorious
sinners, they must not be amongst us. But they will; the Serpent will be in
Paradise, yea Lucifer was in Heaven, the Arc had a CHAM, and amongst CHRIST'S
Disciples there was a IVDAS: Be then they will amongst us. But the meaning of
the Law is, they must not be endured by us, they must not escape unpunished; if
they do, they will prove contagious: such sins are like fretting Gangreenes,
they are like unto Leaven, they infect all about them; and if they do not
infect, they will make guilty; and for sparing such a one, GOD will not spare
a whole State.

And there is good reason: for Qui non vetat, cum potest iubet; GOD takes them
for abettors, that will not when they may reform inordinate livers. Therefore
the State must put away from amongst them such inordinate livers. 1 Cor. 5.
Jerusalem below must, as near as may be, be like unto Jerusalem above;
Apoc. 22.
of that above, St JOHN says, Extracanes and impudici, no unclean person
comes thither, neither must any be endured here: so soon as they appear,
they must be made expiatorie Sacrifices, and their death must free the State
from guilt. But I draw to an end.

A word to you that are the Malefactors. Origin.
Ad paenitentiae remedium confugite, qui praeuenti estis tam graui peccato,
Seeing you have been overtaken with so foul a fault, neglect not the remedy
which GOD has left you, hearty and unfeigned repentance for your sin; the
rather because you have to do with a most merciful Judge, who does not only
moderate the punishment, but commute it also; commute the punishment which you
should suffer in Hell, with a punishment which the CHVRCH inflicteth here on
Earth. Consider the quality, consider the quantity of these different
punishments, and you will confess, that it is a most merciful commutation.
Cast then your eyes back, and consider what you have done, how heinous your
offense has been; and cast your eyes forwards likewise, and consider what you
have deserved, how great a danger you have incurred by inioying a short and
beastly pleasure: Think upon both these often, and think upon them seriously;
so shall you yield GOD the greater glory for the mercy which he vouchsafes
you, and he shall work the greater comfort in your souls, by assuring you of
the remission of that sin wherewith you have so greatly provoked him.

And to us all, this I say; Eligamus prius affectus castigare, quam propter
ipsos castigemur, Let us pluck out our eyes, cut off our hands, rather then,
by retayning them, to be cast into Hellfire: Let this spectacle remember us
often to set before us the shame of the world, and the horror of a guilty
conscience, which befall enormous sinners in this life. And if that will not
hold in our corrupt nature; let us set before us the neuer-dying Worm, the
euer-burning Fire. Or rather, (...), Let us begin here our life in chastity,
Nazian.
that we may one day be in the number of those Virgins that follow the Lamb
whether soever he goes. Revel. 14.


And let Magistrates and Ministers both be jealous over the State with a godly
jealousy; that as by the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments it is espowsed to
one Husband; 2 Cor. 11.
so it may be presented as a chaste Virgin unto CHRIST, when those heavenly
Nuptials shall be solemnized, wherein stands our everlasting happiness.

This God grant, for Jesus Christ's sake, by the operation of the Holy Spirit.
To which one God in three Persons be rendered all honor and glory now and for
ever, Amen. Marriage is honorable amongst all men, and the bed undefiled; but
fornicators and adulterers God will judge.

A SERMON PREACHED IN THE CATHE DRAL CHVRCH OF WELS, AT WHAT TIME FOUR PERSONS
DID PENANCE FOR INCEST. COMMITTED BY ONE MAN WITH HIS WIVES DAVGHTER, BY THE
OTHER MAN WITH HIS WIVES SISTER.
DEVT. 27. VERSE 22, 23. 22 Cursed is he that lies with his sister, the
daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother: and all the people shall
say, Amen.

23 Cursed is he that lies with his mother-in-law: and all the people shall
say, Amen.


WHEN GOD had delivered the Children of Israel out of Egypt, he was pleased to
enter into a Covenant with them at Mount Sinai; the manner of it is set down,
Exodus 24. But the Israelites quickly brake with GOD, and GOD entered into
judgment with them, he made them for the space of forty years to wander in
the Wilderness, and in that space he so consumed them, that of 600000 men
remained alive only IOSVA and CALEB. After so long displeasure, GOD returned
again in mercy to them, he vouchsafed to have his Covenant renewed again;
the form of the renewing he prescribes in this 27 of Deuteronomy. A most solemn
form; for therein were to concur three remarkable acts. First, The Law was
to be fairly written upon great plaistred Stones, that the people beforehand
might see whereunto they were to bind themselves, for GOD would have them enter
into his Covenant advisedly. Secondly, there was an Altar to be erected, and
thereon they were to offer whole burnt offerings and sacrifices of
thanksgiving, which were to be real acknowledgments that they did wholly
deuote themselves to GOD, and give thanks, for that GOD of his goodness would
again renew his Covenant: GOD would have them enter into his Covenant
religiously. Thirdly, GOD commanded that the twelve Tribes should sort
themselves into two divisions, six should stand upon the descent of Mount
Gerezzim, and six upon the descent of Mount Ebal, both divisions with their
faces toward the mid Valley, where the Ark of GOD, the Type of his visible
residence amongst the Israelites was borne up by the Priests. In this Theater
(as it were) did GOD require that the Israelites should hear the Articles of
Agreement between GOD, and them, both blessings, and cursings, and profess
their conformity thereunto. GOD would have them profess themselves party to
his Covenant openly, in the sight both of GOD and Men. In this third act, you
shall find a rehearfall of sins, first in particular, then ingenerall, and a
doom pronounced against the committers of those sins, both by Priest, and
People. Of the particular sins, my Text specifieth two, and specifieth
withal the doom that belongs to either of them. The sins are unlawful
matches; one collateral, a brothers lying with his sister; and because a woman
may be sister more ways then one, here is an exegesis, the word is expounded,
whether she be daughter of the man's father, or daughter of his mother. The
second unlawful match is in the right line, a man's lying with his mother-in
law. Of these matches, you have these penitent spectacles here presented before
you.

The Text goes on, and tells these Penitents, and whosoever else shall presume
to be like unto them, what is their doom, it is set down in one word, but
that is a sharp one, they are cursed. But farther observe concerning this
doom, who does pronounce it, and who does approve it. They that pronounce it
are the Levites, so we read verse 14, and they are willed to pronounce it with
an audible voice, so audible that all Israel may hear. They that approve it,
are the people, they are required to say, Amen, in token that they all assent
to that which they hear, all the people must say, Amen.

You have the brief of my Text, I purpose (GOD willing) now to enlarge it, I
pray GOD I may so do it, as that we that stand may take heed least we fall,
and these that are fallen may learn to rise again.

I begin with the sin, wherein we are first to make you see that the Text
does fit this occasion: For neither of the matches therein specified seems to
agree with theirs that are under the present Censure. Not the collateral, for
my Text speaks of a sister by consanguinitie, and these Penitents were
brother and sister only by affinity: not that in the right line, for my Text
speaks of a man's lying with his mother in-Law, or his wives mother, but this
man here, is censured for lying with his wives daughter. And so you may think
that neither of these couples come within the compass of my Text, and
therefore are neither of them guilty of the sin, neither need fear the
doom. To take away this doubt, you must take notice of two rules in Divinity.
The first is, that affinity makes persons as near in the Law, as
consanguinitie does. The reason whereof is plain: Affinity is grounded upon
marriage, and by marriage two become one flesh, and consequently their kinted
whether ascendent, or descendent, or collateral, become alike near on each
side to the other: Your wives father, and mother, brethren and sisters, sons
and daughters, are unto you by her, as near as if they were of your own
blood. This being true, you perceive that it was no less unlawful for this
man to couple with his wives sister, then with his own sister, the daughter of
his father, or the daughter of his mother.

The other rule is, That more then is expressed in GODS Law is to be understood,
when by analogy it may fairly be deduced therefrom. GOD himself is our
direction to take notice of such analogy; for if you compare this Chapter with
the 18 of Leuit. you shall find that this very instance of a man lying with
his mother-in-law, which is mentioned here, is omitted there: whereupon you may
well conclude, that some particulars which GOD forbids are not named in the
Letter, though they are within the meaning of the Law: and that the meaning is
as wide as analogy will suffer. I will show you in a word, what this analogy
is, it is, that persons which are not forbidden expressly, and in the letter of
the Law, are there forbidden implicitly, and in the meaning of the Law, where
others in the same distance of Consanguinitie or Affinity are expressly
forbidden. As for example; the Law forbids expressly a nephew to marry with his
aunt, it says nothing of an uncles marrying with his niece: yet these being
as near in degree as the other, we may of them reasonably conclude, that they
also are forbidden in the meaning of the Law: the exception of the Romanists is
frivolous.

To our purpose; by the letter of my Text, a man may not marry with his
mother-in-law, which may be either his wives mother, or his fathers wife: if
not with his mother-in-law, which is his fathers wife, then in the meaning of
the Text, he may not marry with his wives daughter, because these women are
equally distant from him, the one in the first degree of the right line
ascending, the other in the first degree of the right line descending: for his
fathers wife is accounted as near to him as his own father, and his wives
daughter as near as his own daughter by the first rule. Secondly, if
according to the letter, a man may not marry with his mother-in-law, that is
his wives mother, then likewise may he not marry with his wives daughter
according to the meaning of the Text: for these women also are equally distant
from him, his wives mother being from his wife (and consequently by the first
rule from him) in the first degree of the right line ascending, his wives
daughter in the first degree of the right line descending. Thus have I brought
the second couple also within my Text by the foresaid rules. You may see that
this couple is also within the very letter of the Law, Leuit. 18.17.

What I have said concerning the unlawful conjunctions of these couples, holds
true as well out of marriage, as in it: yea if they may not marry, much less
may they loosely join together.

Having found that both these couples are the subject of my Text, it follows
that I now show you that they are guilty of sin.

To make this clear, observe that quadam sunt mala quia prohibita, some things
are morally evil, because GOD has forbidden them: so was the eating of the
Tree of the knowledge of good and evil, there was no ill in the Tree, for all
that GOD made was good, very good; only GOD was pleased to exercise man's
obedience in forbearing therefrom. Were there nothing else in these matches,
but that GOD has forbidden them, it were a sin for any one to venture upon
them, because we owe absolute obedience to GODS commands; and if he require we
must forbear from those which otherwise are good things. You that are the
Penitents must acknowledge this for the first degree of your sin, that you
have failed in your absolute obedience to GODS commands.

But your sin is yet greater, for there are some things prohibita quia mala,
therefore forbidden because they are moral evils, either absolutely, or at
least in reference to some good, for the compassing whereof they are commanded.
Look upon your ten Commandments, therein I will give you an instance of
either. GOD says, Thou shall have no other Gods but me; it is absolutely evil
to go against this Commandment, therefore it admits no dispensation, it can
never be done without an heinous offense. Likewise GOD says, Honor thy father
and thy mother; now if this Commandment be broken, an evil is committed,
which frustrates the end whereat GOD aimed in this Commandment: sc. by
subordination of persons to preserve good order in all societies. And this
Commandment is dispensable when the breach of it serves to a higher end; so
LEVI said to his father and to his mother, I have not seen him, neither did he
acknowledge his brethren, Deuteronomy 33.
nor knew his own children: for they have observed thy word, and kept thy
Covenant. To apply this distinction; of unlawful matches, those in the right
line seem to partake of that kind of evil which is absolutely so; the
prohibitions concerning them are indispensable. Though BEILARMINE seems to
doubt of the extent of the Axiom, prohibetur ininfinitum coniunctio inter
ascendentes, and descendentes, and the Rabbis go not so far as we do: yet
certainly, there is no instance to be given, that ever GOD did dispense with
matches in this kind. We have many monuments of his detestation of them, which
upon like occasion I have remembered unto you.

Whence appears the haynousnesse of your sin that has lain with your
daughter, which is much improued by your wicked attempts to marry with her.
Wherein you have heaped upon it three foul sins. First Briberie, by which
you have unlawfully procured sureties to engage themselves in deep sums that
there was no lawful impediment of your match. The second sin is Perjury, to
gain a License, you deceived the Court with a false Oath. The third is
Blasphemy, for whereas it is GOD that joins persons in marriage, you would
have had the Minister that represents GOD to have joined you together flat
against GODS command: there is not the least of these accessories which does
not highly improve your principal sin, and make you to be most sinful. A
less burden then this you must not feel upon your Conscience. And your
daughter must take upon her self so much guilt, as is common to you both.

As for you that have lain together, brother and sister, your sin comes
within the compass of that evil prohibited, which though it be not absolutely
such, yet is it evil in reference to that end which God would compass by the
prohibition: and that is twofold. First, God would have men show themselves
reasonable, in that they can set bounds unto their natural lusts; which
appears in nothing more then in this point of conjunction, wherein lust is
most hardly held in, and therefore is the holding of it in, a special argument
of the sovereignty of reason. The holding it in (at least) within those
moderate bounds which God has set to it. A second end of the prohibition, is
the enlarging of our charity, which is not done so kindly, nor can be done so
universally as by matches; witness the practice of all the world. Therefore
has God forbidden the conjunction of those that are already by Consanguinitie
or Affinity made near, that while we are driven to seek farther, our
charity might spread it self. And although your match is not so evil but
that God has by dispensation allowed it in some persons (because the thing is
not absolutely evil, but evil in opposition to the end which he purposes in
his Commandment; which being sufficiently provided for, God is not farther
tied by his own Counsel) yet is it very evil, for that you have let loose
the raines to your own lusts, contrary to Gods restraint, and have straightened
the bounds of charity, contrary to Gods extent, which are two soul offenses.
For in the first you derogate from the sovereignty of reason, and show your
selves therein brutish, and not to have any command of your lust. In the second
you are enemies to humane society, in that you care so little for the
advancement of that by which it does principally subsist, I mean Charity. And
these faults are the more grievous in that you are Christians, for it is a
grievous thing for him to be less, that should be more then a man; and for his
charity to be narrower then is required by reason, which should be as wide as
true Religion does prescribe. Lay this burden upon your consciences, and let
the sense of these evils yield you the true weight of your guilt, and sin.

It is disputed by those that favor licentiousness, and make merchandise of
good manners, Whether the prohibitions in Leuiticus be a part of MOSES
Judicials, and so determined with the policy of the Jews: or part of his
Morals, that ought to bind all Nations, and that in all Ages. They cannot deny
but the prohibition of some degrees is Iuris naturalis, and therefore forcible
to bind others besides the Jews. But that the prohibition of some other is not
so, they think; First, because God has dispensed with the Collateral
degrees, which he could not do, if they were Iuris naturalis. The ignorance of
the distinction which before I gave you of evil absolutely, and evil in
reference unto Gods end makes them so think. For God may dispense with the
latter evil, with the former he cannot, except he will deny himself. Another
argument of their conceit they draw from examples of the Patriarks, that have
made such matches, and have not been reproved. But viuendum est non exemplis,
sed legibus, their examples show the permissiue, not the preceptiue will of
God, but we must live by the preceptiue, not by the permissiue; otherwise we
shall make the Patriarks patrons of all kind of sins. Wherefore in this point
I resolve, non est distinguendum vbi Lex non distinguit: all must be conceived
as Iuris naturalis, where the Law exempts none. And that all are so, I prove by
this reason taken out of the 18 of Leuit. God says there, that the sins for
which the Land spued out the Canaanites, amongst others were these, unlawful
matches: to the Canaanites these matches had been no sins, if they be sins
only by the Judicial Law of MOSES: for the Canaanites were not tied to that
Law, and therefore did not sin in transgressing it: it was some other Law
that made them guilty; and what could that be but the Law of Nature?

Add hereunto, that in the Civil Law you shall find the same sins
forbidden, even before the Roman State was Christian. Forbidden therefore out
of the light of natural reason, which is the Law of Nature.

It is no impeachment to this truth that in the 20 Chapter of Leuit. these
sins have a civil sanction annexed to the Law which forbids them: for
Theft is in the 20 of Exodus forbidden by the moral Law, and in the 21 Chapter
is punished by a politic Law: so in the 20 of Leutie. these matches are
punished by a politic Law which in the 18 are forbidden by a Moral.

Let therefore the CHVRCH of Rome to multiply her gainful dispensations; let
carnal persons to excuse their unruly lusts, pretend that many of these
prohibited matches, are restrained only by MOSES his Judicial Law, and are
free for Christians: yet all the authorities and seeming reasons wherewith they
labor to maintain this their conceit, will not be able to counteruaile the
reasons alleged. Except they can show a dispensation from God, whosoever so
join together, cannot excuse themselves from sin: if not from sin, then
not from the doom thereof, which in my Text is a Curse, Cursed be he that
lies with etc.

Cursed be he that lies, here I must show you Gods method. First, he does
only forbid these sins, Leuit. 18. then because he knew that few are so well
disposed as to abstain from that which is forbidden them, therefore in the 20
of Leuiticus he armeth the Magistrate with the Sword against them; he will have
all those that presume against this Commandment to be punished with temporal
death: certainly those that offend as two of these Penitents, that have matched
in the right line have done. As for the other two, the phrase that is varied
makes some to cavil, though it be but a cavil that they stand upon. ^ut
though they were not to dye by the Sword, yet the Rabbis confess they were to
be whipped; and certainly the current of the Chapter shows that some temporal
punishment was inflicted: we cannot not think less of those phrases, they
shall be cut off in the sight of their people: and cut off from amongst their
people; they shall bear their iniquity; they shall dye childlesse.

But because many by their greatness, or by their close carriage may escape the
Magistrates Sword, though they commit these sins, therefore in this Chapter
there is a worse doom pronounced against them, from him whom they can neither
illude, nor escape, that is from God; and his doom is expressed in this word,
Cursed. A curse is the reward of sin: now sin is punished by God either in
this world, or in the world to come. In this world, we find in the next Chapter
how many ways God does use to curse man: curse him in his person, curse him in
his posterity, in his cattle, in his corn, abroad, at home, etc. And indeed,
there is nothing whereunto a man can put his hand wherein God may not, yea
often does not lay a curse upon a sinner; yea and makes many of them
prouerbiall curses, as he threatens the Jews, and others in the Scriptures.
Were there no more evil to be expected then this, you that are the Penitents
should think your case bad in that your Conscience can prognosticate you no
good success all the days of your life, no not in your worldly affairs, so
long as you stand charged with this guilt.

But there is a far greater curse, and that is to be endured in the world to
come, Math. 25.
when CHRIST shall say; Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prowded for the
Devil, and his Angels. And indeed, the Devil is the first person upon whom God
pronounced a curse: and his ease is the sampler of the curse which is eternal.
Elsewhere the Scripture expresses it thus: take the unprofitable servant,
bind him hand and foot, cast him into utter darkness. Other-where we are told
that men shall be infected with a worm that never dies, Mark ^. Esaias 66.
and afflicted with fire that never goes out: Finally, they shall be an
abhorring to all flesh. And we see in the Revelations how Angels and Saints
congratulate the torments inflicted upon them by Gods Justice. I say nothing
all this while of their loss of the light, liberty, comfort, company of
Angels, and Saints, and which is beyond all, of the blessed sight of God. When
you hear^ this you that are the Penitents, you may conceive what terrible words
are these which DAVID speaks, Ps. 11 ^. Ps. 37.
Cursed are all those which err from thy Commandments: they that are cursed
of God, shall be rooted out. But least you mistake, you must conceive that this
word does signify meritum, and iudicium, the merit of sin, and the pain
which shall befall an irrepentant sinner. Gods first intention is in this word,
only to lay before our eyes what he may in justice inflict upon us, if he
should enter into judgment with us, so soon as we provoke him; that so he may
strike a terror into our Consciences, and timely humble us, that we may seek a
remedy, even that remedy which he has provided for us. And what is that? By
Faith to lay hold upon CHRIST, who to keep off the curse from us, Gal 3.
was pleased himself to become a curse? You that are the Penitents shall do
well to make your benefit of this day of grace, and so tremble at the
consideration of that which you have deserved, as to shelter your selfs under
the comfortable wings of your blessed Savior, before the stroke of GODS
vengeance light upon you. For as the word cursed does import the merit of a
sinner: so does it also his Judgment, if he continue irrepentant. If
repentance prevent not, GOD will reward every man according as he deserves,
Romans ^.
anguish, tribulation, and wrath shall be upon every one that does ill, which
CHRIST sets forth in a lively emblem when he cursed the Fig. tree in the
Gospel. Remember also that GODS curse is an irresistable curse, you may learn
that of BALAAM, Number. 22.
he assured BALAK that none can alter it when it is gone out of GODS mouth; and
be you sure it is as unchangeable, as it is intolerable. There is much cursing
in the world, there be many whose mouths are full of cursing and bitternrsse.
Ps. 10. Job 2.
Some are so impious as to curse GOD himself, as IOES wife would have had her
husband have done, and as that wicked one did, Leuit. 24. and others mentioned,
Revel. 16. Some are so monstrous, as to curse though not GOD, yet men, Cap. 3.
even with the same tongue wherewith they bless GOD; St JAMES wishes them to
consider how much wo^se they are then senseless Creatures, because out of the
same Fountain there comes not sweet water and bitter also. But of these
curses we must hold these two rules to be true: the one is SOLOMON'S, a
causeless curse shall not come; Prou. 26.
yea GOD will bless them whom the unjust does curse. The second rule is, that
they that delight in cursing shall have enough of it: Ps. 10 9.
He that cloatheth himself with cursing as with a garment, at shall run like
water into his flesh, and like oil into his benes; he shall be thoroughly
drencht with it. But we must not conceive so when a man is cursed of GOD; for as
his curse comes not without a cause, so it will undoubtedly sort its effect.
And though our cursing of him shows but our ineffectual malice, yet his
cursing of us will make us see his effectual Justice. Finally, for these two
causes are maledictions added to the transgressions of the Law. First, that we
might acknowledge that it belongs to GODS Justice to see sin punished.
Secondly, that when we feel any calamities, we may know from whom they come,
and why.

Having showed you what the curse is that belongs to your sin, you must now
see by whom it must be pronounced; and at the 14 verse we find that it was to
be pronounced by the Levites. And indeed, the act being not Politic but
Ecclesiastical as you may gather out of that which I have observed before, the
person must be suitable. But whereas the name of Leuite comprehends the Priest
also, we must understand here the Priest, and not the ordinary Leuite: For
unto the Priest belonged the office of blessing and cursing in the Name of the
Lord, it is not for every one to intermeddle with that work. It is true,
Ecclesiastical
that if the oppressed curse the oppressor in the bitterness of his Soul, his
prayer shall be heard of him that made him. Math. ^.
But yet men's patience should be such as to bless them of whom they are
cursed, and to do good to them of whom they receive hurt. To curse, GOD rather
permits then commands them, as he does parents; except they be led by the
Spirit of Prophecy, as NOAH, and others: for Prophets had this power by an
extraordinary vocation. But the Priest only has it ordinarily by the power
of his Orders, as by the terms of blessing cursing, planting, building,
rooting up, destroying, it is expressed in the Old Testament: and it is expressed
in the New by those of opening and shutting Heaven, binding and loosing men's
Souls, remitting and retayning men's Sins; in a word it is that which we call
the Power of the Keys. So that the Minister does no more then he has good
warrant for, when he does exercise this Jurisdiction, and the people should
fear it, because he does it in the Name of the Lord, no less assured that GOD
will confirm it, then he is assured that GOD does command him to do it.
Although we do not deny but our first intention should be to bless, Numb. 6.
and our power is given us for edification, and our desire is to be unto you
the savor of life unto life: Yet when the peoples sins call for it,
importuning us, then we must come to the curse, use our weapons of destruction,
and be unto the people the savor of death unto death. For, seeing we are not
only slow unto obedience, and need the spurs of GODS alluring blessings, but
also refractarie and inordinate we need the strong bridle of GODS curses, to
hold us in, when the World, the Devil, and the Flesh carry us headlong unto
perdition. Were it not so that men are headstrong to their own peril, we should
not need to deliver unto them the terrors of the Law, but only the glad
tidings of the Gospel; but sin sorceth us to subordinate the curse to the
blessing, that by the terrors of the curse we may remove from you the
impediments of the blessing. And happy shall you be if you make such a use of
it.

As the Priest is commanded to pronounce the curse: so is he commanded to
pronounce it with a loud voice; he must not be afraid to utter it, and his
voice must be so loud, as that all Israel may hear the must not suffer any to
be ignorant of it: that which concerns all, must be made known unto all; and
the greater things are, the more ^^^nestly they must be pressed. We cannot do
you greater wrong, then conceal from you that which concerns you so near,
and if we do not work powerfully into your Consciences the terror of this
curse, we should bring a curse upon our selves, Ser. 48.10.
for cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently.

But I hasten to the last point: that will tell us who is to approve this curse
that is pronounced by the Priest; and there we find that they are the people:
All the people shall say, Amen. Amen to the Curse. If it were the blessing, no
doubt but all would say, Amen; but all must say Amen to the Curse also. GOD
will have us set our seal as well to his Justice, as to his Mercy, and
confess that we subscribe to both. We, that is, Prince, Priest, and People,
all must show their love unto that which is good, and detestation of that which
is ill.

It is true that six of the Tribes stood upon Mount Gerizzim to bless, and
six upon Mount Ebal to curse. Whereupon it is wittily observed by the
Ancients, that the six Tribes that blessed were the children of JACOBS wives,
and represent those that ingenuously serut God, out of love to his goodness:
the other six Tribes that stood upon Mount Ebal to curse, were the children of
his bond-women (all saving RVBEN that had lost his birthright, and ZABVLON the
youngest of his wives children) and these represent those that serve GOD in a
servile manner, and only for fear of the Curse. And verily the members of the
visible CHVRCH differ so, and shall fare accordingly; diuersis diuersa
retributio, all are not alike, neither shall they sare alike: CHRIST shall say
to some, Come ye blessed; and to others, go ye cursed. Though this be true,
yet I doubt not but all the twelve Tribes said Amen as well to the curse, as to
the blessing; for both concerned them all, as it appears in the next Chapter.
But that which I choose to observe unto you, is a remarkable obligation unto
obedience. We read that when the Israelites were returned from the Babylonian
captivity, Nehem. 10.
and fell to inordinatenesse in their marriages, that NEHEMIAH did not only
make them put away their wives, but also to come to the oath and curse that
they would not relapse any more into the same sin. In the story of ASA, we
read the very like practice, 2 Cron. 15.
when that King had reformed Idolatry, he by oath made the people bind
themselves to GOD, not to return unto it again. Strange obligations a man
would think, but they take their example from GOD himself: here we find the
original pattern of such obligations. Yea, you shall find that GOD not only
in general lays such ties upon men to hold them in from sin; but also in a
personal inquiry of the suspected Adulteress, after the Priest had said unto
her these words, If thou be guilty, Number. ^.
this water of jealousy that causes the curse shall go into thy bowels to
make thy belly to swell, and thy thigh to rot, the woman was to answer, Amen,
Amen. Now if God in a personal trial thought it sit to make the woman lay a
curse upon her own Soul, if she were guilty, what wonder if to prevent
sin, he would have his people enter into this general curse. God knows
that there are such remainders of good principles in our Conscience, if we be
but natural men (how much more if we be Christians?) that we can discern
sin, and the haynousnesse thereof, and also the desert, or punishment due
unto it. Yea, as it appears by DAVID'S answer to NATHAN, 2 Samuel 12.
in another man's case we are very likely to be forward in our judgment. GOD
therefore takes us when we are most likely to speak as we think: that so he
might leave no place unto tergiuersation when he enters into Judgment with us
for our sins; neither might woe complain of his severity, if he punish us as
we deserve, seeing with our own mouths we have pronounced, without all
exception of our selves or others, this judgment on our sin.

But as I told you that maledictus does signify either meritum what we
deserve; or iudicium, that which is inflicted: so must Amen be understood as an
acknowledgement of the truth of our desert, and a wish of that which is to be
inflicted. The acknowledgement we must make absolutely, but the wish we must
make conditionally, if we do not repent; and if we do not repent, Amen is an
undoubted prophecy that we shall be cursed indeed.

I will conclude: GOD would have this imprecation made when the people were
come into the Holy Land; to signify, First, that as he had made good his word
unto them in bringing them to the good Land which he promised: so they were to
make good their word unto him, and live as they professed. Secondly, by the
malediction pronounced in the Holy Land, they were to conceive, that neither
their place, nor their calling, did free them from the curse, if they lived
otherwise then they ought. And by this formal malediction, they were to
conceive not only in general how hateful sin is unto GOD; but also that
these sins here specified are in the number of the most heinous. Which you
that are the Penitents must take special notice of: for though your sins are
unequally heinous, and therefore deserve not an equal curse; yet are they both
very heinous, and the curse is very grievous that either of them deserves.

J pray God that by that which we have heard, we may all be persuaded to keep
our vessels in honor, and not in the lusts of concupiscence, as do the
Gentiles which know not God: And for you that are the Penitents, J pray that
you may duly consider what judgments you now feel, and may farther fear, for
your sins; that you may have grace to make use of the Churches censures, and
be humbled as you ought by them; that so timely preventing, by religiously
trembling at the Judgments of God, that hang over you, and may make a
fearful desolation of you: you may return to God in Grace, and he may
return to you in Mercy; he may be reconciled unto you, and you may have peace
with him for ever. To this Prayer made for our selves, made for these
Penitents, let us all Penitents, and Spectators; let all the people say, Amen.
A SERMON PREACHED IN THE CATHEDRAL CHVRCH OF WELS, ONE DOING PENANCE FOR HAVING
TWO WIVES.
MALACHI 2. VERSE 15. And did not he make one? Yet had he abundance of Spirit:
And wherefore one? Because he sought a godly seed: therefore take heed to your
spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth.


MAN being in honor continued not, but became as the beasts that perish; so we
read in the Psalm, chastity. Read Leuit. 18. see there how brutish it is
become, there is nothing there forbidden which was not practiced by men, and if
practiced, we may conclude that man has degenerated into a very beast. Well:
in such a case, in so base a disposition, what is the remedy? What is the best
way to bring man to himself again? That he may recover that honor whereof he
has deprived himself? Surely there is no better way then to set before him
his original, and to persuade his conformity thereunto. For as in the
Articles of Faith it is safest to believe what was first delivered: so in the
rules of our manners, it is best to observe what was first commanded. The
reason is plain: GOD gave the first beginning both to our faith, and to our
manners; and from our most wise, and most holy GOD, nothing could proceed that
was not most righteous, and most true. Out of this Principle does MALACHI work
the reparation of a breach which the Jews had made upon the seventh
Commandment. The breach was Polygamie, or multiplying of wives, whereof the
reparation is a reducing of them to the first institution of marriage; and this
is done in those words that now I have read unto you.

Herein we have, first a Text of the Law, And did he not make one? Then a
Sermon of the Prophet made thereon; yet had he the residue of Spirit: And
wherefore one? Because, etc.

But more distinctly. In the Text of the Law we will consider; First the matter
that is contained in it; then the manner how the Prophet does urge it. The
matter sets before us a Work and a Workmaster. The work is the making of one;
the Workmaster was he: both clauses are dark, because the words are short. To
clear them, we must supply out of Genesis, and there we find that this one was
one Adam, and the he that made him was the Lord God; GOD made one; out of one
male, he made one female by creation; and by conjunction he made that female to
be one again with that male, out of which he took her. This is the matter.

The manner of the Prophets arguing the Text is powerful, that which in
Genesis is a plain narration, is here turned into a question; and in such
questions the Holy Ghost does report himself unto the Consciences of those
that hear, whether to their knowledge he speak not truth. So must you
understand those words, did he not make one?

Having proposed his Text, the Prophet makes a short, but a full Sermon
hereupon: for it consists of a doctrine, and an exhortation. The doctrine
opens the reason of GODS work, and the Prophet argues in effect thus; GOD
made but one, was it because he could make no more? or because he would make no
more? Certainly not because he could not, for he had abundance of Spirit: then
it was because he would not. And indeed all GODS works ad extra, as the
Schools call them, the works of Creation, Providence, Redemption, are all
arbitrarie, they come from his Will: but such a Will as is not blind, it is
guided by his Wisdom; and his Will prescribes nothing whereof his Wisdom
cannot yield a reason; and sometimes he is pleased to show that reason to us,
who otherwise are bound to rest satisfied with the signification of his holy
Will: Therefore the Prophet goes on in his arguing, wherefore one? What is the
reason of this Will of GOD? And he answers by the direction of GODS Spirit,
that it was expedient it should be so; two ways expedient. First, Expedient in
Nature, God sought for seed, he would have men multiply and increase, which
could not be except he had made one; and if he had made more then one, it could
not well have been. Secondly, It was expedient in Grace also: for, though GOD
would have men multiply, yet would he not have them multiply otherwise then
beseemed the children of GOD, he sought a holy seed. For these ends was GOD
pleased thus to order his works; and upon this doctrine of the ends does the
Prophet ground an exhortation; it consists of two parts, because in the case of
marriage we owe a double respect; one to our selves, another to our mate. The
respect we owe to our selves is, that we must watch over our better part, take
heed to our Spirit. The respect we owe to our mate is, we must not violate the
faith plighted to her; let no man deal treacherously with his wife;
especially, if she be the wife of his youth, that is, he married her when he
was young; the longer they have been married together, the more back-ward
should they be from dealing falsely one with the other.

You see the particulars of the Text, and of the Sermon; that we may better
understand them, and their fitness for this occasion, I will open them a
little more fully; I pray GOD I may do it profitably also.

Come we then to the Text of the Law, to the matter contained therein.

I will not trouble you with the diverse translations, and variety of
interpretations suitable thereunto, leave that to the Schools: our CHVRCH has
made a choice, and that choice agrees well with the Original: we will rest
contented with that, and according to it frame our observations. I told you,
that the words set before us, a Work, and a Workemaster, yet neither does
plainly appear, they are only pointed at here, but expressed Gen 1. whence I
supplied the name of ADAM, and the name of GOD, whereof the first is the Work,
and the second the Workmaster; so that then the words will sound thus, God made
one Adam. Let us take these parts asunder.

The name of ADAM is not to be understood vulgarly, but as the Holy Ghost uses
it, and so it comprehends both sexes: so we read Genesis 1. GOD created ADAM, male
and female made he them; in the 5 of Genesis more plainly, God made man male
and female, and called them Adam: so that the name ADAM being but one, is
commonly two, the male and the female. As they are one in name, so are they in
nature also, we read Genesis 2. that GOD made the female out of the rib of the
male; for he would have her to be like him, De Paradiso. Cap. 10.
and he confessed her to be bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. Nec illud
otiose (says St AMBROSH) it is worth our marking, that GOD did not make the
woman of the same Earth whereof he made man; but he made EVE of the rib of
ADAM, to give us to understand, that there is but one body in them both, and
that one body the only Fountain of all mankind. Plat. Do Conuiuio. Leo. Heb.
The Platonists Androgunos is but a corruption of this truth.

As man was by creation made two, but of like substance, and so continued still
one both in name and nature: so by a second work they were made yet more one,
that is, by marriage, Genesis 2.
for that makes two one flesh; two (I say) the Septuagint add that word unto
MOSES his Text, and CHRIST approues it in the Gospel, Math. 19^ 1 Cor. 6. Ephesians.
5.
St PAVL therein follows CHRIST, and the words of marriage are, the man shall
cleave to his wife, therefore does the Apostle call the wife (...), the husband
(...), 1 Cor. 7. Less then one there could not be, and be a natural
propagation, and more then one there should not be, and that propagation be
orderly.

But this oneness is principal or accessorie; the principal is oneness of
conjugal power, and conjugal affection: Conjugal power; for though in other
things the man is superior to the woman, the husband to his wife, Romans 7.1.
because (as the Apostle teaches) she is of him, and for him, and therefore is
called (...); 1 Cor. 7.
yet in conjugal power they are equal. Man has no power over his body, no
more has the woman over hers, each is in the others power; and that in
solidum, they have coequall command each over the other. So likewise their
conjugal affections should be coequall, they should embrace each the other
with entire and undivided love, no reservation of that kind may be endured by
the bond of wedlock on either side, the man's, or the woman's.

It is true that Licentiousness has distinguished where the Law has not
distinguished, and liberty has been granted to men to share their bodies,
and their affections amongst many women, but women are denied that liberty,
and have ever been required to confine their affections to one man, and
communicate their bodies to no more then one: which distinction of
licentiousness has specious grounds, First they say the ends of marriage are
less prejudiced, if the liberty be granted unto men, then if it should be
granted unto women: Are they prejudiced? Then prejudiced: But nothing should be
granted that does prejudice those ends. Away then with that Apology for Lust.
There is another taken from the example of the Patriarchs; and indeed so the
Jews understand this Text, as if it were an allegation of the Fathers to prove
Polygamie, and read it thus, An non vnus fecit? Did not our father Abraham take
many wives? And yet he had abundance of Spirit, i. abundance of the spirit
and grace of GOD, he know what he did, and he did nothing amiss; Why should
not we imitate him? But supposing that reading, to this objection in the next
words the Prophet shapes an answer, he sought an holy seed, that is (as the
Fathers say) non fecit propter libidinem, sed propter orbitatem, he did it not
to satissie his lust, but that he might have an heir according to GODS Promise.

And if you look upon the story of the Patriarchs ABRAHAM, and JACOB, you
shall find that though they had more wives then one; yet never had they them
out of lust, no nor out of their own choice: ABRAHAM took HAGAR, but he was
importuned to do it by his wife SARA; yea and SARA too would have the child
reputed hers, as borne upon her knees: JACOB chose but one wife, and that was
RACHEL, LEAH was put upon him by deceit, and the two Mayds by the opportunity
of his wives.

The after times were worse, and of all, the Kings of Israel were most
licentious, they took too much after the Heathen Kings; but their fact can be
no good president, because expressly forbidden by a special Law, Deuteronomy. 17. Some
excuse them by a dispensation, as likewise the Patriarchs; but being urged to
show it, they are saine to supply the silence of the Bible with a conceit that
the first that swarued from the Law had his warrant by inspiration; and that
others took their allowance from his example. But the excuse is dangerous, and
ungrounded, we may not make so bold with GODS Law; rather may we think, that
the best of the Patriarchs were but men, and that they were carried away with
the error of their times, and that GOD in mercy bore with that, as with other
their imperfections, but we may not venture to say his Justice did allow it. A
dispensation is an allowance of Justice notwithstanding the Law; but a
permission is a forbearance of mercy which does not proceed against sin
according to the rigor of the Law, either to check or to correct it. We may
grant the Patriarchs the benefit of such a merciful permission, but a legal
dispensation we cannot grant them without better proof. As for GODS giving of
SAVLS wives into DAVID'S bosom, 2 Samuel 12.8. we are to understand NATHAN of
those whom SAVL never knew; otherwise they will justify Incest in the right
line, which DAVID so abhorred, that he would never keep company with those
Concubines which ABSALON had abused: much less would he admit into his bosom
any woman which his father-in-law had known.

Unto this principal oneness, we must add the accessorie, of honor and
concord.

Oneness of honor; for Vxor fulget radijs mariti, vt luna solis, when a man
marryeth a woman with his body, he does worship her, and endow her with all his
worldly goods, that is, she becomes as noble, and as rich, as he is, reserving
always the supremacy unto man, I mean reverence to his person which is the
fountain of her honor, and obedience to his command in dispencing the goods,
which she holds from him in chief.

Oneness of concord is a like affection and disposition in prosperity and
adversity, which can never stand with Polygamie, the mother of jealousy, and
jealousy is the mother of discord, as you may gather out of the story of SARA
and HAGAR, RACHEL and LEAH, and the wives of ELCANAH SAMVELS father; the best
men's Families have not avoided it.

All this while that I have spoken of the oneness in marryage, you must not
mistake, as some have done; for there are two kinds of Polygamie, Simultanea,
and Successiua, the having of more wives successively, or at one time. Some
have ouer-rackt chastity, as some have shrunk it: Hist. Fab. lib. 1
The Montanists (as appears by TERTVLLIAN in his Book de (...)) and the
Nouatians (as we learn out of THEODORET) held, that, if a man buried one wife,
he might not marry an other. And the CHVRCH of Rome cannot excuse it self
from this error, in that it forbids the blessing of second marriages in the
CHVRCH; and suffers not any that has had a second wife to enter into holy
orders, or that has married a widow, which is interpreted Polygamie. But this
kind of Polygamie was never forbidden by any Law; it is not only allowed, Romans
7. but commanded also, 1 Timothy 5.14. Canin. 8. Amb. de vid^^^
The Council of Nice has made a Canon in defense of it, and the Fathers
justify it. It is then only Polygamia simultanea, the having of many wives
together that is condemned by my Text, by the Old Testament, Austin de bono
viduit. c. 11. Cap. a. Cap. 19.
by the New, and by the Fathers, as they have occasion to speak either of the
institution of marriage delivered in Genesis, or the interpretation of our
Savior CHRIST in St MATTHEW, which Polygamie had its original from LAMECH one
of CAINES posterity. And this must you the Penitent observe, as that which
gives the first light unto you of your sin; you have offended against the
oneness of marriage.

As you have offended against the oneness the Work, so have you against the
Workemaster; he is the second part that I pointed out in the Text of the Law:
for he is the cause of this oneness.

In wedlock there are three persons to be observed, first, the Male, secondly,
the Female, and thirdly, GOD that joins them together: look upon the story
in Genesis, there you shall find that ADAM non arripuit Euam, sed expectauit
Deum adducentem, he did not carue for himself, Math. 19.
but stayed for GODS consent, and therefore our Savior CHRIST says, Prou.
2.17.
that GOD conjoined in marriage, and SOLOMON says, that it is pactum Dei, the
covenant of God: so that the lawful conjunction of man and wife is not only
Gods ordinance, but Gods act also; he does it by himself, or his Minister, the
very Heathen thought so that had a several God president not only of the
substantial parts, but also of every circumstance of their marriage. I will
not trouble you with enumeration of them. Observe then the interueniencie of
God in wedlock, which does improve it, though not to the state of a Romish
Sacrament, yet to the condition of a sacred thing; and so we should esteem it.
And the act of God in joining ADAM and EVE must be accounted a real Law; the
sampler, whereunto all other wedlockes were to conform themselves as
exemplysications; our Savior CHRIST teaches us so to understand it, Math. 1^.
and our Prophet does here work upon it as being such. But why do I call to
witness these sacred Authors? The light of Reason taught it the Philosopher;
Aristotle gives it for a Law in his Politics, and in his Oeconomicks; the
Roman Emperor Deijs qui infamiae notantur. Leg^.
in his Digests, De intest. nupti^s and ad Legem Just. de Adulterijs.
in the Code, thought it reasonable to put it into their Laws: Gratiam causa
24. quest. 3. and de diuortijs.
the Canonists make it their ground against marriage after divorce; and our Law
has provided for it.

Seeing so many Laws attend Gods legal fact, it cannot be denied but that
Polygamie is a sin against this Worke-master; it cannot be denied but that
Polygamie is a sin against the Lawgiver, as well as against his Law.

Whence you the Penitent may make a farther discovery of your sin, you have
offended against the oneness in marriage, not only that which God has
commanded, but also that oneness which God himself by his own act has made.

And if this Anabaptisticall liberty of having many wives so offend (for
Anabaptists in this dotage of the world, and their abettors, have been the
Authors, and practisers of these masterlesse lusts) how odious is the
community of wives, and the Familists work of darkness? Surely, 1 Cor. 6.
though he that is joined to a Harlot (as the Apostle speaks) be one flesh,
yet that oneness is not of Gods making; for he makes none one but according
to the Law before specified.

And let this suffice for the matter of the Text; I come now to the manner.

The manner is powerful: for MALACHI delivers it in form of a question,
which lays the matter close to the conscience; Did he not make one? is as
much as can you deny it? Does not the Law expressly say it? This is an
undeniable truth: so that he works upon a known principle; and gives us to
understand, that principles of faith and good manners should be familiarly
known; the Catechisticall points should be every bodies study, and they
should be ready with us upon all occasions to resolve our Consciences, they are
the best guide of our Judgments when we come to try the conclusions, that
learned men deduce from them; yea, and if we hold them, we need not be
perplexed in conscience, if we have not skill enough to judge of the
controversies that do arise concerning those conclusions. It is true that
CHRIST bids us search the Scripture, John 5. Col. 8. Hebr. 5.
and St PAVL wills us to let the Word of God dwell richly in us, and those
that are of full age should, by reason of use, have their senses exercised to
discern good and evil. But if our breeding have not been so good, nor our
capacity so great, we must be sure to hold the foundation; the Principles of
Religion must not be strange unto us; if we take not so much pains as to be
well skild in them, our state to Godward is but comfortless.

This I would have them take notice of, who neither themselves know their
Catechism, nor take care that their children and servants (according to the
Law) be bred up therein; the Prophets Sermon could little have profited these
Jews, had they not been acquainted with his sext, and because the common
people know not much of their Catechism, they profit little by our Sermons:
for the truth hereof I report me to your own consciences, as the Prophet here
does for the vndoubtednesse of his Text.

I have done with the Text of the Law, I come now to the Sermon of the Prophet.

I told you it is short but full; for it has the two parts of a Sermon whereof
the first is doctrine, and here is a indicious one. To make it plain, you must
conceive that the Prophet argues upon his Text thus; God made but one, was it
because he could make no more? or because he would not? It was not because he
could not, for he had abundance of spirit, or (as some read) Excellency;
join them together and the sense will be full, anoundance of excellent Spirit.
The words may point out either Gods power, or his store; and signify, that
neither his power was enfeebled by the creation of one, nor his store
exhausted. And indeed touching his power, how should that be enfeebled which is
infinite? Sine numero, sine mensura (as St BERNARD speaks) it is not
restrained with any bounds; it is true that his Will does not always extend as
far as his power; but his power never comes short of his Will; Ps. 135.6.
Luke 1.37.
for he does whatsoever he will both in Heaven and in earth, neither is any
thing impossible unto him. Neither is the abundance of his excellent store any
whit less, consider but the infinite number of Angels which he made before he
made man, DANIEL says that thousand thousands ministered unto him, Dan. 7. Ps.
68.
and ten thousand times ten thousands stood before him; Or look to that which
was done after he made that one, look how many millions of men there have
been since he created that one, Hebr. 12.
so many Spirits has he created, for he is the Father of our Spirits, Eccl. 12.
and when we dye, the Preacher says, they return to God that gave them us.

Observe; that whereas man consists of a body and a soul, there could be no
question but God had stuff enough to make more bodies, all the doubt was of
the soul; therefore the Prophet touches at that, and not at the other, and
gives us to understand, that it was as easy to Gods power to breathe more
Spirits of life, as of the dust of the earth, or ribbe of man to make more
bodies.

Observe secondly, that the addition of Excellency is joined with Spirit, to
show the dignity of the Soul of man. Beasts have souls no less then men,
but theirs compared to ours, are very base, our soul comes from Heaven,
theirs from the Earth; we must not undervalue this precious gift of God, nor
let any unruly lusts tell the world that the Soul that dwells in us is not
much better conditioned then that of a Beast.

You that are the Penitent take notice of this, take notice how your fact has
debased your Soul.

It is clear then that God did not make but one because he could make no more,
whereupon it will follow, that the reason why he made but one, was, because he
would not: And indeed, all Gods outward works are arbitrarie, they depend upon
his Will; neither could any thing have forced them against his Will, whether
they be works of the Creation, of the Providence, or of the Redemption,
whatsoever outward work he does, comes freely from him.

Having found out this general cause, a man would think the Prophet might
have rested here: for who should ask an account of Gods Will which prescribes
to all things? and whereon our Faith may securely rest, because it is a most
holy ground, it is the rule of righteousness, a man may boldly, securely
submit to it; without disputes obey it, in the greatest Articles of our Faith,
as the Mystery of the Trinity, of the Incarnation, we rest upon his bare
word, and we should do ill, if we did enquire beyond it; such busy curiosity
in the highest strains of Religion bred the old Heresies, and is the Mother of
many controversies that now disquiet the CHVRCH. But yet this we must hold,
that in all outward works GODS Will is guided by his Wisdom, Ephesians. 1.
and he does all things according to the counsel of his Will, as the Apostle
speaks. And although sometimes he is pleased to try our Faith, by his
absolute commands; yet oftentimes, especially in moralities, he vouchsafes to
condescend to our infirmity, and cherish our obedience by yielding a reason of
his doings, and so settles our disputing wits; as he does in this place, by the
Prophet, whose resolution of the doubt is very full; for he not only refutes
Error, but declares the Truth, wherein he goes so far, as to set down not
only the general, but the particular cause also of GODS making one, and so
makes our understanding happy: for felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas,
farther our understanding cannot go, and when it comes so far (if ever) it
will be quiet, and obey readily.

Let us come then unto the reason which GOD is pleased to yield; it is in
effect this. It was expedient it should be so in regard both of Nature and
Grace. In regard of Nature, quaesiuit semen, GOD would have mankind propagated:
In regard of Grace, quaesiuit semen sanctum, he would have mankind propagated
as beseemed his children: for these ends was God pleased so to order his Work,
to make one, and but one.

But let us take these branches asunder. First, He sought seed; and is that
hindered by many wives? A man would think it is farthered rather; (for the more
wives a man has, the more children may he have.) A man would think so; but it
is not so: for God has proportioned the strength of one man to the use of one
woman; and if he so confine his lust, he shall have more strength of body, and
length of life to propagate his seed, such seed as may be fit for propagation.
But the man that is given to many women does sooner decay the state of his
body, and becomes barren before his time, or begets children that are
naturally Eunuchs, for the children of lustful persons do seldom prove
fruitful. As for women that communicate their bodies to many men, their case
is much more such; look into the Stews, and you shall see that those common
Harlots are as barren of children, as they are excessive in lust; neither are
they more fruitful that carry their sin more closely. Add hereunto, Cap.
15.
that saying of the son of SYRACH, Bastard plants take no roots; if two
become one, and that one be not of Gods making, they cannot look for Gods
blessing; the more of such ones, the more unhappy ones. Therefore that Gods
blessing, which in the Creation he gave to man, saying, Multiply and increase,
might be poured out upon man in full measure, he made but one.

As he said a seed: so he said a holy seed, he would have men multiply but so
as beseemes the children of God, as was most expedient for the state of Grace.
And here the phrase is to be observed, that which we render holy seed, is in
the Original, the seed of God: it may allude to diverse stories. First, To that
of the Creation, Genesis 1.
God made man after his Image, after the Image of God made he them, both male,
and female; Cap. 3.
therefore St LVKE fetches ADAMS pedigree from GOD, GOD elevated the nature of
man whom he made answerable to the Covenant whereinto he entered, and man
became not only a sociable Creature, but also a member of the CHVRCH: and GOD
would have them multiply as such, bring forth children after his Image,
answerable to the honor which in the Creation he has done them. A second
allusion of this phrase may be to the story of the Separation, which after the
Fall, was made between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, the
seed of ENOS, and of CAIN. The seed of ENOS that continued in the Covenant,
Genesis 6.
and had the seed of God (as St JOHN speaks) abiding in them, were called the
sons of God; and they were to continue on a posterity like unto themselves,
partakers of the same Grace, heirs of the same Promises; the CHVRCH was to be
perpetuated in their seed. But as ADAM took a fall, and then brought out
children after his own Image, not GODS: so these sons of GOD coupled
themselves with the daughters of men, and of them were borne Giants, such
Mongrels, such Monsters as lost the seed of GOD, and therefore were swept away
with the Flood. GOD revived his seed a third time by NOAR in SEM, and of SEMS
posterity, chose ABRAHAM, Exodus 19.
whose posterity he made a Kingdom of Priests, a holy Nation, and forbad them
to profaine the holy offspring of the Lord in mingling themselves with the
cursed offspring of CHAM, to continue their prerogative. The story of EZRA
and NEHEMIAH show how the Jews transgrest this Commandment, and how much
those good men were offended therewith, and pressed the reformation thereof; our
Prophet, that lived about those times may allude thereunto.

But whatsoever did occasion the phrase, the issue of Polygamie must needs be
an unholy, a bastard, a cursed seed. GOD in his Covenant promises to be our
GOD, and the GOD of our Seed, but it is of our seed lawfully begotten, Deuteronomy. 23.
therefore in the Law he commands, that a bastard shall not come into the
Congregation of Israel unto the third generation. Cap. 3.
The Book of Wisdom amplyfieth this point; the children of Adulterers shall
not come to perfection, and the seed of the unrighteous bed shall be rooted
out: the like you may read Eccl. 23. but because those Books are Apochryphall,
Cap. 31.^
here what JOB says of Adultery; It is a sin to be condemned, it will
devour unto destruction, and it would root out all my posterity. And no wonder
that GOD deals so with Bastards; for which of us if he have Land entailed,
entailes it otherwise then upon heirs lawfully begotten? If we think Bastards
unworthy to inherit our Lands here on Earth, shall GOD think them worthy to
be heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven? I will not condemn all Bastards to Hell,
I know IEPHTA found favor with GOD, and so no doubt have many others, but that
comes to pass by GODS extraordinary mercy; ordinary Promise we have none
that they shall do well.

Yea observe, and you shall find that they seldom keep a mean: if good,
very good; and if they be bad, they are very bad: and parents of such
children have reason rather to fear the worst, then hope the best: for though
GOD at after-hand does often pardon sins, yet beforehand he gives no
encouragement to sinners. You that are the Penitent take this to heart, your
second match being plain Adultery, the children borne in such wedlock must
needs be bastards, and being Bastards, they are not the holy seed, yea they are
a seed that is cursed, so cursed for your fault, that, as much as in you lies,
you strip them of all blessings on Earth, and in Heaven, they are favored by
the Law neither of God, nor men. And so great wrong done to them should go to
your very heart; you have sinned against your children not only against your
own body.

And let this suffice concerning the doctrine that is in the Prophets Sermon; I
come now to the exhortation which he deduceth therefrom.

The exhortation is double, according to the double respect which we owe. The
first is to our selves, keep your selves in your Spirit, or, take heed to your
Spirit.

We must take care of our whole man, the outward and inward: for touching the
outward the Apostles rule is, 1 These. 4.4. 1 Cor. 3. 1 Cor. 6.
We must keep our vessels in honor; we may not defile the Temples of God; We
may not take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot; we
must be chaste, propter carnem Christi (as IGNATIUS speaks) because we are
bone of Christ's bone, and flesh of his flesh.

But as we must take care of our bodies, so must we much more take care of our
souls; for it is in vain to keep the body chaste, and to retain an
adulterous heart; for an adulterous heart, though it be peccatum sine test, it
has no man to witness it; yet is it peccatum, Athanasius.
God will doom it for sin: Yea, if a man stop not lust in his heart, Math.
15.
he will not be master of it in his body, for ex abundantia cordis, out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, out of that comes Adulteries and
Fornications. But qui adinngit Spiritui adimit carni, the better the Soul is,
the better will the body be; therefore is temperance properly called (...), a
keeping of a man in his right wits, because so long as a man has his wits
about him, he is master of his lusts; but no sooner has Dalilah brought that
Sampson asleep, but the Philistims will be upon him, and deprive him of his
strength, he will be overtaken with this lustful Epilepsie, and profane the
Temple of the Lord.

But to open this point a little farther, we must observe that as we have
sensual and reasonable faculties; so it was Gods pleasure that those actions
which are Elicitae, or come naturally from the sensual faculties, should also
be imperatae, ordered and limited by the rational: therefore is the rational
faculty called (...), the guide and governor of our life; and he deserves not
the name of a man, whose sense is not subject unto reason.

But the Spirit does not only note the reasonable soul, but in an argument
concerning the CHVRCH, it means that Soul as it is regenerated by Grace; and
then, it puts us in mind, that the care of our Souls must be more then
reasonable, it must be spiritual; and not only the best wit of man which is
corrupt (as appears in the unchaste chastity of the Heathen) but the
sanctifying Grace of God must set bounds to our lusts, which will suffer them
to pass no farther then they are allowed by Gods Law. A man is an excellent
creature, if he be but a man, if he keep his reasonable Spirit; how much more
excellent would a Christian man be, if he could continue a Christian, and
preserve in himself the Spirit of Grace?

I may not omit the word keep, it wills us to set a watch, because we are
apt to run riot; whether the Spirit signify Reason, or Grace, we must watch.

If reason; we must watch, that we admit not into our imaginations nor suffer
our wits to discourse upon lustful fancies; we live in the midst of
temptations, and none are more insinuating then those that are pleasurable; we
must take heed therefore that our reason be not betwitched by them; they will
cunningly euchant us, and transform us into beasts before we are aware:
wherefore we must keep a watch over our Reason; and not only over Reason, but
over Grace also, that we grieve not the Holy Spirit, that we quench him not,
that we do not dispite him: Ephesians. 4.30. ^ These. 5.19.
for the Holy Spirit of discipline will not abide in a Soul that is disposed
unto sin; Adspicis vt veniant ad candida tect a columbae, the doue-like
spirit delights to dwell in doue-like persons, himself being chaste, in those
that are chaste. Wherefore we must keep our spirits, that for our unchastity
the Spirit of God forsake us not.

You have the first branch of the exhortation, the second follows.

This bids us be careful of that respect which we owe unto our mate; Let no
man deal treacherously with his wife. A wife a little before my Text is called
a man's companion, and the wife of his covenant; Now you know that fraud in
fellowship is abominable, especially if that fellowship be established by
covenant, as wedsocke is; and no fellowship upon straiter covenants then
wedlock: for therein there is a double covenant, pactum hominis, and pactum
Dei, the persons contracting do plight their faith each to other, that is
pactum hominis: Then God he comes in as a party to knit the knot, and will
have this mutual stipulation made in his sight, and in his name; so that both
stand bound to God, not only to themselves, never to loose this knot till
death them depart. He then that deals treacherously with his wife, by taking
another while she lives, is guilty, not only of sin against her, but also
against GOD: and he should be so guilty, though he were divorced; divorce may
go so far as to part their company for a time, but it dissolues not the
bond of Matrimony, no though both sides be willing to have it dissolved; they
may renounce their own right, they cannot renounce Gods; without his consent,
the Obligation which he lays upon them cannot be cancelled: he that marries
a second wife, even after divorce, deals treacherously: for marriage implies,
indiuiduam vitae consuetudinem, so strait a tie, that whom God has conioyued,
Math. 19. 1 Cor. 7.
no man can put asunder: and divorce was granted only for the hardness of the
Jews hearts: therefore they that are divorced must be reconciled again, or
remain unmarried to any other. And if it be Adultery upon divorce to marry
again, how much more is it Adultery to marry without a divorce? And this is
your case which are the Penitent. I know you had a fair pretense, your wife
was lewd, she ran from you, she was seven years absent, you heard she was
dead; fair pretenses, and they do you this good, that they keep off from you
the stroke of seuerer Justice. But though they diminish your fault, they do
not altogether excuse it, the death of your wife was not hastily to be
believed, you should have legally proved it, before you ventred upon a second
match. And as for her forsaking you, it was a foul fault; but you ought not to
have recompensed evil with evil, and become an Adulterer, because she was an
Adulteress; if you will partake of her sin, you must partake of her
punishment, at least in part; The full punishment of Adultery is very great,
temporal, eternal; in this life MOSES Law did cut off Adulterers by death,
Leu. 20.
and if the Adulterer be a Polygamist, our Law also (excepting in some cases)
inflicteth death upon him: 1 Cor. 5.
The Apostles Canon does excommunicate him. Neither is an Adulterer only
punishable in this world, his case is much worse in the world to come; for the
Apostle threatens it with eternal death, except they repent, 1 Cor. 6. Hebr.
13.
God himself will judge Adulterers; and they shall never enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Make you then good use of this your Ecclesiastical penance, that so you may
prevent GODS eternal vengeance.

There is one clause more in this second branch of the Exhortation whereat I
will touch, and so end.

The person against whom the Iowe offended, is here called the wife of his
youth; he married her in his younger years, and now in his elder set his
affection upon some other. It is thought that the Jews returning from
Captivity, brought with them their wives, poor in state, worn and withered
in their bodies with carking and caring: and that thereupon to relieve their
wants, and satisfy their lusts with richer and fairer women, they fell to
these second matches. And indeed poverty and deformity are shrewd temptations
to worldly and carnal men; but this phrase teaches that the woman whom a man
loves in youth, he must love her in age; the longer they have been wedded,
the more must be their love; and it is a greater fault to play false with an
old wife, then with a young bride. Men must ever keep in mind the promise they
made at their marriage, I take thee to my wedded wife, to have and to hold, for
better for worse, for richer for poorer, in sickness and in health, till death
us do part.

But I end; and SOLOMON shall make my conclusion; Prou. 2.
Drink waters out of thine own cisterne, and running waters out of thine own
well; Let the fountains be dispersed abroad, and rivers of waters in the
streets; Let them be only thine own, and not strangers with thee; Let the
fountain be blessed, and rejoice with the wife of thy youth; Let her be as the
loving Hind, and pleasant Roe; Let her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and
be thou ravished always with her love. And why will thou my son, be ravished
with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger? For the ways of
man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his doings. Let us
all walk in the Spirit, and not in the Flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.

So shall God bless us, and our posterity here on Earth, and after this life,
we shall be reckoned in the number of those Virgins, which follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes. Amen.
A SERMON PREACHED AT St CVTBERTS IN WELLS WHEN CERTAIN PERSONS DID PENANCE
FOR BEING AT CONVENTICLES WHERE A WOMAN PREACHED.
1 TIMOTH. 2. VERSE 11, etc. 11 Let the woman learn in silence with all
subjection.

12 But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man,
but to be in silence.

13 For Adam was first formed, then Eve.

14 And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the
transgression.


THIS Epistle is a Book of Ecclesiastical Canons; therein St PAVL does
instruct TIMOTHY Bishop of Ephesus, how he should guide his censures in regard
as well of the discipline, as the doctrine of the CHVRCH. Amongst others, in
this Chapter we have two Canons which serve to correct the mis-beuauiour of
Christian women. Their mis-behauiour was twofold, They did glory in the
monument of their shame; and they advanced themselves above the condition of
their sex. The monument of shame is Apparel, for there was no need thereof
while we were clothed with Innocence, but when the conscience of our sin
made us loathsome in our eyes, then did we betake our selves unto this covert;
to hide our vile selves from our counfounded senses we put on clothes. Upon
this ground St PAVL tells women (I may add men also (for we live in an age
wherein it is hard to say, whether in clothes men grow more womannish, or
women more mannish) but here St PAVL tells women, that if they will be gaye and
fine indeed, they must attire themselves according to that fashion whereinto
God at first put them, not according to that which sin has forced upon them;
they must adorn themselves, not with the burnished, and embelished elements,
or rather excrements of this lower world, but with the graces and virtues that
come from Heaven; so shall they have a conversation well suited with their
profession, and make themselves lovely in the eyes as well of God, as men. This
is the sum of the first Canon, the Canon that corrects women's glorying in the
monument of shame, which is their Apparel.

To this St PAVL adds a second which corrects their advancing themselves above
their sex, and it is contained in those words which now I have read unto you.
The better to understand this Canon, we must resolve it into a Rule, and the
Reason which the Apostle gives for the same. In the rule we shall see what it
is, and who prescribes it.

The rule is a precept, which first does range, and then does qualify women
answerable to their rank. In the School of CHRIST there are Masters and
Scholars; women are placed amongst Scholars, they must learn; yea so are
they placed amongst Scholars, that they may never hope to be Masters; for
(...), they can have no license to teach; The ground whereof is a general
maxim, they may not (...), usurp upon men; if absolutely women may not be
superior to men, then may they not be in Ecclesiastical things; for teaching
imports a superiority.

Women being thus ranged, must be qualified answerable to their rank, being
Scholars, they must have the qualities of Scholars; those are two, filence,
and obedience; silence, they must use their ears, and not their tongues about
sacred things, they must be more forward to hear then to speak, they must
learn with silence; And unto their silence they must add obedience, they must
not give but take instructions, and put in practice what they are taught, they
must learn with all subjection. This is the Rule.

But who prescribes it? So harsh a rule had need of a very good Author, women
will otherwise be hard of belief: And surely this has a good one; it is St
PAVL, his style in the Preface of this Epistle shows his warrant, he is an
Apostle of JESUS CHRIST; he delivers it not in his own name, but in his
Masters, as his Steward; so much is intimated in the word (...), whence comes
(...), which signifies a Steward, so that we cannot dis-belieue him, but we
question CHRIST'S truth. The authority of this Rule then descends from Heaven;
and if it do, the bare promulgating of it requires that we credit it.

But as God does all things not only according to his Will, but the Counsel
of his Will: even so his words are Decrees not only of his Will, but also of
his Counsel; they have a reason, and for strengthening of our Faith, the Holy
Ghost though he be not bound, yet is he often pleased to express the same; He
does it in this place. And the reason of this rule is taken first from the
Creation, then from the Fall.

From the Creation thus does the Apostle argue, woman must be subject unto man,
for Adam was first framed and then Eve, the precedencie in being gives a
prerogative of commanding. But this was a real ordinance, and woman (it should
seem) took no notice of it, for EVE began quickly to be a teacher of ADAM.

She did so; but with very ill success, for she was seduced, she discovered
the weakness of her judgment, and that not in a matter of speculation, but of
practice, for she was in the transgression; she brake GODS bonds, and cast his
cords from her; by her and not by ADAM, or rather by her taking upon her to
teach ADAM came sin into the world.

Hereupon the Apostle concludes, that because woman has given so woeful a
proof of her vntowardlynesse in teaching of man, she must forbear for ever to
meddle with that function, and man must maintain that authority which GOD
has given him over a woman.

These are the contents of this second Canon, whereof suitable unto this
occasion I will now speak briefly, and in their order. I begin with the Rule.

I told you it is a Precept wherein we must see first how women are ranged. The
name of man and woman, which in the Original are (...), and (...), have a
double signification, they are understood ratione either Sexus, or Coniugij,
they note in general male and female, or in special such of either sex as
are joined in wedlock. The Apostle in this place makes use of the general
signification, but so that his doctrine may be applied also to the special;
for if in general women be so subjected unto men, wedlock makes no alteration
in this case, but does much more subject a wife unto her husband, and in their
measure must all the particulars of this text hold in the Oeconomicks, though
here they be handled as they are to be understood in the Ecclesiastics.

To come then nearer my Text. The CHVRCH is a society, and therefore consists
of different parts, there must be in it superiors and inferiors; This is
taught us by the resemblance that is made between it and a Kingdom, wherein
there is a Sovereign and Subjects; between it and a City, wherein there are
Magistrates and Commons; between it and an Army with Banners, wherein there
are Captains and Soldiers; between it and an House, wherein there is a
Master and his Family; finally, between it and our natural Body, wherein
there are directing and obeying parts. St PAVL handling this last resemblance,
1 Cor. 12. shows the ground of this subordination of persons, as in all
societies so in the CHVRCH, to be (...) the comeliness and commodity of the
Society.

This being a general course which GOD has set down in Societies it must be
enquired, first, what be the different parts of a CHVRCH, and then who are
assigned to either part. The parts are expressed in my Text, and so also are the
parties that are assigned to bear those parts. The parts are Teachers, and
Learners, all members of the CHVRCH come under this division, for they are
either Pastors or people, ghostly Fathers or ghostly Children, Stewards or the
Household of GOD; such as guide, or are guided unto Heaven.

This being plain that there are but these two parts; The second inquiry is,
What parties are assigned to bear them; And here we find that GOD imposes the
person of a Learner upon the woman, and of a Teacher upon the man. Though the
knowledge, and the fear of GOD are common to men and women (for women also are
in the Covenant, and must not be ignorant of the Articles thereof, especially
seeing GOD has vouchsafed them to be spiritual both Kings and Priests) yet
the administration of sacred things is the peculiar of men. In the beginning of
the world, GOD laid this Function upon the first borne that was male; after
the deliverance out of the Egyptian captivity, GOD, in steed of the
firstborn, chose the Tribe of Levy unto this service, to be performed only
by the males thereof; after CHRIST was inaugurated to the Office of a Mediator,
he chose twelve men to be his Apostles, and to them gave order for the
continuance of the Ministry in that Sex. It is true that GOD extraordinarily
in both Testaments raised up Prophetesses, according to that of Joel cap. 2.
and while the Foundation of the CHVRCH was laying, by women he informed men of
his Truth; yea, by a silly woman gave entrance unto Christianity in a whole
Kingdom; but the instances are rare, and they are works wherein GOD showed
himself to have power to dispense with his own Ordinance, and dispose at his
pleasure his own gifts; but they may not be drawn into example by us, to the
prejudice of a well settled Ecclesiastical policy; the general ordinance must
hold, except women that break it can show a dispensation. Ordinary
Women-Prophets and Priests sprang up amongst the Heathen with the corruption of
Religion, who as they had female Gods, so had those Gods for their attendants
suitable persons of their own Sex; yea, sometimes their He-Gods had
She-Priests, in the Poets tales you shall find enough of such trash. The
Heretics received it from the Infidels corrupting holy orders, as they did
GODS sacred Truth, and had their Prophetesses accompanying them; yea, the
Petuzians ordained Episcopas and Presbiter as, feminine both Bishops and
Priests. Licinius (as Eusebius reports) by a tyrannous Law forbad women to
assemble in the CHVRCH with men, and commanded them to have their several
Congregations, and to make themselves Teachers of their own Sex, but his
Edict is censured for ridiculous, and whether within the CHVRCH, or without the
CHVRCH, the calling of women to this sacred function has been deemed a
profanation of holy orders, The Council of Carthage has a short, but a full
Canon to this purpose, Caum. 98.
Quamuis docta, quamuis sancta, admit a woman be never so learned, never so
holy, yet non presumat, she may not presume to meddle with a sacred function;
It is not to be hoped that any woman will ever be of so unspotted a life as was
the Virgin Marie, nor so well acquainted with the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, yet shall you not find in all the life of CHRIST, or after his death
during the time which she lived with the Apostles, that she intermedled with
any part of pastoral function. Whereupon St Bernard was bold to put off an
imposture of a Priest that made the Virgins Image to speak unto him when he
entered into a CHVRCH to perform his devotion, with this witty answer, Your
Ladyship has forgotten that St PAVL forbids women to speak in the Church.

But if women be allowed to be only Hearers in the service of Religion, it may
be thought they have little to do; whereas indeed it is far otherwise, for
not only St PAVL in this Epistle sets them out other work, but Solomon also,
Prou. 21. has read an exemplarie Lecture of good houswiferie unto them; in
which chapter also they may find some liberty that they have to teach, for
there Bathsh^ba is brought in teaching and instructing her son Solomon; and
it may be gathered out of the second Epistle to Timothy, that Timothy was bred
up in Religion by his mother Eunice, and grandmother Lois, it being out of all
question that women are so far allowed to teach, as to instruct them which
under their husbands are committed to their charge. But the Apostles interdict
forbids them within doors in the presence of their husbands, and likewise
abroad in the company of others (especially if they be men) to attempt any
such thing. If they do it abroad, they usurp upon the Pastors function, as
within doors upon their husbands; for though the place where they meet be not
properly a CHVRCH, yet by reason of the use whereunto they put it, their
meeting becomes a Conuenticle; and such acts of a woman, are in the eye of the
Law derogatorie to the authority of the Pastors, as in the eye of Reason to
the authority of man, upon whom it is not lawful for a woman to usurp; as
follows in my Text.

And indeed the general Inhibition that forbids a woman to usurp authority
over a man, is the ground of this particular, they must not be teachers but
hearers, for teaching carries with it a kind of authority.

But more distinctly to rip up this general rule which forbids women to usurp
authority upon men, the word (...) imports two things, authority, and
exemplaritie; words that are authentical are words of command, and such as
inferiors must exemplify; and the privilege of speaking such words belongs
unto man. For whereas all authority is included in three heads, Rex, Propheta,
and Sacerdos, all three are settled in man; man has a kingly power in his House
to give order unto all businesses which concern the same; and he is appointed
a Prophet to his Family to inform them of the knowledge of GOD; I know him
(says GOD of ABRAHAM, Genesis 18.) that he will command his children, and his
household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, etc. In the Law
parents are commanded every one to teach his children, and St PAVL, 1 Cor. 14.
requires women if they will learn any thing, to ask their husbands at home;
which, as it taxes the ignorance of such men as are not able to teach, so
(that they may be able) it whets their industry to be more careful to learn.
Finally, a man is Sacerdos, the sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving must be
offered by him for his whole Family, Job 1.
this did Job practice day by day, he sent for, and fanctified his children,
and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all.

This which is true in a private Family, is much more true in a Commonweal,
which is but a multitude of Families, and the authority in public must be in
persons of that sex to which it belongs in private. If women intermeddle,
they do (...) usurp upon the authority that is proper to man, and then what
follows? The Philosopher will tell you that (...), the rule of women is the
baine of a Family: no less then tyranny is the baine of a Common wealth; the
reason is plain, they have more of the heart then the head, and their
affections out-step their discretion: yea, whereas in the head there is wit and
wisdom; women are commonly more witty then wise, for wisdom requires the
pondering of circumstances, but the forwardness of their affections will not
suffer women to pause so long; whereupon it follows that their resolutions are
rash and wilful, which cannot prognosticate any good events. Cornelius Agrippa
has tried the best of his wits to advance them in abilities above men, but he
does so collude in handling the Argument, that women may well fear a judgment
will be given against them, if they come to the Bar furnished with no better
evidence. Happily some woman may be as wise as Abigail, and some men as silly
as Natal, yet then neither does man lose his prerogative, nor woman acquire a
title above him; she may deal with him per viam consilij, but not imperij,
counsel she may, command him she may not: In a word, women are not to give
directions to men, nor men to take their patterns from them, the contrary
rather must prevail both in private and public, especially in ecclesiastical
functions men are to give women their directions, and women are to take their
patterns from men, for so much the distinction that sorts them into Learners
and Teachers does import.

And so have you heard how this precept does range women, who must hence learn
with what place they are to content themselves in the School of CHRIST.

As the Precept does range them, so does it qualify them; Learners they are,
and they must have the qualities of Learners, which are these two, silence and
obedience.

First, women must learn in silence. There is a double silence, one of the
tongue, and another of the wit; St CHRYSOSTOM observes that in his days women
came to CHVRCH as they go a gossopping, met there to talk and prattle
together, unto whom he gives this Item, that they must not there so much as
confer of heavenly things, much less may they tattle about worldly affairs,
they must spare their tongues, and use their ears, be swift to hear, and slow
to speak. I suppose many women labor of the same imperfection now adays, who
shall do well to take notice of this memento of St Chrysostom, and make
better use of their Teachers pains then they are wont to do.

But there is a silence of the wit, as well as of the tongue: as women must
hear with attention, so must they also hear with sobriety of judgment; they
must not have busy heads, and move curious and needless questions: seldom
will the tongue be quiet, if the wit be so working; the truth whereof is most
apparent in this age of ours, then which none ever bred more idle disputes,
tending to quarrelling rather then edification, the end of Learning. The
Minister is GODS Steward, and is to give every one his portion of meat in due
season: In our Houses we will hardly endure that enerie one of our Family
should prescribe unto himself his own diet, and not be contented with what is
provided by such as we put in trust to serve them; but we are bolder with GODS
Stewards then we will suffer our Family to be with ours; and none are more
sick of this disease then women, they want the first quality of a Learner, to
wit, silence, when they come to hear they should come furnished with that, but
not with that only, they must be furnished also with another quality, which
is, obedience, Women must learn with all subjection. Women were wont in St
PAVLS days to wear in the CHVRCH the symbol of subjection, which was a
Veil, who himself approues of the expediencie hereof, and says, that it was
to be done propter Angelos, 1 Cor 11
to note their subjection to the Pastors, who were representatiuely unto them
as CHRIST, whose Spowse women must show themselves to be. And indeed, married
women are called Nupt^e, of wearing a Veil, Cat. 24.
and of Rebecca you read in Genesis that so soon as she came within sight of
Isaac, she covered her self with a Veil, and so presented her self in token
of subjection unto him. St PAVL, Ephesians. 5. paralels the subjection of the wife
to her husband, with the subjection of the CHVRCH to CHRIST; so that they must
submit themselves not only to learn, but to obey, and be ruled by them whom
GOD has made their Teachers: for wheresoever GOD places one under another,
his purpose is by the one to order the other.

But you must mark that it is (...), with all subjection, which may be
understood either of the things wherein, or the parts wherewith they do obey.
Touching the things; you heard before that a man is Rex, Propheta, and
Sacerdos, in all these three functions women must be ordered by men, and men
must give directions unto women. And as in all these things they must be
subject; so must their subjection be as well in affection, as in action; it
must partake not only of the outward, but of the inward man; they must be
subject as reasonable, not as unreasonable Creatures.

But we must not mistake: The subjection of the wife to the husband, and of
women to their Pastors, is not serua, but libera, it is not slavish, but
ingenuous. When GOD made the woman for man, he made her as another-himselfe,
Genesis 2.
and man is so to esteem of her; she must be similis, though not aequalis
honoris, she must partake in the same kind of honor, though not in the same
degree that man does: And as Turtullian says of a King, that he is solo Deo
minor, has in his Kingdom none above him but only GOD, so is a woman in a
Family, solo marito minor, she should command all in the House but her husband.
This the Romans intimated when at the first bringing of their wives into their
Houses, they greeted them with these words, Vbi ego dominus tu domina, and Vbi
ego herus tu hera. We mean as much by these words whereat many stumble in the
solemnization of Matrimony, with my body I thee worship, which import nothing
else but that the husband does communicate to his wife whatsoever degree he
has either in the CHVRCH or Commonweal. And indeed, for a husband to esteem
his wife at a lower rate is barbarous inhumanitie: she is and must be accounted
one with himself, and as his Consort.

And as in wedlock the husband must so temper his superiority over his wife;
so must Pastors claim no other superiority over them then CHRIST does over
his CHVRCH. Implicit faith, and blind obedience of the Romanists, are no parts
of the subjection; women must be Learners, but they are not bound to receive
more then Pastors are authorized to deliver unto them in the Name of CHRIST;
farther to subject them, is to tyrannize over them, as popish Priests do over
their followers.

You have heard of what rank women are, and how far they are subjected unto
men: But here we must take heed of two Rocks, whereof one is an error, the
other is a slander. The error is the opinion that does out of this Text impugn
(...), the government of women; to which purpose there was a Tract published by
some distempered humor in Queen Mary's days, which had also the concurrencie
of French Divines, who to countenance the Salicke Law do gladly entertain
such an opinion: But both should know, that general rules have their
exceptions, and those set down by GOD himself: Besides, the general rule,
Honor thy father and thy mother, which shows that even mothers also have their
place in government. MOSES has given us a particular resolution of this case,
Dent. 27. from the mouth of GOD himself, which is, that where heirs males
fail in a line, the females may succeed in an Inheritance. And if in the
Inheritance, then in all things belonging thereunto, though it be a Royal
Sovereignty: And the French that are so stiff for the Salicke Law, hold, that
in Signiories which depend on the Crown of France only in regard of homage,
and are otherwise free, pass unto the heirs females by succession; otherwise
how came Britannie to be incorporated into the Crown of France, and Burgundy
into the House of Austria? It is true, that in Elective States men are absurd
that make choice of a woman; but in States that are inherited, Municipall Laws
(...)

she was (...), in the transgression; she past the bounds which GOD set her,
and broke a Law which was ordained to be a rule of her life.

Join she was deceived, with she was in the transgression, and then you shall
see how the Serpent instills sin into man; we are not constrained, but allured
to do ill, we swallow evil that is branched with the show of good; so did
Eve; and so do all.

But how does the Apostle deny that Adam was guilty as well as Eve? We must
observe that he does not deny that Adam was in the transgression, for then he
should contradict himself, who says elsewhere, that by man came sin into
the world; yea, he should contradict Adams own confession, Romans 5.
who acknowledged to GOD that his wife gave him, and he had eaten of the
forbidden fruit. Some therefore answer, that not Adam but Eve was first in the
transgression, posterior in factura, prior in culpa (says St HIEROME) and
because she was so forward, not he, but she was to bear the blame.

Some clear the place by understanding the words comparatively, as if Eues
sin were so much greater then Adams, that Adams deserved not the name of
sin in comparison of hers; she was deceived by the Serpent, he by his Wife;
by how much more unreasonable it is for a woman to be guided by a Serpent, then
for a man to be guided by his wife; by so much was her sin more soul then
his. But neither of these two answers fits the argument: It lies rather in
(...), Eve was deceived, and not Adam, she made trial of her wisdom in
reasoning with the Serpent, Adam did not; she deceived Adam, Adam did not
deceive her; consider her passiuely, consider her actiuely, she shows her
self unfit to be a teacher, wherefore she must be contented to be a scholar;
Semel docuit (says St Chrysostom) and omnia perturbauit, she taught once, and
disordered all the world, let her never be allowed to teach again: And indeed
GOD so doomes her, Genesis 3. Thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall
rule over thee. If this subordination be not kept, the course of nature will be
depraved (says St HIEROMI) and faults will be multiplied in the world.

But we may not mistake, and think that sin was the first cause of woman's
subjection, and that she was made inferior, quia abus^ est parilitate, because
she abused that coequalitie which she had with man; which was the opinion of
some ancient and modern Divines; that conce it is refuted by the first Reason.
But as man before the Fall was to husband the ground, which after the Fall was
imposed upon him to be done with the sweat of his brows: so women were to obey
before, but after the Fall their obedience was made more harsh and unpleasant;
yea, and a verbal ordination is added to the real.

But I will conclude, with reference of all this unto our present occasion;
Adam and Eve live still; their weakness lives in their posterity; if you
doubt it, behold here spectacles of it; I mistake, Eve is away, but here are
many of Adams children; Eve showed the frailty of the whole nature of her
sex, and if her daughter were here, I would let her see how like she is to
such a mother, but because she is not, I will direct the rest of my speech unto
these sons of Adam. Those that are blind seek such guids as can see, and
they will be sure they have better sight then themselves before they will
commit themselves unto them: we choose the best Lawyers for our Cases, the best
Physicians for our Bodies, but to supply the defect of our Souls, to guide our
Judgment and our conscience in Religion, we trust we know not whom: certainly
you have, and showed your selves unworthy to be men, that could be so weak as
to become Scholars to a woman; I cannot tell how better to resemble your
humor, then to the distemperate appetite of girls that have the
Greene-sicknesse, their Parents provide for them wholesome food, and they get
into a corner and eat chalk, and coals, and such like trash: so you that may
in the CHVRCH have grave and sound instructions for the comfort of your Soul,
in Conuenticles feed upon the raw, and undigested meditations of an ignorant
usurping Prophetess. You may happily think that your fault is but small, but
it is no small fault to violate the orders set down by GOD, for women to lift
themselves above their rank, or men to fall below theirs; it is less lawful
to do so, then for men to wear women's apparel, or women to wear men's; Put
you on their Veil, and be you their glory, and let them put it off, and be
the glory of GOD, contrary to St PAVLS rule; or if you be loath to make such
an exchange, hence-forward let every man keep his rank, and be forrie that
you have broken it; yea, be sorry that you have raised a scandal against your
Sovereign, and your Pastors. Conuenticles make show that you have not freedom
of Religion, and thereby you derogate from the honor of his most Christian
government; and you have wronged your Pastor by your Conuenticle, casting an
imputation upon him that he cannot, or he will not instruct you as he ought.
These things are included in your fault, and you are to be sensible of these
things, confess them, and ask GOD and his CHVRCH forgiveness for them,

And God grant that you and we all may remember that it is our greatest honor
to observe Gods Order, and that no woman presume to be an Eve, no man abase
himself to be an Adam, to imitate either of them in that wherein they inuerted
their rank; but that every one may abide in that whereunto he is called of
God. Amen. A SERMON PREACHED AT St ANDREVVS IN WELLS WHEN ONE DID PENANCE FOR
BLASPHEMY.
LEVIT. 24. VERSE 15, 16. 15 And thou shall speak unto the children of Jsrael,
saying, Whosoever curses his God shall bear his sum.

16 And he that blasphemeth the Name of the LORD, he shall surely be put to
death, and all the Congregation shall certainly stone him: as well the
stranger, as he that is borne in the Land, when he blasphemeth the Name of the
LORD shall be put to death.


Commonweals are governed by two kind of Laws, fundamental, and
occasional. Fundamental I call those, by which the Commonweal was first
framed. Occasional, such as are from time to time added upon emergent
occasions; you may resemble them by our Common, and our Statute Laws. If men
did live as they ought, according to the former, I mean the fundamental
Laws, there would be no great need of the Laws, which I called occasional.
But because they do not, Ex malis moribus bonae leges; the enormous behavior
of some one has occasioned many a wholesome Law, to hold in others that would
sall into the like sin. And GOD by MOSES gives an excellent pattern to all
good Governors of making such occasional Laws, in cases Ecclesiastical,
Civil, and Criminal; Ecclesiastical, Numb 9. Civil, Numb. 27.36. Criminal,
Numb. 15. and in this Chapter.

We have now to do with a criminal case, the case of Blasphemy; concerning
which we find reported in this Chapter an heinous fact severely punished by
GODS Commandment, and an excellent prouisionall Law grounded thereupon to
prevent the like sin. The fact, with the punishment thereof, you may read in
the verses that go immediately before; the Law is set down in these that now
I have read unto you. Wherein we will consider two things, first what this Law
contains; secondly, to whom it was given. It contaynes the two maine parts of
a Law; for it opens the sin, and prouides a punishment.

In opening the sin it shows us against whom, and how it is committed. The
person against whom is GOD. But the name of GOD is taken either for one that
though he be not, yet is reputed to be such; or for him which is GOD indeed,
which is the true GOD. Both are here mentioned, the reputed GOD, in these
words, his God; the true, in those other, the Name of the Lord.

The sin against either of these persons is committed by mentioning and
vilifying them, those two things must be understood in either of these words,
curse, and blaspheme.

If this sin be committed, here is a punishment provided for it, the Text
will teach us, what it is, and upon whom it must be inflicted. What it is, we
learn here first in general, he must bear his sin; by sin, is meant
punishment; the offender must bear it, the Governor must put it upon him,
least the State suffer for him. In special, the punishment is here set down,
that it must be Ecclesiastical, and Civil; Ecclesiastical, for he must be
cast out of the Tents, which was a kind of Excommunication. Civil, it must be
vltimum, and ignominiosissimum; it must be no less then death, he shall dye,
and that death must be most ignominious: two ways ignominious; first, for that
he was stoned to death, which is mors eminus illata, they that executed him
stood a sarre off, as if they did abhor him. Secondly, he was to have no eye
to pity him, for every one was to be his Executioner, All the Congregation
shall stone him. This is the punishment.

And this punishment must be inflicted upon all without any indulgence, no
person must be excepted, quicunque, whosoever does blaspheme must suffer. And
because amongst the Israelites there were natives and aliens, both are given to
understand, as well he that is borne in the Land, as the stranger, that the Law
concerns them, if they presume to blaspheme they must suffer, yea and suffer
so; they must surely dye, certainly be stoned, they must look for no
commutation, no mitigation of their punishment. This is the Law.

And this Law was given to the children of Israel: so says the entrance into
my Text; Thou shall speak unto the children of Israel; Israel was GODS
peculiar people, and it beseemed them to be the more zealous for his glory.

I have broken up the Text; that this Penitent may be made sensible of his
grievous sin, and we may be warned to take heed of the like(...)

man, reaped where he did not sow, gathered where he did not scatter. These
are affirmative blasphemies. And unto these you may refer false Prophets,
false Apostles, Heretics, yea and Schismatics too, which come unsent, speak
unwarranted, make GOD the Author of their own devices; these are all more or
less affirmative blasphemers: yea, and they also that without warrant curse in
the Name of GOD, or by GOD any other person or thing.

Besides these there are negative, and they are those which either wholly deny,
or much lessen the perfections of GOD. Ps. 94.
Some put out the eye of his Wisdom, they say, Tush the Lord does not see,
and is there any understanding in the Highest? Some bridle his Power, 2 Kings
^^.
What God is he that can deliver out of my hand? says the proud Sennacherib.
God is the God only of the Hills, say the King of Syria's Captains. Epicures
strip him of his Providence, Scilicet is superis labor est, ca cura quietos
Sollicitat? God will do neither good nor evil. These and such like, Chryfoct.
we may call negative Blasphemers: and the rule is, (...), they that would be
bad would have nothing good in GOD.

Unto these you may refer them that give to the creature that which is proper
to the Creator; that implies a denial, for if they be common to others, they
are not only his; it is blasphemy to aver it. And such Blasphemers are all
that make and worship false Gods, yea and Christ's also.

Finally, by reason of Reference unto GOD, sacred Persons and Things are
exposed to both kinds of blasphemy, the affirmative, and the negative.
Wherefore the Dragon is said to blaspheme, not only the Name of GOD, but also
his Tabernacle (that is his CHVRCH) and the Inhabitants of Heaven.

Well, whether the blasphemy be affirmative, or negative, by this time I
think you conceive that it is a fearful thing: and if you do not, certainly
you will, if you take notice of these three points, which issue all of them out
of that which you have heard.

First, Whereas sin may be committed either only against the Law, or also
against the Lawgiver, this is committed immediately against the Lawgiver; and
you know that though he make bold which breaks the Law of the Prince, yet his
presumption is most intolerable that lays hands upon his Person. And what
think you then of him that dares set himself against him that is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords?

Secondly, A man's tongue was made to glorify GOD, therefore DAVID calls it his
glory, and the best member that he has. And how intolerable is it for a man
to abuse that to GODS dishonor, which was given him to set forth his praise?
Not his tongue only, but any part of his body, for a man may blaspheme by
writing, by painting, by caruing, sundry other ways, whereas man, whole man,
and only man of all creatures in this visible world, was made to understand
GODS Word, and his Works, that as he had the benefit of them, so he might give
him the glory of them both.

Thirdly, the mischief that man does himself by this spiritual folly. Cap.
27.
He that casts a stone up (says the son of Sirach) it will fall down upon
his own head. Cap 35
Our sins, our righteousness, neither help nor hurt GOD (as speaks Elihu
in Job) if we reverence GOD, the comfort is not his but ours, as the discomfort
is not his but ours, if we dishonor him. Do we blaspheme affirmatively? GOD
will vindicate his own glory, Ps. 50.
and make us see how much better he is then we dream of him. Look upon the
forecited places; the wicked think that God is like unto them. Mal. 3.
What says GOD there? I will reprove thee and set thy sin before thee. So
likewise in Malachy, they thought that GOD favored men the more, the worse
they lived; but GOD tells them, that in the day when he made up his Jewels, they
should return and see the difference between them that fear God, Math. 25.
and them that feared him not. And the unthrifty servant was refuted before
his face; for his Master gave to the thriftie servants each what he had gained
upon his Masters goods.

But as GOD does thus refute affirmative blasphemies, so may you perceive in
the very same places that the Blasphemer does defraud himself of that which
GOD proves to be his perfection, and leaves him to be more vile then he
thinks GOD to be. So likewise, what gayneth the negative Blasphemer, but
this, that he puts himself out of the protection of those Attributes,
whereof he would, but cannot, rob GOD. GOD will ever have an understanding eye,
though not to watch over him, but to enquire into him; he will have a hand of
power, not to relieve, but to plague him; and he will never cease to be
provident, but the Blasphemer shall never be the better for it. What shall we
say then to these things? Surely considering our duty, considering our danger,
we must think better upon, and take more care to fulfill that Petition of the
Lords Prayer, Hallowed be thy Name. That we may perform our duty, that we may
avoid the danger, let us all, and you especially that are the Penitent, daily
join with the Angels, (...)
and bear a part in their Hymn, singing, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts,
Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory. For shall not mortal man adore that
Name which is so reverenced by Cherubins and Seraphins? It is his honor to be
admitted to it, and a horrible contempt if he do it not, yea, do the
contrary.

The kind of blasphemy is not here expressed, neither do I think it sit to
enquire into it seeing the Holy Ghost is silent, such sins are better
concealed then revealed, therefore do not I publish this Blasphemers sin.
And I wish you not to be inquisitiue after it. Our concupiscence is like
tinder, it will quickly take fire, especially the catching fire of Hell. St
Paul has a good rule; Such things should not so much as be named amongst
Christians. Yea blasphemy was so detested of old, that whereas it had a name,
yet they did express it by an Antiphrasis, and used the word blessing in stead
of cursing. I would our taste of words were as good as theirs was.

I have done with the proper blasphemy, Tract. 27. in Ioh.
I come now to speak a word of the occasional. Here take St Austins rule,
Raro inueniuntur qui blasphemant lingua, multi qui vita; few have gone so far
as this Penitent, who has properly and directly blasphemed GOD. But there are
more then a good many that have obliquely and occasionally blasphemed, yea and
do daily, even all those whose conversation is not answerable to their
profession. For they without the CHVRCH who hear us profess that we are the
children of GOD, and have for our guide the Word of GOD; when then they see us
do that which common reason does condemn as wicked, they conclude, Like
children, like ^ather, like lives, like Laws; they open their mouths against
GOD, and against his holy Word. Wherefore we must by well-doing, stop the
mouths of gaine-sayers, and let our light so shine besore men, that they may
see our good works, and glorify our Pather which is in Heaven; or else we
shall go for occasional Blasphemers, as did David, and also did the Jews. 2 Samuel 12. Romans 2.
And let this suffice for the sin.

I come now to the punishment. And here we must see first, What it is, and
then, On whom it is inflicted. The punishment is set down here first in
general, he shall bear his sin. By sin is meant punishment: the Holy
Ghost by so speaking intimates the knot that in Justice should be between
them; none should be punished but for sin, and no sin should be unpunished.
Which is also true when this word signisieth a Sacrifice, for the original of
a Sacrifice was sin, and sin in the Old Testament was not expiated but by a
Sacrifice.

As you must observe these two things in the word sin, so are there two like
things, a ceremonial and a moral, in those words, he shall bear his sin;
for thereby in this place, the Holy Ghost signifies, that a Blasphemer may not
redeem himself from punishment by any ceremonial Sacrifice, the Law has
provided no Sacrifice for so crying a sin; whereas petty sinners might be
ransomed by Sacrifice, a Blasphemer may not so unburden himself, he must bear
his own sin: Number. 15.
for Blasphemy is one of those sins which are committed with a high hand.

As the phrase does debar the Blasphemer of this ceremonial relief, so does
it put him over to the Civil Magistrate; and yields a good moral Note, which
is, that we must unburden the State upon the malefactor, for sin committed by
one that is a member of the Commonweal, by reason of the Communion that is
between the parts of the politic Body, makes all the Body guilty, Nouel.
Consti^. 77.
if it be heinous; which Justinian the Emperor observed well in his Preface to
the Law which he made against this sin: for this sin (says he) does God
send Famine, Pestilence, the Sword upon a Commonweal; neither can it put off
the guilt, and prevent the punishment but by laying them upon the malefactor,
making him to bear his own sin, lest they also bear a part of it. A good
remembrance for Magistrates to quicken their justice in such cases, and teach
them that they cannot be merciful to a Blasphemer except they will be cruel
to their Country.

But I shall touch at this point again before I end, and therefore I will go
on.

The Punishment is not only set down in general, but in special also; the
special punishment is twofold. First, It is Ecclesiastical, for the
malefactor must be carried out of the Tents: so GOD commanded a little before
my Text, and in the end of this Chapter it was so practiced. And when in the
Holy Land they dwelt in Cities in stead of Tents, which they used in the
Wilderness, they observed the same course: for they cast Blasphemers out of
the City, as appears in the story of Naboth, 1 King. 21. and of St Stephen,
Act. 7. who were calumniated for Blasphemers. 1 Timothy: 1.20.
Now this was a kind of Excommunication, and so vile persons were cast out, De
Mal^die. c. Statuimus.
to note that they were unworthy, not only to live, but even to dye also
amongst the people of GOD, lest the place of their habitation should be
polluted by them. The same GOD that would not endure, that persons, though but
ceremonially polluted, should abide in the Camp, could much less endure the
flagitious amongst his people; Number. 5.
his Tents are holy, and only for holy persons. And we that believe in our
Creed that the CHVRCH is holy, should remove from amongst us all profane, all
blaspheming persons. Whereby you the Penitent must understand what you deserve
at the hands of the CHVRCH. And let this suffice for the spiritual punishment.

I come now to the Temporal. And that I told you, is vltimum, and
ignominiosissimum supplicium. Vltimum, for it is no less then death, the
party must be put to death; GOD held him unworthy to breathe, whose impious
mouth breathed out such hellish contumelies against GOD. By GODS Law several
sins have several punishments, and the punishments are proportioned to the
sins; we may argue strongly, when GOD is the Lawgiver, that if the
punishment be great, undoubtedly the sin is heinous; GOD does often punish
citra, but never vltra condignum. Blasphemy therefore is indeed a deadly
sin, that must be so accounted by GODS Judgments not only in foro poli, in
case of conscience; but also in foro soli, at the Tribunal of a mortal Judge,
whose eye cannot discern, as does the eye of GOD: surely that must needs be
very foul, which must be so foul in his eye. Even in this also may you the
Penitent take the scantling of your sin.

The punishment is not only vltimum, but ignominiosissimum, most ignominious,
and that whether you look upon the Execution, or the Executioners. The
Execution, for the malefactor was to be stoned to death, and that was mors, not
cominus but eminus illata, the Executioners stood aloof, as if they did
abhor to touch the person with their hands, and therefore pursued him with
stones. Add hereunto the circumstances wherewith they were to do it, no
sooner did they hear the Blasphemy, but they rent their clothes, stopped their
ears, gnashed with their teeth, threw dust in the air, cried out with their
voices, and ran against the malefactor with a kind of fury, yea and they
afflicted their souls with fasting also; these circumstances shall you find in
the execution of St Stephen and Naboth, misaplyed indeed, but yet I suppose
they set forth the right manner of proceeding, because we find some of them in
the story of Hezekiah, Ier. 36.
when he heard the blasphemy of Rabsache; and the Princes of Judah are taxed
for that they neither sorrowed, nor rent their clothes when Iehoiakim the King
burnt the Prophecy of Jeremy.

In the story of Naboth it appears, that if the Father were stoned for
blasphemy, all his children also dyed with him. But that seems to be a
strain beyond the Law: because by the politic Law of the Jews the child was
not to dye for the sin of his father; and yet in the story of Achan you have
a precedent of a larger extent, for his sacrilege was punished not only in
his own person, but also in his whole Family; all the living were stoned to
death, and their dead bodies, with all their goods were afterward consumed by
fire. A fearful Judgment, and yet was his sin less then Blasphemy, for
Blasphemy is the highest degree of Sacrilege. There is no proportion between
earthly things consecrated to GOD, and the Nature, the Attributes, the Works
of GOD; of how much sorer punishment then is he worthy that robs GOD of the
latter, then he that robbs him of the former? Hear this, and tremble, you that
stand here guilty of that great Sacrilege. Surely if the Execution do not
make you tremble at the ignominy that is due unto you, the Executioners may.
Let us come then to them.

And who are they? We have here set down their number, all the Congregation,
Prince and people, none must think himself too good, when the case so nearly
concerns GOD; not only the most, but even the best also must stoop to that,
which is otherwise thought to be base (as it is but an ignoble profession to be
an Executioner) when GODS glory must be vindicated, and the wrong done
thereunto must be revenged: all must show that they are sensible of GODS
dishonor. GODS (did I say?) yea their own, which is enwrapt in GODS; for all
are wronged by a Blasphemer, because GOD which is reproacht, is honored by
them all: And can any man be patient to hear him so blasphemed whom himself
does honor?

Add hereunto that this multitude of Executioners was to strike the greater
horror and confusion into the Blasphemer; for when he saw himself convicted of
all, judged of all; how could he but give glory unto GOD? and confess that
his sin was most heinous of a truth? Finally, the number was to be a bridle
unto all; GOD would have every one really obliged never to dare to commit the
same sin, for which he had so publicly punished another, and that with his
own hand.

Out of all that has been said concerning the number of the Executioners, we
learn this good lesson, That though it be a pious thing for a man to forgive
his own disgraces, and reproaches, yet it is impious to forgive GODS. GOD is
well pleased with the former, because he can make us amends for our patience,
and is able to bless when others curse us; but patience in GODS wrongs can
have no excuse; for what amends can be made him? or what Superior is there
that can counteruaile that wrong? Though this be an undoubted truth; see
notwithstanding the perverse disposition of the world, how sensible are we of
our own wrongs? how eagerly do we endeavor to right our selves and our
reputation by Law? yea and against Law? pretending the Laws of honor, we
pursue, even but seeming, yea and oftentimes fained disgraces, with duels, unto
death; to the utter ruin of those which have disgraced us: But of GODS honor
we are most senseless, let Varlets and miscreants (for they deserve no better
name that have such foul mouths) profane the sacred Name of GOD, hellishly
rent in pieces, as a vile thing, the precious ransom of the CHVRCH, the sacred
person and parts of our Savior CHRIST, how many be there that laugh at them,
but as mad fellows? and where is he that thinks that the revenge of this
does concern him? Certainly far off is our Congregation from joining
altogether to stone him.

But lest you should think that this was a tumultuary proceeding, I must
supply, out of former words, the order which was observed therein. For the
witnesses that heard the Blasphemy were to be Leaders in this proceeding, they
were first to impose their hands upon him, and set their hands against him.
This ceremony, though practiced in other Judgments, as appears in the 13 and
17 Chapters of Deuteronomie, yet seems to have its original here, and
imports two things, first the truth of their testimony, so that if the man
dyed innocently, not the whole Congregation which followed, but they which led
the Congregation were to be guilty of his death. Secondly, The imposing of
hands upon the Malefactor was the making of him, as it were, a politic
Sacrifice, for mundi expiatio est malorum occisio, as the Priest, so the Prince
has his Sacrifice to offer; as the CHVRCH so the Common weal: the execution
of Malefactors is a propitiating of GOD. And GOD in the Commonweal of Israel
in cases wherein he refused the Ceremonial, was well pleased to have this
Sacrifice, and to admit it as expiatorie of the Commonweal. I told you of the
thing before, but of the deuoting of the person to pacify GOD I could not
speak till I came to this place.

You the Penitent may hereby see how zealously the State should be bent against
you, and how much it concerns us to see Justice done upon you.

Having thus sufficiently opened the punishment, I come now to show you upon
whom it must be executed, Quicunque, upon him whosoever he be that curses or
blasphemeth; here must be no respect of persons, high or low, rich or poor, be
he what he may be, he is liable to punishment, if he curse his God. Though it
be a false-one, yet if it be his, the Law says plainly, he shall bear his
sin.

The words may be understood either as a relation, or as a commandment. As a
relation, what other Nations do; how zealous they are for the honor of their
Gods. In the Story of the wonders which GOD wrought in delivering the children
of Israel out of Egypt, we find that when Pharaoh would have the Israelites
sacrifice to their GOD in the Land of Egypt, Exodus 8.
Lo (said Moses) shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before
their eyes, and will they not stone us? How did Nebuchadnezzar cause the
Furnace to be heated to consume those that would not worship his golden Image?
What a do kept Demetrius the Siluer-Smith when St Paul was thought to
blaspheme Diana? Protagoras was banished; Socrates was put to death for
disgracing the gods of Athens. The Mahumetans lay on many stripes upon them
that disgrace their Alearon. I will omit the solemn Bellum sacrum of the
Graecians. Thus the words may be conceived by way of relation: and then see how
GOD argues; Do the Heathen punish those who dishonor, or curse those that are
only gods in their erroneous reputation? Much more then ought he to be
punished that blasphemes the true GOD. Thus does GOD oftentimes shame his own
people for their Impieties, by setting before their face the Piety that is in
Infidels: Has a Nation changed their Gods, which yet are no Gods? Ier. 2.
But my people has changed their glory for that which does not profit. And
again, Mal. 3.
Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. So that the punishment cannot be
denied to be just by true Religion, which is held most just by the glimmering
light of Reason.

But the words may have in them more then a bare Relation, they may contain a
commandment also; a commandment that whosoever curses God, though it be but
his God, that is, a false God, shall be punished, for, conscientia erronea
ligat, so long as any man in his conscience is persuaded that he is the true
God, he must worship him as if he were such. It is true that when he comes to
the knowledge of his error, Esaias 8. Esaias 2.
he may then curse his false gods; he may cast them to the Bats, and to the
Moles: But so long as his understanding is clouded with error, his Reverence
must follow the Rule of his Conscience. It is good Divinity that is delivered
in the Book of Wisdom touching Idolatrous perjured persons, They shall be
justly punished: Cap. 14.
both because they thought not well of God, giving heed unto Idols, and also
unjustly swore in deceit, despising holiness: ^or it is not the power of them
by whom they swear, but it is the just vengeance of sinners, that punishes
always the offense of the ungodly. And no marvel; for were it a true GOD,
they would use him so; their ignorance is not antecedent, but concomitant; and
such ignorance does not excuse the quantity, much less does it excuse the
quality of sin.

But to leave his God and come to the Name of the Lord. Here Quicunque must be
repeated again, we may less admit exception of persons amongst them that
blaspheme the Name of the Lord, then amongst them that curse their God.

But here we meet with a markable distribution of quicunque, whosoever; Whether
(says the Text) he be a Stranger, or borne in the Land. Though morally all men
are bound, and may be persuaded by Ministers and others to acknowledge and
worship the true GOD: yet politickly Infidels cannot be compeld. And why? It is
a work that needs the assistance of supernatural grace, which is not annexed
unto the Sword. Notwithstanding, the Civil Sword may take vengeance upon all,
even Strangers, Infidels that openly blaspheme the Name of the Lord; though
they may be tolerated in their false, yet may they not open their mouths
against the true Religion, Quicunque, whatsoever Stranger does so, he must be
stoned. And if a Stranger, much more he that is borne in the Land; for he is
tied to honor GOD by a double obligation, a native, a votiue, as a man, as a
member of the Church. Now the more obligations, the more guilt; the more guilt,
the more just the punishment: therefore Quicunque, whosoever borne in the Land
blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, he must be stoned to death.

I must carry Quicunque a little farther; the root of Blasphemy may be
without us, or within us: Without us, the Devil who may suggest it; and then it
is no sin of ours (though a sin) except we consent unto it, and delight in
it. Within us it may be threefold: First, Ignorance; Secondly, Infirmity;
Thirdly, Malice: There is great odds between these to Godward. St Paul
blasphemed, but he did it ignorantly; he did not believe that JESUS was the
CHRIST. St Peter blasphemed, but he did it of infirmie; he did it being
overtaken with fear of death. The Pharisees they also blasphemed, but they did
it out of malice; they did it against their own conscience. Now of these three
Roots, the two first leave place for repentance; St Peter and St Paul are
ensamples thereof: Math. 12.
Not so the third; it is the sin against the Holy Ghost, not to be forgiven
in this world, nor in that which is to come.

But howsoever there is this odds to Godward, yet in regard of the Magistrates
sword there is no difference, Quicunque; be the root ignorance, be it
infirmity, be it malice, he must be stoned to death, his body must be made an
expiatorie Anathema or Sacrifice by the State, whose Soul notwithstanding upon
repentance may be saved in the day of the Lord.

And verily the Blasphemer upon whom this Law was made, blasphemed but in his
rage (as appears) yet he dyed for it. Wonder not at GODS severity, he
measures no more to himself, then he does to Parents, Exodus 21
to Magistrates. He that curses his father, and his mother, the parents of his
flesh, must be used so; and shall not he be used so much more that curses the
Father of his Spirit? He that speaks evil of the Ruler of the people must be
used so; and shall not he that speaks evil of the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords? The comparison makes Quicunque in GODS case to be most just.

To which root we shall refer your Blasphemy that are the penitent; I know
not; in charity we hope the best; we hope that it comes from a mixture of
gross ignorance, and unruly passions; for these do raise evil thoughts, and
murmurings. That it does so, let it appear in your repentance. St Paul in
conscience of his Fall by ignorance, gave himself no better a title, when he
had occasion to mention it, then Maximus peccatorum, the most grievous of
sinners, even when he lead a most holy life; he could not forget his fall in
the hight of GODS grace. And of St Peter the Ecclesiastical Story reports,
that at the crowing of the Cock (the Remembrancer of his Fall) every night
during his life, he did wash his bed, and water his couch with his penitent
tears. GOD make you so mindful, and so sorrowful; otherwise you will betray
that your Blasphemy sprang from malice; and then be sure, that the same GOD
that commanded such severity to be executed here on earth, will himself
execute much greater upon all those which through irrepentance go to Hell. Yea
happily, he may even in this world make you a Spectacle of a forlorn wretch to
the terror of others; as he did Sennacherib, Hercdot. ^^b. 8.
upon whose Statua there is this Inscription, (...), Let every one that
looks upon me, learn to be godly. Such a Spectacle, I say, may he make you,
if by often recounting and bewayling of this crying sin, you do not quench the
fire of his wrath, and prevent his judgments: For God will not hold him
guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

The last point is, that it must be done without all indulgence, Moriendo
morietur, he shall surely dye, surely be stoned. We may not with Eve turn
surely into ne forte, lest the Devil work upon us, and we provoke GOD as Saul
did in Agags case, and Ahab in Benadads.

You have heard the Law; A word of those to whom it was given, and so I end. In
the entrance of my Text you find, that it was given to the Israelites, the
Israelites were the people of GOD, and surely it concerns them, if any, to be
most zealous of his glory, who is their Glory. But did it concern them
only? Then it is dissolved, because their Commonweal is at an end. Take
therefore a Rule, That if a Law which in the institution thereof was National
to the Jews, in the equity of it be Oecumenicall, every Christian nation is
bound to give it a Reuiuor, though they may vary the punishment, as they find
it expedient for their State. And indeed, this has received such a reuiuor in
most Christian States. Justinian the Emperor of Constantinop^e made it
capital. The wise Goths inflicted an hundred stripes for it, and in disgrace
shaued the delinquents head and beard, and imprisoned him during life.
Frederick the Emperor cut out the tongue of all that offended in this kind.
St Lewis of France caused their tongue to be bored with a hot Iron, wishing
that his own tongue might be so used, if ever he did blaspheme. Philip of
Vuloys caused their lips to be slit. And touching our own State, I have
nothing to say in excuse thereof, for that it has all this while left this
sin only to Ecclesiastical censure, and has not provided some corporal
punishment for it, but that of Solon, who being demanded why he made no Law
against Parricide, answered, that he thought none in his Commonweal would
ever be so impious to commit it. So I think our State thought there would
never rise such lewd persons amongst us; But seeing there do, it is high time
we had some sharp occasional Statute to repress them. If holy Job were so
careful to sacrifice for, and sanctify his sons, ne forte, lest
peradventure they had sinned; with what zeal should we be stirred up, when we
see the fact is most apparent?

I conclude. Let all Blasphemy be put out of all our mouths, yea, and hearts
also; and let us pray GOD to set a watch before our lips, and keep the door
of our mouths; that his grace may rule in our hearts, that he may be our
fear, and his praise may be our talk: that praising him here on Earth, we may
be admitted into the number of his Saints, which with heart and voice praise
him for evermore in Heaven.

A penitent Prayer for a Blasphemer.
MOST Sacred, and most dread, Almighty, Everlasting God, to whom the Angels
continually do cry, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hoasts, the glory of whose
admirable and comfortable wisdom reaches from one end of the world to
another, mightily, and sweetly orders all things. J the unworthiest of men,
the most grievous of sinners, humbly, sorrowfully prostrating my dejected,
disconsolate, both soul and body before thy holy eyes, pray that the sighs
and groans of a broken and contrite heart may not be excluded from thine
offended ears. Lord J have been deep in the gall of bitterness, and in the
bond of iniquity: Satan has filled my heart therewith, and out of the
abundance thereof my tongue has sent forth many flashes, even of the fire of
Hell: as a brood of the Serpent J have set my mouth against Heaven, J have
blasphemed the holy, the reverend Name of my God, and vilified his
unchangeable, vnchallengable Providence. Had thou dealt with me as I
deserved, fire and brimstone from Heaven should have consumed me, or the Earth
should have gaped, and swallowed me down quick into the pit of Hell. J
deserved to be made a spectacle of thy just vengeance, that graceless wretches
seeing my judgment, might fear my offense. J confess this, o Lord, J
confess it unfeignedly, penitently; but woe is me if J have no more to
confess, but these my evil deserts. Thy long-suffering toward me puts me
in better hope; yea, this medicinal confusion whereunto thou now put me,
puts me in good hope that thou have not forgotten to be merciful unto me,
neither have thou shut up thy tender mercy in displeasure. Lord J do not
despise this goodness of thine that leads me to repentance, that works in me
remorce of conscience. And from that penitent Blasphemer that proved a most
worthy Apostle, from his mouth do J take unto my self that saying worthy of
all men to be received, That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners,
even such sinners, of whom I am chief. Now then J beseech thee, let the power
of my Lord be great, according as thou have spoken: The Lord is slow to anger,
and of great mercy, and forgiueth iniquity and sin. Be merciful J beseech
thee to the impiety of thy servant, according to thy great mercy: let the
ungodliness of my heart, of my mouth, be blotted out of thy remembrance, let
it not bring upon me the vengeance J deserve, but create in me a new heart, and
touch my tongue with a cole from thine Altar, that J which am unworthy by
reason of my scandalous crying sin, to meditate on, or make mention of thy
glorious Majesty, thy divine Wisdom; may have a heart always enditing good
things: and my blasphemous tongue may be turned into an instrument of thy
glory. So shall my soul be filled, as it were, with marrow and fatness, when
J shall praise thee with joyful lips; and J shall sing forth thy wondrous
mercy all the days of my life. Hear me, o Father of mercy, for give me,
amend me, and establish in me this holy purpose of my repentant heart, to thy
glory, and the comfort of enormous sinners, for Jesus Christ's sake, by the
powerful operation of thy Holy Spirit. Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED AT St ANDREWS IN WELLS, A SCHISMATIQVE DOING PENANCE WHO
HAD FOR MANY YEARS ESTRANGED HIMSELF FROM THE COMMUNION OF OUR CHVRCH.
1 CORINT 3.18. 18 Let no man deceive himself: if any man among you seems to
be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.


A Particular visible Church is built upon two foundations, Union, and
Communion; a loving union of the faithful, and an holy communion in sacred
things: Both these must be preserved, or else that Church will come to naught.
Now there were amongst the Corinthians that did undermine these foundations;
some rent the union, and the communion was corrupted by other-some. St Paul
wrote this Epistle to amend them both. And mark what a distinct course he
takes. He first setleth the union before he offers to purge the communion.
And there is good reason why; for though the loving union of the faithful be
unprofitable, if it be without a holy communion in sacred things, yet is a holy
communion in sacred things impossible, if you take away the loving union of the
faithful. Therefore lest St Paul should lose his labor in redressing of the
communion, he first takes care of repayring the union.

The first thing then that in the Church of Corinth he reformes, is Schism;
and he spends well-nigh four Chapters in reforming thereof, in thoroughly
searching into the disease, and applying thereto a sovereign remedy. The words
that now I have read unto you belong to the remedy, and you shall find them to
be a principal branch thereof. Let us come more closely to them.

Of medicinal remedies, some are preservative, some are restoratiue. The
preservative are for the sound; the restoratiue are for the sick. You shall
find them both in my Text, and you shall find that they are Catholica remedia,
such remedies as do, or may concern us all. The preservative remedy is (...),
providence, or the prevention of Schism; you have it in these words, Let no
man deceive himself. The restoratiue is (...), repentance, or the recovering
of a Schismatique, it follows in these words, If any man among you seems to
be wise in this world, let him be a fool that he may be wise.

But more distinctly. In the preservative we are to behold our natural
weakness, and therefore to learn spiritual carfulness; St Paul supposes
that we are prone to deceive our selves, and therefore advises that no man
should do himself that wrong, Let no man deceive himself. In the restoratiue
we must behold first the distemper of a Schismatique, and then the cure fitting
to such a distemper. The distemper is a carnal self-conceit; a self-conceit,
for the man thinks himself wise; but the selfe-conceipt is but carnal, as
appears by the limitation, or extenuation rather that is added to his
wisdom, he is only wise in this world. Such is his distemper, Whereof the
first cure is an exalting humility. The first branch is humility, He must
become a fool; but he need not be disheartened, there follows an exaltation
thereupon, He becomes a fool that he may be wise. These are the remedies. And
they are (as I told you) Catholica remedia, such remedies as do or may
concern us all. The preservative does, (...), Let no man deceive himself. The
restoratiue may, (...), If any. That which has befalne this man, may be the
case of the best of us all.

These are the particulars which GOD-willing I shall now enlarge and apply unto
this present occasion: I pray GOD we may so do it, as that we all, not this
Penitent only, may be the better for it.

The first remedy is the preservative; and therein the first thing that I
pointed out, is our natural weakness. This St Paul supposes; we may gather
it out of that which he advises; for in vain were his advise, if there were
not a truth in that which he supposes; but far be it from us to think that
the Holy Ghost does require any thing in vain; let it stand then for an
undoubted truth, that we are prone by nature to deceive our selves. (...) (from
whence the Verb is derived which is used by the Apostle) signifies a leaving
of the right way, which puts us in mind, that in this world we are but
wayfaring men. When we are admitted into the Church, we are set in the path
which will lead us to our everlasting home: but when we are in it, we may go
out of it. It appears too plainly in Adam and Eve; and it is not to be
expected that the children should be better then the parents, especially seeing
our restitution comes short of that measure of grace which they had in their
Creation.

It being true that we may, the question is, How it comes to pass that we do
go out of the way, and leave the straight path wherein we are set; the
Scripture observes two means, the one without us, the other within us, that is
the world, this is concupiscence: the world allures, concupiscence inclines.
Add hereunto a third, that is, the devil; he blancheth the world that it may
allure more strongly; and works concupiscence by persuasion, that it may
yield more readily; and these between them consummate the deceit, whereby we
are led out of the way.

But between these we must observe a great difference; that which works the
deceit from without, is but an occasion; that which works it from within, is
the true cause thereof: the world, the devil, Suadere possunt, cogere non
possunt, they may solicit powerfully, but they cannot enforce us unwillingly
to go out of the way. Physical actions may be constrained, moral cannot; I
may have mine eyes forcibly laid open to see, mine ears to hear, and so the
rest of my body may be constrained to produce some work; but the powers of my
reasonable soul can never be constrained; I cannot be constrained to judge
otherwise then my understanding leads me, nor to choose that which my will
refuses: therefore our understanding, and our will, must be actors, principal
actors in this deceit. And so St James tells us, Cap. 1. 1 John ^.
that He that is tempted, is bayted, and led aside by his own concupiscence.
St John insinuates as much when he tells us, that All that is in the world,
is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life: as if
there were no deceit in the world, were it not, that we did fasten our
concupiscence upon it. Romans 7.
Finally, St Paul tells us in his own case, Peccatum decepit me, that which
deceived me was mine own sin. And indeed, he that first instilled sin into
us, gave us the seed of his own sin. The Devils sin was selfe-deceipt; for
when he fell there was nothing besides himself that might deceive him, and
that cunning Huntsman is not contented to make us a prey, except he take us in
the cords of our own sin, except we follow the counsels of our own hearts,
and do that which is right in our own eyes, to disobey GOD, and leave the
path of life. It were easy to illustrate this in all sorts of sins, but I
will keep my self to this present occasion, to the sin of Schism. The
Devil attempts two things against the truth of Religion: the first is
Privation, the second Deprauation; a declining unto the left hand, or to the
right: to the left hand by making men Atheists, to the right hand by making
them Separatists; he would that all should be fools, and say in their hearts
that there is no GOD, or that GOD is without Providence; that GOD knows not,
or eareth not for the things of this world. And if he cannot so stifle
Religion, he endeavors for to leaven it; whom he cannot draw to the left
hand, he will endeavor to draw to the right, he will by corrupting of good
principles, makes them fall upon many ungodly conclusions, and use zeal for
GOD, to estrange themselves from GOD. Woeful experience has the Church had of
such Paralogismes; in the Jews, who upon this ground opposed CHRIST; in the
Gentiles, that took this for a ground to quarrel with the Jews; and the
Separatists of this latter age, whereof we have had more then a good many in
this Country, have stumbled at this stone; lest they should serve GOD amiss,
they have refused to serve GOD at all. Nazianzen in his time though in another
case, yet sauouring of this sin, cried out, (...), Orat. 40.
O unwary wariness, o imposture of the wicked-one, that turns Piety into
Impiety; and overcomes reason by reason! Who can consider this and not
acknowledge the weakness of our nature? This weakness may be resolved into
our ouer-easie believing, and rash dis-beleeuing; ouer-easie believing of
seducing Imposters, that labor to instill their fancies into us; and rash
dis-beleeuing of those whom GOD has lawfully placed to rule over us; both
which a man shall easily observe in all Schismatiques.

But to acknowledge our natural weakness is not sufficient, the Apostle
advises us to beware of it; and indeed, therefore is our natural weakness
remembered, that it might stir us up unto spiritual carfulness, not to do
that which we are prone to do, Let no man deceive himself. We must take heed
of the occasions that from without offer to deceive us, of Wolves in Sheep
clothing, of an Angel of darkness, turning himself into an Angel of light;
Try the spirits, at St John; yea, Try all things, as St Paul wills us. 1 John
4 1 These. 5.^1
In Job we have a pretty resemblance of the ear to the taste; as the one does
try the meats which we are to take into our bodies, so should the other the
words which we are to receive into our souls.

But in vain shall we try them, if we do not try our selves first; for we
must try them by our judgment, by our will; Verum est index sui and obliqui. a
perverse judgment cannot discern truth from falsehood, neither can an
untoward will make a right choice when Good and Evil are presented unto it; he
cannot choose but be deceived by others, that is first deceived in himself:
wherefore seeing our judgment and our will must be the rule by which we must
try others, our first care must be to set them straight, our understanding must
be a good Logician, our will a good Moralist; if either be defective, we
deceive our selves, and we are very apt to be deceived by others. It is a
miserable thing for a man to be deceived by others, Plat^ in Cr^til^.
but to be deceived by himself, is most miserable, cum Impostor ^e minimum
quidem decedat, we shall ever carry about us the Deceiuer in our bosoms, and
he shall have that credit with us, as that we shall never so much as suspect
his deceit: yea, Satan and the World shall ever have their Agent with us, and
make us assacinates to destroy our selves. Add hereunto, that this kind of
deceit makes us incapable of wholesome counsel; for if our ignorance be only
privative, seldom do we obstinate our selves against good instructions; but
if our reasonable powers be depraved, and possessed with qualities opposite unto
those which we should receive, there is much less hope of our amendment. Intus
apparens excludit alienum, Nazianz. orat. 1.
selfe-deceipt is most refractorie, and most hardly will he be brought back
into the way, that being deceived of himself, wittingly and willingly went out
of the way, whereof this Penitent may be a lively example unto us. And let this
suffice concerning the Preservative.

I come unto the Restoratiue remedy, wherein we are first to see the distemper
of a Schismatique; I told you it was a carnal selfe-conceipt. First, a
selfe-conceipt, the Schismatique thinks himself wise. GOD that endowed us
with the faculties of sense and reason, gave these faculties a double ability,
a direct and a reflected. The direct is that whereby they receive their object;
the reflect is that whereby they judge of that receipt. I will make it plain
to you by an example, first of sense, and then of reason. Mine eye sees a
color, for example Green, having seen it, it passes a judgment upon the
sight, and knows that is green which it does see; the like may be observed in
hearing, smelling, tasting, and the rest of the senses. In like manner is it in
our soul: The understanding apprehends some truth, and having apprehended it,
it passes a judgment upon it, and knows that that is truth which it has
apprehended. The like may be said of Good. But we must mark here a difference
between sense and reason, as created, and as corrupted: as created, so non
falluntur circa obiecta sua, whether they wrought directly or reflectiuely,
they were able to work without error; not so as they are corrupted, for now
they are subject to manifold errors. See it in our senses: If the eye by any
chance or suffusion be stained, it will mistake in the apprehending of colors,
and accordingly it will mistake in judging of his apprehension, for the
reflected action is always answerable to the direct; so is it with the palate
in relishing of meats, and judging of the relish. Neither is the condition of
our reasonable faculties better then that of our sensitive. The understanding
may misdeeme, and the will choose amiss, and then the reflected actions how
can they be sound? especially, in cases which concern our selves, and where
the question is of our own worth. Ignorance and self-love will so bleare our
eyes, that they will make up a false glass wherein we shall never see our
selves as indeed we are; (...), Men that make themselves judges of themselves,
are sure to have a very favorable judgment, for that which every man
desires, he is persuaded to be so, because he is by nature a friend unto
himself, and you know the Proverb, (...), if we dote upon a person, all his
imperfections seem perfections in our eyes. You may observe it daily in
Parents affections toward their children, and husbands toward their wives;
but it is not so true in any thing, as in Religion; for if a man once conceive
himself to be devout, all his actions seem presently unto him to savor of
devotion. And hereupon it comes to pass, that rather then he will impair
any part of his reputation, he will discredit even GODS truth it self, if it
seem to lay any blame upon him. And so we see that many men resolve that their
ignorance is wisdom, and though they know nothing, yet that they know all
things.

This being observed concerning the difference between our abilities as
created and corrupted; you will easily acknowledge two good rules that Gregory
Naz. has; the first is, (...), there is great distance between seeming and
being; for seeing we are in the state of corruption, we cannot conclude, this
seems so, therefore this is so, because (...), it is an easy matter (as you
heard in the first point) for a man to deceive himself, and think himself to
be something when he is nothing, (...), being puffed up with vain conceit, and
vain glory. A second rule is, (...), there is no greater enemy to being, De
Trinit. 1.8.
then seeming. Many pretending faith, says St Hilary, are not subject unto
faith; he gives a reason, they square a faith unto themselves, rather then
receive it from the Church, sensu humanae inanitatis inflati: being puffed up
with a conceit of humane vanity, they relish nothing but their own
self-will, and to cleave to that, distaste the truth, Cum sapientiae haec
veritas sit interdum sapere quae nolis, It is a true character of heavenly
wisdom, to relish many things which thwart our natural will.

These two rules will easily resolve us that selfe-conceipt is a distemper, and
will make way for two good instructions to be entertained by us: The first is,
that though we should labor to be wise, yet should we not be wise in our own
eyes; and why? when we are at the best, we have not so much reason to glory
that we are better then others, as we have to be sorry that we are not so good
as we should be: certainly St Paul thought so; Phil 3.13.
that great Apostle made this wise profession, I forget those things that are
behind, and make coward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus. The second is (...), If a man have attained by GODS grace a good
degree of wisdom, it is better in modesty to undervalue himself, then to
ouer-value himself audaciously; for the latter is (...), an empty conceit,
or a vain glory, a vice: but the former is (...), meekness of wisdom, as
St James calls it, a principal Christian virtue. They that are infected with
vice, come under the censure of the Proverb, There is a generation pure in his
own eyes, and yet is not cleansed from his filthiness: but the other are not
so lowly in their own eyes, as glorious in the eyes both of GOD and men. And
let this suffice touching the distemper, the selfe-conceipt of a Schismatique.

The Text does tell us that this selfe-conceipt is carnal; for it has an
addition which does extenuate the worth of the selfe-conceipt, calling it
wisdom in this world. The words are taken in a double sense, noting either
the quality of the wisdom, or the place where this wisdom is. Chrysostom
understands it of the quality, and so that wisdom is of no higher a degree,
then that which springs from the natural corruption of man; and indeed it
was such wisdom wherewith the false Apostles did seek to steal away the
affections of the Corinthians from the true; the particulars you may read in
that part of this tract wherein St Paul does rip up the disease of Schism.
Other-some understand the place; and then the wisdom may be of a heavenly
pitch, but the degree of it is not such as that a man may boast of it, for such
a degree is not vouchsafed us in this world, in Heaven we may expect it: in the
mean time we must acknowledge that we come short thereof, and therefore must
not be wise in our own eyes. Venerable Bede conioynes both senses, saying,
that they are persons, Qui hic sapientes esse volunt, and ex se, mira vanitate,
a Schismatique affects to have more understanding then other men by a special
insight of his own into heavenly things, and that in this mortal life, which
is subject to so many mistakings. And if you join these two together, they
will make up that attribute which I gave unto the selfe-conceipt, and prove it
to be carnal; for that must needs savor of the flesh which does intermingle
humane fancies with divine truth, or vaunt of more perfection then GOD
vouchsafes on earth. And yet such a conceit have all Schismatiques, the
Serpent that is called (...), from his pretended knowledge, makes them affect
to be (...) men of more knowledge then ordinary. But al their knowledge is but
(...), knowledge falsely so called, as appears in the effect thereof, for as
the eating of the forbidden fruit did wor^e a deadly knowledge in Adam and Eve,
even so does this busy knowledge of Schismatiques prove pernicious unto them.
Wherefore it is good for you the Penitent to listen to the rule of the Apostle,
Romans 12. Be not wise in your own conceit. And thus much of the distemper, and
the attribute thereof.

I come now to the cure. And indeed the Holy Ghost does therefore set down the
distemper, that we might see the need of the cure, and seeing it, might be the
more disirous of it. The cure is an exalting humility. First humility, He
that is self conceited, and thinks himself wise, must humble himself, He
must become a fool. A fool says Primatius, Non natura, sed voluntate, let
him not be a natural, but a voluntary fool. In Reg. Breu.
A voluntary fool in two respects. First in his own eyes, then in the eyes of
the world; St Basil observes the first, Si formidauerit iudicium domini, etc.
if he stand in awe of that doom which GOD pronounces by the Prophet, Woe be
to you that are wise in your own eyes, Isay 5. And confess with the Psalmist,
I was even as a beast before thee. Then says St Basil a man becomes a fool,
that is, he does acknowledge his own folly; his folly in that he mistook
seeming wisdom instead of the true, and did esteem his own judgment,
better then the judgment of the Church which he was bound to obey. I did
before show you that all Schimatiques are subject unto a double deceit,
ouer-easie believing, and rash dis-beleeuing; and what are these but branches
of folly? Hasty belief, what is it but plain foolishness, and the greatest
advantage of Impostors? For the Auditors ignorance gives a large scope unto a
Seducers craft if he be apt to follow, and to be persuaded before he is
instructed; and that is the true method of Impostors, they gain an interest in
our affections before they offer to inform our judgment; and a pliable will,
makes a flexible understanding, and nothing is so easily believed as that
which such a man knows least; and when a man comes to the sight of this
imperfection, what can he do less then condemn it for simple folly? Neither
may we judge better of our rash dis-beleefe, when we in our mutinous and
ambitious deliberation, not seeing the ground of our Governors ordinances
whether in Church or Commonwealth, presently brand them for Superstitious,
Antichristian, Tyrannous; and think them the best men that disgrace them most;
and our selves never more religious then when we are most rebellious. It is no
less then proud folly so to reduce the credibilitie of Laws to the measure of
our capacity. Cap. 38
The son of Syrach has made a great piece of a Chapter in checking this
folly: The wisdom of a learned man comes by opportunity of leisure, and he
that has little business shall become wise, etc. But of Husbandmen and
Craftesmen he adds this, They shall not be sought for in public Counsel,
nor sit high in the Congregation: they shall not sit on the Judges seat, nor
understand the sentence of judgment, etc. When a man comes to see this
imperfection, the imperfection of Husbandmen and Craftesmen taking upon them to
judge Scriptures and Synods, what can it be less in his eyes then inexcusable
folly?

Neither only must we think so, but profess it to be so, for therein
properly stands his becoming a fool, when he does not refuse publicationem
sui, as Tertullian calls it, a public recognition of his imperfection,
(...), making an open show thereof, and insulting thereupon as if he were not
able to disgrace it enough. Such a religious fool does King David show
himself in his Penitentia^s, St Paul in his Epistles, St Ausline in his
Confessions: It was not strange nor rare in the Primitive Church, for public
offenders to become such public sooles. You that are the Penitent having so
good examples may well digest your humiliation, and this religious folly needs
not be grievous unto you.

Another sense there is of these words, which is, that as we must be contented
to be fools in our own eyes, in that we mistook seeming wisdom for true: so
when we do embrace truth instead of seeming wisdom, we must be contented to
go for fools in the eyes of the world; for as that which is high in the eyes
of the world, is base in the eyes of GOD: so that which is high in the eyes of
GOD, is base in the eyes of the world. The patience, the obedience, the
charity, the humility of a penitent Christian, they are no better then plain
folly in the judgment of worldly men; they hold them senseless that may live
at ease, and with Moses will think the reproach of CHRIST, better then the
treasures of Egypt; they think him senseless that with Abraham will forsake
his Country, sacrifice his Son; they think him senseless that with St
Stephen will not only forgive, but pray for them that treacherously and
tyrannously do spill inuocent blood; finally, they hold them senseless who
when they might cunningly excuse, or boldly outface, they will with King David,
and St Paul penitently and humbly acknowledge their sins; the believing, the
practizing of the Gospel passes with the world for no better then folly. A man
therefore that will submit himself thereto must be contented to bear the
reproach of CHRIST, and go for a fool.

Another point that we must mark, is, that as bladders are emptied of wind
before they can be filled with good liquor: so must a man empty himself of
his windy wisdom before he is capable of solid. Or as a Scholar that has
been mis-taught must unlearn before he learn, and his soul must be made
tanquam abrasa Tabula, a pair of writing Tables, clearly spunged from
ungrounded knowledge, before grounded can be imprinted in it: even so we must
endeavor for to purge out all our leauened wisdom, before we can be informed
with that which is sincere, and not seeming, but sound.

Lastly, 1 Cor. 13.10
seeming wisdom it that which is (...), as St Paul speaks, it is not
lasting, will we, nill we, it shall be done away; seeing we cannot keep it, it
is good that we rid our selves of it, and willingly part with that which we
cannot keep, but dangerously. The rather, because the ridding of that is but
the making way for that which is much better, and we do become such fools
only that we may be wise. GOD will not have us rest in folly, but pass by
that unto true wisdom, he will not have us deprive our selves of humane
prudence, which is of it self a good gift of GOD, but subordinate it unto
divine: GOD can well endure that wisdom that springs from reason so reason
go right, and keep her rank: but that which offends GOD, is, Si vel secum,
vel cum Deo pugnet, if it be not consonant with it self, or be disobedient
unto him; This is indeed folly which we must put off, to the end that we may
become wise, both men, and Christians. Look then how we are willed to hunger
and thirst, to mortify, to crucify, so are we willed to become fools; we are
willed to dye, that we may live; to hunger and thirst, that we may be
satisfied; to crucify and mortify, that we may quicken, and crown also our
animal life by exchange of it for a spiritual: and so do we put off humane
wisdom, that we may put on divine. GOD loves not folly per se, but propter
sapientiam, neither may we hold that there is any Religion without wisdom, as
there is no wisdom without Religion. It is Lactantius his note Institut. lib.
1. cap. 3. Let the Church of Rome nussell her followers in ignorance, and
advise them to become fools that they may so keep them; the orthodox Church
takes a better course, and only makes the sense of their folly to set an edge
upon their appetite of true wisdom; neither do we require more credit then we
show good warrant for in GODS Word, such warrant as no reasonable man can
justly except against.

But what is this wisdom? I might answer in a word, It is nothing else but
the true rules of Religion, delivered as GOD has commanded his Church, which
rules are fit for us to teach you that are the people, and for you to observe
when they are delivered by us. But I will reduce all unto two heads; specified
by our Savior, Luke 9 Salt and Peace. Salt notes a direction that must season
your heads: Peace a temper that you must have in your hearts: you must know
that as the Church is a body, so it consists of different members, and each
member has his particular vocation, every man must walk as he is called of
GOD; and you show that you have Salt if you keep your selves in your own
rank, and busy not your selves with those things that belong not to your
calling. It had been to be wished that this Penitent had done so, and not
busied himself about the forms of Liturgies, Holy-Orders, the Power of the
Keys, and such like, the power whereof GOD has commended to others; it is
well enough for you if you can be brought to understand your Catechism, and
frame your life according to it; and this is as much Salt as GOD requires in
you, and it is well if following your honest vocation you can attain so much.

A second branch of wisdom, is Peace, and Peace does note a charitable
bearing one with another, considering the manifold infirmities whereunto we are
all subject; we must not be over hasty in condemning Wheat for Tares, or
refuse to grow in GODS field because Tares grow there also; a point of wisdom
which you the Penitent shall do well to carry with you, seeing an offense
taken at seeming or true Tares was one of the grounds of your Schism.

Finally, Unto true wisdom it belongs to avoid two extremes, whereunto this
age is subject, fiery and frostie tempers, whereof Nazianzene, Orat. 26.
treates at large. We must not be wise above that which is meet, is the Apostles
rule, Romans 12. And it was a good rule of a Heathen-man, Plus sapit vulgus si
tantum quantum satis est sapit; A man that is not called to be a Governor is
the wiser, the more sober he is in his wisdom. As you must not be over
fiery, no more must you be frostie, this leans toward Atheism, as the
other does toward Schism: it is no less a fault sapere minus, then plus quam
oportet, stupiditie is as blameable as curiosity.

I may not forget that some join these words (...), In this world, with Let
him be a fool, and observe that in this life we must make this exchange, it
will be too late to do it hereafter; which must put you in mind that are the
Penitent, to give GOD thanks that has so timely called you to the knowledge
of the truth, which (your age considered) might have fallen out otherwise, if
justice done upon the outward man had not awakened the inward; and GOD knows
how uncomfortable your end had been, if you had persisted in your wilfulness
unto the end; Extra ecclesiam non est salus, he presumes too much of GODS
mercy, that dares to dye excommunicate by the just censure of the Church.

But I come to the last point, which I will touch in a word: You have heard the
remedies, I told you they are Catholica remedia, such as do, or may concern
us all. The preservative does; for Omnis homo mendax, every man is a liar, we
are all cast in the same mold, and the Serpent has infused some of his
serpentine quality into us all, and therefore every man has reason to stand
upon his guard, to watch over himself, and take heed lest himself betray not
himself into the hands of his enemies. As the preservative is behoofefull for
us that going right we step not out of the way: so because no man makes such
straight steps that he does not often decline, we may not neglect the
restoratiue: Selfe-conceipt is a distemper that easily creeps into them whose
nature cannot be free from self-love. It was a wise observation of Socrates,
that if in a great assembly a Proclamation should be made that all either
Tailors, or Shomakers, or Masons should stand forth, none but those that were
of such particular Trades would sort themselves together: but if a man should
call forth all that are wise and understanding, he should perceive that none
would stay behind: He adds, Hoc imprimis in vita damnosum quod cum hominum
pars maxima stulta sit sapere tamen videatur, the ouer-weening that is to be
found in all sorts of men breeds most of the mischief that troubles the
world. Therefore si quis, is not particula dubitantis, but supponentis, he does
not so much doubt whether all be sick of this disease, as supposing them all
to be sick, it calls upon them to use the remedy. And indeed if the disease
be common, it is fit the cure be common also, that we timely humble our selves
by condemning our own folly, that GOD may exalt us, and give us true wisdom.

I conclude, remembering unto you the Penitent a good saying of St Basil, Mores
hominis superbi si vere sanati fuerint solent esse sui despicabiliores. You
will (if you make a true use of this humiliation) profess with Agar, Prou. 30.
Surely I am more brutish then any man, and have not the understanding of a man,
I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the Holy. Hereafter deny
your self, and lean no more unto your own wisdom. And to us all I will
remember a good saying of Philo; (...), Vainglory, or selfe-conceipt is the
last coat that a man puts off by grace, I add, it is the first that he puts
on with his nature; the faster it cleaves to us, the more should we endeavor
to strip our selves of it; and remembering that saying of the Apostle, He is not
approved that commends himself, but he whom GOD commends, let us so
renounce that which flesh and blood makes us dote upon, that we ever be ready
to entertain that which GOD prescribes: So shall we be sure, either at all not
to deceive our selves, or if we have been overtaken by carnal self-conceit,
we shall not refuse to be fools that we may be wise.

GOD vouchsafe us this preventing Providence, and recovering Repentance, as
that we may not either stray at all, or if we stray, that we may return
again, till we come to that place where there is no fear of straying, no need
of returning: whither GOD our merciful Father bring us, through Jesus Christ
our Savior that is made the wisdom of GOD unto us, by the gracious influence
of the Holy Spirit of Wisdom into us. To this one GOD in three persons be
rendered all honor and glory, etc. Pntote dxa THe.

SUNDRY SERMONS PREACHED AT COURT.

By the right reverend Father in God ARTHVR LAKE, late Lord Bishop of BATHE and
WELLS.

PRVDENTIA printer's device of a hand emerging from the clouds, with a smake
entwined about the wrist, holding a staff surmounted by a portcullis and sprays
of foliage

LONDON, Printed by T.C. and R.C. for N. Butter. 1629.

A SERMON PREACHED AT FARNEHAM ON St JAMES HIS DAY, BEING THE DAY OF KING
JAMES HIS CORONATION.
JAMES 1. VERSE 12. 12 Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he
is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to
them that love him.


THIS day directs us to this Epistle, and these words thereof are not unfit to
refresh a solemn use, that to our great and common comfort has been made of
this day. The use was a Coronation, and a Coronation is a principal point in
this Text; but the Coronation that was then beheld, is past, that whereof we
are now to hear, is to come; yet this mutual help they will yield the one to
the other, that which is to come, may call to mind that which is past; and by
that which is past, we may the better conceive that which is to come. Yea, by
comparing them, we shall perceive that that which is to come, is much more
desirable then that which is past. For although flesh and blood may affect that
which is past per se, as if to be a Sovereign on earth upon any condition,
were a sovereign good; yet a Christian does not, he cannot as he ought digest
those vexations which sour even a kingly state; but propter aliud, in hope to
be a copartner of a greater, a quieter crown in Heaven.

This hope does St James cherish in these words, he animates great personages
to be constant, notwithstanding all troubles, knowing that their patience is
not in vain in the Lord. That he speaks to great personages appears in the
tenth verse, Let the rich rejoice when he is brought low; where he teaches two
lessons: First, That great men may be brought low. Secondly, That yet they must
rejoice.

That great men may be brought low, is not strange to reason, therefore St
James does only represent that truth in a known, yet a lively resemblance of
fading and withering herbs and flowers. But that notwithstanding they are
brought low, they must rejoice, is an harder truth, reason whose principal it
is, that nothing delights in its own destruction, will not yield it. Our
Apostle therefore works an assent thereunto out of supernatural grounds, he
sets down two fair ones in my Text, whereof the first opens the nature, the
second the end of patience.

The nature of patience is briefly, but fully set down here ratione obiecti,
and subiecti. The object is temptation, but because thereof there are diverse
sorts, here is added a note of difference, it is such temptation as makes
tried men. The subject is Man, but not every man, it is (...), a man of more
then ordinary place and worth, and his worth is here distinctly set down in
two points, wherein it principally does consist, and the points are answerable
to the two parts of the object: The first part of the object is Temptation,
that lays on load upon the outward man, in regard thereof he must (...), he
must hold out under his burden. The second part of the object is the trial,
and that inquires into the inward man, in regard thereof he must hold out, out
of that love which he bears to GOD. When such an object meets with such a
subject, there arises the virtue patience.

You have heard the nature thereof, now hear the end. The end is suitable to
the virtue, a happy end of so worthy a virtue; the end is blessedness; and
what would not a man do to compass blessedness?

But what is this blessedness? though all desire it, yet few are agreed about
the nature of it, quot capita tot sensus, every man strives for his own. To
compose this difference, the Holy Ghost must interpose, and define; he does it
here, behold a full definition in two words, A crown of life; without life
there is no blessedness, and no life is blessed without this crown.

You see the end; one thing remains, the assurance that this is the end of
patience; that we have here also in two verbes, The Lord has promised it, and
the patient man shall receive it. The warrant is good that has GODS word, and
here (...) is he that warranteth it; but his warrant is (...), a promise, so
that the crown must be claymed not by the Law, but by the Gospel. (...), he
that is the Lord may by virtue of his Law command patience, but (...), puts
us in mind how much we are beholding unto the Gospel, by which he vouchsafes a
recompense.

Yea though he does vouchsafe it, and besides his promise the patient man has
no right unto it, he needs not distrust (...), it is as true as the Gospel, he
in all be sure of it.

You see the substance of this Scripture, and see that it brancheth it self
into pataence, and a recompense, whereof the patient man may not be proud, and
yet he is most sure. Let us now run over these points orderly, I pray GOD we
may do it profitably also.

The first is the object of patience, and that is called temptation; here see
how the phrase is changed; of the rich man it was said before that he was
brought low, here it is said that he endures temptation, that was a vulgar
phrase, this is facred; that might be understood by reason, this only by
faith; you will confess it if we do a little rip up the nature of it. GOD
made man, though upright, yet mutable, the root of mutabilitie was Freewill, by
which man may incline to either side: Notwithstanding this mutabilitie, man did
owe unto GOD a constant and absolute obedience; whether he would perform it it
was to appear; his Understanding and his Will were to be exercised the one
with arguments, the other with occasions, which might discover the one the
resolution, the other the election of man, what way he would take, the
right hand or the left, the way of life or death. These arguments and occasions
so administered, are that which the Scripture calls temptation, which though
naturally they light upon the outward man, yet do they formally aim at the
inward man. Examples you have in the two principal temptations registered in
the Scripture, that of the first Adam, Genesis 3. and that of the second Adam,
Math. 4. in both which you may behold the Serpents engines, which were
arguments and occasions which more or less are practiced in all temptations,
and learn us all this caveat, to have an eye to our understanding and our
will, how they are wrought by, how they entertain these either arguments or
occasions.

But of temptations there are two sorts, as they proceed from two different
Authors, which aim at different ends: The one Author is GOD, the other is the
Devil, each uses a temptation, but the common distinctions used by the Fathers
show how unlike their ends are. For the ones temptation is probationis, the
other is seductionis, we owe a duty to GOD, GOD in tempting does but discover
our performance of it, the Devil he labors to pervert us, and corrupt
whatsoever inclination to obedience there is in us. Examples are very frequent
that open this distinction, I will instance but in one, GOD called upon Abraham
to sacrifice his son Isaac, the end of that commandment is revealed plainly
by the Angel, showing that GOD would have the world to see that Abraham held
nothing so dear unto him, which he would not yield readily unto GOD: The Devil
he tempted unto the same work, as it appears in those that offered their
children unto Molos, but he did it, to make men no less impious against GOD,
then unnatural to their own children; so that look what difference there is
between etheriall and elementall heat, whereof the one is vegetiue, the other
destructive when it lights upon herbs and plants, the same is there
between the exploratiue, and seductiue temptation, when it lights upon the
wits and wills of men: St Paul, Ephesians. 4. calls the seductiue by significant
names, (...), but the exploratiue is resembled to the Touchstone, to the
pounding of Spices, the breaking of the box that contains sweet Ointments,
the fire that tries Gold.

But we have not now to do with seduction, but with probation, it appears in
the word (...), which I told you was the note of difference whereby St James
does restrain this temptation, to that which makes tried men. But of this
there are two kinds, for GOD tries by prosperity, or adversity; when our
worldly state is at best, we are even then put to the Touchstone, and GOD
tries what manner of persons we are; the story of Solomon is a clear proof,
but we have not to do with this temptation neither; Our temptation is that
which brings a rich-man low, it is the temptation of adversity, St Peter
calls it a fiery trial, St Paul, Hebr. 12. brancheth it into two parts,
shame, and the Cross, whereof the one disgraceth our person, the other strips
us of our goods and life; these both befell CHRIST, and they are the portion of
Christians: We have examples enough, Hebr. 11. but we will not fall upon the
common place; only these things I will briefly note, First, that when we are
in adversity, we must not think that GOD delights in affliction, but in
probation, were it not to prove his children, he would not lay the Cross upon
them. Secondly, this proof does not presuppose his ignorance, but man's, GOD
knew what would be in us before ever he made us, but we are not so well as we
should be known to our selves, much less to others: lest we or they should be
deceived, GOD brings to light the secrets of our heart, and makes us reveal
them in our eyes, when they are solicited by Adultery, in our ears, when
they are solicited by vainglory, in our hands, when they are solicited by
briberie, finally, in every part of our body, yea, and of our soul too; he
makes us reveal to others or our selves, what lurketh in the deceitful and
intricate laberinth of our hearts. Thirdly, GOD will not be deceived by painted
sepulchers, neither will he receive counterfeits into Heaven, he does therefore
timely unmask them here on earth, and show whether every man appear in his
own likeness, whether he be a Meteor, or a true Star, whether he be fruit
of Sodom, or of Paradise, whether he be an Angel of light indeed, or only by
a metamorphosis; this is implied in the word (...), Ecel. 27.
and this is the end for which GOD tries; vasa figuli probat fornax, et
homines iustos tentatio tribulationis, our temptation is nothing else but the
bringing of us to the Touchstone; This is the note of difference which must be
coupled with the temptation, that we may have the proper object of Christian
patience.

But the object is not enough without the subject, come we then to that, the
subject is man. Blessed is the man, the word in English may reach all men, and
indeed patience is a virtue that is required in all, and all sorts of men are
in other passages of Scripture exhorted thereunto. Every man must be salted
with this fire, and every sacrifice seasoned with this salt, Mark 9. St
Ambrose has a good Simile drawn out of this word Salt, which is, that salt is
no more requisite to keep flesh from putrefaction, then tribulation is to
keep man from sin, and a man must cease to be a member of CHRIST, that will
not in a persecution be conformable unto him, seeing this is an undoubted rule,
that thorns grow not more naturally from the ground, to make Adam eat his
corporal bread in the sweat of his brows, then calamities spring from earthly
men to make the children of GOD to eat their spiritual bread in the
bitterness of their souls; Nullus sieri potest Abel quem Cain malitia non
persequatur; St Paul has a general rule, Gal. 4. speaking of Ismael and
Isaac, As he that was borne after the flesh persecuted him that was borne
after the spirit, so is it now, yea, it will be so even till the worlds end.

But my purpose is not to extend St James his word beyond his meaning, as he
has limited the Text, so will I the Commentary; the word by which he notes
the subject, is (...), which notes no common man, but one of more then
ordinary place and worth, it is more then (...); as in Hebrew Ish, is more
then Adam, for Ish and (...) do often note a great or a noble personage; and
that here the word is so to be taken, it is plain, for it is a relative, that
calls back to the word (...), which is in the tenth verse. This man here is
he which before was called the rich-man, rich not in a vulgar sense, but in the
language of the Holy Ghost, who by Rich understands Noble. In the Old
Testament it is so, and it is so in the New, The place Eccles. 10. is a known
place, Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, and curse not the rich, no
not in thy bedchamber, where Rich and King both signify persons in
authority, for so is the place generally applied. In the New Testament St
Matthew calls Joseph of Arimathea a rich-man, St Mark an honourable-man, as
if rich and honorable were Synonyma's. But the ant thesis that St James makes
between (...) and (...) puts it out of all question, for what is the opposite
to a man of low degres, but a man of high? Enough of the word.

The point intimated by the word, is, that no member of the Church arises to
so high a degree of worldly state, but CHRIST calls upon them to take up his
Cross and follow him; Kings themselves in Baptism are signed with the sign
of the Cross, in token that they shall not be ashamed of CHRIST, crucified,
but shall continue his faithful Soldiers unto their lines end; they eat the
body, and drink the blood of CHRIST in token that they must communicate in his
sufferings, yea Kings moreover (since the days of Constantine the Great) have
borne the Cross on the top of their Crowns, to note, what else but that they
will take their parts thereof. That which the Prophet Isay speaks of CHRIST,
Imperium habet super humeros, Cap. 9.
is a phrase borrowed from earthly Kings, who are called in the Hebrew tongue
N^se, as if you would say Portatores, the erymologie of the word is set down
by GOD himself, Numb. 11. where he designs those that shall help Moses to
bear his burden, and Iethro observes it in the 18 of Exodus. The prouerbiall
speech which Elizaeus used of Elias, My Father, my Father, Currus and auriga
Israel reaches not only Prophets but Princes too, both sustain a double part
in the society of men: they direct, and they bear, and one part of their
burden is the Cross, even plaustra conuitiorum, whole loads of reproaches and
contumelies; what the King of Aram said to the Captains, fight not against
small nor great, but only against the King of Israel, seems to be the charge
which the Bishop of Rome gives to every petty Soldier in his host; They were
wont in their writing to undertake a Luther, or a Calvin, a Beza, or a Jewel,
or some man of their rank; but now there is not the basest Pamphleter that
has not some venomous dart to shoot at the Lords Anointed, whom in better
times of the CHVRCH, the greatest Patriarchs did not mention without that
lowly respect which GOD has made due unto sacred Majesty. But what is to be
done, in the midst of these unbridled tongues and pens? Kings themselves must
resolve, that they are vncti non tantum ad Regnum sed etiam ad luctam, men of
their place, must be men of such worth, as here is described by St James, in
such cases it belongs unto them, and to them principally, to endure the Cross
out of the love of GOD.

The first part of their worth is to endure (...), which word implies two
things, not to sink in their courage, for they must (...), nor shrink from
their burden, for they must (...); That they must not sink is the first, 1
Cor. 4.
Tribulationem patimur (says St Paul) sed non angustiamur, whereupon a Father,
Quomodo angustiari potest qui dilatatur virtutibus? Virtue is like gold in the
fire, which loses nothing of its weight, but gains in luster; yea as gold
when it is melted in the fire, diffundit se in longum and latum, Beda in Ps. 65
it spreads farther, and extends longer; so (says Bid) does the virtue of a
child of GOD when he is exercised by the Cross, more are the better for it,
and himself is the better settled to continue in it, his understanding is more
cleared for the acknowledgment of the truth, and his heart more strengthened
for to stick to it, and this is properly (...), to continue the same, and not
to be altered unto worse by reason of the Cross, but though we be nipt as
corn with the frost of winter, to stock better, and to bear a goodlyer ear
of corn.

As we may not sink under the Cross, so we may not shrink from it; there be
many that be like St Peter, who said unto CHRIST, Master though all men forsake
thee, yet will not I forsake thee, I will lay down my life for thee; yet when
they are put to it, they will, as he did, deny, and forswear their Master. The
experiments that the Primitive Church had in this kind were no less
innumerable, then lamentable, the names of Libellatici and Traditores are
infamous to this day, whereof the one signed their renouncing of CHRIST with
their own hand, and the other with their own hands gave up GODS Word to be
burnt in the fire. Epist. ad Tert.
Those words of Nazianzene, (...), concern very many in all age. But we have
better examples to follow in the Book of Daniel, of the Maccabees, in the 11
to the Hebr. wherein most memorable is that of Moses, who esteemed the reproach
of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, and had rather suffer
affliction with his brethren, then to live as the son of Pharaohs daughter.

But here are two cautions to be observed, the first is, as we must not shrink
from the Cross, so must we not offer our selves to it before we be called:
Stand upon thy guard (says St Chrysostom) and be ready to resist the
assaulting enemy, but do not rashly make thy self enemies; Hoc enim non est
militis, sed seditiosi; it is enough for the Soldier of CHRIST to march forth
when the alarm is sounded by the trumpe of the Gospel; Lib. 10. Conf. c.
and St Austin, Tolerare tentationes iubes nos Domine, non amare, nemo quod
tolerat amat etsi tolerare amat, quamuis enim gaudeat se tolerare, tamen mavult
non esse quod toleret; and we pray, lead us not into temptation. Those Frierly
speeches then, one of him that being released of his temptation, expressed his
grief in these words, Bibliothech Patr.
Domine nen sum ego dignus modica tribulatione? the other of him that being
solicited to Adultery by his own lust, refused the prayers of him that
offered to entreat GOD on his behalf, out of a conceit that his striving with
that lust would turn to his greater glory, savor too much of Cloister
superstition, it may be impuritie also.

The second caution is, that as we must not undergo the Cross before we are
called, so being under it, we must not rest upon our own strength, we must put
on that same complete Armor mentioned ^phes. 6. if we stand upon this ground
with St Paul, Phil. 4.19.
I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, we shall feel the
truth of that which CHRIST spoke to St Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee, 2
Cor. 12.9.
my strength is made perfect in weakness; Ep. lib. 2. Epist. 6.
Deus non est sic (says St Cyprian) vt s^^uos suos tantum spectet, sed and
ipse luctatur in nobis, ipse congreditur, ipse in agone certaminis nostri and
coronat, and coronatur: so that if any fail in temptation, the reason must
needs be, not because he wanted strength (which is present to all them that
seek it of GOD) but because he wanted heart to put forth his strength,
according to that good rule in Tertullian, Aliquando in lucta vincit quis non
quia fortior, sed quia cum timidiore congressus; the enemy preuailes which
could not prevail if we did quit our selves like men; for questionless the
greater strength is on the Christians side, he might if he were not a coward
(...), endure; the first part of the patient man's worth.

But it is not the best part; that looks to the burden that is laid upon the
outward man, but it is little regarded, except it be done out of the love of
GOD that looks to the trial that is made of the inward man; it is not enough
for a man to endure (though he endure temptation) unto the end, he must enquire
what is that that moves him to endure; he may be moved unto it by fear, and so
be patient, but that is patience perforce, he must not be held in thereby, the
virtue that GOD calls for is Love.

But the object of Love may be either GOD, or the Reward. The object of our
love must primarily and principally be the love of GOD, for we must have an eye
to our duty, which requires that we love GOD, though there were no reward
belonging thereunto, and then secondarilie we may have an eye to the reward
whereby GOD is pleased to sweeten our duty. Yea rather we must expect the
reward, and have our eye principally upon that which should be the first mouer
of our duty, the love of GOD. The reason why this virtue is required, is for
the threefold property thereof, the extensiue, intensiue, and protensiue, the
Scripture observes all three: The extensiue it reaches all branches of virtue,
if we be moved by any other virtue, our obedience will be partial; many are
temperate that are not just; many just, that are not valiant; many have one
virtue, that want another; but he that has love has all; in regard whereof
the Apostle says, that love is the fulfilling of the Law, and St Paul, 1 Cor.
13. makes love active in producing any virtue. As love is so extensiue, so is
it intensiue also, for all virtue is contained in love gradu eminentiae, in the
highest pitch, as the reasonable soul does contain virtually and eminently
the faculties of vegetation, and sense; so that he that is either just,
temperate, or patient out of charity, ascends as high as ever he can in any of
those virtues; Last of all it is protensiue, no virtue can hold out so long as
Charity, Cant. 8.
for love is as strong as death, the coals thereof are coals of fire which has
a most vehement flame, many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods
drown it, if a man would give all the substance of his house for love it would
utterly be contemned. We see then that the sincerity, as of piety, so of
patience consists in Love, whereby we must show that we suffer without all
respect of our own either profit, ^ernard.
or pleasure, Pulcherrimus coronae nexus, quando puritas vita and humilis
pressurarum tolerantia, sibi cohaerent. This condemns the Donatists of old,
and Papists of this day, who have callendred Martyrs whose impure lives, and
treacherous purposes if we rip up, we shall find that although in their
sufferings they did (...) yet they did it not out of the love of GOD, but for
satisfying of their own, of their great Masters hateful lusts.

You have heard the subject and the object which must concur unto this virtue
of Patience, to make it true Patience; I come now to the second maine part,
which is the Recompense, the recompense which is provided for Patience, a
recompense suitable unto the patience, a happy end of so worthy a virtue. GOD
is a most gracious Sovereign, though he might command the uttermost of our
obedience active and passive, upon that allegiance which we owe him, yet does
he sweeten his precepts with sanctions, and propose a reward to such as do but
their bounden duty. And no marvel; for the Covenant between GOD and his
Church stands in mutual stipulation of love, and here we have mutual
experiments answerable to that stipulation; The experiment of man's love to GOD,
you have heard in the Patience; now in the Recompense, you shall hear an
experiment of GODS love to man, for the end of Patience is Blessedness;
Blessed is the man, for he shall receive; he is said to be blessed in present,
but his reward is reserved for the time to come; The Holy Ghost speaking of
blessedness, must be construed according to the principles not of Philosophy,
but of Divinity; Philosophy under that name comprehends only man's last end,
but Divinity extends it moreover to the means; and that upon a threefold
reason.

The first is opposition to the Curse; Blessedness stood in the fruition of
that sovereign good, which in the Creation was proposed unto man, and for the
attayning whereof sufficient ability was given unto him; sin forfeited not
only the end, but also the means, and man became a curse no less in regard
of that which he possessed, then of that which he expected; so that not only
to be excluded Heaven, but also to be incapable of heavenly things, is the
curse of sin, and a blessing is that which remedieth this curse, no less
repairing our power to compass this end, then restoring our right and title
thereunto.

The second reason is the subordination of the means to the end, which is a
just cause why the title of the end should be given to the means for GOD does
not appoint means, but with assurance of the end, therefore Mox futurum
habetur pro facto, the Scripture affirms that to be already, which shall be
before long.

The third reason is a compassion which GOD takes upon man's weakness, the wit
of man readily acknowledges, and the will ardently affects the end, but most
men doubt of, and dislike the means, especially this means of patience. The
means therefore, and especially this, are often urged and sweetened with this
title blessed. Blessedness at the first ran in these terms, Hoc fac and
viues, it required only an active, and no passive obedience, but since the
Fall we hear no less of the passive, then the active, neither can we but by
many afflictions enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, we must be baptized with
CHRIST'S baptism, and drink of his cup, And if you mark the eight beatitudes;
in the first Sermon of CHRIST, you see that they run almost all of them upon a
passive obedience, and place blessedness in the Cross.

A blessedness then there is in suffering, but few would affect it, did they
not hope for a better after it, therefore St James adds what hereafter they
are to expect, and that is the crown of life. This I told you is a full
definition of blessedness, a definition that better resolves then those many
but different that are found in Philosophy; Blessedness presupposes life, and
the life is not blessed without a Crown.

But the life, and the crown may either be considered in diverse times, or knit
together in one time; If they be considered at diverse times, then life belongs
to this world, and the crown to that which is to come, so that the Apostle
says, that the crown to come, is for the life that is past, and a man that
looks for the crown, must have a care of this life, Cap. 8.10. Cap. 3.11.
For he shall be crowned that strives lawfully; therefore CHRIST in the
Revelations says, Esto fidelis and tibi dabo coronam, and again, hold fast
that none take thy crown, 2 Timothy 4.
and St Paul, I have fought a good fight, I have kept the faith, from hence
forth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, etc. Haec vita est
negotiatio, they that here exercise their faith, and hope by charity, shall
find a reward in Heaven.

But if we join life, and the crown, and refer them both to the time that
is to come; then does the crown express the condition of the life in Heaven:
For though the word life of it self used absolutely do signify a blessed
life, as appears in many passages of Scripture, yet the crown does more
distinctly represent unto us the manner of that life, and it represents three
things, the perpetuity, the plenty, the dignity thereof; perpetuity, for as
a Crown has neither beginning, nor ending, so is it the lively Image of
Eternity, and in this respect it is called an immarcescible and immortal
crown, and a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. En Ps. 6.
Talia sunt Dei dona (says Chrysostom) valida and decore plena: at in
hominibu^ non ita est, sed qui est in gloria non est securus, qui autem
securus, non est in gloria, in Deo vtraque concurrunt.

Secondly, crown notes the plenty, because as the Crown compasses on every
side, so does that which is plentiful satisfy on every part, and nothing is
wanting in this life, therefore the Scripture in several places runs over
every part of our body, and power of our soul, and shows how every one
shall have his content, the eye in beholding GOD, the ear in hearing the
music of Heaven, the tongue in praising, etc.

The last is the dignity, crown, as it appears by the use that is made
thereof on Kings heads. And indeed what is eternal life, but a Coronation day,
the Scripture indescribing it remembers all parts of a Coronation, the robes
long white robes of righteousness which we shall put on then, the oil of
gladness wherewith we shall be anointed then, the Scepter which CHRIST shall
put into our hands to bruise therewith all Nations, the Throne whereupon we
shall sit with CHRIST, the Feast whereat we shall eat and drink with him;
finally, in steed of a Bishop or Archbishop to perform these ceremonies, we
shall have the great Bishop of our souls JESUS CHRIST, and he shall do it in
the presence, not of earthly Peers, but of the heavenly both Saints and Angels.

Ad hereunto that this Crown is significantly, called a crown of life, to
distinguish it from the Crown of mortal Princes, which is but a dead crown,
whereas this is a living. In a mortal Kings Crown there is gold, and flowers,
and precious stones, but all are dead, the gold, and flowers, and precious
stones whereof our Crown consists are all living, for the Lord himself is the
Crown; In that day shall the Lord of Hosts be for a Crown of glory, Esaias 28.
and a Diadem of beauty to the residue of his people, and the people shall be
a Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the hand of
GOD. And no marvel, for the life to come is the marriage day wherein the
Spouse shall receive her Crown upon her resurrection, as CHRIST received his
Crown at his resurrection. St Paul is plain for it, Hebr. 2. This phrase then
of the Crown of life is more then a military phrase, the Soldiers in triumph
wore Insigne sine regno, but here Insigne ceniungitur cum regno; and the name
of Crown is used rather then any other ornament, because ornamenta caetera
membrorum sunt singulorum, capitis ornatus, totius corporis est dignitas.

You have heard what is Patience, and what is the Recompense thereof; one thing
remains, that the patient man may know upon what ground he may expect this
recompense, That is set down here by the Apostle in two Verbes, (...), and
(...), whereof each has his Nowne annexed unto it; to (...) is annexed (...)
expressly; and between this nowne and that verb there is a strong conjunction,
for the Lord is so great a person as by the Law may command our patience, and
yet so good a person is he that (...), he has promised a recompense. See then
our title, it is from GOD, but grounded not upon the Law, but the Gospel. And
indeed if you look into St Paul, we shall find that (...), is a word proper to
the Gospel, especially in the Epistle to the Galathians: so that we must not
stand upon desert, but acknowledge GODS mercy, for as it is Psalm. 103. Coronat
te miserationthus. 2 Timothy, 4.8.
It is true that St Paul calls it Coronam iustitiae, but there is Iustitia
fidelitatis as well as aqualitatis. The ground of merit even in the Creation,
was GODS Contract which he vouchsafed to make with his Vassal, notwithstanding
the Obligation of his natural allegiance. This Contract consisted of mutual
Covenants, which Covenants were proportionable to the Contractors; Man's
Conenant was of works, but works proportionable to the abilities of man, that
is mean and finite; GODS Covenant was of life, proportionable to the
magnificencie of GOD, so that there was apparently a proportion between the
works and the Worker, the Rewarder and the reward; but between the work and
the reward none at all. Hence it is that between Adams obedience, and GODS
recompense thereof, there could be no merit of condignitie, which properly
understood compares and equalleth the work and the reward, without any other
respect; but merit of congruitie there might have been, seeing GOD was pleased
freely and graciously, to propose to the work so great a reward, and to bind
himself by promise to perform his Covenant of life, if man did perform his
covenant of obedience. And this congruitie carries with it a Justice, for GOD
is no less just when he keeps his word, then when he equalleth a reward to a
work.

But his first word was Legal, the word wherewith we have to do is
Evangelical, a word published by the Prophets and Apostles, wherein there is
mercy, not only in that GOD proposes a reward to the work, but also for
CHRIST'S sake bestows the reward, notwithstanding our defects in the work;
for touching the work of our passive obedience, St Paul's rule is true, Non
sunt condignae passiones, etc. Saint St Bernard opens St Paul's meaning
fairly and fully, lest any man should restrain it out of a vain conceit of
any worth of his own, Non sunt condignae (says he) vel ad praeteritam culpam
quae remittitur; vel ad presentis consolationis gratiam quae immitticur; vel ad
futuram gloriam quae promittitur; our momentaine afflictions which are but for
a little time, do work an exceeding eternal weight of glory. Vsura sortem
excedit; Away then with all pride, and let no Romanists presume of more then
GODS free mercy, for all our title is concluded in The Lord has promised.

And what he promises shall be performed, that appears in (...), there must
be no distrust, no distrust, if the person be not mistaken to whom the promise
is made, that is, to the patient man; he shall be sure of it. There is a
question, An iustus possit excidere a gratia? but of this which is in my Text
there is no question; Papists, Lutherans, Protestants, all are agreed that he
that perseuereth to the end shall be saved, shall be glorified; And I would to
GOD the world did take more care to persevere, then to dispute of the
certainty of perseuering.

Secondly, (...), the future tense intimates that Beatitudo hic parari potest,
possideri non potest, we must stay our time, and in due time we shall not
fail; Nazianz. trat. 9.
(...); let us not be weary of well-doing, for in due time we shall reap if
we faint not.

The last point that I note, is that whereunto St James applies both the nature
of patience, and also the description of the end thereof; it is to resolve
rich-men humbled that they must rejoice; and I doubt not but by this time you
will say they must rejoice; Let affliction be unsavory, yet temptation
rellisheth well, for what generous nature does not affect to have his virtue
most conspicuous? especially that virtue which is the life of all virtue, I
mean the love of God. There is then matter of Joy included in the nature of
the Cross.

If in the Nature, much more in the End, for this end is blessedness; and this
blessedness, is the Crown of life; look how many words, so many seeds, shall
I say? nay clusters of joy. The Moralist teaches that pleasure is inseparable
from blessedness; and how sweet life is, ask but the Naturalist, whose axiom
that is, Skin for skin, and all that a man has he will give for his life. And
as for a Crown, all Histories will teach us, that there has been no kind of
Festiuitie amongst the Ancients, whereof one token was not the wearing of a
Crown. But if we consider moreover that the blessedness here mentioned is
entire, the life heavenly, the Crown eternal, then I am sure there will be no
question made of the joy; the joy that attends the end of patience. Let Julian
seek to disgrace the Cross, and not endure it upon his Standard, he shall
find it in the very entrals of beasts crowned to his confusion. Let all the
enemies of the Church crown us here with thorns, as they did our Savior
CHRIST; yet let us be of good courage, as his, so ours shall be changed into a
Crown of glory. Affliction is not destructive; nay that which is the path of
death in the eyes of men, is unto the godly the path of life, The wicked think
to do us hurt, as Joseph's brethren did when they sold him, but as Joseph
answered, GOD meant it unto good, and so does he work our good out of the
malice of all our Foes; Sicut non minuitur patris dilectio quod Christus passus
sit, ita neque nos minus diligimur, quod tentamur; If we su^^er with CHRIST, we
shall reign with him, GOD will bring upon David a blessing for Shimei his
curse, and all that suffer for CHRIST, shall one day have occasion to sing that
part of the eighth Psalm (which belongs to you no less then to CHRIST) Lord
what is man that thou art so mindful of him? Thou have made him a little lower
then the Angels by affliction, but have crowned him with glory and honor.

The conclusion of all is, Kings are not free from, nay, they are most subject
unto the Cross, they must not be the worse for it, nay, their virtue must
become the more resplendent by it, so shall they be twice happy, happy here on
earth, in that they bear the Cross upon their Crowns, and happy in Heaven,
where GOD shall set the Crown upon all their Crosses. GOD grant all states,
according to their degrees, this Patience, that they may every one in Heaven
receive his measure of the Recompense.

Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake. A SERMON
PREACHED AT WHITE HALL.
JOHN 2.16. 16 Make not my Fathers House an house of merchandise.


THE whole Chapter is a portion of this days Liturgy, and the latter part
thereof contains a preparation against Easter; for that Feast drew near, as
we read at the 13 verse, and we read there also that CHRIST then went up to
Jerusalem. First, He went up to be a good example unto others of obeying the
Law: Secondly, to give a solemn beginning to that Function whereunto he was
not long before inaugurated at his Baptism.

When for these ends he came into the Temple, at the very entrance he
perceived the profanation thereof, and therefore the first work that he
undertook, was to reform that place.

In this Reformation he manifested potentiam and potestatem, power and
authority; power in his deed, and in his word authority, but a Miracle in
both.

His deed was a miracle. St Hierome commenting upon the like reported, Math.
21. affirms that it was the greatest Miracle that ever CHRIST wrought; If
that, much more this, for CHRIST was now less known, and worse attended,
therefore it was the more strange that being but one man, in show a mean man,
he should not only set upon, but expel also out of the Temple, so great a
multitude, and that of no mean ones: yet such was CHRIST'S deed; a very
miraculous deed.

As there was a miracle in this deed: so was there in his words, for they were
commanding, and the command was no less effectual then peremtorie, dixit and
factum est, all obeyed without disputing. Measure these words, as you did the
deed, by the outside of the person, they also prove a great Miracle.

When CHRIST with such words and deeds had amazed the Jews, and prepared their
attention tanquam Dominus, carrying himself as a King; he then goes on (says
St Cyril) tanquam Doctor, at my Text he puts on the person of a Prophet, he
seconds his correction with instruction, and diswades from that which provoked
his displeasure.

So then the opening and forbidding of the Jews sin, are the two points
whereinto we must resolve this Scripture. The Jews did confound the Temple
with a Market, that was their sin, and that was it which CHRIST could not
endure.

But more distinctly. The Temple is a place of GODS gracious presence: Of his
presence, for it is his House: But that presence is gracious, for he is there
as the Father of CHRIST; Sancta Sancte, they must look to their feet that come
into this House, and put off their shoes that tread upon that holy ground. The
Market is an House of Merchandise, men assemble there for worldly commerce;
Terrena sapiunt, dum terrena tractant, as are the things, so will their minds
be; those earthly, therefore these. Seeing then these places be so different,
and our carriage must suit the place; we cannot confound them without sin,
and this sin CHRIST forbids, Make not my Fathers House an house of
merchandise.

I have unfolded and digested the contents of this Scripture, we must now look
into them more thoroughly, I pray GOD we may do it fruitfully also.

To begin then with the Temple: It is here called Gods House. But we may not
grossly conceive of this phrase, or dream that he is included in a place. The
properties of a place are to be definitive, and preservative, it limits, and
sustaines whatsoever thing is in it, whereupon the Schools make a question,
whether it may agree to any Spirit at all? But it is out of all question, That
to GOD the Father of Spirits it can no way agree; It could not before the
Creation, for then there was nothing but GOD; neither can it since, for he
impaired not his own, when he gave being to the Creatures. His Essence then
continues unlimited, higher then the Heavens, deeper then Hell, longer then
the Earth, wider then the Sea (as Zophar the Naamathite speaks in the 11 of
Job) GOD has no bounds of himself, but himself.

As his Essence continues unlimited, so does it independent: his name is
Shaddai, All-sufficient, therefore does the Scripture add (...), to his
perfections, (...), Onely-wise, Onely-immortall, Onely-Lord, etc. and the
Fathers compound his Attributes with (...), mighty, of himself, (...), true
of himself, (...), sufficient of himself; what GOD is, none is besides,
neither is he beholding to any besides himself for whatsoever he is. Seeing
then the condition of GODS nature does exclude a place, how may he be said to
be in a house? Philo Iudaeus answers truly, though briefly, (...), not for
his own, but for his Creatures good: yea there is a necessity that
wheresoever a Creature is, there the Creator must be also, for all things live,
move, and have their being not only by him, but in him, Act. 17.
as the Apostle speaks. So that Vorstius his limitation of GODS Essence to
Heaven does imply a denial not only of the Redemption, for the Son of GOD
could not be incarnate on earth, if that were true; but also of the Creation,
for if GODS Essence be not present with every creature, then the creature
subsisteth in it self, and look in what it subsisteth, from that it had his
being, and so the Creature will prove a Creator, which is a plain
contradiction.

Let it then stand for a fundamental truth, That GODS Essence is euerie-where,
and we are ever not only under his eye, but also in his hand, therefore it is
as impossible for us to subsist without him, as to hide our selves from him. If
we did meditate on such a presence, it would breed in us shame, and fear;
shame to be guilty before such a witness, and fear to be obnoxious to such a
Judge. But more think on GOD, then make use of this general presence; and no
wonder, seeing they neglect, a greater shall I say? certainly a better, I mean
GODS gracious presence in the Temple; Let us now come to that, from a place, to
this place, the place of GODS residence amongst his people.

Though then GOD be euerie-where, yet where the Church is, there is in a
special sort his place, which in my Text is called his house. Now the Church
is partly triumphant, and partly militant, therefore has GOD an House in
Heaven, Cap. 14
of which CHRIST speaks in St John, and an House on earth which Solomon
speaks of in his dedicatorie Prayer; 1 Kings 8.
we have to do with this latter, yet may we not forget, that (...), there is
good correspondencie between the House in Heaven, and the House on Earth, as
Nazianzene gathers out of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Cap. 8.
and the Apostle out of Moses. Hereupon is grounded the frequent communion of
names, Heaven is called a Sanctuary, and the Sanctuary is called Heaven, as
if that were Caelestle solum, Earth in Heaven; and this terrestre Caelum,
Heaven on Earth; which I note the rather, because this correspondencie makes
much for the increase of that reverence which is due to the place.

The place of GODS presence in the Temple, was full of gracious Majesty. Of
Majesty, for it was called Hekal, which signifies a Kingly Palace; And indeed
GOD represented himself there as King, for he was present in the Cloud that
conducted the Israelites out of Egypt, Exodus 23
and of the Angel that appeared therein, GOD said, Nomen meum est in eo;
therefore where that rested GOD was said there to put his Name, and it rested
between the Cherubins as upon a Throne of State; to say nothing of the Cherubs
that were figured on the walls enuironing that Throne, serving to set forth
the Majesty thereof. But this is much more clear in the Visions of Esaias,
Ezechiel, Daniel, and St John, all which put life into these dead Types, and
set forth the living GOD attended with infinite numbers of holy living Spirits,
whose awful behavior preach humility to us vile sinful wretches, and teach
how we should come into the presence of our glorious GOD: we should all be
affected as Jacob was in his vision, and break out into his words, How
dreadful is this place? Genesis 28.


But as the place is full of Majesty: so is that Majesty gracious, for there
is not only the presence of GOD, but GOD is there as the Father of CHRIST; And
indeed the Cloud rested upon the Mercy Seat, which covered the Arc of the
Covenant, wherein were included the Two Tables, containing the Articles
thereof; And this plainly testifies the grace of GOD in CHRIST, for CHRIST is
(...), the Propitiatory, the Apostle calls him so, and if GOD do not look
into the Articles of the Covenant but through him, he is the Mediator between
GOD and us, that is the saving grace of God.

Add hereunto that as that Covenant is resolved into two parts, (...), GODS
stipulation, and our restipulation: so the principal parts of the Temple were
Oraculum and Altar, the Oracle, and the Altar; at both which GOD showed
himself to be the Father of CHRIST. The properties of a Father are vigilant
prouidencie over, and tender indulgence toward his child, and what is the
Oracle wherein GODS will from time to time was made known to the Church, but
an evidence of his fatherly care of it? And what was ^he Altar whereat the
people did daily present, and GOD accept their devotion, but a full proof how
GODS bowels were compassionate toward them? So that both these parts speak
nothing but grace, grace GODS grace in JESUS CHRIST. The other parts of the
Temple were but accessories to these, and therefore must follow the condition
of the principal, they signify grace, Ezekiel 43.
and are also holy, Omnes fines Templi in circuitu Sanctum Sanctorum, the very
outskirts were reverent, and bare engraven Iehoua shamma, Cap. 48.
The Lord is in this place, as appears in the story that goes before my
Text; for these Merchants whom CHRIST expelled, were at most but in Atrio
populi, the second Court, nay it is most likely that they went no farther then
Atrium gentium, the outmost Court of all, and yet CHRIST calls that His
Fathers House; so did it please GOD to hallow those remoter parts, to put us in
mind how much more the nearer to his presence were to be reverent in our eyes.

But how could that or any part of the Temple be CHRIST'S Fathers House, seeing
(by the Jews own confession) it wanted both the Arc and the Cloud, Types the
one of the Father, the other of CHRIST? Surely though GOD after the Babylonian
Captivity would not supply the Jews any more with those Types, to set a
sharper edge upon their longing after the truth, as he would no more suffer
them to be a free Monarchy, that they might wish for the Son of David, their
heavenly and eternal King; yet because the Oracles which were given from the
Cloud, continued in the Scriptures, and their sacrifices were accepted in
reference to the former Propitiatory, GOD still acknowledged the Temple for
his House, and CHRIST does so esteem it; and our Churches also upon the same
ground, for that where two or three are gathered together in Christ's Name, he
is amongst them, GOD speaks to us in his Word, and we have leave to speak to
him in our Prayers; our Churches (I say) upon this ground are (...), places of
state and grace, we may well call them Christ's Fathers House; we may not
undervalue them, nor any thing that belongs unto them; Church and Churchyard,
both are holy, and we must use them holily.

But has GOD care of Churches, of Temples made with hands, built of timber and
of stone, of gold and of silver? Or are not these things rather written for us,
to raise our thoughts to higher things? These were but Types, they have a
truth, they were Ecclesiasteria, places or sites of Churches, not (...) (as
Isidor Peluciota does well distinguish) That which is truly a Temple or a
Church is Rationabilis domus (as Chrysostom speaks) Christ is the Temple; as
himself teaches not far from my Text.

But CHRIST'S person is either natural, or mystical himself, or his Church
also: himself is immediately, and the Church mediately the truth of this Type.
We must first behold this truth in CHRIST, for he is (...), the Original
Sampler, whereof we are but (...), exemplifications, therefore though we must
be answerable unto him, yet equal unto him we cannot be.

CHRIST then is a living Temple, his name Christ imports as much, Cap. 9.
you may gather it out of the Prophet Daniel, when he was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, then was the Holy of Holyes anointed. But St Paul to the Hebrews has
taught us, Cap. 9.
that whereas there are two natures in CHRIST, the Godhead, and the Manhood, he
is a Temple in regard of his Manhood, Cont. Eun^one.
yet (...), (as Nyssene speaks) both parts thereof concur to make this
Temple.

But more distinctly let us see the correspondencie between this spiritual
and the material Temple. The material Temple was a place of GODS presence,
and is not the Manhood of CHRIST? Yes verily, for the Godhead dwells bodily
therein, and they were personally joined together. The material Temple was
furnished with the Oracle, and the Altar; The Manhood of CHRIST is destitute of
neither. Not of the Oracle, for CHRIST was Sapientia and Verbum Dei, the
Wisdom, and the Word of GOD, thoroughly acquainted with his secrets which he
clearly revealed to his Church, and never had she so full, Hebr. 13.
so exact an Oracle. Neither was he less an Altar then an Oracle, Habemus
Altar, we have an Altar, says St Paul speaking of CHRIST; yea, he was
Vtrumque Altar, the Altar of Incense, for from his sacred breast ascended
devout Prayers, more pleasing to GOD then the sweetest odors; and what
Holocaust was ever so propitiatory as the Sacrifice of his Body which he
offered unto GOD to expiate the sins of the world? Well might his enemies
fasten his Body to the Cross as a place of execution, but he on himself
offered himself a Sacrifice of Propitation. Neither could his oblation have
been so acceptable, Hebr. 9. Math. 23.
if by his eternal Spirit he had not offered himself to GOD, for the Altar
must be greater then the gift, because the gift is sanctified by the Altar;
Although we do not dislike the Fathers giving of this honorable title in a
qualified sense to the Cross, yet does it most properly belong to CHRIST'S
Person.

You see then there was nothing remarkable in the material Temple, which was
not in the Spiritual, I mean our Savior CHRIST.

As these things were in him: so by him they are all in us; De Inc. l. 3. c. ^
as many as have Union with his person, have Communion in his grace, and by
that Temples dwelling in us, we our selves become Temples (as Cassian well
collects.) We must then see how well herein we answer CHRIST; and we shall find
that we answer him in all points.

His whole manhood made up the Temple, and so does ours, 2 Cor. 3.
Know you not (says the Apostle) that you are the Temple of God, speaking of
our whole person. But lest question should be made of any part in the sixth
Chapter, he distinctly expresses both Body and Soul, He that is joined unto
the Lord is one Spirit with him, that is clear for our soul. And lest we
should undervalue our worser part, Know you not (says he) that your bodies
are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? So that no question can be made of either
part of our person, both are living stones, 1 Pet. 2.
and built up into a Spiritual House.

And if we be Spiritual Houses, then God is in us of a truth, 2 Cor. 6.
for so the Apostle collecteth, Ye are the Temples of the living God (says
GOD) and I will dwell in them, and walk in them. St Peter is not afraid to
say, 2 Pet. 1.
We are made partakers of the Divine nature, and the Fathers that we are
deified. Although there be no personal union between us and GOD, as there is
in CHRIST, yet such a mystical one there is, that Philo Iudaeus his words are
very true, Deus est animae bonorum incola, malorum tantum accola, though GODS
general influence be wanting to no Creature, yet his gracious inhabitance is
the prerogative of the Church. And all they to whom GOD comes so near, have
presently erected in them an Oracle, and an Altar; the Spirit by the Word
reuealeth their eyes to see the maruailous things of GODS Law, they are all
(...), They have an unction that teaches them all things, 1 John 2. 1 Cor. 2.
yea they have the very mind of Christ; yea, the same Spirit that erecteth the
Oracle, erects an Altar also, an Altar of Incense in their hearts, which
sends forth Prayers, intelligibiliter suaueolentes, Spiritual, but
acceptable unto GOD. (as Origin answers Celsu^ obiecting to the Christians
that they had no Altars.) And how can we want an Altar of burnt sacrifice when
our broken and contrite hearts offer up our bodies a living sacrifice, holy and
acceptable to GOD, which is our reasonable service of him?

This is enough to let you understand that we are (if we are Christians) Houses
of God, answerable unto Christ; I would it were enough also to persuade us so
to esteem our selves as such grace requires at our hands; for what an
improuement is this to our persons? and what a remembrance should this be to
every one to keep his Vessel in honor? but more of that anon. I must first
speak a little of the description of the Market; it is in my Text called an
House of Merchandise.

GOD that made us Men, made us also sociable, and used our wants as a Whetstone
to set an edge upon that propension; but we should live together as Merchants,
ordered by commutatiue Justice, whose Standard is (...), it requires that men
barter upon even terms: otherwise one man will devour another, and the Common
weal cannot continue: To prevent this mischief GOD has appointed
distributive Justice, the virtue of the Magistrate, who dispencing praemium and
poenam, Reward and Punishment, should set every man a thriuing, but suffer no
man to thrive to the prejudice of others. The evil of the days wherein we
live do give me occasion to complain, not only that there is variety of
corruption in Trades, dangerous, because some are ouer-thriuing, but also of
the decay of Trades no less dangerous, because there are so many thousands
that have no means to thrive at all. Governors give order for Houses of
Correction, and no doubt but if they were better used, vagrants might be
restrained thereby, but there must be moreover an increase of Trades that must
employ the Common People multiplying as they do in this blessed time of peace;
while the Gentleman depopulates the Country, and the Usurer and Victualer are
become the chief Tradesmen of Incorporations, what wonder if contrary to
GODS Law and the Kings the whole Land be filled with miserable poor. There is
no true, at least no full remedy for this evil, but they to whom the care of
distributive Justice is committed must revive and quicken the Commutatiue, and
make our Land according unto that good opportunity which GOD has given us, an
House of Merchandise.

This by the way upon occasion of the phrase, where out you may gather, that in
the Market the world takes up most of our thoughts, and our dealing there is
for worldly things.

Having sufficiently opened the description of the Temple, and the Market; The
difference between them is evident to a mean conceit, he will easily
apprehend that the one place is Heavenly, the other Earthly, the one for the
Communion of Saints, the other for the Commonweal, in the one place we need be
no more then Men, in the other we must show our selves to be the Children of
God. And is it not a great fault to confound these things which GOD has so
distinguished? Surely it is, and it was the Jews fault, CHRIST does open it,
as he does forbid it, for if we may believe the Rabbines, the Law was
pronounced in the ears of Malefactors while stripes were laid upon their
backs, and it is most likely that while CHRIST expelled the Merchants with his
whip, he spoke these words unto them, Make not my Fathers House an house of
Merchandise. Let us come then to this Prohibition.

The best places are subject to abuse, Heaven was, and so was Paradise, no
wonder then if the Temple be; And seeing abuse can be excluded no where, we
must be watchful euerie-where; yea, the better a place is, the more does the
Devil solicit us to abuse it, because he will do GOD the more despite, and
work man the more mischief; Therefore the better the place is, the more
circumspect must we be; It is a soul fault to dishonor GOD any where, but
specially in his own House. In estimating our own wrongs we aggrauate them by
this circumstance, Esaias 26 Ier. 11.
and shall we neglect it when we ponder the sins we commit against GOD? Nay
rather, the greatness of our contempt arises with the greatness of his
Majesty which appears in that place, and the more gracious he shows
himself there, the more graceless are we if we yield him not a due regard.
Now what does that due regard require at our hands? Surely that we bring not so
much as the world into the Temple, we may not do legitima in illegitimo loco
(says St Austin) we may not do lawful things in a place appointed for better
uses; Caelum est, Caelum ingrederis, Nilus.
the Temple is Heaven, as you are taught before, when thou entrest the Temple
thou must suppose thou art entering into the Kingdom of Heaven. Now in Heaven
there is neither eating nor drinking, marrying nor giving in marriage, buying
nor selling, therefore we must neither think of, nor meddle with these things
while we enter into that place. 1 Cor. 11
Have you not Houses of your own (says the Apostle) or do you despise the
Church of God? If ever, there it must appear that though we be in, yet we are
not of the world; for as GOD has chosen a Day, wherein to represent the time:
so has he chosen a Place wherein to shadow the state that we shall have in
Heaven; our animal life shall then cease, and we shall enjoy no other then
that which is spiritual. And this is that which we should have a taste of at
our coming into the Temple, yea to the very out-skirts thereof. To breed the
greater respect of the inmost parts, the outmost are to be honored, and I
would that the Canons of the Church, and Statutes of this Land were observed
touching Churchyards; if we did put off the world when we come thither, no
doubt but we would be more free from it when we came within the Church. But the
Church is less reverend in our eyes, because the Churchyard is grown so
contemptible; for what more usual then therein to think of dealing in worldly
things? CHRIST would not endure it (as you may perceive in my Text) I would we
had some of CHRIST'S zeal; I fear, not only superstitious Papists, but Jews,
yea Turks too will rise up in Judgment against us, and condemn us for this
abuse; for bringing the World into the Temple.

And if we may not bring in the World into the Temple, much less the Flesh and
the Devil, wanton eyes, and malicious hearts, for what communion has the
Temple of God with Idols? and every lust is an Idol, yea, it is a very Devil.
And yet Bedes complaint is true, Many come to Church which are so far from
having any mind to hear or pray, vt ea pro quibus orare debebant peccata
augeant, that they run farther in arrerages while they should be by repentance
and faith cancelling their Obligation; they not only dishonor that Temple
wherein themselves are made Temples of GOD, but also add to those ruins of
their spiritual House, for the repair whereof they should resort unto these
places; Neither do they, silly wretches, discern the stratageme of the Devil,
he diuerts their attention from the Oracles of GOD, that they may not be put in
mind of their duty, and casts their devotion into a slumber, that their
drowsy prayers may not be able to pierce the Heavens, and then he knows that
if he can so ruin the Oracle and Altar of GOD in man, the masterie will not be
hard, let him suggest what he will, he shall be believed by them, them that
have no better thoughts, yea, and obeyed too by them that neglect to call to
GOD for grace. And indeed though he wish ill to the material Temple, yet his
malice is most bent against the Spiritual, and he makes way to the abuse of
the later by the abuse of the former, knowing that their reverence does live
and dye together, and he will easily make a House of Merchandise of us, if he
can bring us to make a House of Merchandise of the Church.

But though neither of the Temples must be abused, yet our greatest care must
be of the Spiritual, for the Type is inferior to the Truth, yea, and if the
Truth be abused, the contagion thereof will reach unto the Type (as we learn
in Haggai) where the polluted Priests are said to pollute the hallowed things.

But the Truth is either Christ or Christians, both Temples may be abused; The
abuse of CHRIST, and turning that Temple into a House of Merchandise, is a
peculiar sin of the Church of Rome, and well may we call the Popes (...),
Basil. Epist. 11
Merchants of CHRIST, witness this very year which Paulus Quintus has made
a year of Iubile, that is, of Merchandising CHRIST; for howsoever the Bull
have a specious Preface, deploring the iniquity of the times, and the
vengeance of GOD upon the Christian world, and excites peoples devotion to
pacify GOD, and divert his wrath, yet seeing it gives every man leave to
choose his Confessor, and the Confessor power at his pleasure to commute
penance, do you not perceive the Mystery of Iniquity? The artificial
merchandising of CHRIST'S merits under the covert of the Popes Indulgence? no
doubt but GOD will so be well pacified, and Christian souls filled with
heavenly comfort, Or rather the Pope shows himself to be that Whore of
Babylon that makes merchandise of the souls of men. And indeed both in Hebrew
and Greek a Whore and a Merchant meet in one name Zona, and (...), to note
that they use their merchandising but to give an opportunity unto whordome; So
does the Pope make sale of these things but to draw men to resort unto him, and
commit spiritual fornication with him, fall down and worship their Lord God
the Pope. But GOD be thanked we have better learned CHRIST, and are far from
turning that Temple into an House of Merchandise. I would we were as far from
abusing our own, but we merchandise too much therein. Merchandising in the
Story going before my Text is resolved into buying, selling, and taking money
to use, for there were that sold, and there were that bought, and there was a
Banker; And have we not all these in our selves? The World offers her wares
unto us, and our Flesh has a good will to trade with the World, but
oftentimes we want means, and the Devil is by as a Banker, and what wicked
policies, and mischievous devices does he furnish us with, that we may not part
without a bargain? seldom are we tempted with that which we affect, that we
have not too good opportunities to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, at least we
show that there is no want in affection, even when we are excluded from the Act
of Sin, and that is plain merchandising in the sight of GOD, and abusing of
his Temple that is dedicated to him; So the ambitious, the voluptuous, the
covetous do turn their Temple into an House of Merchandise. And I would this
were all, that we did only merchandise in the House, I would we did not
merchandise the House it self, merchandise the material House; For how venall
are sacred both places and things? The Simonie that cannot be excused is grown
to be a crying sin, all the Sophistry that covetousness and ambition have
devised will never wash away the guilt thereof that cleaves to the
consciences, nor kill the Canker-worme that eats into the estates of those
profane Merchants; pereat pecunia tua tecum, St Peter's doom upon Simon Magus,
has pronounced a curse against that sin.

If we may not Merchandise the Type, much less the Truth; and yet how many
sell themselves to work wickedness? Esaias is branded for a profane person who
sold his Birthright for a mess of pottage; and no wonder, for his Birthright
was mystical, he therein sold his right to Heaven, and therefore he found no
place for repentance though he sought it with tears; a fearful thing. And is
our case less fearful if we sell our selves? Our persons are mystical, they
are Temples of the Holy Ghost; and are not we very profane if we merchandise
them? do we not run a desperate course? and prostitute our sacred selves for
things of naught? A Heathen-man could say, Sen^^^.
Nihil cuiquam vilius serpso, a man sets less by nothing then by himself,
Nostri essemus si haec nostra non essent, we would own our selves, if we did
not desire to be owners of the world. How many sinful things be there in
exchange for which if we should be demanded our Farm, or our House, we would
happily answer Non tanti emam poenitere, I will not buy repentance at so dear a
rate; yet for those very things we can be contented to give our selves, and
think, silly ones that we are, that we have that very cheap, which costs us
too too dear, too too dear (I say) if we know the price of a Temple of GOD,
and set our selves at so high a rate as the honor GOD has done us requires
at our hands; were we but reasonable men, we might not so undervalue our
selves as to think any worldly thing worth our either civil liberty, or our
natural life, how much less then may we equal any of these, yea, all these
things unto that Adoption of Sons, and consecration into Temples which are
vouchsafed us of GOD? Well, if we do not (as we ought) prize GODS favor, GOD
will (as we deserve) punish our contempt, he that destroys GODS Temple, him
will GOD destroy; Prosaners of the natural Temple have had ill ends, and the
profaners of the spiritual may not look for good; What CHRIST in regard of
the natural Temple did visibly, In Math. c. 21.
that (says Origin) does he every day inuisibly concerning the Spiritual,
and believe that if he showed such zeal for the material, he will show much
more for the Spiritual, and if we regard not the Judgment which he executed
with a whip, he will one day set upon us with his two-edged Sword; and if he
struck such terror into the wicked in the days of his Humility, judge you
what terror he will strike into them in the days of his Glory; and if we are
ashamed of the disgrace of being cast out of the Temple, let us fear the
vengeance of being cast into Hell.

But I told you that this was a preparation for Easter, and it is for Easter
that you are now to be prepared, and you see what your preparation must be, The
material Temple must be rid of all profanesse, and so must the Spiritual too,
purify the place, purify your selves, so may you with comfort eat of CHRIST
our Passover which is sacrificed for us; and if all the doore-posts of either
House be sprinkled with the blood of that Lamb, the punishing Angel will pass
by us, and the Plagues of Egypt shall never seize upon us. Away then with
these things, away with Sheep, and Oxen, the rich-mans worldly thought, away
with Turtles, and with Doves, let not the world here possess the poore-mans
heart; let both remember and show that Holiness beseeming GODS House for ever.

When CHRIST spoke these words they were so powerful that all that heard them
did readily obey them, I cannot hope for such a Miracle, Leu. 19.
but I will pray, That we may all have grace so to keep Gods Sabbaoths, Ps. 5.
and reverence his Sanctuary, that coming into his House in the multitude of
his mercies, and in his fear worshipping toward his holy Temple, we our
selves may more and more become Temples of Grace, have GOD dwell in us until
we are translated unto him, have the Oracle of Faith, until we are admitted
unto his blessed sight, and the Altar of Devotion, until we attain our
everlasting union: This the Owner of the House grant us, through CHRIST, in
whom we have this honor to be Houses by the operation of the Holy Ghost the
Architect of these Houses. To which one GOD in three Persons we render all
honor and glory now and for ever, Amen.

Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, O Lord, they shall ever be praising
thee. A SERMON PREACHED AT GREENWICH.
PSALM 32. VERSE 5. 5 J said J will confess my transgressions against my
self, and thou forgauest the iniquity of my sin. Selah.


THIS is one of the Psalms appointed for this days Euening-prayer, and it
fits well the season, For it is the second of those that are called
Penitentials, and Repentance is, or ought to be, the most of our exercise this
time of Lent.

But when we go thereabout, it is our best way, considering our ignorance, and
negligence, to endeavor the exemplification of some worthy Patterns, and a
more worthy then king David we cannot have; For, Regis admirabilem virtutem
poenitentia fecit splendidiorem, as Theodoret observes, that King was a
manifold Worthy, but his worth did shine in nothing more conspicuously, then in
the feeling acknowledgment of his own unworthiness; and his Doctrinall
practice of that kind is the argument that is handled in this Psalm. Let us
look then into it.

The Title is a brief of the whole; for Maschil being interpreted, is, a
lesson of happy wisdom; and no wisdom so happy as that which makes, or
keeps our peace with GOD.

But these things are done, the one by Repentance, the other by Ob^dience;
these causes, with those effects, are the four parts, whereinto we may fairly
break this Psalm.

My Text is found in that part which teaches Repentance, for thereof
Confession is a principal branch, and the doctrine of Confession is redoubled
in this verse, whereof I have chosen the latter clause.

So then, we have now to do with Penitential Confession, and are out of this
Scripture to learn, what it is, and how it speeds. What it is, we shall see in
King David's Practice, and in his Success, how it speeds.

But more distinctly. In the Practice we are to consider the matter confessed,
and the manner of confessing. The matter is Sin, his own sin. Of this he
had a sense, manifested by an evidence; The evidence is a Confession, a
penitential confession, for it lays the blame where it is deserved, he
confesses against himself, and seeks relief where it may be found, he
confesses unto the Lord.

He confesses do I say? I say too much, for he was come no farther then Dixi
confitebor, he did but profess his resolution, the action was to come. Thus
far the Text does open his Practice.

In that which remains it reports his Success; He sped remarkably well. Well,
He in humility gave glory unto GOD, and GOD did graciously relieve him.

But mark here also the matter wherein, and the manner how. He relieved him in
that which he confessed, in Sin, the iniquity of his sin; and this relief
was a Release, it was the Forgiveness of that sin.

But here observe and wonder at the goodness of GOD; King David's Practice was
but a purpose, but his Success is a performance; so much is GODS mercy more
forward then man's duty. And is not this a remarkable Success?

Surely it is, and so much is signified by Selah; for Selah interpreted morally
is a note of some great and some constant truth, and such is that which is
contained in my Text.

You see the particulars, whereof this holy Scripture does occasion me to
speak; that we may all be the better for that which shall be spoken, let us by
GODS assistance, with Christian audience, listen again unto them as they shall
now be unfolded briefly, and in their order.

I begin at King David's Practice; wherein the first thing observed was the
matter confessed; and that is Sin. Peccatum confitetur, vt Publicanus, non
iustitias, vt Pharisaeus; he appears before GOD in the humility of the
Publican, not in the pride of the Pharisee; He had many Prerogatives, for he
was a man after GODS own heart; the Father of faithful Kings; the sweet
Singer of Israel; a lively Type of our Savior CHRIST; but he fixed his eyes
upon none of these, neither came any of these into his mind, he remembers
nothing but sin. And what does this intimate, but that his guide was not
nature but grace? For by nature we not only desire to hear from others, but
also our selves would be Heralds of our own virtues, yea and are contentedly
deceived by setting and seeing them in a false light, to have others admire
them, but specially our selves to dote upon them. Every man naturally is a
Laodicean, and thinks himself rich, and increased in goods, and in regard of
his spiritual estate to want nothing. But what our Savior CHRIST replied to
that Church, is spoken to us all, Thou do not know that thou art poor,
wretched, blind, and naked; No man does think on these things by nature, and
therefore when any man does, it is a sign of grace, as it was in K. David,
that thought rather what he wanted, then what he had; rather how vile, then how
good he was.

And indeed where grace is, it fares with our souls, as it does with our
bodies, If a man be sick, have he never so stately reabes, they cannot
shelter; have he never so dainty fare, it cannot relish; have he never so
soft a bed, yet cannot rest, his diseased body feels nothing but the
afflicting peccant humor. Even so when the remorse of conscience works, all
our gifts, be they never so great, they appear not, they cannot cover our
nakedness, they cannot satisfy our haunger, and thirst, neither do they ease
our torture; though we have them, yet for the time we have no use of them, we
see, we hear, we feel nothing but sin; as experience teaches them that
have been assistants to souls distressed in this kind.

But it is not only Sin, but P^shang, heinous and ennormous sin that is
here remembered; King David is as ambitious to amply^ie his sin, as others are
to amplysie their virtues, for this word sig^ifieth Revolt, and Rebellion, the
highest improuements that can be of sin. You will acknowledge it, if you
distinguish inter Legemet Legis latorem; every trespass is a violating of the
Law; but to set at naught the Lawgiver, and set our selves against him, what
is it but High Treason? If men satisfy particular lusts, they commit but
particular sins, as in Theft, Adultery, Murder, but Treason is vniuers^lis
iniustitia, it includes all kind of ennormities. What then could King David say
more against sin, then to make it the character of the son of Belial, that
breaks GODS bonds, and casts his cords from him, and perverse imitatur
Createrem suum vt sibi ipsi lex sit, vsurps the Throne of GOD?

Yea, because there is no neutralitie in this case (for he that is not with GOD
is against him) and auersenesse from GOD, is attended with aduersenesse to him
(for rebellion is that whereat the Devil aymeth in revolt) Sin does muster us
in the Army of the Dragon, and ranketh us with the malignant brood of the
Serpent; so much does King David signify by this word, and by so amplifying,
teaches us that we may no^ mince sin, but as we consider the Law which we
transgress, so must we also the Lawgiver to whom our sin does reserre, and
we shall find that commonly it is of a higher nature then we suppose, and is a
plain spiritual Treason.

Oh that all Adulterers, and Murderers would herein be David's Scholars, and
then no doubt, but out of that detestation which they have of Treason, they
would profitably conclude, how odious they deferue to be in the eyes of GOD,
themselves deserve to be, for the sin which King David amplyfieth, is his own,
he makes bold in this case with none but himself.

It is a strange perverseness of our conscience to be sharp sighted a far
off when we view others; but to be purblind at hand, when we look on our
selves: our perspectiues multiply the motes that are in other men's eyes, and
make them appear as great as beams; but the beams that are in our own eyes,
they so diminish, that they scarce ^^peare so big as moates: How do we
detest that in others, which we suffer in our own breasts? And how many would we
send to Hell, for that wherewith our selves hope to climb to Heaven? Sic nemo
in sese tentat descendere, nemo; self-love is persuaded that all is well at
home. But every man is best known to himself, and therefore every man
should study himself most, and if he do, though happily others be bad, yet will
he find himself to be worse, and confess with St Paul, 1 Timothy 1^. (...) Sam.
24.
Peccatorum ego primus, and say as this King does in another place, I have
sinned, I have done wickedly, but what have these sheep done? No man's sin
will appear greater then our own. And so much of the matter confessed.

I come now to the manner of confessing. The word used by the Psalmist is
borrowed out of the Law, Leuit. 5. and Numb. 5. and so alludes to the
Ceremonial Sacrifice, wherein the offerer was to lay his hand upon the
Sacrifice, in acknowledgement of what he deserved, and wherewith he was to be
relieved. The words of my Text contain the Moral of that Ceremony, which
teaches, that we must manifest a sense of our sin, and in that
manifestation, must first lay the blame where it is deserved, and then seek
only to him in whom we may find succor. Confess we must, that is the
manifestation; but the confession must be made against our selves, who only
are blameworthy, and we must present our confession unto the Lord, from whom
only we may expect succor.

But a little more fully to rip up these points. The Septuagint has (...),
which shows that in Confession there must be a concurrencie both of soul and
body, and both must arraigne us at the Bar, for it is verbum forense. If it
were only (...), the evidence of the tongue were enough, but (...) imports,
that there is an inward sense of the outward evidence. And indeed St Cyprian
tells us concerning the inward sense, that confession is (...) conscientiae;
St Austin, that it does pondus animi prof^rre; St Ambrose, He that confesses,
ingemit cu^pae dolor, speaks with sighs and groans that cannot be expressed.

And indeed this inward sense, must be the first step of Confession, and we
must be resolved of that truth which is delivered by Nazianzene, (...), it is a
principal thing in Confession to be touched at the heart.

But then ex abundantia cordis os loquitur, and therefore St Austin says, that
to confess is ex occulto et tenebroso procedere, alluding to Lazarus his
coming out of the grave, and to show that indeed we detest sin, a true
penitent will utter it (...), Nazianz.
so did Manasses, so did the prodigal child, and so does King David in this
place. If any man be spare of speech in this kind, Tertullian will tell him,
that dissimulatio est consilium contumaciae, it is to be doubted that he is not
so out of charity, but he may be reconciled again to his sin; whereas
Confessio error is is professio deserendi; and he that outwardly and inwardly
does confess, obliges himself to forsake sin, both to GOD and man.
Obliges himself, I say, for the verb (...) is judicial, and the obligation
is the stronger, by how much the stipulation is more solemn; and if the
arraignment pass before GOD and men, there is no traversing of such an
Indictment, the Indictment which our selves put in, and our selves do sign to
be Billa vera.

But as Confession signifies a giving in of evidence, or rather the finding of
the Bill of Indictment, so we must particularly see, against whom the Bill is
found. King David finds it against himself, he lays the blame where it was
deserved, and confesses against himself. It was condemned long since for an
Heresy in unchaste Martion, to hold peccata non voluntate sed necessitate
patrari, with that maxim he thought to excuse his incontinencie. For the
ground of this pretended necessity men have sought to opposite places, some to
Heaven, and some to Hell; the opinion is ancient that setcheth it from either;
Adam was the Author of the first, he laid his sin to GOD, The woman that thou
gave me, gave me of the fruit, and I did eat. And no less ancient is that,
that fetches it from Hell, Eve laid the blame upon the Devil, The Serpent
(said she) beguiled me, and I did eat. These Masters have had many Scholars; I
would they had not still; But to the first the son of Syrach spoke in his
days, Say not the Lord has caused me to err, for he has no need of sinful
men; he is a GOD of pure eyes, and cannot behold wickedness. And to the second
St Austin, Non est hoc tollere sed geminare peccatum, the excuse is worse then
the fault; for as strong as the Devil is, suadere potest, cogere non potest, he
may very powerfully commend it unto us, but it is never entertained but by our
good will. So that we may spare much unnecessary pains of climing into
Heaven, to know what GOD has decreed; or descending into Hell, to inquire
after the Devils power; we must stay at home, and there sind the right party,
for man (as Soloman speaks) peruerteth his own ways, and every man (says
St James) when he is tempted, is baited and led aside by his own lusts; so
that the rhetorical translatio criminis, whether it be de compendio, or per
circuitum (as St Austin speaks on this Text) must have no place in Confession,
herein quo quis humilior, eo laudabilior, the less excuse, the more grace.

And if men in Confession may not derive their blame to others, how much less
may they vaunt of that which they do amiss? And yet how many are there which
not only some out their own filthiness, but also glory in their shame? Isay
3.
The show of whose countenance witnesses against them, who discover their
sin as Sodom did, Cap. 6.
and desire not to hide it; of whom GOD complains in Jeremy, Were they
ashamed when they committed abomination? They were not ashamed, neither could
they blush. Too too many there are that set themselves down in the seat of the
scorner, and think that it is their highest commendation not only to have
sinews of Iron in their neck, but plates of Brass on their forehead, to be
not only incorrigible, but impudent also, whose sins that are indeed the
works of darkness, are become so shameless as to walk abroad at noone day.
Witness the blasphemies, the impurities, the violences that are so frequent
objects of every man's eyes and ears. But this is not to confess against our
selves, for to confess against our selves, is to be humbled, not to be
exalted; it takes down our pride, and does not hearten our shamelessenesse.
This is the first branch of that evidence which we give in, and it was the
first thing noted by imposing of hands upon the Sacrifice.

But there was another meant also, which was the pointing out of the means and
person by whom we are relieved, and that is GOD, in CHRIST, which is taught in
the second part of the evidence, the confessing to the Lord. To confess to the
Lord, is not to inform him of that which he does not know, but rather (as St
Austin speaks) Affectum nostrum patefacimus in te Domine confitendo tibi
miserias nosiras; we add nothing to GODS knowledge, Chrys^, 5.
but rather reveal our assection to Godward. Confessio fraudis nostrae est
laudis Dei, which the very word Iadah in Hebrew notes, including in it both.

But the affection that we reveal in our Confession is double; it is affectus
timoris, and confidentiae, which look to the two Artributes of GOD that temper
his providence in governing the world, I mean Justice, and Mercy; for
confessio peccatorum est testimonium conscientiae timentis Deum (as St
Chrysostom) no man can do it, but he does acknowledge, and tremble at the
lustice of GOD.

Yet not the Justice only does affect him, but the Mercy also; for confessio
poenitentis, ad laudem pertinet ignoscentis, because, as we tremble when we
consider GOD is just, so considering that he is merciful, we hope in him also;
Thus to sear, thus to hope, is to give glory unto GOD, and to give him
glory, is to confess unto him.

You expect happily, that importuned by the Romish Commentaries on this place, I
should fall upon the controversy of Auricular confession, but I know that the
Pulpit, especially in the time of Lent, is rather for Ghostly counsel, then
for disputes, and therefore I forbear; only giving this note, that our Church
does not condemn it as simply evil, and therefore has in the Liturgy
restored it to its native purity. Only it were to be wished, that so far as
the Church allows it, we would practice it, for I am persuaded that many live
and dye in enormous sins, that never made any use of it, nor received any
comfort from the power of the Keys. The confessing to the Lord, does not
exclude confessing unto man, so the due limitation be observed. But enough of
the Confession.

There is one point more to be observed before we come to the Success, and
that is, that this confession of King David was only in purpose, he was come
no farther then dixi; a sense he had of his sin, but he was not yet come so
far as to utter it, though he was disposing himself thereunto.

But dixit was not only verbum oris, but cordis also; promptitudinem and
alacritatem hoc verbo notat (says St Bernard) he was willing and ready to make
his confession, he adds, Saul dixit peccaui, sed quia non dixit antequam
diceret, cord, priusquam ore, as King David did, non audiuit Deus transtulit
pec^atum tuum, he heard not so good news from Samuel, as King David did from
Nathan, The Lord has put away thy sin.

The lesson rising hence is, pij non trahuntur ad Tribunal Dei, sed sponte
accedunt; knowing that there is no shelter against GOD, but only in GOD, we
must prevent our summons, and resolve upon a voluntary appearance.

Finally, putting the Purpose to the Confession, we see, that the children of
GOD use not to continue in their sins, but so soon as they are roused, the
principles of grace do work, and they humbly shreeue themselves to GOD. And
so have you the first maine point in this Text, which opens unto us King
David's Practice.

I come now to the Success thereof, which is the forgiveness of the sin;
Where we may first see the difference between Tri^unals on Earth, and the
Tribunal of Heaven. On Earth, Non est confessi causa tuenda rei, Confession is
the cause of condemnation, it is not so at the Tribunal of GOD, there though
it be not the cause, as Papists strain it, yet it is the means of absolution,
Whereby you may perceive, that the word here used is a phrase of the Gospel,
and not of the Law; For judgments of men, tread the steps of the Law of GOD,
(...), there is no relief for a poor sinner to be found in the Law, he that
will have it, must seek i^ in the Gospel. And yet the word here used is
borrowed out of the Law, but it is the Ceremonial Law, and the Ceremonial Law
is, if not wholly, yet for the most part Gospel.

But more distinctly to handle this point; We must observe the Matter forgiven,
and the Manner of forgiving. The matter forgiven, is the Iniquity of his
sin. It is disputed what is meant here by ^^^quitie, whether culpa, or poena.
Some understand poenam, and think that an allusion is made in this word unto
the message of Nathan, wherein GOD does remit the heauiest stroke of his wrath,
but yet retains some part in punishing the child, and permitting Absolon to
rebel and abuse king David's concubines; so Theodoret, Deus non condigna poena
Dauideni puniuit. Some understand culpam, and will have this phrase to be an
amplification of that, as if Superbia defendens, or Taciturnitas celans, or
Impietas contra Deum assurgens, or some such great guilt were meant by this
phrase. But as I do not censure these opinions, which may well stand: So I
think the phrase looks back unto that word which was in the Confession. The
sin confessed was Peshang, and this is but an analysis of this word; for
Gnaon Catai, what is it word for word, but the perverseness of my aberration?
Catah is an aberration from the Scope or Mark whereat we aim; all men aim at
felicity, but most men stray from it, because they are not led by that Law
that guides unto it, the violating whereof is called Catah.

But some do stray out of mere ignorance, and they only break the Law; some
out of stubbornness, which will not submit themselves to the Lawgiver; these
men's sin is called perverseness, which GOD is said here to forgive. So that
David did not confess more against himself, then GOD includes in his pardon;
well may. GOD exceed our desire, he never does come short thereof, if it do
concern our spiritual, our eternal good; as he does exclude no sinner that
does confess, so does he except against no sin, that is confessed.

You have heard the Matter of the pardon, now hear the Manner. And the manner
makes the Remission answerable to the Confession. The Confession had an inward
sense, and an outward evidence, so has the Remission; For, GOD spoke the word
by Nathan to resolve king David's faith, but he also gave a taste of his truth by
working ease in King David's heart. Both are included in the word, but specially
the latter, for Nasa signifies to unburden, as if the soul were burdened with
sin.

And indeed sin is a burden, a burden (as King David elsewhere speaks) too
heavy for him to bear, (...), heavier (says Chrysostom) then any lead. And
no wonder, For if every evil do make a heavy heart, much more spiritual
evil cloggeth the Spirits, makes a man sincke inwardly, and bow outwardly; you
can have no better character of such a dejected soul, then that which we find
in the penitential Psalms. It is very true, that many walk lightly, and
skip frolickly, as if they bare no weight, though they be fraught with sin,
but the answer is plain, Nihil ponderat in loco suo, while sin resides in
that part, which commits the sin, it gives such content to the concupiscence
that dwells therein, as being the desired object thereof, that it presses not
at all, neither is it ever burdenous till it be brought unto the conscience,
which only has an eye to discern it, a scale to weigh it, and a sense
wherewith to judge of that weight; and when GOD inhibendo, withholding those
vanities which hinder the conscience from weighing, and exhibendo, putting the
whole measure of sin into the scales, does rouse us, then the most careless,
and the most senseless, shall be driven to acknowledge, that indeed it is a
great burden. But the penitents comfort is this, that as he feels it, so he
has one by whom he may be eased of it; the putting on the hands upon the
Sacrifice did ceremonially testify as much, but the moral thereof is in St
John, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, Qui
tollit, a plain translation of Nasa. But CHRIST speaks it more plainly, Mat.
11. Come to me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will ease you.
Where also we find, that it is the Lord only that forgiueth sins. They spoke
truly in the Gospel that excluded all others, Lib. 5. cap. 1^.
saying, Who can forgive linnes but God only? St Irenie gives the reason,
Quomodo recte remissa peccata, nisi ille ipse in quem peccauimus donet
remissionem? He is the only I egislator (as St James speaks) and concludes,
that he only has power to condemn and absolve. Therefore does GOD, Esaias 43
and 44 claim this as his peculiar; it is the peculiar of his Word to acertaine
our Faith, and of his Spirit to unburden our Souls, and instead of the
heaviness that did oppress, to cheer us up with spiritual joy.

Hitherto you have seen a good correspondencie between the Co fession and the
Remission: but now you must hear of a great difference, for David was come no
farther then Dixi, he had a good purpose to confess, but of GOD, which is the
searcher of the heart, he witnesses, that he was come to Remisisti, granted
the parden before it was asked; so does St Austin paraphrase these words, Vox
mea in ore nondum erat, sed auris Dei iam in cord erat. And what is this but a
proof of that gracious promise which GOD himself has made in the Prophet
Esaias, (...). 6 5. O^at. ^. Orat. 15.
before they call I will answer, and while they speak I will hear (...),
cried out Nazianzene when he con^dered this; But elsewhere he gives the reason
of this celeritie, ^ra est opus alienum, when GOD is angry he goes against his
own nature, but eius proprium est misereri, it is as it were natural to him
to do good unto men. You need no better proof then the parable of the
pro^igall child, man cannot be so forward to receive good, but GOD is much more
forward to bestow it, and what greater encouragement to confess most humbly,
then to observe that GOD deals with a confessing sinner most graciously?

And indeed we ought to observe it, for, which was the last point to be handled
on the Text, the success is remarkable. It is signed with Selah. Not to
trouble you with the use of this word in Music. The learned make hereof a
double moral use, for it is either a note of so ^e great thing, and then they
render it by the superlatiue degree, or of some constant thing, and so the
Caldee renders it, in aeternum. Both these moral uses sit our purpose, for
the two maine branches of my Text, are great, and constant truths. What is
there in the Confession that is not great? Is it not a great thing to see a
man, so to put off selfeloue, and pride, the properties of his corrupt nature,
and not only acknowledge himself to be, but also to humble himself as being
a sinful wretch? To use that rhetoric wherewith he was wont to shift off his
blame, in amplyfying of his own sin? In being so charitable as to e^cuse
all, the more to accuse himself, and the more to set forth GODS glory, not to
stick, even in the hearing of men, to be the publisher of his own misery?
This is great, but due.

But how much more great is it, to see GOD, the Judge of man, so little to be
moved with the heynousnesse of sin, as to send a Prophet to comfort an humble
sinner, yea, to send his Spirit to ease the broken heart, to take off the load
from his Rebels, and lay it upon his dear Son? And herein to prevent him,
who might well think himself happy, if he spead after long attendance?
Certainly these things are great, the more great, because not due.

But as they are great, so they are constant also, for what king David did,
must be done by all, and all in so doing may look for the same success^
Solomon has a general rule, Pro^. 28.
He that hides his sin shall not prosper, but he that confesses them, and
forsaheth them, shall find mercy. The Apostles confirm it, If we confess our
sins, God is faithful to forgive, says St John: and St Paul, If we would
judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. But the more is the
pity (...), (...) there are many (as Tertullian speaks) which either
defer, Nazianz.
or abhor this work of Confession vt publicationem sui, as if they should be
too well known thereby, either to GOD, or men; praesumo pudoris magis memores,
quam salutis, more respective of a little false credit, then of eternal life;
whereby you may perceive the truth of St Chrysostomes note, Inuertunt homines
Dei ordinem, Diaboli instinctu, Deus enim pudorem dedit peccato, confessioni
siduciam, but Diabolus peccato sid^^iam, confessioni pudorem; the world has
too many spectacles of this perverse dealing, to whom we may use the words of
Tertullian, Ne tu verecunde bonus qui ad delinquendum exporrigis frontem, ad
confitendum contrahis; Is it not fors^oth a goodly modesty to be impudent in
sin, and shamefast in the censure thereof.

But to what end does man avoid this shame? Surely to fall into a worse; for he
that will not be ashamed voluntarily, shall against his will be put to shame;
Certainly the shall at the last day, when GOD shall reveal all secrets in the
sight of Angels and men. Yea, happily GOD will bring it to light in this world,
for some men have their mask taken off here, and their nakedness discovered
before they dye, so that it is ill providence e malis maximum, when we must
choo^e one of two evils, to reserve our selves unto the worst; And whereas he
which accuses himself, need fear no accuser; to spare himself, that he may
have many, and those that are much worse to accuse him.

But if a man be senseless, that he will not provide what is best for himself;
yet, let him not be so graceless, as to do wrong unto GOD, Peccator cum sis,
Nazianz.
accede vt glorifices Deum and occasionem praebeas, (...)^ Si dubitas accedere
inhibuisti bonitatem, and we shall find, that GOD can worse brook the contempt
of the Gospel, then the breach of the Law.

Wherefore let us listen to the Son of Syrach, Cap. 4
and not be ashamed to confess our sin; let us sow in tears, that we may
reap in joy, for blessed are they which now mourn for they shall be
comforted. Let every one of us have that good testimony of our conscience,
which Job had, I have not hid my sin, Cap. 31
as Adam, conceiving iniquity in my bosom; and we shall be able with King
David to pray, and pray with hope, Lord have mercy upon me, heal my soul,
for I have sinned against thee. If we follow David's practice, and say as he
did, we will confess our sins against our selves, unto the Lord, we shall be
able upon our own experience every man to boast of King David's success, and
to say, Lord thou have forgiven the iniquity of my sins.

A SERMON PREACHED AT WHITE HALL.
LVKE 22. VERSE 60, 61, 62. 60 And immediately while he yet spoke the cock
crew.

61 And the Lord turned and looked upon Peter, and Peter remembered the word of
the Lord, how he said unto him, Before (...) cock crow thou shall deny me
thrice.

62 And Peter went out and wept bitterly.


THESE words were read this day in the Church, ^ent.
and they are very agreeable to the Season; an Argument of Repentance to the
days of Humiliation.

Now Repentance is here delivered not in a Rule, but in an Example, but such an
example as deserves our best regard, because the person is of principal note;
no meaner a man then St Peter is here presented unto us in the form of a
Penitent. Let us then look upon him.

And if we do, we shall see him here down and up, taking a fall, and ^ysing
again; And indeed, Repentance is nothing but a rising from a ^all; Therefore
we may well resolve St Peter's Case and my Text into his Fall, and into his
Rising. His fall; Peter denied Christ; a sore fall, because from a high Rock,
and that Rock was CHRIST.

That Fall was sore; but it is made sorer, in that it was taken so soon, and
so often; Soon, before the cock crew; not many hours after he was
forewarned, and fore-armed. Often, before the cock crew, Peter denied CHRIST
thrice, being over shoes, he would over ears, and the ^arther he went, the
worse he was: So Peter came down,

But he got up again, and the Text will teach us of his Rising, first, What
were the Means; and secondly, What were their Effects. The means were two,
one outward, another inward; The outward was a timely sign; The sign was the
crowing of a cock; an ordinary thing, but here serving to an extraordinary
use. And that sign was timely, immediately, even while he was speaking, did
the cock crow, no sooner was Peter down, but he was put in mind of his Fall.

Neither was he only put in mind by the outward means, but he was also by an
inward made sensible thereof, even by the help of CHRIST, CHRIST turned and
looked; the Works seem corporal, but indeed they are spiritual; for he that
turned, he that looked, was the Lord, and he turned and looked as a Lord, both
Works were spiritually operative; Witness the Effects.

The Effects are as the Means were in number two; each Means produced his
Effect. The Cock did crow, and what came of it? presently Peter remembered the
words that the Lord saio unto him, he acknowledged CHRIST to be a true Prophet,
and gave glory to his truth. This is the Effect of the outward means. The
inward means wanted not his Effect also, CHRIST turned, he looked, and lo,
Peter is presently changed. He was ouer-bold, he now finds his weakness, for
he went out, he durst no longer abide by the Temptation.

Peter was senseless, he now grows tender hearted; for he wept bitterly; the
floods of sorrow that ouer-whelmed his soul, gusht out in streams of tears
that trickled down his eyes.

There is one thing more in the Text which I may not omit, and that is the
correspondencie of the rising to the fall; Peter was quickly down, before the
crowing of the cock; and he was as quickly up, even as soon as the cock did
crow. Secondly, Peter had means to rise, the cock did crow, CHRIST turned,
CHRIST looked, and Peter did use the means which he had, for he remembered, he
went out, he wept. Finally, Peter endeavored to make his Repentance as
afflictiue, as his Sin had been offensive, for as he denied shamefully, so
did he weep bitterly.

You have seen our Penitent, but not so thoroughly, but we may all desire to
see him again; And verily, if with a reflecting eye we do deliberately reuiew
him, in him we may profitably behold our selves, behold what we are, behold
what we should be, are in his fall, should be in his rising: GOD give us all
such single eyes. I resume the Fall.

Peter denied CHRIST. Romans 10
It is a rule of the Apostles, That with the heart a man belieueth unto
righteousness, and with the mouth he confesses to salvation: whereby we
learn that it is not enough for us to stand in good terms with GOD, except
we also let the world know what good he has done for our souls; we may
forfeit the former, if we be not resolute in performing the latter; CHRIST does
assure it in the Gospel, saying, that if any deny him before men, he will deny
them before his Father which is in Heaven. This ground must guide us in judging
aright of St Peter's fall, by it you shall find that it was a sinful fact,
which that you may the better see, I will distinctly observe the Fact, and the
Sin.

The Fact was a denial; but it was negatio duplex, a double denial; First,
Negatio notitiae, and secondly, Negatio consortij; by former verses we are
directed so to understand it; First, he denied that he had any acquaintance
with CHRIST, and secondly, he denied also that he had any dependencie on him.
This was his Fact.

And this Fact was sinful; for it contained a plain contradiction to his
Calling, and his Conscience. To his Calling; Peter was CHRIST'S Apostle; could
he be one of CHRIST'S Apostles, and not know him? A chief Apostle, and have
nothing to do with him? A flat contradiction to his Calling. Neither to his
Calling only, but to his Conscience also; For was not Peter the man that
Matthew Cap. 16 confessed, Thou art CHRIST, the Son of the living God, and
was well rewarded for that confession? And had he not acquaintance with him? A
flat contradiction to his Conscience. Was not Peter the man that Matthew cap.
19. said, Behold we have forsaken all and followed thee, and was warranted an
exceeding gain for a trifling loss, and had he no dependencie on him? So that
the denial contains two notable untruths wherewith St Peter is justly
charged, and charging him therewith, we keep our selves within the reasonable
bounds which St Bernard has set, Peccauit Petrus, De Gratia and libero Arbit.
it is out of question that St Peter did sin in denying, but yet he did sin
Non odiendo Christum sed se nimis amando, he bare no malicious mind against
CHRIST, but was willing to sleep in a whole skin. And that he might so do, he
suppressed the truth in his heart, and his tongue uttered these untruths;
Wherefore his faith was still unfeigned, and his love undoubted, but Constantia
turbata est, his constancy was shaken; Love of CHRIST, and fear of danger had
so shrewd a conflict, that the fear of danger got the vpper-hand of the love
of CHRIST; So that though he continued inwardly a good man, yet durst he not
out of the good treasury of his heart bring forth his good things.

These are reasonable bounds, but they are diversely transgrest; for some do
rack, and some do shrink the sin; They rack it that in their Tracts De
Apostasia Sanctorum put St Peter in for an instance, but put him in unjustly,
because Apostasy is Christianity dead at the root, whereas in St Peter it was
only withered in the branch. Others there are that shrink the sin; even
among the Ancients some have adventured to excuse Peter from all fault, and,
which is worse, they excuse him by a Mental reservation, or a secret evasion,
Non noui hominem quem Deum esse scio, I do not know him as a mere man, so
much his words uttered (as they think) import, whereunto he supplied in his
mind, for he is more, even the Son of the living God. But certainly St Peter
was no Aequiuocator, and such Apologies can have no Apology; St Hierome does
censure them roundly, but truly, They that so excuse Peter, do necessarily
accuse CHRIST, and make him a false Prophet, when he told the denial of Peter,
yea, they accuse Peter himself, as if he wept bitterly when he had no just
cause to do so. We may not lie for GOD, much less for the Saints, neither may
we discredit GODS truth to salve their credit with officious lies; the Legends
of Saints, and the Lives of Popes are too often guilty in this kind. Wherefore
let it stand for an vnchallengable truth, Cribratus est Petrus, Peter (as
CHRIST foretold) was winnowed, and found, though not to be Chafe, yet not to
be without it; He that walked on the Sea while it was calm, and when the
storm arose began to sink, set forth valiantly with CHRIST, but when he was
put to try his manhood, Petrus non erat Petrus, he could not endure the winds
and the waves that beat upon him, the stone mouldred into sand.

But enough of St Peter's denial; In him I told you we were to see our selves;
which that we may the better do, I will observe unto you three kinds of
denyers; The first are those that profess themselves to be worse then they
are; such were the Libellatici, that signed their denial with their own hand,
the Traditores, that with their own hand, in token that they did deny,
delivered up the Scriptures, and the Thurificantes, that redeemed their lives
by sacrifising to Idols; with whom we may range many of our Trauellors, who
being sound in judgment, provide for their security by conforming themselves
to such Religion as they find current in the places where they come,

A second kind of denyers are those which are worse then they profess
themselves to be, of whom the Apostle speaks, they have a show of godliness,
but deny the power thereof; I will give you a taste of them; How many be there
that hold the Articles of CHRIST'S Incarnation and Passion, whose faith, if you
do measure by their lives, you cannot believe that they do believe? For did
they hold CHRIST'S to be their Savior, and his death the ransom of their
sin, would they so much profane these sacred Mysteries, as with the mention
of them to obligege themselves not only when they talk idly, but when they
ungodly auerre, or congratulate their ribaldry, and their villainy, then which
impiety there is nothing more common? We hold that we have Communion with
CHRIST, that we are Members of his Body, and Temples of his Spirit, but how
many do indeed deny that which they would seem to hold? For did they not,
could they endure to make the Members of CHRIST, the Members of an Harlot? And
turn the Temple of his Spirit into a very Stew? Yet so do all impure and
unchaste livers, though they thus far profess that they know CHRIST, yet do
they deny him in their works. If every man would go to shrift to his own
Conscience, and make his Catechism the rule of his Confession, I doubt not but
his heart would often smite him at his own Bar; by his own Verdict he would
be found a manifold denyer.

There is a third kind of denyers that neither profess themselves good,
neither have any goodness in them; this was wont to be a disease of vagrant
and base persons, but now many descended of good parentage, and whose breeding
has been of the best sort, are grown sick thereof, they are called, yea, and
they glory to be known by the fearful Names of Roaring Boys, and the Damned
Crew: The Land groaneth under their Atheism, for the repressing whereof, an
Inquisition were merciful Justice, they suck out the heart blood of all
Religion, and make Sacraments, and sacred things the familiar subject of their
hellish rec^eations. Amongst other abuses, it were to be wished that the State
would take this crying one into most serious consideration; For it is to be
feared that our indulgence toward such incarnate Fiends does provoke, and will
pluck down GODS heavy vengeance upon the whole State.

I told you that in St Peter we might behold our selves, behold what we are,
and I think, by this time you see that many of us are much worse then St Peter
was; for of the three kind of denyers (whereof there are too many in the world)
we find St Peter in the first, and the first, if they be compared, does plainly
appear to be the least; Therefore we may well acknowledge our selves to be
worse, though we cannot deny that he was bad.

He was bad, it is plain in his Fall, which as I have showed you was a sore
fall; Sore, if there were nothing more in it then the denial of CHRIST, but
there was more; the Text does aggrauate the Fall two ways; First, in that it
was taken so soon, Before the cock crew, that is, not many hours after he
was forewarned, and fore-armed. Forewarned, for CHRIST told him what would
befall him, that his performance would come short of his promise; that he would
be so far from dying for CHRIST, that he would flatly deny him. Neither did
he only so fore-warne him, but fore-arme him also, he gave him Viaticum
militiae spiritualis, the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, which being the
Monuments of CHRIST'S Passion, are the best hearthings against the Cross.
Secondly, he had CHRIST'S consolatorie speech, Be of good comfort, I have
overcome the world. Lastly, he saw his exemplarie patience, the Captain
taught the Soldier how he should be resolute in this spiritual war. But
notwithstanding all these, behold Peter denied CHRIST, and denied him very
quickly, more quickly then he should have done if he had neither been
forewarned, nor forearmed.

You have not heard all this first aggrauation; For St Peter was not put upon
the Rack, neither was he so much as questioned by a Magistrate, they were but
Scrui, Ancillae, certain drudges or base persons that did question him, and
these extnguisht all the vigor and courage that before appeared in him. This
was quickly indeed, he fell very quickly, that upon so small a temptation, and
having so good provision did deny CHRIST.

What shall we say to it? Surely man is a mutable Creature; as he was made of
Nothing, so would he turn to Nothing again; neither do we have so fast to
Nothing natural, as we do to Nothing moral; we sooner cease to be good, then
we cease to be. This defection began in Adam, of whom the Psalmist, Man being
in honor had no understanding, Non pernoctauit, he did not continue so much as
a night, but became like the beasts that perish. Yea, he became Radix
Apostatica (as Saint Austin calls him) a Root of that backsliding which
cleaves to all his posterity. Take an example or two. We read, Genesis 4. of the
separation of the children of GOD from the daughters of men; in the next story
that follows is their confusion. Cap. 20.
In Exodus GOD sorbids the making of Images, and presently after we find that
the Israelites made the Golden-Calfe: Ps. 7^.
David has made a whole Psalm of this inconstancy of Israel. And we Ilanders
are too like Israel herein; for how quickly do we shift the fashion, of our
clothes, of our diet, of our manners, Cap. 6.
and of our Religion also, All our goodness is but like a morning cloud (as
Hosea speaks) and as an early dew does it pass away, in this we are all too
like St Peter, that we quickly fail.

St Peter did not only fall quickly, but he fell often also, Before the cock
crew he denied thrice, this is the second aggrauation of his Fall. Bis ad
cundem, is a Proverb teaching that he deserves little pity that stumbleth
twice at the same stone, St Peter stumbled oftener, he added a third unto two
former falls. And verily so it is; he that sins once, if he be left unto
himself, will sin again and again, yea, of himself he will never leave
sinning. There are two reasons of it; the first is Iudicium Dei, a just
judgment of GOD is it that he that once yealdeth to sin, should always bend
toward that whereunto he yealded, and become prone to do what he has done
amiss.

The second is Veneficium peccati, the^e is a kind of sorcerie in sin, which
causes that he that has once tasted it, will retain such a smacke, that he
will desire to taste it again; the proof is daily to be seen in those that
are inordinate livers, in whom to days sin does but work a longing to sin
again to morrow. Yea, not only to sin, but to sin worse and worse; St Peter
did not only deny CHRIST, but his second denial was worse then his first, and
the third worse then his second. Sin is said to be the sting of death; Now
you know that a sting does enter by a sharp point, and makes but a little
hole at first, but the farther it goes in, it cutteth the larger wounds: Even
so sin, the oftener it is repeated, the more is a man corrupted. And no
marvel; for the Principles of Conscience will grow more stupid, and he that
sins a second time, will be more senseless of that which he does, then he
was at first; he that blushed at first, will by little and little grow impudent,
and in steed of bewayling, will fall to defending of his sault.

Yea, and as the Principles of Conscience grow more senseless, so does
Concupiscence grow more lawless, and he that at first had but a squemish
appetite, will by little and little learn to sin with greediness.
Especially if he be in passion, as St Peter was, for that betrayeth all the
succor which reason would offer, if man through hardness of heart be not
grown unreasonable.

There is one thing more which the Fathers handling St Peter's fall remember,
and that is the Cause why so worthy a man as St Peter was, took so grievous a
Fall; they observe in him first Confidence, and secondly Negligence; Confidence
in himself; he thought himself to be a iollier man then indeed he was, and
thought he could do much more then indded he was able to do: We cannot be
bold of our strength in civil matters, whereunto is required only the
general assistance of GOD, so St James tells us; Go to all ye that say to day
and to morrow we will go to such a place, or such a place, and buy and sell,
etc. whereas you should say, if GOD will, if we live, etc. Much less in
moral, or spiritual things, which are not performed without a special grace.
Captus amore de virtum suarum otentia non cogitauit. Aug. de Gl^^. Dei, l. 14.
c. 19.
But St Peter was so far carried away with the zeal of his love, that he
cast not up his accounts, neither did he inquire into his abilities, but
thought he was able to do as much as he would; such presumption of his own
strength was GOD pleased to check with the permission of his fall. And we do
commonly stumble soonest, when we grow ouer-weening of our own selves, and
mind more our perfection, then our imperfection.

A second reason of his fall was St Peter's Negligence in seeking unto GOD,
which commonly follows upon Confidence in our selves; CHRIST bid him with the
rest watch and pray lest be entered into temptation, and withal gave him a
reason, which was a secret reproof of his Confidence, the Spirit is willing,
but the Flesh is weak; but St Peter did as little follow the counsel, as he
did heed the reason, For he grew presently drowsy headed, and drowsy hearted,
in steed of watching he fell a sleeping, and his devotion slumbred as well as
his eyes; And what wonder if he took a fall, that for want of providence might
so easily be surprised? The best way of standing out in temptation, is out of
our distrust in our selves, to commend our selves to the help of GOD.

I conclude this point with this religious Caution, haec nos protulimus non
iustos culpando, etc. I would not have any man mistake, or think that I have
amplyfied St Peter's fall out of any purpose to dishonor the blessed memory of
that glorious Light of the CHVRCH; the Holy Ghost related it, and I have
insisted on this Text for a better end, First, Vt consideremus, that we might
take notice of the frailty that cle^ueth to our sinful nature, from which the
best are not always, nor altogether exempted. Secondly, Vt horreamus, that we
may tremble wh^e we see how preualent temptations are when GOD is pleased to
leave a good man unto himself. These be the uses that we should make of such
examples, and suppose that other men's cases may likewise be our own; we may
fall, as they have done.

As we may fall, so we should rise again; St Peter did, and he is therein
proposed as an example unto us, you shall find it in the second part of my
Text. I now come on unto it. There are two carnal Affections that are
hinderers of our constancy in the Christian Faith, Love and Fear both of the
World; but of these two the forwardest to fall, and feeblest to rise is Love;
Fear renounceth not so far, and it leaves more hope of amendment; And why?
The love of the world quenches the Faith that is in the heart, but the fear
of the world only stays us from confessing it with our mouths; so that the
love makes us sin willingly, but fear unwillingly; yea, love makes us
inwardly to prize the world above CHRIST, but fear makes us only to deny
CHRIST, that we may escape the malice of the world. Whereupon it comes to
pass that of the three kinds of denyers of CHRIST, which I described before,
though all may recover, yet they that fall through the love of the world,
recover more hardly, and they recover more easily that fall only out of the
fear thereof. And such was S. Peter's casu; I pray GOD that ours never be
worse; it will be likely that as he, so we also will not so fall, but that we
will rise again. But let us behold his Rising, behold the means, and behold
their effects.

The means were two, whereof the first was outward, a timely sign; The sign
was the crowing of a cock, an ordinary thing, but by our Savior used to an
extraordinary end. It is familiar with GOD so to deal; I will instance only
in the Sacraments; Water a common Element, yet designed to be a Bath of
Regeneration; Bread and wine, our daily food, yet consecrated to make us
partakers of the Body and Blood of CHRIST; to show his power, GOD does so
honor the meanest of his Creatures, and for their use teaches us to give them
their due regards.

But I must not forget that there is some Analogy to be observed in the
Creature when it is called to serve the power of the Creator. CHRIST here
makes use of the crowing of a cock, but see how fitly it serves his turn.
The cock crowing is, as it were, the harbinger of the Sun, it gives warning
unto men that the Sun is repairing unto their Horizon, and ready to dispell
the darkness of the night by shedding forth his beams upon the face of the
Earth. Now CHRIST is the Sun of Righteousness, and whither he comes,
thither comes light, spiritual light; he was coming to S. Peter after the
midnight as it were of his fall; and of this he gave notice to S. Peter by the
crowing of a cock.

But what is this to us? I will not insist upon signs in general, by which
GOD is pleased familiarly to put us in mind of our duty, or let us see the
state wherein we stand; I will keep my self to the AlI gorie which the
Fathers make of this sign. They tell us that GOD has granted to enerie member
of his Church two crowing cocks by which he does awaken him when he falls
into a spiritual sleep; and they are Concionator, and Conscientia, the
Preacher outwardly, and the Conscience inwardly do or should serve for moral
crowing cocks. Nathan was such a cock unto David. Jonah unto Nineueh, S.
Peter to the Jews that crucified CHRIST, when they called them to repent, and
return unto GOD. And Christian people ought also to esteem their Preachers
such, they must esteem them as crowing cocks, whose vovce sounds nothing but
this, Ephesians. 4.
Surge qui dormis, Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, and JESUS
CHRIST shall give thee light; Romans 13
they tell us that our night is past, and our day is come, therefore we must
cast away all works of darkness, and put upon us the Armor of light.

Besides this outward crowing cock, every man has another that croweth
within him, that is his Conscience, it is said to be a thousand witnesses, and
the Son of Syrach does tell us, that from it we shall learn more then from
seven watchmen that are set on a Tower; And verily many a man would sleep unto
death, were he not often rowsed by this Cock. Wherefore though CHRIST took
extraordinary care of St Peter, we may not think that he does neglect us,
that has provided that which outwardly and inwardly does awaken and rouse us;
he has not left us destitute of crowing cocks.

But I told you the Cock did not only crow, but crowed timely, it was a
timely sign that CHRIST gave to St Peter, immediately even while he was
speaking did the cock crow. Peter was denying him, forswearing him, cursing,
and in the very heat of his sinning the Cock crew. We can have no greater
proof, that the mercy of GOD is free, then when we see a man reclaymed, even
then when he is most transported with his unruly affection. And GOD has
magnified his mercy thus more then once, it was St Paul's case also, he was
breathing out threats, and enraged to make havoc of the Church, when a light
from Heaven shone about him, and by a merciful violence brought him to bethink
himself. And happily, if every one of us observe the course of his life, he may
remember that some good Sermon working some religious inward motives, has made
him step back, while he was stepping rashly into the pitfall of the Devil.
Assuredly when we are once going, there would be no staying, if we were not by
so provident a hand, and by so gracious violence, seasonably held back.
Wherefore we must acknowledge it as a special benefit of GODS mercy, that he
then comes in with his help when we are past hope.

Theophylact goes one step farther O bonitatem! Etiam cum ligaretur, etiam cum
negaretur, non neglexit discipuli salutem; How wonderful is the goodness of
CHRIST? When his enemies were binding him, he took care to loose St Peter out
of the snare of the Devil; yea, while S. Peter was denying him, ashamed of his
bands, CHRIST was not ashamed of S. Peter, but recovered him out of the jaws
of the Lion, as one of his dear Sheep; A great improuement of CHRIST'S
compassionate bowels, and encouragement unto all, that have they been never so
enormous sinners, CHRIST will be to them, as he showed himself to S. Peter a
most merciful Savior.

You have heard the outward Means, I hasten now unto the inward. The inward
Means are CHRIST'S help, he turned and looked, that which he prayed for in
this Chapter, that Peter's faith should not fail, he performed now. It is
disputed, whether these Acts were corporal, and the judgment of Divines are
different; but all agree that they were spiritual also, if it be granted that
they were corporal. S. Austin argues it from the Title that is here given
unto CHRIST, which is, The Lord; CHRIST was now at the Bar, in the eye of
flesh and blood a poor prisoner, yet does the Holy Ghost honor him with the
name Lord, and elsewhere calls him that was crucified, The Lord of Glory,
The Lord of Life; that present condition of his manhood did not derogate ought
from the glory of his Godhead, that wrought answerable to its power, when
CHRIST seemed to be altogether in the power of others; it wrought upon the
soul and conscience of S. Peter, and did there press him being so far gone
with, Petre vbi es? bethink thy self, O Peter, what is become of thee, and
what is done by thee.

But let us take these Works a little a sunder, Christ turned unto Peter; then
was CHRIST before turned from him; And indeed so he was; propter arrogantiam,
says S. Basil, by reason of his presumption who had vaunted that though all
men were offended, yet would not he be offended. When children begin to go,
they use to be so well conceited of the strength of their legs, that they need
not any help of their Nurse; to let them see their folly, the Nurse will leave
them to themselves, that so smarting by a fall, they may the better be brought
to find what need they have of their Nurse. The best of us are but Babes in
grace, yet do we think that we can stand of our selves, yea and run the ways
of GOD also; GOD does refute us by our own experience, and by this Mistress of
fools makes us better known to our selves. But though he leave us for a
time, yet does he not forsake us for ever, no more then a Nurse does the
weakling child; she makes use of one fall to keep the child from many, and
GOD does make use of our sinning to make us see how prone we are to sin. And
this is that which is meant by Christ's turning, his turning to us is nothing
else but his renewing of grace in us, Ps. ^5. Ier. 31.
it is a quickening Conversion, such a turning as works repentance.

As Christ turned, Leo de Passione Sermon. 9.
so he looked; that was spiritual, and so this, he not only looked on, but
into S. Peter, and it was an operative look. Before I told you that the
crowing of the Cock did foretell the approaching of the Sun; Now the look
of the corporal Sun when it shines upon the Earth, does carry with it a
quickening influence; it puts life into the Earth, and all things are the
better for the look thereof. The same must you conceive of the Sun of
Righteousness, his look, gracious look, is such, as that it infuseth grace
into the soul, and transformeth the person on whom he looks. You will easily
acknowledge this truth, if you look to the Effects. I come then to them.

The Means were two, and so are the Effects that proceed from them; each
Means produces its Effect, for CHRIST does not use his Means in vain. The
cock did crow, and presently Petr remembered the words which JESUS spoke; Plato
in Cr^t.
this was the Effect of the first Means. Our memory is a good Storehouse, but
no good Steward; it lays up much, but of it self dispendeth nothing; it
needs some help to make use of her store; the speculatiue memory does; but
the practicke much more. How many be there whose memories are richly stored
with excellent rules of life, whereof in their life they make no use? their
memory does not offer them when they have occasion to be doing: as if they had
never known Commandments or Creed, they live like Infidels, and like sons
of Belial. Wherefore as the eye of the body needs the light of the Sun to
raise and convey the visible species unto it: Even so does the eye of our
understanding need the light of the Sun of Righteousness to stir up, and
present unto it the Principles of Grace, whereof it has need in the ordering
of our life: without this actual grace our memory will never make use of her
habitual.

But there is a double use of memory, the one is Praeueniens peccatum, the
other is Subueniens peccato; The best use of memory were to suggest good rules
by which we might avoid sin, and do nothing which is displeasing unto GOD.
But this memory does often fail us, and it is too common a fault to set our
selves on work before ever we think whether the work be such as is fit for
us to do; seldom does our memory serve us to prevent sin; and wretched
were our case, if we had not memoriam subuenientem, a memory that does call us
to an account, and after-thoughts to reueiw our actions; if the Cock did not
crow after we are down, and we were not thereby put in mind of our fall. But,
GOD be thanked, we have the benefit of this after-memorie; and it is the first
step of our rising again. It was to St Peter, he did not mind CHRIST'S warning
to keep him up, but he called it to mind when he was down; then did he
remember that he had been forewarned, and gave glory unto CHRIST'S truth; he
acknowledged that the event had proved him a true Propher. You are bound to the
Ministers, not only for their informing, but for their reforming pains also;
not only for teaching you what you should do, but also for laying to your
consciences what you do amiss; we often tell you of your frailty, and that
you are by nature prone unto sin, but you hear us with a deaf care, even as
deaf an ear, as St Peter heard CHRIST; I would CHRIST would say unto our
memories Ephata, as he did to St Peter's; and as he, so we (after we are down)
would remember our selves, and confess that we are not challenged in vain;
that we our selves are monuments of humane frailty; and they that tell us,
when we are in the height of our self conceit, that we will prove such, do
not prophecy what our life does not justify. If we be so ingenuous, such a
Remembrance will set us forward to perform the acts that are required in
repentance; which are the Effects of the second Means.

The second Means are CHRIST turned and looked; and what followed thereupon?
Surely Peter presently became another man; He had been very bold, but now he
began to find his own weakness, Praesumens Petrus ignorauit se, negando
didicit se cognoscere; while Peter thought well of himself, he was a very
stranger to himself; but he grew better acquainted with himself after he had
denied CHRIST; in witness whereof he went out; he would no longer conflict
with that by which he had been foiled. Occasions of evil are shrewd stumbling
blocks; he that will not fall must be afraid to come nigh them; In this case
Basils rule is true, Nihil formidolosius quam nihil formidare, none are in more
fearful case, then they that are foole-hardy; Et in securitate periclitatur
fides, he wrackes his faith, that is bold, when he may decline, to put it in
danger; that will touch pitch, and think he cannot be defiled; carry fire in
his bosom, and think he cannot be burnt; Peter came into the High Priests
house, only out of the love of CHRIST, and yet he fell; And shall we be able
to stand, that out of a love of the World, thrust our selves into the
temptations thereof? I would all that dote upon the baits of sin were as
timorous, as St Peter was, and would not so rashly hazard themselves; men would
not so often be overtaken with the vanities of this life, they would not so
often relapse into sin.

Peter went out, not only out of fear of that which might be done, but also
out of hatred of that which he had done; he cannot be said truly to repent that
continues on his enter-medling with that which caused his sin whereof he
does repent; Godly sorrow for what we do amiss, is joined with a perfect
hatred of that which did seduce us; otherwise we should wash our selves that we
may be defiled again; and that we might surfeit again, ease our stomaches of
that which did surcharge them; and so (as it is in the Proverb) return like
Dogs to our vomit, and like washed Swine to our wallowing again in the mire.
Peter did not so, he went out, in detestation of his sin, he abandoned the
place that gave occasion thereof.

Neither did he only go out, but he hastened out; so some interpret the word
in St Mark. And indeed fear and hatred add wings unto our feet, and will
turn our going into flying; and he that is slow paced, does betray his
good will toward sin; and that he does neither hate or fear it as he ought.
And verily such Snailes are all unwilling Penitents, they think there is no
reason why they should make speed, yea, why they should stirie at all; most are
like unto Lot's sonnes-in-law, who when they were wished to be gone, because GOD
would destroy Sodom, thought that Lot did mock them. And we are thought
oftentimes to be but merrie-men when we tell you that GODS Judgment hangs over
you, and therefore it is high time for you to forsake your sins.

They that are not so bad as Lot's sonnes-in-law, yet will be as unconstant as
Lot's wife, who went out indeed, but yet looked back to Sodom: so do they
give over their sins, but as those that are sorry for that they have parted
company with them: You have an excellent proof hereof in the 18 Chapter of
the Revelations, where the destruction of spiritual Babylon is related: The
Kings that had committed fornication with her; the Merchants that had bought of
her commodities; the Mariners that had made long voyages to her; all went out;
but being out they looked on, not rejoicing, as the Saints there do, but
lamenting, and mourning, and crying out, Alas, alas for that great City. Where
sin is, there is Babel; For what is Babel, but confusion? And what does more
confound then sin? And yet do we no more willingly part from sin, then
those persons did from Babel.

There is one cause more of Saint Peter's going out, and that was, that he might
have more liberty to perform the second Act of Repentance, and weep
bitterly. Theophylact does interpret the word in Saint Mark, Obuelauit se, he
covered his head. And indeed so were malefactors used in the Eastern
Countries; you read it in the story of Haman, and happily so much is meant in
this Chapter, where our Saviors face is said to have been covered. In the
West-Countrey they had also the like custom, as appears by that clause in the
capital Sentence, Caput obnubito, veil his head; so that Saint Peter did
judge himself by that Ceremony to be a son of death, and as a son of
death did he bewail himself.

Add hereunto, that solitariness does argue sincerity in our Repentance; for
Ille dolet vere, qui sine test dolet; he cannot be thought to dissemble, that
calls no witnesses of his grief, but only GOD, and his holy Angels.

Finally, He that is solitary will mourn not only more sincerely, but more
freely also; he that is alone has nothing to restrain him, but, if ever, he
will then pour forth his soul before GOD, grouell in dust and ashes, bathe
himself in his own tears, and with sighs and groans that cannot be
expressed, often interrupt his penitential prayers; In a word, he will in the
best fashion perform the last Act which here we read of in St Peter's
Repentance, he will weep bitterly.

Percussit Petram and effluxerunt aquae; Peter's heart in the heat of his
denying seemed to be as hard as a rock, but when CHRIST with his Spirit touched
Peter's heart, it melted into tears, as the rock did into waters when Moses
struck it with the rod of GOD.

But in this Act of weeping bitterly we must observe that the bitterness was
in the soul, the tears came from the body. No doubt but Peter's heart was
ouer-whelmed with sorrow while he was in the High Priests Palace; and you know
that Strangulat inclusue dolor atque exaestuat intus, and it cannot be eased,
except the heart be unburdened by tears. But we must take heed that we do not
sever the soul from the body when we bewail our sins; yea, the heart must
begin to the eyes, the bitterness of the heart, must go before the weeping of
the eyes; otherwise we know that of tears the Poet has long since noted, Hae
simulare docentur; hae quoque habent arts; many shed Crocodile tears, and
hypocritical, which cannot be reckoned amongst true Penitents. Oftentimes the
body cannot weep, though we would never so feign; the reason may be in the
temper thereof; but if there be a rational sorrow in the heart, GOD accepts
the will instead of the act, and will impute tears unto us, though we never
shed them.

This act of weeping bitterly is no indifferent thing, but a provident rather;
for weep and sorrow we must for sin, either here, or hereafter; Luke 1^.
Math. 33.
and that we may not weep hereafter, either in Judgment when we shall be
rejected, or in Hell when we shall be tormented, we must weep here, and let
the bitterness of sorrow succeed in the place of the sweet fruit of sin.

The last note therefore that I will give upon this Act is the Effect hereof;
For there are comfortable and uncomfortable Tears; Esau did weep when he had
sold his Birthright, but he found no place for repentance though he sought it
with tears; but St Peter's had a happier issue, Aust. Cons. l. 3.
Filius tantarum lachrymarum perire not potuit, he that wept so bitterly, did
not fail to speed of grace; his tears did wash away his sins. The Fathers
compare them to a Baptism, not meaning that they restore our adoption again,
but only that they release the suspension thereof; neither mean they to
prejudice the work of faith which must go before; but to show what GOD
moreover expects of us, and what he accepts in virtue of our faith. And verily,
the CHVRCH has ever held that the less excuse we have for our sin after
Baptism, the more humiliation is expected from us; and upon our humiliation,
In Ps. ^1
if we be faithful, we may promise our selves restitution into the favor of
GOD. Thy sins (says St Chrysostom) are written in a Book, and thy tears
are as a sponge; weep, and thy sins will be blotted out, and there will no
record Remain extant against thee. Were it not for this relief, the Nouatians
opinion would hold current, and there would be few that could have hope that
after their fall they should rise again.

The last point of this Text remains, which is the correspondencie between
the rising and the fall, which I told you consists in three points.

First, Peter was soon down, and soon up; the same night that he was
wounded, he was healed; and cured the same night that he fell sick: many
perish through their procrastination, and their case becomes desperate before
they enter into consideration thereof; no sooner did the cock crow, CHRIST
turn and look, but Peter came to himself. But what do we do? What use do
we make of the time given us to repent? How little does adversity,
prosperity, words, stripes prevail with us? We are so far from repenting
quickly, that we do not repent at leisure. And what is the reason? We do not
make use of good means whilst GOD does grant them us; The Cock did crow, and
Peter did remember; CHRIST turned, and looked, Peter went out and wept bitterly;
he did not receive the grace of GOD in vain. It were to be wished that we did
herein resemble him, and not frustrate either the outward or the inward Means.
Esaias 47.
But the Minister may complain, I have labored in vain; I have spent my
strength in vain; Yea GOD himself may complain, Romans 10.
All the day long have I stretched forth my hand unto an unbelieving and gain
saying Nation.

Or if we are not so graceless as to neglect the two former correspondencies;
certainly it is a hard thing to find the man that is like to St Peter in the
third, and proportioneth his Repentance to his Offense. Great faults should not
be a little sorrowed for, but we should afflict our souls for sin, as much
as we have solaced them therewith. Certainly St Peter did so. Yea Clemens
Romanus observes that St Peter every night about the crowing of the Cock did
rise and pray with tears until the morning. If he did lament so incessantly,
in whom inward piety did not fail, but only the outward constancy was
shaken; what should we do that sin so willingly, and with so high a hand? We
should better observe, and observe more days of Humiliation then most of us
do. Bitter tears, if ever, are now most seasonable; not only the compunction
for our own sins, but compassion also toward the distracted Churches
woeful calamity does importune us for them. We make grievous lamentation for
a friend, if his soul be departed from his body; but who is much troubled for
himself when GOD by sin is driven from his soul? If but a neighbors House,
or some small Village be laid wast by casualtie of fire, as many as hear of
it, are moved with compassion, and readily afford some succor; But how many
Towns, yea Countries, Members of the Orthodoxe Church are exhausted, and made
desolate by famine, sickness, the attendants upon the blood-thirstinesse of
the Sword, and there are few Samaritans that have any Bowels? All like the
Priest and the Leuite pass by, yea, and pass over these troubles, as if they
did nothing concern them; but only to administer Table-talke, or fill up the
wast of their idle times. I will only remember you of GODS censure of such
stupiditie; And I pray GOD it may make us all more sensible of our own, and of
the Churches case. In the day of the Jews calamity did the Lord God of Hosts
call to weeping, and to mourning, to baldness, and to girding with Sackcloth,
and behold joy and gladness; slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep; eating flesh,
and drinking wine; Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall dye; So said
those senseless wretches: But it was renealed in mine ears (says the Prophet
Esaias) by the Lord of Hosts; Esaias 22.
surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you, till you dye; says the
Lord God of Hosts. He said it to them; and in them to us; happy are we if
other men's harms make us beware.

But I conclude. This Text is an example, and an example is the easiest
doctrine for apprehension, and most powerful in operation; so that if we do
not learn it, there is something amiss in our head; and there is something
amiss in our heart, if we be not the better for it.

Wherefore let us all turn to him, and humbly beseech him, that we may be made
mindful of our frailty, and set in a good course of our penitencie, that we
may be as apt to rise, as we are to fall, and judge our selves as severely, as
we gracelesly offend our God: So may God accept our tears, cleanse our souls,
and make us all as he did repenting Peter, his faithful servants in this
world, and glorious Saints in the world to come. A SERMON PREACHED AT GREENWICH.
MATTHEW 3. VERSE 16, 17. 16 And Jesus when he was baptized went up straight
way out of the water, and lo the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the
Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him.

17 And lo, a voice from Heaven, saying; This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased.


IN this days Gospel our Savior CHRIST taught Nicodemus, Ioh. 3.
that Except a man be borne again, or from above, he cannot see, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and St. John the Apostle teaches how a man
may know whether he be so borne again, or no. He that believes that Jesus is
(...), the Christ or Anointed of the Lord, is borne of God. Now a fairer proof
of that Article, or a more sufficient warrant for our says therein, the whole
Bible does not yield, then that which was delivered at the Baptism of CHRIST,
and is contained in those words that now I have read unto you. For here you
must, (my Text does will you so) behold GOD the FATHER anointing Jesus of
Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power, as St. Peter speaks Acts 10.

And see with all how well the Text fitteth the time; for this is Trinity
Sunday, and what is the Text but a report of the clear, the comfortable
presence and concurrence of the blessed Trinity in Sacring Jesus to be the
Christ. Here is Pater in voce, Filius in carne, Spiritus Sanctus in columba;
the Son in our nature receives the Unction, the Holy Ghost in the shape of a
Dove becomes the Unction, and the Father in a voice from Heaven bears
witness to the grace that flows from that Unction. In this great work every
Person bears his part.

But more distinctly in this Sacring of Jesus we may learn from my Text,
First, What were the circumstances: Secondly, What was the substance of it. The
circumstances were two; First, the Time; when Jesus was baptized; Secondly, the
Place, without the water, or upon the Rivers side, for Jesus came straight way
out of the water, and lo, etc.

In the substance we shall see, first Quis, who it was that was Sacred, it was
even the same Person that was baptized, the Son of GOD in the nature of man,
it was Jesus. Secondly, Quo modo, how this Sacring was performed, it was
performed Signo visibili, and verbo audibili, with a visible sign, and an
audible word.

The Sign comes first in the Text, we are told what it was, and what it
meant; It was the shape of a Dove; and by it was meant the Spirit of God.

But touching this Sign, we learn here moreover Vnde and Quo: Whence it
came, where it pitched; whence; the Heavens were opened unto him, and the Spirit
of God descended; where it pitched; the Spirit that descended lighted on Jesus.

You see what was the Visible sign. A visible sign of it self is but a dumb
show, it may amaze, it cannot instruct, therefore it must be illustrated; and
it is here illustrated, by an audible word, the word is called Vox de Caelo, a
voice from Heaven, and it was fit it should be so; for from whence came the
vision, from thence was the Revelation for to come; the vision was from Heaven,
therefore the Revelation thereof also.

But this is not all that we learn here concerning the word, go on and you
shall find Cuius and de quo, who it is that utters it, and of whom.

He that utters it is not expressed but fairly implied in Filius meus, my
Son; Jesus could not be the Son but of GOD the Father, therefore is it GOD
the FATHER that speaks the word.

And the word that he speaks concerns Jesus, it teaches us first What he
is to God the Father, and secondly, What he does for us.

He is near because the Son, and dear because his beloved Son; add to
both the Article (...) that Son, that beloved Son, and then he will prove
near and dear indeed.

From him that is so great with God, we may not exspect small matters, that
which he does, is answerable to that which he is; he does that which never
any other person could do, he propitiateth GODS wrath, and by him we find
grace in the eyes of GOD; These blessings of JESUS are contained in the last
words. In whom I am well pleased.

There is one Point more. All this commendations that is given unto JESUS
refers to (...), This, this person that is in the midst of you, that
makes so little show, and is so little regarded, is he whom I so esteem, and
upon whom depends your sovereign good; I will not, you may not for his
Humility defraud him of his Glory.

You have seen a glimpse of the Sacring of Christ, though I should not, yet
the Text would require you to entertain it with your best regard; for the
visible sign, the audible word, both are prefaced with a particle of
attention. Lo; lo the Heavens were opened, Lo a voice from Heaven; the word
does summon your eyes, your ears, to behold, to attend these holy Mysteries.
And I pray GOD so to sanctify your eyes and your ears, that while I take a
sunder this Text, and show it you more fully in the parts, the blessed Trinity
may vouchsafe by them to instill into you some fructifying drops of our blessed
Saviors heavenly Unction.

Amongst the particulars where-into I resolved the Text, the first was the
circumstance of Time when CHRIST was baptized; CHRIST was baptized before he
was Sacred, he was received into the new Covenant by Baptism, before he
became a dispenser thereof. And the Church never thought it fit to swerve from
so good a Pattern, and confer Holy Orders upon any that was not first
incorporated into the Church: Yea, it has always gone for a grounded truth,
that it is Baptism that makes a man capable of other Holy rites, and that
being unbaptized he is incapable of them.

Secondly, the circumstance of Time, does notify the kind of grace that was
figured in the descension of the Dove, he descended not in, but after the Act
of Baptism. Had he descended in the Act, it might have been thought that
only Gratia gratum faciens, the grace of regeneration or sanctification, had
been represented by the Dove, but descending after, some farther kind of grace
is more over intimated. What that grace was let us breifely inquire.

Some fetch hence the Original of Confirmation, and suppose that Christ the
Head confirmed himself here, unto his Body the Church; So that as in the
Church Baptizati recipient spiritum sanctum, they that are first baptized are
after confirmed: so CHRIST would be confirmed after he was baptized. There is
no doubt but the Right of confirmation is Apostolical, notwithstanding the
frivolous exceptions that (by some) are taken to it, and it may pass inter pie
credibilia that CHRIST did vouchsafe in his own person to sanctify that, as
he did many other sacred rites of the Church. But yet it may not be denied,
that over and above, here is meant another kind of grace, a grace that is not
common to every member of the Church, as the grace of confirmation is, but
peculiar unto a public Person, such as CHRIST was now called to be. And
therefore I call it Sacring grace; such a kind of grace seems to be intimated
by the circumstance of Time.

The second circumstance is that of Place, the Place was where CHRIST stood
after he came out of the water, that was the bank of Jordan, which St. John
calls Bethabara, the very name does contain a Monument: of the children of
Isreal's first passage there into the land of Canaan; and then the Place is not
without a Mystery, the choice thereof gives us to understand, that the
History of Joshua was performed in Jesus, that the waters of Baptism were
become a passage from earth to Heaven, from the condition of Nature to the
condition of Grace, and that even while we live in this veil of misery, we
are thereby enrolled among the Saints.

Add hereunto that Bethabara was now a place of great concourse; Jerusalem,
Iudaea, all the Regions about Jordan, and all sorts of men resorted thither to
be baptized of John; and it was meet that so great a work, as CHRIST'S
Sacring, should be performed in a great assembly. Yea, all the remarkable
manifestations of our Savior, his Miracles, his Sermons, his Death, etc. are
noted to have been public, they were not (as St. Paul observes to King
Agrippa) done in a corner; the unbelieving Jew, or other that doubts or
disputes of their truth, is by the circumstance of Place convicted to do it
out of affected ignorance. And let this suffice for the circumstance.

I come to the substance of the Sacring, where first we must see who it is
that was sacred. We find, that it was the same Person that was baptized, the
Son of God clothed with the nature of man. Where note that Jesus had two
Abilities, an Active, a Passive, one to give, another to receive the Spirit;
he that was able for to give, was contented (...), according to the divine
dispensation, and humble condition whereunto for our sakes he submitted
himself, to receive the Spirit. And indeed so it behooved him to fulfill all
righteousness, whereof this was a Branch, to show that he was the Truth of
former Types. Cap. 8.
We read in Leuiticus how solemnly Aaron was consecrated, and seeing CHRIST
came to be what Aaron only did signify, the high Priest of God, it behooved
that he also should have an Inauguration, but so much more excellent, by how
much the Truth exceedes the Type, Luke 3.
and the Lora the Servant. This correspondency is made the more probable,
because St. Luke tells us, that when this was done: CHRIST was about thirty
years old, and of that age was the Priest to be when he entered upon his
charge; the Holy Ghost by that Law, Numb. 4.8.
and by this example of CHRIST giving us to understand, That maturitie of age
is a necessary requisite in all that will undertake a sacred function.

Mark withal the regular humility of our Savior, though he were the Lord of
Glory. H^b ^.
No man (says St Paul) takes the honor of Priesthoed upon him, but he that
is called of God, as was Aaron, therefore Jesus glorified not himself, but was
glorified by him that said unto him, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the
order of Melchisedeck; he took not upon him the office of a Mediator, until
he was thereto ordained; checking the sacrilegious pride of those which presume
of their ability, and intrude themselves without Imposition of hands, into
sacred Functions; they cannot be so able, they should not be less humble then
was our Savior CHRIST.

St. Luke adds, that CHRIST was praying when the Holy Ghost descended. As GOD
does promise: so we must desire his gifts; the greatest gifts with the most
earnest desire; CHRIST would herein be exemplary unto us, to testify the
humility that beseemes our nature; and go before us in that which he
commands; he prays for that which he looked for from GOD.

After this holy pattern have all Christian Inaugurations, and Ordinations
been accompanied with public, and devout Prayers. And if CHRIST did not
receive the Holy Ghost from his Father but by praying, how can they but blush
at their unmannerliness, that refuse upon their knees to receive the Sacrament
of the Body and Blood of CHRIST?

Finally, we learn of CHRIST praying, that after Baptism we must not be
secure; for though all sins be forgiven us, yet is not concupiscence wholly
extinguished, neither have we our full measure of grace; we ought therefore to
fall to our prayers, and so prepare our selves to receive the Holy Ghost which
is our needful guide, and strength in our spiritual warfare.

But because I shall resume this second Person again in the end of the Text,
we will pass on, and see in the next place how he was consecrated. He was
consecrated, first in signo visibili, with a visible sign, which was the
likeness of a Dove: De Agone Christiano.
The word likeness is not used (says St. Augustine) ad excludenaam veritatem
Columbae, to deny, that that which appeared was a true Dove but ad Ostendendum
quod spiritus n^n apparuit in specie substantiae, to show that the Essence of
the Spirit is a sarre different thing from that wherein he did vouchsafe to
manifest himself. It was then a true Dove, and the end for which it was used
shows there is reason we should think it to be so; It was to be signum
analegicum, an apt sign to represent what was signified, and the shape without
the substance of a Dove, could not so well signify the properties of the Holy
Ghost, their correspondency is to the qualities that are observed in a living
Dove.

I am not ignorant that many think otherwise, and that the shape only was
sufficient. Some advocates of Rome, make use of this shape without substance to
confirm their Transubstantiation, and the subsistence of accidents without the
subject Bread and Wine: But I leave them to feed upon their fancies, and will
not contend about that which is no Article of Faith, only this I would have
observed, John 1.
that (...) in the Text does not always note a resemblance, but some times a
truth, and seeing the phrase will bear both opinions, as well that which holds
that it was only the shape of a Dove, as that which defines it was a true
Dove, I choose rather the latter, as most agreeable to the intent of the Holy
Ghost, and the difference that I put between the works of GOD, and the works
of the Devil. As GOD is an Omnipotent Creator: so those things which he
exhibits are real; but the Devil affecting to be thought what he is not,
makes show of that which he does not, his works are spectra mere illusions.

Though this were a true Dove, yet was it not assumed into one Person with the
Holy Ghost, as the nature of man was at the Incarnation of CHRIST; St. Austin
gives the reason, Non venit spiritus sanctus liberare Columbas, he came not to
redeem Doves, Ergo non est natus de Columba, therefore was not incarnate by a
Dove; but he came to signify the properties of CHRIST, therefore it was
sufficient that by his Almighty power he created a Dove of nothing, and
thereby gave notice of his presence and residence in our Savior CHRIST; which
Dove as it was made of nothing: so after the service was done, was dissolved
into nothing again. Wherein, amongst other things, appears a difference
between this Dove, and the imposture of Mahomet, and superstition of Rome,
both practiced by a Dove, whereof the later in a Roman Council proou'd but an
Owl.

S. Chrysostom gives another note upon this Dove; In principijs spiritualium
rerum, etc. when GOD first foundeth Religion, he uses sensible visions in
commiseration of them which are not capable of incorporall natures, but his
purpose is that when once such things have made faith unto his truth, we should
continue our faith in his truth, though he do not daily confirm it unto us by
such things. Which the Romanists should observe, who, after so many hundred
years plantation of the Christian says, will still have Miracles a mark of
the true Church.

Finally, we must observe that signs come not Propter se, but Propter aliud,
there is some other thing intended besides that which is presented; so was it
here, the Dove appeared, but the Spirit of God was meant thereby, the Spirit
was the Sacred Oil wherewith our Savior was anointed. The holy Spirit though
in Person but one, yet is he infinite in the variety of operations, and so
may have answerable va^ietie of resemblances, out of which the Scripture makes
choice, upon several occasions, of such as come nearest unto the Argument in
hand. And to this purpose must we refer signs, they serve not only for
illustration but for limitation also, they confine our thoughts which otherwise
would be confused, and fix them upon that which is presently intended.

The grace then of the Holy Ghost here meant, is not indefinite, because
represented in a special sign, the sign of a Dove, this sign draws our
thoughts from plunging themselves into that infinite variety of grace that was
in CHRIST, to contemplate that which bears correspondency to a Dove. In which
contemplation we must keep this rule, to behold, first, Qualis Christus
fuerit, how CHRIST himself was qualified; then, Quales nos esse debeamus, how
we as Christians must be conformable to him.

But let us come to the special grace designed by the Dove. Some observe the
neatness of that bird, Aspicis vt ventant ad candida tecta Columbae, Accipiat
nullas sordida turris aues; and they will have the virtue here intimated to be
Sanctity; and indeed such an high Priest it behooved us to have as was holy,
harmless, separate from sinners, and higher then the Heavens; the Angel at
his birth calls him that holy thing; Daniel the Holy of Holies, his person, his
conversation both were most pure, he was in nothing soild with the filth of
sin. And what the Church must be we learn in our Creed, where it is called
the holy Catholic Church, Holiness beseemes Gods House for ever, and from
this (...) have we the honor even on earth to be called Saints; a Christian
should not be an vneleane person, neither should he delight in filthiness.

Some look upon the sweet nature of the Dove, which is loving, and lovely;
and indeed the name (...) sounds that property, the Dove is so called quasi
(...) exceeding in love.

St. Austin observes this property: Tract. 7. in 1. Epist. Ioh:
De Columba demonstrata est charitas quae venit super Dominum quo nobis
infunderetur; the Dove was the Emblem of charity that was in CHRIST, and from
him streamed into us: And indeed greater charity could not be found in any,
then was in our Savior CHRIST, who gave his life for his friends, yea, for his
Enemies, and he commends no virtue more then charity unto us; he prays that
we may be like to him therein, and tells us that by this shall all men know
we are his Disciples if we love one another; Ioh. 1^. Ioh. 13.
the whole book of Canticles is nothing but a commentary upon this property,
wherein the name of Dove is more then once remembered.

But I will resolve this property of the Dove into two, which will make way
unto some others. The Dove is without Guile, and without Gall, a simple and
harmless bird; which figure two excellent properties of the Holy Ghost,
Sincerity and Mercy, the one a virtue of the Head, the other of the Heart, and
they are opposed unto the two maine properties of the Devil, who is noted to
be sly as a Serpent, and cruel as a Lion. Our Savior CHRIST is especially
recommended unto us in the Scripture as being far from these hellish
qualities; That of the Head, there was no guile found in his mouth; Ioh. 14.
Ioh. 18. Revel. 1.
and no marvel, for he was the Truth, he came into the world to bear witness
of the truth; St. John calls him the faithful and the true witness; the more
blasphemous are they that draw any act, or word of his to patronize or color
their impious Aequiuocations, and mental Reseruations; we should conform our
selves unto CHRIST, be true Nathaniels, without simulation or dissimulation,
Satien. cap. 1. Psalm. 15.
be as good as our word though it be our own hinderance. How far then has
the World degenerated, when Christians to excuse their own fraud, will fasten
fraud on CHRIST?

Yet when I commend plain dealing, I do not condemn discretion, the good of
the Serpent we may have, though not the evil; plain dealing may well stand
with Prudence, and there is an innocent providence; only we must take heed
that our tongues, and our wits be not made snares and pitfalls, but as CHRIST'S
word was not yea and nay, but all the promises of God in him were yea, and
Amen: so must our dealing not be fraudulent but sincere.

As CHRIST was without Guile: so was he without Gall, so far from taking
offense when it was not given, that when it was given, he would not take it;
witness the check which he gave unto his Disciples when they would have had
fire from Heaven to destroy the churlish Samaritans, you know not (says he) of
what spirit you are; Luke 9.
the Son of Man came not to destroy, Isay 42.
but to save men's lives; He would not break a bruised reed, nor quench
smoking flax, yea, so tender were his Bowels that in the midst of his
tortures upon the Cross, Luke 23.
he forgave, he prayed for his crucifying enemies. It is this sweetness of
CHRIST'S nature, that, when the conscience of sin holds back, does encourage
us to come with boldness unto the throne of Grace; the Dove is not so free
from Gall, as our Savior is from reuengfull malice. And what should a
Christian be? hear our Savior CHRIST, Discite a m^ quia mitis sum, Matthew. 12.
Act. 8. Hebr. 13.
we should imitate CHRIST in meekness, we should not be in the gall of
bitterness, like Simon Magus, neither should any ro^te of bitterness spring
up in us, Spiritus non generat accipitres sed columbas, if so be our nature be
cruel, it is sign it was never new molded by the Spirit of grace, Romans 12,
whose property it is not to be overcome of evil, but to overcome evil
with good.

But here also mark, that he who forbids Cruelty, does not forbid Courage,
we may partake the good of the Lion, but not the evil: It was and it is a
gross conceit of Macheuilisme, to think that these properties of the Dove,
to be without Guile and without Gall, have been the baine of Christiandome,
while the Enemies thereof have taken advantage of their simplicity to ensnare
them, and of their pity to devour them: well may imprudent simplicity, and
cowardly pity disadvantage, the prudent, the courageous can never
disadvantage; nay, sincerity in the end ouercometh infidelity, and pity
triumphs over cruelty; none ever dealt more plainly then CHRIST, none was
dealt withal more deceitful; none used more pity, none was used more cruelly.
And what was the issue? he proved the wisdom of his Enemies plain folly,
and their fury turned unto his greater glory. Neither have these properties
proved worse in Christians, it were an easy matter to prove it out of the
Martyrs story, recorded both in the old and the New Testament.

Yea, which makes the opposite vices more odious, never was there any crafty
wit that was not unto himself a snare, nor cruel heart, whose hands did not
give himself the deadliest wounds; the Serpent, the roaring Lion that set
upon CHRIST, what are they but monuments of the evil success of their hellish
qualities? Wherefore, though the world please it self in wiliness and
bloodinesse, let it always be the care and comfort of a Christian, never to
speak what he does not mean, nor to do what he would not be done unto. I
would it were so, but (GOD knows) it is far other wise, even with those
that bear the name of Christians, as if so be they were altogether ignorant
that the Dove is included in the name of a Christian, none are more fraudulent,
none are more cruel, as they are even amongst us that are Orthodox in opinion;
It were too much if these things were only in practice, how intolerable is it
when they are become Doctrinall, and the Devil has so far insinuated
himself into men's heads and hearts, as that a generation should rise up, who
should teach such cases of Conscience, as resolve men artificially to lie, and
meritoriously to shed blood, making men put off not only Christianity, but
even humanity also? The Christian world, especially, the Orthodox part thereof,
is in a desperate Paroxisme by this means, if GOD be not pleased to put to
his helping hand; certainly, if ever, the Devil and Satan (both names
opposite to the Dove) are now let loose, the Serpent, if ever, has now made
way for for the Lion, the bands of humane society were never so cracked, if they
be not quite dissolved; and yet is sociablenesse a special property of the
Dove, but a property grown strange amongst Christians, who by their
degenerating malice, have brought the Church to be a Dove indeed, that is a
bird subject to oppression, (so the Hebrew word signifies) to such oppression,
that a man might well wish for the wings of a Dove to fly away into some
Wilderness, where he might not see these unnatural Barbarismes; or if that
may not be, at least a man has just cause to wish for Gemitum Columbae, the
mourning of a Dove, to bewail the miseries of GODS Church. And indeed the
Spirit figured by the Dove, is he that works in the hearts of Christians
sighs and groans that cannot be expressed: And I pray GOD he may work such
sighs and groans in us, Psalm. 68.
that though the Church now lie amongst the pot sheards and deformed, she may
recover again the wings of a Dove covered with silver, and all her feathers
be as yealow gold.

Though these be profitable observations, which you have heard of the
correspondency of the Holy Spirit to the Dove; yet may I not forget a note
which goes farther, and as (I suppose) is most natural to the Text, Columba
docuit (says St. Austin) Christum baptizaturum in Spiritu sancto, the Dove did
signify that CHRIST would baptize with the Holy Ghost, and that he would
communicate this power to none, he would transfer the ministry to men, but
reserve the efficacy of Baptism to himself, both while he was on earth, and
as he now reigns in Heaven. For certainly the Sacring does note this his
possession and dispensation of the Holy Ghost, it is his Spirit, and he only
gives it, he sanctifies the waters of Baptism unto their sacred use, and by
his Spirit added unto them, does regenerate those that are members of his
Church.

Having thus far opened unto you the visible sign, what it was, and what it
meant; I must now show you Vnde, whence this Dove came, and that we are taught
in these words, the Heavens were opened unto him. Much dispute there is, how
the Heavens were opened; many think it superfluous to have the Dove descend
from an higher Stage then the Air, they hold it not likely the firmament
should be divided to give way unto him; but they little think of GODS power,
and the Majesty that beseems this Sacring. I make no doubt but that as GOD
could: so he did make all creatures do service unto CHRIST; he that made the
Sun to stand to honor Iosuah, and to honor Ezechias, made it go back many
degrees; would he not make those glorious bodies part a sunder to give paslage
to this Sacring Dove? I suppose he would; Especially, seeing all acknowledge
that it was a Dove newly created by the Omnipotent power of GOD, and the Text
says, not that Heaven, but that the Heavens were opened unto him. Yet must we
not transfer the motion of the Dove to the Spirit, who being every where
changes not his place.

But GOD by that motion would give us to understand that the grace of the Holy
Ghost comes down from Heaven, according to that of St. James, every good and
perfect gift comes from above, even from the Father of light, with whom
there is no variableness nor shadow of change, not so much as of place,
himself unchangeable breaths where he will.

Besides, the phrase of opening the Heavens shows us, that only by CHRIST,
Paradise above is opened, and the commerce renewed between Heaven and earth,
and as many as are baptized into CHRIST, are really freed from that curse which
was Symbolically sigured by our shutting out of Paradise below, and the
shutting up thereof, by placing the Cherubims at the entrance with a flaming
branded sword.

Last of all, the Text says, that the Heavens were opened to Christ; but
Chrysostom expounds it well, Illi, sed propter nos, to him, but for us; all
the benefit that CHRIST reaped by his mediation and Inauguration, was but to
be a wellhead from whence Grace should stream into us, he had the honor, we
have the good.

You have heard whence the Dove comes, ^ib 3. Cap. 19. Cap. 11. Cap. 41. Ca^.
16. Numb. 11.
now shall you hear where it pitched, it lighted upon Jesus. Irenie observes
well, this is the fulfilling of sundry Prophesies recorded in Isay, The Spirit
of the Lord shall rest upon him; I will put my Spirit upon him, the Spirit of
the Lord is upon me. But observe that it so came upon him, that it manifested
it self by him; so is the phrase elsewhere declared in the story of Gedeon,
Sampson, Saul, and others, for after this Inauguration, never any man spoke as
CHRIST spoke, and he did those works that never any man did.

But we must not mistake; the Holy Ghost did not now descend upon Jesus as if
he had him not before, he that was conceived by the Holy Ghost could not be
without him, no not for a moment, even as he was the Son of Man. Yea, and of
Grace of Sanctification it is out of all question, that from the moment of his
conception he never increased therein.

Some question there is touching the Grace of Edification, which in the
Schools is called Gratis data; Some hold that he had the fullness thereof also
when he was conceived; Cap. ^.
but the words of St. Luke makes it probable, that though the man hood of
CHRIST were so near linckt unto the wellhead of the Spirit, which is his
Godhead, as by personal union, yet the Godhead did communicate the Grace of
Edification unto the manhood by degrees, as it was fit for him to manifest it;
and we may without impiety hold, that some accession of such kind of grace
was made to the manhood at his Inauguration, though it did not then make him,
but declare him to be the King, the Priest, the Prophet of his Church.

But a little farther to enlarge this point; distinguish Signum, and Signatum;
In regard of the Sign, the Holy Ghost came now upon Jesus, that he might point
him out to St. John Baptist; for had not the Dove pitched upon JESUS, the voice
from Heaven might have been misapplied; but the sign put it out of all
question who was meant. If you look to the thing signified, then does St.
Jerome give a most comfortable note; The Holy Ghost lighted upon Jesus, that he
might inure himself more familiarly then before to dwell with the sons of
men, and make them new creatures; for (as St. Austin thinks) CHRIST did now
vouchsafe to prefigure his Church, wherein those that are baptized receive the
Holy Ghost, and CHRIST received the Spirit above measure, that of his fullness
we might all receive grace for grace, which S. John seems to confirm, when
he says, that he descended and stayed upon him; in the sign, until the word
was spoken, but in the grace, until the worlds end. Until the Worlds end
shall CHRIST be those Olive trees in Zachary, which feed the lights that burn
in the house of GOD; for he was anointed, not only Prae, but Pro consortibus
suis, not only above, but also for his Church. And although in the members of
the Church grace may ebb and flow, yet in CHRIST is it always constant and at
the full.

Finally, note the improouement of CHRIST'S honor; it was great when the
Heavens opened, and the Angels ascended and descended upon him, but when the
Heavens opened, and the Holy Ghost descended upon him, then was his honor much
more great.

I have done with the Visible sign, and come now to the Audible Word. The
sign had been but a dumb show without the Word; for those signs that are
sacred, do not signify Natura sua, by their own nature, but Diuino
Instituto, by divine Institution; and who knows it but he that commands it,
and by his Word informs us of his purpose?

Therefore GOD never appoints any Visible sign, but he adds an audible
word; as appears in Sacrifices and Sacraments, which had precepts and promises
annexed, showing their use and effects. This light added to those shadows, did
guide men to see their reference and correspondency; the neglect whereof caused
the carnal Jew, and causes the superstitious Papist to maime the mysteries of
Religion, and feed upon beggarly rudiments, and empty ceremonies; If we will
be truly and fully religious, we must join both, and let both work in
their order, our thorough edification.

But mark that the sign was from Heaven, and so is the word from Heaven also,
and GOD is Author of both, of the Vision, and of the Revelation; no man may
presume to be farther of GODS counsel then he is admitted, or to fasten
commentaries upon his Texts without his instruction. I should tire you and my
self, if I should show you, how Jews and Christians have lost themselves in
such presumptuous contemplations. But I rather choose to impart unto you the
correspondency of the Gospel to the Law. At the giving of the Law, there was
Vox de coelo, a voice heard from Heaven; so is there also at the delivery of
the Gospel; that did contain a breife of the Law, and this of the Gospel. But
there was moreover this difference between the voices, the first was the voice
of Sinai, the second the voice of Sion, De Baptismo Christ's.
the first was a dreadful, but the second was a still voice. St. Cyprian
concerning this second voice, moves this question; Was there ever heard such
a voice before? Whereunto the answer is ready, certainly never so sweet, so
gracious a voice; you will confess it when I have showed you whose, and of
whom the voice was.

It was the voice of GOD the FATHER, Hoc non ego dico (says St. In c. 3. Lucae.
Ambrose) when thou hear these words, This is my well-beloved Son, etc. know
that it is not I who speak them to thee, neither has any man spoken them, no
nor GOD by an Angel or an Archangel, Sed ab ipso Patre vox caelo demissa
significau^t, it is the FATHER himself, that by a voice does notify this unto
thee. The Father, I say, for suppose by the Ministry of an Angel the voice were
framed, yet certainly it was uttered in the Person of the FATHER; Matthew. 11.
the Text does plainly intimate it in the words, My Son. But our Savior
CHRIST does elsewhere confirm it with an undeniable reason, No man knows
the Son but the Father; and to St. Peter affirming, Thou art Christ the Son
of the living God, Matthew. 16.
he replieth, Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father
which is in Heaven. Many testimonies went before concerning CHRIST; of the
Wisemen, of the Shepherds, of the Angels, but none ever came near this; if we
receive the testimony of men, of creatures, the Testimony of GOD, of the
Creator, is much greater.

What shall I say then to these things? but only exhort you in the Apostles
words, Heb. 12.
See that you refuse not him that speaks, for if they escaped not who refused
him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn away from
him that speaks from Heaven, especially, when he utters so comfortable and
gracious words as are those, Thou art my Son.

Some difference there is between the Evangelists in relating the words; some
making GOD to speak unto Christ, some to the Hearers concerning CHRIST; but
the reconciliation is easy; for even when GOD bends his words to CHRIST, his
meaning is not to inform CHRIST of that which he already knows, but to
instruct us in that which it is fit for us to know, as CHRIST elsewhere, and in
another case observes; This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes;
so S. Austin does well reconcile the Evangelists. John 12.


But let us come to the contents of the voice. Decensensu Euang^^^^. I^b. 2.
cap. 4.
That which the FATHER speaks is concerning his Son, he tells us What he
is to Him, what he does for us: first, what he is to Him; Filius, and
Dilectus, his Son, D. Baptis. Christ ^.
and his Beloved; Duo grata vocabula (says St. Cyprian) two most contenting
words, specially if you add the article to either of them, (...) this Son is
more then an ordinary Son, and this Beloved, is more then ordinarily beloved.
Tertullian de Trinit.
Look upon the words a sunder, first the Son. Christ was the Son of God
two ways considered, Principalitas nominis Filij est in Spiritu Domini qui
descendit, the chief reason why Christ was called the Senne of God, is because
he is God of God, Light of Light, begotten of his Father before all worlds;
but Sequela Nominis istius est in filio Dei and hominis, the same title
belongs unto him even as he was incarnate, whereof the ground is the
personal union; the manhood being assumed into one person with the Godhead.
In regard of the first consideration is he called vnigenitus, the only
begotten of his Father, in regard of the second he is called Primogenitus, the
first borne of many Brethren; both ways is CHRIST near unto GOD; but our
comfort stands in the latter, that Emanuel, God with us, or in our Nature is
(...) the Son of God, for that is fons and origo Adoptionis nostrae, it is
that which lays the soundation of being the sons of GOD.

As CHRIST was near; so was he dear unto GOD. And indeed the words that note
the neerenesse, contain the grounds of the deerenes^e also, and they were
vnigenitus the only begotten, and primogenitus, the first borne; vnigenitus,
ergo vnice dilectus, the only begotten, therefore only beloved; primegenitus,
ergo praecipue dilectus, the first begotten, therefore the especially beloved
of GOD; for this is a principle, Every man loneth himself, the more of
himself he finds any where, the more he affects, if he be not
degenerate. A father loves his only son entirely, because he has no more,
and his eldest chiefly, because he is Principium and praecipuum roboris, the
first, and chief of his strength. But this (...), or natural affection of
men, is but a sparkle, and that much allaied, of that which is in GOD
originally, and but deriuatiuely in us. Therefore we may easily conceive that
CHRIST that is so near in nature and grace, must needs be most dear unto
GOD, that indeed he is Vir desidertorum, a man after Gods own Heart, and the
true David, that is, beloved, as the Prophets call him.

Add hereunto, that settled love where it is judicious, is more fervent. Now
Christus is dilectus not recenti impulsu sed inolito and probato; it is as
ancient as GOD, even coeternall, that CHRIST is the Son of GOD; only it is
in time delated to the manhood, but the length of it is Aeternitie.

See then how GOD expresses his love to us, when he so describes the person
that he bestows upon us. And have we then any thing which we should think
too good to render unto GOD? Abraham will teach us better, who spared not
Vnicum and dilectum silium, his only beloved Son, when GOD called for him;
and we see how his thank fullness prospered. Certainly we would prosper much
better, if in this kindness we would strive to be answerable unto GOD. I.
pray GOD we may, sure I am, we have good cause, if there were no other motive
then is contained in filius, and Dilectus, if we do consider only what the
second Person in Trinity is to the first: How much more if we consider what
he does for us? In him is the Father well pleased.

We will resolve this Note into two; first, we will see in whom, and then how
the FATHER is pleased.

He is pleased in his beloved Son; This opens a Mystery, Thou shall make a
plate of pure gold, Exodus 28.
(said GOD to Moses) and grave upon it like the ingrauing of a signet,
Holiness to the Lord; and thou shall put it upon a blew lace that it may be
upon the Miter, upon the forefront of the Miter it shall be, and it shall be
upon Aarons f^rehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things
which the children of Israel shall hallow in all their hory gifts, and it
shall be always upon his forehead that they may be accepted before the Lord:
Even so CHRIST, being to be consecrated now High Priest, has the Holy Ghost
descending upon him, that so the Church may be made acceptable in GODS beloved
SON.

Neither was he the Truth only of the High Priest, but of the Sacrifices
also; St. Paul, Hebr. 10. applies to this purpose that place in the Psalm,
Psalm. 40.
Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have then prepared me, in
burnt offerings and Sacrifices for sin thou have no pleasure, then said I,
lo I come; In the volume of thy Book it is written of me to ave thy will O
God: In this sense does the Law use the word Ratza, when it is applied to
Sacrifices, ^enit. 1.
and says, that they shall be accepted for the offerer, and make an atonement
for him. Until CHRIST came there was no remedy against the curse of the Law,
but Typical within the Church, and without fruitless; Colos. 1.
but CHRIST incarnate brought a sovereign remedy, Ephesians. 2.
when he became the true Propitiatory, in him it pleased God that all fullness
should dwell, and by him to reconcile all things both in Heaven and earth. De
Censensu Ruangelact. lib. 2. cap. 4.
St. Austin speaks briefly but fully, In te complacui, is as much as Per te
constitui gerere quod mihi placuit; In thee am I well pleased, not only taking
delight in that which thou art, but also by thee accomplishing all the good
that I mean to the sons of men.

But what did CHRIST? Surely he did propitiate GODS wrath, and give man grace
in GODS eyes; these two works are contained in (...), they are the blessings
that flow from GODS good will toward men: Reconciliation is composed of both,
of GODS Indulgence and Beneficence; Indulgence is not enough without
Beneficence; ^ Sam. 14.
Absalon showed this to Ioab when he was restored from his banishment, but not
admitted into the King his fathers presence. A good pattern to be imitated by
men is GOD, who deals so in his reconciliation with men; whereas men use some
times to forgive, but seldom to forget also; they think it too much to
deserve well, and enough that they do not deserve ill. I would it were no more.

But let us touch at these points a sunder; first, at the propitiating of GODS
wrath.

The latter Chronologers will have this Sacring of JESUS, to have been
performed upon the day of Expiation, in September, which (if it be true) then
the Holy Ghost does fairly insinuate that CHRIST came as the Lamb of God to
take away the sins of the world. How soever this is true, that he bare our
sins in his body, and by his stripes we are made whole, that he cancelled our
obligation, and slew hatred, when he suffered upon the Cross,

Neither did CHRIST only propitiate GODS wrath, but also gave man grace in
GODS eyes; CHRIST teaches it in three Parables; of the lost Sheep, the lost
Groat, and the Prodigal Child. The Fathers observe the Allegory that St.
Peter makes in comparing Noah's Arc unto the Church, and observe moreover,
that as the Dove brought the Olive branch into the Arc, in token that the
deluge was ceased, and the world was become habitable again: Even so the Dove
that lighted upon CHRIST, brought the glad tidings of the Gospel, it was the
Emblem of the acceptable year, Luke 4.
it testified that GOD was now (...), and that men had now communion with him
again.

But here are two rules that must be observed; first, that these words, in
whom I am well pleased, must be understood exclusiuely; Act. 3.
CHRIST is the only Mediator, neither is there any other Name under Heaven
given by which we may be saved, but only the Name of JESUS; so that he which
has the Son, has life; 1 John 3.
and he which has not the Son, has not life, CHRIST will yield this glory
to none other. Secondly, that GOD is immediately well pleased with CHRIST, but
mediatly with us; If we do not so understand the words, we have but little
comfort in them; wherefore we must be assured, that we are made accepted in
Gods beloved, that the Church is now called Hephzibah, My delight is in her,
says the LORD. By the Son, Esaias 62.4.
we have all access unto the Father, through the Holy Ghost.

Finally, all this is to be understood of (...) Hic, this Person which seems
so mean, appears in the form of a Servant, yet he is Filius meus, my Son,
my beloved, in whom I am well pleased, GOD is not ashamed of his SON humbling
himself in our nature, neither does he love him the less. And why? his
obedience was voluntary, it was to do his FATHERS will, it was to do us good;
much less should we be ashamed for whose sake he became so humble, yea, God
forbid, that we should rejoice but in the Cross of Christ; if Hic, and Meus
sort so well in GODS judgment, they must agree much more in ours.

But to draw to an end; In this Text there is (...) a true Epiphanie; And
indeed the Church reads my Text, (but out of St. Luke) upon the Epiphanie day,
on which the Tradition holds that he was Baptized, and this great manifestation
of GOD was made unto the world, wherein all things are Augusta, and maiestati
Christi congrua, very solemn, very heavenly; no where is the Mystery of the
Trinity, which is the first foundation of true Religion, nor the comfortable
actions thereof, which is the foundation of Christian Religion, so jointly, so
undeniably revealed. The Mystery of the Trinity is incomprehensible,
unutterable, Ego nescio, says St. Hilarie, I profess my ignorance of it, yet
will I comfort my self, the Angels know it not, the world cannot comprehend
it, the Apostles never revealed it, cesset ergo dolor querelarum, let not men
murmurre or complain that this secret is hidden from them, let it suffice them
to know that there is a Trinity in Unity, let them never inquire how it is;
for they will inquire in vain. Naztanzene gives the reason, (...), While I
would contemplate the Unity, my thoughts are da^led by the Trinity, and while
I go about to distinguish the Trinity, I am presently cast upon the Unity,
the one does call my thoughts upon the other. And what wonder that a man
should be so puzzled? For, Quo intellectu Deum capiat homo, 3. Austin.
qui intellectum suum quo vult capere nondum capit? How should he be able to
comprehend the Trinity, that comprehends not yet his reasonable Soul, the
only help which he has wherewith to comprehend it, and is indeed the best
resemblance of it?

That which I have said concerning the Trinity, is a good rule of sobriety to
hold in curious wits, that will pry too far into these divine Mysteries. And
yet Epiphanius does well check the incredulity of Sabellius, Non credis tres
personas diuinae Essentiae? do thou not believe the Trinity in Unity?
Comitare Iohanem ad Iordanem, attend John Baptist to the river Jordan, there
thou shall find them all three. And indeed, here the Trinity is brought in
some sort within the compass of our conceit; for it is not set forth as it
is In se, but ad Nos, not simply, as the foundation of true Religion, but as
the foundation of Christian Religion, as every Person contributes toward our
Salvation.

When such an Object is presented, the word of attention is pressed seasonably
and reasonably; it is pressed to the eye, and pressed to the ear, these reasonable
senses are summoned with reverence, and confidence to behold, to attend these
sacred Mysteries. To behold them as they are delivered in the History, for
even the History it self being rare, is able to allure our reasonable senses.
Did it nothing otherwise concern him, who would not willingly, yea greedily,
hear the voice of GOD the FATHER? see the Holy Ghost in the shape of a Dove?
and see the SON of GOD so humbling himself in the nature of man? How much
more should we desire it, when there is not only Miraculum, but Mysterium in
it, even one of the greatest Mysteries of godliness. The Heavens are opened,
that is a Miracle, but they are opened for Us; the Holy Ghost descends in a
Dove; but the Dove is but an Emblem of the holiness that must be in Us, that
is the Mystery; the SON of GOD here appears to be the Son of Man, that
is a Miracle, but he appears to Sanctify the waters for the regeneration of
man, that is a Mystery; when the Miracles present these Mysteries, do they
not deserve a Lo, deserve that the eye, the ear, both should be taken up, by
which thou may be made partaker of them.

O but thou will say, I would travel farther then Jordan to see such a sight,
might my eye see the Heavens opened, might my ear hear GOD speak from
Heaven, might I be so happy as to come to such an Inauguration of my Savior,
my eye should not be satisfied with seeing, nor my ear with hearing. Hear
what S. Ambrose answers to such an objection, Eisde^ sacramentis res iam
agitur quibus and tunc gesta est, nisi quod gratia pleniore; the life of that
Mystery continues still, though it be not clothed with the same Miracle; then
was the Trinity seen with carnal eyes, whom now we contemplate with the eyes
of Faith: Dominic^ 6. post. Pentecost.
Yea, St. Ambrose is bold to say that greater grace is offered unto us, then to
them that were present, at the Baptism of CHRIST, for unto them (as being
incredulous) GOD persuaded Faith by corporal signs, but in us that are the
faithful he works grace spiritually. And it is greater grace so to behold
GOD as the faithful do, then as do those that are unfaithful; so that the
Lo does no less concern us then it did them.

Yea, it concerns us much more; our eyes should daily be lifted up Heaven, and
behold how the grace of Sanctification descends from thence into us; and to
behold how the benefit of Adoption is daily offered us, our ears should be
opened unto Heaven. The Holy Ghost comes to us, but who sees him? GOD
professes that he accepts us in his beloved SON, but who hears him? No;
be we never so often summoned, our eyes, our ears are slumbring, are
wandering; and I presume not, though I wish I might, that what I have spoken
will awaken and fix them.

Wherefore let us turn both unto him that opened the eyes of the blind, and
ears of the deaf, that he would vnuaile both our eyes and our ears; that
these Mysteries be not presented to us in vain, but that the Heavens be now
so open to our Faith, that hereafter they may be opened to our persons; that
the Dove would make us such Doves that we may fly with peace into the Ark of God; that he which is the Son and Beloved, would make us beloved sons of
God; that having our sins purged, our persons accepted, we may have an
endless Communion in Glory with the Holy Spirit that affoordeth us this
Communion in Grace. A SERMON PREACHED AT WHITE HALL.
1 JOHN 3. VERSE. 20, 21. 20 For if our heart condemn us, God is greater then
our heart, and knows all things.

21 Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence to wards God.


AND verily this Scripture deserves well to be looked into at this time. For we
are at length awakened out of our dead sleep in carnal security, GODS
Judgments have rowsed us, and we purpose, GOD willing, publickely, and
penitently to deprecate GODS fierce wrath provoked by our crying innes. GOD
grant we may do it acceptably, and effectually.

But that cannot be, except we first keep a Scrutinie, we thoroughly suruay
every man his own self; this is the truest Preface unto, and best
preparation for a Penitential Fast. He that can vnflatteringly present
himself before the impartial eyes of his own soul, and the most holy eyes
of GOD; he whose heart is of that temper that it can receive those religious
impressions which such a sight will work; he, and he only, has made the
first and the hardest step that must be trodden by a penitent man.

My purpose is, and it is the scope of my Text, to guide our feet into that
step, and advise us to grow more familiarly acquainted with that whereunto the
most of men desire to be very strangers, I mean, our Consciences.

Conscience in my Text is called by the name of heart, and our heart imports
as much as the Conscience of a Christian.

Touching this, my Text does teach us what is her work, it is to censure, or
to sentence us; this you may gather out of the whole body of my Text. But in so
dealing, she proceeds not alike with all. And why? She finds not all alike.

Some are, and they are censured as guil^ie persons; they have a Conscience
that condemns them.

Other-some are not guilty, and they have a Conscience which condemns not.
The difference of the persons makes a difference of her Work.

Upon this Difference St John groundeth an Inference. He argues from our Heart
unto GOD, and gives us to understand, That as we deal when we reckon with our
selves, so will GOD deal when he calls us to an Account. The work of GOD
and our Heart are in this case alike.

Alike they are, but yet they are unequal, and that in two respects, First, of
Power, secondly, of Knowledge. I will a little supply the words, so you will
perceive that St John speaks as much in two comparatiue Maxims. Our heart is
great, and indeed it can do much in this Little world of ours, and yet it is
no match for GOD, God is greater then our Heart, he can do whatsoever he will,
both in Heaven and earth. This is the first Maxim. Our Heart knows much of
that which is in us, it is ever of our Privy Council; but yet that much
comes short of all, it is God only that knows all things, even those
things that are hid in the obscurest darkness. This is the second Maxim.

See now what S. John works out of these two Maxims. First, concerning
persons that are guilty. If our evil Conscience that is less in power, and
more shallow in knowledge, do notwithstanding condemn us; How shall not God
condemn us, who is both Omnipotent and Omniscient. Secondly, concerning those
that are guiltless. If a man upon due scrutinie can give himself a Quietus
est; certainly, that man may come with boldness unto the Throne of Grace. S.
John expresses the Inference in these words; If our Heart condemn us not,
then have we confidence toward God.

But whom does all this concern which we have spoken of Conscience? Surely,
the members of the Church, they are meant by this name Beloved, they must know
that the works, and fruits which proceed from these works, do concern
them, neither have they any privilege.

By this short model you may conceive the substance of my Text, and apprehend
upon what I mean to insist. GOD so bless me in speaking, and you in hearing,
that whenever we are put upon the trial, God and our Heart may be
comfortable to us, seeing we are assured by my Text that they will deal very
plainly with us.

The first particular was the name whereby Conscience is here called, and that
is Heart. Under this name Heart, the Scripture comprehends three things; the
Will, the Conscience, and the Affections; sometimes the Holy Ghost intends
all three by the word, at other times some one, in this place it understands
that one of them which is called Conscience. And there is reason why that is
called by the name of Heart. The heart of man is his Moral Treasury, CHRIST
teaches it in St. Cap. 1^.
Matthew; A good man out of the good treasury of his heart brings forth
good things, and an evil man out of the evil treasury of his heart brings
forth evil things; whatsoever our conversation is, be it good or bad, the
root of it is there, and from thence (as Solomon speaks) proceed life and
death. Prow. 4.
Now where the fountain is of our moral Actions, there GOD is pleased should
be the seat of moral Directions, and Corrections too, that no motion of the
heart should farther be yielded unto, then might stand with the fore-hand
Counsel, or afterhand content of the Conscience. GOD would not have us seek
far for these things, either up to Heaven, or down to hell, or pass the
Sea's, they are near us, in us, yea a very part, a principal part of us. And
by whom will a man be ordered in these things, if not by himself? and to whom
could GOD more mercifully commend him then to himself? This merciful care
cutteth off those poor excuses, and vain Apologies which men might make, if
GOD had not chosen so sit a Seat for Conscience.

But we must farther observe, that the Conscience is furnished with two
Powers, a Directorie, and a Iudicatorie; it has in it moral Principles
whereby to guide men, which is the Law written in our Heart, whereby we
discern good and evil, the learned call it (...), which is nothing else but
practique rules of life, of which there are two sorts: As there is the Heart of
a natural, and the Heart of a Christian man: so these rules are either
Natural, or Supernatural.

The Natural are those which are inborne and engraven in the hearts of all
men, the relics of that Image which in the Creation we received from GOD;
these inform the natural man, though weakly, of Piety, Equity, Sobriety;
and concerning all these, the very Heathen have delivered many memorable
sentences. But besides these a Christian has other rules, his Heart is new
written with the Spirit of GOD, Cap. 31.
according to the promise made in Jeremy, I will put my Laws into their
inward parts, and in their Hearts will I write them; and we find the
performance thereof in the New Testament preached by St. Peter, Act. 2. and St.
Paul, Corinth. 3. and to the Hebr. cap. 8. Yea, every Christian man feels the
truth of it in his own soul, he feels those Natural Principles rectified
by Grace, and much higher superadded to them: so that the Christian man
discernes much better then a natural man can, what is good and evil. This is
the furniture of the Directory power.

The Conscience has besides this a Iudicatorie power, and there is furniture
for that also, which is nothing else but a skill how to try men's lives by
those former rules, and doom them as it finds them. And this skill is as well
in the Conscience of a natural man, as of a Christian man, though it be of
much greater perfection in the latter, then in the former.

But we must know that it is not the having, but the using of these rules is
properly meant by our Conscience. For, as the Schools note well, Conscientia
neque potentia naturalis, neque habitus; it is neither a native, nor an
acquired ability, sed est Actus, Conscience is a Work; and indeed it is a
work which my Text speaks of; and whereas Conscience has two works, the
one going before our moral works, the other following after; though, for your
better understanding, I will touch at the former, yet, keeping my self to my
Text, I will insist upon the latter.

These principles then whether Natural, or Supernatural, were bestowed upon
us perpetually to assist and guide us in our ways. One of the Heathen well
resembled Conscience to a Paedagogue, Epictetu^.
for as the Paedagogue by the appointment of parents, is always at hand with a
child to direct, and restrain him, who otherwise through impotency of
affection would go astray: even so is our Conscience appointed over us to hold
the raines, to guide and hold in our wild and headstrong nature. And surely,
we are bound to acknowledge the mercifulness of GOD manifested herein, he
has graciously provided for the preventing of sin, who is pleased not only
to give us a Law, but also to place in us a perpetual remembrance thereof unto
us. And the reason why men sin, must needs be, either because they do not
consult, or do contemn this guide: so that either their sins are wilful,
if they contemn, or their ignorance is affected, if they neglect this
preventing means afforded of GOD.

But I have not now to do with the Consciences work of Direction, that work
of hers that goes before our work: but I have to do with the work of
Judicature, the work that follows our works. GOD has left it in some sort
in our power whether we will, or will not make use of the former work of
Conscience; and some by his grace use it, some for want of grace use it not;
but GOD has appointed Conscience a second work, which it is not in any man's
power to put off, the work of Judicature, wherein GOD does let us see what it
is to use, or not to use the former work.

And here we must mark, that as the Law which is contained in the Directory
work of Conscience has two parts, a Precept, and a Sanction: so the
Iudicatorie work of Conscience does two things, it plays the Jury to
arraigne us, and the Judge to doom us.

First, it testifies whether we have, or have not observed the precepts of
GOD. In that respect it is resembled to a Registrie, or an exact Record
exhibited at an Assizes; if we do not take notice of the counsel which our
Conscience gives us before hand, we shall find that our Conscience takes
notice of all that is done by us, and will make a perfect presentment thereof,
it will truly relate how far we have, or have not suffered our selves to be
led by her advice, and we shall not be able to except against the Verdict of
this Jury.

As it makes a true Presentment in regard of the Precept: so does it
pronounce a just Doom in regard of the Sanction, for it pronounces what is
our due, and therein we shall find it a Judge, not only putting us in mind
of life and death, but also sentencing us thereunto. And indeed, this is the
last and the highest work of Conscience, and for this cause Nazianzene does
fitly term it (...), an inward and upright Tribunal.

But to open this Iudicatorie work of Conscience a little more fully, we must
observe that she deals not alike with all, because she finds not all alike.
The Physicians acknowledge Corpus neutrum, a body that is neither sick nor
whole; but the Conscience does not acknowledge any neutrall man that is
neither good nor bad, Non liquets, and special Verdicts are not known to the
Conscience, it finds every man, either guilty or not guilty. Secondly, it
confounds not Tares with Wheat, nor Sheep with Goats in the Presentment,
not in the Doom does it confound the right hand with the lest, Hell and
Heaven, Death and Life. It has an accusing and excusing Voice, a condemning
and an absoluing Voice, these two sorts of Voices it has and no more. Finally,
we must expect no shift, no delay in the work of our Conscience, whether it
play the Jury or the Judge.

But let us take these works a little a sunder. And first see that which is
against us: the Apostle uses a significant word which is (...), a compound
word which shows, that Conscience does first (...) know thoroughly, before it
does (...), offer to condemn us, the very word imports an orderly course of
proceeding, it does not go against us without a just ground, and so is free
from the corruption which is in too many worldly Judges, that resolve upon a
man's execution before they have heard his cause. But our Conscience is privy
to all our doings, an eyewitness of all that passes from us, (...) it
knows, and proceeds upon certain knowledge. Yea it will present it so to
the eyes of our soul, that it will not suffer us to be ignorant of that which
it knows, it will make us Confitentes reos, we shall plead guilty against
our own selves.

And here see how GOD deals with us, he makes our Hearts the Chronicles of
our lives, a Chronicle indeed, for hereinto are entered both what we do, and
when, and we can as hardly deny the Record, as we are unwilling to belie our
selves; and therefore we should take heed what we do, seeing the evidence
thereof will remain with us.

Neither is it an idle Evidence, but the presentment of a Jury, our Conscience
is, as it were, a whole Jury empanelled to try us, whether Guilty, or not
Guilty; it is always going upon us, and presents us as it finds us. And
who would not bemoane his case, that, will he, nil he, himself must be tried
by himself, and that his sins are so palpable in his own eyes, that
himself must bring in a Verdict against himself?

This is woeful, be cause the Conscience that is (...), is also (...), we
will not spare to doom our selves, if we find our selves guilty, we will
power confusion upon our own souls, and with confusion and horror, and breed
that worm suddenly, which will bite us intollerably; we will bitter and sower
our relish with the foretast of Hell; Mala Conscientia tota est in
desperatione, August in Psa. 31.
we will make our selves most forlorn creatures. In the Conscience which is
guilty, there are stings dreadful which the patient feels, but none other
can be acquainted with, and it is a true rule, that Tribulationes tanto
acerbiores, quanto sunt interiores, The Spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can bear? especially the spirit which
himself wounds; but he is his own afflictor who is asllicted in
Conscience. A man may flee from his enemy, but who can sly from himself? It
is true that a Conscious man would every where thrust himself from himself;
but he finds by woeful experience, that he can never go from himself, no,
though he would unnaturally bereave himself of corporal life, yet the
tormenter abides by him, and whether soever he draws himself, he afflicts
himself evermore. Many men that seele themselves euilly Conscious, labor to
put off the distress thereof by solacing themselves with the pleasures and
vanities of this life; but their attempt is a poor and short palliation of a
desperate disease.

Wherefore let us take heed of an evil Conscience, that loadeth us with so
much intolerable evil. Though a man grow so desperately wicked that he
regards no body; yet he has good reason to regard himself, he that fears
no bodies eye, should fear his own, and fear the power that he has over
himself, though he fear not the power of any other. Though we hide our
sins from others, we cannot hide them from our selves, neither will we spare
our selves, though all the world would spare us. He never wants an accusing
Jury, nor a condemning Judge, that is infested with a guilt^^ Conscience.

As the Conscience deals uncomfortably with them that are guilty: so with
them that are guiltless it deals very comfortably, it does not condemn: so
speaks St. John. But in his phrase there is a Litote, Minus dicitur sed plus
intelligitur, there is more meant then is expressed. And indeed it cannot be
otherwise; for if the Conscience be a work; as it condemns him whom it
finds guilty: so whom it sindeth guiltless, him it absolueth, it does
iustilie.

And here also, we must observe, that our Conscience, if it be good, (...) it
knows all the good we do, it Records it, yea, and tendreth the Record,
that we may solace our selves with the contemplation of it. And indeed
Conscientia recte factorum, to be Conscious to our selves of well doing, is no
small comfort: Especially when goodness is little regarded in the world; yea,
is commonly persecuted by the world, it is no small matter to have in our
souls, that which can sweeten all the crosses which are laid upon our bodies.
Goodness has pleasure inseparably linckt unto it, as in GOD: so in godly men,
and our Conscience will not suffer us to be defrauded of this heavenly
pleasure, which keeps a memorial of our bypast virtues, and sweetens our
life with the relation thereof. It comes not to absolve us per Saltum, but
does it upon as good a ground, and as fair evidence brought out for us, as
the condemning Conscience works upon evidence brought against us. It is then
the first benefit of an absoluing Conscience that it keeps and shows
soorth, when it may best steed us, the Record of our well-doing.

Neither does it only tender it as a I^ry, but also, as a Judge, sentenceth
us according to it; As it keeps in mind how well we have observed the
Precepts of the Law: so does it award unto us the Sanction thereof, all the
Benedictions that GOD has annexed unto it, corporal Benedictions, Benedictions
spiritual, temporal Benedictions, and Benedictions eternal. Although
well-doing be full of contentedness; yet the reward of well-doing makes no
small access unto it; a good Conscience is accompanied with both, it is
accompanied with Bonum in re, and Bonum in spe, good in possession, and good in
expectation. Wherefore, blessed is the man that can enter into his own heart,
and find there so good Evidence, and so good a Sentence.

But how may a man have such a good Conscience? St. Austin teaches the method
of it. Psalm. 31.
Vt habeat quis bonam Conscientiam credat and operetur, he that will have a
Conscience that shall give in good evidence for him, and pronounce a
comfortable sentence on him, must Believe well, and Live well, Faith does
purify the Heart, and a good life bears the fruit that abounds to our
reckoning when we judge our own soul.

But a man must not look to have this blessing of a good Conscience
suddenly, Augst. in Psalm. 66.
Vade ad formicam piger, got to the Pismire thou sluggard, she gathers grain
in Summer, whereof she makes use in Winter, Et formica Dei surgit quotidie,
currit ad Ecclesiam, etc. GODS Emmet (that is, a man that will have such a good
Conscience) rises early, hasteneth to the Church, hears often, prays often,
meditateth often, and so does acquire this absoluing Conscience, Colligentem
in aestate videre potes, commedentem in hieme videre non potes, the outward
means which he uses are visible, but the inward comforts which when time
serves he reapeth, are invisible. Thus does Saint Austin moralize that Simile
of Solomon; and we must not look to have such not-condemning, or absoluing
Consciences, except we be such Pismires of GOD.

But here are two Rocks to be heeded, at which many suffer Shipwreck, while
they mistake the doctrine of a not-condemning, and a condemning Conscience.

First, of a not-condemning. Some confound herewith a seared Conand because
they are senseless, they do not think themselves graceless: Custom in
Sin, or the busy pursuit of their corrupt lusts, silenceth their Conscience
that it speaks not to them, or stoppes their ears that they hear it not.
But this does rather suspend the work, then alter the nature of their
Conscience, it does not make it a not-condemning Conscience of a condemning
one. How many theiues and murderers are very frolic, not only when they act
their wickedness, but when they are in the Gaile, when they are brought to the
Bar, yea, when they are casting off the Gallows. But wise men that see them
in this humor, censure it for unreasonable stupiditie and desperateness, they
hold it not to be comfortable security. No more is that which we see in
sinners, who, while they drink in iniquity with greediness have stony
hearts, and brazen foreheads. If in the days of grace we make unto our selves
the days of Judgment, and sift our selves impartially according unto GODS
word, before we be tried at GODS Bar, and find our selves discharged with a
not guilty, and an Euge Serve bone, well done servant faithful and true,
enter into thy Masters joy; this is indeed a not-condemning Conscience.

The second Rock is, that many confound a tender Conscience, with a guilty
Conscience, and plod more upon the Heart of a man, then they do upon the Heart
of a Christian man; they consider not the prerogative that the Elect have by
being in CHRIST, into whom when they were ingrafted, they were justified from
all sin: So that though afterward they may become damnable through their
fall, yet damned they cannot be, because their repentance and says cannot be
in vain; neither must they measure the truth of their state by their sense.
GOD is pleased often times to humble his children by suspending the sense of
their state; but he does not alter their state, because his gifts are without
Repentance; and upon their tears, sighs, and prayers wherewith GOD is pleased
to be importuned, he restores unto them the sense of their state again: their
eyes are opened to see that their obligation is cancelled, and the book crossed
wherein all their debtes were entered, and that the blood of Christ has
cleansed them from all sin.

You have heard many things concerning Conscience, all which, though they be
of good regard, yet they contain not all that which we must heed. For the
work of Conscience is rather Praeiudicium, then Iudicium, it is but a real
Prophecy informing us how GOD will hereafter deal with us. Therefore Saint
John carries our thoughts from our Hearts unto God, and will have us expect
from GOD what we find in our own Hearts. And indeed our Heart is nothing
else but GODS Apostle, whose message is the Judgment to come; St. Ieromes
Trumpet that sounded still in his ears, Surgite mortui, and venite ad
iudicium. Besides our inward, we have an outward Judge, besides the present,
there is a future Judgment.

And verily it is a wonder that any man should doubt of a future Judgment that
has a Conscience, seeing the use of the Conscience is to forewarne us of it,
the Judgment in our bosom, must be unto us a Remembrancer of another
Judgment that is to come, and we must the rather be moved with the former,
because of the reference it has unto the latter.

Reference; nay, Resemblance, which is more: for in the present Judgment, we
have a lively representation of the Judgment to come; GOD will deal with us
no otherwise then our Heart do^th, the Jury at his Bar will exhibit no other
presentment, neither shall we hear any other Sentence from that Judge; the
Book of GODS Providence, will agree with the Book of our Conscience and the
Doom of our Conscience shall be ratified by GODS Doom. And this
representative quality that is in our Conscience, must make us the more to
regard the absolute quality thereof. For though it be much to feel the force
of Conscience without this Reference; yet is it much more if the Reference be
included in our feeling thereof, it will make us more careful to prepare our
selves for GOD, when we are remembered so to do by our own Heart.

God then and our Heart agree in one work, their work is like. Like it is,
but not equal, you may perceive it in St. John's Inference that he makes
according to the difference of the work of Conscience. One work of the
Conscience is to condemn, thereupon St. John makes an Inference, If our Heart
condemn us, God is greater then our Heart and knows all things. Wherein
appears a double inequality.

The first is of Authority. Our Heart is great, it is King in this little
world of ours, for it does season all that comes from us, our works are
good or evil, so far as our Conscience is a party to them; they are good,
if she be good, and if she be evil, they are evil. The inclination of the
Heart is the inclination of the whole man; so that no power of the soul, or
part of the body will hold back, if our Heart or Conscience do set forward.
Our Heart then is great, great within the Sphere of this little World.

But God is greater then our Heart, who commands both ours, and the great
World. GOD is said to be greater, not so much in regard of his Eminency above
us, as his Soueraignetie over us, in which sense the Psalm says, that our God
is a great God, and a great King above all Gods. And indeed, Power belongs
only unto him. Creatu^es are termed Powers, rather Propter Ministerium then
Dominium, they can do nothing beyond the influence they have from GOD; But
GODS power is absolute, and the Sentence he pronounces irresistable, whereas
he can check the sentence which our Heart pronounces.

But to fit this point of Gods power, to that which we said before of the
power of our Heart. GODS power does season all the afflictions that come upon
us, and the apprehension that they come from him, makes them much more
grievous then they would be in themselves: Secondly, if GOD be bent against
us, no creature will stand for us. You see wherein stands the first
inequality between GOD, and our Heart.

The second Inequality, stands in Omnisciencie. It is true that our Heart
knows much, 1 Corinthians. 2.
and (as the Apostle says) No man knows the things in man but the Spirit of
man. But that is as true which Solomon says; Prou. 20.
The spirit of man is as the candle of the Lord, searching the inward parts of
man, it is but a Candle, and that is a dim light, a Candle of the Lord, and
that is a Ministerial light. Two ways is our knowledge dim, through
Ign^rance and Self-love. Ignorance is the cause that we cannot know our selves
if we would; Self-love is the cause that we will not know our selves so well
as we can; therefore David prayed, and we must pray, Ab occultis munda me
domine, O Lord cleanse me from my secret faults.

As for GOD, his eyes are ten thousand times brighter then the Sun; Eccles.
23.
David has made a whole Psalm of GODS not only all-seeing, Psalm. 13^.
but also foreseeing Eye. GOD himself answers the question in Jeremy
concerning man's Heart, Who can search that intricate and wicked labyrinth? I
the Lord. The LORD only is (...), the searcher of the Heart, and we are much
better known to him, then we are to our selves. This Inequality being
observed, mark now the Apostles Inference, Is our Heart condemn us, God is
greater then our Heart, and knows all things. If we regard the Judge in our
bosom, how much more must we regard the Judge of Heaven and earth? if we
stand in awe of the knowledge which we have of our selves, how much more must
we reverence the piercing eye of GOD? Nay, if Cain, and Judas, and such other
wretches were so distressed and perplexed, when they were but (...), only
condemned by themselves, and it is so fearful a thing for wickedness to be
condemned by its own Testimony; Wisd. ^^.
How will they be at their wits end when they shall be (...), arraigned
before CHRIST coming in the glory of his FATHER, and all his holy Angels with
him? when the Books shall be opened, and the lury give evidence unto the Judge
according to those things that are written in those Books? The misery must
needs be answerable, and it is fit that our fear be answerable to the
misery. Certainly, it is the drift of the Apostle to work an Affection in us
suitable to the object that he sets before us. And we shall do well to make
that use of it, use of the Inference which he makes arguing from a condemning
Conscience, unto a Condemning God, whom no Judge can equal in Omnipotency, no
Jury in Omnisciencie.

My Text entreats not only of a Condemning, but also of an Absoluing
Conscience, and it makes a comfortable Inference thereupon. And here we are
first to observe the absolute comfort of a good Conscience, that from thence we
may ascend unto the Comparatiue.

The absolute is Boldness, boldness in Judgment, for so you must understand
it sutably to the Argument. The word is (...) freedom of speech. A guilty man
is tongue tied, as you may perceive in the Parable of the Marriage Feast, the
man that wanted a wedding garment was no sooner asked, Friend, how came thou
in hither? but he was even speechless. The eloquentest man will become mute
out of the guilt of his Conscience. It is no small comfort that a servant can
utter his own defense in the presence of his Lord. The Syriacke Paraphrase
renders the word by Reuelationem faciei a guilty man hangs down his head,
he hides his face; so the Scripture describes Cain. And indeed confusion is
inseparable from guilt. The Philosopher can tell us that Blushing in children
is nothing but the veil of Consciousnesse, and men that do not easily blush,
supply that defect by hiding their face. But Innocence needs no such covert,
it shameth not to be seen; the cheerfulness of the countenance, does
speak unto the world the guiltlesnesse of the Conscience.

St. ^ Corinth. 1.
Paul calls this boldness (...), a Gloriation, because it is the only thing
wherein a man may glory, yea, and joy too, for A good Conscience is a
continual feast. Pre^. 25.
Whatsoever man's state is in this world, he can never be defrauded of this
glorious joy. He that has a good Conscience has more comfort under the
Cross, then he that has an ill Conscience can find in the midst of all
his pleasures, for Conscientiam malam non sanat preconium laudantis, nec bonam
vulnerat conuitiantis opprobrium. This is the general comfort, and therefore
it is found as well in the Judgment of the Heart, as of God.

But from the absolute consideration hereof let us come to the Comparatiue. If
we feel this boldness in the inward Judgment, we shall feel it much more in
the outward, if the imperfect verdict of our own Heart so cheer us; what
cheer shall we conceive out of the perfect verdict of GOD?

But the boldness that we have to Godward, does appear specially in three
things. First, in Prayer, in that a good Heart brings us to GOD, Hebr. 10.
in full assurance of Faith, and the answer of a good Conscience makes
intercession for us to God. 1 Pet. 3.
Secondly, at the day of Judgment, when a man of good Conscience will not
fear the wicked, nor be troubled; he stands confident like a Lion while
the other fly. A good Conscience is that same Oil which the wise Virgins had
to trim their Lamps when they met the Bridegroom, which made them stand
with boldness before the Son of man. Thirdly, in Heaven, when they shall
appear before the Throne of GOD, there to attend with Angels and Saints.
Blessed are the pure in heart (says CHRIST) for they shall see God. Argue then
thus; If it be comfort to behold GOD by Faith, what comfort will it be to
behold him by sight? If it be comfort to find a Quietus est when we call our
selves to an account, what comfort will it be to receive our discharge from
GOD? if it be comfort to me to talk familiarly with my own Soul, what
comfort will it be for me to talk familiarly with GOD? We must argue from the
one to the other, as from a finite unto an infinite thing, and so conclude the
greatness of the one, from the little taste that we have of the other.

To draw toward an end. The scope of this Scripture is to teach us what use we
must make of our Conscience. We should consult it before we set our selves
about any moral work; and assure our selves that it is a more faithful
Counselor then are our lusts; they draw us whither themselves incline, and
what themselves abhor from that they withdraw us; but the Conscience will
deal most faithfully with us, it will diswade us from nothing but that which
is evil, and persuade us to nothing but that which is good. And happy were we
if we would make it our guide. Natural men were less unhappy if they did so,
for they would less offend GOD, and should be less punished. Christian men
were much more happy; for their guide would teach them more to please GOD, that
they might be more blessed. But if this do not move us, let us fear the
aggravating of sin; the more means, the more guilt; the more guilt, the more
stripes. And what use will a man make of other means, that neglects this
domesticke, that sits so close to him as his own Heart?

And yet see; I report me to every man's own Conscience, whether he be ruled
less by aim, then he is by his own Heart? Our Conscience is furnished both
with the Law and with the Gospel; and how could we so enormously violate either
if we would hearken unto her, if we would suffer her to direct our actions? But
this is rather to be wished then hoped for; all are not so provident as to let
their Conscience prevent sin.

Well; howsoever we neglect the first work of Conscience, we cannot avoid
the second; if we will not take notice of it, it will take notice of Us; it
takes notice of all our doings, whether they be good or bad, and proves a
comfortable, or uncomfortable Jury unto us. Neither is this all; Our selves are
trusted not only to give in the verdict, but also to take it, whether it be
against us, or for us. And as our Conscience will not spare to doom us
according to the Law, if we be guilty, our selves shall pronounce what our
sins deserve: So will it not fail to assure us of all the Blessings of the
Gospel, if it find us innocent, and we shall rest assured of the truth of our
own Judgment: And why? GOD will second our Heart, his work will keep
correspondencie with ours, whether it condemn or absolve. Only for the
greater terror of the wicked, and comfort of the godly, let us not forget the
inequality; if we sincke under our own Judgment, we shall sincke more under
GODS; and if our own do yield boldness, GODS will yield much more.

Wherefore read te tibi, forget not the preventing work of thy Conscience to
be ruled by it, Bernard. Meditat.
neglect not the enquiring work of thy Conscience, to prognosticate of thy
future state according to it. Let every one of us endeavor with St. Paul to
have an vnoffensiue Conscience toward God and men, that he may solace himself
in that true peace thereof in this world, and have the consummation thereof
with Aeternall Bliss in the world to come. Amen.

Pntote dxa THe.
FINIS.
A Meditation upon Psalm 19. VERSE 14.
Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in
thy sight, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer.
FAst and Pray; Lord I do fast, and I would pray; for to what end do I
withold sustenance from my body, if it be not the more to cheer up my Soul?
my hungry my thirsty Soul? But the Bread, the Water of life, both which I
find no where but in thy word, I partake not but by exercising my self
therein. This I begin to do, and feign would I do it well; but in vain shall
I attempt, except thou do bless; bless me then O Lord; bless either part of
me, both are thine, and I would withhold neither part from thee. Not my body, I
would set my tongue on work to speak of thee; not my Soul, I would exercise
my heart in thinking on thee, I would join them in Devotion, whom thou have
joined in Creation. Yea Lord, as they have conspired to sin against thee: so
do they now consort to do their duty to thee; my tongue is ready, my heart
is ready, I would think, I would speak; think upon thee, speak to thee. But
Lord what are my words? What are my thoughts? Thou know the thoughts of men
that they are altogether vanity, and our words are but the blast of such
thoughts; both are vile. It were well it were no worse, both are wicked, my
heart a corrupt fountain, and my tongue an unclean stream; and shall I bring
such a sacrifice to God? The halt, the lame, the blind, the sick, though
otherwise the beasts be clean, yet are they sacrifices abominable to God; how
much more if we offer those beasts which are unclean? And yet Lord, my
sacrifice is no better, faultring words, wandering thoughts, are neither of them
presentable to thee; how much less evil thoughts and idle words? Yet such are
mine, the best of mine, they are such; I cannot deny it, but grieve at it I
should, I do, that having nothing else to offer God, having nothing that is
required of him, this that I have should be such as he cannot like. What
remedy? None for me; if any, it is in thee O Lord that I must find it, and for
it now do I seek unto thee. Thou only O Lord can hallow my tongue, and
hallow my heart, that my tongue may speak, and my heart think that which may
be acceptable unto thee; yea that which may be thy delight. Do not I lavish?
Were it not enough that God should bear with, that he should not punish the
defects of my words, of my thoughts? May I presume that God shall accept of me?
Nay delight in me? Forget I who the Lord is? Of what Majesty? Of what
felicity? Can it stand with his Majesty to vouchsafe acceptance? With his
felicity to take content in the words of a worm? in the thoughts of a wretch?
And Lord, I am too proud that vilify my self so little, and magnify thee no
more. But see whether the desire of thy servant does carry him, how wishing to
please, I consider not how hard it is for dust and ashes to please God, to do
that wherein God should take content. But Lord here is my comfort, that I may
set God to give content unto God, God is mine, and I cannot want access unto
God, if God may approach himself. Let me be weak, yet God is strong; O Lord
thou art my strength. Let me be a slave to sin, God is a Sau^our, O Lord
thou art my Savior, thou have redeemed me from all that woeful state whereunto
Adam cast me, yea thou have built me upon a Rock, strong and sure, that the
gates of Hell might never prevail against me. These two things have thou done
for me O Lord, and what may not he presume of, for whom thou have done these
things? I fear not to come before thee, I presume my Devotion shall content
thee; be thy eyes never such all-seeing eyes, I will be bold to present my
inward my outward man before thee; be thy eyes never so holy eyes, I will not
fly with Adam to hide my nakedness from thee, for I am able to keep my
ground; seeing I am supported by my Lord, I doubt not but to prove a true
Israelite, and to prevail with God. For all my Woe, for all my sin, I will
not shrink, nay I will approach, approach to thee, for thou art my Redeemer.
The nearer I come to thee, the freer shall I be both from sin and woe. O
blessed state of man who is so weak, so strong; so wretched, and so happy;
weak in himself, strong in God; most happy in God, though in himself a
sinful wretch. And now my Soul, thou would be devout, thou may be what
thou would; sacrifice to God thy words, sacrifice to God thy thoughts, make
thy self an Holocaust, doubt not but thou shall be accepted, thou shall
content even the most glorious, the most holy eyes of God. Only presume not of
thy self, presume on him; build thy words, build thy thoughts upon thy Rock,
they shall not be shaken; free thy words free thy thoughts (thoughts and words
enthrauled to sin) by thy Savior and thy sacrifice shall be accepted.

So let me build on thee, so let me be enlarged by thee, in soul in body, That
the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart may be acceptable in
thy sight, O Lord my strongth and my Redeemer. AMEN.

A Meditation on Psalm 62. VERSE 9.
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are but a lie, to
be laid in the balance they are altogether lighter then vanity.
ALthough there is odds between man and man, as they act their parts upon the
stage of this world, some being Noble and some Ignoble, some abounding and some
wanting; some commanding and some obeying; yet were all made of the same mould,
and into the same is every man resolved in his due time, herein between rich
and poor there is no odds, except this be the odds, that the better are herein
the worse, so much worse as a Lie is worse then vanity. Poor men what they
are they appear, their state speaks their vanity, they bear it engraven in
every of their wants, for what are wants but the steps of vanity? Vanity
whereunto man is subject by reason of his fall, even so far subject, as that
it cease not incroaching on him, till having exhausted that little which he
has, it lodge him in the grave; In hunger and nakedness, in contempt and
heaviness who does not read vanity?

But this is but the outside thereof, the inside is worse; the Lord knows
the thoughts of men that they are vain, and men vanish in their own
discourse, which has much folly, little solidnesse, witness the looking
glass thereof, the talk of most men, most vain talk.

The understanding is not so vain, but the Heart is much more vain; how idle,
nay how evil, are the desires thereof? So much as is manifest, is able to
confound us: but how intolerable is that which is not manifest? Certainly
that is most vain.

But the vpshot of Vanity stands in the vanity of our Hope, our hope is
felicity, at that we aim, and of nothing are we more disappointed then of
that; for when we come to reap the fruit of our discourse, of our desire, we
find our selves deluded, and our end is wretched.

And indeed, Vanity is not only a bare want, but an evil that accompanies
that want. If our veins be destitute of good humors, yet are they not
empty, wind will take up the place of good blood, and where that is, it
tortureth with ach, the crampe, and sundry diseases: even so vanity is not
only a want of spiritual substance, but it is withal a painful wind, a
disquieting emptiness. Such vanity follows the nature of man; if any one be
a Son of Adam he is subject to this vanity. And no marvel; for from Adam
it was propagated, and it is as natural to his issue, as their nature is, that
nature which they derived from him after he ceased to be a Son of God. For
where God is, there substance is, and where God is not, there is no substance.
This we grant, we think no better of the common sons of Adam.

But the sons of Noble men are they no better? Are they also vanity? Their
state promises better things then so, there appears in them few steps of
vanity. If we look on their outside it may seem so, for they have food to
satisfy their hunger, yea sauce to their food that they may eat with
pleasure, their bodies are warm clad, not only so, but their garments speak
their wealth, they are well guarded with attendantes, countenanced with
Alliance, and advanced to all degrees of honor; helps they have to prevent
sickness before it come, and when it is come they have helps for to cure it.
What do they want? And if they want not, how are they vain? Surely in this,
that all this is but a Lie, it seems, it is no substance; had it not all his
first original from nothing? And how can it then but return to nothing
again? And what stay can that be which it self is fleeting? Be our garments
never so rich they wear, but we wear faster that are couered-with them; they
do but hide from our eyes the evidence that we do grow old, they keep us not
from growing old, could we as often put on a new body, as we do a new garment,
then garments might be some remedy against vanity; but we keep on still, and
never shift our body, it is never the younger for our new coat. Gay clothing
is but a Lie.

And as for food, that is much more a Lie. As a man is not the better for his
garment: so he is nothing the worse; but the delicate fare of great ones is so
far from being a preservative against death, that nothing speedeth it faster;
excess in quantity, variety in quality of meats at rich m^ns ^ables, or
rather in rich men's stomachs, what are they but the roots from whence
springs sickness? and the arms (as it were) wherewith death lays hold
upon them? Then is not meat a Lie?

Friends it may be will steed us better; none less then great men's friends,
in whom especially envy reigns which is the forge of ruin; so that the
greater friends are, the less commonly may they be trusted; Fidelity is not a
virtue of the Court but of the Country; brand then such friends with a Lie,
for their friendship is no better then a Lie.

But if they fail us, our honor will support us; he that is in authority is
his own Pillar, he may rest securely upon his own power; no man less; he is
like a fair Castle ab^ue ground, well planted with Ordinance, and furnished
with Munition, you would think it impregnable, but it is subject to a Mine,
and often is over turned before he that gives the blow can be perceived. Many
have been brought to their end by their secret cunning, from whom they
received greatest respect in the eyes of the world.

If any dignity be privileged it is the Throne of Kings; but what are their
Thrones but the stages of Treason? He is but a stranger in Chronicles, that
does not read that all kind of honor is Cronicled for a Lie.

What remains? Only servants; and will they stand by us when others fail?
Nothing less; of all men's theirs is a most mercinarie fidelity, their service
does not out-liue their wages; yea how often do they sell their Masters life
in hope of better wages? Let them wear their Cognizance, their true Cognizance
is a Lie. If clothes, if meat, if friends, if honor, if attendants, if every
of these be but a Lie; what is all worldly greatness? Is it any more then a
Lie? Nay, how great a Lie is that to the making up whereof concur so many
Lies? So that the Great men, whose outside seems to lift them up above
ordinary men, gain nothing by their advancement but this; that whereas
ordinary men appear to be what they are, that is Vanity, Great men are so,
but do not appear, and therefore their state has another, but no better
name, it is a Lie.

The case of all then, high and low is bad, if it be no worse then this, that
it is Vanity, that it is a Lie. For what do we abhor more in nature then
vanity, which is the emptiness of nature? What in good manners more then a
Lie, which is the counterfeit of good manners? We think nothing ought more to
be endeavored then sollidnesse in Being, and sincerity in Appearing, and
abhor nothing more then the contrary to them both. So that to have our state
not only paralleld with, but to become Vanity and a Lie, we may deem the
greatest debasement that can be thereof.

And yet it is not; the comparison does us too much honor, we are not worthy
to be matched with these; though these be of so small weight, yet they
ouer-waigh us in the scales of God; if we both be waighed, our lightness will
soon discover the inequality. And indeed no wonder; for vanity is nothing in
comparison of sin, and a natural Lie in comparison of a moral. To be
mortal takes away much of that substance which we had in our Creation, but to
be sinful takes away much more; the Maxim, Quod efficit tale illud ipsum
est magis tale, holds most true between sin and vanity; for man becomes
subject unto vanity through sin, and who does not know how much lower sin
does carry us, then does vanity? Vanity lodges us in the earth, sin
tumbleth us into hell; and that is lightest that carries us lowest the more
sollid every thing is, the nearer to God, and the farther from God it carries
us, the lighter it must needs be.

And behold a Paradoxe; Here grauia tendunt sursum, and Leuia deorsum; so that
they that are light in the scales, are out of the scales very heavy, they
sink down into Hell; and they that are in the scales heavy, are out of the
scales very light, they so are as high as Heaven.

But it may be thought if men of low degree be singled by them selves, or men
of high degree by themselves, their weight is no greater; yet if they be
joined each will help to augment the others weight, and what they cannot a
part, they may do going together; at least counterpoyse, if not ouerpoyse,
Vanity and a Lie. No verily; for as a Cipher added to a Cipher makes but a
Cipher: so Vanity is no whit the heavier by the addition of a Lie, nor a Lie
by the addition of Vanity. Put high men and low men, all sorts of men, yea all
persons into Gods balance, and you shall find that, if they have no other
weight then that which is in men they cannot hold weight, no not with vanity
it self, then which you would think nothing can have less weight; and indeed
nothing has but sin, wherein stands the chief lightness of man.

O Lord thou have appointed a Day wherein thou will weigh all both things and
persons, and try how much they have lost of that sollidnesse which thou have
bestowed upon them; I confess that I had lost much, yea all true sollidnesse.
I brought none with me out of my mothers womb, but it has pleased thee again
to repair it in part, and promise it in whole. Grant that of whatsoever Degree
I am, I may think no better of my nature then it is, and may value thy grace
according to its worth; make me which am a son of Adam, a child of God, and
so free me from vanity. And if thou be pleased to prosper me on earth; yet
Lord prosper me much more toward Heaven, and free my greatness from a Lie.
So shall I not be light in thy scales with that lightness that descends to
Hell, but heavy with that sollidnesse that ascends to Heaven. Amen.

A Meditation upon Hebr. 9. VERSE 27.
It is appointed for all men once to die, and after death comes Judgment.
O My Soul, what now thou art, thou can not continue long, and what thou
shall be, it is good thou timely do consider. Thou now dwell in a body
made of clay, and daily mouldring into dust, thou can have no surer
prognostication that it will have an end, then thy continual experience that
it is mortal. Were there nothing but Age that wrought upon it, it would
wither, but when sickness, which speedeth sooner, and spends faster, conspires
with Age to ruin thy habitation, how can thou be unmindful of the fall
thereof? How can thou but every hour expect it? But there is a higher
remembrancer, one of whom thou may less doubt in this case, then of either
sickness or Age, and that is God, he has decreed it, All must die; thou art
one of that All, and of All, not one that can exempt himself from, or except
against Gods decree. Especially so just a decree, no less just then
peremptory, no less peremptory then just. God peremptorily threatened death
before thou sinnedst, and since thou have sinned Justice can do no less then
give sentence against thee, the sentence of death. The Soul that sins must
die; thou art a sinful soul, and therefore thou must taste of death. Thou
must not look that those eyes of thine which have been the windows of lust,
shall always gaze upon this besotting world; thou must not think that those
ears of thine, by whose gates have entered so much vanity, shall still be
inchaunted with the flatteries of thy deceitful friends; thou must not think
that this taste of thine, importunate solicitor of thy appetite, shall still
serve to pamper thy body with delicacies. These things have had their time, and
it is but a time that is allowed them; they were, and the more they do, the
less shall they be able to do; dimnesse casts a veil upon thine eyes, and
deafness locks up the doors of thy ears, and thy taste forgets to discern
thy meats. And justly become they so infeebled, that kept no measure in their
strength; what they should have done, they delighted least to do, though by
doing it they might have lasted long; and what they should not have done, in
doing that they took their greatest solace, though in doing of it they wrought
their own decay. Had not Eve beheld the forbidden fruit more willingly then
God; hadshee not listened to the Serpent more attentively then to his word; had
she not tasted the Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil more sweetly then
the tree of life; I had had immortal eyes, ears, and taste. But because she
abused them, I must loose the use of them. But why do I derive my fault upon
others? Why do I uncover my Parents nakedness? Are my teeth set on edge only
because they did eat sower Grapes? My self did eat in them, and after them,
my self have eaten like unto them; I do not so much resemble them in nature
as concupiscence; what so ever they planted, I have watered; and watered that
often, which they planted but once. And as if I feared that their ill
husbandry would not prove fast enough, my self have been a toylesome
Husbandman in cherishing the briers and thorns that have choked even all those
few corns of good seed, which I derived from them. At least if their leprosy
ouer-spred my whole man, yet was it not so deep rooted, or so strongly settled,
as by my ill diet it has since been. What then may this house of my body,
this garment that covers my Soul, expect, but to be used as the leprous
house, the leprous garment, which in a fretting leaprosie were, the garment to
be burnt, the house to be plucked down? And indeed, as impossible is it for
the Iuie that springs and ouer-spreads a wall, to be killed, without taking in
sunder of all the stones, and separating them from the mortar which knitteth
them together; as for the native sin wherein I was borne, branching it self
over every part of my body, and power of my soul, to be purged, except I be
dissolved; my Soul part from my body, and the parts of my body loose that
knot wherewith each is linked to the other. I do not then complain of the
Decree; it is just, it is necessary; my sin makes it just, and that this
sin be dispossessed, it becomes necessary; necessary for All and then for me.
I would yield unto it, I would be contented with it, blessed Apostle, the word
of the Lord which thou have spoken were good, I would obey it, I would yield to
death, though death be bitter, were there not a heavier thing that follows
death, more terrible then death it self. Let me feel Gods hand, so I come not
into Gods presence, into the presence of the Judge, to give an account for my
life. Blessed Apostle, is it not enough that my Soul can no longer enjoy her
body; no longer by her body enjoy those things wherein she has placed her
sovereign good, that she can no longer solace her self with her mate, take
comfort in her offspring, eat the fruit of her labors, receive honor from
others, bestow favors at pleasure, be an Oracle unto many, and to as many be
a terror? Blessed Apostle, is it not enough that these things fail, and I must
part with them? No, thou say no, when thou have lodged my body in the the
Grave, thou suffer not my soul to rest, thou call her to a straight
account, thou tellest her of a Judgment. How vainly have I been abused by
heathenish proverbs that told me death ends all, and yet all is not at an end?
When I come to death, I must come before my Judge, I must answer the Law, the
Law must try my life, how well I have observed it, how answerable my carriage
has been to it And Lord what a fearful thing is this? When thou, blessed
Apostle, did reason of these things, thou made Foelix a great man a heathen
man, to tremble, and a greater then Foelix, the King of Niniuie did tremble
also when he heard Jonas. And yet how little did they know thy Law? How much
did their ignorance excuse their transgression thereof? And what then will
become of me that know so much, and have so little to plead? Can I choose but
tremble? O Lord while I live, I often hear of thy Law, and the account that
must be given thereof, but I never had so much grace, as Foelix, or the King of
Niniuie, no not when I read the story of Foelix, and the King of Niniuie.
Neither of them only, but of good King Josias also, whose heart did melt at
the reading of thy Law, when he saw how unanswerable the lives of his people
were thereto. And what wonder that Josias heart did melt, when Moses himself
did quake at the receiving of the Law? Surely these all felt the terror of the
Judgment, they knew what it was to come before their Judge. And I, the more in
my life I was senseless, the more sensible shall I be hereof in my death;
unexpected evils afflict the more, especially if they be great, their
impression must needs be deep. But be I affected never so woefully, I must
appear, I must be tried, he that gave the Law, will inquire into the
observance of his Law. While we live, many cover our faults, which, when we
are dead, they will not stick to amplify; and he that living goes for a
Saint, after his death is traduced as a devil. A heavy Judgment, yet how
many undergo it? But this is their comfort, that of this Judgment they have no
sense, how their name fares in this world, in death they know not. But against
the other Judgment there is no shelter, all the storms of it must light upon
us, in our own persons we must answer for our selves, and we are not so well
known to our selves as to him that sifteth us. Yet so much we know, that we
shall trauerse no Indictment we shall plead guilty to every Bill, our own
conscience is a true counterpart unto Gods Book, we shall be charged with
nothing out of the one, which we shall not read distinctly in the other. To
read it were enough for the uttermost confusion; for what man knows, and does
not abhor himself? Had we a true looking glass, wherein we might behold
the manifold enormous sins of our life, never could any thing be more ugly,
never would any thing be more abominable, never were we so much in love with
our selves, when we acted sin, as we shall detest our selves, when we see
the stains of sin. But detestation and confusion are but the first part of
this Judgment; the worm, the sting, bitter tortures, even before we are
sentenced for Hell, make us to be woeful wretches. Add hereunto that which is
the hight of shame, the depth of pain: Were no body privy to our sins, but
our selves, the knowledge of them will confound us; but when they become known
to others, if they be but men, sinners like our selves, and therefore more
likely to be temperate in their censure, the shame grows double; but how
manifold then will it be, when the Angels shall be witnesses to it, the holy
Angels, whose purity will the more illustrate it? Nay God himself whose Image
we should bear, and to whom how unlike we are, his presence will make most
manifest? So that our shame will be out of measure shameful. Our pain will
be no less painful: For here in this world the remorse of sin, even in
those that have not a seared conscience, is many ways delayed; in sleep, by
feasts, with company, many other outward helps, but especially the putting
far off the evil day, and the weak information that our distracted
understanding gives our Heart, and the hardness that does benumme the senses
thereof; all these more or less do mitigate our pain. But after death these
lenitiues are withdrawn from us, our eyes will be kept waking, our stomach
fasting, our friends far from us, our wits that were wise to do evil, and
to do good had no understanding at all, shall then be wise only to know our
evil, but good of ours it shall have none at all to know, and our heart was
never so waxie, to be wrought pleasurably with sin, as it shall be feeling
when it is affected with all kind of woe; This is our condition after death,
and such is the Judgment, where at we must appear, even the first Judgment.

Demie-Atheists though they would not hold an absolute imortalitie of their
Soul, yet for a time, till the day of Resurrection, they dreamt their Souls
should be as senseless as their bodies, but it was but the devils Sophistry
to comfort the wicked with a Souls sleep from the hour of death, until the
general Assizes of the world; as he did with hope of a general pardon after
some years of torment, which made Origin to think that at length the devils
themselves should be released from pain. But (blessed Apostle) I believe thee,
I will not flatter my self, I do not more certainly expect death, then I do
look instantly thereupon to come before my Judge; I know that there is a
Judgment before a Judgment, a private before the public; I believe as truly
that even now Dives burns in Hell, as that Lazarus is in Abraham's bosom, and
I do no more doubt that Judas went to his own place, then that the good
thief was that day with Christ in Paradise; no sooner does the soul leave the
body, but God does dispose it to rest and pain.

O ever living God, impartial Judge both of quick and dead, thy decree is
past upon my life, for my arraignment, I am here but a soiournour, and yet
accomptable for what so ever I do here. Let not this decree be unknown, pass
unregarded of me, if health, if prosperity promise a longer term, a careless
life, let me try their persuasion by thy infallible word. For there shall I
learn that heaven and earth shall pass, the greater, how much more this little
heaven and earth of mine? and that thy word only endures for ever. Yea I see
that all things come to an end, but thy Commandment is exceeding broad; and it
is this Commandment that thou have laid upon my body, and laid upon my Soul;
a heavy Commandment that sounds nothing but that which is unsavory to flesh
and blood. Death unsavory, but Judgment much more; skin for skin and all that
ever a man has he will give for his life; but life it self who would not
part with that he might be free from Judgment? My soul and body are loath to
part, but much more loath to appear before thee; it is grievous to forgo that
which I love, but to feel that which I fear is much more grievous; if I die,
I want what I would have, but if I come to Judgment, then I must endure that
which I abhor, death ends the pleasure which I take in life, but Judgment
reckons for the inordinatnesse thereof. And it is a double grief to be so
stripped, to be so tried; but what shall I do? Thy word must stand, and
seeing it must stand, let me not doubt, let me not neglect, let those two be
ever before mine eyes, let me use this world as if I used it not, seeing the
fashion thereof does pass away, and I change faster then it. The little world
have thou proposed as a glass wherein we may behold what will become of the
great world, both appear subject unto Vanity; thou have subjected both, the
frame of both must be dissolved, so deeply is sin rooted in either, that
nothing can extirpate it but the dissolution of the whole. But the case of the
greater world is better then that of the little, that is dissolved, but this
must be arraigned also; arraigned for it self, arraigned for the great world
also, If that have any evil it has it from man, man infected it, and it is
dissolved because of man; but man for himself, his own sin, makes himself
and others mortal also, good reason that he which has baned the world, so
ruined the frame of all Gods creatures, should account for it unto the owner
thereof. If a subject trespass against the King, or his Image, the Law does
challenge him, it calls for an amends; and can the King of heaven and earth
be wronged in his creatures, be wronged in his own Image, and not challenge
the offender? No Lord, there is great reason, as for man to die, that has made
all things mortal, so for man to be judged that has done it by sin, no
reason that other things should suffer, and he escape, nay, great reason why the
blame of all should be laid upon him. He deservedly must be exposed to shame,
and blush for whatsoever himself has deformed, and what he has made to
groan, he must sigh for it. The mask must be plucked off, where under in
this life we hide our selves, and our sense must be rectified, wherewith in
this world we excuse our selves, we that would not judge our selves must be
judged of the Lord. And his judgment shall be without respect of persons;
This Judge stands at the door, his Assizes are proclaimed, no sooner are we
quickened but we are informed of death and Judgment, no sooner come we out
four mothers womb, but we witness our knowledge thereof; every day of ourlife
is a Citation day. But as it wants not a date: so it prefixeth not; a day,
every one must dye once, but the time of his death no man knows; every man
must be judged; no man knows how soon. This uncertainty makes death and
Judgment more terrible. And it should make us more watchful; watchful for
that which we are sure will come, but when it will come, we are unsure; when
it comes it is fearful, but it comes suddenly. Did it concern my
temporal state I would take great care; if the good man of the house knew when
the theife would come, he would surely watch, and not suffer his house to be
surprised; And care we more for our goods, then for our selves? For that which
may be repaired, then for that which being past has no recovery? So senseless
are we, so usually are we ouer-taken. Let it not be so with me, O Lord, let me
ever meditate upon Death, and let me ever be provided for Judgment.

Before Sickness provide Physic, and Righteousness before Judgment.

A Meditation upon Philippians 1. VERSE 21.
Christ is to me life, and death is to me advantage.
I Have been at Mount Sinai, I have heard the thunder, I have seen the
lightning, I have felt the shaking thereof, it has put me in mind of my
mortality, at it I have learned what it is to be arraigned before my Judge.
Were there no other Hill, I were in woeful case; woe is me, if I have no
succor against death, which I cannot avoid; against judgment, which is so
strict. But blessed be God, I have a succor; though God bring me to Sinai in
my passage out of Egypt, yet is it not his pleasure that I should stay there;
the Cloud is risen and goes before me I will up, I will follow it; And see, it
brings me to another Hill, it rests me upon Mount Sion; I no sooner lift up
mine eyes unto that Hill, but from thence comes my salvation. And no marvel;
that Hill is the Hill of the Lord, it is lifted up above all Hills, the Hill of
Mercy is higher then the Hill of Judgment, there the punishing Angel that
with his sword drawn pursues the sins of men is commanded for to sheath it.
It is Hie^usalem indeed, The Vision of Peace, there is the Altar, there is the
Sacrifice, whereat God will be worshipped, wherewith he will be pacified. Yea,
where Abraham shall have his Jsaac redeemed, and a Father greater then Abraham,
will give a Son dearer then Isaac, that Isaac may live; and indeed to be an
Isaac, that is a matter of true gladness unto Abraham. There David shall find
a truer David; David out of love to his people would have yielded his life to
end their plagues, but he finds there a David that is more loving, and more
beloved, and which indeed there does what David was but willing to do, but was
willing in vain; for no man can by any means redeem his brother, or give a
ransom to God for him. No man, if he be no more then a man, can do it, it is
a work of God, of David's Lord; he it is that is the Resurrection and the Life,
it is his blood that speaks better things then the blood of Abel Abels blood
called for vengeance, even the vengeance of eternal death; and so does all
sin, which shed the blood of a more righteous one then Abel, even the blood
of Christ himself, it should call for vengeance unto God. But see how the
voice thereof is changed, and how Christ excuses sin before he sacrifice
for sin; Father forgive them they know not what they do, even in the act of
his Passion, he makes this intercession; when he felt their wrongs, see how
he excuses them to his Father; that they may find mercy, he pleads for
them that they do it ignorantly. How much more did he in his Oblation for
sin speak for remission of sins, when in his Passion he was so indulgent
unto sinners? This person do I find on this Hill, and I find him able and
ready to calm all the storms that were raised in me at Mount Sinai. The
storm of Death, the storm of Judgment: for must I die? I fear it not, I am
assured of life; Christ is to me life. Is death the gate that leads to
Judgment? I will enter it, it shall turn unto my gain; for the Tribunal of
God is but the Theater whereon I shall be crowned. Yea, Christ has so altered
both death and Judgment, that well may I say Perijssem nisi perijssem, I had
never tasted of such a life, had I not been subjected unto death. And how much
of my glory should I have lost, if I should never have been brought unto Gods
Bar? O Jesus how wonderful is thy virtue, what strange effects proceed from
thee? The Alchymists boast much of their skill, that they can turn baser
metals into better, lead into silu^r, copper into gold; but this is their
presumption whereupon they build* that these baser metals are in their nature
in the way to the better, and they do but perfect that which is imperfect, and
which, by the course of nature of imperfect would have become perfect, if they
had nouer labored it. But they never adventure to turn dross into silver, or
dirt into gold. Thou do more, much more, of so base a one as I am, (for who
is more base then a sinner? who is indeed seruus seruorum, a slave of slaves,
for sin is nothing but servitude, and the Master whom a sinner serves, who
is it but the Devil? then whom there is none more slavish, of so base a one
thou make a vessel of gold, even where there was no disposition to become
such, thou have given so excellent a nature, and make death to become life.
Thou have quickened me, which was dead; I that was dead in sin am quickened by
thee the fountain of grace; my understanding lives, my will lives, my
affections live, they live their true life, they know God, they love God, they
long after him, they discover the evil of sin, they hate it because it is
evil, and what they hate, that they abhor. Are not these Evidences of life?
I cannot be dead so long as I feel these things in me. I feel them in me;
but I confess they spring not from me, they have a better Fountain, that is,
Christ; He is this life of mine, it began in him; when he became one with me
by his personal Union, then the Understanding, then the Will, the Affections
of man which had been long dead began to live. As this began in part when
Christ became one with me by personal union, so did it stream forth into me
when I became one with him by Mystical Union; then the beams of his light
cleared my darkness, the comfort of his Heat warmed my chilnes; then was I
quickened by the influence of his life. I do not count that life which I lived
before, though it go for such with men, and it seemed such to me. I thought as
the world thinks, that if my soul dwelt in my body, I was alive, but alas,
if Christ be from my soul, my soul is dead; and how can a dead soul quicken
my body, the body of a man, of such a man, as should be of the same society
with Angels? Well may it make my body vegetable, and so range it with the
Planets, and yet therein I shall come short of many of them. It may do more,
my body by it may become sensible, and I may be of the condition of beasts;
and yet therein how many of them will ouermatch me? Happily, or unhappily
rather, it may boast of more, it may boast that it makes me reasonable; and
indeed such faculties have I, but corrupt, in that I have a reasonable soul.
But this aduanceth me no higher then Devils, and herein the Devils incomparably
surmount me. But that life, which is the chief life, the life which is proper
to the children of God, I live not except I live by Christ; and if once I live
that life, I live indeed. And hear a Paradoxe; I desire to die, this life
makes me most desirous of death, of any death, saving that which is opposite
to this life, I would not die the death in sin, but the other death I will
die most gladly. I would be dissolved, I would lay aside this Tabernacle of my
body. Not that grace makes me unnatural to my flesh; No; it makes me love
my flesh the more, the more, but the more truly. I would have my body do
as well as my soul, and therefore I mortify it, that it may be holy, as my
soul is holy. Flesh and blood thinks that fasting and watching and other
castigation of the flesh is a hateful austeritie of the soul, but well may
the soul reply, Castigo non quod odio habeam sed quod amem, and though this
chastisement seem not for the present to be joyous but grievous, yet
afterward it yeildeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are
exercised thereby. See a great gain in this death; by it I which served God at
first only in the law of mind, come thereby to serve God also by the same law
working in my members. Something I get by it, but not so much as I would, for my
mortification leaves too much life in my flesh, and the old man is too strong
irrecouerably to die by my strokes. Therefore what I cannot do, should I not
be glad when God is pleased to do it? pleased so to dissolve this body of
sin, that it may cease from sinning, yea, be brought to that case, that it
may be fit for a glorious Resurrection. And is not this a great Gain, the
happiest seed time that promises the best Harvest that ever man can look for?
When I die, I sow my body in corruption, but when I rise, I reap the same
body again in incorruption; when I die I sow my body in weakness, when I
rise I reap it again in power; when I die, I sow my body in dishonor, when
I rise, I reap it again in honor; finally, when I die, I sow it a natural
body, but when I rise I reap it a spiritual. And is not this gain? and this
is the gain of death. Foolish were that Husbandman that would spare his seed,
and lose his Harvest; but much more foolish were I, if I should be unwilling
to die, that know death is the seed of such a Resurrection. You see what my
body gains by death, my soul gains much more, the grace I have does but
set an edge upon the desire of that I shall have, and hope deferred is the
languishing of the soul, but a desire accomplished is as a tree of life. If I
delight to behold Christ in the Looking glass, to hear him in the Riddle of
his Word; how shall I be ravished with him when I shall see him face to face;
and hear him speak without Parables?

O my soul when thou think hereon can thou do less then break forth into
Saint Paul's words, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ which is
much better for me? It is good I confess to be in the Kingdom of Grace, but
much better to be in the Kingdom of Glory. Suffer me sweet Jesus, to desire
the best, I know the best should be the vpshot of my desires. I hear King
David say; O how plentiful is thy goodness which thou have laid up for all them
that fear thee, and that thou have prepared for them that trust in thee before
the sons of men. Lord I hunger, I thirst for these things, to be satisfied
with the fatness of thy house, I would drink my fill out of the rivers of thy
pleasures. And seeing my soul cannot come to these except it come to thee; for
the good of my soul I desire for a time to be freed from my body, that my
soul may attain that blessedness, by which my body also in her due time
shall be more blessed. If my body gain, and my soul gain, when death
puts them so asunder, how great will the gain be when after death they
shall both conioyne their gains together, and each shall communicate his good
unto the other? When death approaches me, it shall not be accounted either a
thiese or a murderer. Let wicked men who have their portion in this life, and
beyond this life expect no other good, so account of death. And well they may;
for it robs them of all that they account good and bereaues them of that
which they account life. But death cannot deal so with me; for it has no
power over my goods, and over my life; I lose nothing but that which I am
willing to leave. I will at all times leave the flesh pots of Egypt to be fed
with Manna, and forsake the muddie waters of Nilus, to drink of that water
that streamed from the Rock; it shall never grieve me to change the food of
men, for Angels food. And for this mortal life, why should it be precious
unto me, that hinders me from that which is immortal? No, let this life die,
that death may be my entrance into that life; that life which is indeed life,
the life of Saints, yea, the life of God. By death I gain this life, because
by death I come to Christ, who by grace is my life here, and when I die will be
my life of glory.

The young man's Meditation upon Death, grounded upon Wisdom 4. VERSES 7, 8, 9,
10, 11.
Though the righteous be prevented with death: yet shall he be in rest.

For honorable age is not that which stands in length of time, nor that is
measured by number of years.

But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age etc.

He pleased God, and was beloved of him; so that living amongst sinners he was
translated.

Yea, speedily was he taken away lest that wickedness should alter his
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul.


WE would be immortal, we cannot be, all sinners are doomed to die; yet of a
mortal life who does not desire the longest term? who would have his Spring
to prove his Autumn, and be gathered before he is ripe? It is unpleasing
enough to nature that it must be dissolved, but then to be dissolved when
soul and body begin each most comfortably to enjoy the other, must needs be
most bitter. It is now my case; in the quickness of my sense must I taste of
that potion; mine eyes must be closed, when they do but begin to judge of
colors; and my ears do but begin to judge of sounds, and they must be shut
up also; my pallat has but tasted, and set an edge upon my desire, and I must
away, and leave these delicates to others, others must enjoy whatsoever worldly
thing I have, and the worms must enjoy me, enjoy my body. And for my soul,
scarce has it been initiated with knowledge, after which it thirsts
naturally, scarce has it given proof of her virtue, wherein it delights
principally, but I am taken from this School, wherein I thought to prove
wise, from this Theater, whereon I hoped to be exemplarie; but unlearned as I
am, and vnrenowned, I must yield, and my name must be buried with my Coarse.
What shall I say to all this? and against this evil what is my comfort?
Surely, I must calculate mine age a new, and judge better of Gods intent
herein. Gods Calendar is not like man's, a thousand years to him are but as one
day, and one day to him as a thousand years. Let a wicked man live a thousand
years, because he is a wicked man, his thousand years are but a day, nay, the
worst part of a day, that is the night, for the evening and the morning did
make the first day. Let a good man live but a day, and because he is good, he
has lived a thousand years, for he is ready for God, and the longest time of
our Pilgrimage, if it be Methusalems age, it can but make us ready. I will
then enquire not how many days I have spent, but how much I have profited,
profited in the ways of God. And I have profited so far, as to acknowledge,
that of my self I am but an unprofitable servant; what I should I cannot do;
but I do that which I should not; so that if I guess at my readiness by mine
own worth, I am most unready. But I have another valuation, by my being in
Christ; my faith is steadfast in him, my Hope has cast an anchor in Heaven, I
fear not Gods judgment, against which my faith does hearten me; I expect a
Kingdom which my Hope does promise me; And as for my love though the world
does woo me, and my flesh does often yield to dally there with, yet has it
none, to whom it is devoted, with whom it is contented, in comparison of God.
And what greater readiness can I desire? my Audit is made, my arrerage paid, I
have a Quietus est; why do I fear to come to my trial? Nay, the bargain is
made, Heaven is purchased for me, I have the Conueyance why do I stay from
taking possession? Am I so senseless as to affect the worse, that am offered
the better? shall I dote upon this house of clay? my youth makes it seem
better then clay, though indeed it is no better; a glased pitcher,
notwithstanding the luster, is but a pitcher, and the verdure of youth is but a
gloss set upon a lump of earth cunningly wrought by the hand of the Potter;
age that wears that gloss will discover this clay. And why should I murmr
at God that is pleased to let me see quickly what in time I must needs see?
That I am brickle. Neither am I only brickle, but the world is frail also,
and all the things of this life, whatsoever they promise, they perform no
perpetuity to me. Seeing then sooner or later the world must leave me, and I
must leave the world, let me leave it rather sooner then later; the less
acquaintance the less grief at the parting; and indeed the longer I live the
more unwilling shall I be to dye. Now peradventure I leave behind me a father
and a mother, and leave grief unto them for the loss of a child; but I cannot
so feelingly grieve as they, when I depart from my parents, because love
descends more then it ascends. If I live, I may marry, and marriage
doubleth the bitterness of death, when they that of two became one, by death
of one are made two again. And if God bless me with posterity, how much more
unwilling shall I be to die? How hardly shall I endure to be rent from mine
own bowels? I say nothing to the common infirmity of Age, which seems to
have appropriated unto it self covetousness, and who knows not how hardly
the love of money, and death consort together? But these are the weakest
holdfasts that the world has on me, there are much stronger, the hooks of
sin, which, where they catch so fasten even upon the Will which is in it
self most free, that it makes men desire rather to be slaves unto Pharaoh,
so they may feed on the flesh pots of Egypt, then to endure the difficult
passage into Canaan, though, when they come there, they shall be Princes of a
land which flows with milk and honey. God then that knows what may alter
me and of ready make me unready, deals more mercifully with me, he
preuenteh that evil that might stay me from him, and having prepared me,
calls me unto him.

Lord all seasons are in thy hand, and thou have appointed unto me this season;
I bless thee for it, I submit my self to it; if I be ripe in thy Judgment
gather me, though in mine own Judgment I am green. And thou which feast that
although I now stand, yet I may fall, least I fall, take me whilst I stand. It
does not grieve me, I am most willing to change earth for heaven, to have those
windows of my senses all broken down, that my Soul may be at liberty;
having no agent for the world to solicit me from God, I shall more freely,
more fully give my self unto him; my understanding to know him, my heart to
love him, and more shall I learn in one days sight of God, then in many
thousand years I could have gathered out of the Glass of the world, or Riddle
of the Scripture. And how base spectators are men on earth in comparison of the
Saints in heaven, who shall witness my service, and behold my glory? Do I
love my Parents? I go to better, my best Father is in heaven, and my best
Mother is Jerusalem above; the joy that I foretaste for seeing them, makes me
insensible of the heavy farewell I take of these. I am not moved with their
wealth which they have stored up for me, and the land which they have purchased
is as nothing in mine eyes, I shall have a more enduring substance, a lot is
fallen unto me in a more pleasant place, I have a more goodly Heritage. And
why? The Lord is the portion of mine Inheritance and of my cup, the Lord
maintains my lot. Lord then teach me so to number my days, that I may measure
them by righteousness, and let me so interpret this thy summons by death, as a
warning to take shelter before a storm. Hasten me on by grace, that I be not
long on my way to heaven, and in my way lest I decline, shorten more and more
my passage, so shall I be as willing in this morning of my age, as I should be
in the evening thereof, to change my state and come to thee, to pass from
earth to heaven.

(*)

The old Man's Meditation. PSALM 91. VER. 16.
With long life will J satisfy him and show him my salvation.
Every man, if a child of God, is a double man, and so leads a double life,
and longs for a double good, a corporal, a spiritual; that he may hold out
long in regard of the life of nature, and withal be ponest of the life of
grace. Thus doubly happy would every one be, but it is not the portion of
every one. Many have shortened either the one life or the other; if they have
lived unto God, their days in the world have been but few; and of those which
have lived many days in the world, how few of them have they lived to God? O
my Soul then, how blessed art thou, whom God has blessed both ways? Blessed thee
in thy natural life, thou art grown till thou art ripe; blessed thee in thy
spiritual life, thy eyes have seen the salvation of God. The greatest
blessing that God bestows upon earth, he has bestowed on thee; thou have
experienced the truth of the Apostles speech, Piety has the promise of this
life, and of that which is to come. For this life; God has bestowed upon thee
length of days, thy time is not reckoned by nights but by days. And some men
that live long, all their life long, never see the Sun, their time is night,
it is an uncomfortable time. No sense has his contenting object, they are all
covered with darkness, yea, and if it be a waking night, instead of
contenting, every sense is haunted with discontenting objects. Such nights do
many live in this world, which have presented unto them many eye-soares, and at
whose ears do enter many heart-breake sounds; whose perfumes are the damps of
loath-some prisons, whose bed is little case, whose sustenance is the bread and
water of affliction, whose robes are fetters and manicles; finally whose
consorts are wretches no less forlorn then themselves. Such a night how many
live, yea of what length are such nights of theirs? But Lord thou have
vouchsafed my life to be a Day, the Sun is up to me, and I have the pleasure
of beholding the light, my eye wants not content, my ear has her pleasures,
and every sense is cherished according to his kind. I have not been pinched
with famine, I have not been consumed with sickness, thieves have not spoiled
me, I have not been exposed to the tyranny of malice, my life has been a
day; yea many days; for my prosperity has not been like the good day of an
Aguish man, which has been succeeded with painful fits, but every day has
been a day; the Sun has not set, the clouds have not ouer-cast the Sun;
so that all my whole life seems to have been but one day. But there are
Winter days and Summer days, short and long. It had been well if my life had
only been a day, though that had been but a Winters day, at least many
Winter days. But to have my day, yea my days, and have them at length, how
much better does it make my state? In a Winter day, as the Sun stays not
long: so it warmeth not much; but in a Summer day the longer it staieth, the
more it warmeth; then my length of days are attended with the warmth of days,
and to have both length and warmth, what more can a man desire for this life?
Yes, a man would have the stinting of them, he would not have them end until
himself say enough. And so far has Gods mercy gone with me, he has
satisfied me, I never had my appetite satisfied more to the full with the most
delicate meats, then my heart is sariat with my days. It is enough Lord; now
let me die. But I forget, thou have done much for me in my natural life, how
much more have thou done for me in my spiritual? My spiritual life also has
been a Day, it has been I say a day and no night. The Soul has a night no
less then the body, and much heavier is the night of the soul, then that of
the body, the darkness is more uncomfortable, the terrors thereof are more
intolerable. How uncomfortable is it for a man who naturally desires to be
happy, to be ignorant both where he must seek it, and how he must come at
it, and so to wander all the days of his life in vanity? And did he walk
only in Vanity, the discomfort were not small; for it is no small discomfort
still to hope, and yet still to have his hope fail. But for a man to have
vexation of spirit added unto vanity; whereas we abhor nothing more then
misery, out of the guilt of conscience to be harrowed with the forerunners of
eternal misery, how intolerable is this? How uncomfortable, how tedious is
this spiritual night? Or rather how desirable, how comfortable is that day
which has freed me from that night? I was in it, I was borne, borne in it, for
Lord no man comes out of his mothers womb, but he is borne in the night, and
the day does not dawne to him until he is newborn out of the Churches womb.
Therefore do the ancients fidy call Baptism (...) illumination, because then,
he that commanded light to shine out of darkness, does shine unto us in the
face of Jesus Christ, and we are translated out of darkness into his
marvelous light. It is my blessing that I am light in the Lord, made light,
not light of my self, but illightned by him. Lord if thou had not illightned
me, I could never have seen; thou that restoredst his sight that was borne
blind corporally, have wrought a greater miracle in restoring my sight that was
borne blind spiritually. Let others boast in whole, or in part of the strength
of nature, I do, I will confess that the eyes of my mind are a gift of grace,
these eyes that see that which I see, and cannot but be blessed in seeing it, in
seeing Gods salvation; a blessed sight that discouers that object. How glad was
Abraham when he saw the Ram which was an exchange for Isaac his son? How
glad was Hagar when she saw the fountain, wherewith she refreshed both her
self and her babe? And were they glad at the sight of these things? How glad
then should I be that see a Lamb, the Lamb of God that offers himself to
be a ransom for me? How glad should I be that see the Well, the well of
living waters which only can quench my thirst? Isaacs danger was nothing to
mine, well might his soul for a time be parted from his body, both were to
go to a blessed rest; but my danger was that soul and body both must have
burned everlastingly in hell. Hagars thirst was nothing to my thirst; she
traveled in the hot sands, and I in the midst of many tyring sins; no
corporal pain can so spend our spirits, as the conflicts do of a troubled
soul. How willingly then do I behold the Lamb? Behold the water? Even the
Lamb and water, that are my Jesus. Many saluations there are but no saluations
of God but in him; there is no name under heaven given by which we may be saved
but only the name of Jesus, he is indeed a Divine Savior, the highest degree
of salvation is placed in him. Let others make their peace by other means, I
will be ransommed only by this Lamb; let others quench their thirst in puddle
streams, I will drink at this well, this salvation of God which God has made
me see. For Lord thou have not dealt with me as thou did with Moses, to
whom thou shewedst from mount Nebo the land of Canaan, but sufferedst him not
to enter in; what thou have showed me, thou bestowest upon me, and he that
has eyes to behold thy salvation, by seeing does enjoy the same. It is not so
true in Nature as in Grace, Intellectus fit omnia; certainly this is
everlasting life, even to know thee to be the only God, and whom thou have
sent our Savior Jesus Christ, for by beholding with open face this thy
salvation, we are changed into the same Image from salvation to salvation by
the spirit of Christ. O Lord that art pleased I should live, I bless thee, for
that my time has not been night but day, even Summers days, long, and warm,
cheerful and fruitful. But the day of my Soul has been much better then
the day of my body, seeing the Sun of righteousness has also risen unto
me, who has so illighned me, that he has discovered thy salvation to me.
That salvation which freeth me from all I fear, and supplieth unto me all that
I want; my eyes are upon both, yea my self is possessed of both. And what
could thou have done for me Lord, which thou have not done, that have blessed
me so corporally, that have blessed me so spiritually? I have no more to expect
in this life, and therefore I willingly surrender it to thee; this long-liued
body, this spirituall-liued soul: Hoping that both shall turn their length
into eternity, and their days shall be yet much more clear, and much more
warm, where God is the Sun, and both light and heat are such as proceed from
that Sun.

A Meditation upon Psalm 39. VERSES 12, 13.
12. Hear my prayer O Lord, and give ear unto my erie, hold not thy peace at
my tears: for I am a stranger with thee, and a soiourner as all my fathers
were.

13. O spare me that I may recover my strength before J go^ hence, and be no
more seen.


O Lord, I am mortal, I see it, I feel it, but it is thou that have cleared
mine eyes, and quickened my sense, which otherwise are to dim and dull to
read, or acknowledge what notwithstanding I bear engraven in capital letters,
and the condition of my nature makes palpable. Yea so are my senses taken up
with other objects, and so little am I willing to know that, whereof (if I be
not willingly blind) I cannot be ignorant, that except thou had rowsed me,
and thy afflicting hand stung me, I should certainly have been both deaf and
dumb; I should not have heard thee, neither should thou have heard from me.
But Lord, the bitter Potion that I have taken from thy hand has wrought thus
far, as to make me confess that it is too hard to be digested by me; if
thou do not delay it, I must needs perish by it. Yet Lord I know that it is
not the end whereat thou aymest, thou meanest not to take me out, but weane me
from the world. This use if I make of thy rod, thou will quickly give over to
lay on stripes. I have made this use, I now do better know my self. I lived
before as if I were not only in, but also of the world; I used not the things
of this world, but enjoyed them rather. Now I find that I have here no abiding
place, I am but a soiourner; a Tenement I have here, but no freehold; the
goods that I have, I account them not mine otherwise then by loan, and
therefore am as ready to leave them; as I have an uncertain title to them.
And if I am but a soiourner in this place, I must needs be a stranger to the
persons; little commerce with them, little affection toward them have I. And
why should I have more seeing they will have little with me, and bear little
toward me? I am crucified to the world, and the world is crucified to me?
Weeds grow near the corn, and corn near the weeds, but yet the neerenesse
is not without a strangeness; for neither do their roots suck the same juice
in the ground, neither above ground do their stalks bear the same fruit:
even so thy children, O Lord, that cohabit with the children of this world,
neither inwardly nor outwardly live by, nor walk with the same spirit which
the worldlings have. My root is in heaven, and my fruit heavenly. I am
transplanted from the wild Olive into the true, and grow no more in the fields
but in the Paradise of God. Neither is this my single condition, I have it
common with my Fathers, I am their heir, and their inheritance is descended
unto me; what they were not, I desire not to be. neither would I be more inward
with the world then they desired to be. Happily flesh and blood may suppose
that it has a greater interest in things of this life, and nearer cognation
with the men of this world; but it is a supposall of flesh and blood. I make it
not the Judge of my state, neither according to it do I esteem my self, I
have better Parentage, and better can I prove my Pedigree* I acknowledge none
for my fathers that had their portion in this life; from them I descended that
used the world as if they used it not, and walked with thee; with those
Pilgrims, I profess my self a Pilgrim, and my life but the life of a
wayfaring man that is on his way to the Holy land. Therefore as they, so I
desire not to be surcharged with earthly things, neither to surfeit on the
vanities of this life; I desire to live, but it is, that I may keep on my way,
to have the things of this life, but no farther then they are necessary for my
journey; I have enough, if I have enough to do this Measure unto me so much,
and so temper my cross that I may not come short of this. I desire not to be
immortal in a state of mortality, far be that from the heart of thy
servant; only let me not be dis-inabled to my journey, so long as I am fit to
walk therein, and to walk toward thee. Forbear to sour my life and make
bitter my days; I would serve thee cheerfully, I would serve thee
courageously; deiect me not, enfeeble me not, let not thy heavy hand
ouerwhelme me with heaviness of heart, neither let thy punishing hand enfeeble
my fainting spirits. It is not long I desire to live, neither is it continual
ease that I affect. I know that the later is not safe, too much ease is the
bane of piety, and more have gone to heaven from the Rack, then from their
Downe-bed. And as for the former, it is against the Decree, thou have made our
days but a span long, and the time of our pilgrimage, is but a moment, scarce
worthy the name of time. What then is my desire? That of this little thou
should afford me a little, a little breathing before I breath out my last.
Let me be a while, what before long I must cease to be, a vigorous Pilgrim;
let me walk strongly, that before long shall not be able to walk at all; let
me foretaste heaven on earth, and try me with the use of earth, how much I
prefer heaven before it. If thou continually affright my conscience with the
horror of sin; if thou daily for sin afflict my body; if thou put no end
to the malice of men; and if thou cloud the state of thy servant with incessant
disgrace; how shall I so forlorn a wretch, so distressed a caitife, not be
ouer-whelmed with despair and prove restiue in my way? How shall I inwardly or
outwardly mind my country, and rejoice in my hopes? These things I would do,
but by reason of my pain I cannot do. What remains then but that I desire
release, and thou deny not my desire? I make my suite, as one that desires to
speed, passionately, feelingly; ^pray, but my prayer is a Cry; and my cry is
powered forth not only by my tongue, but also by mine eyes. Behold Lord a true
Penitent, whose voice is not only verbal, but real; and can thou stop
thine ears against such words? can thy relieuing hand forbear to succor when
it is importuned by such deeds? thou that have opened my mouth, vouchsafe to
open thine own ears, and let the fountain of merciful comfort stream down
upon him, from whose eyes thou have drawn floods of Tears; speak comfortably
to him, that speaks penitently to thee; and deal graciously with him, that
prostrateth himself humbly before thee. So shall I willingly be a soiourner in
earth, that I may be a Citizen of heaven; a stranger to the world, that I may
be a friend of God: the ease that thou give me shall encourage me in thy
service, and I will live so hear, as he that shall not live long. And because
I shall, when death comes, be no more a mortal, though never so worldly a
happy man; I will endeavor that I may be, by thy grace, an immortal, an
eternal blessed Saint.

A Meditation upon Psalm 63. VERSE. 1, 2.
1. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my Soul thirsts for
thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a barren and wearisome land where no water
is.

2. So have J appeared before thee in thy Sanctuary, that I might see thy
power and glory,


O Lord, I want, I seek relief, to whom shall I come but unto God? And with
thee I dare be bold, thou art my God; there is store in God, and my want cannot
be relieved but by his store. I am in a wilderness; for what is this world but
a wilderness? Nay my self am a wilderness; what is a wilderness but a dry
earth, which tireth those that pass through it? And what is the cause? It has
no water; no water to quench the traueilers thirst, no water to make fruitful
the soil that it may bear food to sustain his hunger, no water which may
enable the earth to become green, or be imbellished with flowers, the sight
whereof may ease the wearisomnesse of the traveler that languisheth and
faints through thirst and hunger. This is the state of a wilderness; and in
such a wilderness am I, dry and weary, no moisture, no strength: and why? I
have no fountain, I have spent that moisture which I received from thee. Thou
made me a green tree, but I am become dry, withered, no fruit, no leaves,
no sap, as far spent as was the prodigal Son; and all by sin. And yet
sin does not leave me, it turmoiles me still, and my blood being spent, my
spirits wasted, the blood and spirits of grace and goodness, now I faint, now
I am weary. And gladly would I recover some strength; even as gladly as the
prodigal child would have fed upon Husks, but he found none that gave him.
And here in my wilderness I find no waters except they be the waters of Marah,
so bitter they cannot be drunk; or of Jericho, so bad that they will make the
land barren; of such Waters I have springs enough. Every outward sense, and
every inward; my understanding, my will, are fountains of such waters;
fountains that stream forth and moisten my whole man, yea and turn the whole
man into a dead Sea. This goodly as it were Garden of the Lord, which was set
every where with trees of life, I mean my body and soul, inwardly and
outwardly representing the Image of God, what are they now, but even as the
dead Sea? And what are all the fruits thereof, but even as Sodom? I want not
waters then, but sweet waters; the want of them makes me a wilderness,
fruitless and yet fruitful; fruitful in roots of bitterness, in thistles,
in briers, the fruits of a cursed soil. But fruitless am I, in whom grows
neither the Lilly nor the Rose, neither is my life innocent, nor my heart
patient; I am as indisposed to suffer for well-doing as to doing well. But as
for these better plants, the Vine that cherishes God and man, the Olive by
which they are honored both, and the sweet figtree that grows in Paradise,
they grow not in my soil, dry soil, that has no sap of that kind. And yet a
soil in husbanding whereof I tire my self, and therefore well may I call it a
wearisome soil; all the fruit it bears is but vanity of vanities, and all
my comfort is but vexation of spirit. Seeing this is my case, where lies my
comfort? The comfort of my Soul, the comfort of my body, both are a
wilderness. But neither would be so; the thirst of my Soul, the desire of my
flesh, my dry, my tired soul and flesh speak their wants, and speak more
audibly then can my words what I want, what I beg. The thirst is mine, but that
I thirst it is thy gift, O Lord; the desire is mine, but that I do desire, O
Lord, it comes of grace; it is thy holy spirit that teaches me this language
which can be learned in no other school. And why Lord have thou taught it me?
Is it not because I should speak to thee? That my drougth should speak, my
weariness should cry? That both should ask of the Lord rain? For with thee
is the well of living waters; it is thou that turnest a wilderness into a
standing water, and dry ground into water springs. Unto thee then come I, O
Lord, that only art able to relieve me, because thou art a God of power; and
no less willing, then able, because thou art my powerful God. Even thou, O
God, that art three in one, and one in three: O God the Father I come to thee,
and in the bowels of a Father thou can not reject me; thou art my God, I have
no other God, then he that is my Father. O God the Son I come to thee; thou
can not refuse him whom thou have made thy brother; thou art my God, I have
no other God then he that is my Savior. O holy Ghost I come to thee; will thou despise him whose comforter thou have vouchsafed to be? thou art my God,
I have none other God then he that is my Comforter. A threefold cord cannot be
broken, and how should I fail that have this threefold stay? Let me be a
wilderness, a dry, a wearisome wilderness, was it not this God that of the
Chaos, unshapen and empty Chaos, made this solid, this beautiful fabric of
the world? And cannot be transform my wilderness into a paradise? Yea; the
waters of the Sanctuary no sooner entered the dead Sea, but they became living
waters; all things presently lived in it, and the Tree of life grew plenteously
all along the banks of it. Therein what do thou show, Lord, but how
powerful thy grace is, and what an alteration it can work in me? I
acknowledge this, and, Lord let me feel that truth which I acknowledge; make
have to moisten him that early seeks to thee. I should have sought unto thee
in the morning of my age; and happy had I been if I had so timely sought unto
thee, I had not so long continued in the wilderness: Yea the trees which now
scarce blossom would then have been laden with ripe fruit, the seed which is
now scarce in the blade, would have shot an ear, and been white for harvest.
But, Lord, I that neglected that morning, to testify my grief therefore take
holdfast of another morning; as much as I can I redeem the time, the day has
dawned, I suffer not the Sun to shine in vain; so soon as I can see my way,
I take my way to thee, I come early, I would speed betimes. See, Lord, my
desire in my haste; and, Lord, let thy grace hasten like my desire; yea prevent
my desire, who cannot desire so timely as I would. Only, O Lord, I take notice
of my Day, and would not have it spent in vain: Turn my morning into
high-noone, let the Sun of righteousness ascend unto his greatest highth;
but proportion my desire to thy light, and let me so begin betimes as that I
persevere unto the end; let my later works be better then my first, let my
motions be, not violent, which slacken as they go on, and are weakest in in
the end; but let them be natural, yea supernatural motions, let them increase
as they go on, and the nearer my race draws to an end, the hotter let my
zeal be toward God. Let me thirst the more, let me the more desire those
waters that moysten my drougth, and refresh my weariness; so let me appear
before thee. But where art thou? In thy Sanctuary, thy holy place. How
reverent is that place? And how unfit am I to be seen there? Is that a place
for a wilderness? Paradise is a better object of the eyes of God, where God
may see all that he has made; and see it good, and bless it being so; but
sin has no place in Paradise, Gods eyes cannot endure it; yea therefore were
the Cherubins set with the flaming sword that sinners might not approach the
place of God. How senseless then am I that being such as I am, dare approach
the place of God being such as it is? True Lord, I am senseless indeed, if I
come only as a dry, as a thirsty land; such an object is not for the holy
eyes of God, it is not to approach his presence. But if the dry land be also
thirsty, then thou call, Ho all ye that thirst come ye to the waters, and
he that has no money buy and eat, yea come buy wine and milk without money
and without price. If the barren land be weary, thou call O Lord: Come unto
me all that labor and are heavy laden, I will ease you, I will give you
rest. Seeing this thirst this desire is acceptable unto God, even where there
wants the fatness and fruitfulness of good works, and God, whose Throne is
heaven, and whose footestoole is the earth will look to that man, even to him
that is poor and of a contrite heart; though I want righteousness, yet
because I hunger and thirst after it, I am not afraid to be seen in the
Sanctuary of God, yea in the Sanctuary to look upon God. For I know what he
will show unto me, even his Power and Glory; he will show them both to me,
nay, he will show them both on me: His power, that shall work on me, and his
glory, that shall crown me. He will make me as a water garden, and plant me
with most generous plants, by his power; that so I may flourish and be comely
in the eyes both of Angels and men. Yea God will show his power, and God will
give me glory, that my eyes beholding them, my mouth may speak of them,
speak of the works of God, and tell what he has done for my body and for my
soul. O Lord, other creatures partake thy Power, partake thy Glory, but all
do not see it; we that are endued with reason, not only have them, but
perceive them; and it is our happiness that we know what blessings we have.
Lord let me never be so stupid, as not to behold thy Mercies; and when I do
behold them, let me also feel how blessed I am whom thou vouchsafest to
possess them; so shall I more and more confess that thou, O Lord, art my God,
and being my God, I shall make haste to thee; my Soul shall make haste, and so
shall my body also; my dry and weary body and soul shall go out of this
world, wherein there are no springs of life, and thirsty and longing as they
are, they shall approach thy Sanctuary, and there Lord, let them see, not
only feel, thy Power, thy Glory, quenching my thirst, and satisfying my
Desire. Amen.

A Meditation upon Psalm 90. VERSES 11, 12.
11. Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear: so is
thy wrath.

12. So teach us to number our days. that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom.


THE FIRST PART.
Sin and wrath by nature should go hand in hand, and as deep as we plunge
our selves in to sin: so deep should we sink in wrath. We should, if Justice
measured unto us as we deserve; but mercy has provided better for us, and God
is pleased to proportion the smart of stripes to the fear which we have of
them, the less fear, the more smart; and the less smart, the more we fear.
Thou have left it (O Lord) in the power of a sinner, how far thou shall take
vengeance of his sin. Let the Law speak never so terribly; let sin offend
never so grievously; let the curses be never so many; let the plagues be never
so manifold; yea let thy countenance be ouer-cast with never so thick a cloud;
let the burning coals that are kindled by thy wrath be never so scorching;
rore the waves of thy ouer-flowing indignation never so hideously, and be the
whirlwind of thy wrath never so tempestuous; fear, only fear, the fear of
a penitent Soul that trembles at the voice of thy Law, that melts at the
sight of thy Judgments, that accuses it self, that condemeth it self, that
is ready to join with God to do Justice upon its sinful self; this fear
(I say) that least armeth it self against God, is best armed and preuailes
best by stooping most. And this is powerful weakness, a conquering
captivity, a match ouer-matching that for which we can otherwise find no
match. This power (O Lord) have thou given to repentant fear, a blessed power;
and yet there are few that use it, though all do stand in need of it. And
why? Who arms himself against that whereof he has no regard? Men sin, but
little do they think that their sins offend God, and if they offend they
shall be punished, because God is not only sensible of his wrongs, but also
Judge of our lives; as he has prescribed the precepts of his Law, so has he
added sanctions thereunto; and as the precept shows what we must do, so what
he will do we learn out of the Sanction, if we fail to obey, thou (O Lord)
wilt not fail to strike, for there is Wrath with thee, and from thee will that
wrath break out on us. And woe be to us if it break out; for thy wrath, O
God, is a powerful wrath. And indeed how can it be otherwise, if it be thine,
who art a God of power? Can we look into thee and not apprehend Almightinesse
in thee? But our eyes are too weak to pierce so far, happily in that that
comes from thee a natural man may behold what power there is in thee. Heaven
and earth are the work of thy hands, nay they are the Host that attends thy
Person; if they are mighty, thou much more; for what they have, thou gave
them, and in proof thereof thou take from them at thy pleasure. As the Sun
did shine first at thy command: so at thy command it has lost his light; it
was from thee the fire received his burning quality, and when thou forbaddest
it, it could not burn; thou made the waters flow, thou spakest but the word
and they were sollid like a wall? Thou fixedst the Globe of the earth, and it
stood still: and when thou did utter thy voice, it quaked, it trembled for
very fear; when thou sendest forth thy spirit* thou renewest the face of the
earth, and all things wither and return to nothing if thou withdraw thy
spirit. How powerful then art thou, O Lord, at whose command is the power of
every creature, and fights for thee against thine enemies? The Sun can
scorch them, the fire consume them, the air poison them, the earth swallow
them; and how many spectacles have we of such Judgments? But what speak I of
these greater soldiers of thine, and weapons of thy wrath? How many beasts in
the fields? How many birds of the air? How many fishes in the Sea have
undertaken Gods cause against man, and executed remarkable Judgments upon
sinners? But I do not yet come home enough; he that reads the plagues of
Egypt, and considers what a destruction God wrought by frogs, and flies, and
lice, the least whereof wrested a submission from Pharaoh and his Kingdom, and
forced them to confess their unableness to resist can he choose but be amazed
at the sight of Gods power, when these creatures so far in their own nature
under the power of man, when he commands them to be his Executioners, so far
ouermatch the stoutest of men? But what look I without us for the sinnewes of
Gods wrath? What sinnewes may we find every man within himself? If God be
pleased to reward us according to our deseruings, he shall need no other, we
will do him this service our selves. Our wits will not only fail us, but
ensnare us; our hearts will be so far from eschewing, that they will carry
us headlong into all mischief; our eyes will see fearful visions; our ears
be filled with dreadful sounds; our tongues will betray us; our feet
miscarrie us; our hands offer uiolence unto us, no power of our soul, no part
of our body, wherewith we have conceived or acted sin, that will not lay on
some deadly stroke upon us for sin. But of all the soldiers of God wherein we
are most feelingly to behold the Power of his wrath, there is none comparable
to our own Conscience, which lays on so heavy a burden, and peirceth with
so deadly a sting, that there is no man whom it cannot crush with its weight,
and which will not run mad if he thoroughly feel the smart thereof. I will
not draw a man down into hell, where into notwithstanding wrath will tumble
sinful man; I might there show him utter darkness the privation of that light
which shines in heaven; unquenchable fire, in opposition to the Waters of life
that stream in heaven; the weeping and wailing instead of the endless music
that is above; the murmuring gnashing of teeth, instead of the triumphant songs
of blessed Souls; finally the tormented and tormenting fiends, instead of the
blessed Sain^s and Angels that are above. And what are all these but evidences
of the power of Gods wrath? And is the power so large, so palpable and yet
unknown? Can it be such, and yet not discerned of man? If he climb into
heaven, God manifests it there; and he finds it in earth, if his thoughts fall
thither; neither can he descend into hell, but there he shall meet it; nay he
must go from himself, or else God will force him to behold it. Why then does
thy servant Moses move this question, who knows it? Is it not because men do
not heed it, and so though they should, yet take no notice of it? And indeed,
Lord, if any be ignorant, his ignorance is inexcusable; and yet some such
beasts rather then men are there, that are willing not to know what they are
not willing to regard. Or if men be not so gross as thus to wink with their
eyes, that they may stupifie their hearts; yet do their lusts dim their sight,
and they see so imperfectly, that they they are but weakly affected with it.
Hence comes it to pass that thy minatorie words and works stay so few from
falling into sin, and reclaim so few that are fallen there into they do not
believe that thou will strike, until they feel thy strokes are on them. The
Israelites would not, as Moses had good proof for forty year; and we are no
better then they, though our trial has been much onger then theirs; we have
no useful knowledge of the wrathful power of God. This question may well be
moved of us, even of us to whom God has vouchsafed the same power over his
wrath; our little fear argues our little knowledge; and we may not think
that we have any true knowledge which does not end in fear; such a fear as
can hold Gods hand, or at least moderate his stroke is the only argument that
we have profited in that school of the great and lesser world, wherein we
have so full so plain a Lecture read unto us of the powerful wrath of God.

A Meditation upon Psalm 90. VERSE. 12.
So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
THE SECOND PART.
THou do manifest thy power, O Lord, and we are the monuments of it, our
mortality is; therein are graven the capital Letters that describe thy
powerful wrath.

For what is mortality, but a real voice in our ears, or presenting rather
unto our eyes the doom of sin? Thou made us immortal, and immortality
was a part of thy Image which art eternal; our time then had no term, it
could not be defined by any kind of period. But sin has abridged what had no
bounds, it has brought our life within a short compass; it is measured by
days; and days are* a^ the first, so the least part of Time which thou have
made. And these days are not infinite; in vain should a man desire to number
that which cannot be numbered; Jacob said his days were few, David that his
were but a span long; Saint James that no man's life is more lasting then a
bubble; a man would think a little Arithmeticke would cast up so small an
account; a man seems to need no better a master then a man; for what man is he
that is ignorant of this principle, That man is mortal? and that it cannot be
long before he return to dust. And yet Moses that was learned in all the
sciences of the Egyptians (amongst which Arithmeticke was one) desires to
learn this point of Arithmetic only of thee O Lord; and why? Is it because
(as Job speaks) thou have determined the number of his days? Would Moses
have thee reveal to every man the moment of his end? Such speculations may
well beseem an Egyptian, an Israelite they do not beseem. Thy children, O
Lord, know that it is not for them so to know times and seasons which thou
keep in thine own power, and are a secret sealed up with thee; we should
not pry into that counting house, nor curiously inquire into that sum. It is
not then a Mathematical numbering of days that Moses would be schooled in, but
a moral, he would have God not simply to teach him to number, but to number
so; and so points out a special manner, a manner that may be useful for the
children of God. And indeed our petitions must bear this mark of profitable
desires, and we should not ask ought of thee, but that by which (if we speed)
we may become the better; he that so studieth his mortality learnes it as he
should, and it is only thou, O Lord, that take him out such a lesson. But
what is the use, O Moses, that thou would have man make of such a knowledge?
Even to apply his heart unto wisdom; O happy knowledge by which a man
becomes wise; for wisdom is the beauty of a reasonable soul, God conereated
him therewith. But sin has divorced the soul and wisdom; so that a
sinful man is indeed no better then a fool; so the Scripture calls him; and
well may it call him so, seeing all his carriage is vain, and the vpshot of
his endeauours but vexation of spirit. But though sin have divorced wisdom
and the Soul; yet are they not so severed, but they may be reunited; and
nothing is more powerful in furthering this union, then this feeling
meditation that we are mortal. For who would not shake hands with the world,
that knows we must shortly appear before God? Yea who would not provide for
that life which has no end, that sees that this hastneth so fast unto an end?
Finally, who would suffer the arrows of Gods wrath that summon us unto
Judgment to pass unregarded, seeing the due regard thereof is able to turn a
Tribunal into a Throne of grace? Surely affliction, if we discern the hand
that infflicts it, is the best school of wisdom, yea of the best sort of
wisdom, the wisdom of the heart; it turns knowledge into practice, and
makes us more tender hearted then we are quick sighted; it does not only
discern that God is a consuming fire, but melts at the very sight of him; it
does not only know that Gods word is a hammer, but feels the force thereof
in a broken and contrite spirit; it conceive fears, so soon as it hears
threats, and is no sooner touched but it is reclaimed. And this is Wisdom,
the true wisdom of a mortal man, whose best help against mortality stands
in the awful regard of Gods offended favor. Seeing then (O Lord) this is the
fruit of that desired knowledge, and he is best seen in the length of his
days, that is most humbled with the sense of thy wrath; and he needs least to
fear death, that does (as he ought) most fear thee; vouchsafe to be his
master that desires to be thy scholar, and let grace teach what nature does
not discern, that I moulder into dust, because I corrupt my self with sin;
so shall I be weary of my natural folly that negotiates for death, and
affect true wisdom that is the Tree of life; with this I shall endeavor to
furnish not only my head, but my heart also; and that which now is the seat
of death, shall then become the receptacle of life; that life which begins in
thy fear, which is the only inlet of everlasting joy.

A Meditation upon Lament. 5. VERSE. 21.
Turn thou us unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned; renew our days as of
old.
We are mutable, and what wonder? Seeing we are creatures, we cannot know that
we were made of nothing, but we must acknowledge that to nothing we may
return again: and indeed thither we hasten if we be left unto our selves.
For mar our selves we can, but we cannot mend our selves, we can dedestroy
what God has built, but we cannot repair what we do destroy. Wretched power,
that is only able to disinable us, and has no strength but to enfeeble him
whose strength it is. I read of Adam the first monument of this unhappy
strength, but I may read it in my self; I (as all his sons) inherit as his
nature, so this self ruining power. But when experience has made me see how
valiant I have been against my self, inflicting deadly wounds, precipitating
my person, and misguiding my steps, I become disconsolate and helpless in my
self; what then shall I do? To whom then shall I seek? To the fiends of hell
that solicited me to sin? To the worldly vanities by which my lusts were
baited? Well may they add to my fall, raise me again they cannot, they will
not, such evil trees bear no such good fruit: and if they did, they would
rather have me a companion in their sin, and in their woe, then seek to free
me from, or ease me in either of them. But happily the good Angels, as they
are more able, so they are more willing to pity, to relieve me: but they
behold thy face, O Lord, and stir not but when thou sendest them, and they
only to whom thou sendest can be the better for them; these heavenly spirits
that attend thy Throne move not but at thy beck, and do no more then thou
commaundest. I see then that if I stray, it is thou that must fetch me home; it
is thou, Lord, that must lift me up when I am slipped down to the gates of
death, and my wounds will be incurable if thou be not pleased to heal me.
Thou Lord have made me know in what case I am, and only can redress my
woeful case, I seek to thee, and to thee only. To thy wisdom I commend my
head, illighten it, show me thy way; thou that of nothing made me something,
vouchsafe to make me something that have brought my self to nothing. Yea worse
then nothing, for sin is so, it does not only abolish that good which thou
have given me, but it fills me with evil that is opposite to good, yea to
God. And how much better is it at all not to be, then to be a sinner? To be
nothing, then to be a feind of hell? Never to have seen the Sun then to be
at enmity with God? This is the state where into I have cast my self, and
thus far have I estranged my self from thee. And how restless am I until I
return to thee O Lord? Sin forfeits many things besides God, but let a man
recover all, all besides will yield no content, except a man recover God. And
why Lord? Thou art the sovereign good, and without thee nothing is good. If I
do not partake the creature in reference to my Creator, well may I have it, I
shall have no true comfort in it. Take then all from me and leave me God;
though I have nothing yet shall I enjoy all things, for God is all in all.
Wherefore though I am sick, I do not desire health, I desire God; and it is
God that I desire when I am poor, I do not desire wealth; I am senseless of
all other wants, I hunger and thirst only after God. Seeing then thou, Lord,
only can quiet, can satisfy my Soul, if thou vouchsafe to turn me,
turn me unto thee; let me not make a stand before I come so far, neither let
me think my self recovered until I have recovered thee. Let others rest
contented with the dross of the earth, or with the pomp of this world, my
original is from heaven, and I can find no rest until my affections rest
there. Therefore return me unto him, from whom sin has estranged me, even
to thy self, O God; I beg this of thee, because I can expect it from none but
thee, and from thee I am sure I shall not expect it in vain. For be I never so
far gone, I cannot go out of thy reach, I can be no more out of the reach
of thy Grace then of thy Power; as thou can smite me, so can thou heal me;
and thou can bring me home, as well as thou can cast me out. Lord I make
no doubt of the success, if thou vouchsafe thy will; for Lord, if thou will
thou can make me whole, only thy power is equal to thy will, and thou can
do whatsoever pleases thee. Be pleased then, good Lord, to put to thy helping
hand that thy prodigal Child that by the first step of thy grace is come home
to himself, by a second step may come home to thee. I desire no new blessing,
no such blessing as thou have not vouchsafed to the sons of Adam, yea to me.
Thou made Adam after thine own Image, and me in him, holy and happy did
thou make us: such sunshine days were our former days, clear and warm,
without corruption, without mortality, though now we are both sinful, and
woeful; all our days are such evil days. But thou, O Lord, that command
at first light to shine out of darkness, and do continually exchange the
night for day, shine upon me; let the Sun of righteousness arise unto me;
become my father, make me thy child, give me grace to serve thee, and
vouchsafe thou to bless me; create a new heaven and a new earth in this little
world of mine, wherein let righteousness dwell. Yea and happiness also; let
them rest on my body, let them rest on my soul, let them rest on both all the
days of this life, until thou be pleased to remove both hence, and
consummate this thy favor in the life to come. Wherein my days shall be,
though like, yet much better, then my days of old; by so much better as
glorification shall exceed the creation. Thou see. O Lord, the vpshot of my
desire. Now let my desire be a comfortable Prophecy of thy favor; disappoint
me not of that for which thou have made me long; so change me by grace here on
earth, that I may be what I hope to be by glory in heaven; where all things
are made so new that they never can wax o^d, AMEN.

Meditation upon Ecclesiast. 41. VERSE. 1.
O death how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in
his possessions, unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has
prosperity in all things, and is yet able to receive meat?
We have no abiding place on earth, none have, but of those that would have
there are many. Many there are, O Lord, that, though they must die, cannot
endure to mind death, nothing more unsavory to some, then that their memory
should be exercised with the memory thereof. And who are they? Surely they
whom the earth most favors, are they that are best affected thereto, where
their goods are, there they think it is good being. And how should any be
willing to part from that wherein he finds content, and whereupon he has
set his rest? He it is that is not only in, but of the world; not only uses
but enjoys the same and from that which is our joy if we be severed, we
cannot be severed without pain. Heaven is a blessed place, and blessed is the
state which all are promised that shall come thither. But this truth we
believe, we do not see it; surely the worldly happy man does hardly credit
it, because he has no sense thereof. Sense that has immediately to do with
the world, as it is pleasured, so does it judge thereof, it judges it the
only place of happiness. If it may be so happy as to be fed to the full with
that which it desires; if we have goods, and have the use of them; what says
flesh and blood should I wish for more? And indeed what fuller definition can
an earthly mind make of a blessed life, then secure store, and a comfortable
use of such goods, which are the goods of this natural life? Although in
themselves they are fleeting vanities, yet sensual reason honors them with
the glorious title of substance, it thinks they are, and are what they seem,
because it judges according as it wishes, and what it would have them to be,
it holds them to be such. And if man be so unhappily happy as to hold them
without the opposition of envy or malice, and their wings are clipped from
flying away, the more propriety we think we have in them, the more are we
confirmed in our erroneous judgment of them. Nothing does more root a man's
heart in the world, then an over great calm wherein he sails and rides at
Anchor in the world; worldly peace does much help forward a worldly mind.
Especially if we be lulled a sleep by both charms of this peace, Security
and Plenty; if no body disturb us, no body impair what we have gathered,
no casualtie, no calamity cloud the Sun shine of our day, or sour the sweet
of our welfare, how can we but think that so secure a l^fe must needs be a
blessed life? But if our Spring be not only not blasted, but also bear all
kind of fruit; all go well with us, and we have the world at will, blessed in
the field, and blessed at home, blessed in our cattle, and blessed in our
corn, blessed in all where to we put our hand, how can we but deem our
selves possessed of a blessed state?

But having is not enough; though we hold all this securely, yet is it
comfortable use that is the Soul of sensual blessedness, if this quicken
that body, then is a man, a natural man then is as blessed as he would be.
When his eyes can behold the glory of his wealth, his ears be tickled with
the flattery of music, and the music of flattery, his nostrels breath in
the fragrancie of his Paradises and perfumes of his precious ointments, while
his pallat can taste and distinguish the delicacies of Apicean Cookerie finally
while every sense is courted with his fawning object, and nature has not
given over to delight in such courtings, but holds her self more blessed in so
partaking, then in having of such worldly goods; when such a state is befallen
a man, then is he^ come to the highest degree of that prosperity which the
world can afford. And being in it, little sense has he of ought besides it,
for hardly will it give leisure to the Soul to think that there is any other
welfare then that which is enjoyed by the dodie. And how should it think that
this is brickle if it never feel it crazed? How should it loath that which
never gave it any discontent? Finally how should it be willing to bid that
farewell, wherein all its welfare does consist? How then should Dives
clothed in purple and fine linen and faring deliciously every day, think of
death, and not think with horror, that comes to make so unwelcome a
separation? a separation between such loving friends that take such mutual
content each in the other, and whereof each seems with an inviolable league to
have devoted it self unto the other. P^reant qui inter nos dissidium volunt,
says flesh and blood, evil betide them that will break this true love knot.
And who can do this but death? And how should he be willing to hear of
death, that knows that death will do this? Death will give the lie unto our
goods, and prove they are not substance but a shadow; death will turn our
calm into a storm, and toss the ship that lay still; our wealth which we
have treasured it will bequeath to others, and it will lodge us in the grave
long before we desire to be at our iournies end. A natural man knows this is
so, but yet he takes no delight to make this the subject of his thoughts, the
feeling of this truth, when it falls out, is bitter enough. Why should he
taste the potion, thinks he, before he is sick? And lengthen his misery, by
making himself miserable before his time? The prognostication of such weather
does more afflict then the weather it self, and fear torments more then
pain. More is he distressed that forefeeth, then he that feels misery; for
fear and foresight are the tortures of the Soul, whereas death and the
harbingers thereof fasten their afflictions only upon the body. And much more
sensible is the soul, then the body can be.

Seeing this is the evil of worldly weal, and the ease our corrupt nature
takes in it makes us more to distaste the loy^^s of heaven, mix I beseech
thee O Lord my peace with war^^^, let me never be a secure Owner of my worldly
goods. Yea Lord; let them appear as they are transitory and uncertain, that
I may never repute them to be my goods. Let thieves strip me, let crosses
distress me, though I lose, yet I shall gain, and prosper best when I do
not prosper. Death that must come shall never be unwelcome, nay the
remembrance of it shall be my greatest comfort, it shall never find me but
willing to leave what I never did enjoy, and happy shall I account that hour
that shall take me out of the world, when it takes the world from me because
we never were at one, and therefore shall not fear to be at ods, the world
is crucified to me, and I to the world. Death shall have no pains in parting
our association, which shall find us before hand parted in affection; let death
be bitter unto others, to me it shall be sweet, and I will prepare my self
by timely thinking on it; so shall I never be uncomfortably surprised by it.

FINIS.

