SPIRITVALL ALMS: A Treatise wherein is set forth the Necessity, the
Enforcements, and Directions of the duty of Exhortation.

PRO. 10. 21. The lips of the righteous, feed many, but fools dye for want of
wisdom. By A. L.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Samuel Man, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Swan. 1625.

TO The Right Honorable, William Earl of Pembroke, Lord Herbert of Cardiffe,
Marmion, and S. Quintin, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, Lord
Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household, Lord Warden of the Stanneries of Deuon,
and Cornwall, one of his Highness most Honorable pri^y Council, my very good
Lord.
^ight Honorable:
IN liew of thanks, I am now become your remembrancer for Alms, but those
spiritual; to be distributed only by such on whom the spirit of glory
rests, and to be conferred chiefly on the glorious rest of the king of glory,
the Church militant I mean, all glorious within.

Was it not the glory of the Rulers and Princes of the Tribes of Israel, to
offer willingly among Gods people, for the frame of the Tabernacle, and
fabrique of the T(...)ple? And as the heart of Deborah was toward the
Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the people; so
did the pen of Nehemiah brand the Nobles of the Tekoites, that put not their
necks to the work of the Lord.

Surely, as this is a day of rebuke, wherein the word of mutual Exhorration
(the treasure of spiritual Alms, for edification of the Temples of the holy
Ghost,) is made a reproach; of most men neglected, delighted in of few, and of
many derided: so in this day the Lord seeks for a man among us, to stand in
the gap for the Land, that the glory thereof become not as a fading flower, and
the light thereof as the shadow of death.

Is not this therefore a time for Nicodemus to stand forth among Rulers, Joseph
of Arimathea among Counselors, and Theophilus among Nobles, to give witness
to the truth, and to hold forth the word of life; yea, and with so much more
shouting, to cry grace, grace unto it, by how much the more it is any way
disgraced?

Wherefore if any man's eye should be now evil, because among Nobles and
Counselors, mine eyes are thus hopefully fixed on your Honor for this
gracious acclamation; this wrong (if any should be) may easily be forgiven
me; because mere conscience not only long ago procured me such undeserved
respect in your Noble heart, but sithence also many such compassion are
favors, as I thereby rest

Your Honors most obliged servant A. I.

The Author to the Reader.
CHristian Reader, thou have here proposed to thy veiw, out of the glass of
Gods word the Necessity, the Enforcements, and Directions, of that most
necessary duty of Exhortation; much pressed in the holy Scriptures, not
purposely treated (that I know of) by any other writer, ambiguously trauersed
by some, and generally neglected of us all. My hearts desire and prayer is,
that all may be as profitable to the^ and to the Church of God, as it has bin
painful to me (a man of polluted lip^) not only in undergoing the censure of
man's judgment (which is a very small thing to him that knows the terror of
God, and sees him who is invisible) but in dissoluing doubts, removing
obstacles, discovering depths of Satan, and conuincing gainsayers, as well as
proposing the truth (all uttered as near as I could reach, with words which
the holy Ghost teaches) that by manifestation of the truth, I might com^^nd my
self to every man's conscience in the ^ight of God.

Pro. 17. 36
Why, says Solomon, is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom,
and he has no heart to it? And why, say I, should there be in the ^ands of
professors such treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and men no^ Pro. 9. 12.
be wise for themselves to employ them; but keep them, as Eccl. 3. 13.
riches are kept to the owners thereof for their hurt? Which the wise man saw
to be a sore evil under the sun. In the Turks winning of Constantinople it
is recorded of many Historians, that they ransacking that city, at first
wondered to see what little treasure they found therein. Whereupon Mahomet the
second, suspecting the treasures to be hid under the ground, commanded the
earth to be dug up, and the foundations of the houses to be searched: Where
finding treasures incredible, what, quoth he, how could this place lack
m^nition and fortification, which abounded with such great riches as here? And
indeed had they bin so wise to have employed the one half, or lesser part, of
these in their defense, never had Mahomet shared any part of them at all. Now
God forbid that by our folly in hiding our talents, our adversary the devil
should ever have just cause, either to make us such a hissing and byword among
men, or to Reu. 12. 1^
accuse us as Mat. 25. 26
wicked and sloathfull servants before God.

Behold, I who am less then the least of all the Saints, for Sions sake could
not hold my peace, but have produced my mite which by Gods grace is given me;
if by any means I may provoke the rest of my brethren (especially the great
Rabbis of our Church) to supply, rectify, and perfect, whatsoever they may
find defective, amiss, or imperfect in me: (For, who is sufficient for these
things?) That the abundance of grace powered on them may be Psalm. 133.
like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even
Aarons heard, that went down to the skirts of his garments. O Verse 1.
how good and pleasant might be our brotherly co-habitation by this spiritual
union and communion; and how hereby might our Church become, not only Cant.
6. 4.
comely as Jerusalem, but terrible as an army with banners? Whereas now for
want hereof it lies in many places as Pro. 24. 30 31.
the field of the sloathfull, all grown over with thorns, and nettles
covering the face thereof.

Pro. 20. 6
Most men will proclaim, every one his own goodness; and Pro. 26. 16
the sluggard is wiser in his own conceit then seven men that can render a
reason: but the treatise ensuing, not only proves him to be the only Pro.
11. 30
wise and Pro. 10. 21
righteous man (in Gods account) that by lips dispersing knowledge wins
souls, and feeds many with his lips: but also rips up the Mat. 23. 27
filthy, nasty, inside of many whited sepulchers, and grubs up the Pro. 15. 19
hedge of thorns that stands in the way of many a sluggard* 1 Cor. 8. 1
Knowledge puffs up* but Charity edifieth; as they are best zealous of
spiritual gifts, that 1 Cor. 14. 12.
seek most to excel to the edifying of the Church; so Pro. 18. 9.
he that is slauthfull (in this work of edifying especially) will prove be
other to him that is a great waster.

Herein albeit some may say of me as of the Prophet, Eze. 20. 39
Does he not speak parables? Yet this I a^de, that our souls may weep in
secret places to fore-thinke how we pr^fessors, even every one of us that has
Reu. 2. 4. 5
left his first love, and zeal, in whetting up each other to love and good
works (unless we remember from whence we are fallen and repent) will be
found among those great wasters and night-walkers, that provoke and hasten God
to remove our candlestick out of his place; and to lay waste his goodly
vineyard amongst us.

Wherefore w for Sions sake hold not your peace, and for Ierusalems sake rest
not, till the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the
salvation thereof as a lamp that burns. For he must x love Jerusalem,
whosoever he be that loves to prosper: and as in word we pray, Peace be within
thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces, so not only for our brethren
and companions sake, but chiefly because of the house of the Lord our God, we
must indeed and in truth seek her good. And there being not 1 Cor. 12. 3. and
cap. 13 and 14.
a more excellent way to be showed for this, then by charity to speak to the
edifying each of other: I say to every one that loves, and prays for the
peace of Jerusalem, as Ezr. 10. 4.
Shecaniah said to Ezra, Arise, for this matter belongs unto thee, we also
will be with thee (as many as love Sion) be of good courage and do it. And if
therein thou r^ceiue any help from this treatise following, remember the
unworthy Author when thou art in thy fervent prayers; that utterance may be
given unto him, with the tongue of the learned, to speak forth the words of
truth and soberness as he ough^ to speak.

Farewell.
A DIALOGVE, Proving and enforcing the necessary use of mutual exhortation,
and the orderly performance thereof.
Archippus a Minister Aristarchus Aquila --
two priuatmen.

Aristarchus. Neighbor Aquila, as I wish you may prosper, even as your soul
prospers; so I cannot but ask, what meane^ those cheeks of yours so bedewed
with tears?


Aquila. Alas brother, is not this the time even of Jacobs trouble? you hear
how great the affliction of Joseph is abroad; and you know the reproach that
lies on us at home, and how in^quity getting the vppe^ hand, does with Esaias
48. 4.
the iron sinew and brow of brass, so outface and bear down the Heb. 13. 22
word of exhortation, tha^ now (as in the Prophet Ho^ sea his time) Hos. 4. 4.
no man may strive nor reprove an other for this people are as the^ that strive
with the Priest yea, they (...). 5. 10.
hate him tha^ rebukes in the gate, an^ abhor him that speaks uprightly.
Having therefore so great cause to fear, that Amos 8. 10.
the end hereof may be as a bitter day, even the Hos. 4. 5.
destruction of our Mother, as the Prophet speaks: is it not better to weep in
Sion, for keeping out of Babel, then in sitting down by Babels rivers to weep
for Sion?


Arist. I confess that as this is a Esa. 22. 1^
day wherein the Lord God of host calls to weeping and mourning, and wherein
he that Psalm. 122. 6. 9.
loves Sion, and seeks her good, should with good Neh. 1. 4.
Nehemiah, and Psalm. 109. 136.
David, weep and mourn: so if men will not be Amos 6. 6.
grieved for the affliction of Joseph, nor Eze. 9. 4.
mourn for the abominations of Jerusalem, the Scripture marketh them out (as
with a black cole or a Amos 7. 8.
plumbe-line) for Amos 6. 7.
slavery, or for Eze. 9. 5. 6.
the slaughter. But shall tell you how in this very day, they that love to play
the good fellows, (saying 1 Cor. 15. 32.
lot us eat and drink, for tomorrow we dye) talk of us Esa. 61. 3.
mourners in Sion? Oh say they, let them, according to the Scriptures, Iam. 4.
8.
cleanse their hands, and purge their hearts, as well as mourn and weep, and
so Iool 2. 13.
turn to the Lord, as well as rent theit hearts; else what is all their
mourning better then Heb. 12. 17
Esaus blubbering, or their hearts-renting then Mat. 27. 3
Judas his repenting?

Let Luke 4. 23
the Physicians therefore heal themselves say they; and let them Mat. 3. 8.
bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, in dealing their bread to the hungry,
and covering the naked, etc. or else the Esa. 58. 5. 6, 7
Prophet tells them, that all this afflicting of their souls, for a day, with
their heads bowed down like bul-rushes, and sackecloath and ashes spread under
them, even all their fasting and mourning is as plain a mockery as our
merriment and fast-eating.


Aqu. Though Pro. 26. 18 19
mad men make sport in casting firebrands and arrows, and death, and the Psalm.
11. 2.
upright in heart be the special mark such mad fools privily shoot at, out
of the very Esa. 26. 11
envy they have against Gods people, whereof they shall one day be ashamed: yet
this reproach sticks as a Psalm. 42. 10
sword in my bones, and it may Psalm. 69. 20
break our hearts to think how many of us that are large in shows of
humiliation, are too strait -- laced in works of mercy, and 2 Samuel 12. 14
give great occasion to the enemies of the Lord thus to blaspheme.


Arist. And for my own part, when I consider what Hos. 10. 1.
empty vines many professors are in these respects, and how much fruit they
bear to themselves, as the Prophet speaks; and how according to the goodness
of our Land, they make goodly idols of back and belly, of purchases and
buildings, whereunto they sacrifice the first fruits, the fat and blood of all
their substance and increase in excessive superfluities: when in the mean time
the Lord Jesus (to whose Pro^. 3. 9.
honor these should be dedicated in more Heb. 13. 10
pleasing sacrifices) is suffered to lie in his poor members harbourlesse,
here hungry, and there naked, yea, sick and imprisoned, and yet unfrequented
and unvisited: when I think on these things, I say, my Hab. 3. ^.
belly trembles to conceive how speechless many a professor will be found in
that great day of reckoning, when Math. 25. 35
account will be exacted of these very particulars.


Aqu. The Lord therefore grant that in the mean time the reproaches of those
that Ier. 20. 1^
watch for our haltings, may serve us as Tit. 1. 13.
cutting rebukes, to make us sound in the Faith, the 2 Timothy 1. 5
unfeigned faith which Gal. 5. 6.
works by love; that we Heb. 12. 13
may make straight steps to our feet in these 2 Timothy 3. 1.
last pe^ilous times, wherein Romans 2. 2^
the ^orme of Knowledge and 2 Ti^ 3. 5.
show of godliness have so shrunk the sinews of the power thereof, that few
among many Gal. 2. 14. (...).
foot it aright, according to the truth of the Gospel. For Gal. 6. 7.
God is not mocked, Iam. 2. 13.
but he shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy, and
mercy rejoices against judgment.


Arist. I call to remembrance this day, a great fault of mine in a higher
strain of mercy, and I would to God it were not a general fault of
professors, and yet it is generally less heeded.


Aqu. What is that I pray?


Arist. Even that which at first your complaint might have minded us of, that
we have suffered the duty of exhortation to be hushed and put to silence
amongst us. For to what end has the Lord put Cant. 3. 11
honey and milk under our tongues, I mean the 1 Pet. 2. 2.
sincere milk of the word, Psalm. 19. 10
(sweeter then honey and the honeycomb) but that we should look to Pro. 10. 21
lip-feeding, as well as to hand-feeding? And if a man should hereupon ask us,
whether is greater, the body or the soul (as our Lord did in an other case,
Mat 6. 25
whether is greater the body or the ^ayment) might he not soon lay the finger
to the soar? If we deal our bread to the hungry bodies only, may not Mat.
5. 46*
even a Publican, a Pagan, do so? Every fool tha^ ri^h is, if they would bu^
Mat. 6. 2.
sound the trumpet, an^ play the hypocrites, might win the applause for doing
such alms: but Pro. 11. 30.
he ^ wise that wins souls and he Pro. 10. 21
the righteous man (in Gods account) that feeds many with his lips.

Howsoever therefore natural men, 2 Pet 2. 12
as bruit beasts made to be destroyed, cannot savor this Ioh. 6. 27.
food that endures to eternal life; ye^ we that are 1 Cor. 2. 17
spiritual, and should discern all things, should be more sensible in Romans 8.
5.
minding the things of the spirit. Otherwise for us to bemoane the Apostasy of
the times, to sigh for the abominations of the land, and to cry out (as many
do) on the Ier. 23. 11 15.
profaneness of Prophets, from whom profaneness is gone forth into all the
land; if in the mean time we forbear lip-feeding, and restrain those Ioh. 7.
38.
rivers of water of life, that should flow from us to quench this Iam. 3. 6.
world of wickedness, that being set on fire of hell, may set on fire the
course of nature among us: what is it else, but as if men should look to
acquit themselves as merciful neighbors by bewailing their neighbors house
on fire, and all-while forbear the casting on of water to quench the same?


Aqu. You have opened a vein that may make our hearts bleed within for the
bloud-guiltinesse of our neighbors souls: and my soul having now in
remembrance that speech of our Savior, Mat. 12. 30
he that gathers not, scatters, is humbled in me to cry with David the
Prophet, Psalm. 51. 14
Lord deliver me from bloudguiltinesse, Psalm. 19. 12.
cleanse thou me from secret faults.


Arist. And your so sensible remembrance calls to my mind, what you and I with
many others heard pressed to the full not long since by a Preacher out of Hebr.
3. where he Heb. 3. 13.
showing that exhortation was enjoined, as a preservative against apostasy,
concluded thence, that the neglect of the one, attracteth the guilt of the
other.


Aqu. What now remains, but as ever we hope to be 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
cleansed from this so great a guilt, by the blood of Gods own Son, so we
walk in the light; and show so Luke 7. 42. etc.
much the more love in a future zealous performance of that which we have so
much neglected? And to this end, I pray help call to mind with me, what we
thence heard concerning the duty of Exhortation.


Arist. Oh that this might be as fully performed, as it is seasonably moved.
But unless your memory by better then mine, I fear we shall prove as
slippery riuen vessels, in Heb. 2. 1.
letting slip much of that doctrine, which then so Deuteronomy. 32. 2
dropped, and rained, and showred upon us.


Aqu. In this you may say to me; Lame, help thy fellow. For even when I begin
to remember, fear takes hold on me, that I shall find it to be with my
memory, as with many a false servant, who is deemed trusty, till he be called
to reckoning: and this is a lamentable effect of our want of Heb. 2. 1.
earnest heed to the things we have heard. O what a candle did God light
within us, when that doctrine was taught us! But when by repetition, conference
and practice, we should have Mar. 4. 21.
set it on a candlestick, to give light to our families and neighbors, we in
part did put it under a bushel. And now the Mar. 4. 24. 25.
same measure is meated to us, which we measured to others: as we had not (for
our Masters advantage) that which was given us, so that which we then had, is
now in part taken from us. And if all were taken from us, and our selves Mat.
25. 30
cast with ^he unprofitable servant into utter darkness, we had but our own
deseruings.


Arist. But though our memories may much fail us, yet God, who Esa. 66. 2.
looks to the contrite heart that trembles at his word, will Heb. 13. 5.
never fail us; either in 1. Cor. 11. 31.
acquitting those that judge themselves, or in Iac. 4. 8.
drawing near to those that draw near to him. Remember, Dan. 9. 20. etc.
whiles Daniel the Prophet was speaking and praying, and confessing his sin
(as we do now in part) the man Gabriel was sent unto him with consolatory
information, as flying upon the wings of the wind. And while the Luke 24. 15
etc.
two Disciples were sad and perplexed in their conferences about their Master,
Jesus himself drew near; and rather then his truth, should fail to be their
shield and buckler, he himself out of Moses and all the Prophets expounded
the things concerning himself, to clear their scruples. But lo, who comes
yonder I pray?


Aquil. If is even Mr. Archippus himself, who is best able to bring all to our
remembrance that we heard from him, and therefore let us without delay address
our selves toward him.


Aristar. Mr. Archippus you are welcome as Job. 33. 23.
one of a thousand, and blessed be God, Act. 1. 7.
in whose hands are the times and seasons, that he has sent you unto us so
seasonably, and Esa. 50. 4.
given you a tongue of the learned to minister a word in season to us, who are
now full Mat. 11. 28.
weary of our former heedlesnes in hearing you.


Arch. What is the matter my dear brethren?


Aqu. Oh Sir, you remember what not long since you taught us (out of Hebr. 3.)
concerning the duty of exhortation to the full; and we tremble in our selves to
find in our account, how little of so much wholesome doctrine we have either
put in practice, or kept in memory. As therefore we now feel how it will be
Phil. 3. 1.
for us a safe thing, so let it not be grievous to you (we pray) to rehearse
summarily the same things to us: whom Esa. 50. 4.
God has now awakened to hear, if not as the learned, yet surely as those who
unfeignedly desire to learn of you.


Arch. Blessed be God, who has thus Psalm* 40. 6.
boared your ears, and the Lord Mic. 3. 8.
fill me with power and judgment by his Spirit, to satisfy your desires, and
to stablish your hearts in a duty so necessary. And for your better memory I
will reduce the sum of all into thee rheads, insisting, 1. in the necessity
of the duty, 2. in the reasons enforcing it, 3. in the right manner of
performing it. And seeing we are now Marc 4 10
apart (where your questioning will disturb no public ministry nor
audience) be bold I pray, with Chrish Disciples, to ask the full meaning of
any thing that may seem as a hidden parable unto you. For this is noted as a
remarkable property of Luke 8. 9, 10. Mar 4. 10. 11
those, to whom it is given to know the mystery of the Kingdom of God: such
Go^ teaches Mare. 4. 34 Luke 10. 23.
apart, when others, though presenta^ public teaching, are Mat. 13. 11 13.
etc.
nothing the wiser; and such a^ of Gods privy council and have the Psa. 25. 14
secrets of the Lord revealed unto them, from which Luke 10. 21
others are kept as strangers to their dying day.


Arist. Brother Aquila, in guilt of our own unworthiness might not we say with
the Ioh. 14. 22
Apostle, Lord how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us and not unto
the world? But seeing it is Gods good pleasure thus to sequester us from those
Act. 13. 41
despisers, that wonder and perish in their infidelity; God forbid that we
should stand in our own light by any vain admiration or inquisition. And
therefore as our Luke 4. 20.
eyes are fastened on you Mr. Archippus, being Act. 10. 33
here present before God to hear all the counsel of God that you shall
reveal unto us: so according to your method first show us the necessity of
exhortation we pray.


Arch. Mutual exhortation (...)
is a duty so necessary, that none can be, or abide in the state of saving
grace^ but (...) only who endeavor the performance of it.


Aqu. Before you go on* I must entreat you to explain fully the meaning o^
those two words, mutua^^ exhortation.


Arch. The origina^ (...)
Heb. 3. 13.
word in Hebr. 3. which ^ commonly translated, exhort, signifies properly, t^
call unto.

1. It is sometimes tak^ in a strict or limited sense as where Saint Paul says
2. Tim. 4. 2
reprove, rebuke, exho^ with all long-suffering an^ doctrine. Here that which
the Apostle speaks (^^ show what he meant b^ preaching the word) man
according to the twofol^ use of scripture (Speculatiue as they call it, or
practical) be reduced into two heads. First that which concerns the informing
of the understanding and judgment, which is done either by reproving, called
elsewhere Tit. 1. 9.
conuincing; or by doctrine, elsewhere called Romans 15. 4.
learning or teaching.

Secondly that which concerns the reforming of the will and affections, which
is done either by rebuke, called elsewhere 2 Timothy 3. 16
correction; or by exhortation, called elsewhere Verse the same.
instruction in righteousness. And here doctrine, though ranked in the last
place, is yet so added as that which must be inter-weaued with the former, as
the woofe with the warpe, being the chief of all the rest. For reproving goes
before but as an usher, by removing errors to make way for doctrine to enter;
and doctrine is that which both in faith and manners gives life and strength to
rebuking ^ and exhorting. So that by exhorting here we are to understand
neither reproving, nor rebuking, no^ teaching (it being distinct from all
these) but that only which in other places is figuratively expressed by 2. Pet.
1. 13 (...).
rowzing, or Heb. 19. 24 (...).
whetting. Whereby we are to learn, that albeit the state of Gods children may
be such, that they need not so much as others to be either reproved for errors,
or rebuked for disorders, or informed in faith and manners: yet even these are
sometimes Mat. 25. 5.
slumbering and sleeping as the wise virgins, and then have need of rowzing;
and sometimes Heb. 5. 11
dull as the believing Hebrews, and then have need of whetting.

And thus exhortation in a strict sense signifies only rowzing or whetting,
which if it be for with-standing ill or errors, is called 1 Cor. ^. 1^.
admonition; if for pursuing truth or goodness, its called 2 Cor. ^. 2. Romans 11.
14.
provocation; If for sustayning difficulties or grieuances accompa^ing both the
former, its called Romans 15. 4
consolation.

2 Exhortation in other Scriptures (as Heb. 3. 13
Heb. 3.) where it is not restrained by other words or circumstances of the
text, is taken in a large sense, implying all the former means of building up
our selves in our most holy faith. And it this large sense, Saint Pa^^ says, 1
These. 5 13
exhort one another, and edify one another* where he adds the similitude of
edifying, to explain the general meaning of the word exhorting. For as in
material buildings, some stones are to be hewed for their hardness, some
planed for their softness* some rammed in for their unevenness, others
supported for their weakness, and every empty place filled* the crooked
straightned, the high leuelled, and the low advanced; that so the whole frame
may be fitly proportioned, and fully erected: So in 1 Pet. 2. 5
building up each other as living stones, a spiritual house for God; some are
exalted with high imaginations against the knowledge of God, they must be 2
Cor. 10. 5
cast down with the word of reproof; some are hardened in their sins, as
rocks or adamants, they must be Hos. 6. 5.
hewed or Ier. 23. 29
broken with rebuke; some sin as children, for want of knowledge, their
emptiness must be supplied by Ephesians. 6. 1.
information of doctrine; some are out of square by unruliness, no 2 Cor. 13.
2. and 10. 10.
weight of admonition must be spared to bring them within compass; some fall
too short by negligence, by Heb 6 11, 12.
provocation must they be drawn forward; and some are sunk down by
feebleness of mind, and they are to be raised up with 1 These 5. 15.
comfort. And thus in this large and general sense do I now press this duty
of exhortation.


Arist. Blessed be God for such a Luke 11. 52
key of knowledge, whereby he thus Acts 16. 14
opens our hearts, as wel^ as the Scriptures; we now wai^e for the
explanation of the other word, mutual.


Arch. The Greek Heb. 3 1^. (...)
word, in Heb. 3. which is translated, one an other, signifies properly your
selves; as the translators in an Jude verse 20.
other place render it. Yet here as Col. 3. 16.
elsewhere, well do they express the meaning of the spirit by these words
(one an other) because in the same Heb. 10. 24 (...).
Epistle, the spirit so explaineth himself, saying, let us consider one an
other, to provoke unto love and good works; and so more plainly in an 1 These.
5. 11. (...). Beza: singuli, singulos.
other place, saying, exhort your selves, and edify one another; where the
spirit, who 1 Timothy 4. 1.
speaks expressly (being the best interpreter) does interpret the word, your
selves, by the words one an other; as the word exhort, by the word edify. And
this is that which I mean by mutual exhortation* viz. that every one of us
must exhort each other: that as we are 1 Cor. 12. 27.
the body of Christ, and memoers in particular, so Verse 25.
the members should have the same care one of another, the Verse 21.
head being not able to say to the feet, I have no need of you. And upon this
very ground, the spirit says, ex^ort your selves, when ^ee means, every one
each other; not only because believers may not be hypocrites, (to w^om he
s^ith, Romans 2. 21
thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self?) but chiefly because
being 1 Cor. 12. 13.
all one body, as Ephesians. 5. 31.
man and wife are one flesh; he that teaches another, teaches himself, even
as Verse 28.
he that loves his wife, loves himself.


Aqu. Blessed be God, 1 Samuel 25. 32.
who has sent you this day to meet us with such a 1. Cor. 12. 4, 10.
gift of interpretation: proceed now I pray to show us the necessity of this
duty.


Arch. To prove that none can be or abide in the state of saving grace, but
they who endeavor the performance of this duty, I will chiefly insist in that
of Heb. 3. where the Apostle says, Heb. 3. 12, 13
Take heed brethren least there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief,
in departing from the living of God: but exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day, least any of you be hardened through the deceiptfulnes of sin.
Here we see that if they who Heb. 3. 1.
are partakers of the heavenly calling (whereby they Heb. 6. 4. 5
were once enlightened and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost; and have tasted the good word of God and the
powers of the world to come) if they, I say, take not heed and exhort each
other, sin with its Iac. 1. 14. (...)
baits and Satan's 2 Cor. 11. 3
subtilty may through 1 Ioh. 2. 16.
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of life deceive any of
them, were he in show as holy and righteous, as indeed 1 Timothy 2. 13 14.
the Woman was, that was deceived in Paradise.

Secondly as sin may deceive them, so the custom of sin may harden them by
Zeph. 1. 12
settling them on their ^ees (as by continuance the Job. 38. 30
face of the deep is frozen) and then their consciences (though wounded) may
have no more feeling of sin (as it is the 1 Cor. 15, 56.
sting of death) then wounds that are 1 Timothy 4. 2 Esa. ^4. 4.
seared with an hot iron. Their neck is an iron sinew, and their brow brass;
in which case they can now neither Ier. 6. 15.
blush, nor Ier. 2. 19.
fear.

Thirdly an hardened heart may transport them to an evil heart (as bad almost
as Mat. 13. 19
the evil one the devil Luke 8. 12.
himself) when men Ephesians. 4. 19.
being past feeling may give themselves over to work all uncleanness with
greedines, Job. 15. 16
drinking iniquity like water, and making no more conscience of any sins be
they never so gross. Be it Hos. 4. 4.
swearing, lying, stealing, whoring, killing, yea or Psalm. 14. 4.
eating up Gods people as bread, they are all now Pro. 4. 17.
as meat an^ drink to them, yea a^ Job. 20. 12 13.
sweet morsels, which they are loath to depart withal; nay their Pro. 4. 16.
sleep departs from them, vnle^ they cause some to fall wit^ them.

Fourthly when men a^ come to this pitch of a^ evil heart, then whiles they
are Esa. 4 18.
drawing iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as with a cartrope, the
devil draws and holds them to an heart o^ unbelief; whereby they are Romans 1.
28.
given up to such a reprobate mind, that they are now as T^t. 1. 16. (...).
contumacious or refractary, as before they were abominable: even such a Mat.
17. 17
faithless and perverse generation, that no means, fair or foul, neither
Pr^. 29. 9.
raging nor laughing as Solomon says, nor Mat. ^1. 17
piping nor mourning as Christ speaks, can work upon them to 2 Cor. 5. 11
persuade them. Yea though a Mat. 13. 52.
Scribe instructed unto the Kingdom of heaven should bring out of his treasure
things new and old, as our Savior speaks; even all that Heb. 12, 18 etc.
mount Sinai or Ve^s. 22. etc.
mount Sion may afforde, all the precious promises of the one, and all the
tremblable curses of the other: yet all would be to them but as Ier. 5.
wind, and no better in their esteem the^ Act 17. 18.
babbling, or 2 Cor. 10. 10.
speech contemptible, or idle addle talk against all which they ca^ set their
Zach. 7. 12
hearts as adaman^ stones, and Psa. 58. 4. 5
stop the^ ears like the deaf adde^ which will not hear the voice of the
charmer, charming never so wisely.

Finally through this beguiled hardened evil ha^ of unbelief they depa^ from
the living God, an^ that not as heirs of salvation who may be Iac. 1. 14.
with drawn in part, and Ion. 1. 3.
depart for a season; but these Heb. 10. 39
are of them that draw back unto perdition, even by a Ier. 8. 5.
perpetual backsliding, with a Ier. 5. 29.
reuolting and rebellious heart, and with a Romans 2. 5.
heart that cannot repent. For it is Heb 6. 4. 5. 6
impossible for those who were once enlightened (so as we showed before) if they
fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.

Now out of all the premises we thus conclude, that for as much as mutual
exhortation is prescribed in this text as a special remedy to prevent this
fearful final apostasy: therefore as those professors that make no conscience
of giving or receiving the word of exhortation, will surely depart from the
living God, and can not abide in the state of saving grace; so in departing
from God they show plainly that they never were in the true state of saving
grace, that is, they never 1. Cor. 1. 30.
were of God in Christ Jesus. For says S. John, 1. Ioh. 2. 19
if they had bin of us (that is, not in profession and show only but indeed
and in truth) they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out
that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us.

And this is as evidently to be proved out of Col. 3. where S. Paul says, Col.
3 16
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one an other, etc. Here the Apostle shows, that they who have
the word dwelling in them in all wisdom, (that is, they that hear and do
the word as Mat. 7. 24.
wise men in deed, being 2 Timothy 3. 16
made wise thereby unto salvation) they must approve themselves to be such in
teaching and admonishing one an other. And therefore those professors that be
Iam. 1. 22.
hearers only, and not doers, ( Iam. 2. 10.
offending in this one point of mutual exhortation) do but deceive
themselves, and will prove Mat. 7. 26.
foolish men in the end, when all their high profession will be the occasion of
their Verse 27.
great downfall.

Likewise the same Apostle 1 These 1. 5. etc. to the end of Verse 11.
tells the Thessalonians, that as children of the light, and of the day, must
watch and be sober, putting on the breast plate of faith and love, and the
hope of salvation for an helmet, Go^ appointing them not t^ wrath, but to
obtain salvation: so by a word of relation, including all the premises, he
infers that they must still acquit themselves to be such, by exhorting
themselves, and edifying one an other as they did.

To this purpose, the sauing-graces of the spirit are set forth by such
comparisons as show this dispersing and communicating property in them; as to
Ioh. 7. 38. and Eze. 47. 8.
rivers of water of life, flowing and issuing out, and going from place to
place; even as all rivers are ever running, in coming or returning, as Eccl.
1. 7
Ecclesiastes shows. So likewise to ^ Ioh. 2. 27
ointment, which cannot be hid from be wraying it self, as Pro. 27. 16
Solomon speaks: to Mat. 3. 11.
fire, which being shut up in a man's bones, will make a man weary of
forbearing, as Ier. 20. 9.
Jeremy complained: and to a Mark. 4. 21
candle on a candlestick, which as Mat. 5. 15.
our Savior says, gives light to all that are in the house. And finally, as
the Pro. 10. 11.
mouth of a righteous man is compared to a well of life, and his Verse 20.
tongue to choice silver; to show as well the current, as the precious use of
them: so the righteous man himself is likened to a liberal housekeeper, the
door of whose lips is open upon all just occasions, to Verse 21.
feed many with his lips; even as many as in his Eccl. 10. 4.
place, and 1 Cor. 7. 17 20.
calling, he can Gal. 6. 10.
opportunely* and 1 Cor. 14. 40.
orderly, extend himself unto. Nay, lest any should think women's tongues to
be tied short from all lip-feeding. Solomon brings in the Pro. 31. 10.
virtuous woman, as clad with the honor of the same similitude, saying, Verse
26. (...) Trem. and I^n. Lex benignitatis.
she opens her mouth with judgment, and in her lips is the law of kindness,
or bountifulness, as the Hebrew word imports. And thus I hope it fully
appears unto you, how necessary this duty is for all that will be numbered
among the righteous.


Arist. O that the practice might be as full on our side, as the proof is on
yours: and for our better encouragement, I pray add some examples to your
former arguments and similitudes.


Arch. The Scriptures are so full of them, that I may say as the Apostle did in
an other case, Heb. 11. 3^
time would fail me to tell them. No sooner hear we that Phillip had found
Christ, but we hear withal, that Ioh. 1. 43. etc.
by his persuasion, he brought Nathaniel to Christ; as Andrew likewise Verse
41. etc.
brought Peter to Christ. And the same Peter, according to Christ's Luke 22. 32
charge, did no doubt strengthen his brethren when he was converted: even as
Dau^^ also professed for his part that when God should restore him to the joy
of hi^ salvation, he Psalm. 51. 12* 13.
would teac^ transgressors his ways, an^ sinners should be conue^ted unto
him. And lest any should think that this practice might be peculiar unto them
by virtue of their Prophetical and Apostolical callings: both Prophet* and
Apostles do not only propose this as a common duty of every righteous man and
good steward of the grace of God, (to Psalm. 37. 30
talk of judgment, to 1 Pet. 4. 10
speak as the oracles of God, that their Col 4. 6.
speech be always gracious, seasoned with salt, and Ephesians. 4. 29
good to the use of edifying, to minister grace to the hearers) but accordingly
they also record and recommend unto us, their practice of the same. As in that
general defection of Ezraes time, how powerfully was worthy Ezra himself Ezr.
10. 2. etc.
exhorted and encouraged by Shecaniah? So in the Prophet Malachies time, when
religion was down the wind, and men Mal. 3. 14.
said, it is vain to serve God; it is registered that Verse 16.
then, they that feared the Lord, spoke every man to his neighbor, or spoke
often one to another, as the kings translators render it. And what spoke they?
no doubt that which was good to the use of edifying* as many their fellows did
before them, saying, Hos. 6. 1.
come, let us retu^ to the Lord, Ier. 50. 5.
come, let* join to the Lord, and (...) c Psalm. ^22. 1
us go into the house* God. And as for this ^^ speech, come and let ^ go up
into the house ^ the Lord, etc. the Prophet (foreseeing that the Gentiles
should receive the spirit of faith, and 2 Cor. 4. 13
believe and therefore speak) d^^ Esa. 2. 2, 3. Mich. 4. 1, 2.
testify before, that the speech of mutual exhort^on, should be the common
language of all beleeui^^ nations, when in the la^ days, the mountain ^^ the
Lords house should be^ exalted above the hills, an^ people should flow unto i^
And accordingly we hau^ it recorded, that in the daie^ of the Gospel, not
only the Mark. 5. 20
Demoniacke and Luke 2. 17. 8
Shepherds among the Jews, performed this duty, to the admiration of their
hearers; but Act. 10. 45. 46.
Cornelius also with others of the Gentiles, to the astonishment of the Jews
that heard them. Yea, Ioh. 4. 28. etc.
the woman of Samaria, though she were but a poor Tankard-bearer, (as it
should seem by her water-pot, which for have she left behind her) yet she no
sooner in her heart received the Messiah, but out of the abundance of her
heart, her mouth so spoke, and ministered such grace to those that heard her,
that she was a blessed instrument to bring many Samaritans to the faith of
Christ. Hereunto may be added Tryphena, Tryphosa, and Persis, women among the
Romans, and other women among the Philippians; of whom the Apostle gives this
commendation, that they Romans 16. 12.
labored, yea much labored, yea, and Phil. ^. 3.
labored (some of them) with himself in the Gospel: which they could not
do, but by private exhortation, as Acts 18. 26.
Priscilla did; seeing by the Apostolical Canon 1 Cor. 14. 34
women were silenced from speaking in the Churches. And memorable above all
others, is that example of the Luk* 23. 40 41, 42, 43.
thief upon the cross, who then (at last cast as we say) believing, did so
speak* to the rebuking o^ his fellow thief, and to the justifying and
magnifying of the Lord Jesus; that immediately Jesus himself, Heb. 12. 2. ^.
despis^ng the shame, and all contradiction of sinners, did with his Psalm. 45.
2.
own lips, full of grace, as Psalm. 24. 8.
king of glory, crown him as it were on the cross; and there Col. 2. 15.
triumphing over all Principalities and powers of darkness, even in Luke ^^ 53
the very hour and power of darkness, he proclaimed him an heir of
Paradise, and promised him seizin and possession thereof, together with
himself that very day; as a present reward for the fruit of his lips, whereby
he had so manifested his faith, and honored his Savior. So that ^t fares
with every believer, who has found hi^ lost soul, as with Luke 15. 8. etc.
that woman in the parable, who ha^ found her lost piece of si^uer; who as she
fate no^ moaping in a corner with fullennesse, when she ha^ lost her piece,
but Verse 8.
lighted a candle, and swept the house, and looked diligently till she found
it; so having found it, she could no^ sit smiling in her sleeue, bu^ Verse 9.
she called together h^ friends and neighbors saying, rejoice with me^ for I
have found the peec^ which I had lost. And ^ Christ applied that to the Verse
10.
joy of the Angels over on^ sinner that repents; so may as truly here apply
^^ to the Romans 14. 17.
joy of the hol^ Ghost, that accompaniet^ righteousness and peace in all
unfeigned believers. And I likewise say unto you, that such joy there is among
believers, over any one sinner, whose repentance may be by their means, either
begun or perfected; that 2 Cor. 4. 13
according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken, so they
believing, Acts 4. 20.
cannot but speak, for the Jude ver. 3
common salvation of others with themselves. And let this suffice for the first
general point.


Aqu. Mr. Archippus, you have set such a Iam. 1. 23.
glass before us, and Heb. 12. 1.
compassed us with such a cloud of witnesses; that when we behold our faces in
the one, and cast our eyes to the other, we may Ier. 3^. 10.
strike on our thighs and be ashamed of our backwardnes in a duty so
necessary, wherein the primitive believers were so forward. I pray therefore
proceed and whe^^e and rowze us thoroughly (dullards and drowzy headed as we
are) by your forcible reasons.


Arch. For your better remembrance, you shall have all included in 4. general
motives, concerning 1. God and our Savior, 2. our neighbors, 3. our selves,
4. our enemies.

First therefore you know the Mat. 2^^ ^7 ^^.
first and great commandment, which is Mare. 12^ 30, 33.
more then all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices; thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength. And from the Psalm. 119. 5, 8, 20, etc.
unfeigned hearty desire and endeavor of keeping this commandment no
gospeller can plead immunity; because being freed from the Romans 6. 14 and 10.
4.
rigor and Ga^ ^. 10, 13.
curse of the Law, by the grace that Ioh 1. 17.
came by Jesus Christ; we are even by the bond of grace so bound to Ep. 6,
(...).
love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, that if 1 Cor. ^6 2^
any man thus love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha,
says S. Paul. Signifying hereby, that such a man is excluded from grace, and
thereby left to a curse more Heb. 10. 29
heavy then all the Law could have imposed on him: being 2. Pet. 2. 9.
reserved to the day of judgment and the Reu. 6. 16.
wrath of the lamb heavier then the rocks and mountains; to be punished even
by the 2 Tess. 1, 7, 8.
Lord Jesus himself, when he shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty
Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that obey not his gospel Now
Ioh. 14. 15
if ye love me says Christ, keep my commandments; and again, Ioh. 15. 14.
ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you; and again he says,
Ioh. 14. 23
if a man love me he will keep my words. And therefore the word of exhortation
and duty of lipfeeding being one of his especial commandments, so frequently
inculcated as we have heard: He that says he loves him (though he say it
again and again and call the Lord to witness for it, as Ioh. 21. 17
Peter did) yet if he keep not this his commandment, 1 Ioh. 2. 4.
he is a liar and the truth is not in him, as S. John says.

Secondly, whatsoever sticks deepest in the love of the heart, will soonest
bewray it self in the utterance of the tongue: for out of the Mat 12. 34
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Why does the Psalm. 37. 30
tongue of the righteous man so talk of judgment, but because the Verse. 31,
Law of God is in his heart? What made the Prophet David, to Psalm. 34. 1. and
35. 28.
bless the Lord at al times, to have his praise continually in his mouth even
all the day long? Why did his Psalm. 34. 2, 3
soul so make her boast of the Lord and so stir up others to magnify the
Lord with him, to exalt his name together, to Psalm. 105. 1 2, 3.
thank him, to call upon his name, to make known his deeds among the people,
to sing Psalms unto him, to talk of all his wondrous works and to glory in
him? Why, the Lord was the Psalm. 16. 5
portion of his inheritance, his Psalm. 42. 1.
heart panted after him, his Psalm. 63. 1.
soul thirsted for him, and his flesh longed for him: yea he calls God to
witness to his soul, saying, Psalm. 73. 25, 26.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? there is none in earth that I desire besides
thee: my flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart and my
portion for ever. So look to the spouse in Cantic^es, if Christ be he whom her
Cant. 1. 7.
soul loves, if he be the Cant. 5. 10
chiefest among ten thousand unto her; how frequently does she Cant. 1. 12 and
2. 3. etc.
talk of him, how passionately does she Cant. 3. 9, 5. 8.
ask after him? how eloquent is she to discourse of him how potent to Cant. 5.
9, 6. 1.
persuade others to enquire after him? All the excellencies of Art and Nature,
the Cant. 5. 10 13. etc.
white and ^uddy orient colors, the sweet flowers and odoriferous beds of
spices, gould rings set with berill, and pillars of marble set upon sockets of
fine gol^, and the like (such as would seem to others like wonders of nine
days to talk of) they are not hear of out of her lips, but as they may serve
her either for resemblances to set forth, or as Organes to sound out the beauty
and savor, the worth and excellency of her beloved and friend, whom her soule^
loves.

And if the tongues ^ righteous men, of the man after Gods heart, and of the
spouse of Christ, be not enough to school Psalm. 71. 15
or mouths to show forth, an^ our Ver^ ^.
tongues to talk o^ the righteousness and salu^tion of our great God an^
Savior, even all the da^ long: as Christ in an other case Luke 16. 8, 9
puts us to learn ^ the unjust steward, so here say I, learn, for shame lets
learn of wordlings, of Mammonists, of Belly Gods whose Psalm. 17. 14
portion is in this life. Consider the men of these perilous times, that are
as S. Paul says 2. Tim. 3. 4.
lovers of pleasures (or of riches and of the glory of the world) more then
lovers of God. How does proud Haman crake and vaunte of the Hest. 5. 11, 12
glory of his riches, and the height of his promotions, and the pre-eminence he
had above all others in the Kings favors and the Queens banquets? How does
the rich fool talk and boast of his Luke 12. 17 18, 19.
plentiful crops, of his pulling down barnes and building greater, of
disposing all h^ fruits and of his much goo^ laid up for many yeare^ etc? Yea
every voluptuo^ faulkener and huntfma^nay every base pot companion, how do
they in a^ companies prate and bra^ of the sport, the game, the good fellowship
they thu^ and thus met withal, as ^ they had no sweeter, n^ worthier, no
louelier God to consecrate the fruit ^^ their lips unto? Shall the thus talk
and fill the^ mouths with discourses every man of his Idol; h^uing nothing,
else bu^ Pro. 15. 14
foolishness for their mouths to feed on; and w^ having for our portion the^
Ioh. 17. 3
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent^ the Tit. 2. 13.
great God and our Savior, whose Esa. 9. 6.
name is wonderful, the prince of peace, the Heb. 2. 20.
Captain of our salvation, the 1. Tim 6. 15
blessed and only potentate, who has Reu. 1. 5.
loved and washed us in his own blood, and so 1 Timothy 1. 10
abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light, through the great
and glorious mystery of the gospel: shall not we Psalm. 106. 5
glory with his inheritance and Psalm. 105. 2
talk of all his wondrous works? Therefore they shall be Mat. 12. 27.
our judges, and accordingly as our Savior foreteils every man of us, saying,
Verse. 37.
by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned; so shall they who have so many words to witness their love to their
idols, Verse. 41.
rise up in judgment and condemn many a professor for his louelesse silence.

Thirdly as the glorious and gracious works of our great God and Savior
should set our tongues on work; so the reproaches indignities and blasphemies
which we see and hear daily, whereby men Esa. 3. 8.
provoke the eyes of his glory, should force us to break silence: and for his
names sake we should not hold our peace, if there be any spark of the love of
his name abiding in us. We know what our Lord says, Mat. 10. 37
he that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me; and he that
loves Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me: that is, not to be
2 Thessalonians. 1. 5
counted worthy, no not by the Iac. 2. 12.
Law of liberty, or by the Romans 3. 27
Law of faith. And accordingly elsewhere he explanes his meaning, saying, Luke
14. 26
if any man come to me and hate not his Father and Mother and Wife and Children
etc. (so far forth as they Psa. 139. 21
hate Christ, he means) he can not be my disciple. Now what one of us that is
not Romans 1. 3^
without natural affection, can keep silence in seeing and hearing Father or
Mother, Wife or Child, pierced to the heart or trampled under feet? O how
passionately, how powerfully Genesis 44. 17 18, etc.
pleaded Judah against the bondage of young Benjamin, when he foresaw how that
would even pearce the heart of his old Father, his life being bound up in the
lads life, and bring down the gray hairs of his Father with sorrow to the
grave? How affectionately, think we, said David, Sam. 1^. 5
Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom, when all the
people (says the Text) heard the King give all the Captains charge concerning
Absalom? Was not this young man now an old traitor? Yea, but he was his Son
though most unnatural, and because he is a child David cannot cast off the
natural affection of a Father; he is perplexed with care with fear of the
blow before it fall on him; he is sensible of his wounds before they bleed:
and when he once hears that he was pierced to death, he mournes, he weeps,
he cries, as if he could speak no other language; Verse. 33.
O my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom, would God I had dyed for thee,
O Absalom my Son, my Son. So the Mother of that Child which by Kings
Salomons sentence was presently to be divided in two by a sword brought before
the King ^ a 1. Reg. 3. 16 etc.
harlot though she were, yet being the true Mother of the living child, as
soon as she saw the sword and heard the sentence pronounced, out of her bowels
yerning upon her Son how did she presently power it out with her lips saying,
Verse. 23.
O my Lord, give her the living child, and in no wise stay it.

What shall natural love thus plead and cry against blows and strokes and
pearcing griefs, but yet approaching toward our Fathers or children? And ca^
we see and hear our heavenly Father blasphemed yea ^eu. 24. 11 (...)
pierced and stricken through (as the 2. King. 18 21. Hab. 3. 14.
Hebrew word signifies) with blasphemies and curses; and our loving Savior
Heb. 10. 28 29.
trodden under foot, and Heb. 6. 6,
crucified afresh by wilful sins* and apostacies: and shall not our spiritual
love make his case ours as he made ours his? shall not our hearts rise, our
bowels yerne, and our tongues power out, and speak in the behalf of our
merciful redeemer, and his Father and ours? We see how affectionately
righteous Lot spoke in the behalf of the two Angels of the Lord, whom he had
entertained, and how for preventing the foul indignity tendered to them, he
boldly adventured not only the Genesis 19. 5, 6, 7.
safety of his own person, but also the Verse 8.
Virginity of his two daughters. Likewise young Elibu was so full of Job 32. 5.
kindled wrath in his makers quarrel, that his Verse. 18, 19
belly was as wine without vent, ready to burst like new bottles, and speak he
would, (he says) that he might be refreshed; as if his soul had fainted
within him at his long forbearance. So Jeremy the Prophet, full weary though he
were of speaking in the name of the Lord, Ier. 20. 7. 8
because the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto him, and a derision
daily, so that he had resolved to make mention of him no more: yet he found
himself Verse 9.
more weary with forbearing, for his word was in his heart as a burning fire
shut up in his bones, and he could not stay. And so David the Prophet, albeit
for Psalm. 69. 7.
Gods sake he had born such reproach, that shame had covered his face; yet
Psalm. 119. 46
would he speak of Gods testimonies before Kings, and would not be ashamed:
yea so did the Psalm. 69. 9.
zeal of Gods house eat him up, and the reproaches of them that reproached
God, were so fallen on him, that when his tongue could not prevail for the
honor of Gods name, Psalm. 119. 136.
rivers of waters ran down his eyes, because men kept not his law. Whereunto
then shall we liken the men of this generation, whose lips are sealed up from
any such testimonies of the love and zeal of God? They are like a sort of
graceless children and faithless friends, who having tasted some sweetness
of profit or pleasure in the society of their friends and parents enemies, they
can familiarly and io^undly, talk and walk, converse and commerce* yea, feast
and sport with them; and in the midst of all this see and hear their friends
and Parents spitefully disgraced among them, yea, trampled under feet, or
stricken through, and swallow up al in senseless silence.

Fourthly and finally, let us hear the Lord pleading his own quarrel by the
Prophet, saying, Mal. 1. 6.
a son honors his Father, and a servant his Master; if ^ then be a
Father, where i^ my honor, etc. says the Lord of hosts? Now where in shall it
be known that we honor God our Father, o^ Christ our Master? Shall we come (as
the Micha 6. 6.
hypocrite says) before the Lord, and bow our selves before the high God?
Verse 7.
will the Lord be pleased with offerings and such formal complements of
religious services, wherein, the hypocrite, if he might be believed, would not
spare to Verse the same.
give the fruit of his body for the sin of his soul? He has showed thee O
man what is good, and wherein he will be glorified; even in this, that we Ioh.
15. 8.
bear much fruit, and Dan. 12. 3. Act. 11. 18. 13. 48.
turn many to righteousness. For as Pro. 14. 28.
in the multitude of the people, is the Kings honor, so this is as the Cant.
3. 11.
setting of the crown on the head of the Lord Jesus, when now in the day of
his espousals, every private Christian, 1 Cor. 16 16. Romans 16. 3, 9
men and Romans 16. 12. Phil. 3. 3.
women, labor much in the Gospel, and be helpers together with the Preachers;
that many may be 2 Cor. 11. 3.
presented as a chaste Virgin unto Christ. Now then private Exhortation being a
help to Iam. 3. 19, 20.
convert and Ioh. 1. 43, 44, 45.
bring others to Christ, yea, and a mean whereby a Prou. 9. 9.
wise man may be yet wiser, and each Heb. 10. 23, 24
provoke other to love and good works: this therefore is a special duty
whereto al believers must addict themselves; that so many conuerts, and much
fruit may abound, to the honor of God our Father, and Christ our Master. And
otherwise for any professor to lift up his eyes to heaven, and to say, Our
Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, etc. and
to cease from mutual exhortation, whereby his name is hallowed, and his
kingdom enlarged: is as plain and gross mockery, as for a Plough-man and
Goade-inch, or a Carter and Seedes-man, in a fair seede-time, to lift up their
hands and pray, Our Father, etc. give us this (...). 1. 8.
day our daily bread, and so withdraw their hands from the plough, and
withold the seed from the ground, spending all the se^d-time in some other
trifling business. For as their Masters bread will soon fail another year,
if his fallowes be not turned, and his arables sown: so the Eze. 1^. ^, 18.
etc.
glory of the God of Israel, will soon^ by little and little depar^ from among
us, if the Ier. 4. 3.
fa^ low ground of men's hear^ ^ 2
be not broken up, and the e immortal seed of the 1 Pet. 1. 23.
word sown, as well by hel^ of mutual exhortation, a^ by public preaching.
An^ let this suffice concerning my first general motive.


Arist. Mr. Archippus, yo^ have so approved your fir^ motive to our f
conscienc^ (...). 4. 2.
in the sight of God; that o^ g hearts cannot but condemn (...) 3. 20
us of great defect our love to God and o^ Savior in the h fruit of o^ Heb.
13. 15
lips, whereby his nam^ might have bin more ble^sed and praised, and o^
neighbors better edifie^ And we may with Ezra, Ezra 9. 6.
blush to lift up our faces, and call God Father, or Christ our Redeemer, when
we consider how justly God may stop our mouths with that answer which
Absalom gave to Hushai, 2 Samuel 16. 17.
Is this your kindness to your friend? or as the Prophet answered the
Priests, that by their lame and sick sacrifices despised the name of the Lord,
saying, Mal. 1. 8.
offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy
person? etc. But seeing the Father of mercies is well pleased to accept us as
his scholars, to be informed to the full, upon condition Eze. 43. 11
if we be ashamed of all that we have done (as we are at this day) how
hopefully man you proceed to the rest of your motives, whereby we may be
stirred up to Deuteronomy. 32. 6
requite the Lord in a better Tit. 2. 14.
zeal hereafter, as becomes his redeemed peculiar people, and Mat. 11. 19
children of wisdom.


Arch. Though happily you may feel as much terror in my second motive, as
shame in the former; yet in your desire o^ well-doing, 1 Pet. 3. 6.
fear not my dear brethren with any slavish terror, because there is Psalm.
130. 4
mercy with the Lord, that he may be feared with filial fear: and your
happiness it shall be, so to ^ Hab. 3. 16.
tremble now, that you may have rest hereafter, for the furtherance whereof I
now proceed.

My second general motive is drawn from that royal law as S. James calls it,
viz. Iam. 2. 8.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Here by our neighbor we are to
understand, not only, no nor chiefly, his body and life, food and raiment,
etc. (after which the Mat. 6. 31.
heathen seek, as our Savior speaks) but principally his soul. For Mat.
16. 26
what is a man profited, if he should gain the whole world, and loose his
own soul, or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Now as there is
for the body a Ioh. 6. 27.
perishing meat and raiment* for which most men are so solicitous and
laborious, that Christ calls for a Mat. 6. 31.
diuersion of men's thoughts and pains from these; so there is for the soul
Ioh. 6. 27.
a food enduring to eternal life, and a Esa. 61. 10.
robe of righteousness, or garments of salvation; and of these most professors
are so careless, and in a manner senseless, that the Lord not only Reu. 3. 18
councelleth, and Ioh. 6. 27. Col. 3. 2.
commands, but with a Esa. 55. 1. etc.
solemn O-yes, or cry, calls most earnestly, even on men already called,
that they should more mind, and chafer and labor for these, and Prou. 4. 7.
with all their getting* get them. Moreover as Ioh. 6. 35.
Christ is the only bread of life for the soul, and his robe o^
righteousness its Reu. 7. 14. and 19. 8.
raiment, and the soul that Gal. 3. 26, 27.
puts not on Christ, an^ Ioh. 6. 53.
eats him, has no life in him: so the only mean whereby we Verse 63.
spiritually eat and put on Christ, is Verse 40. 54
faith, and the soul that lives in unbelief, is Ephesians. 2. 1. 1 Timothy 5. 6.
dead though it live, being Ioh. 3. 18.
already condemned.

And now what is this f^^th I pray, whereby Christ is made our food and
raiment? Is it possibly an idle historical faith, such as the Iam. 2. 19.
devils themselves have? No, neither surely a temporary fained faith, such as
Mat. 13. 21 Luke 8. 13.
hypocrites have, no, though therewith they could work wonders, 1 Cor. 13 2
removing mountains, and Mat. 7. 22, 23.
casting out devils in the name of Christ. But it is the Tit. 1. 1.
faith of Gods elect, which only a Mat. 20. 16
few among many professors obtain even a 2. Pet. 1. 1.
precious, 1 Timothy 1. 5
vn^ained faith, which Acts 15. 9.
purifiet^ the heart, Gal. 5. 6.
works by love, and 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
walks in the light, being 1 Timothy 1. 19
kept in a goo^ conscience (desiring in all things to Heb. 13. 18
live honestly) as a Jewel is kept in a cabinet. And this sauing-faith being
joined with Ephesians. 4. 13.
knowledge of the truth (whereunto all must 1 Timothy 2. 4
come that will be saved) and with 2 These. 2. 13.
sanctification of the spirit* ( Heb. 12. 14
without which no man shall see the Lord) eue^ with the Tit. 1. 1.
acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness; and it being not in man
Mat. 19. 6.
to put a-sunde^ what GOD has couple^ together: as for lack o^ knowledge all
ignoran^ persons are excluded from faith, so are all the profane for want of
holiness. And therefore howsoever any of these, whom the Scripture thus shuts
up in unbelief, may say unto Christ in that day, Mat. 7. 22.
Lord, Lord, etc. yea, Luk 13. 25 etc.
knock and cry presumptuously, Lord, Lord, open unto us, presuming on the
great things they reckon to receive at his hands, for the profession they have
made, and the wonders they have done in his name (as if the name of Jesus had
been all in all unto them) yet as surely as by ignorance or disobedience they
abide in unbelief; so assuredly will Ioh. 3. 39.
the wrath of God abide upon them, and the Lord Jesus will have nothing in that
day to render unto them, but 2 Tess. 1. 8, 9.
vengeance with everlasting perdition, as to them that know not God, so to them
that disobey the gospel.

Now we that 2 Cor. 5. 11
know the terror of God, and how the iudgment-seate of Jesus Christ will know
no difference between the Ier. 9. 25.
circumcised and uncircumcised, betwixt an unwashed Turk and an ignorant or
wicked Christian (the one being Verse. 26.
uncircumcised and 1 Pet. 3. 21.
unbaptized in the heart, as the other in the flesh) do not we by this
evidence o^ Scriptures see discovered every where among our neighbors a
multitude o^ Reu. 3. 17
poor blind, naked, and st^rued souls; howsoever some of them may be Luke
16. 19
clothed in purple and fine linen, and fare deliciously, or sumptuously,
every day, with the damned glutton, and the most of them travail with high
conceits of their Reu. 3. 17.
riches and increase of goods, as if they had need of nothing, like the
lukewarm Laodi^^an? And by how much the more blind and insensible they are to
know an^ feel this their spiritual poverty and nakedness; are they not so much
the more Verse the same.
wretched and miserable, that is, so much the more to be pit tied of us, as
they are woeful in themselves? Here then Phil. 2. 1.
if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies: must not every one of us
show the same by Esa 32. 8.
devising of liberal things, and by ^sa. 58. 10
drawing out our replenished souls to these hunger-starued naked souls; that
by our Pro. 10. 21.
lipfeeding they may be sed with the bre^d of life, and clothed with the
garments of salvation: And that if it Romans 12. 18
be possible, as much as in us lies: we may Iam. 5. 20. 1 Cor 9. 22.
save all of them from staruing and famishing? And is not this the chief mercy
and alms that the royal Law requires of all Christians that have obtained
mercy, saying, Leu. 13. 17
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy neighbor and not suffer sin upon him? And does the 1 Ioh. 3. 16
gospel by virtue of Christ's love to us, call for our lives to be laid down
for our brethren; and shall we be sparing of the rebukes which the Law so
v^hemently presses upon us ^ saying, as it in the Hebrew Text, Leu. 29. 17
rebuking thou (...)
shall rebuke, that is, as much as possibly in thee lies, that thou may not
suffer sin upon him. As S. John says, 1 Ioh. 3. 17
Who so has this worlds good and sees his brother have need, and shuts up
his compassion from him; how dwells the love of God in him? May not I much
more here say, who so has tr^ Mat. ^. 11.
good things of the Luke 11. 13
hol^ Ghost, or the Col. 2. 3.
treasures ^ wisdom and knowledge and sees his brothers sou^ have need, and
shuts ^ his bowels of compassion from it; how dwells the love of God or
neighbou^ in him?

I conclude therefore, the it is no less then a hatefu^ mockery to naked
destitu^ souls (as to bodies, as ^ Iac 2, 15, 16.
James shows) to fee^ and warm them one* with fair wishings an^ wouldings
(as we say) a^ not to give them tho^ things that are needful ^ the soul. And
whatsoeue^ pretenses of tender lou^ and affections men man make, insparing to
woun^ men's consciences; as in effect Pro. 13. 24
he hates his Son that spares the rod: so he hates his brother that
spares the 1 Cor. 4. 21
rod of rebuke; because it is the best Psalm. 141. 5
kindness to smite therewith Pro. 19. 18.
whiles there is hope, ^ea to smite and Verse the same.
not to spare for his crying. It is better once to smart, then ever to a^e, as
we say; much more then to Mat. 25. 30.
weep and gnash the teeth in hell (as the Scripture says) Marc. 9. 43 44.
where their worm dies not, and the fire is never quenched. Whereunto then
shall we liken those many among us; who Act. 1^. ^5, 16.
caring no more then Gallio did for matters of the soul, bestow all their
care, cost, and pains for the worldly welfare, wealth and creditte of the^
neighbors and families and then Deuteronomy, 29. 19.
bless themselves in their hearts, saying much like Idolatrous Judge. 17. 13.
Mica^ now know I that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have lou^d my wife,
children and neighbors; as if they had never heard that Iam. 4. 4.
the love of the worl^ is the enmity of God, or Mat ^6. 26.
what is a man profited i^ he should gain the whole world and loose his own
soul? The Ephesians. 1. 18
understanding being the eye of the mind, as the Mat. 6. 22.
light o^ the body is the eye, and the will and affections of the soul being
as the vital spirits of the heart: and the Luke 16. 9
Mammon of unrighteousness and 1 Ioh. 2. 16
pride of life wit^ all the things of the world, being not to be compared to
the excrements of men's hairs and nails; (which might be better spared, then
the parings of men's nails, if men would Esa 46. 8.
remember and show themselves men and bring to mind what verdict the Scripture
has past upon those that dote most on them; namely that 1 Ioh. 2. 15
if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him) these
premises being considered, is not the comparison in our mouth and in our heart,
whereunto we shall liken them? Surely they are like witles, merciles parents,
that take great thought and spare no cost for trimming and dressing their
childrens hair, an^ suffer their eyes to rot ou^ of their heads: or that are
most curious and careful for curing the white o^ their nails, and carelessly
suffer a gangrene to eat out their very hearts. And in all such is that
proverb verified, Pro. 12. 10
The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.

Again, if we look to the rest of our neighbors, not only those that have a
Romans 2. 20
form of knowledge and 1 Timothy 3. 5.
show of godliness, but them also that have 1 Timothy 3. 13
purchased to themselves a good degree and great boldness in the says; even
among these see we no^ some 2 These. 2. 2
shaken in mind, an^ Esa. 1. 6.
reuolting more and more (in a fearful manner, as I at first showed out of
Heb. 3.) And these must be fetched onward and stablished with the Eccl 12. 11
words of the wise, as with goads and nails fastened by the Masters of the
assemblies. Others are Gal. 6. 9. Heb. 12. 3.
weary and fainting in well-doing, and they must be Pro. 27. 9.
refreshed with the ointment and perfume of hearty counsel. Sundry are Cant.
2. 15
sick of love, and Pro. 12. 25.
stooping under heau^nesse of heart, they must be stayed with flagons, and
cheared with good words, and words fitly spoken Pro. 25. 11
, like apples of gold in pictures of silver. Finally some are bruised by the 2
Cor. 12. 7
buffets of Satan, and pierced with Ep. 6. 16.
his fiery darts, so that their Job 11. 20
hope is as the giving up of the ghost: in this case our Cant. 4. 11
lips must drop as an honycombe, and honey and milk must be under our tongue*
that we may give them Zac. 1. 13.
good words, and comfortable words, and Pro. 16. 24
pleasant words, such as may be sweetness to the soul and health to the
bones, and more to be Job 23. 12.
esteemed then our necessary food. No^ it being a Luke 10. 3^ etc.
neighbour^ duty not to pass by on the^ other side with the Prie^^ and Leuite,
when we se^ men stripped and wounded: but with the Samaritane to bind up their
wounds pouring in wine and oil and supplying their wan^ with our store: shall
Christians 1 Ioh. 2 20
who have an unction from the holy one, and knowing all things should know how
Gal. 6. 2.
to bear one an others burden and so fulfill (...) Law of Christ; shall they I
say in the midst of all this passeby on the other side, not pouring out 1 Ioh.
2. 27
the anointing which they have received, and so Mat. 25. 18.
hide their Lords treasure with the Verse. 26.
wicked and sloathfull servant?

Howsoever under Verse. 24. 25
pretense of difficulties and Pro. 24. 12.
blind excuses, they may for a while quietly Genesis 49. 14.
couch down between two burdens (their brethrens faylings I mean, and their
own conniuence) because looking through such false sp^ctacles, and not through
the glass of the word, they may Verse 15.
see that rest is good Yet as surely as they Number. 32. 6 etc.
sinn^ against the Lord in thi^ neglect of their brethren so Verse. 23.
let them ^e sure their sin will find them out; and then themselves will be
^ound little better, then as merciless stewards an^ Surgeons; who being sen^
into the harvest, and into the battle, with store o^ food and balm, and
wit^ strict charge therewith to refresh and revive the hungry laborers and
wounded soldiers; they go and give the gaze upon them; beholding some
faynting in their hunger, and others languishing i^ their wounds, and so
passeby them, only with the courtesy o^ the day, (...) good wishes given them
never bestowing either their food or balm for the relieuing of any o^ them.
Now if a man should ask the bordering neighbors that see and hear all this,
what they say an^ deem of such stewards and Surgeons; happily they being not
privy to the store and charge committed to them, may commend them as courteous
quiet passengers that disturbed or abused no man: but if ye ask the Lord of
the harvest, and the general of the field when he hears of this, will not he
cry out (and that justly) fie upon such murderers? And here if ye recall to
mind what before ye heard from the mouth of the Lord; namely th^^ he who
rebuking rebukes not this neighbor, hates him in his heart in suffering
sin upon him; and thereto add what he has told us by his Apostle, viz: 1
Ioh. 3. 13
whosoever hates his brother is a murderer: see ye^ not how the former
sentence Zac. 1. 6.
takes hold on all silent Christians, as a Eccl. 12. 11
nail fastened and riueted to the Psalm. 24. 9.
doors of their hearts and consciences; where the Lord yet Reu. 3 20.
stands and knocks Zeph. 2. 2.
before the decree bring forth execution, that by Mat. 5. 7.
showing mercy they may obtain mercy, and that their Iam, 2. 13.
mercy may rejoice against judgment Deuteronomy. 32. 29
O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end; yea 2 Cor. 5, 20.
in Christ's steed I beseech such a one, whosoever thou art, not to Rom, 2. 4.
despise the riches of Gods goodness and forbearance and long suffering, leading
thee to repentance, but that thou will be reconciled to God. For if thou
should ^ harden thy heart in im^enitency, ^ Verse. 5.
thou treasurest ^p to thy self wrath against ^e day of wrath; when his
soule-murdering sin that now lies lighter on ^y conscience then cork ^
feathers, will in that day ^eme heavier then the ^eight of Reu. 6. 16.
the rocks and ^ountaynes.

O therefore that my Dan. 4. 27.
council might be acceptable unto thee, and that thou would imagine, that
the justice of GOD should even now meet thee (while Mat. 5. 2^.
thou art in the way) with such a greeting as he gave Genesis 4. 9.
Cain, saying, Where are thy neighbors and brethren? will thou answer, am I
my Brothers keeper? Eye on it, it was the speech of a Verse the same.
murdering Cain, and if thou Amos 4. 12
prepare not to meet the Lord with a better answer, he will proceed saying,
Genesis 4. 10.
what have thou done the voice of thy neighbors blood cries vnt^ me from the
earth. W^ thou reply, thou did n^uer give wound, or deablow among them with
sword or fist? But thy neighbors have souls (as well as bodies) and they may
be slaughtered without sword or fist. Yea, but for their souls thou will say,
thou did never seduce them with error, nor poison them with heresy; for thou
did seldom or never exchange a word with them about soule-matters. A goodly
answer, as if a steward being called to reckoning for murdering his Masters
servants, by detaining the meat and drink which he should minister unto them;
should answer, I never baned them with meat, nor poisoned them with liquor,
for they had none at all from me. But all the world knows, bodies may be
murdered as well by want of meat and drink that should be given them, as by
bane or poison in lieu thereof ministered unto them. And so may souls likewise
be Hos. 4. 6.
destroyed for lack of knowledge, and Pro. 5. 23. and 10. 21.
dye for want of instruction and wisdom; wherein Mat. 12. 30
he that is not with Christ, (for saving souls) is against him, and he that
gathers not, scatters. And therefore 2 Timothy 2. 7.
the Lord give us understanding in all things, whereby we may 1 Timothy 3. 9.
have the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience, that so we may be Acts
20. 26
pure from the blood of all men. And thus you have my second general motive.


Aqu. Brother Aristarchus, how truly may we with the two Disciples, say one
to another, Luke 24. 32
did not our hearts burn within us, whiles the Scriptures have bin thus opened
unto us? The Lord be merciful to our former luke-warmenesse, and grant that
our affections thus now kindled, may be for the time to come, Cant. ^. 6, 7
like those coals of love, which many waters may never quench. And to this
end, we pray you Mr. Archippus, to proceed, and 2 Cor. 13. 2.
spare not; though the word of GOD in your mouth be Ier. 23. 29.
like a fire, and your lips as Ier. 6. 29.
bellows to make the flame vehement; that you may not leave us, as the Verse
the same.
Founder that melts in vain. How much better is it, seeing the hardest frost
must sooner or later have a thaw; that our frozen hard hearts should melt here,
that we may be 1 Cor. 3. 15
saved, though so as by fire; then to be Job 21. 30
reserved unto the day of wrath, to be thawed with Esa. 33. 14.
everlasting burnings hereafter, which Mat. 24* 51.
is the portion of hypocrites.


Arch. Blessed be God, that by Esa. 4. 3.
the spirit of judgment and by the spirit of burning, does purge the blood of
Jerusalem; and thus 1 Pet. 4. 17
begins judgment at his own house here, that they may not be 1 Cor. 11. 31.
condemned with the world. And to your comfort be it spoken this tender Esa.
66. 2.
contrite heart of yours, thus trembling at the word, is a powerful blessed
Job 33. 23, 27.
effect of Gods gracious aspect toward you, as Heb. 12. 23
his first borne that Esa. 4. 3.
are written among the living in Jerusalem. O my brethren, how should you Luke
10. 20.
rejoice in this as our Savior says, that your names are written in heaven ^
And as I have spoken these things unto you, that this our Ioh. 15. 12.
Saurours joy might remain in you, and that your joy may be full, so
whatsoever I shall add, is intended as 2 Cor. 1. 24.
a furtherance of this your joy, though by the way any thing should 2 Cor. 9. 8.
make you sorry for a season. And so I proceed.

My third general motive derived from the consideration of our selves, is
this* that we all professors being here in the militant Church ( Can. 6. 10.
terrible as an army with banners) and having our 2 Cor. 10. 3
life for a warfare* and the 1 Timothy 6, 12
good fight of faith for our combat: as ever we look to Ephesians. 6. 13
stand in the evil day, so must we put on the whole armor of God, especially
the 1 These. 5. 9
brestplate of faith and love, and the hope of salvation for an helmet. And
passing here by love as already dispatched, I say Faith is compared to a
breast plate, because as this is the safeguard of the heart wherein the natural
life consists; so Faith is the safeguard of Romans 2. 29 1 Pet. 3. 4.
the hid man of the heart, wherein spiritual life consists. And therefore as
we are said to Gal. 2. 20.
live by faith of the Son of God, so Faith is said to be 1 Ioh. 5. 4.
the victory that overcomes the world; and we know the te^or of the Gospel
is plain and peremptory, Mar. 16. 16
he that believes, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be
damned. Upon this ground I infer, that I must either make good proof of my
faith, or quit claim to the sauing-state of grace. Now we know what evidence
S. James calls for, Iam 2. 17. 18. etc.
show me thy faith by thy works. Ask ye what works? Search the Scriptures,
and among all outward ordinary works, they produce that in the prime place, as
the prime-rose and fairest evidence of Faith, which is in least esteem with
worldlings; I mean the fruit of our lips, whereby we bless God, and edify
our neighbors. ^ Cor. 4. 13
We having the same spirit o^ Faith (says S. Paul) according as it is
written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken: we also believe* and therefore
speak. Ag^ine, Romans 10. 9
if thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart etc.
thou shall be saved. An^ this he doubleth again wit^ a reason annexed, saying
Verse 10.
For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mout^
confession is made vnt^ salvation. Thou will sa^ then, that the fruit of the
lips being, as I avouch, the prime-rose of outward works, belike the Apostle
teaches men to be saved according to their works. In no wise; but this I
say, that the confession of the mouth, being the chief evidence of true Faith
in the heart, whereby we are justified as by Gods privy seal: in the
revelation of Gods righteous judgment, we shall be admitted by confession,
as by Gods broad-seale, to pass from justification to salvation* And search
the Scriptures, and you shall find, that both before, and in the time of the
Law, as well as in the days of the Gospel, the fruit of the lips is not only
culled out as the choice, but made as the epitome of all outward works, being
alleged in stead of all the rest; and produced as Gods broad-seale to
distinguish Genesis 4. 26. 6, ^.
the Sons of God from the Sons of men, Ier. 10. 25 Psalm. 14. 4.
the beleeeuers from Infidels, and Joel 2. 32. Act. 2. 17. 21. Romans 10. 13
the saved from the damned.

And for this cause the Scriptures attribute to the tongue, above all other
members of the body, the title Psalm. 5^. 7. 108. 1.
of our glory: because though it be for matter a small member, yet in virtue
and power it ouerswayeth all the rest, Iam. 3. 3. 4
as a Bit in the horses mouth, or a Helm in a Ship; Verse 2.
and if any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able to
bridle the whole body: and yet this is not all, but chiefly because there is no
member like it Psalm. 108. 1 3, and 57. 7, 8, 9
to glorify God, when it is set on work by the fervent spirit of Faith; as
there is none so bad, if Iam. 3. 6.
it be set on fire of hell. Look we to it therefore, for Pro. 28. 21
death and life are in the power of the tongue, as the wise man speaks. And
howsoever the wisdom of worldlings, Romans 8. 7.
being enmity against God, does thwart and slight this, and judge of speaking
(as of 1 Cor. 2. 18, 21
Preaching) esteeming it as light as foolishness, to be put in the balance
with works high in their esteem: yet a Mat. 12. 42
wiser then Solomon (even the Acts 17. 31
man ordained to judge the whole world, and therefore must needs Genesis 18. 25
judge, an^ do right) avouches the same, saying Mat. 12. 42
by thy wor^ thou shall be justified, an^ by thy words thou shall b^ condemned.
What the^ though thy feet be swift ^ Eccl. 5. 1.
go to the house of God and Esa. 1. 12.
tread his courts, thy head bowed down Esa. 58. 5.
like ^ bulrush, or as Ier. 9. 1.
a fountain^ of water to Heb. 12. 17
seek the ble^sing with tears; thine q Psalm. 119. 37.
eyes turned away from b^ holding vanity, thine ear^ shut from Psalm. 15. 3.
taking up a reproach against thy neighbor, and Ephesians. 4. 2^.
thy hands stron^ to labor, and so stretche^ out to the needy, that the
should 2 Cor. 13 ^
bestow all the goods to feed the poor^ yea, and give thy body to be burned;
yet with out the right use of the tongue, thou art nothing. For if thou
refrainest not thy tongue from Mat. 12. 36.
idle words, and Ephesians. 4. 29
corrupt communication; if thou Pro. 15. 14
feedest thy own mouth with foolishness, in stead of feeding others with thy
lips; if thou Ier. 9. 3.
bend thy tongue like thy bow for lies, but art not valiant for the truth upon
earth, to Esa. 59. 4.
call for justice and plead for truth; if finally Mat. 12. 35
out of the good treasure of the heart, thy tongue bring not forth good thing
that may be Ephesians. 4. 29.
good to the use of edifying: thou Iam. 1. 26.
deceiuest thy own heart in seeming religious, and failest in one maine proof
of thy faith, which Iam. 2. 20.
one lacking, will prove thee no better then a transgressor in al^ the rest.
And Mal. 1. 14.
cursed be^ the deceiuer (faith the Lord) that has in his floc^ a male, and
voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord, a corrupt thing. The Hos 14. 2.
calue^ of thy lips not rendered to God, prove all the rest but lame sacrifices:
and thy glory, thy tongue I mean, the most glorious instrument of Faith,
wherewith thou should Iam. 3. 9.
bless God, and Iam. 5. 20.
save thy neighbors soul, is Pro. 3. 27.
withheld from them to whom it is due; etc what faith or righteousness can
then be in thee?

And that herein thou may no longer be faithless, but believing, reach thy
hand I pray thee, to the Scriptures alleged, and search with the Acts 17. 11
noble Be^reans, whether these things be so: namely, that the Pro. 10. 21
lips of the righteous feed many, but fools dye for want of wisdom: so that
no lip-feeder, no righteous man. And again, Pro. 28. 4.
they that forsake the law, praise the wicked, but such as keep the law (in
faith and a good conscience he means,) contend with them; that is, as others
praise them with Psalm. 12. 2.
flattering lips, To these Psalm. 141. 5
smite them with ^eproofes, and so fight or contend with them in bat^aile; as
the (...) Prou. 28. 4
Hebrew word ^ignifieth, and as the kings ^ranslators Deuteronomy. 2. 9. 24.
elsewhere render the same: Whence we conclude, as before, no ^ip-feeder, no
righteous man: so here, no lip-sm^ter, no believer. Wherfor^ Pro. 9. 12.
if thou be wise, be wise ^^thine own soul, to make sure the evidence of the
faith, which is thy bres^ plate. Then as 2 Timothy 2. 3.
good soldiers of Jesus Christ, ye wi^^ Ephesians. 6. 17.
take the sword of the spirit, which is the word o^ God, and therewith teac^
your tongues to 1 Timothy 6.
figh^ the good fight of says, no^ only Ephesians. 6. 12.
against flesh and blood, but also against the Principalities and power of
darkness, according to the Deuteronomy. 29. 12.
covenant and oa^ of the Lord your GOD whereinto ye entered by Baptism. And as
thus fighting, ye 1 Ioh. 5. 4.
have the victory that over comes the world, even your faith, and ^hereby
Heb. 4. 3.
enter into rest, (even Mat. 11. 29
rest to your souls, which is a heaven upon ^arth) before many of your
^rethren (like as the Josh. 1. 1 5
sons of Reuben and Gad had their rest and possession before their brethren)
so ye may not sit still here, as ^^ Moses told them, and d Number. 3^. ^
^our brethren go to war without your assistance; ^ut ye must pass armed
before your brethren, (as Josh. 1. 14.
Ioshuah charged the Rou^enites) and fight for them with the sword of Christ's
mouth, till the Lord have given them rest with you.

And concerning hope, ^t is compared to a helmet, because as it secureth the
head, wherein the brain is seated, whence the animal spirits proceed, that
sti^ up the senses, and mo^^ the sinews of the body so hope is the
preseruati^^ of all those spiritual motions, whereby the spirit stirs, and
grows in grace* Therefore it is called a 1 Pet. 1. 3.
lively hope, because i^ quickens men (as the Acts 26. 7.
twelve tribes) instantly to serve God. And so necessary a thing is hope to the
sauing-state of grace, that (...) were better for our bodie^ to be headless,
then ou^ hearts to be hopeless. For Romans 8. 24
we are saved by hope: an^ Ephesians. 2. 12.
without hope, without God in the world. Now Heb. 11. 1.
faith being the ground o^ l Romans 10. 17
things hoped for, and fait^ coming by the word o^ God heard* where we have no
word of promise to be^eue, there I can have no ^^pe to wait for. What
^^erefore says the word of ^^omise? Mat. 25. 29
To every one ^^at has (to employ for ^^e Lords advantage) shall (...) given,
and he shall have ^^undance; but from him ^at has not, (so to im^^oy) shall
be taken away ^^en that which he has. (...) worldly treasure the ri^^er a
covetous man is, the ^ore unwilling he is to ^^mmunicate and distri^^te to
others; because the ^ore he gives, the less he ^inkes remains for him (...)
feed Eccl. 5. 11.
his eyes withal. ^^t in the true riches of ^race, the Proverb is veri^^d,
Pro. 11. 24
There is that scatte^^th, and yet increases, and there is that with-holde^
more then is meet, but ^ tends to poverty. No^ therefore have thou hope t^
stand, when others fall, an^ to thrive in grace when others turn b^nkerupt ^
make good then thy hop^ by Heb. 3. 6.
holding fast the conf^dence, and the rejoicing ^ the hope, firm unto the end.
Ask ye how? The Apostle shows, by Verse 13.
exho^ting one an other daily whiles its called to da^ This is the way to hold
fa^ the profession of our hop^ (as of our faith) witho^ wavering, Heb. 10. 23
24.
when we consider one another to pr^uoke unto love and to goo^ works, by
exhorting o^ another. Herein devise ^ the Prophet Esa. 3 ^. ^.
says of lib^rall things (like a liberal lip-feeder) and by liberal things
thou shall stand: yea* the more thou winnest souls to God by employment of thy
talents, the more shall thou increase in thy own stock, with Mat. 25. 20. etc.
the good and faithful servants.

Look on such as by reading, praying, catechizing, and singing in their
families, and by mutual exhortations, and conferences employ their talents:
how are they, as Cant. ^. 16
gardens whose spices flow out? how is their Pro. 4 ^8.
path, as the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day ^
how Hos. ^4. 5, 6, 7.
grow they, as the Lilly, and cast forth their roots as Lebanon? how spread
their branches with beauty, as the Oliue-tree* with smell as Lebanon; so that
they that dwell under their shadow, return? On the contrary, take a view of
Ministers and People, that with the sloathfull servant, hide their talents. How
many of those, that once began to shine as stars, and dislilled doctrine as
rain upon the tender herbs; became afterward as clouds without rain, and
stars without light, yea some like snuffes in scokets, whose wimpering light
cannot be so comfortable, as their stench is abominable? And how many others
among the people, that once flourished like green bay-trees, and yielded
refreshing like Jonas gourd, to all about them; ceasing afterward from mutual
exhortation, have bin blasted as forward buds with untimely frosts, and
withered as Jonas gourd, smitten with the worm? How is the knowledge of some
ouercast with fogs of ignorance, and unresolved doubts, as the light with
clouds of darkness? their ^ast loses their sweet re^ish in the things of
the spirit, as the Israelites in their Manna, their memories that, marble-like,
could ^^st ^^etaine the good things ^hey heard, are now as lea^ing tubs, or
out-running ^^eues; and the door of their ^ips that was wont to open ^ith the
law of grace, is ^ow locked up from good words, or moves as door^ on rusty
hinges, with murmuring and complaning and words tending rathe^ to the
perverting of the hearers then godly edifying. They have left their first love,
with Reu. 2. 4.
Ephesus, their zeal is cooled, with Reu. 3. 16.
Laodocia, and they have a name that they live but are dead, with Reu. 3. 1
Sardis. A^ ye see these things, so consider them I pray, and look on them, (as
Solomon did on Pro. 24. 30 31, 32
the field of the sloathfull) and receive instruction.

And if all this be not enough to rowze the^ take heed left while a spirit of
slumber fall on thee* Hos. 7. 9.
strangers devour thy strength, and thou know (...) not, as the strength of
Gods spirit departed from Iud. 16 19, etc.
Sampson whiles he slept on Dalilahs knees. And then when thou art awakened to
see what foul spiritual wickednesses are upon thee, thou may fondly imagine
(as Sampson) to go out, as at other times, and shake thy self, when thou wast
wont to break the bonds of iniquity, as Sampson did the Philis^ines withes and
ropes: But alas the Lord being departed from thee, the powers of darkness may
so surprise thee, that they may not only put out the eyes of thy mind, but
bind thee with fetters worse then of brass, and make thee grind in any base
service and filthy drudgery of the unclean spirit, as the Philistines made
Sampson grind in the prisonhouse. And how many may you see or hear of to be
thus kept grinding at the Devils pleasure, some in play houses and
whore-houses, others in tauernes and lehouses, and not a few in extortions,
vsuries, abundance of idleness, pride and new-fanglednesse, and many other
abominations? Yea, but yet have all these free liberty in the midst of all
this bondage to come to the house of God, and there to present themselves among
the sons of God. I answer, what can this avail them, when Job. 1. 6.
Satan himself may be there as well as they? Nay unless in better manner they
make good their 1 Ioh. 1. 3.
hope, by purging themselves as God is pure; their presence there, and all
their praying, hearing, and receiving of the Sacraments, whereto serve they,
but as Iud. 16. 25
Sampson when out of his prison he was presented among the Philestines? even to
make sport for the Devil and all his children; who having espied what a
foundation of goodly hope these men began to lay, and how ill they are able to
finish it, Luk 14. 29 30.
begin to mock and say, lo these men began to build and were not able to
finish? Will thou therefore be without fear of such ^ellish slavery and
scorn, let thy glory (thy tongue) then awake and bestirre it self, to the
glorifying of God and edifying* of thy neighbors; disperse the fruit of thy
lips and give to poor souls so shall thy Psalm. 112. 9
righteousness endure for ever, and thy horn shall be exalted with honor.
Yea, though men and Devils may grieve and gnash the teeth to see it, and Jude,
Verse. 13
like raging waves of the sea foame out their own shame against thee, yet this
thy Heb. 6. 11. 19
diligence shall make to the full assurance of hope unto the end: which hope
thou have as an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast and which enters
into that within the veil; to secure thee, that as thy diligence shall be
blessed with perseverance here, so it shall be crowned with glory hereafter.

Last of all, this hope of the glory that shall be revealed, should be a strong
motive to all of us that with Heb ^^. ^6
Moses have respect to the recompense of reward. For as in bodily alms, so
much more in spiritual; 1 Cor. 9. 6.
he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he that sows
bountifully shall reap bountifully. And if Mat. 10. 42
a cup of cold water given in the name of a disciple shall not loose a reward;
how much more shall the excellent oil of reproof, the precious perfume of
hearty council, and the fruit of the lips* feeding many hungry souls for
Christ's sake, Act. 10. 4.
come up for a memorial before God and Phil 4. 17.
aboun^ to our account S^ith the scripture in vain Pro. 11. 30.
he that wins soul (using all a^t and cunning and industry to catch
souls, as fowlers do to take birds, as the Hebrew word (...)
imports) he is wise? The wise, says the Dan. 12. 3.
Prophet Daniel, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; but they that
turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. How should this
make us with the Apostle to be 1 Cor. 9. 22 19.
made all things to all men, that we may by all means win and save some; yea,
and make our selves servants unto all, that we may gain the more? Shall they
that run in a race Verse. 24. 25
and strive for the mastery, so temper and stretch out themselves for a
corruptible crown, and not we for an incorruptible? Shall wordlings so
strive, every husbandman, who may have the best crop at harvest, every
merchant who may have the best return in a Mart, every soldier who may have
the best booty in a conquest? and all these as uncertain venturers upon
doubtful hopes, which are sometime swept away as spiders cobwebs? and have we
a hope so sure and steadfast, grounded upon the truth of God that can not lie,
and on his omnipotency which being infinite can neither fail o^ it self, nor
be mated by any ^^uerse power, which at greatest is but finite? And hear we
the righteous Judge encouraging us, saying, Reu. 22. 11 12
He that is righteous let him be righteous still, etc. and, behold, I come
quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work
shall be? And shall not we be 1 Cor. 15. 58.
steadfast and immovable always abounding in this work of the Lord; in this
fruit of the righteous, which is a tree of life?


Arist. Mr. Archippus, you have twisted such a threefold cord in your 3.
motives already dispatched, that is able to draw any faithful heart to the
practice of that you press. We pray you therefore, that briefly touching the
4. you may come to your directions for the right manner of performing the same,
which our resolved hearts long to hear.


Arch. My fourth general motive is drawn from the consideration of our
enemies. We Ephesians. 6. 12
wrestle, says S. Paul, not against flesh and blood (only, or principally)
but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness
of this world, against spiritual wickednesses in high places: And therefore
we must not only Ephesians. 6 11. 13, etc.
put on the whole armor of God, and stand every man upon his 1 Pet. 5. 8.
watch and 1 Ioh. 5. 18
guard: but as ever we hope to stand (...) and quite our selves lik^ men, and
be conquerou^ in the good fight of faith we must Phil. 1. 27.
stand fast in on^ spirit, with one mind str^uing together (as the Apostl^
says) for the faith (...) the gospel. For in battle they that look to
conque^ are careful to put their soldiers in array, to march in ranks,
supporting and encouraging one another, a^ Captain Io^b told Abisha^ saying,
2 Samuel 10, 11, 12.
if the Syrians be to^ hard for me, then thou sha^^ help me; but if the
children of Ammon be to^ strong for thee, then I wi^ come and help thee: be o^
good courage and let us play the men, etc. And wo^ to the battle, where the
array is broken, and every man shifteth for himself, being divided each from
other. So if we join 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8
love with faith in our breast plate, and Col. 3. 14.
put on charity which is the bond of perfectness, and so with united forces
fight together the good fight of faith, encouraging and strengthening each
other; our 1 Ioh. 5. 4.
faith is the victory that overcomes the world, and neither men, nor devils,
nor gates of hell shall prevail against us. For Eccl. 4. 12.
if one fail, two shall withstand, and a threefold cord is not quickly
broken. But Verse. 10.
woe to him that is alone (that is uncharitably or presumptuously alone) when
he falls; for he has not a second to help him up. Love therefore Col. 2. 2.
knitting us together, is not without cause called the bond of perfectness;
because, as a bond joining many weak sticks fast together in a faggot, makes
them too strong for a man of strength to break; which yet a weak child may
break one by one, being loosed from the bond: So if the saints of God be knit
together in love, they are Cant 6. 4.
terrible as an army with banners; too strong ^or that strong man armed, and
all the powers of hell.

If Mat. 12. 26.
Satan be divided against himself, how then can his Kingdom stand? Nay, the
devil, our adversary is wiser then so. If Reu. 12 7.
the dragon fight, his Angels shall fight with him; and though they be Marc. 5.
2. 9.
legions yet they join together as if they were all but one spirit, as they
are all, named Ephesians. 2. 2.
the spirit that works in the children of disobedience. And this wise-dome
the devil so teaches his children, that Pro. 11. 21
hand ioynes in hand among the wicked. And howsoever in their opposite lusts
they may agree as ill as hounds about their bones; yet as the whole kennell can
join and run together with one mouth in pursuit of the Hare, so they against
Christ and his members. Luke 23. 12
Herod and Pilate, Mat. 22. 19, 16.
Pharisees and Herodians, yea Mat. 16. 1
Pharisees and Sadduces, (most Act. 23. 8.
contrary one to an other in their several opinions) can be good friends, and
stick together against Christ. Genesis 11. 3, 4.
Go too, said the old Rebels one to an other, let us make brick, and go too
let us build etc. Pro. 1. 11, 14.
Come with us, say the thieves to their fellows, cast in thy lot among us, let
us all have one purse. Esa. 56. 12
Come ye, say the drunkards, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves
with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day and much more abundant.
Likewise the Idolaters Esa 41. 6, 7
helped every one his neighbor, and every one said to his neighbor, be of
good courage; so the Carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth
with the hammer, him that smote the anuill. And how do our Pharisees of Rome
compass sea and land to make proselytes, by their Romans 16. 18
fair speechs deceauing many simple ones among us? And how may it vex every
righteous soul among us to see and hear, how idolaters* blasphemers, and
others who should not dare to whisper or mumble between the teeth, do from
day to day Psalm. 12. 3. 73. 8, 9.
talk so proudly and loftily with their mouth set against the heavens and
their tongue walking through the earth; as if they had the dominion over us?

O how should this stir up the spirit within us to contend in battle
against all these with the sword of Christ's mouth, Deuteronomy. 32. 31.
their rock being not as our rock, even our enemies themselves being Judges? O
ye that are named the family of faith, the armies of heaven, and the good
soldiers of Jesus Christ, 1 Ioh. 4. 4.
Is not he that is in us greater then he that is in the world? Is the Esa. 59.
1. Mich. 2. 7.
hand, or spirit, of the Lord shortened, or are these his works? That ye who
have given your names to Christ, and vowed to fight manfully under his banner
against the world, the flesh, and the devil, should in the midst of all this
be fearful or ashamed of him, and his words, in this* sinful and adulterous
generation; and Psalm. 78. 9.
with the children of Ephraim being armed turn back in the day of battle,
till Verse. 61.
his strength be delivered into captivity, and his glory into the enemies
hands? Do ye thus requite the Lord, O ye fearful and shameful soldiers,
even the Captain of your salvation; who has Reu. 1, 5.
loved and washed you in his own blood; who with his vesture dipped in blood
has fought for you, and Heb. 2. 14
by death destroyed the devil that has the power of death, that Romans 8. 37
ye might be more then conquerors through him that has loved you? Remember
this I beseech you, and show your selves men, bring it again to mind all ye
that by baptism have Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12
entered into covenant and oath with the Lord your God even all of you from the
hewer of wood to the drawer of water: gather your selves together 2 Timothy 2. 3
as good sou^diers of Jesus Christ, and as Reu. 19 14
the armies of heaven, follow him who is faithful and true: gird on the sword
of the spirit, and stand fast in one spirit, encouraging each other, and with
one mind striving together, and contending earnestly for the maintenance of
the faith and the power of godliness. And he that Reu. 19. 11
sits upon the white horse, and judges and makes war in righteousness,
will for your sake Psalm. 45. 3, 4, 5
gird his sword upon his thigh, as the most mighty* with his glory and majesty,
and in his majesty ride prosperously because of truth of mee^enesse, and
righteousness, and his right hand will ^each him terrible t^i^gs: and ^is
arr^wes shall b^ sharp in the ha^ts of the Kings ^n^mies whereby the people
shall ^^ll under him.

Wherefore Ephesians. 6. 20.
my brethren be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, and Phil. 1.
28.
in nothing be terrified by your adversaries, seem they as terrible as Number.
13. 33
those giants the sons of Anak, and ye but as Grasshoppers in their sight: for
as courageous Caleb said, Number. 14. 9
they are but bread for us, their defense is departed from them, and God is
with us, fear them not. Behold Deuteronomy. 2. 24
as the Lord gave into Israel: hand Sihon of Heshbon, and Deuteronomy. 3. 3. 1^.
Og that huge giant o^ Basha^: so the Lord has delivered into our hands the
most giant-like sinners and the stoutest Champions under the whole heaven, that
bear a head against us in our good fight of faith; to be either by the 2 Cor.
10. 4, 5.
mighty weapons of our warfare brought into captivity of the obedience o^
Christ, or to Esa. 1^. 4
be slain by the breath of his lips, and Re^. 19. 14
the sword proceeding out of his mouth. If in this our day of salvation we
would call one upon an other and set to it, Deuteronomy. 1. 30
The Lord would now again go before us and fight for us, according to all
that he has done before our eyes in Egypt; I mean that Reu. 11. 8.
spiritual Egypt of Rome, whose man of sin, and mystery of iniquity, he so
wonderfully brought down among us and consumed with the breath of his mouth.
Yea except Deuteronomy. 32. 30
our rock had sold us and shut us up, how (long err this) should one of us
have chased a thousand and two have put ten thousand to flight, not only of
those hellish Locusts and Romish merchants that Reu. 18. 11 12, 13.
make merchandise of the souls of men, that Zac. 11. 5.
sell and slay them, and say, Blessed be the Lord, as if they were guiltles;
but also of those Esa. 29. 20 2^,
terrible ones that watch for iniquity and make a man an offender for a word,
and turn aside the righteous for a thing of naught; and of those that Hab. 1
14, 1.
devour the men more righteous then themselves, that with their angles, nets,
and drags, catch and take and gather up all, making men as fishes of the sea,
or as creeping things that have no ruler over them; together with all those
hellish troops of raylers, swearers, ly ars and all abominable livers, whom
the Lord for Iud. 2 2, 3.
our disobeying his voice has no more driven out from before us; but left them
to be Ios. 23. 13.
snares and traps unto us, yea scourges in our sides and thorns in ou^ eyes?

What should I more say? If by all that has bin said professors be not pressed
in spirit to cast off all carnal shame and fear of man (that has Pro. 29. 25
brought so many snares among us) and to be courageous (as 2. Sam. 10. 12.
Ioab said) and play the men for our people, and for the cities of our God, for
the Sanctuary of the Lord and the beauties of holiness (that the right hand of
the adversary be not exalted with their ensigns displayed, and the enemies
roar wi^h Edoms cry in the midst of the Lords congregations, to the defiling
of his dwelling place and the reproaching of his great and terrible name) let
them know what that is which the Lord spoke saying, Le^. 1^ ^
I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me: and Heb. 1. 38.
if any man draw back, m^ soul shall have no pleasur^ in him. And let them
hear^ what the Angel of the Lord said, Iu^. 5. 23.
curse ye Meroz* curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof because they came
not to the help o^ the Lord, to the help o^ the Lord, against the mighty. And
if any such think by saying, Lord, Lord, to find the Lord Jesus for their
refuge, he tells the^ before hand whereto they shall trust, saying, Mark. 8. 38
whosoever shall be ashamed o^ me, and of my words, i^ this adulterous and
sinfu^ generation; of him al^^ shall the son of m^n b^ ashamed when he
comes in the glory of ^^ Father with the holy Angels. Then to their
everlasting shame will they learn, that as he that Mat. 12. 30
is not with Christ is against him, so they and all their fearful Companions,
that are not valiant for the truth upon the earth, shall not stand in the
congregation of the righteous. For Reu. 21. 8.
the fearful, as well as the unbelieving and the abominable, shall have their
part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone which is the second
death. And on the contrary, they that have the testimony of Jesus, and love not
their lives unto the death to hold it, and resist unto blood, striving against
sin, and so fight a good fight, and keep the faith and overcome; they Reu.
2. 11.
shall not be hurt of the second death, but receau^ 2 Timothy 4. 8.
the crown of righteousness, and Reu. 3 21.
sit with Christ i^ his throne, Reu. 2. 26 27.
having power over the nations and ruling them with a rod of iron, and breaking
them to shiuers a^ a potters vessels. And le^ this suffice for the reasons
enforcing the duty of Exhortation.


Aqu. Concerning you^ reasons we witness wha^ we feel, and our feeling
makes us say with Job, how forcible are right words Oh that we were as we^
enabled to exhort in the right manner as you have made us willing to set about
it. Now therefore we pray show us in what manner we are to perform ^


Arch. For as much as we have heard that to Exhort is to edify or build, and
that not a sheepe-cote, for a swayne, nor a palace for a Prince, but a
spiritual house for the King of glory, and temples for the holy Ghost; Ephesians. 2.
^^.
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief corner stone: therefore it behooves 1 Cor. 3. 10
every man to take heed how he build thereupon. For as ^ Cor. 4 2
it is required in stewards that a man be ^ound faithful: so is it in
builders, that a man be found Mat. 7. 24
wise and skillful. And of this, above all other buildings begun Luke 14. 28 29.
without forecast and cost counting, comes an end with confusion and mocking.
For your better capacity therefore and memory, I will insist in the metaphor of
edifying, and thence deliver your directions for the right manner of exhorting
in five distinct considerations, showing first, who must be builders; secon^ly,
with what tools they must build; t^irdly; what be the materials whereon they
must work; fourthly, what is the method of building, and fifthly, what is the
fit season wherein they are to work.

Concerning the first, as it is not for every common quarry-man or unskillful
bungler to set hand to building in any goodly frame; but he must be such a
workman as is fitted and allowed to build: so it is not for every Christian in
name, to presume to set hand to this work of edif^ing souls, but such only
who have received both ability and approbation from God to set to it. All they
therefore that will exhort, and teach, and admonish others, must first take
heed to this, that they themselves be 1 These. 5. 5 11.
children of light, Heb. 3. 1. ^^
partakers of the heavenly calling, Col. 3. 16.
having the word of Christ dwelling in them richly, in all wisdom; in a word,
such as are Romans 15. 14.
full of goodness, and filled with all knowledge (as the Apostle says) are
able also to admonish one another* Not as though admonishers of others were
Phil. 3. 12.
already perfect, either in goodness or knowledge; for we ^ Cor. 13. 9, 10.
know but in part, and our greatest perfection and fullness is here but in
part* but they must be sound in faith and charity, holding the mystery of the
faith in a pure conscience, and in this sense full and perfect, as perfection
is opposed, not to imperfection or pollution, but to unsoundness and
dissimulation: perfect as S. James means, that is, Iam. 1. 4.
entire, wanting nothing, nothing of those essential or necessary parts of
knowledge and goodness that belong to sincere Christans; though the degrees of
their growth therein may differ as much as 1 Ioh. 2. 12 13.
little children from Fathers, or young men from them both.

For if fools that want knowledge, will here be meddling, and full of words,
like empty caskes that give the greatest sound; as Eccl. 10. 13
the beginning of their words will be foolishness, so the end of their talk
(if they may be ^arkened unto) will be mischievous madness. For as blind men
cannot judge of colors; so these having not the veil removed from their
hearts, nor their eyes anointed with eye-salue, 2 Cor. 2. 14.
cannot discern the things of God: they are all under the Esa 5. 20.
Prophets curse, calling evil good, and good evil, putting ^ight for
darkness, and darkness for light. And therefore, Mat. 15. 14
if such blind should lead the blind, both will fall into the ditch. And
strange folly should men impute to GOD* to t^inke that ever he gave commission
to such kind of leaders; for Pro. 2^. 6
he that sends a message by the hand of a fool, cutteth off the f^ete, and
drinks damage.

Again, though men have a form of knowledge, yet if they be unsanctified, they
may not with Gods acceptance Psalm. 50. 16 17.
take up Gods word in their lips, which they cast behind their back in their
lives. For therein they Eze. 2^. 39
pollute the name and word of God, causing men to loathe it passing through
their lips, as men 1 Samuel 2. 17*
abhorred the offering of the Lord, passing through the hands of Elies wicked
sons. Who can endure willingly to hear a notorious thief or strumpet,
discoursing of true dealing and honesty? or what stomach loatheth not to
receive physic from his hands, who is known to have the plague, and the
botch running upon him* Secondly, such builders pull down more by their
ill-liues, then ever they can build-vp by their good words. For there is as
well in ill conversation as in ill doctrine, a contagious power of infection. 1
Cor. 5. 6.
Know ye not that a little leaven ^owreth the whole lump? And Eccl. 9. 1^
one sinner (says Solomon; especially if he may be listened unto) destroys
much good. Let such Physicians therefore first heal themselves, and free
themselves from sin reigning, before they presume to cast stones at others:
otherwise Pro. 26. 9
a parable in such lewd men's mouths, is as a thorn going up into the hand of
a drunkard; wherewith as they much trouble all about them, so they most of all
hurt themselves, making hereby, themselves the Romans 2. 1.
more inexcusable, and their vengeance so much the Luke 12. 47
more intolerable. Then shall they feel the burden of this question
wherewith the Lord now poseth them, according as it is written; Psalm. 50. 16
to the wicked, says God, What have thou to ^oe to declare my statutes, or
that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth? etc.


Arist. Mr. Archippus, we feel doubts and scruples so fast arising out of your
directions, that according to your own wish, we shall now be bold to ask
your full meaning in all we shall doubt of. First therefore resolve us I pray,
if wicked Husbands, Parents, and Ministers, take upon them to exhort their
Wives, Children, or People, whether their inferiors are bound to hearken unto
them, who have no allowance from God to exhort? (...) ill manner of attempting
so good a work, will with woe be found speechless, as the evil servant, when
they shall be posed with this heavy question; Romans 2. 21
Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self? Or Mat. 7. 4.
how will thou say to thy brother, let me pull out the moate out of thine eye,
and behold, a beam is in thine own eye?


Aqu. But if no ignorant nor profane men have commission from God to meddle
with the duty of Exhortation, may not they deem themselves happier then the
righteous, to be freed from such a burden?


Arch. Happier say you? then let thieves and rebels count themselves happier
with their manacles and fetters, because it is not for them in these cases to
walk abroad, and be doing good among their neighbors, as true and loyal
subi^cts. O how much rather should they hereby take notice of their woeful Heb.
2. 15. Ioh. 8. 33. 34
bondage, wherein they are so fettered in chains of darkness and bonds of
wickedness, that they have not the power so much as to speak one good
acceptable word, either for the glory of God, or the good of their neighbors
souls, or their own. Mat. 12. 34
O ye generations of Vipers, says the Lord, how can ye being evil, speak
good things? Mat. 7. 16.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?


Aqu. Why then say they, do you so complain of them for want of exhortation,
which they cannot perform?


Arch. It is true, that Romans 6. 20
while men are the servants of sin, they are free (as S. Paul says) from
righteousness. How free? so that they are not bound either to do
righteousness, or to yield account for default of it; God forbid, the Lords
own Romans 6. 18. 22,
free men unto righteousness have no such immunity, much less the servants of
corruption Shall untrusty servants sent with money to the m^rket to buy and
bring home their masters provision, wast all their money by the way, among
riotous gamesters, and then say why does our Master complain for want of that
provision which we were not able to buy? Eccl. 7. 29.
Lo, says the Wiseman, this only have I found, that God has made man
upright (being Genesis 1. 27.
created in Gods own image, and thereby enabled unto all Ephesians. 4. 24.
true holiness and righteousness) but they have sought many inventions; that
is, Romans 5. 12.
by one man sin entered into the world, and in and by him all have sinned and
Romans 3. 23.
come short of the glory of God, 2 Cor. 3. 18
of that same image of God wherein man was created. No reason then that God
should loose either the prerogative of his right in commanding, or the glory of
his justice in punishing; because men have by their own inventions lost their
ability in performing. Nay, seeing Romans 5. 18
by the offense of one, judgment is thus come upon all men to condemnation; and
God as we see Psalm. 51. 4.
will be clear when he judges, and Romans 3. 19
iniquity shall stop her mouth; O how should this move all men that have dyed
in the first Adam and yet remain Ephesians. 2. 1.
dead in sins and trepasses Ioh. 15. 5.
unable without Christ to do any thing that good is, to pant and thirst after
1 Cor. 15. 22. 46.
Christ, that second Adam, and quickening spirit, and in him to be made alive,
and to live by faith in him? So shall they recover in the last Adam a better, a
surer estate, then that which they lost in the first; and Christ being made
unto them of God 1 Cor. 1. 30.
wisdom and sanctification as well as righteousness and redemption, they shall
be enabled and accepted to exhort others, and to walk worthy of the Lord, unto
all pleasing. As therefore to all that are not thus quickened in Christ, I must
with grief say as Ezr. 4. 3.
Zerubbabel said to the adversaries of Judah, you have nothing to do with us
to build a house, a spiritual temple, I mean, unto our God: so to all that
are awakened and stand up from the dead, I must say with earnestnes as Ezr. 10.
4.
Shecaniah did to Ezra in another case, Arise, for this matter belongs unto
you, be of good courage and do it.


Aqu. We must confess that though you have made the way plain before us, yet
we^ have bin hindered by many thoughts arising in our hearts, and sundry
Scriptures that seemed to us to stand in our way; namely, 1 Cor. 7. 20
Let every man, says S. Paul, abide in the same calling wherein he was called;
1 Cor. 12. 29.
Are al teachers? And again, Verse. 28.
God has appointed some teachers to Heb. 13. 17.
watch for men's souls as they that must give an account: Teaching therefore
being the proper calling of such as God makes watchmen, what have we private
men, say some to do with teaching?


Arch. To teach and preach publicly in the church is the peculiar office of
those whom the Lord sends; and this honor Heb. 5. 4.
no man may take to himself (no more then the priesthood) but he that was
called of God, as was Aaron: as it is written, Romans 10. 15
How shall they preach except they be sent? But all Christians that have the
word of Christ dwelling in them, as we have heard, may and must be Col. 3. 16.
teaching and admonishing one another privately, as God offers occasion. Yea,
to this end they must Heb. 10. 24. (...),
consider or watch one another with a holy jealousy, to provoke unto love and
good works: yea, and sometimes Col. 4. 17.
speak a word to the watchman himself, that he take heed to his ministry to
fulfill it. For all Christians are called to be 1 Pet. 4. 10
good stewards and Luke 10. 36 37.
neighbors, and must therefore every man as he has received the gift of grace,
minister the same one to another; and help with the Samaritane where he sees
need. Imagine a deep dangerous quarrey in a street, where a watchman is hired
to give warning for saving all passengers; a tradesman by in his shop espies
one ready to fall headlong for want of warning, the watchman being asleep or
at the ale-bench: shall ^e in this case suffer his brother to perish, rather
then give warning, and say he is guiltless, because there was a watchman set
for that purpose?


Aqu. Why then says the Apostle, that we must 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
study to be quiet and to do our own business? And likewise Solomon, that Pro.
20. 3.
every fool will be meddling?


Arch. It is manifest that Solomon there speaks of meddling, not by way of
exhorting, but by carnal strife and iangling: and so the Apostle of busying
our selves with others, not out of conscience of Gods command (charging us
Phil. 2. 4.
not to look every man on his own things, but every man on the things of
others) but out of idleness, when men are busy with other men's matters,
because they 1 Tess. 4. 11. 1 Timothy 5. 13
work not with quietness doing their own business; or out of curiosity,
when men 1 Timothy 1. 6
turn to vain iangling and 1 Timothy 6. 4
doting about questions and strife of words, whence comes envy* strife,
raylings, evil surmisings and perverse disputings, rather then edifying, which
is in faith: or out of malice and malignity, when men taking things in the
worst sense, and loving all devouring words, will be Rom 1. 29 30.
whisperers and backbiters, or taletellers and false accusers, as 1 Samuel 22. 9,
10, 22.
Doeg the Edomite: or out of envy and contempt, when men fall to be murmurers
and complayners, like Number. 16. 3.
Korah and his Accomplices, and Iud. Verse. 8
despising dominion do speak evil of dignities and Eccl. 10. 20.
curse even the King as well as the rich, which men should not dare to do, no
not in their bed-chambers, least the bird of the air carry the voice, and make
the fools lips to swallow up himself.


Aqu. But though nothing else but conscience of Gods command so stir us that
sometimes we can not but speak and rebuke out of the Scriptures: yet are we
presently a byword in the lips of many, saying, what should ignorant sinful
souls, such as cobblers and poor tradesmen meddle with such high and holy
matters as the Scriptures?


Arch. How contrary are such scorners unto God, who Hos. 8. 12.
complayneth of his people for meddling so little with the Scriptures, and that
they were accounted as a strange thing? And when the Scriptures are by God
himself compared to the Col. 4. 6. Mat. 5. 13.
salt of the earth, and the Psalm. 119. 105.
light of the world, were not this a strange 1 Pet. 1. 19.
mockery to hear great men cry and say, what should base poor tradesmen have
to do with salt and sunshine? Leaving therefore such unreasonable men to the
Lord, against whom they sport themselves, who will one day answer them for
himself: 1 Pet. 4. 14
your happiness it i^ to be reproached for the name of Christ, who also for
your sakes was Luke 2, 34,
a sign to be spoken against. And to the comfort of all poor artificers, God
has put it in his sacred records for a perpetual memorial; how Aquila and
Priscilla Act. 18. 3.
being by their occupation Tentmakers, Verse. 24. 26
took unto them Apollos, an eloquent teacher and mighty in the Scriptures, and
expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly.


Aqu. Yea but we must needs acknowledge our selves to be, as they say,
ignorant, and sinful souls. And having many of us a poor measure of
knowledge, how little is the fruit that our lips can yield, and what small good
are we like to do in edifying* when every mocking Sanballat will be ready
with indignation to scorn our endeauours, as Neh. 4 1, 2
he did the Jews, s^ying, what do these feeble souls, will they fortify
themselves, will they sacrifice the calves of their lips, and revive the stones
out of the heaps of the rubbish? Again they seeing many faults in us, and we
being conscious of many more whereof our hearts condemn us; alas wha^ can we
say? when every scoffing Ismaelite will stop our mouths with the Scriptures,
saying, Mat. 7. 5.
first cas^ out the beam out of thine own eye; and Ioh. 8. 7.
he that is without sin among you let him first cast a stone at us*


Arch. Howsoever men, as devils, may use and abuse the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 3. 16
perverting them to their own destruction; yet they may not deter any
repentant sinner (were his sins as soul and notorious as the theifes that hung
on the cross) from rebuking others. And as for the Scriptures alleged, they
are not to be understood of sins of infirmity (for then Eccl 7. 20.
there being not a just man on earth that does good and sins not, there
should be none at all to rebuke) b^t of reigning sin and hypocrisy: 1 Ioh.
5. 18
and we know that whosoever is borne of God, so sins not; Romans 6. 14
sin having no dominion over any that is under grace. Now concerning your
small measure of knowledge, and as small hope of any great good that ye may
do; Remember how it is written, Zac. 4. 6.
not by might, not by power, but by my spirit says the Lord: and again, Verse.
10.
who has despised the day of small things? Be thy knowledge never so small, so
that it be the true saving Ioh. 17. 3.
knowledge of the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent; were it
but Mat. 13. 31 32.
as a grain of mustard-seede, which indeed is the least of al seeds, the
Kingdom of heaven is with it, by virtue whereof the birds of the air may
lodge in the branches thereof. God respects not, as man, the greatness of
men's gifts, or their great and glorious effects: but in Gods account Luke 16. 10
he that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful in much* and 2 Cor.
8. 12
if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that which a
man has, and not according to that he has not. The Lord in his sacrifices
accepted as well Leu. 1. 2, 14 and 5. 7.
doves and pigeons from poor men, as goats or bullocks from the rich; likewise
in the offerings for the tabernacle, as well Exo. 25. 3, 4.
brass, as gold and silver, and goats hair as well as purple and scarlet. Yea
search the Scriptures, and to your comfort you shall find the Luke 21. 2. 3.
poor widows two mites more in Christ's acceptance, then all the abundance of
the rich; and the 2 Reg. 5. 10, etc.
words of Naamans servants greater in operation, then the words of that great
Prophet Elisha. And as Solomon speaks of Eccl. 9. 14. 15.
one poor man by his wisdom delivering a city beseiged by a great King; so
we 2 Samuel 20. 16, etc.
read of one wise woman by her gracious words to prevail against desperate
Ioab, for preservation of another city.


Arist. Your mention of women minds us of one objection more, whereby some with
great indignation would stop all women's mouths from teaching and admonishing.
Says not S. Paul (say they) 1 Timothy 2. 11 12.
Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection? And again, I suffer not
a woman to teach or to usurp authority over the man, but to learn in silence.


Arch. Such men are as good disciples of S. Paul, as Ioh. 9. 28, 29.
the Pharisees were of Moses, whom they alleged and magnified not for any faith
or credit they gave him, but to cover their malice in vilifying the Lord Jesus.
For if S. Paul's meaning should be as they urge, that no women might teach in
private, he should be contrary to himself and the Scriptures. But plainly else
where does he expound himself? Saying, 1 Cor. 14. 34.
let your women keep silence in the churches. And as for women's teaching in
private, were they not wilfully blind on that side, they might see the same
Tit. 2. 1. 4.
Apostle charging Titus to teach it as found doctrine, that the aged women
should teach the younger women, etc. Is it not also registered, to the
commendation of Salomons Pro. 31. 1, etc
mother, how and what she taught him? Yea and to women's praise the Scriptures
witness, that they have taught, what, inferiors or equals only? nay, as need
required, they have given a word of exhortation to their superiors, and that
not only in the family as 2 Reg. 4. 9, etc.
the Shunamite did to her husband, but also in the Church and commonwealth; as
Act. 18. 26.
Priscilla did to Apollos, a preacher, and 1 Samuel 25. 24, etc.
Abigail to David the Lords anointed, For sometimes Genesis 21. 9, etc.
Sarah the weaker vessel may hold staunch when Abraham may fail, and then what
must Abraham do? In this case Abraham himself, though Sarahs Lord, is Verse.
12.
commanded by God to hearken to Sarahs voice in all that she told him;
wherefore although the world set this as a brand of just reproach upon 1 Timothy
5. 11, 12, 13.
wanton, idle and light huswifes that they are tatlers and busy-bodies: yet
when God sets forth the Pro. 31. 10
price of a virtuous woman, one of her excellencies, whereby she is valued far
above Rubies, is this, that Verse. 26.
she opens her mouth with wisdom, etc. and who is he then that should dare
to shut it?


Arist. You have so fully satisfied us in your first rule of direction, that
laying aside all blind excuses, and frivolous pretenses, we shall henceforth
gird up the loins of our minds, and be more ready to this good work of
edifying; whereunto, the Lord stir up all whom he has sanctified and made
meet for this his service, be they male or female. Help us onward therefore
we pray, with your further directions.


Arch. The second rule of direction, is to take heed to that of the Apostle, 1
Pet. 4. 17
if any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God. For it is Act 20. 32.
the word of Gods grace, that is able (as a fit tool or instrument) to build
up new men, as S. Paul says: being compared sometime to a Ier. 23. 29.
hammer, sometimes to an Mat. 3. 10.
axe, sometimes to a Esa 28. 10.
line, and some times to a Gal. 6. 16.
rule. This is that we are called to look unto, Esa 8. 20.
to the law, and to the testimony; which must be carefully heeded, as Verse 16.
bound up and sealed among the Lords Disciples, though cast aside of all
others: and if men speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them. Wherefore it is not humane Philosophy, morality, or polity,
though accommodated with History, and adorned with Poetry; not the edicts and
statutes of Kings and Parliaments; ^o, nor the decretals and Canons of Popes
and Councels; that are fit and complete instruments for the edifying of souls,
either for converting or perverting them. For this is a special prerogative
that God has reserved to his Law and holy Scriptures, above all the glorious
works of his own hands: according as it is written. Psalm. 19 7.
The Law of God is perfect, converting the soul; and 2 Timothy 3. 15. 17
the holy Scriptures are able to make the man of God perfect and wise unto
salvation. For this cause the Scriptures bear the title of Pro. 8. 6. (...).
Chiefetaines or Leaders, and of Eccl. 12. 11 (...).
Lords of collections, (as the Hebrew words import) because they are as
Leaders, and Lords paramount above all other words and writings of men, that
ever were collected into volumes; which are not only to be made subordinate
unto them, but no otherwise to be admitted for use, then as attendants and
servants unto them. And this pre-eminence is to be given to the holy
Scriptures, first in regard of their descent, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
being all given by inspiration of God, and 2 Pet. 1. 21
holy men of God speaking therein as they were moved by the holy Ghost;
secondly, in respect of their authority, they being authentic of themselves,
and teaching, Mat. 5. 21. Mark, 7. 14.
like Christ, of their own inbred authority, all others teaching by commission
and authority from them: and thirdly, in regard of their use and extent, being
Psalm. 19. 7
perfect, and Psalm. 1^9. 96.
exceeding large, as well for reforming the will and affections, as for
informing the understanding and judgment in Pro. 2. 9.
every good path: so that in all things concerning either faith or manners,
they are 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of GOD may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works.


Arist. Is there then I pray no use to be made of men's works and writings and
of the great Book of the Creatures in edifying souls?


Arch. As the Prophets and Christ himself used Hos 12. 10.
similitudes, and Mat. 13. 34, 35.
parables for illustration, to make heavenly things sensible by earthly
resemblances; and examples of Ier. 35. 24.
men, Ier. 8. 7.
birds, Esa 1. 3.
beasts, and of Esa 1. 2. Ier. 5. 22.
senseless creatures for provocation and conviction: and as S. Paul dealing
with Pagans, disputes with them Acts 14. 13, 17, 24. etc.
by the principles of Nature, and Acts 17. 23
their own inscriptions and Poets; and elsewhere against 1 Cor. 15. 33.
euill-speakers, and Tit. 1. 12.
slow-bellies, alleges the testimonies of their own profane writers, to
leave them the more inexcusable: so in like cases to the same ends, may we use
the same means: provided always that it be done respectively and sparingly.


Arist. What mean you by that respective and sparing use? I pray tell us fully
your meaning; for we doubt, too little respect is had of that.


Arch. First, that for the converting, directing, and perfecting of souls, we
carefully observe, and reverently prefer the prerogative of the word of God.
For that is the hammer that Ier. 23. 29.
breaks the rock, the stony heart in pieces; the mighty engine to 2 Cor. 10.
4.
cast down the strong holds of Satan, the quick and powerful sword of the
spirit, Heb. 4. 12.
sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of
soul and spirit, of joints and marrow, for crucifying the old man: in a word,
it is not only the Lauer that Ioh. 15 3
cleanses us, the immortal seed that 1 Pet. 1. 23
regenerateth us, and the heavenly Charter that Ioh. 8. 32.
freeth us from the power of darkness; but it is the Esa 11. 4. Psalm. 110. 2.
rod and scepter of Christ's mouth and strength, to conduct us in the kingdom
of grace; and the Psalm. 11* 9. 105
lamp of our feet, and the light of our paths, to lead us in the narrow way
to the kingdom of glory. The more to blame are they, who without the word, and
with speech unseasoned with salt, will be forward to give advise and direction
in matters of faith and manners; and have nothing to allege, but their me
thinks, and me seems (as they use to say) and the opinion of the learned, the
precedence of great ones, the example of multitudes, (such as are the ordinary
intelligencers of their consciences) wherein there is often as much relish and
good savor, as in the white of an egg. As if such men had never read nor
heard, that Psalm. 94. ^^
God knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity; that Pro. 14. 12
there is a way that seems right unto man, but the end thereof are the ways
of death; that Job 32. 9.
great men are not always wise, and the Mat. 7. 13.
way of the multitude is the broad way ^^ading to perdition. These are like
foolish and presumptuous builders, that will go to work, and leave their
tools behind them; or set to build, and lay aside line and plummet, rule and
square, or hang them at their backs, trusting only to their own aim and
discretion. Thou fool, will thou offer that folly and presumption in edifying
the Temple of the Mal. 1. 14.
great King and Lord of hosts, whose name is dreadful among the heathen; which
thou would shame to Verse 8.
offer in building the Palla^e of thy governor, or the cottage of thy
neighbor? And yet how many othe^s are there, who being ouer-hasty in rebuking,
lay aside the holy Scriptures (profitable for reproof and correction) and all
words of Pro. 8. 6
righteousness, Act. 26. 25.
truth, and soberness, and have little else in their mouths but that which is
Pro. 8. 8.
froward and perverse? pouring out of their distempered stomachs and unadvised
anger, those sayings of Racha, fool, and other such corrupt speeches and
carnal threatenings; such as Jude ve^. 9
Michael the Archangell durst not bring forth against the Devil, contending
with him, such as God will not allow Ephesians. 6. 9.
in Masters, dealing with their Servants; yea, such as the Lord threatens with
Mat. 5. 22
danger of the council, yea, and with danger of hell too, as a meet
recompense for Pro. 16. 27.
the burning fire in their lips.

Secondly in our exhortations we (...) beware how we prefer 1 Cor. 2. 4
the entising words of man's wisdom, and Verse 13.
words which the wisdom of man teaches, before (...). 1. 13
the form of sound words, and 1 Cor. 2. 13
words which the holy Ghost teaches: as, some love to fill their mouthe^, with
filed phrases, and pomp of humane authors, as if some reigning Just of Ioh. 5.
44
seeking honor one of an other, by pleasing itchi^g ears, had compelled them
togather up broken pieces of brass into the Lords treasury, to help forward
the Lords building, and to leave so many golden plates, which bear for
credence the stamp of Gods spirit, sleeping in the deck. Must Genesis 21. ^9. ^0.
etc.
the bond woman and her son be cast out, rather then the son of the
freewoman should receive scorn and disparagement from the son of the
bondwoman? And was it in Salomons time an eyesoare Eccl. 10. 5. 7.
to see servants advanced in Princes saddles? And seems it a small thing in
our eyes, that in this worthy work of Edifying the Lords Temple. Underlings
should be preferred before the Chiefetaines, and Servants before the Lords, the
holy Scriptures I mean, which are called the Lords of Collections? Can this be
acceptable to God, who is 1 Cor. 14. 33.
not the author of confusion. but charge Verse 40.
all things to be done decently and in order? And if in private exhortation
this be not tolerable, God grant it may be duly considered of those, who in
Moses chair advance such things as should be taught to know their distance,
though not by an utter exclusion, yet by a sparing admission. Ier. 23. 28.
He that has my word, let him speak my word faithfully: What is the chafe to
the wheat, says the Lord? Or what is Cor. 3. 12
wood, hay, and stubble (as the Apostle speaks) to gold, silver, and precious
stones? 1 (...)2.
If they had stood in my council (says the Lord) and had caused my people to
hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way. Take we
heed therefore that we use the right tools wherewith we may edify each
other, for, some as well Verse 32.
by their lightness, as by their lies, bring no profit at all to Gods people.


Arist. We have yet one main doubt that has much perplexed us, wherein we
desire your full resolution, and this it is: How we are to use Gods word for
edifying each other in things indifferent. For in these things we can no
sooner admonish men to take heed, according to the word, but we are presently
answered, that in such things men have liberty, and are left to their own
discretion. What say they, must we ask counsel of the word, of what dish at
table we shall eat, or what raiment we shall put on, or whether we shall ride
or go on foot? Away with this peevishness say they, for whereto tends it,
but to cast snares on men's consciences, and needless fears, and to discourage
from the narrow way of life, such as are coming on?


Arch. You now put me to it indeed, and in handling this point, how would
discretion and consciousnesse of mine own weakness, persuade me for the
resolution of this question, to say with Moses, Exo. 4. 13.
O my Lord, send I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou will send: But
seeing Verse 14.
Gods anger kindled thereupon against Moses, may school me to say with Samuel,
1 Samuel 12. 23.
God forbid that I should cease to show you the right way: I will keep nothing
back of that which I conceive to be the consaile of God, desiring the Prophets
to judge of what I shall say, though I may seem to speak as a ^ Cor. 4. 10.
fool for Christ's sake, unto some that are wise i^ Christ. Confessing
therefore that there may be* fault as well in Eccl. 7. 16, 17.
straightning as in widening the way of the Lord, as we are apt to Esa 30. ^2.
err on the right hand as well as on the left: I pray God our ears may so
hear that word behind us, that we may come forth out of all extremes, and
follow that good way wherein we may find rest for other souls as for our
own.

First therefore concerning things indifferent, we are to know that 1 Cor. ^0.
29* 30.
by grace we are partakers of such a liberty, that Tit. 1. 15.
to the pure, all things are pure, and ^ Cor. 10. 23.
all things lawful; that is, all things in different, as well as creatures: and
Verse 25
no question to be made of them for conscience sake. Wherefore as we ought with
the Romans 14. 14
Apostle, to be persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of
it self, (nothing of that which God simply forbids not) so I beseech all
believers to stand fast in this liberty, which is Verse 16.
your good, as S. Paul says: a good whereby much peace may accrue to your
consciences, and much thanksgiving unto God. Stand fast therefore I say
again, and be not moved from it by any subtle iniection, snarling objection,
or idle scruple, that devils, men, or your own hearts may disturb you
withal, though for the present you cannot assoile them: as you will hold fast
the maine Articles of your faith, though you cannot answer every doubt, that a
subtle sophister may object against them. For if here the conscience be once
cast into a snare, there is no end of doubting and superstition. But as the
doubting conscience sounds heavily as a Shaulme, Romans 14. 23.
to him that doubts it is sin; so the superstitious conscience cries as a
captive subject to worldly ordinances and traditions of men, Col. 2. 20. 21.
Eat not, taste not, handle not* ^uer plunged deeper and deeper, as we see in
the poor Papists, whose consciences are so captiuated with those chains of
darkness wherewith the Council of Trent has fettered them, that they shun
the omission of any rite or tradition which the Church imposes on them, as a
damnable sin. And thus both conscience loses that benefit and peace which
which is the sweet fruit of Christian liberty; and Christ loses the thanks
of his rich liberality. We must therefore beware of superstition, as of
profaneness, and remember that it is a spice of superstition as well to doubt
of things lawful, as to make a religion of things in different.

Secondly, knowing and enjoying this Christian liberty, we must not 1 Pet. 2.
16
use it for a cloak of maliciousnes ( Jude ver. ^
turning, as some do, the grace of God into lasciviousness) but as the
servants of God. Ask ye how? Psalm 123. 2
As the eyes of servants look to the hands of their Masters; so must our eyes
be toward our master Christ whose name is (...) 9. 6.
wonderful, and Counselor; and wait on him, being our Psalm. 84. 11
sun and shield, as well for direction as protection. For as this liberty is
not our own, nor bought with silver and gold, but with the precious blood of
Gods own son; so therein must me live 2 Cor. 5. 15
unto him that dyed for us, and not unto our selves either formally or finally.
Not formally I say, as though we might Prou. 3. 6.
lean to our own wisdom, and Eccl. 11. 9.
walk in the sight of our own eyes, and Esa. 30. 1.
take counsel, but not of him, Eccl. 11. 9.
For all which things God will bring men into judgment, howsoever men's hearts
may cheer and bless themselves in their own discretion. Nor finally, as if
in things indifferent we might serve our own credit, pleasure, or profit;
for, Mat. 6. 24
no man can serve two Masters, so contrary as God and Mammon; and 1 Ioh. 2* 15.
16.
if any man love the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, or pride of life,
the love of the Father is not in him. We must therefore, Pro. 3. 6.
as acknowledge God in all our ways, taking council of our great Councellor,
Esa. 59. 21.
whose spirit and word are ever with us to advise us, Esa. 55. 1.
without money, without price, and 2 Timothy 4. 5.
watch in all things Psalm. 119. 9.
taking heed there-to according to his word; and therefore in things
indifferent as well as all things else; so, Col. 3. 17.
whatsoever we do in word or deed, we must do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus; and 1 Cor. 10. 30
whither we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do (be it never so much
indifferent) we must do all to the glory of God. For otherwise Verse 23.
all things being not expedient (in choice or use) that are lawful, and
indifferent in their nature; because though all things be lawful for us, yet
all things edify not: If men love not to be under Mat. 11. 29
Christ's yoke, learning of him who was meek and lowly in heart (as if the yoke
of Christ were too heavy and soary for their fair necks) but love rather with
Ephraim to be turned loose to their own discretion and will, Hos. 10. 9.
as a heifer that is taught, and loves to tread out the corn: as surely as
they harden their hearts from that fear of watchfulness in all things (which
Pro. 23. 17
should keep their hearts from envy of sinners, and in the fear of the Lord
all the day long) so they Pro. 28. 14
shall fall into mischeife as Solomon says. Yea into such mischief may they
fall, that they may go Luke 17. 26. etc.
eating and drinking with the men of the old world, and buying and selling,
building and planting, with the men of Sodom, to the Jude ver. 7
vengeance of eternal fire, and the 1 Pet. 3. 19.
prison of hell.


Arist. But say men, this is a nouelty and strange doctrine, that men should be
thus yoked and directed, as babes, in the choice and use of things indifferent.
And again, if in those things men should not be left to their own discretion,
what stops and amazements will this cast in men's ways? Admit this, say they,
and it shall not be with us as with the Centurion, who could say to his servant
go, and he goes; do this, and he does it: but every servant will first have
his warrant and direction of Gods word before he stir.


Arch. First I answer, that though Gods word call for stops and fears, Ier.
6. 16.
saying, stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is
the good way: and Pro. 23. 17.
be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long: yet this is not to stop or
fray men from readiness and diligence in doing service, but from wisdom in
their own eyes and foole-hardinesse Pro. 3. 5, 6, 7
, whereby men lean unto their own wisdom, and acknowledge not God in all
their ways, that he might direct their paths. And concerning the obedience of
servants, they could not lightly have given a fitter instance, wherein the
spirit of God does more strive to stop all such froward mouths and perverse
lips: charging Col. 3. 22. 23.
servants to obey their Masters in all things, not with eyeseruice, as men
pleasers, but in singlenes of heart, fearing God, doing heartily whatsoever
they do, as unto the Lord, and not unto men: and that also Ephesians. 6. 5.
with fear and trembling, 1 Timothy 6. 1.
counting their Masters worthy of all honor, and Tit. 2. 9.
pleasing them in all things; not aunswearing again: and all this to be
performed 1 Pet. 2. 18
not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward: and the end of all
is, that Tit. 2. 10.
they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things, and that the 1 Timothy 6. 1.
name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed. So that a happy world (may men
say) it would be for Masters, if servants could be brought to watch in all
things according to the word.

Secondly, if men were left to their own d^scretion in things indifferent, why
then does the word expressly charge them with so many directions, injunctions
and restraints, as well in doing things indifferent as all things else? Namely,
that Phil. 2. 3.
nothing be done of strife or vainglory, 1 Cor. 10. 33
no^ with giving offense, Romans 15. 1*
no^ with seeking our own profit or pleasing our selves, but let all things be
done Col. 3. 17.
in the name of the Lord Jesus, all 1 Cor. 16. 14
in love, Eccl. 3. 1. and 8. 5
seasonably, 1 Cor. 14. 40
decently and in order, and 1 Cor. 10. 3^
all to the glory of God, and 1 Cor. 14. 26
unto edifying.

Thirdly, when men are loath to put themselves to the pay ne to Ier. 6. 16.
enquire for the good way, and to Prou, 2. 4.
seek and search for knowledge as for hid treasures, as God commands: then
they verify the Proverb, that Pro. 26. 16.
the sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, then seven men that can render a
reason. Job 11, 12
Vain man would be wise though a man be borne like a wild asses colte, and
Ier. 51. 17
every man brutish by his own knowledge; and the longer they live without
guidance of the word, the more brutish, never more Rom 1. 22.
playing the fools then when they profess themselves to be wise; even more
stupid then Esa. 1. 3.
the ox or ass, as the Prophet Esaias shows. And is not this a strange pride,
that man so brutish Psalm. 10. 4. 5
through the pride of his countenance should not seek after God, but puff at
all his opposites? And the truth is, because pride will not suffer them to
enquire for God, nor to desire the knowledge of the great things of his law,
they are well content that such things be novelties to them still, let God Hos.
8. 12
complain and Zeph. 1. 4, 6.
threaten never so much against it. And if ye will have the whole truth, it is
plainly thus, that Pro. 8. 13.
pride and the evil way being copem^tes, men are surely evil doers in those
things wherein they are proud, and Ioh. 3. 20.
they that do evil (in things indifferent, as in things simply naught) hate
the light of Gods word, and prefer their own dimne reason and discretion, as
adulterers do the twilight before the day light, and as false drapers do
their f^lse light before the clearest sun shine.


Arist. But the Law consisting of things commanded or forbidden, they cannot
see say they, how the Law should medole with things in^ifferent, whose nature
consists in permission, being neither commanded nor forbidden: unless we
deny the whole nature of things indifferent.


Arch. No can? What say they then to all the former directions and limitations?


Arist. They say they are certain general rules, which are to be respected
(they confess) in the use of things indifferent: but say they, men must be
wise^ then so to debase the law of God as to teach men thereby what food and
raiment they should wear, and whither they should ride or go on foot.


Arch. Yea but say I, these general rules (and all such like, except those
that have relation unto Christ, which properly belong to the Gospel) are but
particular branches or abstracts upon particular occasions extracted from the
Law of God, which is Psalm. 119. 96.
exceeding large, and conteyneth far more then is contained in such
particulars. For, is not Psalm. 19. 7. 9
the Law of God perfect and righteous altogether? Then must (...).
it needs conteyne a perfect direction for Pro. 8. 4.
men of all sorts, Psalm. 49. 2.
both high and low, rich and poor together; and that in all their ways, Pro.
8. 2, 3.
in the top of high places, by the way in the places of the paths, at the
gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the doors; and that at
all times, Pro. 6. 21. 22.
continually, leading us when we go, keeping us when we sleep, and talking
with us when we awake; and that in 1 Timothy 4 5 Tit. 2. 7.
all things, and 1 Pet. 1. 15. (...).
in all manner of conversation, up and down to what thing soever we turn us,
and therefore in things indifferent as well as in things simply good or evil.
For the law of God comm^ndeth and forbids not only what is simply good and
evil, but all the means and occasions of them both, as our Savior shows in
his Mat. 5. 21. 22, 28.
exposition of several commandments: and thereupon he teaches (how
fearfully and yet how profitably, judge in your selves all ye that have any
fear or care of your own souls) that if Verse. 29. 30
thy right eye, or right hand (whereby he means things in themselves lawful,
as useful, or delightful,) offend thee, thou must by plucking out and cutting
off, cast them from thee, or thy whole body may be cast into hell: Whereunto
an other Mark. 9. 43, 44, etc.
Evangelist, for the greater, terror makes an addition, which he repeateth
again and again, saying, into the fire which never shall be quenched, where
the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. That it might be duly*
waighed what a mad discretion this is, that men should rather run the hazard
of such a heavy eternal vengeance, then abide the questioning, trying, and
removing (if need be) of their moment any light pleasures and profits in things
indifferent: when Mat. 18. 6.
it were better for a man that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that
he were drowned in the depth of the Sea, then that he should offend (himself,
yea or) any one of those little ones that believe in me, says the Lord.
Wherefore, things indifferent, for as much as they cannot be used but they
help or hinder to the the maine end of the law, accordingly as they are used,
so are they found as necessaries within the verge and censure of the law, and
concluded to be good or ill in practice, though in their nature in different
and lawful. Will ye have a general instance? 1 Cor. 1^. 23. (...).
All lawful things (says St. Paul) are not all expedient, that is, they help
not the maine end: Why? all things lawful edify not. Do they not edify?
Then the law that 1 Cor. 14. 26.
commands all things to be done unto edifying* judges them in that respect
sinful, though in their own nature lawful. And that I may not balke the
particulars objected* what more indifferent then this or that meat? Rom 14. 17.
The kingdom of God is not meat nor drink; and 1 Cor. 8 8.
neither if we eat are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the
worse: Yet, be the meat never so pure, Rom, 14. 20.
it is evil for that man that eats with offense, and ^ Cor. 8. ^2
he sins (says S. Paul) and that not only against the brethren in a degree
of murder, but also against Christ; and so in a thing indifferent breaks both
Tables of the Law. So, though to drink wine or water, to wear costly or
course apparel, be things in their nature indifferent; yet when Pro. 21 17.
he that loves wine and oil shall not be rich, is it not a sin for poor
men Pro. 13. 23
through want of judgment to destroy or devour the labor of their hands by
swilling-in wine instead of water? And is it not likewise a sin in women
Deuteronomy. 22. 5
to wear man's apparel, or 1 Timothy 2. 9.
costly array beyond their ability, or broyded hair in garishnesse, though it
be the cheapest of all trimmings? And finally, though it be a thing indifferent
to ride or go on foot; yet Solomon saw Eccl. 10. 5. 7.
an evil in seeing servants upon horses, and Princes as servants walking on
the earth.

Secondly, if the law be perfect, then it binds the whole man Mar. 12. 30
with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his mind, and with all
his strength; whence Christ concludes, that Mat. 12. 36
every idle word that men shall speak (men he means that are not under
grace) they shall yield account thereof in the day of judgment; and if of
every idle word in the moving of their lips, then of every other idle voluntary
motion of their minds and bodies. And let no man here, think me a fool, and
that I debase the Majesty of Gods law in bringing it so low, that will not
impute debasing of Gods providence to the Lord Jesus; when he makes it stoop
and look so low, as Mat. 10. 2^ 30.
to the falling of the least Sparrow on the ground, and the very hairs of our
head, which he says are all numbered. Nay, when by the dim^e light of nature,
heathens* could see so much, as to say ^ that a reasonable man should not do
the least thing whereof he could not yield a reason: is it not lamentable,
that in the clear light of the Law, and Gospel, great Rabbis, and
seraphicall Doctors, should magnify their discretions in exploding the former
instances, as worthier of derision, then of man's consideration* by the word, or
of Gods examination in judgment? Yet as the Prophet says, Esa 31. 2.
God also is wise, and will not call back his words, but as the 1 Cor. 1. 2 5
foolishness of GOD is wiser then men, in Verse 21.
making the wisdom of this world foolishness: so the day is at hand, when
the Verse 25.
weakness of God will prove it self stronger then men; when the Lord Jesus
shall sit on his throne, as 1 Timothy 1. 17.
the only wise God, and judge every man ^ fool that will not believe what he
now fore-tels, with an asseueration, saying; Verily I say unto you Mat 5. 18,
19.
till heaven and earth pass, one ^ot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from
the law, till all be fulfilled* whosoever ^ therefore sh^l break one of these
least commandments and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in
the Kingdom of heaven.


Aqu. Mr. Archippus, as it is your duty Tit. 1. 9.
by sound doctrine, not only to exhort, but also to convince the gaine-sayers,
so we pray you, be not weary of this good work in the full conviction of the
remnants they have yet to say. No doubt say they, but ye are the people, and
wisdom shall dye with you; we also have reading and learning as well as
others, yet cannot we possibly comprehend what perfect direction the law
contains for all humane affairs. What must husbandmen learn out of the
Scripture, how to plough a furrow well, or huswiues how to grind their meal,
and kneade their dough well? Finally, to what perplexed horrors and despair
will this drive all sorts of men, to tie them in all their endeauours to such a
direction, the perfection whereof they cannot reach unto?


Arch. As I look to reap, so I must not be weary of my work, though it make
me cry out by the way, who is sufficient for these things? Now concerning Deuteronomy
28. 66. 67.
their last objection, first, I answer, that horrors and despair are the
proper concomitants of the Esa. 51. 20.
wicked: because they Ioh. 12. 35
walk in darkness, and know not whether they go, which must needs be
ghastly and dreadful. Howsoever many of them being as the Apostle says, 1
These. 5* 7
a-sleepe, and drunken in the night, are Pro. 23. 34.
as he that lies down in the midst of the sea, or upon the top of a Mast,
having no more sense of their horrors (till with Foelix and Judas, their
consciences be awakened) then drunken men of their dangers, or men a-sleepe of
broken bones. But Gal. 6. 16
as many as walk according to the rule of the word, peace be on them, says
the Apostle; and he that makes Gods Psalm. 119. 24.
testimonies his Counselors, shall find them his delight, and the Verse 11 1.
rejoicing of his heart. For the Pro. 3. 17.
ways of wisdom are the ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

Secondly, I answer, that the Esa. 28. 24. 26. etc.
discretion and faculties of ploughing (as of grinding, and all other lawful
Trades, Mysteries, Arts, and Sciences) are natural endowments, which God
bestows on the reasonable soul of man, as he does the sensible faculties ^
Psalm. 94. 9. Pro. 1^. 12. Iam. 2. 19.
of hearing, seeing, tasting, etc. on the body. And as it is not the Scripture,
but the sense of seeing and tasting, that teaches men to judge of colors,
which is white, and which black; and of savors, which is sauory, and which
tainted: so it is the discretion and faculties of all manuary Trades, and Arts,
and Sciences, that teach men how to plough, grind, write, or speak well; well
I mean, not according to w that good, that acceptable, and perfect will of God,
(which it may-be they intend not, nor understand) but well, according to the
rules and method of each several Trade, Art, or Science: and so men may be
said to do well, as S. James says, and be no better all while, then children
of the devil. Yet the Scriptures being not ordained to such ends, are 2 Timothy
3. 16
perfect unto all such supernatural ends, for which they are ordained. I grant
therefore, that the word does not exclude the help and use of natural reason
in the former instances; yea, I add, that in matters moral, politic, and
domestical, there is such a work of the law, written in men's hearts, that
Romans 2. 14
Gentiles which had not the law, have done by nature (that is, by natural
light of reason) the things contained in the law, that is, many things
materially good which the law requires: yea, and that in some of them, and
Trades, Arts, and Sciences, many natural men have out-stript and excelled many
children of light; as Genesis 4. 20. 21, 22.
cursed Caines posterity were the first great Trades-masters and Arts-masters
of the world. What then? may we hence conclude that natural reason (being now
corrupt) can without the word, give sufficient direction to do any thing well
and acceptable unto God, according to his perfect will? Then was the Apostle
far wide in point of discretion to teach, that Tit 1. 15*
to the unclean all things are unclean, and Romans 8. 8.
they that are in the flesh cannot please God. Indeed natural reason (as it is
corrupt) is of it self sufficient to Romans 1. 20
make men without excuse, and to Romans ^. 6.
lead them to death: but that it should afford sufficient direction to do any
thing well, and acceptably unto God, in ploughing, grinding, or any other
voluntary action indifferent or moral, is utterly impossible: because as Romans
8. 7.
the carnal mind is enmity against God, so Heb. 11. 6.
without faith, it is impossible to please God, and faith teaches us 1 Pet. 4,
2.
to live, not to the lusts of men, but to the will of God. And therefore as
Solomon says, that Pro. 21. 4.
the ploughing of the wicked is sin, so Christ says; Mat. 24. 41.
(...)o women shall be grinding at the Mill, one shall be taken, and the other
shall be left.

Thirdly, concerning that argument of theirs, that they with all their reading
and learning cannot conceive what perfect direction the Law contains for all
humane affairs, and therefore it does not: I answer, what mean they? Would
they be set to school with that Rusticall, of whom the Roman Orator writes,
that he could not possibly see how the Moon did contain greater quantity
then his wives Cheese-fat? Must it therefore be so concluded? Tell me, O thou
vain man, was David a man of no reach nor learning, he that was wiser Psalm.
119. 98. 99. 100.
then his enemies, and had more understanding then the ancient, and all his
teachers? To what end then says he I pray, that the Verse 129.
testimonies of the Lord are wonderful, and that Verse 96.
he has seen an end of all perfection, but Gods commandment is exceeding
broad; if there were no more therein contained, then our crazed understanding
can comprehend; why prays he, Verse 18.
open thou mine eyes, that I may see wondrous things out of thy law; why
complains he Psalm. 40. 12
of innumerable evils compassing him, and his sins more then the hairs of his
head? why cries he out, Psalm 19. 12
who can understand his errors; cleanse thou me from secret faults? But that he
espied in the law of God, an height above his ken, a depth beyond his reach, a
great inquest, greater then his heart, able to find out more sins then his 1
Cor. 4. 4.
own conscience could be privy unto, and to Romans 7. 13. and 6. 20.
make sin become exceeding sinful: yea, such a perfection of holiness, in
comparison whereof Esa. 64. 6.
all our righteousness is but filthy rags.

Will thou now say, why then or how with any comfort can I endeavor to find
out in Gods Law, a perfect direction for my choice and use of all things
indifferent* when no man living can comprehend the perfection of the same?
Froward folly, whether will thou? Shall not a bankerupt endeavor to pay his
debts, so far as his goods can reach, because he knows he cannot pay al?
Or will thou cast away all care and endeavor of hearing, praying, or of* doing
any thing that good is, because thou can do nothing in that exact perfect
manner that the Law requires? See now how fitly God does couple together Pro.
8. 15.
pride and arrogance and the evil way, and the froward mouth: a hateful
mess, fitter for those that 1 Cor. 10. 21.
partake of the devils table, then for us partakers of the Lords table. O that
thou were wise to consider whether thy mouth could have bin so froward, if thy
way were not evil; and whether it could ever have bin so ill with both the
former, if pride and arrogance could have suffered thee to ponder that which is
written: 1 Cor. 1. 19.
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the
understanding of the prudent. 1 Cor. 3 18.
Let no man deceive himself, if any man among you seems to be wise in this
world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise. Be entreated therefore I
beseech you, to come out of that fools paradise, that conceited suff^ciency of
humane discretion and natural reason: be humble and meek, and cast down
that crown of pride at the feet of that great Councellor, the Lord Jesus,
(who Psalm. 25. 9.
will guide the meek in judgment;) and become fools, that he may be 1 Cor.
1. 30
made unto you wisdom: Mat. 11. 29 30.
take his yoke upon you, and learn of him, for he is meek and lowly in
heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls, for his yoke is easy, and his
burden light. Indeed if God should Psalm. 142.
enter into judgment with us, in his sight could no man living be justified.
But being Romans 6. 14.
not under the Law, but under Grace, ^hereas the more we see Romans 5. 20.
(...) to abound by the knowledge of the Law, so much the more we shall find
grace to ouer-abound and free us from all the rigor and curse of the Law: what
should now discourage us, when if there be but a Esa. 1. 19.
willing mind to obey, God will accept 2 Cor. 8. 12
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not: and if we
have but a Psalm. 119. 6
respect to all his Commandments without guile in our spirits, no shame of
imperfections or pollutions shall lie upon us to hinder our happiness, for God
will not Psalm. 32. 2.
impute iniquity unto us. Yea, so will God Man. 3. 17.
spare us (like a man that spares his own son that serves him) that he
Mat. 12. 20
will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, till he send
forth judgment into victory, ^ Cor. 12. 9.
perfecting his power in our weakness, and Phil. 1. 6.
finishing the good work he has begun in us.

What man is there of you, that sets before his son a most perfect coppie
for him to write by; i^ his son in a humble* willing endeavor, set pen to
paper, and his eye on the coppie, though he come not near the perfection
thereof, nay, though his aberrations should be as many as the motions of ^is
pen* yet if he st^iue to do his best, and sign and cry, and crave pardon for
that he can do no better, will his father in this case give him blows, or
frowns* or any dis-hart^ning words? You know our Saviors inference, Mat. 17.
1^
If ye being evil, know how to accept, and encourage, and reward your
childrens good endeauours; how much more shall your Father which is in heaven,
deal graciously with his children? On the contrary, if any son, out of
despair to attain to the perfection of the coppie, should be so contemptuous
that he would not set pen to paper, nor his eye on the coppie; or be so
presumptuous, that casting the coppie behind his back, he should stir his
pen according to his own discretion; and in his high conceit tell you for a
final answer, that he is no beast, and he has done the best according to
his discretion: would not the Father frown on such a son, yea, and
backe-beate as well as brow-beate, and rule and overrule him, or turn him out
of his fatherly government? Consider what I say, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things.


Aqu. We, and many with us, will be thankful to God (I hope) for this
comfortable resolution, and now in conclusion, we desire you to furnish us with
some special reasons and directions whereby we may stir up our selves and
others to take heed according to Gods word in the choice and use of things
indifferent.


Arch. You have already in our former discourse, many reasons (if you observe
them) to this purpose, drawn, first, from the right use of Christian liberty,
which is Gods service; secondly, from the precious price of its purchase, which
may not be vilified; thirdly, from the mischievous ^ellish danger of the
contrary heedlesnesse; fourthly, from the ready awful service which it will
procure in inferiors; fifthly, from the many rules that the Scriptures give
concerning it* sixthly, from the strange pride that keeps men from submission
to it; seauenthly, from the perfection of Gods law* that extendet^ it self not
only to all things simply good and evil but to all the means and occasions of
them both; eighthly, from the sweet peace of conscience that does accompany it;
ninthly, from the insufficiency of our corrupt natural reason to guide us;
tenthly, from the wonderful holiness and righteousness of the Law, whereunto
we must aim, though we cannot attain: and finally from the Law of liberty and
grace, whereby all believers being free* from the rigor and curse of the Law
of works, shall find most gracious acceptance with God, and rest to their
souls in all their humble willing endeavors. But seeing the discovery and
approach of dangerous enemies are the readiest officers among men for procuring
watch and ward, I will thence briefly dispatch a few more arguments for your
full satisfaction.

Wheref^re as the Scriptures a (...) (...) 12.
sobri^ty unto righteousness a^^ g(...)nesse, because that is (...) nurse of
both the (...) so they 1 T(...) 5. 6
^^t-soones (...) watchfulness to sobri^ty* ^ (...) 4. ^.
because that is as the mother ^ Pet. ^. 8.
of this. For b^ing awakened out of the dea^^y sleep of sin, to live in
holiness and righteousness, by watching and taking heed to our ways, according
to the word, we keep our selves waking, that we may walk circumspectly and
soberly, temper and keep our selves from 1 Cor. 6. 12
being brought under the power of any lawful or indifferent thing when it is
not expedient, that we may 1 Cor. 7. 31
use this world as not abusing it. We must therefore be sober, and watch, as
many as purpose to live holily and righteously (yea Luke 21. 36
watch always, says our Savior, and in 2 Timothy ^. 5.
all things says S. Paul;) and, why so watch? For first, the 1 Pet. 3. 8.
devil your adue^sarie, as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking who^ he may
devour, and as he is a Lion for strength, and roaring for greedines, and
circuiting for diligence, and seeking to devour not yours, but you: so he is a
2 Cor. 11 3.
serpent for subtilty, an Reu. 12. 9.
old serpent for experience, and for efficacy such a cheater that he Verse the
same.
deceives the whole world. And no marvel, for to this end 2 Cor. 11. 14.
he is transformed into an Angel of light, holding forth the present pleasure,
profit, and credit of sin, (by Genesis 3: 6.
which trains he first beguiled Eve) as a false Draper shows forth the fair
end of his cloth, but keepee back out of sight the middle, and the other end;
inward remorce of conscience here, and eternal punishment hereafter. Secondly,
there is the Ioh. 15. 19
world that hates us, a world of ungodly men ^ 2 Pet. 2. 5.
that 1 Ioh. 5. ^9
lies in wi^kednes whose Ephesians. 2. 2.
course is according to the prince of the power of the air, whose office it is
to be the devils Factors in 2 Timothy 3. 13
deceiving others, as themselves are deceived: who by their terrors and
allurements, customs and multitudes, raise dust in our eyes, that we might
not discern things that differ, but be inuolued and carried away with the sway
and current of the evil times. Thirdly, there is in our selves Gal. 5. 17.
the flesh lusting against the spirit, and 1 Pet. 2. 11
warring against the soul, and the wisdom of the flesh is Romans 8. 6
death to v^, as it is Verse 7.
enmity against God; in respect whereof, the Ier. 17. 9.
heart of man is said to be desperately wicked, and deceitful above all
things, that is, of greater efficacy to deceive our selves, then all other men
or devils. For Mark. 7. 21, etc.
from within (out of the heart of man) arise evil thoughts, (and all things
that defile a man, as naturally as sparks out of a furnace) which of
themselves, without the devil, or the world, are able to set on fire the
course of nature: whereas they both, with all their temptations without this,
are but as fuel and bellows, that could never make sin to flame ^ut of us,
if they had not the spark of Iam. 1. 14.
our own concupiscence to kindle it.

Now, having in all our ways to deal with such crafty, deadly, enemies had
we not need, unless it were good taking of our worst foes to be our best
guides; had we not need (I say) to stand upon our watch and ward, and Pro. 4.
23.
above all keepings, keep our hearts, that we take not up from them the choice
or use of any indifferent thing before we try it by the light of the Word,
examining both ends with the middle, and circumstances of it. Nay, when in
things indifferent, most of all Satan sets his snares for Gods servants
(knowing how Psalm. 97. 10
they that love the Lord abhor evil, and all things simply unlawful) as he
met with Gen 34. ^. ^.
Dinah and 2 Samuel 1^. 2, 3.
David, in their walking; with Genesis 9. 21.
Noah and Genesis 19. 33
Lot, in their drinking of wine; and with Luke 22. 25 Ioh. 18. 25.
Peter, in warming himself at the fire: had we not need watch and ward most
in those things wherein the devil most makes assault, unless it were wise
watching to watch against enemies a far off, and to neglect such as are
nearest at hand to cut our throats?

Now, for directions how to take heed; all that look to do any thing well and
acceptably unto God, in the choice and use of things indifferent, must look
first of all to that which is the root and foundation of all good actions
since the fall of the first Adam, namely, to that Ioh. 6. 29
work of God, that they believe on him whom he has sent, and be Phil. ^. 9.
foun^ in Christ as John 15. 2. etc,
branches in the Vine; that so, Col. 3. ^7.
whatsoever we do in word or deed, may all be done in the name of the Lord
Jesus: for he is that Reu. ^. 3. Heb. 13. 10. 15.
golden Altar, on, and by whom we must offer unto God all our spiritual
sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2. 5.
and services; that being per^^med with his l^cense, they may Phil. 4. 18
(as odo^s ^^ a sweet smell) be accepta^^e and well-pleasing unto God by him.
For he being the only begott^n and beloved Son, in Mat. 3 17.
whom God is well-pleased, and he being Heb. 1. 2.
appointed heir of all things, through whom (we being his by faith) ^ things
z 1 Cor. 3. 22 23.
present, and things to come, are all ours. As we Ioh. 15. 5. Heb. 11. 6.
can do nothing without him to please God; so, without him we have no more
right in Gods sight to the use of any thing, then a thief has to the use of a
true man's purse.

Secondly, being in Christ we must know that as for all things necessary and
simply good, we have warrant out of the Word by Deuteronomy 6. 5. 25.
express command or just consequence; so, for things indifferent we have a
warrant by Gods permission either directly expressed, as in the particular
matter of ^meats, or thence necessarily b De^t 12. 15. 20, 21.
collected, as in all things of the like nature: whence the Apostle concludes,
that not only meats, but all things of like indifferent nature, are 1 Cor. 6.
12 and 10. 23.
all lawful, Romans 14. 20
all pure, and Tit. 1. 15.
all clean to the clean, whose Romans 14. 22, 23.
consciences are purged from dead works by the blood of Christ to serve the
living God. And of this warrant of the Word we must be persuaded, that the
particular indifferent matters we meddle withal are not unclean of
themselves, but pure; else whatsoever is not of this faith is sin, even in
things indifferent, sin (I say) to any that doubtingly and unnecessary shall
adventure thereon.

Thirdly, being in Christ, and having knowledge of the lawfulness of the
particular matters, we must try whether the doing of them be 1 Cor. 6. 12
and 10. 23.
expedient, that is, help to the maine end of the Law, which is 1 Timothy 1. 5.
love, out of a pure heart and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. For God
commanding 1 Cor. 16. ^4
all our things to be done in love, 1 Cor. 10. 3
all to his glory, and 1 Cor. 14. 26
all to edifying; that is, so as all may help and further our selves and our
neighbors in holiness and righteousness: whatsoever choice or use be made of
things indifferent, ^f it be not expedient to these ends, ( 1 Cor. 10. 23, 24
expedient, I say, for our selves, and 1 Cor. 6. 12
expedient for our neighbors) it must needs be sin, because it 1 Ioh. 3. 4.
transgresses the Law in these respects, howsoever the thing chosen and used,
be of it self lawful. So that that rule of our Savior, Mat. 12 30
he that is not with me, is against me, must of necessity hold, as well in
the use of things indifferent, as of things necessary.

Fourthly, when being in Christ, we know our warrant for the lawfulness of
the matter, and see the expediency of it to the foresaid ends; then that which
before was indifferent in nature, become now Ro^ 19. 21.
good and Acts 15. 18.
necessary in use: and we must set about it, as thus in the right manner and
end, so with observation of all due circumstances; namely, that we do it Romans
13. 4. 5.
conscionably and Ephesians. 6. 6 ^7. Col. 3. 22. 23
willingly, as to the Lord (who commands the doing of it, as it is expedient)
Eccl. 8. 5. 6
seasonably, ^ decently, and 1 Cor. 10. 30.
circumspectly, according to all other ^ Ephesians. 5. 15
known rules of the Word, not conformed to v. Romans 12. 2
this world, but transformed by the renewing of our mind, that we may prove
what is that good, ^^at a^ceptable and perfect will ^f God. And here let no
man say that (...) destroy the whole nature of all indifferent things,
c^^ctions; for schoolem^n themselves confess, that G^rs^^ in ^ogul. mor.
no action, though it be indifferent as it is considered in it is naked nature,
can be indifferent as it is ^^ad with it is particular circumstances in doing.
And Tho. Aquisum. part. 1. q. 18. ^. 9.
no particular moral action, or no action of the reasonable soul proceeding
from reason, can possibly be so indifferent, but it must of necessity be good
or evil, and either conformable to the rules of Gods holy Word or
disconformable thereunto.

Now, if any man, notwithstanding all that has been said, shall love to range
where he list after the sight of his own eyes, Eccl. 11. 9.
with the young man, or to be turned loose to the ways of his own heart,
with the Luke 15 12 13.
prodigal Son, and say the indifferent things we meddle withal, are for
the most part sports and trifles, or petty matters; and in such light matters
at least, men have sufficient warrant to make choice and use according to their
own discretion, so that nothing be done against the general rules of Gods
Word; or else men shall be left in perpetual suspense and amazements. First, I
answer, that Psalm. 119. 168.
all our ways being before God, we cannot play out of Gods presence, no more
then pray; and if in play, or other ways, any man draw back, sequestring
himself from Gods presence, as Heb. 10. 38
Gods soul shall have no pleasure in him, so he may look to have the devil
for his playfellow. And when God has branded such for Psalm. 106. 13, 14
exceeding lust, that waited not for his counsel, must not we set God always
before us as did Psalm. 16. 7, 8
David, that he may give us counsel* whereby we may be directed, as well to
play, as to 1 Cor. 10. ^0.
eat and drink, and to do whatsoever we do to the glory of God, as he
commands us. And when we read that 1 Samuel 13. 14, 23.
rebellion in not obeying the voice of the Lord, is as the sin of witchcraft,
though in a light matter, as Saul esteemed it, as the sparing of a few cattle:
Nay, when we hear of such wrath reueiled from heaven against petty matters, as
m^n would deem, as 2 Samuel 6. 6, ^.
touching and 1 Samuel 6. 19
looking into the Arc. Number. 15. 32, 36.
gathering a few sticks o^ the Sabbath, and Genesis 3. 6. etc.
eating of an Apple; alas, what mean men yet thus to talk of things so
fearful, as but of trifles and petty matters? We know him who says, He that
breaks the least Commandment, etc. For the authority of the commander is
violated in the wilful breach of the least tittle, as of the waightier
matters; and one Iam. 2. 10.
point wilfully offended, makes a man guilty of the whole Law: as one little
leake let alone may sink the whole ship, one little hole in a shoe may make
the whole foot watershod, and one little claw held fast in the s^are, brings
the whole bird into the Fowlers hands. And why does the Scripture tell us of 1 Timothy 1. 19
shipwreck of faith, of Ephesians. 6. 15.
feet sh^d with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, and of 2 Timothy 2. 22
men taken captive in the snare of the devil, but that men should fore see, if
happily they might feel those spiritual dangers by such earthly similitudes.

Secondly, concerning men's own discretion i^ choice and use, so that nothing
be done against the general rules of the Word, I answer: that if herein they
intend to lean to their own wisdom, and not to acknowledge God in all their
ways, they have already broken the pale of the Lords Pro. 3. 5. 6.
direction, Hos. 5 10.
like them that remove the bound, and are 1 Timothy 6. 9.
fallen into temptation, and a snare, whereby they may fall into many foolish
and no^some lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction. But if herein
they intend to take heed, according to the Word, as that which must be bound
continually Pro. 6. 21.
upon their heart, to be their Psalm. 19. 1* 1
admonitor, their ^ counselor, and their Psalm 119. 24.
^ leader. Then they must Pro. 6. 22.
acknowledge with reue^^nd ^ Calvin, that seeing the Calu. inst. lib 3. cap.
10. sect. 1.
Scripture gives general rules for the lawful use of actions and things
indifferent, our use is to be limited according to the same. For Mat. 12. 30
he that is not with Christ (the great Counselor of his Church) is against
him. And therefore whatsoever the subtle serpent, or the world, or thy own
carnal wisdom by peeping and muttering shall say against it, remember I
pra^, that they are all dead in sins and trespasses, and hearken to the
living GOD, that says, Should not a people, (a people that has the Esa. 8. 16.
t^s^imony bound, and the la^ sealed among them, as the Lords D^scipl^s) should
n(...) such a people Verse 19. 2^
seek unto their God? from the living to the dead? To the law, an^ to the
(...)imony, if they spe^ke not according to this Word, it is because there is
no light in them. Ah my brethren, why should any Disciple be here so amazed, as
t^ say, John ^. 60
This is a hard saying, who can bear it? Why should any cry out of Psalm. 2 3.
bands and cords, like those Luke 19. ^
enemies that would not have Christ to reign over them? A^a^, why should the
Pet 2. ^
chie^^ corner st^^^, el^c^ (...) be ^ad^ a (...)bli^g, ^ that stu^bl^ at
(...) being (...) unto a (...) (...)? Esa. 30. 1.
(...) to (...) (...)ous child^e^ (...) says the Lord, that take counsel, but
not of me: Ver^. 8. etc
g^e now write it before them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may
be for the ^ime to come for ever and ever, that thi^ is a rebellious people,
lying children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord: which say to
the Seers, see not; and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things,
speak unto us smooth things, prophecy deceits; get ye out of the way, turn
aside out of the path, cause the the holy One of Israel to cease from before
us. O what amazement will that be to all that despise thi^ Word, when Verse
12, 13, 14
this iniquity shall be to them as a breach ready to fall swelling out of a
high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly at an instant, and shall be as the
breaking of the potters vessel, that is broken in pieces without sparing, so
that there shall not be found in the bursting of it a sheard to take fire from
the hearth, or to take water withal ou^ of the pit.

Thirdly therefore, concerning suspense and amazements, I answer, Esa. 8. 11.
be thou instructed not to walk in the way of this people, Pro. 3. 7
be not wise in thine own eyes, but Esa. 33. 16
shut thine eyes from seeing evil, and Esa. 45. 22.
look unto Christ thy Counselor; and then Esa. 8. 12. 13. 14
fear not their fear, nor be afraid. Sanctify the Lord of hoasts himself,
and let him be thy fear, and let him be thy dread, and he shall be for a
Sanctuary unto thee; and in the waste howling wilderness of this world where
thou know not which way to take, he will go before thee, as Exo. 13. 21 22.
the cloudy pillar by day, and the fiery pillar by night to lead thee in the
way, to Deuteronomy 32. 10.
to instruct thee, and keep thee as the apple of his eye: as Vese 11, 12.
an Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her
wings, takes them, bears the^ on her wings; so will the Lord lead thee. It
was an old trick of sinners in Sion, and of hypocrites, that would not humble
themselves to walk with God, when they were Esa. 33. 14
surprised with fearfulness, to cry out, who shall dwell with the devouring
fire ^ who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings And sure Heb. 10. 31
a fearful thing it will be to fall into the hands of the living God for any
man, that with such Ier. 12. 8.
hateful outcries sha^ turn Heb. 12. 25
away from him tha^ speaks from heaven. For Luke 19, 27
those mine enemies (says he) that would not have me to reign over them,
bring them hither, and slay them before me. And those that will not bind upon
their hearts his law and testimony, loving darkness more then light, Esa. 8.
16. 22.
shall be driven to darkness, where they Verse 15.
shall stumble and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken; and so
go Psalm. 49. 19
to the generation of their Fathers, and never shall see light. Yea, seeing
they refuse him in whom is all Ioh. 1. 16.
fullness, that Ephesians. 1. 23.
fills all in all, without whom all creatures are as husks without grain,
subject to vanity and emptiness: therefore even in earth where they will Iam
5. 5.
live in pleasure, and nourish their hearts as in a day of slaughter; they
shall Hag. 1. 6.
eat and not be satisfied, they shall Pro. 14 13.
laugh, but their hearts the while, shall be sorrowful; and they Esa. 8. 21.
22.
shall pass through it, as hardly be-sted, as hungerly unsatisfied; and (their
consciences being awakened) whether they look upward or look to the earth,
they shall in desperate discontentednesse, curse their God and their King, whom
they have preferred before the Lord Jesus; who will Mat. 21. 44
grind to powder all that fall on him, as a stone of stumbling, and rock of
offense.

But what of all this? Is not Christ yet still the Pet. 2. 6. 7
chief cornerstone, elect and precious to all believers? Yea, by all means,
as Heb. 13. 8.
yesterday and to day, so the same for ever: and as Ioh. 1. 16.
of this fullness we have all received, so 1 Pet. 2. 6
he that believes in him, shall not be confounded. God forbid therefore that
any believer should here in amazement cry out with Peter, Luke 5. 8.
Depart from me, for I am a sinful man O Lord: but seeing he is our
Councellor, (though wonderful) let us in the midst of all back-sliders, say
with Peter, (when he was better advised, being put unto it) Ioh. 6. 68.
Lord to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life. And
therefore howsoever the Esa. 11. 4
rod of his mouth, his word, whereby he will counsel and rule us in things
indifferent, as in all things else, may seem at first terrible to be thought
on, in respect of the perfection and extent thereof; and Satan would faigne
persuade us to keep aloof off, as Exo. 4. 9.
Moses fled from the rod of the Lord, when in his sight it became a Serpent:
yet at Pro. 4. 13.
Gods commandment, let us lay fast hold on it, as Moses did on that, and we
shall find and feel it, not only free from the sting of death, and so
fearelesse, but useful (as the rod of Moses was) to work wonders for our
guidance and safety in the midst of all our spiritual enemies, Deuteronomy. 33. 29.
who shall be all found liars unto us, and we shall tread upon their high
places. Mat. 14. 30. 31.
Yea, but as soon as thou pitchest thy conceit on the Law for direction in all
things indifferent, thou beginnest to sink in the depth thereof, as Mat. 14.
30. 31.
Peter did in the sea; and thou art at such an amazement with 2 Chr. 20. 12.
King Iehoshaphat, that thou know not what to do. Yes, being Gods child,
thou have received the spirit of adoption, whereby thou can cry Abba Father:
let thine eyes then be upon Christ, as Iehoshaphats were upon God, and cry with
Peter, Lord save me; cry with David, Psalm. 119 18. 19, 20.
Lord open thou mine eyes, that I may see wondrous things out of thy Law: I am
a stranger upon earth, hide not thy commandments from me, O let me not wander
from thy Commandments. Thou can not be so ready to look and cry unto him,
as he is ready to lead and save thee: it is but Mat. 7. 7.
ask and have, seek and find, Esa. 45. 22.
look unto him, and be saved. For Deuteronomy. 4. 7.
what nation is so great, that has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our GOD
is in all things that we call upon him for? Call, yea, Esa. 65. 24.
before we call, he will answer, and while we are yet speaking, he will
hear.

Yea, but thou would have me show thee presently, that perfect direction of
the law in the choice and use of things indifferent. So would Exo. ^^. 18 19,
20.
Moses have God show him his glory, when good man, he asked he knew not what,
for he could not live and see Gods face. But answer me, would thou see
the full ear while the blade is springing, and the stalk growing? or can a
growing-childe comprehend what belongs to full age? Or can thou be in thy
heavenly Mansion House, whiles thou art in thy earthly Tabernacle? Then and
there shall we 2 Cor. 5. 7.
walk by sight, but now by faith; 1 Cor. 13. 1^
now we see through a glass darkely, but then face to face; now we know in
part, but then shall we know even as we are known. Such perfect knowledge, as
it is too wonderful for us Pilgrims on earth; so it is neither for our own
safety, 2 Cor. 12.
lest we should be exalted above measure in the abundance of revelations;
neither for our Saviors glory, Verse 9.
whose strength is made perfect in weakness. Be content therefore now with
Moses, Exo. 33. 23
to see his backe-parts, whose face cannot here be seen; thy Saviors Verse
13. 14.
presence shall still go with thee Esa. 59 21.
by his spirit and word; whereby he will be so gracious, as to make 2 Cor. 12. 9
his grace sufficient for thee. Only humble thy self to walk with thy God,
show thy willing mind, and endeavor to keep his word; and he will be thy
advocate to plead for thee, that thou have 1 Ioh. 17. 6.
kept his word; namely, in that evangelical manner and measure, which grace
requires of thee. Yea, but here is a doubt, how thy humble willing endeavor
must be made manifest? Herein let no man deceive himself with his faint
wishings, and sluggish wouldings: never can such wishers and woulders thrive in
the kingdom of heaven, which Mat. 11. 12
suffers violence, and is taken of those that Luke 16. 16.
press into it, and take it by force. Here therefore, if ever, thou must be
Iam. 5. 16.
fervent in prayer, and instant in 2 Pet. 1. 5.
giving all diligence; that above Pro. 4. 7.
all gettings, thou may get wisdom and understanding: thou must Pro. 2. 2.
cry for the spirit of wisdom and understanding, and ply all means (as they
that Verse 3.
dig for treasures) by continual Ios. 1. 8.
meditation, Iam. 1. 19. Pro. 8. 34.
hearing, Revel. 1. 3 Col. 4. 16.
reading, and Psalm 119. 13. 48. Acts 17. 11.
conference of the word: that so thou may be Col. 1. 9.
filled with all wisdom and spiritual understanding, in applying general
knowledge to particular practices; by Heb. 5. 14.
reason of which use thou maie^^ have thy senses exercised to discern both
good and evil, and so Acts 24. 16.
exercise thy self to have always a conscience void of offense toward God and
toward men. Then when the Psa.. 119. 21.
proud that err from Gods commandments shall be cursed, and Esa. 45. 24. and
65. 14.
all that be incenced against him, shall be ashamed, and howl for vexation of
spirit, being snared in their own transgression; thou shall Pro. 29. 6.
sing and rejoice with the righteous, and shout for joy in the 2 Cor. 1. 12
Pro. 15. 15.
testimony of thy conscience, as in a continual feast.

Yea, but by the former means applied, thy conscience accuses thee of many
sins, yea, of Genesis 42. 21
sin many years past, and of the Job 13. 26.
sins of thy youth, sins Psalm. 40. 12
more then the hairs of thy head: and the more thou look into the glass of
Gods law, the more thou see thy sins to abound. Yet being washed in the
blood of the Lamb, were they multiplied to thousands, and every penny debt
increased to a pound, to a talent; the Heb. 9. 14. 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot
to God, does purge thy conscience from them all. So that they may now serve
thee as good remembrancers, to magnify that grace that has Romans 5. 20
ouer-abounded them all; but Romans 8. 1.
condemn thee they cannot, being in Christ Jesus, and walking after the
spirit. Yea, but as thou walk, thou art still yet erring on the right hand,
or on the left; and how far so many errors may carry thee, thou can not but
fear. But Gods promise I say, stands for thee, that Esa. 30. 21
in all these errings, thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying,
This is the way, walk ye in it: and this shall Psalm. 19. 13
keep thee back from presumptuous sins, and thou shall be innocent from the
great transgression. Yea, but sometimes thou stumblest foully thou say, and
fallest down flat. Yet Psalm. 37. 24
though thou fall, thou shall not utterly be cast down, for the Lord vpholdeth
thee with his hand; yea, Deuteronomy 33. 27.
the everlasting arms are underneath thee to raise thee up, and Psalm. 34. 7.
Angels encamped round about thee, Psalm. 91. 11.
who have charge over thee, to guard thee in all thy ways. Yea the Psalm. 121.
4 5.
Lord himself, that keeps Israel, and neither slumbereth nor sleeps, will
be thy keeper; he Psalm. 37. 23
will order thy steps, and delight in thy way; leading thee familiarly, as a
Ioh. 15. 13 15.
friend that having laid down his life for thee, will not keep his secret
from thee; compassionately as a Heb. 2. 13 1^. and 4. 15.
Brother, who partaking the same flesh with thee, can be touched with thy
infirmities, and is able to succor thee; and most lovingly as a Esa. 62. 5.
husband rejoicing over thee, as a Bridegroom does over the Bride, Cant. 2. 6.
with his left hand under thy head, and with his right hand embracing thee,
Psalm. 45. 11
greatly desiring thy beauty, and Cant. 4. 9.
his heart being ravished* with the love of thee; to whom thou art Can. 7. 6.
fair and pleasant for delights, ( Can. 2. 14.
thy voice sweet, and thy countenance comely) his Love, his Can. 6. 8. 9
Do^e, his undefiled, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, Cant. 4. 7.
all fair and no spot in thee. For he being the Sun of righteousness, has ^
blotted out all thy sins as a cloud, and he has Micah 2. 19
cast them all into the depths of the sea of his mercies, which in its
vastness can swallow a thousand as one, and mountains as mole-hils: so that
Ier. 50. 20.
no sins of thine can be found, though they be sought for, but Ier. 54. 17.
every tongue that rises against thee in judgment, shall thou condemn: Romans
8. 33 34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, it is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is
risen again, who is even at the right hand of GOD, who also makes
intercession for us. So that committing our way to him in things indifferent,
as in all things else, we may Esa. 45. 25.
glory in him, in whom we are justified, casting down the gantle^ of defiance
against all our spiritual enemies; for Romans 8. 31
if God be for us, who can be against us? so that for joy of heart, we may
sing to him with David, Psalm. 73. 24.
thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and ^ afterward receive me to glory.


Aqu. Mr. Archippus you have even ravished our souls with the admiration of
Christ our Counselor: Wonderful may his name well be, who is such a friend,
and brother, and husband, as well as councellor unto us. The children of this
world, that are wise in their generation, if they have a Lawyer at hand, of
whom they may ask counsel upon every occasion at their pleasure and
free-cost, will be sure to do nothing wherein appears any suspicion of
danger, without advise. And have we a Councellor so nigh us, with his word in
our mouth, yea, with his spirit and word in our heart; so wonderful in his
friendly familiarity, in his brotherly compassion, and husbandly loving
kindness; with whom we may in all things consult without money or price, who
is never weary of our conference, but delighted with our voice and presence,
and never displeased with us, but either for Esa. 30. 1. 31. 1.
not asking, or Pro. 1. 25. 30.
not following his counsel: and shall we children of light, slight him, and
presume on our own discretion without him, especially where there is such
deadly danger in the abuse of things indifferent? would not the children of
this world so rise up in judgment against us? Surely confusion already
covers our faces, to think on our former foole-hardinesse and whiles we
live, we sh(...) never more say to our di^cretion, (...)u art our gui^^ Now
(...) procee^^ we pray you, to your t^ir^ ^ile of direction for our mutual
edification.


Arch. My third rule concerns the materials, the parties I mean whom we are
to edify: and they are principally the 1 Pet. 2. 17.
brotherhood and household of Gal. 6. 10.
faith; for they are Esa. 61. 3.
called trees of righteousness, and 1 Pet 2. 5.
lively stones: because they are already fit to be built up, a spiritual
house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God
by Jesus Christ. And among them, 2 Timothy 5. 8.
especially those that are our own, and of our own house, our Phile. verse 16.
brethren both in the flesh and in the Lord. Yet may not Deuteronomy. 11. 19. Genesis 18.
9.
our love that edifieth be restrained only to those; for the same Scriptures
that order us to do good, especially to the household of faith, and to love the
brotherhood; charge us also to 1 Pet. 2. 17.
honor all men, and to do good, even Gal. 6. 10.
to all, ^ These. 5. 15.
yea, to Mat. 5. 44.
love, and to do good to our enemies, yea though they be our hateful,
spiteful persecutors; much more then to our friends and families, and other
neighbors.


Aqu. But say some, what man can edify all?


Arch. As when the Scripture says, Heb. 12. 14
follow peace with all men, the meaning is not as if any good man could have
either commerce or concord with all: for besides all those whose ^aces he neue^
saw, there are some Psalm. 120 6,
haters of peace, against whom David made his protestation, saying, I am for
pea^e, but when I speak* they are for war: as also he complained of furious
Ioab, that 1 Reg. 2. 5.
he shed the blood of war in peace: but as the Apostle says, Romans 12. 18
If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men; so
here we mean, not as if any could edify all; for besides those millions of
people, whose faces we never see, how many of those with whom we converse, are
as stones, crumbling all to crattell, as soon as we begin to hammer them, and
as timber falling to splinters, when we fall to hewing of them, (both which are
fitter for the highway, and chimney corner, then for Gods building) and other
such 1 Samuel 25. 17.
sons of Beliall there are, that a man cannot speak to them; they are 2 Samuel
23. 6, 7.
thorns that cannot be taken with hands, but the man that shall touch them
must be fenced with iron, and with the staff of a spear: will such ever be
edified? Nay, they shall be thrust away, as thorns, says the Prophet, yea,
utterly burnt with fire in the same place. The meaning therefore is, that if it
be possible, as much as ^lyeth in us, we should edify all; and 1 Cor. 9. 22
be made all things to all men (as every man's calling and opportunity can
permit) that we might by all mean^ save some; yea and those that are Verse. 19.
free from all men should make themselves servants unto all men ( Gal. 5. 13
by love serving one another) that they might gain the more.

But say others, 1 Cor. 5. 12
what have we to do to judge them that are without? Reproof therefore is to
be ^estrayned only to brethren in religion, at least in outward profession.
And others object, that all who ^re not truly religious, are dead in sins and
tres^asses, ^ Ephesians. 2. 1.
and therefore in exhortation we have nothing to do with them; what say they,
must we speak to carkases and dead men?


Archip. First I answer, that S. Paul in the former place speaks of judging
by public censure of the Church, which can reach to none, but to those that
are within the Church: which may not restrain private 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. 15.
admonition, no not from such disorderly, disobedient persons, from whose
company the brethren themselves are restrained by the Apostle. Nay by how much
the less the censure of the Church can reach to those that ar^ without, so
much the more must we admonish them privately as we have opportunity, if we
intend the doing of any good unto them, as we are bound to do, even Gal. 6. 10
to all, though they be not of the household of faith.

Secondly they who are dead in sins and trespasses according to the Apostles
meaning, are yet 1 Timothy 5 6
living in the flesh though dead in regard of spiritual vegetation: and may be
quickened as Ephesians. 2. 1.
those were of whom the Apostle speaks. Nay we all that now Gal. 2. 20.
live by faith, were dead as they by nature; and may not they then as well as we
be quickened by grace? As the Apostle pleading for the Jews that were cut off,
says to the believing gentile, Romans ^^. 18. 23.
Boast not against them for God is able to graffe them in; so say I to thee,
despair not of these; for God who quickened you in their case, is able also
soon to quicken them together with you. Should a man that has escaped danger
of drowning by favor of a drawbridge afforded him, pluck up the bridge from
his endangered fellows following after him? Behold, Ioh. ^. 24
thou have passed from death to life, by the grace of him who is I^h. 14* 6
the way, the truth, and the life; and will thou stop this passage of gra^e
from thy fellows behind thee? May thou not so provoke the Father of
mercies, who Exo. ^4.
keeps mercy for thousands* to speak to thee in his wrath, as the Lord says
in the parable, Mat. ^8. 32 33
O thou wicked servant etc. should not thou also have had compassion on thy
fellow as I had pity on thee? Does thy soul abhor those envious Genesis 26. ^8.
Philistines that stopped Abraham's wels, wherewith cattle were watered and
refreshed; and will thou stop the Ier. 2. 1^.
fountain of living waters, the Zac. ^3. ^.
fountain that is opened for sin and for uncleanness to refresh thousands
of men's weary souls? O how are they branded that Psalm. ^8. 41
limited the holy one of Israel in his power? and art not thou blameworthy if
in thy thought thou limit him in his rich mercy; who is Rom 10. 12
the same Lord over all, rich unto all that call upon him, who has Rom 11. 32
concluded all under sin, that he might have mercy of all, gentile as well as
Jew, and of the elect yet vn-called and without, as well as of those within. For
this purpose must not Man. 15. 15
the gospel be preached to every creature in all the world, and that Mat. 28.
20
even unto the end of the world? Now therefore as well as in the days of the
Apostle 2 Cor. 6. 1.
is the accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation; and the hour is not
yet expired whereof the Lord of life says, Ioh. 5. 25
verily, verily I say unto you, the hour is coming and now is, when the dead
shall hear the voice of the son of God, and they that hear shall live. And
if by hearing they that are dead in sins and trespasses shall live, then you
see the dead must be spoken unto that they may hear and live.

Thou will say perhaps, true, and were I a preacher, 1 Cor. 9. 16
woe were to me if I should not preach the gospel to the dead, Act. 20. 28
of whom I am made an ouer-seer. But say I, thou art a neighbor, though no
preacher; and if they that be dead in sin be thy neighbors, the royal law
charge thee to love them as thy self; if their bodies, which none will deny;
how much more then their souls? Yea were it but thy neighbors, nay thine Exo.
23. 4. 5
enemies ox straying, or ass lying under a burden, thou must in pity help
him. What, does God take care for oxen and asses as the Apostle 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10.
says? No doubt for our sakes this is written, that he that sees his
neighbour^ soul lying under the burden of sin; Leu. 19. 17
must not (as the Law says) hat^ his brother in his heart, but he shall in any
wise rebuke his neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Whereto cut off all
such cauils, as if only brethren in religion or profession were to be rebuked:
the Lord himself makes brother and neighbor terms conuentible, or of equal
extent: and in this case every soul that thou see to have need, is thy
neighbor, though he be the man whose face thou never saw before, as Luke
10. 29 etc.
Christ shows at large in that parable, where he tells the per^ Lawyer who is
his neighbor. And here Deu. 15. 9
beware there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, to Zac. 7. 10.
imagine evil against thy brother in thy heart, saying, he may be for ought
thou know a vessel of wrath fitted to destruction, and never to be
quickened. For Deu. 29. 29
the secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things that are
revealed, belong unto us, and to our children for ever, that we may do all
the words of this Law. Whither God will quicken this or that particular m^n or
no, is a secret yet known only to him ^ Tim 2. 19
who has this seal, the Lord knows who are is: thou see thy duty of love
revealed which thou must do to help quicken him: and it is thy want of 1 Cor.
13 7
charity not to hope that he may be quickened, till thou see God reveal the
contrary; for what know thou whither thou shall quicken and save him, when
the Pro. 10. 11 and 11. 30
mouth of a righteous man is a well of life, and his fruit a tree o^ life?


Aqu. But say some, when we deal with such men, we find them not only as
beasts without understanding, but rude as horse and mule: we can no sooner
meet them with a word of rebuke, but they are snuffing and kicking with the
heel, and off they turn us with reproachful and beastly usage: and who that
wise is, will trouble himself with such beast^?


Archip. I aunsweare, where is now that Tit. 3. 2.
gentleness and meekness that must be showed unto all men? Or have they
forgotten, that 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25
the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all men, apt to
teach, patient: in meekness instructing them that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance etc? O if thou would call to
remembrance the days past, Tit. 3. 3.
were not we our selves sometimes (as they are now) not only unwise and
disobedient, but living also in envy and malice? Could not we show spleen and
stomach more then enough, to the man that should have stopped us with a word of
rebuke, when we served our diverse lusts and pleasures? May not the best of us,
if we consider our selves, Ier. 31. 18 19
bemoane ourselves with Ephraim, yea strike upon our thigh, and be confounded
to think how we played the unruly beasts, when God first began to chastise
and turn us? Nay, since we were converted, have we not often played the Psalm.
^3. 22
beasts (as David) in our ignorant foolish thoughts and censures? Yea, and
sometime when we have bin set in withal for acknowledging some darling sins,
have we not bin Psalm. 32. 3, 4, 5, 9
as horse and mule which have no understanding, whose mouth must be held in
with bit and bridle, least they come near thee? Remember therefore how in
times past Job 33. 14
God spoke once, yea twice, and thou perceauedst it not; yea often Ier. 22. 21
he spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, when thou said I will not hear,
behauing thy self as Iere. 2. 24
a wildasse used to the wilderness that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure,
in her occasion who can turn her away? Yet was Esa. 65. 1.
God found of thee when thou soughtest him not; Esa. 30. ^8.
he waited that he might be gracious unto thee; yea many a time and long Reu.
3. 20.
has he stood knocking at the door of thy conscience, Cant. 5. 2.
till his head was filled with dew, and his locks with the drops of the night:
and had not he wrought for his great names sake to Ioh. 6. 44
draw thee and that Hos. 11. 4
with cords of love, yea and sometime with Eze. 20. 34 37
a mighty hand to rule thee, causing thee to pass under the rod, and Luke 14.
23
compelling thee into the bond of the covenant (the Genesis 19. 16
Lord being merciful unto thee) and 1 Pet. 1. 5
keeping thee by his own power through faith unto salvation: thou might for
ever have perished in thy dung, as a beast, or thy latter end might have bin
worse then thy beginning. Now let thy soul have these things still in
remembrance and be humbled in thee, to read unto others a lecture of thine
own experience as Psalm. 32. 8 etc. 66. 16
David did; and show mercy to thy neighbors, as God has had compassion on
thee.


Aqu. But when we assaye to do their souls good, and find nothing in them
but ignorance and brutishness, may we not then leave them? Why else says
Solomon, Pro. 14. 7
go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceiuest not in him the
lips of knowledge?


Arch. Solomon in your place alleged, forbids all unnecessary familiarity
and society with such wicked fools: because as they are Mat. 23. 3.
Serpents by nature and have an inbred serpentine Genesis 3. 25
enmity against the seed of the woman (that is, Romans 9. 8.
the children of God and of the promise, which are counted for the seed) so
their evil speech 1 Cor. 15. 33.
corrupts and 2 Timothy 2. 17
fretteth like a gangrene, their wickedness spreads and sowreth 1 Cor. 5. 6.
like leaven, and their society is as Pro. 13. 20
perilous, as their language is venomous, and their lives contagious. But
enemies though they be, and full of deadly poison; yet we may, nay we Pro^
25. 21
must give them bread to eat if they be hungry, and water to drink if they be
thirsty; and if to their hungry and thirsty bodies, then much more to their
hungry and thirsty souls. So that we must watch an opportunity to 2 Thessalonians. 3
14. 15
admonish even them, with whom we may have no company; and men must be 1 Tess.
5. 14
warned though they be unruly, yea the more unruly men are, Tit. 1. 10. 12, 13
as evil beasts, the more sharply must they be rebuked, Jude 23.
and saved with terror. And this is the choicest cunning of all hunting and
fishing in the world, when men, as good huntsmen and Mat. 4. 19
fishers of men, are Pro 11. 30.
wise to win or take souls, and to Luke 5. 10
catch men, though by nature as unruly as evil beasts or Sea Monsters. And
though Christ call his Apostles Fishers of men, because they and their
successors in preaching, are the chief Eze. 47. 10.
Fishers and net-spreaders by those waters issuing out of the Sanctuary: yet
Solomon applies the same similitude of fishing or hunting, to every righteous
man; because they must be helpers and laborers with Preachers in the Gospel,
as formerly we heard; and they being Verse 12.
trees that grow by the banks of the waters of the Sanctuary, their fruit must
be for meat, and their leaf for medicine; by whose lips many must be cured,
as well as fed, to fulfill that which is written, The tongue of the wise is
health, Pro. 12. 18.
or medicines; and a wholesome Pro. 15. 4.
tongue is a tree of life. Now when all these similitudes of curing, hunting,
and fishing, import not only cunning and wisdom, but a great deal of
labor, watching, and long-suffering: we may not turn off our neighbors for
a little rudeness and untowardness, or utterly leave them if we cannot
presently catch or cure them. In the former case, if thy neighbors Ox going
astray, or his Ass lying under a burden; if the Ox when thou offerest to
bring him back, should fling dirt in thy face; or the Ass should assay to
bite thee, while thou assayest to help him from under his burden, will thou
presently leave the one and the other, and think to answer Go^ with a cold
assaye, when God charge thee, saying, Exo. 23. 4, 5.
Bringing thou sha^ bring back the one, an^ helping, thou shall hel^ the
other; that is, as much as in thee lies, if it be po^sible, thou shall bring
ba^ the one, and help up the other? Wherefore if there ^^ any bowels and
mercie^ any meekness and patience, when thou see soul^ straying in the Mat.
7. 13
wide wa^ of perdition, or 1 Ioh. 5. 19.
lying wit^ the world in mischief, he^ is matter for them all t^ set on work:
namely, 2 Timothy 2. 24 etc.
t^ be gentle unto all of them apt to teach, and patient in meekness
instructin^ those that oppose themselves, if God peraduentur^ will give them
repentance ^ the acknowledging of ^e truth: and they may (...)over themselves
out of ^esnare of the devil, who ^e taken captive by him at ^ will.


Aqu. But say they, the ^cripture it self says, Pro. 9. 8.
Re^roue not a scorner, lest he ^^e thee, and Pro 23. 9.
speak not ^ the ears of a fool, for ^e will despise the wise^ome of thy
words; And a^ine, Mar. 7. 6.
give not that which ^holy unto dogs, neither ^st ye your pearls before ^ine,
lest they trample ^em under their feet, and ^ne again and rent you.


Arch. I answer, that ^ere are two sorts of dogs ^d swine, of fools and
^orners. First, some are such by inbred corruption of nature, and such were
we all by nature: Tit. 3. 3.
no^ only unwise and disobedient, deceived, and serving diverse lusts and
pleasures; but also living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one
another. Such was the Acts 2. 13.
woman of Samaria, who could check, and quip, and taunt our blessed Savior*
such were those scorners, who said, the Apostles were full of new wine; and
such was Paul* when in his ignorance, he was 1 Timothy ^. ^ 3
a blasphemer and a persecutor, and so injurious, that he was Acts. 9. 11.
exceedingly mad against the Saints. And yet none of^ these was such, but that
as God would have pearls* and holy things tendered and given them, so they,
after they were soundly convinced and pricked to the heart, and humbled, most
penitently embraced them. Secondly, some are fools and scorners by acquired
wilful blindness, and scornful obstinacy; who after the light revealed,
Mat. 13. 13.
wink with their eyes, lest they should see, and are ^ the more blind for the
u Ioh. 9. 39.
light; not only despising the words of wisdom, and* trampling pearls under
their feet, but will so much the more maliciously hate, scorn, and persecute,
all that shall offer to give holy things unto them. These are not only
naturally dead in sins, and trees without fruit, but Iud. verse. 12.
trees whose fruit withers, twice dead, plucked up by the roots: not only
dogs and swine by nature, but such as to whom, 2 Pet. 20.
after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, it is happened according
to the true Proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow
that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. Such were Luke 23. 8, 9.
Herod and Ioh. 18. 19 20, 21.
Caiaphas, and Ioh. 19. 9.
Pilate, when Jesus vouchsafed not to answer them: and such were those Mark
11. 27. etc.
chief Priests and Scribes, and Elders, to whose question Christ gave an
answer, answerelesse, stopping their mouths with another question. It is not
therefore every rude and brutish entertainment, nor once or twice refusing of
rebuke, no nor scorn, or in^^rrection against the rebuker, that may conclude
men to be such dogs and scorners: for 2 Chr. 15. 8. etc.
Asa himself, a courageous, zealous king, whose heart was said to be perfect
all his days, did yet 2 Chr. 16. 7. etc.
in wrath and rage kick and spurn against Hanani the Seer that reproved him:
and good King 1 Reg. 22. 14. etc.
Iehosha^hat, when he could sit-by with wicked Ahab, and hear and see the
Lords Pro^^et Micaiah to be so snibbed and smitten on the ^heeke, and committed
to prison for speaking the ^^uth in the name of the Lord; and he all while
sitting like Acts 18. 17
Gallio, cared for none of those things, so much as to put forth a word for
justifying wisdom* or delivering the Prophet; was not he also as Obad. Ver.
11, 12
one of them that scorned and persecuted him? Nay, and King David, 2 Samuel 6. 8
etc.
when God himself by a sudden strange judgment had actually reproved him for
carting the Ark of the Lord, which should have been 1 Chr. 15. 2
carried on the Levites shoulders, how was he displeased, and how untowardly
spoke he, as if the fault were more in God, then in himself, tha^ there was
such a breac^ made in Vzzah?

Wherefore unless we would unadvisedly condemn the generation o^ Gods
children, we must be wary how we condemn men for dogs* and swine, in the
latter sense. O consider I pray, what terrible thunderbolts from heaven are
those threats, when the Lord says, Hos. 4. 14.
I will not punish your Daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your Spouses
when they commit adultery: and again, Micah 2. 6
they shall not pro^^ecy unto them, that they shall not take shame. For Pro. 6.
23.
reproves of instruction, being the way of life, needs must this judgment be
most fearful, for a man to be in the way of damnation, and to have all
reproves ^ept from him, whereby he should be reduced into the way of life.
What, for a man to be poisoned or deadly wounded, and to have all physic and
chirurgerie kept from him? For a man to be blind, and to have all guides
restrained from him; and yet to walk there where the treading awry is the
tumbling into hell; O how wonderful is this case? If in capital offenses,
where men's lives were to pay for it, GOD charged the Israelites to Deuteronomy. 13.
14. 17. 4.
make search, and to ask diligently, and to see that it were truth, and the
things certain, before they should proceed to any execution: how much more in
this case, where men's souls lie at stake, without means of recovery to be
ministered unto them, should we by all diligent means of inquisition, see it to
be truth, and the thing certain, that men are dogs and swine, and such fools
and scorners to whom our pearls and holy things are not to be given; till ever
we execute this fearful sentence on any man? God forbid therefore that we
should yield up our brethren unto such a dreadful case of Pro. 29. 1.
destruction, and that without remedy, before they harden their necks against
often reproves, and that in such manner, that they not only Pro. 23. 9.
despise the words of wisdom, and o Mat. 7. 6.
^ trample them under feet, but also Pro. 9. 8.
hate, Verse ^.
scorn, and r Mat. 7. 7.
^ rent us for tendering such unto them. For Eccl. 7. 22.
oftentimes also our own hearts knows, that we have not spoken the best of
others, that have reproved us, and Esa. 63. 17.
hardened our hearts from Gods fear. Now considering our selves, this should
make us pause in respect of our neighbors, Ier. 31. 20.
since we spoke against them, we should remember them still as God did us; and
as Gods bowels were troubled for us, so let ours for them: and let the pitteous
case of their souls plead with us, as ours did with the Lord, saying, Esa.
63. 15
Where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy
mercies toward me? are they restrained? And in imitation of our merciful
Father, who cried out, Hos. 12. 8.
how shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall
I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within
me, my repentings are kindled together, etc. ^o should we say, How shall I give
thee up brother? how shall I deliver thee O my neighbor? how shall I make thee
as a swine, how shall I set thee as a dog? my heart is turned within me, and
my repentings so kindled together, that I will never execute the fearfulness
of this doom upon thee; till in fear of our jealous God, who forbids the
giving of holy things to dogs, I dare no more cast pearls before thee.

Remember I pray, that the Apostle would have no Tit. 3. 10.
Heretic rejected, till after the first and second admonition. Yea, our
merciful Savior in private personal injuries, requires Mat. 18. 15 etc.
a threefold distinct admonition (if need be) and each of the two latter,
more solemn then the former, for the recovery of our brother; till he should
be unto us a Heathen, and a Publican. Nay, if he Luke 17. 4.
trespass against thee seven times a day, and seven times in a day turn
unto thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him. And if thou wonder at this
and say with Mat. 18. 21, 22.
Peter, Lord, unto seven times? remember Christ's answer, I say not unto thee,
until seven times, but until seauenty times seven. And who among us
hereupon feels not cause to cry with the Luke 17. 5.
Apostles, Lord increase our faith; and to remember our Saviors caveat given
us in respect of brotherly admonition, Verse 3.
Take heed to your selue? For who almost heeds this, that if our brother
offe^ding us, come not to reconcile himself unto us, as our Sa^iour upon
fearful terms charge him to do: yet e Mat. 5. 24.
we should Mat. 18. 15
go, and tell him; and why? If he hear thee, says Christ, thou have gained
thy brother. Now who among many, takes ^eed to himself in this? For as the
good Father hereupon says, If in doing this thou gainest him; then he had
been lost, if thou had not done it: and so with the loss of thy brother,
thou had also lost the gain thou have in recovery of thy brother, whereby
thou may Dan. 12. 3.
shine as a star for ever.

Men are sensible of worldly losses, but who almost takes to heart these
losses? Is it a small loss to loose a brother, when the son of man, yea the
Son of God himself came down from heaven Mat. 10. 21
to save that which was lost? Or by thy uncharitable negligence, will thou
suffer a 1 Cor. 8. 11
weak brother to perish, nay, will thou Romans 14. 15.
destroy him for whom Christ dyed? For, in this case, Mark. 3. 4.
not to save, is to kill: will thou say, thou art sure, that Ioh. ^7. 1^
none of those for whom Christ dyed can be lost, or ever perish? True, and
thanks be unto Christ, that Ioh. 1^ 28 29.
none shall be able to pluck them out of his hands: but that is no thank to
thee, who in doing that which tends to his destruction, art justly charged by
the Apostle, with destroying him. And never tell me, that thy brother may see
thy charity and patience in forgiving him, and letting him alone without
rebuke, whereas he would perhaps impute thy rebuke to anger and hatred. For
Pro. 27. 5
better is open rebuke, then such secret love, that appears not in deed And
take the answer of that good Father that says, that because thou art not
angry enough to hate and smite with reproof the sin which would destroy his
soul, in this thou art convinced of so much the more hatred against his
person, whom thou should Iam. 5. 20.
save by turning ^im from his evil way. For as the Father says, suppose a boy
swimming and sporting in a flood, by the violence whereof he may be carried and
cast away, thou if thou see it, and patiently suffer it, thou hate him;
and thy patience is his destruction. And never tell me that thy brother having
trespassed against thee, ought to come to thee for reconciliation, Should he
(...)? Yes, and so ought thy (...)-away child to come to ^^ee too: but if he
be so ^^unded that he cannot ^^me to thee for weake^esse, would thou in
this ^^se stand upon thy terms of pr^cedency? nay, woul^est thou not hasten
to him as soon as thou hear of ^it? O remember then the ^ffence given to
thee, is a ^ound given to his own ^oule; else God would never have said, Hos.
14. 4.
I will heal ^^eir backe-sliding; and lest that which is halting q Heb. 12. 13
be turned out of the way, let it rather be healed. And if Satan has
conspired ^ith carnal fear and shame to withold him from thee (as by Genesis
3. 10.
these he withheld Adam from God) should not thou go to him, as our Savior
charge thee^, to rescue hi^ soul out of the hand o^ such enemies? Yea,
knowing him in such a case, should thou not even whiles he is afar off*
have compassion on him (as the Luke 15. 20.
Father had on his Pro^igall son) yea run and embrace him, and receive him
into thy favor? As Romans 15. 7.
Christ also received us to the glory of God, and u Cant. 2. 8.
came leaping upon the mountains, and skipping upon the hills, passing over all
obstacles and difficulties; and pauing his way Heb. 9. 12
by his own blood entered into the holy place; and having obtained eternal
redemption for us, Ephesians. 2. 17.
came and preached peace to us ^^suing and as it were 2 Cor. 11. 2
wooing us as his spouse, by his Ambassadors, who 2 Cor. 5. 20
prayed us in Christ^ steed to be reconciled to God) whiles we were yet Ephesians.
2. 12, 13.
afar off and of Romans 5. 6
no strength to come unto him; yea and so far from any such motion, that we
stood off as enemies, and Col. 1. 21.
alienated c Verse. 10.
in our minds by evil works.

Now if in imitation of thy Saviors mercy (whose Ioh. 4. 34. etc.
meat it was to do his Fathers will, and to finish his work in reaping and
gathering souls, as Mat. 3. 12.
wheat into the garner) thou feel an hungry appetite to recover thy
neighbor; and in some cases fear to transgress thy Saviors inhibition, in
giving holy things to dogs: thou may deal with him, as an hungry labourer
does with his pottage; which though they may be perhaps too hot and scalding
to go down with him, yet being very hungry he will give a suppe or an assay,
to try whither they may be endured: So do thou likewise, and try whither
possibly holy things will down with thy neighbor; if not, thou may stay a
while by thy charitable assay: yet give him not utterly over, but as God Esa.
30. 18
waited that he might be gracious unto thee, so wait thou on him, and try
again and again, whither his obstinacy and malice be deep and spreading with
scorn and renting, and the thing be certain that he is a dog and a swine,
till t^ou dare judge him so. And let us all learn by the s^adowe, what great
suspense and warynesse God would have to be observed in the substance, when we
read in the Leuiticall Law; that in a doubtful case of leprosy, Leu. 13. 4.
etc.
the Priest was to ^hut up the man seven days for trial; and then if the
plague in the Priests ^ight were at a stay, and ^pread not in the skin, he
was to be shut up yet ^eauen days more: and behold, if the plague were
somewhat dark, and spread not in the skin, the Priest was to pronounce him
clean: and if the scab spread much abroad in the skin, after he had bin
seen of the Priest, yet for his cleansing he was to be seen of the Priest
again, and the scab to be seen evidently to spread in the skin, till the
Priest was to pronounce him unclean.


Arist. Mr. Archippus, you have so stirred our bowels within us, and kindeled
our repentings together, that we now feel it is no vain word when the
Apostle tells us; that Iam. 3. 17.
the wisdom from above is first pure, then gentle, easy to be entreated,
full of mercy, and good fruits, without judging, and without hypocrisy: and
that 1 Cor. 13. 7
charity bears all things, belieueth all things, hops all things, and
endures all things. The Lord increase this heavenly wisdom and fervent
charity, that we may 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9
have compassion one of an other and be pitiful and courteous, not rendering
evil for evil, nor railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing, Romans 12. 21
and ouercomming evil with goodness. For our better accomplishment whereof,
we now desire your fourth rule of direction for our mutual edification.


Arch. My fourth rule of direction comprehends the right manner and method
of exhortation: which respects first the parties exhorting; secondly the
parties exhorted; and thirdly the matters whereabout exhortation is conversant.
First therefore the parties exhorting are carefully to observe the Apostles
method, prescribed not only to Timothy, saying 1 Timothy 6. 2
teach and exhort; but also to all Christians, saying, Col. 3. 16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another: First by teaching to inform men's understanding and
judgment, and then by exhorting or admonishing to work upon their will and
affections. For as God being a God of order, that Eccl. 3. 11.
made every thing beautiful in his time; has given men understanding and
judgment which should order, and by their light guide the will and affections
(whereupon our Savior s^ith, Mat. 6. 23.
If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?) and
as in good things men are first to Luke 12. 4^ John 13. 17
know the will of their master, and then to do it; and likewise in evil first
to Pro. 28. 13 1 John 1. 9
acknowledge and confess, and then to forsake: So we must first seek to
enlighten men's understanding and inform their judgment* that in the word held
forth as a Phil. 2. 16
light or a Iam. 1. 23.
glass, they may see and discern what is good, and what is ill: and then we
must labor to draw, or withdraw their affections accordingly. For whatsoever
is not well grounded in the under(...)ing a(...) judgment can (...) w^rk^
^ffect^ally, (...) abide ^irmely in the will and affections. Why did the
Israelites Heb 3. 10
always err in their heart, but because they knew not Gods ways? And why came
Jerusalem to be Mat. 23. 37 38
desolate for her wilfulness, but Luke 19. 42 44
because she knew not the time of her visitation, and the things that belonged
to her peace were hid from her eyes? That therefore men may know the things
that belong to their peace; we are to know that as he who Pro. 15 32.
refuses instruction can less hearken to reproof; so we must first ^egin
with instruction, and then come on with reproof, remembering that (...)
reproves of instruction a Pro. 6. 23.
are the way of life. For want of this wisdom to direct men's exhortations,
many have spoken much to small purpose: putting the cart before the horse, and
rushing upon men's affections without information first given to the judgment.
As if a man meeting with his neighbor half ^trangled in a rope, where^ith he
would needs hang a^mselfe, should with might and strength tugge and pull down
the body, when with a discreet eye and cunning hand he should discern and
untie the knot, or cut the rope. And as such bring little help to others,
except it be to help them with more speed to some mischeiuous end: so
oftentimes they procure much hurt to themselves, like those bungling Carpenters
or foolish woodcleauers, to whom Eccl. 10. 10
Solomon alludeth; who when the iron is blunt, put too more strength, when they
should put on a better edge; and so insteede of cleaving the logs, hurt their
own shinnes with rebound of the wedges. But as Solomon Verse the same.
there says, wisdom is profitable to direct: and as one soft stroke makes
the wedge cleave better if the edge be well sharpened, then many hard strokes
when the edge is dull: so Eccl. 9. 17
the words of a wise man are more heard in quiet, (...)n the cry of him that
(...)eth among fools.

Others contenting themselves with information of men's judgments by tea^^ing,
strive not to work on men's affections by admonishing or exhorting: wherein
like careless hus^andmen and planters, ^ey have suffered much good seed to be
devoured by the fowls of the air for ^ant of covering; and many a good graffe
to rot and come to nothing for ^ant of close binding. For ^is with the word as
with ^^eede, and Iam. 1. 21.
a graffe; if it ^ Mat. ^3. 3. 19
^e not Psa. 119. 11
h^d in the heart, and there rooted; if it be ^ot set in and close bound as a
graffe in the stock; it will never prosper to the saving of men's souls. Now
because naturally, men are so far from setting their hearts to Gods word as
God Deu. 32. 46
commands, that they are all naturally prone Act. 13. 46.
to put it from them, therefore as we love their souls, we may not content
our selves with bare instruction, but by application we must help put the word
to their hearts, that it may Io^. 5. 37, 38
abide in them, else it will never do them good, howsoever Verse. 3^.
for a season they may seem to rejoice in the light of it. And let no man
here say, that if men's understandings be once opened, every man can then apply
to himself. For, natural men, how ever they may be wise to do evil, yet
Iere. 4. 22.
to do good (to others, or to their own ^ Sam. 24. 5.
souls) they have no knowledge, but are as foolish, as sottish children, says
the Prophet. Now Physic and Surgery were like to do much good* were they not,
if pills and corrasiues were left to children to apply them? Nay children of
wisdom themselves, howsoever they be sensible of sins, as of 2 Samuel 24. 10
blows or wounds, and of reproves as of Psalm. 141. 5
balmes or excellent oils: yet in long pursuit of any sin their Esa 63. 1^
hearts come to be hardened, as the water with long frost; and in great sins
they Hos. 4. 11.
loose their sense as men that swoune in great wounds; and in these cases they
have need as others to be plied and wel-heated with sound application (as we
see by the 2 Samuel 12. 1 etc
example of David, and the disciples) till they come to themselves, Luke 24. 25
32
and recover their spiritual sense and ^eeling.

Secondly in respect of those whom we are to exhort, we are to Iud.
put a difference as S. Jude says; and that in regard both of their inside,
and of their outside. In regard of their inside and state of their souls, we
must carefully observe that difference of Pro. 29. 9
anger and laughter that Solomon sets down; of Luke 7. 32
piping and mourning, whereof our Savior speaks; and of 1 Cor. 4. 21
the rod and spirit of meekness: the choice of either of which is to be made,
not as we would i^ our voluntary inclination, but as the state of our
neighbors soul requires. And this the Verse the same.
Apostle makes evident, saying, what will ye? Shall I come unto you with a
rod, or in love, or in the spirit of meekness? Intimating hereby, that the
choice hereof lay rather in their condition, then in his own disposition: For
besides all the former particular differences of men's inward estates, Page 27
and 28
which I at first expressed in explaning the meaning of the word (exhorting) by
the word (edifyng) and Page 90 and 91. etc
afterward again in my second general motive (all which, being long to be
repented, I pray you here to inserte as in their proper place) besides all
those, I say, there is one maine difference o^ men unregenerate, and of men
regenerate, which I am now further to insist upon. First therefore some men,
namely, all the unregenerate, have not only Eze. 1^. 19
stony hearts naturally, but by continuance in that natural estate and custom
of sin they Zach. 7. 12
make their hearts as adamant stones; making them harder by actual
transgression, which were hard enough by natural corruption. By which
augmentation they grow to be a generation of Esa. 48. 4
iron sinews, and brows of brass, without ^ere. 6. 15
shame or Iere. 2. 19
fear; and men of 1 Timothy 4. 2
feared consciences, and Mat. 13. 15 Psalm. 119. 70
hearts fat as grease, without sense or feeling. Now if ever we look to
work good on such men, we must as the Apostle says, Tit. 1. 13.
rebuke them sharply, and *save them with fear, pulling x Jude 23.
them out of the fire. For as it were extreme cruelty toward a man fallen into
the fire, under pretense of soft and gingerly handling, to suffer him there to
burn; when it were mercy rather to pull him out by head and ears, though we
made him black and blew in pulling: so is it in this case of men's souls, mercy
and not cruelty, to stick in such men's Psalm. 45. 5
hearts the sharp arrows of Christ's qui^er, to Act 2. 37
prick and Heb. 4. 12
pierce them through with the sword of the spirit, sharper then any
two-edged-sword, and to rub their seared crusty consciences with the Mat. 5. 13
salt of Gods word, till they begin to smart and bleed, and become sensible of
the 2 Cor. 5. 11
terror of God, that so they may be fit patients for Christ's cure; whereby Mat.
13. 15
they may be converted, and he heal them, when they thus stand forth in the
rank of those that fear his name,

Deuteronomy. 5. 29
O that there were such a heart in men thus to fear God, that it might be well
with them for ever. And in the name of the Lord look we to it; for if any man
by ^ closing his eyes and ears, Mat. 13. 15
^ill be wilfully deaf, and blind on this side; and ^^artle and fling away,
when in the fear of God he should Mal. 3. 2.
stand and abide the day of the Lord his physicians coming (though he belike a
refiners fire, and like fullers soap) let him tremble lest while he har^en his
heart, and withstand and out-stand the way and day of his cure, ^e Lord for a
Romans 11. 9
recompense unto them, give them the Verse. 8.
spirit of slumber, that they may never be converted nor healed. Mal. 4. 2.
But unto you that fear my name says the Lord ^^eauing Verse. 1.
all the proud and all that do wickedly to the burning oven of his fiery wrath
and indignation) shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing in his
wings. And why only to them that fear his name? But because as Christ
himself says, Luke 5. 31
the whole have no need of the ph^sitian, but they that are sick* I came not
to call the righteous (that is Luke 16. 15
tho^^ that iustifi^ themselves before men) but sinners to repentance, that is,
such as Mat. 11. 28
labor, and are heavy laden with the Psalm. 38. 4.
burden of their sins. The Gal. 3. 24
Law therefore must be the Schoolmasters to bring men to Christ; from mount
Sinai, they must come to mount Sion; from Heb. 12. 21
fear and quaking to Verse 24.
that speaks better things then that of Abel: and never any received the
spirit of adoption to cry Abba Father, but they first ^ received the spirit of
bondage o Romans ^. 1^.
to fear. For unless men come to Christ with a^hes and mourning, and the
spirit of heaviness, how ^^all he Esa. 61. 3.
give them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of
praise for the spirit of heaviness?


Arist. This is that which is every where spoken against, as the Act. 28. 22
doctrine of the Apostles was: and say men, this is to begin at the wrong end.
For say they, you must first begin with fair and soft words to win the love
of men, or else you will never do other good then stir the world about your
ears, and make variance and combustion, as some crackt-brained preachers do
where ^re they come. And in common discretion (say they) how should men expect
the quiet fruit of righteousness from others, if they gash and cut them to
the heart with such terrors and sharp rebukes?


Arch. First I answer; this sounds, as if some young conceited scholar, not
knowing what belongs to husbandry, should tell a ploughman whom he sees
breaking up his fallow grounds and ploughing, and grubbing up his thistles and
thorns, alas ^^r what mean you, can ^ou look, your ground should ever yield
you good crop, if you use it ^us hardly? Or like as if ^ome Shepeards swain,
be^olding a wise builder pul^ing down ruinous towers, and digging up and
casting out the rubbish, that he may lay a sure foundation; should blame him
for making such heaps and ruins, where in his conceit there needed not but a
few pla^tering or dawbing repara^ons. And when we hear the Lord Iere. 1. 10.
setting the Prophet to root out and to pull down, to destroy and throw
down, and then to build and plant: and when accordingly the Prophet charge
the men of Judah, and Jerusalem to Iere 4. 3.
break up their fallow ground, and not to sow among thorns: who is so simple,
but he that will not learn, that may not hereby be instructed how to begin
spiritual husbandry and building? This is not therefore to begin at the wrong
end; for thus began God himself with Adam and Eve after their transgression,
by Genesis 3. 7, 8 etc.
shame and fear, and judging them to lay a ground in their hearts for the Lord
Jesus the corner stone, that so they might be fitted to receive the promise of
the blessed seed. And as all the Prophets held the same course so John
Baptist, greater then all the Prophets, began his ^uk. 3. 3.
preaching with the baptism of repentance for the ^emission of sins; and ^
so did the Lord Jesus vv Mat. 4. 17
himself, and Luke 24. 47
directed also his Apostles to the same course; which not (...) they observed
in Heb. 6. ^^ Act. 20. 21.
laying the foundation first of repentance from dead works, and then of faith
toward God: but all that in the primitive times preached with Apostolical
approbation, as S. Paul 1 Cor. 14. ^4 26
witnesses, so convinced and judged all unbelievers, that they fell down on
their faces worshipping God, and reporting that God was in them of a truth.

Secondly, concerning the combustion, and variance that accompanies the Zac.
7. 5.
ministry of the spirit, and the 1 These. 1. 5. 6.
Gospel where ever it comes not in word only, but in power and in the holy
Ghost, (which is a Esa. 4. 4.
spirit of judgment, and of burning) let me entreat men to stay themselves,
and seriously to consider of what spirit such men are; who now dare to cast
that as a reproach against Preachers, wherein our Savior gloried, professing
that he Mat. 10. 34
came not to send peace on earth, but Luke 12. 49
fire and sword; and for which he so highly magnified the Preaching of John
Baptist, saying, Mat. 11. 12
From the days of John Baptist, until now, the kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force. What, will ^^ey indite afresh the
Lord (...)us, as the chief Priests (...)d, who when they had nothing else to
say, laid it ^eauily to his charge, say^^g, Luke 23. 5.
He stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Jury, etc? Or shall ^ae
spirit of Festus, or any wi^e temporizer, stand up again against those
fierytongued men that 1 Pet. 1. 12.
Prea^hed the Gospel, with the ^oly Ghost sent down from heaven, and judge
them to be Acts 26. 24.
mad with ^uch learning, or at least, as ^ men besides themselves: k 2 Cor.
5. 13
because Verse 11.
knowing the ter^or of God, they so power^^lly persuaded men, that ^^ey turned
many from i^^ls, and turned out devils, and overthrew idolatrous and devilish
crafts and gains; whereby they Act. 16. 19 etc, 19. 24. etc.
exceedingly troubled (as some cried out) their city; and Acts 17. 6.
turned the world vpside down, as others said? Or must we now at last cast,
yeel^ up that chosen vessel S. Paul, to be a Acts 24. 3.
pestilent fellow, and a mouer of sedition through the world, as he was
accused; because he was 2 Timothy 3. 11
persecuted at Antioch and Lystra, pelted and Acts 14. 19
driven away with stones from Iconium, Acts 16. 22 etc.
openly whipped and stockt in Philippi, Act. 17. 5. 6
forced to hide his head at Thessalonica; and his ministry generally opposed
and blasphemed with Acts 18. 6. ^
insurrections, Acts 19. 28 20. 1,
vproares Acts 21. 30. 34
tumults, and Acts 22. 22 23.
outcries following him, and ^ bands y Act. 20. 22.
(...) afflictions in every ci(...) abiding him?

I confess, that the wise^^me from above, is peace^ie as pure, and neither
^eacher nor Professor, ^ay either carry in his own ^eart, or kindle among
o^^ers any Iam. ^. 14. etc.
bitter envying and strife, which is earthly, sensual, and devilish: the ^
servants of God must not ^ 2 Timothy 2. 24.
(...) strive; but rather as bles^ed peacemakers, they must raw water out of
the wels ^^saluation, to quench all (...) fiery passions that are (...) on fire
of ^ell. But the ^^th is, that as Iam ^ ^.
the spirit (...) dwells in us, lusts (...) envy, and all men naturally are
full of envy, and malice within; so it never breaks forth, and rages c Acts
^. 54. 57.
geth more, then when i^ meets with the word o^ rebuke: as hot lime neue^
smoaketh so much, as when cold water is cast on it, an^ as filthy cold
dung-hils n^uer euaporate so man^ sticking vapors, as when the Sunne-beames
mo^pierce into them. No^ were not he a wise ma^trow you, that should cry out
and blame the cold water for the fume of the one or the warm sun for the
stinch of the other? Again, as long as the devil ca^ keep men in the chaine^
of darkness and bonds o^ iniquity, he is wiser the^ Luke 11. 21
to disturb his own possession; as a merciless Iaylor is quiet among his
prisoners, as long as they suffer their gives and fetters (...)t about them:
but as he ^estirreth himself, and rai(...)h hue and cry all the ^^untry over
to recover ^^em, if they break prison; ^o when Christ comes to ^ loose the
works of Saman e 1 Ioh. 3. 8.
by Luke 4. 18
Preaching deliverance to the captives, and Esa. 61. 1
the opening of the prison ^o them that are bound; ^en the devil cries out as
one tormented to loose h Luke 8. 28, 29.
^s prisoners.

And yet this is not all, ^or where Christ comes ^ith the scepter of his ^outh,
to set up the king^ome of heaven on earth; ^ere he is Mal. 3. 2.
like a Refiners ^re, and Fullers soap; and ^ill Esa. 4. 4.
wash and purge men by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning,
and Mat. 3. 11.
baptize them with the holy Ghost, and with fire. And in respect o^ this
principally, Christ came (as he says) to sen^ the sword and fire on earth not
the fire of carnal contention and strife, but o^ heavenly zeal and feruency
of spirit: whereby in opposition of sin, Satan and the serpents seed, me^
should fight the good figh^ of faith; and H^b. 12. 4
resist vnt^ blood, striving against sin and Jude 3.
earnestly contend for the faith, and Luke 14. 26
hate Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and Sisters yea, and their
own life also; rather then they should hinder them from Luke 16. 16
pressing into the Kingdom o^ God, when it is Preached. Now if any in wilful
hud^inke will not see when the hand of the Lord is thus ^^fted up to Tit 2. 14.
purify unto ^^mselfe a peculiar people, ^ealous of good works; out envy and
grudge that this fire of heaven should ta^e and kindle amongst men, they shall
be ashamed (says the Prophet) for r Esa. 26. 11.
their envy at the people; yea, the fire of Gods enemies shall devour them.
^et men therefore refrain ^^emselues, lest while they seek to quench this
fire which Luke 12. 29
Christ would have ^o be kindled, and to re^^te the sword of the spirit, which
he will have Heb. 4. 12.
to pierce to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit; they be Act* 5. 39.
sound fighters against GOD, and Luke 19* 27.
enemies o^ Christ, that will not have him to reign over them* and what then
can be their end, but to Job 36. 12
perish by the sword, and by that Heb. 10. 27
fiery indignation and fury powered out like fire that Nah. 1. 6.
shall devour the adversaries? For as we have heard, so have we seen, that
Christ Psalm. 110. 1.
rules, and has ruled in the midst of his enemies, yea, and 1 Cor. 15. ^5.
he must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet.


Arist. But say men, you bring strange things to our ears; you will have us
win souls to God, and yet you will have us fright them with terror of Gods
Law: Is not this to catch Hares with rattle bags? Can we ^ooke to have thieves
and ^ebels come in, whiles we follow the one with hue and cry, and the other
with (...)ts of rebellion? But a proclamation of pardon is ^^at, which easily
brings ^^em in both.


Arch. Indeed were men ^^^ensible of spiritual, as of ^^dily dangers, and as
rea^y naturally to receive re^^sion of sins for their ^^les, as pardon for
their ^mporall lives: men might ^^ll glory in such discreet ^^asonings, whereby
we are ^^ged as fools. But why ^en does the Evangelist (...)nesse, that Christ
Ioh. 1. 11.
came ^^o his own and his own ^^ceiued him not? And ^^y did himself
complain, saying* Ioh. ^ ^^.
Ye (...) not come to me, that ye might have life? And again, Man. ^^. ^7
O Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as an
Hen g^^her^th her Chickens under her wings* and ye would not? Nay, let
themselves judge, ^^ these very thieves and rebels they talk of, should be so
bewitched, that they should verily think themselves to be true and loyal^
subjects; would they not think scorn in that case to have pardons offered
them? Even Ioh. (...)
an those bewitched bond* slau^s of sin, when they heard of the truth to make
them free, answered Jesus* We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to
any man* ^ow say thou* ye shall be made free* This is ^ust the case of all
men unregenerate; except that sometimes they are as sea-sicke with ^aging
storms of ^^eir consciences, they are Zac. 1. 1^.
all at rest, and with Luke 12. 19
the ^i^h fool, s^^g a Requiem ^o their souls, crying, 1 These 5. 3^
peace and safety. As S. Paul witnesses of himself, that ^ whiles he was
without the Gal. 3. 22, 23.
Law, (that is, the know^edge and sense of the law) ^ee was alive; that is, he
^om. 3. 19.
thought himself in a happy case* yea* so was he bewitched, that when he Act^
26. ^.
was exceedingly mad against the Christians, and did the worst he could do
against the name of Jesus, he verily thought with himself, that he did but as
he ought to do. And the like sencelesnesse does Christ discover in others,
saying, Ioh. 16. 2.
the time comes, that whosoever will kill you, will think he does God
service. And therefore, when as Solomon says, Pro. 27. 7.
the full soul loatheth an honey comb; and (...) 9. 12.
they that be whole, need not a Physician, but they that are sick: we had
need by the terrors of the Law, to prepare such souls for receipt of the
promises of the Gospel; unless we would prostitute the Gospel to scorn and
contempt, like importunate Physicians and Surg^ons, that will press the
receipt of physic on healthy persons, and lay plai^ters on whole skins, where
there is neither soar nor ache. My meaning is not that the corasiues of the
Law should be ministered to any without the cordials of the Gospel; for it is
the Gospel which is the 1 Pet. 1. 25
word of life, and the Romans 1. 16.
power of God unto salvation, which strikes the maine stroke in the conversion
of a soul, and in turning a sinner to God: but Gal. 3. 22, 23.
before faith come, the Law must conclude men under sin, and ^ guilty before
God; and ^ Romans 3. 19.
^^ut them up (as condemned malefactors) unto the ^aith afterward to be
revealed. And 1 Pet. 4. 6.
for this cause (says S. Peter) was the Gospel preached also to them that are
dead; that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live
according to God in the spirit.


Arist. Yet we see (say men) by common experience, that the unregenerate are
best pleased, and most won by gentle and fair means: and we see say they,
in all the Epistles of the Apostles, with what Phil. 2. 1. and 4. 1
sweet insinuations, and lovely persuasions and entreaties they beseech men
Romans 12. 1
by the mercies of God, 2 Cor. 10 ^
by the meekness and gentleness of Christ; yea ye man p^rceiue say they, how
2 Cor. ^ ^.
sorry and unwilling z 2 Cor. ^3. ^, 10.
they were to grieve men with terror and sharpness, like wise and merciful
Surgeons, that are loath ^^ come to section and (...)on, till after they have
first tried all fair remedies.


Aron. I grant, that natural men are best pleased ^ Mic. ^ ^^
with gentle meale-mou^^ed Teach ^s, as trua^tly scholars with such
Schoolmasters a^ least use the rod. But as light of nature taught men to say,
that the thing must needs be naught which wicked Nero accounted good: so it
was a greater light of grace that inspired S. Paul to say, Gal. 2. 10
If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. And as for the
winning of such men to be professors, is it not like the Pharisees Man. 23. 15
making of Proselytes, who were made twofold worse the children of hell then
themselves? For as Samuel confounded 1 Samuel 15. 13, 14.
Saul's goodly verbal profession, by the actual lowing of the Oxen, and
bleating of the Sheep which he heard, contrary to Gods commission: so say I
here, what means the prodigious swearing and blasphemy, pride, and
newfangled-nesse, usury and oppression, abundance of idleness, and other
abominations, that to the vexing of all righteous spirits, we see and hear in
many so easily won to be professors? Are those men won to God, when of
profane sinners they are thus made gross hypocrites; and become Jude verse 12.
spots in our assemblies (which should be Psalm. 110. 3
the beauties of holiness) to pollute the ^ame of God, and to provoke the eyes
of his glory? The truth is, these men being never laden with their sin, came
^oo easy to Christ to be eased by him; and therefore finding as (...)le love
in their hearts to Christ, as they find r^st from him, they can not take his
yoke upon them as ^e bids them; but power out themselves to al excess of riot,
and resolve to ^ay all the reckoning on Christ's score: making Christ to serve
with their sins, as noble men make their sumpter horses to bear their
burdens, whiles they sport at their pleasures. Better had it bin for such men
never to have learned Christ, then thus to learn him (...) etc.
contrary to the truth which is in Christ Jesus: just as the Father of lies
would have it, whiles they claim him for their Savior, whom they disclaim
for their Lord. Is not this to Heb. ^. 6
crucify to themselves afresh the son of God, and to put him to an open
shame? Is not this to crown him again with thorns insteede of a Diadem, and
to put a reed in his hand in li^ue of a scepter; crying hail Master, but
standing in no more awe of him then of a Iackstrawe, in respect of any hearty
reverence or obedience they mean to yield him? Now may any vaunt of winning
such men to Christ; who have none to mock and make sport withal, but the Reu.
19. 16
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords? Surely Esa. 57. 4.
a seed of falsehood they are, never begotten of God by the word of truth; and
manifested so much the more to ^e bastards and no sons, l Heb. 12. 8
by how much the freer they are from chastisement: and men may with as much
credit boast of winning them, as whore-masters may of begetting bastards; who
if they be not past shame, have never more cause to be ashamed, then when they
most see the faces of them. And surely when God shall arise to judgment, and
make enquiry by what means his son is thus mocked among so many Professors:
the hand of God will be heavy and woeful as well against Eze. 13. 9, 10, 19, 22
private flatterers as Ier. 23. 14 15. 32
flattering Prophets for their dawbings and sowing pillowes to arme-holes, by
saying peace, where there was no peace, and by saving the souls alive, that
should not live, in promising them life; by which lies and lightness they have
made many so to err in vanity and prophannes, and so strengthened their hands
in evil doing, that none (almost) does return from his wickedness.

Secondly, concerning that gentle lovely method of the Apostles writings, it
^omes in here just as sea^^nable as Pro. 26. 1.
snow in summer, or rain in harvest. For they to whom those Epistles were
directed, were such among whom the Apostles, as wise builders, had formerly
laid the Heb. 6. 1.
foundation of repentance from dead works and of faith toward God: whereby
they had not only Romans 8. 15.
received the spirit of bondage to fear, but in such ^ power of the holy Ghost
r 1 Tess. 1. 5.
had they also received the word, that it wrought among them like a refiners
fire and fullers soap; so scowring and cleansing them, that whereas 1 Cor. 6.
10, 11.
some of them had bin thieves, and covetous, and drunkards and reuilers, and
extortioners; they were then washed, as the Apostle says; that is, they were
as well sanctified from the filth of their sins by the spirit of our God, as
justified from the guilt of them in the name of the Lord Jesus. Now to take
those fair titles and praises, those lovely entreaties, and gentle persuasions
which the Apostles conferred on them that were justified and sanctified; and to
apply them to those that are yet in their sins, and never washed from their
filthiness wherein they are securely settled: what is it, but ^ Mat. 15. 26.
to take the childrens bread and give it to dogs, and to do as those of whom
the Prophet complained; that they ^ chanted to the sound of Amos 6. 5.
the viol, and invented to themselves instruments of music, like David? Like,
I say, in form and sound of the instruments, but most unlike in the intention
of the hearts that used them. For whereas David used them to make melody to ^^e
Lord, with grace in his heart; they used them to make melody to the devil, in
Verse. 3, 4, 6.
sacrificing to their belly-god. Let men therefore with Job 32. 22
Elih^, tremble to give flattering titles, and Romans 16. 18
goodly words, and fair speeches to serve, not the Lord Jesus, but their own
bellies; Esa. 32. 5.
in calling the vile person liberal, and the churl bountiful, and evil
good, which is Esa. 5. 20.
woeful. For all such flattering rhetoric, being excluded from all those in
whom Esa. 32. 1, 5
Christ reigns, is nothing else but a Ephesians. 4. 14.
cogging sleight of men, and cunning craftiness of methodicall guile, which
the devil uses to Rom 16. 18
deceive, Pro. 29. 5
ensnare, and Pro. 26. 28
ruinate many a simple soul. And such flatterers may be compared to faithless
stewards, who bestow the choice provision of food, and raiment, prepared for
their Lords own children, and faithful servants, upon deboshed rogues, and
idle vagabonds: which how much it may vex and provoke to anger the children
and servants, and strengthen the others in their roguery, I leave to others to
judge.


Arist. But says not the Scripture (say some) ^ why iudgest thou thy Rom 14. 10
^bother? And, Mat. 7. 1.
judge not, that ye be not judged; and again, 1 Cor. 4. 5.
judge nothing before the time until the Lord come.


Arch. The first place now alleged is against the erroneous judgment of such
men as would judge others in Romans 14. 3, 4.
meats and days things that were then indifferent:) and so judging and
speaking evil of others without warrant of the Law, they did therein Iam. 4. 11
speak evil of the law and judge the law; as if they had bin wiser then the
Lawgiuer to find out evil: a shameful presumption.

The second place is against the rash and malicious judgment of hipocrites,
who would be Mat. 7. 3, 4
pulling out moates of their brothers eye, and not consider beams in their
own.

The third is against the untimely judging of such secrets, as are reserved to
the Lords judgment to be manifested, as appears in the same place. Now as
this last place may not hinder the judging of 2 Timothy 5. 23
some men's sins, which are open before hand, going before to judgment; so
neither may the second place restrain the 1 Cor. 6. 2 3.
Saints, who shall judge the world and Angels, how much more, things that
pertain to this life? And least of all may the first place stop righteous
judgment, in judging the trees by their fruits; which Christ himself not
only Mat. 7. 16 etc.
warranteth, but also Ioh. 7. 24
inioyneth, and was effectually 1 Cor. 5. 12
put in 2 Cor. 2. 6.
practice in the primitive Churches.


Arist. Yea, but yet say they, S. Paul says that we should be Tit. 3. 2.
gentle, showing all meekness unto all men, and that 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25.
the servant of the Lord must be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient,
and in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, If to all
meekness and gentleness must be showed, then to the unregenerate also: and
where then will be room say they for terror and sharpness?


Arch. I confess those places may have relation to men unregenerate: but look
to them both and they will show you that by meekness, gentleness, and
patience the Apostle excludes all 2 Timothy 2. 23, 24.
foolish unlearned questions and strifes, and all Tit. 3. 2.
evil speaking, and brawling (which make Ministers and people unfit to teach
and help others out of the devils snare) and not terror and sharpness, which
S. Paul, and S. Jude prescribe as the means to save some, and to make them
sound in faith. Yea, search the Scriptures, and ye shall find that regenerate
men themselves, have sometimes need of them: is the best bodies may be ^icke
of repletion and plu(...)es sometimes; and then ^eede purging and bloud^etting
as well as others; as Mat. 16. 23
^ S. Peter, ^ Cor. 6. 1 7. etc. 2 Cor. 13. 2, 10.
the Corinthians, and the Gal. 3. 1 etc
Galatians. And therefore a reproof upon an obedient ear is compared not
only to Pro. 25. 12
an eare^ng and ornament of gold; but also to an Psalm. 141. 5
excellent ^yle, and sovereign mean of Pro. 29. 1.
cure: implying, that without these the Saints themselves might sometimes loose
not only their grace and beauty, but also their life and safety. How much more
then do the lawless and disobedient need sharp rebuke and terror for their
recovery? For 1 Timothy 1. 8, 9.
the law is not made for a righteous man but for the lawles and disobedient,
that is, to such principally and properly belongs the ^^gour and curse of the
law, which the Apostle calls the lawful using or the law. And yet our
sharpest rebukes and terrors may not be ministered, no not to the worst, without
gentleness, meekness, and patience: First, that with a 2 Cor. 2. 4 and 7. 8.
pitiful resenting heart we apply them, ever expressing most Iere. 4. 19 20,
and 9. 1.
grief and lamentation, when we are Luke 19. 41, 42 etc.
most urged to proclaim desolation.

Secondly, that thereby we may patiently Gal. 4. 12.
put up all injuries of enuyings, swellings, euill-speakings, and ^rutish
outrages, that our (...)st reproves may meet withal; and that we may Romans
12 21.
overcome all those evils ^ith good. Thirdly, that (...)ng-sufferance we may
exhort daily, whiles it is Heb. 3. 13.
called to day, waiting i^ peradventure 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26
God will give them repentance, that they may recover themselves out of the
devils ^hare, who are taken cap^^ue by him at his will. And (...) all this will
not yield ^^em satisfaction, to whom ^^all I liken them, but to ^owzy or
festered froward children; who having their ^eads crawling with flitches of
lice, and their soars ^anckling; would yet never acknowledge any gentleness,
meekness, and patience in their most tender hearted tending nurse-mothers,
except they will cast away all combs with their sharp teeth that must fetch
out the vermin; and all mundifying waters or playsters, that by their smarting
must draw forth the corruption that may otherwise kill them.


Aqu. We have but one doubt more in this which we pray you to resolve, which
is this; that when Christ sent forth his Apostles to preach, they were first to
tender peace unto every house whereinto they should enter; yea though the house
were unworthy thereof: which Christ himself also supposes and answers by
way of prevention, saying, Mat. 10. 13.
if the house be not worthy, let your peace return to you.


Arch. Though Christ there speak of Mat. 10. 12
saluting the house, and not of tea^^ing; yet I must confess that in this
salutation Christ would have his Apostles to intend the peace of the Gospel to
be conferred on ^e houses whereinto they entered. But shall any man ^^inke, that
he that was greater then Solomon, was either ignorant or forget^ull of what
Solomon foretold; That Pro. 27. 14
a man may be early up to bless his friend with a loud voice, when all shall
be counted a ^urse to him? God forbid. And therefore Christ Jesus the Esa. 9. 6.
Prince of peace* would not have his Ambass^dours hand-ouer-head (...) cast
their peace, as Princes a^mne^s do their alms: because a Psalm. 112. 4, 5
good man guides his affairs even of compassion and favor with diseretion.
Look therefore to the same place, and there may you find if you wel-heede it,
that Christ beforehand charged his Apostles, Mat. 10. 11 12.
into whatsoever city or town they should (...)ter (...) to eaquire who in it
was worthy, and there to abide, saluting ^uch a house wit^ peace as they
entered. And where Psalm. 150. 1^, 11.
righteousness looking down from heaven; may meet with truth springing out
of the earth* can any man forbid that righteousness and peace should kiss
each other, where m^rcy and truth meet together? ^et because judgment of
charity, which upon probable grounds hops the best, may be deceived* and
report (as the heathen man te^s us) is prodigal of her favors, bestowed
sometimes upon most unworthy persons: therefore Christ was so iealours of his
louetokens to be prostituted to any adulteres^e any Iam. 4. 2.
friend of the world, I mean; that he would not have his Ambassadors to
conclude their peace simply upon their first enquiry. But if for want of faith
in Mat. 10. 13 14.
hearing their words, which should work by love in Verse the same.
receiving their persons, they found any house not worthy; their peace was not
to come upon it, but Verse 13.
return to them to be bestowed upon the right owners* and the Verse 14.
dust of their feet was to be shaken off for a testimony against them, that
not peace, but vengeance belonged unto them, and that more Verse 15
intolerable then that of Sodom and Gomorah.


Aqu. You have given so full satisfaction in this point, that you may say with
the Apostle, 1 Cor. ^^ ^^
if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. Proceed now we pray, and briefly
show us, how in exhortation we must deal with men regenerate.


Arch. In this and all directions ensuing, I must ^e so much the briefer, by
^ow much the longer I ^aue been in the former. Concerning therefore men
regenerate, we are to know that they having past under the Ier. 23. 29*
hammer of Gods word, have had their stony ^earts broken and contrite; ^ea,
Eze. 1^* 19
God has taken the ^tony heart out of their ^^esh, and given them an ^eart of
flesh; whereby they ^o ^sa. ^6. 2.
tremble at the Word, and Psalm. 119. ^6^.
stand in such awe of ^t, with their Psalm 40. 6.
ears so boa^ed to receive it* that a Pro 1^. 10
reproof enters more into a ^ise man, then an hundred stripes into a fool.
On such therefore we must generally Jude verse 22.
have compa^sion as S. Jude directs us, and learn of our meek Savior, Mat.
12. 20
not to break ^ bruised reed, nor quench smoking flax: but as we see an^
such Gal. 6. 1.
ouer-taken with a fault, we that are spiritual must restore such in the
spirit of meekness: dealing as gently and tenderly with them, as if we were
handling bones vn-ioynted, as the (...).
original word imports, which the Apostle there uses. And generally I say,
must we thus handle them, because in some cases, if Gods children stagger in
faith, and by Satan's buffets, swoune and loose the sense of their says, they
must be fetc^t again with smiting reproves, and heated with the word as fire,
till they Luke 24. 21 25. 32
feel their hearts ^uen to burn within them: and if they play the fools with
Hos. 13. 13
Ephraim, and stay ^ong in the place of the ^reaking forth of the chil^ren* and
be so Gal. 3. 1. 3
foolish, ^at having begun in the spirit, they will be made perfect by the
flesh; they must be handled accordingly, and befooled, and ^e sorrows of a
travailing ^oman must needs come upon them, seeing they put ^ others again to
travail o Gal. 4. 19.
^^ birth of them. And as I ^^ewed before, if their ^earts be oppressed with
^^rfetting, or cares of this ^^e* or s^rcharged with fullness; what else should
we ^oe for them, but blood(...) and purge them? unless (...) wounds that
should be bound up and healed, and by their cruelty, making the rent worse,
that should be repaired. What is it a small matter for these men to E^e. 13. 22
make sad the heart of the righteous, whom God has not made sad; but they must
also De^t. ^^. 18.
with Amalek, smite the feeble among them, when they are ^^int and weary in the
way of their p^lgrimage? Let men look to it for as Zac. 1. 14.
God is jealous (...) Sio^, with a great iealous^e, so says our ^^auiour,
(...). 18. 7.
shall not God a ^eng^ ^is own elect which cry day and night, though he bear
long with them? It for this, Job 42. 7. 8
Gods anger were so kindled against Jobs friends, that he would not put it up,
nor bear it at their hands, unless they would put themselves to ^^ame, and
humble themselves unto his servant Job, whom they had vnadui^edly grieved in
the day of ^is calamity: let men trem^le that arrogantly and maliciously do
this, lest the Lord s(...) are in his wrath against the^ as he did against
Amalek, that he will never put it up, but Exo. 17. 16
have ^a^re with them as with Amalek, from generation to generation.


Aqu. As you have now given us full direction for the difference we are to put
in respect of men's inside, so now we pray, show us what difference our
exhortations are to put, in regard of men's outsides.


Arch. In regard of men's outward condition, some are our elders and superiors,
some our inferiors, and some our equals. If superiors, we are to observe that
rule of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 1
rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father. Where the word rebuke, is ^ot
to be understood simply, as if no manner of rebuke were to be given to an
Elder; for in the same Chapter, the Apostle speaking of an Elder, in respect of
authority as of age, says, Verse 19, 2^
Them that sin, rebuke, etc. And Leu. 29. 17.
rebuke being an effect of love, it is to be rendered as a Romans 13. 8
due debt to every neighbor, as occasion requires. But the Apostle there
prescribing the manner of exhortation, in respect of several sexes and ages,
would not have an Elder to be rebuked without reverence, but to be dealt
withal as a Father, with all humble modest respectiuenesse, and not to be
contemptuously handeled, or conte^ptuously lashed or ^erked with the scourge of
the tongue, as if he were a puny: and so much does the 1 Timothy 5. 1. (...).
Greek word there import, being far different from the word Verse 20. (...).
rebuke in the 20. verse.

Secondly, we are to exhort our equals, as 1 Timothy 5. 1.
brethren and sisters, sugering the bitter pills of reproof, with the sweet
promises of the Gospel, and seeking to win them with brotherly compassionate
persuasions, and not to goare them with sharp reprehensions and taunts, as if
we intended our own oftentation, more then their edification.

Thirdly, if they be our inferiors, we must Tit. 2. 15.
rebuke (if need be) with all authority, that none despise us* by our
authority, Deuteronomy. 6. 7 (...).
whetting our exhortations, and setting an edge on them; as it is witnessed of
Abraham, that he so Genesis 18. 19.
commanded his children and his household after him, that they kept the way of
the Lord. Thus authoritatiuely must we deal with inferiors, if need require,
as I said before: for otherwise it is not for Ephesians. 6 9.
Masters, that know they have also a Master in heaven, to use need^esse
threatenings, but Phile. verse 8, 9.
for ^^oues sake ra^^er to be^e^ch, though they might be bol^ to enioy^ne,

For want of regard to these differences, many Parents, with old Ely and
David, have made by their too much indulgence, many a wanton 1 Kin. 1. 5, 6.
traitorous Adoniah, and many children, 2 Samuel 2. 12 23. 29.
sons of Beliall: many mopish husbands ^aue made many a wi^e to perch aloft
and crow over them, as 1 Kin. 21. 5. 6. 7. etc.
Iezab^l did on Ahab; and many fond Masters and Rulers, have made their Pro.
29. 21.
Servants their untimely heirs, and their 2 Samuel 3. 7, 8. etc.
underlings, to loose the bridle before them, and Esa. 3. 5.
the base to behave themselves proudly against the honorable. Likewise on the
contrary, many inferiors hunting after feruency of spirit, without humility and
reverence, have Eccl. 10. 4.
le^t their place, and exasperated their superiors with little profit to them,
and less comfort to themselves.


Aqu. Now that you have satisfied us concerning the manner of exhorting, both
in respect of the persons exhorting and the parties to be exhorted: we pray you
to give us direction concerning the matters whereabout exhortation is
conversant.


Arch. Concerning the matters we deal withal in exhortation: some good good
things are of less moment, as Mat. 23. 23
Mint, and Cummin, and some waightier matters of the Law, as judgment, mercy,
and says: some evils are in comparison but as Mat. 7. 3.
moates and Mat. 23. 24
gnats, some as beams and camels: likewise some ^ults are committed of ^
ignorance and Mat. 26. 41
infirmity, e Acts 3. 17.
and some of Heb. 10. 26 2 Pet. 3. 5.
wilfulness and Psalm. 19. 13 Mat. 27. 18.
presumptuous malice: According to all those differences is our zeal and
earnestness to be intended or remitted. For when men are nice and scrupulous
of Mi^t and Cummin, and traditions of men, and make no conscience of Gods
Commandments, and weightier matters of the Law; when men cannot endure moats,
and suffer be^mes, strain gnats, and swallow camels: they be wray themselves
to be no other then painted sepulchers, and whited walls, and no less, then
very Mat. 7. 5. and 15. 6. 7. and 23. 23.
hypocrites. Consider therefore what I say: it is not only the blind eye that
cannot diseerne things that differ, but the distempered eye too. Some have such
fiery eyes sparkling with rage and sury, that they cannot discern any fault
with love and compassion, with gentleness and meekness; but with rigor and
cruelty Eccl. 7. 21.
mark all that is done amiss; not remembering that it is a Pro. 19. 11
man's glory to pass over a transgression, and that 1 Pet. 4. ^.
love covers a multitude of sins: and ^forgetting themselves, and n Eccl 7.
22. Tit. 3. 3. Gal ^. 1.
that the Prophet David says, Psalm. 130. 3.
If thou Lo^d should ^iest mark iniq^^ties, O Lord who shall stand?

My meaning is not, as if our love were to cover foul public sins; or ^uch
private secret faults as are enormeous against Gods glory, or our brethrens
safety. For Deuteronomy. 13. 6. 8.
piety toward God, and Acts 23. 17
charity to our neighbor, requires the detection of such malefactors as will
capitally dishonor God, or ^amnifie their brethren: and in such cases a
concea^er may be no better then a consenter or a partaker, as ^n the case of
treason, every hypocrite can judge. Neither may our charity by complacence or
conniuence be made a bawd to any other private injuries or secret
transgressions, so to cover them, as to suffer them upon our brethren, or our
brethren to lie in them without rebuke, which were Leu. 19. 17 Mat. 18. 22.
hatred of our brethren, as I proved before: But such, Luke 17. 4.
were they seauenty times seven times reiterated with repentance, our love
must so cover and pass over, as that we neither unnecessarily blaze them,
with Genesis 9. 22, 23. 25.
cursed Cham, nor Pro. 10. 12
contentiously or Pro. 17. 9
spitefully repeat them, nor heed them to be Romans 12. 19.
revenged of them; but we must so cover them, as we may cure them, and Iam. 5.
20.
convert the sinner from the error of his way; so shall we save a soul from
death, and hide a multitude of sins, not only from the eyes of men, out also
before God.

Again, some on the contrary have such watery eyes, so abounding with pitiful
cold humors, as they cannot discern any ^eynous offense with due severity; a
beam and a moate trouble them much alike, they are Bsa 30. 20.
smoothing, when they should be Hos. 6. 5.
hewing, and touch a skirt, when they should rent the heart. But he that has
the right scope for his eye sight, to glorify God, and edify their brethren,
will look with a clear and temperate eye, both to the fault, and to the
offender; so that neither his compassion to the person shall s^ake his zeal
against the sin, nor ^is zeal against the sin shut up his compassion from
the person; but he will learn of Christ to Mark. 3. 5.
look angerly, and mourn too, for the hardness of men's hearts in great
offenses.

Finally, some sins are private, and more secret, these as our Mat. 18. ^5
Savior teaches, must be reproved privately and more secretly: some are
public and before all, these are to be 1 Timothy 5. 20
rebuked before all, that others also may fear; as Mat. 16. 23
Christ and Gal. 2. 14.
S. Paul reproved S. Peter, and S Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom, Ans^lme,
Calvin, Aquinas, and others, do prove ou^ of ^ Tim 5. 20. and Gal. 2. 15. For
as he is a defamer and betrayer of his brethren (as some of those Fathers ^^en
say) rather then a reprouer and a corrector, that instead of private rebuke,
blabbeth abroad vnnec^^sarily, or openly reproves his neighbors secret or
private faults: so when S. Augustine says, a public scandal needs a
public remedy and cannot be cured privately, as S. Jerome says; let me for
the love of our heavenly Father, entreat men to consider, whether it be not a
betraying of Gods name and honor, which is Eze. 20. 39
polluted, and Romans 2. 24
blasphemed by public heinous offenses, to wrap up all with a privy check or
reproof in secret?


Aqu. But say men, discretion would that we should first deal privately with
public sinners, for fear of exasperating them and making them worse;
especially if they be great men, in respect of their credits, and avoiding
scandal: and to this purpose many urge upon men's consciences that rule of our
Savior, tell him his fault between thee and him alone.

So did many under fair pretense urge circumcision in the Apostles times: but
what, out of conscience of Gods command? No, but out of a Gal. 6. 12.
desire they had to make a fair show in the flesh; only lest they should
suffer persecution for the cross of Christ. I speak not this to accuse or
shame any of my brethren, but as my beloved I beseech them to be warned, that
when they speak for directing and pressing men's consciences, they speak 1
Pet. 4. 1^
as the oracles of God, as S. Peter says; and not out of the wisdom of the
desh, which is as Romans 8. 6.
damna^le to men, as Verse. 7.
opposite to God and his Law: that they may have wherewith to answer the Reu.
12. 9. 10.
accuser of our brethren (the devil I mean) when in the evil day he may
heavily lay these things to their charge. And when S. Paul professes, that
Gal. 1. 10.
if he did yet please men he should not be the servant of Christ; judge in your
selves I pray, whither that discretion they talk of could be so well pleasing
unto men ( 1 Cor. 2. 14
natural men I mean, to whom the things of the spirit of God are
foolishness) if it well served the Lords turn to stayne the pride of flesh,
that the Esa. 2. 17.
loftiness of man might be depressed, and the haughtiness of man abased, and
the Lord only exalted. Nay when Christ himself tells his disciples, Woe be
unto you when all men speak well of you, for so did their Fathers to the false
Prophets: and when God charge his Prophets Ier. 1. 17
to speak all that he commands, Eze. 2. 7.
whither men will hear or whither they will forbear (that is, whither they
will be the better or worse) and not to be dismayed of men's faces lest he
confound them: were not this a goodly discretion to win men's applause with
Christ's curse cleaning to it, and to Mat. 10. 28
fear them which kill the body, and not him which is able to destroy both body
and soul in hell?

Secondly, concerning the words of Christ, which they make their shelter; the
meaning of them being restrained to secret offenses, they will find that
covering too narrow to wrap themselves in. For it being the same Lord, as S.
Augustine well observes, that says by S. Paul, 1 Timothy 5. 20.
them that sin rebuke before all; that out of his own mouth says, Mat. 18.
15
tell him his fault between thee and him alone: God forbid that our
construction should make discord between the words of the Prince of peace,
seeing Pro. 6. 16, 19.
he is an abomination to God that sows discord among brethren. Wherefore as
there was a time when the Lord himself said, Genesis 17. 11
every man-child whose flesh of his foreskinne is not circumcised, the same
soul shall be cut off from his people; and a time when the Heb. 10. 1.
very image or substance of things shadowed being come, the Lord says by S.
Paul, ^ if ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing* so here,
distinguish the times says, S. Augustine, (...) (...)mini in Mat. 18. (...) 26,
and the Scripture is at concord. Some sins says ^e are committed before
all, they are to be reproved before all, and those are to be reproved more
secretly, that are more secretly committed. The same distinction puts Mr.
Calvin, auouching Calum ^^st. lib. 4. c. 12. s. 3
that Christ speaks of secret offenses, and S. Paul of public; and says,
that those words of Christ (if thy brother sin against thee) cannot otherwise
be understood (unless thou will be a Cauiller) then in thy knowledge, so that
others be not privy thereto.

Thirdly touching the pretense of scandal, they are quite besides the Cushion
as S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 5. 20
avouches; for as he well says, men are rather scandalized, if being not
ignorant of the sins, they see no grieuance inflicted: For as impunity in
sinning makes many delinquents, so if sins be punished many addict themselves
to virtue. Therefore rebuke says he not perfunctorily or for fashion (as we
say) but severely; for so also others will fear. And this reason S. Jerome
yields, why Hier. in Gal. 2. 14
S. Paul reproved S. Peter before all, because a public scandal cannot be
cured privately. And as Anselme says, if S. Paul Ansel. in Gal. 2. 14.
should have said those things to S. Peter alone, the Jews and gentiles had
lost the benefit of his reproof; therefore before all he spoke that he might
profit all.

Fourthly, concerning the credit of men, and especially of great ones: as S.
James charge us Iam. 2. 1.
not to have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with
respect of persons: so S. Paul to remove all personal respects from hindering
public reproof, which he had enjoined, adds a most solemn charge, too
high and heavy for any earthly potentate to dispense withal, saying; 1 Timothy 5.
21
I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that
thou observe these things without preferring one before an other, doing nothing
by pa^tiality. And sure if public sins were to have private admonition
before public reproof, then would not the Prophet Elias so 1 Reg. 18. 18 and
21. 20
instantly and openly have reproved king Ahab, nor our Savior so have Luke 13.
32
taxed king Herod for a fox, nor have said so openly to Peter, Mat. 16. 23
get behind me Satan etc. nor to the ruler of the synagogue, Luke 13. 15
thou hipocrite etc. neither would S. Paul so have Gal. 2. 14
reproved S. Peter before all, nor S. Peter himself, have so said to his
auditors, Act. 2. 36.
Jesus, whom ye have ^rucified etc. and again Act. 4 15.
this is the stone set at naught of you builders, etc. Now if rulers, if
Apostles, if kings be not to be spared, who men? Doubtless it is a great ^ult
and no less then an Eze. 22. 2
abomination to Verse 7.
set light by Father and Mother, to Iud. verse. 8
despise dominion, and to speak evil of dignities, for it is written, Act 23.
5.
thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people; that is by Exo. 22. 28.
any reuiling manner or cursing as the law expresses the meaning. But this is
no reuiling, when reverence and honor being exhibited to dominions and
dignities, and that with all fear and trembling, as unto Gods vicegerents on
earth, the scandal of a public flagitious offense is sought to be removed by
a public reproof. And most famous through the Christian world is that
commendation which Thedosius, Vid. Theodoris. hist. Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 17.
the Emperor, gave to S. Ambrose, saving that he had hardly found a teacher of
truth, and that he knew only bishop Ambrose worthy of that name, because
Ambrose had openly reproved him, and Ruffinus his favorite, for their public
scandalous faults. And to the everlasting praise of our gracious Sovereign
King James, it is worthy to be written with the point of a Diamond; how Anno
Domino 1619. in detestation of the impudent whorish attire and habits of some
man-like monstrous women, who with a whores forehead then out-faced Church and
Court; his most excellent Majesty commanded the Lord Archbishop of Cant: and
other Bishops by him, to charge the preachers in his royal name, publicly in
their pulpits to rebuke such women, and put them to open shame. And for as
much, as by notorious heinous offenses Romans 2. 24
Gods name is blasphemed, and many souls endangered (notorious offenses being
as Heb. 12. 15
powerful to corrupt others as a 1 Cor. 5. 6
little leaven is to leaven the whole lump? What reason that the honor of our
heavenly Father and the safety of many souls should yield to the undeserved
credit or respect of any one man; Unless it were good piety toward our parents
to hear them capitally slaundered in public, and to dismiss the slaunderer
with a reproof in secret; or good charity toward our neighbors, to suffer a
whole city to be infected, rather then they should hear an Alderman
publicly rebuked, for going among them with the botch running on him?

Finally when I hear how the love of every natural child, cries to have the
plaster as broad as the wound given to his Fathers honor: and remember the
verdict of our Savior saying, Mat. 10. 37
he that loves Father more th(...)e, is not worthy of me. Again when I
consider that as Mr. Perkins says, Perk. in Gal. 2. 14.
liberty in reproving is not the fruit of a rash disposition, but the fruit of
Gods spirit, and so to be acknowledged, as the Prophet Mic. 3. 8.
Micah shows: and that S. Paul is never any where so witnessed to be filled
with Act. 13. 7, 8, 9, 10
the holy Ghost, as when he set his eyes on Elymas, and openly to his face said
(though he were a man in respect with the Deputy of the Country) O full of
subtly and mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness etc. Last of all, when I remember, how in the days of John
Baptist, ( Mat. 11. 12
when the Kingdom of heaven suffered ruiolence, and men took it by force) men
were Mat. 3. 6.
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins: and how afterward in the
days of the Apostles preaching, the Act. 19. 18 etc.
word is said so mightily to grow and prevail, that many believers came and
confessed and showed their deeds, and many great curious artists brought their
books together and burnt them before al men, though the price of them being
counted was found to be 50000 pieces of silver, about 800 English pounds: and
how long before these, Number. 20. 10 11, 12.
Moses the servant of God, Psalm. 51. 1, in the title of the Psalm.
King David, Ion. 1. 3. 5
Jonas the Prophet, and Act. 22. 4. 5 and 26. 9. etc
Paul the Apostle (for an example to all the w(...)d) being all 2. Pet. 2. 21
inspired by ^^e holy Ghost (that 2 Timothy 1. 6
spirit of power and love, and of a sound mind) stood forth as voluntary
penitents with their public writings, accusing and confessing against
themselves their public notorious offenses, and shaming themselves to
glorify God and edify men; When I call to mind these things, and lay them to
heart, my belly trembles to conceive in what disgrace and contempt the word of
public reproof is held, being censured as the froth of a rash and giddy
brain, rather then the fruit of Gods spirit; and how it is hushed and almost
buried in silence as well in pulpits as p(...)ru meetings, to fulfill the
prophecies written of these last and perilous times: namely, Mat. ^4 12
because iniquity shall abound (as Christ says) the love of many shall wax
cold; 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 5.
and men shall be lovers of their own selves (as S. Paul says) having a form
of godliness, but denying the power thereof.

Concerning the manner of public reproof, I gain say not any discretion or
respect to men that good is; but wish all heavenly skill and humble endeauours
therein to be used, either by help of parables as the 2 Samuel 12.
Prophets dealt with King David, and 1 Reg. 20. 39 etc.
^ing Ahab; or by way of intercession (...) humble advise and intr^aty, as Dan.
4. 19, 27.
Daniel dealt with King Nebuchad^ezz^r, and Iere. 38. 20 etc.
Jeremy with King Zedekiah; or by any ^uch lovely 1 Samuel 12. 10 etc. Act. 3. 17.
lenitiues and mittigations, 1 Cor. 4. 6.
figurative translations and applications, or 2 Cor. 2. 4. 5 and 12. 20 and 13.
7.
compassionate insinuations 1 Cor. 12. 2 and Reu. 2. 3 4 etc.
and preambles of deserved praises, used by Prophets or Apostles. But for the
matter of reproof, it self I must take leave to say with Elihu, Job. 32. 20
21.
Let me not I pray accept any man's person, for I know not to give flattering
titles; in so doing my maker will some take me away. And if any herein for
preservation of men's credit profess better skill, as Boaz told him that was so
forward to redeem his brothers and, saying, Ruth. 4. 4, 5
what day thou buyest the field of the hands of Naomi, thou must also buy (...)
of Ruth the wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead etc. so must I
tell that man, whosoever he be, that what day he shall be ready to redeem man's
credit from public reproof, he must redeem it also from that bill of
complaint and strong plea which the great King and Lord of hoasts has put into
the court of our own consciences for the maintenance of his own honor;
saying, Mal. 1. 6.
A son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master: If I be a Father,
where is my honor, and if I be a M^st^r, where is my fear? Verse ^.
Offer it now unto thy Governor, (offer it to thy Father) will he be pleased
with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of hoasts?


Arist. Mr. Archippus, the Lord so enable you to end as you have begun; now
remains only the fit season of edifying, wherein we desire your direction.


Arch. Concerning the season of edifying, as there is a day time appointed by
GOD for bodily labor, Psalm. 104. 21, 22, 23.
when the Sun rises, and the Lions, with the beasts of prey, gather
themselves selves together, and lay them down in their dens; and then man
goes forth unto his work, and to his labor till ti(...)ening* so when Christ
Mal. 4. ^.
the Sun of rightcousnesse is risen unto men, and the Devil, that 1 Pet. 5.
8.
roaring Lion, with his Ephesians. 6. 12.
principalities and powers of darkness, are as driven to their dens (for
Christ Luke 10. 18
beheld Satan, as lightening fall from heaven at the Preaching of the Gospel)
then the Romans 13. 12
night is past, as S. Paul says, and the day is at hand: that is, the Esa. 60
2. and 25. 7.
gross darkness that covered people, is removed, and the Luk 1. 78, 79.
dayspring from an high visits them, to give light to them that sit in the
shadow of death, and ^o guide their feet in the way of peace. 2 Cor 6. 2.
Behold, now ^s the day of salvation, says S. Paul, the day Heb. 3. 13.
of exhorting each other, as the Apostle says, whiles it is called to day. And
as when the Can. 2. 11.
winter is past, and the ^aine gone over, the flowers appear on the earth, the
time of the singing of birds is come, the Psalm. 104. 30.
face of the earth is renewed, the Psalm. 65. 11 13.
year is crowned with Gods goodness, and the valleys are covered over with
corn, they shout for joy, they also sing: so where God sets up his husbandry
of sowing, planting, and dressing, and doctrine distilleth as showers upon the
grass, and the Sun of righteousness arises (...) with his heat to (...)
and quicken men's (...): it should in this spring time of grace, be as natural
unto all new creatures to teach and admonish one another in Psalms, Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, and as trees planted by the rivers of water, to bring forth
their fruit in their season, and by mutual provocation, to be filled with the
fruits of righteousness. For, (says the Prophet) Esa. 61. 11.
as the earth brings forth her bud, and as the Garden causes the things that
are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord God will cause righteousness and
praise to spring forth before all the nation^.

Now therefore is the time for our Cant. 4. 13 etc.
Camphire and Spikenard, Saffron, and Calamus, Cynamon and Frankincense, Mirrhe
and Aloes, with all the chief spic^s, to flow forth from e^ch to other, as if
we were a fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from
Lebanon; now as trees of righteousness should we Hos. 14. 5, 6.
cast forth our roots as Lebanon, and our branches should spread; our beauty
should be as the O live tree, and our smell as Lebanon; we should Psalm. 92.
12. etc.
flourish like Palme-trees, and grow like Cedars, we should flourish in the
Courts of our God, and still bring forth fruit in old age, and be fat and
flourishing, to show that the Lord is upright, and to fulfill that which is
written of the trees of righteousness; Eze. 47. 12
their fruit shall be for meat, and their leaf for medicine, Hos. 14. 7.
they that dwell under their shadow, shall return; and in P^o. 11. 30.
winning souls, the fruit of the righteous is a tree of life. For if in this
our day, we know not the things that belong to our peace; if in this spring
and summer-season we have nothing but leaves for a vain show, and neither
fruit for meat, nor leaf for medicine; if after so many years planting and
watering, digging about and dunging, we still frustrate the Lords expectation:
what can men expect but Luke 19. 42 43.
the enemies to cast a ^^ench about us, the Mark. 11. 13. 21
curse of the barren fig tree to ^^ize upon us, and that wo^^ll doom, Luke
13. 6. 7
Cut it down, ^hy cumbreth it the ^round? Look we to it, if ^^ spring time
the voice of ^^e Turtle be not heard in ^^r Land, if this be not a ^^me for
birds to sing, trees (...) bud, and corn to sprout, (...)hen then? if in Summer
^^d Autumn, the corn (...) not full in the ear, the ^^ees be not laden with
(...)it, and the vines with ^^usters, when then? Lift (...) your eyes, and
look on (...) fields, as Christ says, though it be all as dead ^inter in
many places of ^^e Land, yet where the lord of the harvest has thrust forth
faithful laborers, blessed be God, the Ioh. 4. 35. 36.
fields are white already unto harvest, and he that sows, and he that
reapeth, may rejoice both together; and shall others now Pro. 10. 5
sleep in harvest, as sons that cause shame? May not the Ier. 8. 20.
harvest so pass, and the summer be ended (as the Prophet says) and such
sluggards never be saved? What, shall the Mariner observe his wind and tide,
the Lawyer his Term, the Chapman his Market? Nay, shall the Ier. 8. 7.
Storke, the Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallow, know their appointed times,
and observe them; and shall not Gods people Luke 19. 44.
know the time of their visitation, but be snared (...) an evil time, a Eccl.
9. 12.
(...)ken in an evil (...) birds caught (...) GOD forbid. (...), as wise
builders (...)bserue their sea(...) (...)lding (so Gal. 6. 10.
while (...)pportunity) we (...)ood to all, espe(...) he household of
(...)fying each other (...) faith, by exhor(...) other whiles it is (...)ay;
because the (...)nmeth, as Christ c Ioh. 9. 4.
(...)oman can work. (...) say some, the day (...)el has bin long (...)s, and
blessed be (...) still to continue (...)y among us.

As the Prophet (...)in a like case, so (...) en, the Lord do a Ier. 38. 6.
so; and the Lord for his great names sake, prolong this day of the Gospel
among us, even to the day of the Lord Jesus. But what says the Lord by his
Prophets? Esa. 28. 23. etc.
Give ye ear, and hear my voice, hearken and hear my speech, does the
plough-man plow all day to sow, etc? Amos 6. 12
shall horses run upon the rock, or will one plow there with Oxen? for ye
have turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlocke.
Ier. 5. 26, etc.
For among my people, are found wicked men, with their houses full of deceit,
as a cage is full of birds, they are waxen fat, they shine, they ouerpasse the
deeds of the wicked, they judge not the cause, the cause of the fatherless,
nor the right of the needy: shall I not visit for these things says the Lord,
shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? A wonderful and
horrible thing is committed in the Land: the Prophets prophecy falsely, and the
Priests bare rule, by their means, and my people love to have it so: and what
will ye do in the end thereof? Again, Hos 4. 2. 4.
by swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery,
they break out, etc. yet let no man strive, nor reprove an other, etc. M^c. 3.
10, 11.
yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among us? none
evil can come upon us. Therefore Hos. 4. 5.
shall thou fall in the day, and the Prophet shall fall with thee in the night,
and I will destroy thy Mother: Mich. 3. 12
therefore shall Sion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall
become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of the
forest. Now 1 Cor. 10. 11
these judgments happened to them for ensamples, and are written to admonish
us, upon whom the ends of the world are come. For Acts 10. 34
God is no accepter of persons, but they that will be Reu. 18. 4.
partakers of Babilons sins, must receive of her plagues; and if Hos. 5. 5.
Judah will be in the same iniquity with Israel and Ephraim, Judah also shall
fall with them; and if Ier. 7. 14.
Jerusalem be wicked as Shilo, God will do to his house there, as he did to
Shilo, he will cast them out of his sight, and cause Eze. 10. 18.
his glory to depart from it. Wherefore as the Lord says, Ier. 7. 12.
Go ye now unto my place, which was in Shilo, where I set my name at the
first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people; so say I, go
now and see what God has done to the Churches of the Pallatinate, of Bohemia,
of France, etc. what was the Lords had shortened, that it could not reach us as
well as them? or suppose ye that their abominations were greater then ours?
or have we beyond them all Pro. 22. 3.
seen the plague and hid our selves, and Amos 4. 12
prepared our selves to meet the Lord with fruits worthy amendment of life,
so that his wrath is pacified, and his fierce anger turned from us, whereby we
rest as a center, quiet amidst them all, whiles they have been whirled about
with such woeful stirs and bloody tumults.

Ah my brethren, should Amos 6. 9.
men of wisdom see Gods name (as the Prophet says) hear the rod, and who
has appointed it? Or may not men that Hab. 2. 1.
stand upon their watch, and will watch to see what the Lord says; by
proportion of sins and judgments discursiuely see Amos 7. 8.
Amos his plumb-line, Eze. 2. 9. 10.
Ezekiels roll of lamentation, mourning, and woe, with Ier. 1. 11.
Ieremies rod of an Almond tree, and Joel. 3. 13.
Ioels sickle commanded to be put in, and the full press and fat
ouer-flowing, because the harvest is ripe, and the wickedness great? Surely,
unless we take forth the Prophets lesson, to Esa. 26. 9.
learn righteousness while the judgments of God are thus in the earth round
about us: unless we Luke 13. 3.
repent, (as Christ says) we shall all likewise perish. Nay, when we remember
these exaggerations of the Prophets, Esa. 26. 10
Let mercy be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness,
etc. And Dan. 5. 18. 22.
thou his son O Belshazzar, have not humbled thy self, though thou knew all
this, etc. (to wit, the judgment of God upon his Father) Eze. 16. 56
and thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride:
as in these respects, our prouocations have exceeded the iniquities of our
sister-Churches, so because we Lam. 1. 9.
remember not our last end, may not our Church (as Jerusalem) come down
wonderfully? And what though the shadows of the evening that began to stretch
themselves over us, seem to be well blown over; yet if we give not glory to
the Lord our God before he cause darkness, may not he cause our Amos 8. 9.
sun to go down at noone, and darken our earth in the clear day; and Ier.
13. 16
while we look for light, may not he turn it to the shadow of death, and
make it gross darkness? Ioh. 12. 35
Yet a little while the light is with you, walk (says Christ) while ye have
the light, lest darkness come upon you.

Again, though the day of the Gospel be prolonged, yet our Iam. 4.
life being a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away;
nay, our determined days Job 9. 26.
passing away as the swift ships, and as the Eagle hastening to the prey, Verse
25.
swister then a Post, or a Job 7. 6.
Weauers shuttle: and no man Eccl. 8. 8.
having power over the spirit to retain the spirit, or power in the day of
death, to Job 14. 5
pass his appointed bounds: may not the day of thy life be short, and Psalm.
140. 4 and 1^4. 29.
thy breath suddenly go forth, and thou return to thy dust? And then Psalm.
30. 9.
the dust being not able to praise God, nor declare his truth; that other day
of the Gospel is thine no longer for performance of exhortation. Nay if Heb.
3. 7. 8, 13.
while it is called to day, thou harden thy heart from hearing Gods voice that
charge us to exhort one another daily; may it not Zac. 7. 13.
come to pass that as God cried, and thou would not hear, so thou may cry
and he will not hear? and he that Reu. 3. 7.
has the key of David, and shuts and no man opens, may not he shut thee
up in unbelief and an impenitent heart; and then what good will the day of thy
life, yea, and the Gospel it self do thee; unless it be the more to Ioh. 12.
39, 40.
blind and harden thee, that thou may wax worse and worse, and fulfill thy
sin always, that the wrath may come upon thee to the uttermost? Eccl. 8. 6.
Because to every purpose, there is time and judgment, therefore the misery of
man is great upon him, that is, upon every man Luk 19. 44
that knows not the time of his visitation. Men may out-stand the acceptable
time of grace, and the opportunity of doing good, as foolish chapmen do their
faires and markets; and then they may sit long enough, till the like be offered
them again: yea the season being slipped, men may cry and yellow as with the
voice of dragons, Mat. 25. 21 etc.
Lord Lord open unto us, and all too late when the door is Luke 13. 24, 25.
etc.
once shut. Eze. 24. 13
Because I have purged thee (says the Lord to Jerusalem of old time) and thou
wast not purged; thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I
have caused my fury to rest upon thee. And for this cause the Lord Jesus Luke
19 41 42.
wept over Jerusalem at last, saying, if thou had known, even thou at least
in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid
from thine eyes. And we know he told the disciples, Luke 17. 22
the days will come when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the son
of man, and ye shall not see it. And surely if the Lord had nothing else
against as but this that we Reu. 2. 4, 5
have left our first love in whetting up each other to love and good works,
we, even we, professors (except we repent of this) may be the men will cause
God to remove our candlestick out of his place; or to Job 2^. 20, 21.
hurl us out of our places, as a storm or as a tempest, stealing us away in
the night.


Arist. But though many are called and few chosen, yet I hope you speak not
this as if any of the elect could either fall short of grace, or ever fall from
grace.


Arch. No, but those terrible threats and judgments are like thunderclaps;
though they strike but some, yet they should fear us all from security; and
make us Heb. 12. 15
look diligently least any man fail of the grace of God, and Heb. 3. 12, 13.
take heed and exhort one another daily, whiles it is called to day, lest any
of us be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. And this I add, that
though Heb. 10. 38 39.
the just shall live by the faith of Gods elect, when hipocrites draw back unto
perdition: yet concerning every righteous soul that either being cumbred with
many things neglects the golden opportunity of edifying others in the faith,
or leaning to his own discretion, pursues not the right means and manner of
edifying; though himself shall be saved, yet it will be 1 Pet. 4. 18
scarcely, as S. Peter says, and 1 Cor. 3. 15
so as by fire, as S. Paul says. He shall not only Verse. 14. 15
suffer loss of the reward which otherwise he might have received, but through
much Ier. 10. 9. Luke 24.
heart-burning must he enter into the kingdom. For though the righteous cannot
loose the being and habit of faith unfeigned and saving grace till they 1 Pet.
1. 9.
receive the end of their faith, even the salvation of their souls (because
Romans 11. 29
the gifts and calling of God are without repentance) yet by negligence and
security Psalm. 51. 10. etc.
may they loose the degrees and acts of saving grace in that measure of the
strength of the spirit, of the joy of salvation, of peace of conscience, of
sweet communion with God, and of well being in the state of grace, which once
they enjoyed: which may cost them heavily the recovery, yea the loss of some
part of them to their dying day. And therefore as Christ in an other case said,
Luke 17. 32
Remember Lots wife, so here remember Iud. 16. 28. etc.
Sampson say I; lest we see the day, wherein we may count it our happiness
in this world, if with the loss of our lives we may redeem the shame and
grief of such spiritual losses.

Wherefore as we have opportunity, let us do good, and every day (as the
Scripture says) while it is called to day let us exhort one another; and as
Ephesians. 5. 15, 16.
Wise men redeem the time, because the days are evil: especially every
Sabbath let us double our exhortations (as the Jews did their Number. 28. 9
sacrifices) for then above all days we may not be Esa. 58. 13
speaking our own words. And at all times pray we God so to Psalm. 141. 3.
keep the door of our lips, and so to Psalm. 51. 15
open our lips, that our mouth may show forth his praise, by that Esa. 50. 4.
tongue of the learned, whereby we may know how to Minister a word in season:
that is, how to Verse the same.
time a word as the Prophet Esaias (...)
speaks, and to Pro. 25. 11.
set a word upon his wheels, as Solomon speaks; that our words may be like
apples of gold in pictures of silver, not only precious for matter, being
Eccl. 12. 10
words of truth, but delectable for order: and then Pro. ^5. 23
a word spoken in due season, how good is it? To this end we must with the
Eccl. 12. 9.
Preacher, give good heed and seek out, and order our words according to the
circumstances of Time, Place, Persons, and Occasions. I say of Time, as when 2
^am. 14. 1 etc.
Ioab perceived king David's heart toward banished Absalom, then he put words
in the wise woman's mouth for his return; of Place, as when the Mat. 13. 36.
Marc. 4. 10, 34. and 7. 17
disciples keeping silence where Christ taught the multitude, respited to ask
him the things they doubted of till he came into the house and was with them
alone; of Persons, as when 1 Cor. 9. 20 etc.
S. Paul became as a Jew unto the Jews, to them that were without law, as
without law, and all things to all men that he might by all means save some:
and of Occasions, as Ios. 24. 22. etc.
Joshua when the people had witnessed with their own mouths against
themselves, that they had chosen the Lord to serve him; he thereupon presently
persuaded them to put away their strange Gods, and that very day made a
covenant, statute, and ordinance with them. And so S. Paul, Act. 17. 23, etc.
when among the Idolaters at Athens he had espied an altar with this
inscription, To the unknown God, he thence took occasion to declare unto them
the only true God, whom they ignorantly worshipped. And because it is the
property of a Eccl. 8. 5.
wise-mans heart to discern both time and judgment, therefore by due
observation of all circumstances we are to discern, first whither it be a fit
season for us to speak, and secondly whither the season be fit for others to
hear.

Comcerning the first of these, for as much as a Pro. 29. 11
fool utters al his mind, and the Pro. 15. 2
mouth of foolesse powers out foolishnes; whereas a Pro. 12. 23
prudent man concealeth knowledge, and Pro. 29. 11
keeps it in till afterward; therefore as generally we must set a watch
before the door of our lips, and be sparing of our words, Pro. 15. 2
studying to answer before we speak: so especially in the presence of our
betters in gifts of grace, callings, and years, we must Job 29. 9.
refrain talk, and lay our hands upon our mouths: knowing our distance, and
observing humility in speaking as in sitting, Luke 14. 7, etc
giving the first place to the more honorable, as our Savior taught the
guests. And then if they speak not at al, or not fully to edification; if any
thing better be revealed to us, we may and must speak for our parts. Thus
Elihu (being young, and Job, and his friends very old) though he werefull of
matter, yet he Job 32. 4, etc.
waited for their words, and long attended unto them, till he answered his
part. For want of this observation, as empty caskes sound loudest, and ^ase
metals ring shrillest; so many vain talkers and tatlers power it out when
ever they come, before their wiser, their betters, in foolish and unlearned
questions, in profane and vain bablings, no way good to the use of edifying,
but to the 2 Timothy 2. 14
subuerting or 2 Pet. 2. 8.
vexing of the hearers. Wherein as they bewray the Iam. 1. 26.
vanity of their religion in not refrayning their tongues, and Pro. 10. 19.
no want of sin in the multitude of their words: so Mat. 12. 37
by their words they shall be condemned, not only because they edify not, but
because they hinder those that would edify: like the Mat. 23. 13
woeful Scribes and Pharisees that shut up the kingdom of heaven against men,
neither going in themselves, nor suffering them that were entering to go in.

Touching the second, we are to observe that some times fools are in a rage,
then Pro. 17. 12
let a Bear robbed of her whelps meet a man rather then a fool in his folly,
says Solomon: and then Pro. 21. 23.
who so keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from troubles. For
as the Iam. 1. 2^. (...)
wrath of man (even of a man regenerate*) works not the righteousness of
God; because Pro. 27. 4.
wrath is cruel and anger is outrageous: so a fools wrath is Verse. 3.
heauyer then the weighty sands or heavy stones. And therefore at such times
either we must keep our mouth with a bridle, and keep the door of our lips
close shut; or at leastwise our Pro. 15. 1.
answer must be soft, to turn away wrath: else what do we but as men that
will be rashly opening their doors to raging bears, or Eccl. 10. ^.
removing weighty stones? in both which without great warines men may soon get
no little hurt. Again, in times of prosperity the hearts of most men are Luke
21. 34
surcharged with cares and pleasures of this life, and drunk, but not with
wine as the Esa. 29. 9.
Prophet speaks; as others are sometimes drunken with Naball, Hos. 4. 1^
wine and new wine taking away the heart. Now as wise Abigail waited an
opportunity 1 S^^. ^^. 36.
till the wine was gone out of Nabal, and then told him his own: and as God
because Ier. ^^. ^1.
he speaks unto men in their prosperity and they will not hear, which is
their manner from their youth up (being as hardly to be diuerted in their
occasions, as Ier. 2. 24
the wild ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her
pleasure) does therefore Job 36. 8, 10.
bind them in fetters, and hold them in cords of affliction, to open their
care to discipline: and then in Esa. 26. 16
trouble they will visit him, and power out a prayer when his chastening is
upon them: so must we look and wait for the like opportunities in dealing
with the like persons.

And as they that seek the wild ass, will not Ier. 2. 24
weary themselves as the Prophet says, because in her month they will find
her; that is, once a year comes her foaling month, and then she is tame
enough to be dealt withal: so when Esa. 26.
Gods judgments are in the earth, the Inhabitants of the world (says the
Lord) will learn righteousness, much more the inhabitants of Jerusalem: then
are men's consciences awakened, as were the Genesis 42. 21
Patriarchs, to call their ways to remembrance; then are men's Leu. 36. 41
uncircumcised hearts humbled, to 1 Reg. 8. 38 47.
know every man the plague of his own heart, and to bethink himself: and in
affliction not only Gods children will Hos. ^. ^^
acknowledge their offenses, and seek Gods face, and seek him early; and
become as tame as Lambs and Kids, so that a Esa. 11. 6.
little child shall lead them, and Eze. 20. 37
bring them into the bond of the covenant while God causes them to pass under
the rod: but hipocrites themselves will Psalm. 78. 34 etc.
return and enquire early after God; and they that were as unruly as Ier. 5.
8.
fed horses, every one neighing after his neighbors wife, are brought to Pro.
3. 11 12.
mourn at the last and say, How have I hated instruction and my heart despised
reproof? Wherefore affliction being a furnace, wherein as God will make the
hardest hearts, were they Ier. 6. 28.
brass and iron, to Eze. 22. 20 21.
melt when he blows upon them in the fire of his wrath; so he purges others
and new mouldes them as choice vessels unto honor, choosing them as the
Prophet Esa. 4^. 10
says, in the furnace of affliction. We must therefore watch to strike when
the iron is hot as men say, remembering that one sound stroke of reproof may
then do more good then an hundred before. Finally, there are some special
acceptable times of grace, when it pleases God more then other times to Mar^.
6. 33 Ioh. 4. 30. 35
stir the hearts of men, as the John 5. 4.
Angel moved the water of the poole Bethesda: then he that is wise to win
souls, must learn of Christ to apply himself to the opportunity, as John 4.
35
husbandmen that forecast four months before* hand to attend their harvest:
we may not then stand upon set hours or other businesses, but borrow from our
meale-times, as our Verse 31. 32.
Lord and his Mark. 6. 31 34, 35.
Disciples did, and from our bedtimes, as Acts 20. 7.
S. Paul did, and from our worke-times, as Acts 18. 26
Aquila and Priscilla did, to further the Lords harvest, and to edifying each
other in our most holy faith.


Arist. Though for my own part, I have so failed in the wise man's heart, to
discern both time and judgment, that I may blame my self for many
successelesse speeches: yet say others, that think it too strict to be held
every day to this duty of exhortation (and therefore are in and out, off and
on, like aguish stomachs, that have their good days and bad; to day opening
the door of their lips, and ministering grace to the hearers, and tomorrow
shutting it with deep silence, and many days as silent as if it were clean
off the hinges) say they, what will ye have men do? We have often and long
labored and waited, and taken the opportunities to deal with men, and yet we
can work little or no good on men; shall we still spend our strength for
naught, and labor in vain?


Arch. As we say, they are void houses where the doors daily open not, and
there wants oil when the doors move not without creaking, as on rusty hinges:
so a shrewd token it is, that the 2 Cor. 4. 13
spirit of faith is no indweller, where the door of the lips is not daily open
to set forth Gods praise; and sure great want there is of the Esa. 61. 3. Psalm.
45. ^.
oil of joy and gladness, when men's lips like rusty hinges, move not without
Jude verse 16.
murmuring and complaining. It is with the spirit of regeneration, as with the
wind, Ioh. 3. 8.
which blows where it lists, for God Romans 9. 18
has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will, he hardens. And Christ that
Psalm 45. 7.
was anointed with the oil of gladness above all his fellows, could find
matter of Luke 10. 21
rejoicing in spirit, and thanksgiving to his Father, in that which seemed good
in his Fathers eyes, both in hiding and revealing the mysteries of the kingdom
of heaven. And as Christ and his Apostles ceased not to give witness to the
truth, no, not when it seemed that rhey Esa. 49
spent their strength for naught, and their labor in vain; because their
judgment was yet with the Lord, to 2 Cor. 2. 1
whom they were a sweet savor in them that lived, and in them that perished:
so should we be 1 Cor. 15. 58
steadfast and immovable, always abounding in this work of the Lord, for as
much as we know that our labor is not in vain in the Lord; whether we be 2
Cor. 2. 1^
the savor of death unto death, or the savor of life unto life. God that
could not endure Deuteronomy. 23. 9. 11
Miscellane seed, nor Linsey-wolsey in Israel, can less endure that his
people should be Ier. 12. 9.
as a speckled bird, here of one color, and there of another, or Hos. 7. 8.
as a cake not turned, hot on one side, and cold on another; this
variableness cost Ephraim full dearly, when his Hos. 6. 4.
goodness, being as a morning cloud, and going away as the early dew, it
made Hos. 5. 14.
God, even God to tear and go away, to take away, and none could rescue him.
And we know it is Phil. 3. 12. etc.
perseverance that carries away the price, which by Romans 2. 7.
patie^t continuance in well-doing, and Mat. 10. 2^
enduring to the end, has the promise of salvation and eternal life: whereas
the double-minded man that is unstable in all his ways, is so far from
receiving a full reward, that he not only 2 Ioh. verse. 8.
loses the things which he has wrought, but he must never Iam. 1. 7. 8.
look to receive any thing else of the Lord, saving an Mat 6. 2.
hypocrites reward.

The time was, when Jesus bidding Simon to Luke 5. 4. etc
launch out into the deep, and to let down their nets for a draught, Simon
answered, Master we have toyled all the night, and have taken nothing;
nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net: and then they enclosed such
a multitude of fishes, that the net brake, and they filled their own ship and
their partners* till they both began to sink. In like manner sometimes it
fares in fishing for souls At the first Preaching of the Gospel, little was
the good that John Baptist and Christ himself wrought upon souls; for the
fruit they reaped from most men for their labors, whether they piped or
mourned, was nothing else but g railing (...) 1. 18, ^9
and scorning. And the Preaching of all the Apostles being added to the former,
yet small was the gleaning they all gathered, till Christ's ascension; for the
greatest assembly of Disciples that we read of till then, and Pentecost
ensuing, was but about the number of Acts 1. 15.
120. to fulfill that which was written, Esa. 53. 1.
who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?
And when on Acts 2. 1. 3. 4.
the day of Pentecost, Christ had in the appearance of fiery cloven tongues
powered out the holy Ghost upon them, at first when they spoke with strange
tongues as the spirit gave them utterance, how were all their auditors Verse
12. and 13
amazed and in doubt? and others how mocked they, saying, these men are full of
new wine? Yet afterward so mightily prevailed the word of God, that Verse 37.
many were pricked in heart, saying, Men and Brethren what shall we do? and
the same day there were Verse. 21.
added unto them, about three thousand souls. And afterward: o came in (as we
read) the Rom 11. 25*
fullness of the Gentiles to fulfill what Christ had foretold, saying, p Now
Ioh. 12. 31 32.
shall the Prince of this world be cast out, and I, if I be lifted up, will
draw all men unto me. Finally, it is with the word of God spoken, as with seed
sown, wherein John 4. 37
that saying is true, one sows and another reapeth; and the success may be
good, though not presently apparent. And therefore a foule-fault it is to be
weary of well-doing, and to cease exhorting any day, while God commands us to
exhort every day, while it is called to day. Wherefore, as in hand-feeding, so
much more in lipfeeding Eccl. 11. 2
give a po^tion to seven and also to eight; for thou know not what evil
shall be on the earth: nay in hope of Gods blessing omit no opportunity of
doing good, but Ver^ 6.
in the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withold not thine hand;
for thou know not whither shall prosper this or that, or whither they both
shall be alike good.


To GOD (only wise) be glory.
FINIS.

