A treatise made by Johan Lambert unto king Henry the. viij. concerning his
opinion in the sacrament of the aultre as they call it, or supper of the lord
as the scripture names it. Anno do. 1538.

Meritum Christi



Spes



The way of the ryghteouse is indged to be utter desirnctyon, but they are in
rest. And though they suffer pain before me^, Yet is their hope full of
immortalyte Sapi. 3. Johan Bale to the christen reader.
AS Moses described the prymatyue church for the first. ij. ages of Adam and
Noah (most gentle reader) he neither Moses.
omytted the malycyouse murderer Cain, nor yet the hateful scorner Cham, but
set them both fourth in their lively colors of reprobate uessels Lucas.
and wylfull persecuters of the same. Luke in like case with the other
Euangelystes, forgate neither Judas nor yet the hypocrytysh clergy of the
Jews, as he worte the Gospel and Acts, whose wretched hearts vnsacyatly
thursted for tho se innoce^tes blood, which purely confessed the lord. A like
manner in writynge observed Egesippus, Eusebius, and other Eusebius.
historyanes, i the dscripcyo^ of that lively church which followed immedyatly
after the Apostles time, as is evident to them that has read their works.
Which godly manner of writynge, the vyole^ce of Satan would in no case sufferse
to proceed or continue, least the mad mastryes of his mody mynysters were
thereby perceived, and darkness so known for darkness.

Yet was not the currysh nature of that Cainysh generacyon, churlyshly reiectyn
Cain.
ge the gentle uoyce of God, for the ages following, all hyd to the^ which had
both eyes and sight of the lively scripres. But they well perceived at all
times that they were both spyghtfull mur therers and thieves, for all their
counter fett colors of holiness, prelacy, priest hode, chastyte,
ghostlynesse, and soch other dregs the devil, in the kind that they used
them. If the congregacyon of God do now find such ernest writers, Writers.
as the said Moses, Luke, and Eusebius were, which will not in these days rock
the cradle of Iesabel, Apoca. 2. or flatter the prelates and tyrauntes in all
their idolatrouse whoremo^gynges, they may well think they have no less
godly treasure than they were the^ to the world, time for time and age for age.

For what else seaketh the greatter nombre of men learned, but to lawde for
Learned.
^uere, to praise for pleasure, and to please for advantage? encoragynge the
wicked tyrau^tes of Sodom in all their blas phemouse euyls. Yea, and a
wonderful matter is it, to se* as the laws are wicked, how the prestes, the
lawers (I spea ke not of the godly) and the wytlesse ma gystrates, stir about
them, to have the Laws.
tyranny of the^ in all points performed. They sta^pe, they leap, they
run, they backbyte, they compain, they accuse, they hate, they reuyle, they
slau^dre, they why sper in that care and that care, and su^tyme give fytlhy
rewards, to bri^ge their cruel purpose about, and to depryue the i^noce^tes
of life.

But when the laws are ryghteou se than is it no world for them, but they
Lu^ter^
keep silence as monks were wont to do. They dwell at ho^e, they sleep, they
drea me, and utter nothing at all* They lurk like the fox that fears the
whyppe, and like the wolf that doubts the shepeherde or hunter. For their
nature is not to maynteyne the righteousness of the law, but busyly to call
upon, to stir up, and to quycken the tyranny thereof. For they are the
natural mynysters of Tyra^^
tyranny, and in that perverse office, the fearce promoters of Antichrist, and
cruel slaves of the devil. Of this spyghtfull rabble of rude rash ruffyanes,
was he city of Norwych yet never clear, in the which this persecuted servant
of God Johan Lambert, otherwise called Johan Nycols, was borne, and from the^s
exyled for his christen beleues sake.

I have reddein the chronycles of that Norwych.
city, that it has been dyuersly often plaged for the slaughter of innoce^tes.
And in the year of our lord a. M. S. and. vi^. I beheld it in effect most
wonderful, being than but a ladde of. xi. years of age. As their blind
bishop and clergy, by their full consent, had brent a young man there, aft^r
the most tyrannouse ma ner (I think) that ever was seane, only for having the
lordesprayeri Englysh, and for not allowynge that prayer in latyne idolatrously
to besayd to their dead O thieves
saints, neither followed in them nor yet in their clergy repentance for that
cru ell slaughter. No, neither lent fasting, fyshe eating shryft palm
sunday, good friday, clyppe clappes, cross crepynge, easter day, nor yet the
receyuynge of their maker, as they call it, which all im medyatly succeeded,
could bring them ones in remembrance, that they had therein done amys.

But se what folwed by the ryghtfull hand of God. On tuysdaye in Easter weke,
which was than opon saint Marks Fire.
day, soch a fire suddenly kyndled in the streets of their cytte, as in five
days and as many nyghtes following could scarsely be quenched. The euydent
signs of that destructyon, are yet to this present hour to be seane there in
diverse places, the people never knowing from whens that fire came. And yet
still they, by the blyndenesse of their curates, not only remained without
repentance, but also Vnpenytent.
consented to murder upon murder, as apered in sir Thomas of Eccles, in an ol
deman of Bongay, and in mastre Bylney, whom they put to cruel death also for
their christen beleues.

If they have borne them the boldar, prestes
for that they have seane their prestes not much harmed by that fire, or no
less there after to prospere than before, they fowly have deceived themselves
through ignorance of the scriptures. For God only chasteneth here in this
life, those whom he loves and intends to save. Hebre. 12. As for the prestes
which commenly witholde the truth of God in vnryghtcousnesse, God has given
them over to themselves, Roma. i. which is the most terryble plage upon earth.
They are the sede and ofsprynge of that wicked one, re Antichrist
served to the lattre vengeance. whom Christ shall destroy in his lattre
coming, for beleuynge lies, and fordoynge here the operacyon of error. 2.
These. 2. Moreover Christ has terrybly thrette* ned, that it shall be much
worse with that generacyon of infydeles in that last judgment day, than with
Sodom and Gomor, or Tire and Sydon, luce. 10. which had sore ponnyshmentes
here.

How many the before named city has spirytually slain, by unjustly withol
Norwych.
dynge the scriptures of God, which only mynystreth life to the soul, the
lord of beauen knows, and will to their confu syon, make it open at that
lattre judgment day. Therefore I counsel them to re pent in due season, and
from hens fourth towashe their hands clean from inno cent blood, not with
Pylate but with Paul, which after his conuersyon apered no more a persecuter of
christianes* And as concerning their cytiezen suntyme, Lamber^*
Johan Lambert, whom they for his faith rejected, though, he was not for them,
yet was he for Christ. And I doubt not of ^t, but this treatise solowyn ge,
which being in the prison, he wrote unto the king as a reckenynge or accounte
of his faith concerning the chief article whereof he was accused, shall be
able to declare him a true witness Martyr.
and servant of God, detestynge all false and idolatrouse worshyppynges. The
sprete of the father eternal, and of his son Jesus Christ, be evermore with
the^ that fauer his truth unfeignedly, and seek thereafter to fashyo^ their
lives, and not after the corrupted examples of synnefull men. So be it.


To the most Christian, Gracious, and godly prince. king Henry the.viij.
being now the right defender of the pure faith, his poor, but full true
subject Johan Lambert prisoner, does wy she increace of knowledge i Gods
truth, and of love to the same, with all felycyte thereof ensuynge.
AS I poor afflict, dedlye and do lie in prison, I have considered the
majesty and myldenesse or God.
mercyfulnesse of God, being a king in compara ble and immortal that he as
concernyn ge his majesty, is pereles, and the high God over all. Which yet by
his goodness se does ever regard and look down up on the humble and low* that
be either in heaven or in earth. Upon this consyde racyon, o my most noble and
gracious prince, have I conceived double relefe and confort in mine anguysh
and captyuyte. For the first relefe do I take that fynge immortal, trusting
surely that his highness which is vnmeasurably good, will sumwhat regard and
look upon his unworthy workemanshyppe or creature, and his child by adopcyon,
to ease me being in dystresse, according to his promise, Cum ipso sum in
tribul^ tione, qui habitat in adi^torio altissimi, uterip^^m eum, et cet.

The second relefe do I conceive of King.
your most gracious highness, trusting to find you, being Gods very depu
te, and our king mortal, ensuynge the ensample before showed of God the king
immortal. Thus do I hope that your highness, will gracyously regard the
dystresse and comberouse captyuyte of all troubled, specially being your full
true lyeges and lambs. And that so you will gracyously hear the cause of my
present afflyctyon, Which if it shall please your grace to know, is thus. Upon
wednisday next after saint Mychaell, ded your graces prynter call me to him,
demaundyn ge if I had translated the book of the a^ tycles of Geneua. Which
thing Ireny enge me to have done, as in truth I ded it not, he axed if I would
iustyfy my sayn ge before the prynter of that treatise, which therefore Prison.
was imprisoned in the counter, where as he charged the kepar to hold me also.
From whens I with other was brought to Lambeth, where as I do abide in the
ward of your metropolytane.

Sens that time was I called before certain bysshoppes / and required upon an
oath, truly to certyfye them of. iiij. artycles. Of whom I desired, that first
I might know whereof I was accused, or who would accuseme? But that beyn ge
right lefull, could I not obtain, whereby I conjecture uerely, that without
any accusers or accusacyo^, I am put into this trouble or prison of mere plea
sure. Then after my oath taken, the arty ^rtycles.
cles were recyted. Against. ij* of them I ever have resysted styffely, and
never to them ones consented. And the third be ynge full false and untrue, had
Ineuer heard of before that it was there to me recyted. So that I might
surely co^iec ture, that no man had accused me a^ fawty in them.

The fourth co^cerned the holy sacrament of Christ's body and blood. In the
which although no man can, as I suppose, accuse me to have spoken therein amys,
yet seeing they required my sentence there by virtue of an oath, I could not
for fear of God, speak with my mouth con trary to my mind and conscience,
although Death.
death should redyly thereupon (as I could not otherwise espy) to me ensue. I
then co^sydered with myself, first that to show fourth my sentence, though it
were so sure and true as the Gospel, seeing that as yet, it was dyssonaunt
from the vulgar opinion, of long time preuaylynge, much dysturbau^ce might
there by arise to the multitude hearing it, and that therefore I could not but
over rypely declare it before the multitude in that judgment assembled.

Secondly I considered that your gra ce is si^drouse and feign, to know all
truths, of long concyled and hyd, and ^ruthes.
so at times conuenyent to set the^ fourth, or reduce again to light, as they
may be well dygested and borne. I therefore de syered that I might than and
there no further proceed in making over ripe declaracyon of that matter, but
that I might write my mind in it to your most gracious majesty. Which my
mine de or sentence Iiudge to be right catho lyck and true. That so after your
graces judgment and advise known, I and other should follow, but not prevent
your dyrectyon, either by speaking thereof or by sylens keeping. My sentence
therein ce.
may at the first opening, apere synystre, and so perverse, for so much as of
lon ge we have conceived a contrary persua syon Nevertheless I hope, that due
and delyberate perpendynge of scriptures, and of the authorytees of ancient
fathers, justly alleged for my purpose, shall decla re me to proceed sy^cerely
and faithfully.

Before that I shall in this matter, show fourth myrudely uttered sentence,
this with your gracious fauer do I think necessary to protest. That I here do
nothing defyne nor will defyne, although Defyne.
I justly might. I do know, that where as I am blunte, rude, and dulle, that
your grace is of judgment full fine, sharp, and quycke, so that you can se
the defynycyon and determynacyon of God, in things godly, far better than I
or soch like can either show or think. I shall therefore omytt soch nedelesse
defynycyon or determynacyon in my sentence, and only according to my promy se
and oath, symply and truly will I relate my sentence, so to be examyned and
discussed Submyssyon*
of your sull gracious wisdom, when there it be quadrau^t to holy scriptures
and to the artycles of our Creed or no. And certain, if it be quadraunt to
these, my hope is, that then your grace will not re iect or refuse it. And
otherwise would I nothing, specially that is mine, or com mynge from me, to be
allowed.

I am co^te^ted to receive life or death at your hand, in which God has put
the power of both. Nevertheless when your grace shall by this true writynge,
find me so to fear God, that I can not fauou A martyr^
re mine own life, by using falshed, die ssymulacyon, or perjury. Wha^ you
shall find that mine en^e^^ is as becomes a true subject, to open unto you
the uery true the of this matter, as I will in all other. Wha^ you shall find
that I ente^de not to prevent your good dyrectyon and advise, but to follow it
both in this and all other affairs, as I have showed tofore. Wha^ you finally
shall find how quyetly I ha Obedyen^
ue enterprysed into it, so that I renyed to open my sentence in the matter,
before I had heard your graces advise. These things co^sydered or re membred,
I trust your grace will enclyne to my sauetie rather than to cause me bodyly to
peryshe.

But in all points I do humbly and gladly submyt me, under the mighty hand of
God and of you his anointed depute over us in earth, to whom I shall continue a
true subject and an innocent la^be, what so ever shall betyde me, with the
grace of our sauer and redemer, who^ Pray*
I shall also heartily pray, ever to gyde, preserve, and save your grace to his
plea sure and to the mayntenaunce of truth and innocencye in this realm.
Finally if it shall please your most noble grace, with layser to pondre and
consydre my rudely written sentence, and to use it as an occasyon to
inuestigate or try out the very truth of the matter, by christen dysputacyons
made to and fro, pro and co^ tra. My. hope is, that so the truth after such
dysputacyons shall the son^r to your Truth.
grace euydently apere, and by you to all us your subjects, to a great common
both Joy and quietness.

For what subject can but rejoice and hyghly thank God, seeing his prince with
all dylygence and myldenesse, is glad to hear and try out all truths, and so
with godly love and tenderness, to commend or set fourth the same abroad to
his subjects, for their true instructyon, unity, and solace both bodyly and
ghostly. This full godly dylygence of dyggynge Doctrine.
up the fountain again, of pure and lively water of dyuyne knowledge, that is
to say of searching holy scriptures long stopped up by the myscreaunt
Phylistynes, that be pharysees and papystes, with the dunge of their earthly
fantasyes and humayne gloses, do I wyshe in your grace to be continued and
increased to Gods honor, to your own felycyte, and to the commen weal. Ame^.

His sentence concerning the sacrament.
After this protestacyon does now follow, if it shall please your full godly
grace to know my sentence concerning the Sentence
sacrament of Christ's holy body and blood. Which sentence is this. Christ is
so ascended bodyly into heaven, and his holy manhede thydre so assumpte, where
as it does sytt upon the right hand of the father, that is to say, is with
the father there remanent and resydent in glory, that by the infallyble promise
of God, it shall not or can not from thens return before the general dome.
why^h shall be in the end of the world. And as he is no more corporally in the
world, so can I not se how he can be corporally in the sacrament or his holy
super. And yet not withstanding Confess.
do I knowledge and confess, that the holy sacrament of Christ's body and
blood, is his uery body and blood in a certain manner, which shall be showed
herafter with your graces fauer and perm^ss^on* According to the words of our
sauer instytutynge the same holy sacrament, and saying. Hoc est corpus meum,
quod pro uobis datur. And again, Hic est sanguis meus, qui est no ui
testamenti, qui pro multis effunditur in remissionem peccatorum Math. 26.

But now for approuynge of the first part* that Christ is so bodyly ascended
Ascended.
into heaven, and his holy manhede so thydre assumpte and caet* that by the
infal lyble promise of God, he shall not, or can not any more from thens bodyly
return, before the general dome. I shall for this, allege first the
scriptures, and then following the authorytates of old holy ^octours, with one
consent testyfyenge with me. Besides this. I need not to tell* that the same is
non other thing, but that we have taught to us in these Creed.
iij. artycles of our Creed Ascendit ad coe los, sedet ad dexteram Dei patris
omnipotentis, Inde uenturus est iudicare uiuos and mortuo^. For Christ ded
ascend bodyly, the godhede which is infynyte, vncircumscriptyble,
replenyshynge both heaven and earth, being immutable and immovable, so that
properly it can neither ascend nor descend

Scriptures affermynge the same.
The scriptures which I promised to allege for the confirmacyon of my said
sentence, be these. First Acto. 1* Videntibus Scripture
illis eleuatus est, and nubes suscepit eu^ ab oculis eorum. Cunque intuerentur
in coelum euntem illum, ecce duo uiri and cet. Here is it euydently showed,
that Christ departed and ascended in a vysyble and cyrcumscript body. That this
de partynge was vysyble and in a vysyble body, these words do testyfye. Cunque
ituerentur. Quid statis aspicie^tes in coelum. and Que^admodu^ uidistis. That
secondly it was ^ body, I have before proved, and mereo^ the Deyte is not seane,
but is inuysyble, as apereth. 1. Timoth. 1. Inuisibili soli Deo, Godhede.
and caet. and. 1. Timoth* 6. Lucem habitat inaccessibilem, quem nullus hominum
uidit, sed nec uidere potest* Therefore the man head and natural body was
assumpt, or ded ascend. That thirdly it was in a cyrcumscript body, apereth
manyfestly in this. First that his ascensyon and bodyly departing, caused them
to look up, And secondly that he was lift up, that is to wete, from byneth or
from low. And thirdly quod nubes suscepit eum. Where as no cloud nor clouds
can receive or embrace the Deyte, and caet.

I am feign to leave out other euyde^t Breuely.
arguments for the same purpose, least I should be over prolixe and tedyouse.
It does there also further follow in like form, how the Angels made answer to
the dyscyples, saying. Viri Galilei, quod statis aspicientes in coelum? Hic
Jesus qui assumptus est a uobis in coelu^, sic ueniet que^ad modu^ uidistis eu^
euntem in coelu^. Here we se again that Jesus is assu^pt, or taken away in to
heaven. And then it must be from out of the world, accordyn ge to that we
read, Johan, xvi. Exiui a patre, and ueni in mundum. Iterum relinqo mundum,
and uado ad patrem. That is not else, but as he came from the father of heaven
into this world, in that he was incarnate and madema^, for his godhede Manhed^
was never absent, either from heaven or yet earth, even so should his manhede
leave the world again to go to heaven. Moreover in that it is said, sic
veniet, is plainly testyfyed, that he is away and now corporally absent.

Finally it is showed further, after what manner he shall come again, by these
words. Quemadmodum uidistis eum eu^tem in coelum. Which is not else, but asyow
ded vysyblye se him ascend or go away to heaven, a cloud embracing him and
taking him from amon Vysybly*
you. Even so shall you vysyblye se him to come again in clouds, according
as we read, Math. 26. Videbitis filium hominis uenientem in nubibus coeli. And
again, Math. 24. Et uidebunt filium hominis. Soch other textes have we full
many, declarynge my sentence to be catholyck and true. Of which I here shall
breuely note some places, and pass over them, knowing that a little rehearsal
is suffycyent to your noble wisdom. The places be* Mark. 16. luke. 24. Johan.
13. 14. 16 and. 17. Romans. viii. Ephesians. 1. and. 2. and. 2. Corinthians. 6. Hebre.
8. 9. 10. and. Bodyly.
12. and. 1. Thessa. 4. and. 1. Pet. 2. which all do testyfy, that Christ has
bodyly forsaken the world, departed from it un to his father, ascended into
heaven, sitting still upon the right hand of the said father above all
domynyon, power, and pryncypalyte, where he is present advocate and
intercessour before his father and that he shall so bodyly come again, like as
he was seane to depart from he^s.

Nothing can better or more clearly testyfye and declare, what is contained in
the sacrament of Christ's holy body and blood, than do the words of scriptu
^arke.
re, whereby it was instytute. Mark does agree with Matthew, so that in a manner
herecyteth his very words. And no mar uayle it is. For as the doctors do say,
the Gospel of Mark is a very Epytome or compendye of Matthew. I shall therefore
write the relacyo^s of the^ touching the instytucyon of this sacrament
together. The relacyo^ or testymony of Matthew is Matthew.
this. Vescentibus eis, accepit Jesus panem, and cu^ egisset gratias, fregit,
deditque discipulis, et ait. Accipite, comedite. Hoc est corpus meu^. Et
accepto poculo, gratijs actis, de dit illis dicens* Bibite ex hoc om^es. Hic
est enim sanguis meus, qui est noui testamenti, qui pro multis effunditur in
remis sionem peccatorum. Dico autem uobis, non bibam posthac ex hoc fructu
uitis usque in diem illum, cum illum biba^ uobiscum nouum in regno patris mei.

The testymony or relacyon of Mark, Mark.
is this. Et edentibus illis, sumpto Jesus pane, cum gratias egisset, fregit,
and dedit illis, and dixit. Sumite, comedite, Hoc est corpus meum. Et accepto
poculo, cum gratias egisset, dedit illis, and biberunt ex eo omnes. Et dixit
illis. Hic est sanguis meus noui testamenti, quod pro multis effunditur. Amen
dico uobis, posthac non bibam de fructu uitis usque ad diem illum, cum illum
bibero nouum in regno Dei. Luke Luke.
being the compaynyon of Paul, as apereth in the acts, and. 2. Timoth. 4.
does so next agree with him in making relacyon of this supper and holy
instytucyo^ of the sacrament. His relacyon or report is thus. Accepto pane, cum
gratias egisset, fregit, ac dedit eis dicens. Hoc est corpus meu^, qod pro
uobis datur. Hoc facite in mei re cordatione^. Similiter and poculu^, postqua^
coenauit dicens* Hoc poculum nouum testamentum per sanguinem meum, qui pro
uobis effunditur.

Paul's testymony does follow next, Paul*
agreably to Luke, and it is thus. Ego em^ accepi a domino quod and tradidi
uobis, quod dominus Jesus in ea nocte qua tradebatur, accepit panem, et
postquam gra tias egisset, fregit and dixit. Accepite, edite. Hoc meum est
corpus quod pro uobis frangitur. Hoc facite in mei commemorationem. Ad eundem
modum and pocu lum peracta coena, dicens. Hoc poculum nouum testamentum est in
meo sangui ne. Hoc facite quotiescumque biberitis, in mei commemorationem.
Quotiescumque enim and caet. By these testymonyes shall I declare my se^te^ce
to your grace which Sentence.
I conceive of the holy sacrament of Chri stes blessed body and blood, and in
all points of dyffycultie, shall I annexe the very interpretacyon of the old
holy doctors and fathers, to show that I do not ground any thing upon my
self. Thereafter shall I add certain arguments, which I trust shall clearly
prove and iustifye my sentence to be true, catholyck, and according both with
God and his laws, and also with the mind of holy ^octours.

My sentence is this, that Christ ascended into heaven, and so has forsaken
the world, and there shall abide, sitting Sitting.
on the right hand of his father without returning hither again until the
general dome. At what time he shall come from thens, to judge the dead and
living. This all do I believe do ne in his natural body, which he took of the
blessed vyrgyne Mary his mother, in the which he also suffered passion for our
sauetie and redempcyon upon a cross, which dyed for us and was buried, i^
which he also ded arise again to life immortal. That Christ is thus ascended
in his man head and natural body, and so assu^pt into heaven, we may sone
prove, for as Godhede.
much as the godhede of him is never out of heaven, but ever replenyshynge both
heaven and earth, and all that is besides fourth, being infynyte and
intermynable or vncyrcumscriptyble, so that it neither can propyrly either
asce^de or descend, being without all alteracyon sand vnmutable or immovable.

So that now his natural body being assumpt from among us, and depar ted out
of the world, the same ca^ no more return from thens unto the end of the
world. For as Peter wytnessyth, Peter.
Acto. 3. Oportet eum coelum accipere usque in tempora restitutionis omniu^
quae locutus est Deus per os omniu^ fa^ctorum suorum a saeculo prophetarum. And
the same does the article of our Creed teach us, which is. Inde (scilicet a
coelis uenturus est iudicare uiuos and mortuos. Which time Pau le calls,
Apparitio domini nostri Jesus Christi. Timoth. 6. Seeing then this na turall
body of our sauer, that was borne of his mother Mary being a Vyrgyne, is all
whole assu^pt into heaven, and departed Oportet
out of this world, and so Oportet, as says S. Peter, that is in English, he
must remain in heaven until the end of the world, which he calls te^pus
restitutio^is omniu^. This I say, seane and bele ued according to our Creed
and the scrip tures, I ca^ not perceive how the natural body of him can
contrary wise be in the world, and so in the sacrament. And yet not
withsta^dynge is this true, that the holy sacrament is Christ's body and
blood, as after shall be declared.

Doctors affermynge the same.
But first, for the establyshynge of my former purpose, that the natural bo
dye of our sauer, is so abse^t from this world and ascended to heaven, that it
ca^ be he be no more present, unto the general dome. I would besyche your grace
to consydre the mind and sentence of old holy doctors in this purpose or
matter, how agreably they testyfye with that is tofore showed. Amongst whom
we have first S. Augustyne, Augustyne
writynge thus to Dardanus. Proinde quod ad uerbum attinet, creator est
Christus. Omnia enim per ipsum facta sunt. Quod uero ad hoi^em creatura est
Christus. Factus est em^ ex semi ne David secundu^ carnem, and in similitudinem
hoi^m ordinatus. Item quia in hoi^e duo sunt, anima and caro. Secundu^ anima^
tristis fuit usque ad mortem, secu^du^ carnem passus est mortem. Nec en^ filiu^
Dei Chri^stu^ dicimus, hoi^em separamus, aut cum eundem Christum filium hoi^s
dicimus, separamus Homo
Deum. Secundu^ hoi^em na^que in terra erat, no^ in coelo ubi nunc est, qua^do
dicebat. Nemo ascendit in coelu^, nisi quod desce^dit de coelo, filius hoi^s
quod est in coelo. Qua^uis secundum id qod filius Dei erat, esset in coelo,
secundu^ uero id qod filius hoi^s fuit, adhuc esset in terra, no^du^que
asce^dit i^ coelu^.

Similiter cum secundum id qod filius Dei est, sit dominus gloriae, secundum id
autem quod filius hominis, crucifixus sit. Ait tamen Apostolus. Si enim
cognouis sent dominum gloriae, nunquam crucifixissent. Ac per hoc and filius
hominis erat in coelo, filius Dei secundum hominem crucifigebatur in terra.
Sicut ergo potuit recte dici dominus gloriae crucifixus, quu^ Dominus
ad solam carnem illa passio pertineret, ita recte dici potuit, hodie mecum
eris in pa radiso, cum iuxta humanam humilitatem per carnem in sepulchro, per
animam in inferno illo die futurus esset. Iuxta diui nam uero immutabilitatem,
nunquam de paradiso, quia ubique est semper, reces sit. Noli igitur dubitare
ibi nunc esse hominem Christum Iesum, vnde uenturus est. Memoriter recole, et
fideliter tene, chri stianam confessionem. Quoniam resurrexita mortuis,
ascendit in coelum, sedet ad dexteram patris, nec aliunde quam inde uenturus
est, ad viuos and mortuos iudicandos. Venturus
Et sic uenturus est, illa angelica uoce testante, quemadmodum uisus est ire in
coelum, id est, in eadem carnis for / ma atque substantia, cui profecto immor
talitatem dedit, naturam non abstulit. Se cundum hanc formam non est puta^dus
ubique diffusus. Cauendum autem ne ita diuinitatem astruamus hominis, ut
ueritatem auferamus corporis. Non est aute^ consequens, ut quod in Deo est, ita
sit ubi que ut Deus. Nam and de nobis ueracissime scriptura dicit. Quod in illo
uiuimus, sumus, et mouemur. Nec tamen sicut ille ubique sumus, sed aliter homo
ille in Deo, quoniam and aliter Deus in homine, proprio Deus.
quodam and singulari modo. Vna enim persona Deus and homo est, and utru^que
est unus Christus Jesus. Vbique per id quod Deus est, in coelo autem per id
quod homo.

By which words of holy Augustyne, your grace may euydently se that he
testyfyeth and teaches the blessed body or flesh of Christ to be no where else
tha^ in heaven. For to it being assumpt or ascended into heaven, God, as he
says, has given immortalyte, but not taken a way nature* So that by the
nature of Nature.
that holy flesh or body, it must occupye one place, wherefore it follows,
Secundu^ hanc formam, that is to wit, of his flesh, Christus non est putandus
ubique diffusus. For if Christ should in his humanyte be every where dyffuded
or spread abroad, so should his bodyly nature or natural body be taken from him.
And therefore he says. Cauendum enim, ne ita diuinitatem astruamus hoi^s, ut
humanita tem corporis auferamus. But in that he is God, so is he every where,
according to my words before written. And in that he is man, so is he in
heaven. And therefore is it Athanasius.
said. Vna enim persona Deus and homo, and utrumque est Christus, ubique per id
qod Deus, in coelo autem per id quod homo,

And yet do we read agreably to the same matter, more largely in the same
epistle, by these words* Christu^ dominu^ nostru^ unigenitu^ Dei filium,
equale^ patri, eu^de^que hoi^s filiu^, quo mayor est pater, ut ubique totu^
praese^te^ esse no^ dubites ta^qua^ Deu^, eti^ eode^ te^plo Dei esse ta^qua^
inhabita^te^ Deu^, and in loco aliquo coeli propterueri corporis modu^. Thus
find we clearly, that for the measure of his very body he must be in one pla
ce* and that of heaven as concerning his In heaven.
manhood* and yet every where present in that he is the eternal son of God
and egall to his father. Like testymony does he give in the. xxx. treatise that
he makes upon the Eua^gely of Ioha^. These be his words there written. Donec
saeculum finiatur sursum est dominus, sed etiam hic est ueritas domini. Corpus
enim domini in quo resurrexit, uno loco esse oportet. Veritas autem eius ubique
diffusa. The first parcel, that is, Donec saeculu^ finiatur, is so put, that
it may joy ne to the sentence going before, or else to Sursum.
these words following. Sursu^ est dominus and caet. And so should it well
accord to my se^te^ce before showed, which is, the lord is so bodyly
ascended, that in his natural body he can not again return from hea uen
until the general dome.

But how so ever the said clause or par cell be applied, it shall not greatly
skylle, for my se^te^ce notwithsta^dynge remay yneth full stedefast. In so
much, as the scripture does me^cy^n but of. ij. aduc^tes or co^mynges of
Christ, of which the first is performed in his blessed in carnacyo^, and the
second is the coming at the gene rall do^e. And furthermore i this article
Coming.
of our Creed, Inde ue^turus e^ iudicare uiuos et mortuos, is not only showed
wherefore he shall come again, but also wha^ he shall come again. So that in the
mean while, as the other article of our Creed witnessyth, Sedet ad dextera^
Dei patris, that is not else to say, the^ he remains in glory with the
father. Furthermore eue^ as I have by fore rehearced the foreseyd auctoryte of
Augustyne, even so have I read it in his quinquagenes upon a psalm, of which
I can not now precysely note or name the nombre. And the same words does he
also write in a pystle to S. Hierome. So that we Augustyne
may know, he had good liking in it, that he so commonly does use it, as his
usual proverb or byworde,

In the same is also testyfyed, that his blessed body can be but in one place,
so that it being now according to the scripture and article of our believe or
cre de, in heaven, it can not be in earth. And much less can it be in so
innumerable places of the earth, as we may precey ue that the sacrament is.
Thus although the body of our sauer must be in one pla ce, as he writes
agreably to the saying Petrus.
of Peter, Que^ oportet coelos accipere, us que ad tempus restitutionis omnium.
Yet as the words following make mencyon, ueritas autem eius ubique diffusa
est. This veryte of Christ, or of his body, do I take to be that he in other
places, does call uirtus sacramenti. As in the xxv. treatise upon Johan we
find thus writ ten. Aliud est sacramentu^, aliud uirtus sacramenti. And
again, Si quis manduca uerit ex ipso non moritur, sed qui pertinet ad uirtutem
sacramenti, non qui pertinet aduisibile sacramentum. And to declare what is
uirtus sacramenti, that I count to be ueritas Virtus.
domini uel corporis ipsius, he says. Qui manducat intus, non foris, qui
ma^ducat in cord, no^que premit dente.

So that finally this ueritas domini uel corporis ipsius, which is dyspersyd
every where abroad, is the spi rytuall profit, fruit, and confort that is
opened, to be received every where of all men by farthe in the ueryte of the
lord, that is to wit, in the uery and true promise or testament made to us in
the lords body that was crucyfyed and suffered death for us, and arose
again ascen dynge immortal in to heaven. Where he sytteth, that is, abides
on the right ha^ Abides
de of his father, from thens not to retur ne until the general dome or
judgment. This bodyly absence of our sauer is like wise clearly showed in the
fyfty treatise that he makes upon Johan, where he does expowne this text,
Pauperes semper habetis uobiscum, me autem non se^per habebitis, to my purpose,
that thereby I count and bold to be rather catholyck. Finally the same does he
confyrme in his sermons of the second and third feryes of Eastre, and in so
many places besides fourth, as here can not be recyted, the nombre of them is
so passing great.

With him consentyth full plainly Fulgentius, li. 2. ad Thrasimundu^,
Fulgentius
writynge in this wise. Vnus idemque homo lo calis ex homine, qui est Deus
immensus ex patre, unus idemque secundum humanam substa^ tiam, absens coelo cum
esset in terra, and dear linquens terra^ cu^ ascendisset in coelu^. Secundum
uero diuina^ immensa^que substantiam, nec coelum dimittens cum de coelo
descendit, nec terram deserens cum ad coelu^ ascendit. Quod ipsius domini
certissimo sermon potest cogno sci, qui ut localem suam ostenderet humanita
tem, dicit discipulis suis. Ascendo ad patrem meum and patrem uestrum, Deu^
meum and Deu^ Lazarus.
uestrum. De Lazaro quoque cum dixisset, Laza rus mortuus est, adiunxit dicens.
Et gaudeo propter uos, ut credatis, quoniam non eram ibi. Immensitatem uero
suae diuinitatis osten dens, discipulis dixit, Ecce ego uobiscum sum usque ad
consummatione^ saeculi. Quomodo au^t ascendit in coelu^, nisi quia localis est
and uerus homo? Aut quomodo adest fidelibus suis, nisi quia idem immensus and
uerus Deus est, and caet. In this s^^e and sort does he proceed fou r^h
speaking much, full agreably to my sentence, which, is now ouerlonge here to
write. But what ca^ be said more plainly Plainly*
with me in so few words?

First he says, that Christ being a man, is as concerning his manhede,
local, that is not else then contained in one place. And to express that the
more clearly, he adds to it, sa^nge. Vnus idemque secundum humanam
substantiam, absens coelo cum esset in terra, and derelinquens terram cum
ascendisset in coelum. where as he has a contrary Antithesis for the godly
nature, to show fourth the first point Antithesis.
the more effectually. The Antithesis is thus. Secundum diuinam uero
immensamque substantiam, nec coelum dimitiens cum de coe lo descendit, nec
terram deserens cum ad coelum ascendit. whereby is also confyrmed that I said,
Christ ded descend and ascend as touching his humanyte, but not in his
deyte, which is immutable and immovable. As we may preceyue by that he here
does call it, substantiam immensam. Furthermore to show that Christ, as
touching his humayne and natural body, is local and in one place, ij. textes.
he alleget^ and that right justly* ij. textes of scripture* The first is,
Ascendoad patrem, and caet* And the second is of Lazarus, Gaudeo propter uos
and caet.

Finally he makes this demand. Quomodo autem, ascenditin coelum, nisi quia
localis and uerus est homo. Whereby we may se, that by this sentence, Christ
could not ascend, except he had be local, that is, contained in one place,
and souery man. And that is according to. S. Augusty ne, writynge as is above
showed: Et sic uenturus est, illa angelica uoce testante, que^admodum uisus est
ire in coelum, id est in eade^ carnis forma atque substantia. Secundum ha^c
Forma.
formam non est ubique diffusus. Cauendum enim ne ita diuinitatem astruamus
hominis, ut ueritate^ corporis auferamus. So that they both do testyfye, that
Christ could not have ascended, except he had be local, that is to wit*
contained in one plale and v^^^ man. And that if he were not local, he could
not be man* Wherefore S. Augustyne Augustyne.
says further, ad Dardanum. Spatia locorum toll corporibus, and nusquam
erunt, and quia nusquam erunt, nec erunt. Chat is to wit, take away localyte
or sytuacyon in place from bodies* and they shall be no where. And forbycause
they shall be no where they shall have no being.

We therefore coveting to find Christ ^r his natural body, should seek for him
in heaven, where his natural manhede is sitting on the right hand of his fa
there. So wylleth us S. Ambrose in the. Ambrose.
x. book which he writes upon Luke, speaking of Christ's humanyte assumpte,
in this wise. Ergo non supra terram, nec in terra, nec secundum carnem te
quaerere debe mus, si uolumus te inuenire. Nunc enim secun dum carnem non
nonimus Christum. Denique Steqhanus non supra terram quae siuit, qui stan tum
te ad dexteram Dei uidit. Mar^a autem quae quaerebat in terra, tangere non
potuit. Stephanus tetigit, quia quesiuit in coelo. Stephanus inter Iudeos uidit
abse^te^ and caet. Thus we must seek for the natural body of Stephanus.
Christ, not upon the earth, but in heaven, if we will not be deceived. And
that does he more largely in the same treatise, speaking thus of the veryte of
Chri stes body. Quomodo non corpus quiesceret, in quo manebant insignia
uulnerum, uestigiae cicatricum, quae dominus palpanda obtulit? In quo non solum
fidem firmat, sed etiam deuotionem acuit, quod uulnera suscepta pro nobis coelo
infer maluit, abolere noluit, ut Deo patri, nostrae precia libertatis
ostenderet. Talem sibi pater ad dexteram locat, trophaeum nostrae salutis
amplectens and caet.

Gregory also in an homelye of pentecost Gregory.
, says agreably to the other, i these words* Quando non maneret apud eos, qui
ascensurus coelos? promittit dicens. Ecce ego uobiscumsum omnibus dicbus usque
ad con summationem seculi. Sed uerbum incarnati^o manet and recedit. Recedit
corpore, manet diuinitate. Apud eos ergo tunc mansisse se perhibet, is q^i
inuisibili semper potestate preseus erat, corporali iam uisione recedebat. In
Ly ke wise does he testyfye in the homelye of Bedas.
Easter day. * With these does Bid accord in an homelye of easter, in which
he declares this text, Johan. xvi. Modum and i am non uidebitis me, and e^t:
And also in an homelye of the vygyll of pente cost. And, who can otherwise say
or think, knowing the scripture and our believe, but that the natural body
of Christ is so assumpt in to heaven all whole, that it must there abide
without returning until the general judgment. Notwith standing, seeing
this is the chief point whereupon I seek to establyshe my senten ce in this
matter of the holy sacrament, that Christ's holy and natural body is so
assumpte in to heaven, that there it Assu^pte.
must remain all whole without returning until the general dome. I will yet
with the permyssyon of your grace, ad de one or. ^. arguments deduced out of
the scriptures, to declare further my sentence to be faithful and catholyck.

Arguments out of scripture
First as Christ was enclosed and so borne about in the womb of his mother
being a vyrgyne undefiled, and thereafter was borne into this world, and put
in a manger, And so he growing in age ded abide in diverse places, but in one
after One place.
an other sometime, in Galyle, sometime in Samary, sometime in Iurye, sometime
byonde and sometime on this half of Ior dane, And consequently was crucyfyed at
Jerusalem, there being ^enclosed and buried in a grave. From whens he ded a
rise, so that the Angels testyfyed of him, Surrexit non est hic, Math 28. And
as at a time appointed after his resurrecty on, he was assumpte or lift up in
to heaven, from the top of the mount of Olyu^^e, in the sight of his
dyscyples, a cloud compassynge him about. Even so shall be come from the same
celestyall Shall come.
place corporally, as they ded se him to de part out of one place corporally,
according to the testymonye of the Angels, Acto. 1. So that in this we may
undoubtedly find that Christ, as touching his man head, ca^ not be corporally
in ma nigh and diverse places at ones, and so to be corporally in his natural
body in heaven and also in the earth, and that is moreover, in so many parts
of the world, as men have affirmed.

Neither does the scripture require that we should spoil Christ of the
property property
of mannys nature, which is to be in one place, whom the same scripture does
perpetually witness and teach to be man, and so to confound the condycyo^ of
his bodyly nature with the nature dyuyne. Paul does teach that Christ in man
head, was made in all points like unto us his brethren, sin excepted. How
then can his body be in more pla ces at ones, unlike unto the natural pro
prytie of the bodies of us his brethren? But here do some wittye philosophers,
yea, rather sophysters than dyuynes, Sophysters.
bring into the anullynge of Christ's humanyte, a symylytude of mannys soul
which being one, is yet so all whole in all our whole body, that it is said,
to be all whole in every part of the body. But such should remember, that it is
no conuenyent symylytude which is made of things dyfferent and diverse in
nature, soch as be the soul and body of man, to prove them to have like
propertyes. This is as if they would prove Christ's body to be of one nature
and propyrtie with his soul, and that things naturally corporal, The soul.
were not most diverse from creatures naturally spirytuall.

Furthermore, if so it might be, that the body or flesh of Christ, were mere
ly spyrituall, and full like unto the substance of Angels, yet could it not
i^ this wise follow, that hysbodye could be every where, or in diverse places
at ones. Where for soch subtyltees are to be omytted, and the trade of scripture
should well like us, by which the old doctors, do dyffyne, that the body of
Jesus exalted or assu^pte Local.
into heaven, must be local, cyrcumscript, and in one place* notwithstanding
that the ueryte, spirytuall grace, and fruit that comes of it, is dyffuded and
spread abrode^ all places, or every where How could Christ corporally depart
out of this world, and leave the earth, if he in the kinds of bread and
wine be not only corporally contained and received, but also there reserved,
kept, and enclo sed? What other thing else do these worcester destestyfye,
Iohan^xiij, Sciens autem Jesus, quia uenit hora eius, ut transiret ex hoc mun
do ad patrem, and caet. And in like form, Luke. xxiiij. Et factum est cum
benediceret illis, recessit ab eis, and ferebatur in caelum. Recessit.
What do they sygnyfye, if Christ went not uerely ont of this world, his
natural body being surely assumpt into heaven?

They do therefore undoubtedly declare that Christ, being uery God and very man,
ded not verily depart out of this world in his natural body, his blessedhu^a
nyte assu^pt into heaven, where it remains sitting in glory with the father.
Where as yet his deyte ded not leave the world, ne depart out from the earth.
Paul does say philip. 2. that of. ^j. things Paulus.
he wist not which he might rathest chose that is to wit, to abide in the
flesh for preaching the Gospel, or else to be dyssolued from the flesh, Seyn
ge that to abide with Christ is much and far better, by the which Paul does
manyfestly prove, that they be not present ly with Christ, which yet do abide
mortal i^ the flesh. Yet they be with Christ i^ soch wise, as the scripture
does say that the beleuynge be the temple of Christ. And as Paul does say.
2. Corinthians. 13. An no^ cognoscitis uosmetipsos, quia Jesus Christus Christus.
in uobis est? In which sense he also promised to be with us unto the end of
the world.

Christ therefore must be otherwise in that place, in which, the Apostle desired
to be with him, being dyssolued and departed from his body, then he do abide
either in the supper, or else in any other places of the churches. He therefore
does undoubtedly mean heaven, whyh is the paradyse of perfyte bless and
glory. Where as Christ being a vyctour, triumpher and conqueror over death,
sin, and hell, and over all creatures does reign and remain corporally.
Thus do I trust The king.
that your grace does se my sentence, this farfourth to be right catholyck,
christian, and faithful, according to holy scripture to holy fathers, and to
the artycles of our christen believe. Which sentence is thus. Christ's natural
body, is so assumpt into heaven, where it sytteth or remains in glory of
the father, that it can nomo re come from thens, that is to wit, from heaven
return, until the end of the world. And therefore can not the same na turall
body naturally be here in the world, or in the sacrament. For the^ should
Contradi ctio.
it be departed or gone out of the world, and yet be still remaining in the
world. It should then be both to come, and all ready come, which is a
contradyccyon, and naryaunt to the nature of his manhede

The second part of this matter.
Now my sentence in the second part of this matter, is this, if so your grace
shall please to know it, as I your poor and unworthy, but full true subject
would with all submyssyon and instaunce besych you to know it. I grant the
holy sacrament Sacrame^tall.
to be the very and natural body of our sauer, and his very natural blood
And that the natural body and blood of our sauer, is in the sacrament after
a certain wise, as after shall apere. For so do the words of the supper
testyfye* Accipite, comedite, Hoc est corpus men^, quod pro uobis datur. And
again, Bibite ex hoc omnes. Hic est enim sanguis men's qui est noui testamenti,
qui promul ti^ effunditur in remissionem peccatoru^. Of which words seeing in
them depen death a great trial and prove of this matter, Interpre tacyon*
and that for the interpretacyon of them, is and has been all controuersye of
this matter, I therefore shall show the interpretacyon, that holy doctors have
made of them, that as to me semyth, be full worthy credyte.

First we find in the second book of Tertulyan, which he writes against
Marcion. Ipse Christus nec pane^ repro bauit, quod ipsu^ corpus suu^
representa^. This Marcio, against whom Tertulya^ does this write, ded
erronyously reprove all creatures as cuyll. Which thing Tertulian Tertulya^
does improve by the sacrament, saying as is above written. Christ ded not
reprove the bread, which represen teth his body. As who would say. If Christ
had judged the bread evil, then would he not have left it for a sign or sa
crament to represent his blessed body. Agreably to the same does he also say
in the fourth book made against the said Marcyon, in these words. Christus
acceptum panem and distributum discipulis, corpus suu^ illud fecit. Hoc est
corpus meum dicendo, id est figura corporis mei. Figura au^t no^ fuis Figura.
set, nisi ueritatis esset corpus. Caeterum, uacua res, quod est phantasma,
figura^ capere non potest. This Marcio had an erroneouse opynyo^, that Christ
had no natural body, but a body pha^tastycall. Which error or heresye, this
famous doctor Tertulya^ does improve by the holy sacrament, saying as a fore
is written.

The sacrament is a figure of Christ's body, ergo Christ had a very and true
body. For a thing which is vain and fantastycall can receive no figure. So
Note this*
that in both places we may clearly per ceyue his interpretacyon of these
words. Hoc est corpus meum. Which interpretacyon is not new, but authentyke
or full ancient, like as is the writer. And this interpretacyon do I the
rather allow, that no^ of the old doctors, which followed him, ded ever
i^proue him therefore, but rather have they followed it, as apereth fourth by holy
Augustyne. In the Augustyne.
preface upon the third psalm, do the said Augustyne hyghly commend the wo^
derfull suffraunce of Christ, which so lo^ geded suffer and forbear Judas, as
if he had been a good and honest man. Where as nothwithstandynge he ded know
his traterouse thoughts, when he received him to feast or supper, in which he
ded commend and deliver to his dyscyples, the figure of his body and blou de.
The words of Augustyne in laty^e, be these. In historia noui testamenti, ipsa
do mini nostri tanta and tam admiranda pacie^tia erat, quod eum tandiu pertulit
tauquam benum, Judas.
cum eius cogitationes non ignoraret, cu^ adhibuit ad conu^u^um, in quo
corporis and sa^guinis sui figuram discipulis suis commenda uit and tradidit.

The same holy doctor also, writynge against Adamantius, says thus. Non enim
dubit auit dominus dicere, Hoc est corpus meum, cum daret signum corporis sui.
Ad for a further declaracyon of the same chap tree, he says. Sic enim sanguis
est anima, quo modo petra erat Christus. Nec tamem petra, ait, signifi cabat
Christum: sed ait, petra erat Christus. Expressly does Augustyne here, call
the sign of Christ's body, his body, Asygne.
plainly interpretynge these words, Hoc est corpus meum, as both he and
Tertulyane ded before. Moreover he tafet these. iij. sentences, Hoc est corpus
meum, Anima est sanguis, and Christus erat petra, to be of one phrase, and to
be like speches, or to be expounded after one fashyon. And this text, Petra
erat Christus, does he commonly thus expowne, Petra signifiea bat Christum. As
apereth libro. xviij. de ciuitate Dei. ca. xlviij. Also in libro quaestionum in
Genesint, and libro quaestionum in Leuiticum, Tractatu. xxvi. super Euangelium
Ioa^nis, and In sermon de anunciatione dominica.

In like manner also S. Hierome expounds Hierome.
it, in the small scholyes written upon the first chaptre of the first epistle
to the Corinthyanes, and all other writers with one consent, so far as I can
read. And so does the text require to be expounded, for Christ was not a
natural stone, as all men may well perceive, and yet was he the very true
stone fyguratyuely, as Lyra says. Solet res quae significat Lyramus
, nomine rei quam significat nominari. And so is the stone sygnyfyenge Christ,
called Christ which thereby is sygnyfyed. And as he does approve this text,
Petra erat Christus, like wise does he expound, Sanguis est anima, with the
which he does knytt this text, Hoc est corpus meum, to be fyguratyuely
expounded, as they be. According, to this, do the same holy doctor write,
Psalmo. 50. Nisi quis manducauerit carne^ mea^, no^ uidebit uita^ aeternam.
Acceperu^t illud stulte, carnaliter illud cogitaueru^t, and putaueru^t quod
praecisurus esset dominus particulas quasda^ de corpore Capern^^tes.
suo, et daturus illis* Et dixeru^t. Durus est hic sermo. Ipsi au^t era^t duri,
non sermo. Etenim si duri no^ esse^t, sed mites, dixisse^t sibi, No^ sine causa
dicit hoc, nisi quia est ibi aliquod sacramentum latens, Ma^sissent cu^ eo
leaves, non duri, and didicissent ab eo, quod illis discedentibus, qui manserunt
didicerunt.

In this may we se, that our sauer wylleth his precyouse flesh to be eaten.
But for the manner of eating, is and has been much controuersye. The Jews of
Iudei.
Capernau^ were offended with Christ, wha^ he said, he would have his flesh
eaten, and except man should e^^^ his flesh, he could not come to life
eternal. They sup posed grossly, and understood him (if a man might so
plainly speak it) bocher ly, that he would cut out lu^pes and peaces out of
his body, as the bocher does out of dead beasts, and so give it them to ea te
of, as Augustyne does here say. And upon this gross, or (as holy Augustyne
does here call it) folyshe and fleshly understanding, they were offended, and
said to him. This is a sore or hard saye^ ge. They ded shote fourth their
bolte and Un wise.
un wise saying over sone, and were offen ded before they had cawse. They took
that for hard and fore, which should have been passing plesaunt and profitable
to them if they would have heard the thing declared thoroughly to the end.

And even so now, that which in this matter may appear at the first blushe, a
sore, strange, and intolerable sentence, for as much as we have not heard of
it before, but the contrary has of long ty me been beaten into our heads and
per suaded to our minds, yet by delyberacyo^ Delyberacyon.
and indyfferent hearing, and abiding a trial of that which at the first
may appear sore and intolerable, shall I trust be found a sweet truth, to
soch specially as your grace is, loving to hear and to know all truth, But
the Capernaytes were hard, as here says Augustyne, and not the word. For if
they had not been hard, but soft and pacyent to hear, they would have said in
themselves. Christ says not this without a cause, and there is some hyd
mystery therein. And so by pacye^t tarryaunce, they should have known the
truth, that they could not attain to Hastyn^^
for perverse hastynesse, or have which is a great stop and let of true
judgment. But the dyscyples tarryed pacyently, to hear farther, and so ded
they know this speech of christ to be the words of life, that to the other,
over redyly departing from Christ, were words of death. For they took them
lytterally and gross ly, and the letter, as Paul says, sleyth.

But to show what the dyscyples, remaynige with Christ, ded learn, S.
Augustyne Augustyne.
does consequently show by the words of the Gospel, saying thus. Ille aute^
instruxit eos, and ait illis. Spiritus est qui uiuificat, caro nihil prodest.
Verba quae locutus sum uobis, spiritus and uita sunt. Spiritualiter intelligite
quod locutus sum. No^ hoc corpus quod uidetis, manducaturi estis, nec bibituri
illu^ sa^guine^ que^ fusuri sunt qui me crucifige^t. Sacramentu^ aliquod uobis
co^mendaui, quod spiritualiter intellectu^ uiuificabit uos. Et si (...)lliter
celebrari, oportet tamen inuisibiliter intelligi. In this dowe se, that both
Christ and Augustyne would have Christ's words to be understand (...)nally
spyritually and not carnally, fyguratyuely and not lytterally, And therefore
does he say, Non hoc corpus quod uidetis, ma^duca turi estis, and bibituri
illu^ sa^guine^, quem fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent. And what else is this, but
that Christ would his body to be eaten, and his blood to be dronken? But he
would not his body to be carnal ^^ eaten, which was materyally seane of them,
to whom he spoke, nor his matery all or natural blood to be carnaly dronke,
which his crucyfyers should cause to issue from his natural body crucyfyed,
as says Augustyne. But he ordained and wylled his body and blood to be
spirytually In faith
eaten and drunk in faith and be leave, that his body was crucyfyed for us,
and that his blood was shed for the remyssyon of our sins.

This eating and drinking is nothing, but such true faith and believe, as is
showed. Wherefore as Christ says, Qui manducat mea^ carnem, and bibit meum sa^
guinem, habet uitam aeterna^. Even so does he say, qui credit in me, habet
uita^ aeterna^. And S. Augustyne agreably to the same, does say in
tractatusuper Ioannem. Ad quid paras uentrem and dente^? Creed and manducasti.
I do Believe.
know that Christ has ordained his sacrament to be received and eaten, which
is in a certain wise called his body, as after shall be more largely opened.
But the same does not feade the mind of men, except it be taken spirytually
and not corporally. Hebte. 13. Bonum est enim gratia constabilire cor, non
escis. And S. Augustyne assenting to the same does say in a sermon that he
makes upon these words in the Gospel of Lu^e, Dominc doce nos orare. Panem
dixit, sed Epiousion, hoc est, supersubstantialem. Non iste panis est Panis.
qui uadit in corpus, sed ille panis qui animae nostrae substantiam fulcit.

Our sowles therefore, into whom nothing corporal can corporally enter, does
not carnally receive the body and blood of our sa^er, neither ded he orday ne
his blessed body and blood so to be eaten and dronken. Although our sowles
ca^ not live, except they be spirytually fed de with the blessed body and
blood of him, spyrytually eating and drinking them, in taking also at times
co^uenye^t, Sacrament.
the blessed sacrament which is truly called his body and blood, Not that it
is so really, but as is showed by the interpretacyon both of Tertulyan and
Augustyne, because it is a sign or figure of Christ's body and blood. And
the signs or sacraments does commenly, as says Augustyne, both ad
Bonifaciu^, and in his work Se ciuitate Sei, take their denomynacyo^ of the
things by the^ represe^ted and sygnyfyed. But for as much as some will object
that Augustynei the word before rehearced does not speak of Eating.
eating the sacrament. For the text of the scripture, upon the which he does
ground, is not spoken by eating the sacrament, which text is this. Nisi quis
manduc auerit carnem meam and caet.

I answer, that true it is, he began of spirytuall earynge, and thereto serves
the text recyted, Nevertheless he means that Christ is not ordaxned to be
eaten, either without the sacrament or in the sacrament, but spirytually of the
faithful. As more euydently does appear by these words there following.
Sacramentu^ Sacramen tum.
aliquod uobis co^mendaui, quod spiritualiter intellectu^ uiuificabit uos. Etsi
neces se s^t, illud ui sibiliter celebrar^, oportet tame^ inuisibiliter
intelligi, Here does he show, that he means of eating Christ, not without
the sacrament only, but also in the sacrament. And therefore he does not only
say, sacramentu^ vobis and cet. but he adds moreover. et si neresse est
illud uisibiliter celebrari. How therefore can the eating of Christ, and the
sacrament thereof, be vysybly celebrate but in the mau^dye, or in his supper?
Which is celebrate vysybly, Vysybylye
in vysyble things of bread and wine. Which can not quycken or releue us and
our sowles, except they be understand and so received spirytually.

Furthermore, as concerning the exposycyon of these wurdes of the supper, Hoc
est corpus meu^, and caet. S. Augustyne writynge ad Bonifaciu^, says thus.
Sepe ita loqui mur, ut pascha appropinquante, crastina^ uel pere^dina^ domini
passione^ dicamus. Cu^ ille an te tam multos annos passus sit, nec omnino nisi
semel passio illa facta sit, ne^p eipso die dominico, dicimus, Hodie dominus
resurrexit, cum ex quo surrexerit, tot a^ni transierrint. Quare Loquela.
nemo ta^ ineptus est, ut nos ita loque^tes arguat esse mentitos. Quia istos
dies, secundu^ illoru^, quibus haec gesta sunt, similitudinem, nuncupamus* ut
dicat ipse dies, qui non sit ipse, sed reuolutione temporu^ similis eius. Et
dicatur illo die fieri, propter sacramenti celebratione, quod non ^llo die, sed
iam olim factu^ est* Nonne semel immolatus est Chri stus in seme^ipso? Et tamen
^n sacramento non solu^ per annuas pasche solennitates, sed omni die pro
Mystice.
populis mystice immolatur. Nec utique mentitur, qui interrogatus responderit,
eum immolari. Si em^ sacramenta, quandam similitudine^ earu^ reru^ quaru^ sunt
sacramenta, non haberent, omnino sacramenta non essent, Ex hac aute
similitudine, plaerumque etia^ ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt.

Sicut ergo secundum quemdam modum, sacra mentu^ corporis Christi est, and
sacramentu^ sa^guinis Christi est. Ita sacrame^tu^ fidei fides est, Nih^l aute^
aliua est credere, quam fide^ habere, at per hoc respondetur, Fides*
infa^tes fidem habere propter fidei sacra menta, and conuertere se ad Deu^,
propter conuersio n^s sacramenta. Quia and ipsa responsio pertinet ad
celebrationem sacramenti. Sicut de ipso baptismo Apostolus dicit. Consepulti
(inquit) sumus per baptismu^ in morte No^ ait, sepultura^ significauimus, sed
prorsus a^t, consepulti sumus. Sacrame^tu^ ergo ta^t^ rei, no^ nisi eiusde^rei
uocabulo nu^cupauit. Nothing can be more plainly spoken, nor more agreably to
the natural under standing of the textes of the supper, and to the exposycyon
before showed, of Tertu lyan and of himself. For seeing that christ is bodyly
in heaven, and so absent Christ.
^ro^ the earth, it is needful to know, how the holy sacrament, which he
does call his body and blood, should be his blessed body and blood.

This holy doctor therefore S. Augusty ne, does this matter manyfestly and syn
cerely declare by other like speeches. And first by commen speeches, and
secondly by speeches of scripture. The common speech is this. We do (says he)
use often to say, that when Easter does approach or draw nygh, that to morrow
or the ne^ Speech.
re day, is the lords pass^on. Where as he ded suffer before many years past*
And that passyo^ was never but ones done. The second common speech is. And of
that sunday we say, that this day the lord ded rise from death, where as
so many years be yet past sith the time he arose. Wherefore to conclude, he
says. No man is so folysh, that he will reprove us for so saying, or to say
that we have lied forbycause we do call these days after the symylytude of
those, in which these thyn ges were done. So that it is called the same day,
not for that it is the self, but Ly^e it.
by reuolucyon of time, like unto it. And the ressurection is said to be done
in the same day, through the celebratynge of the sacrament, of that which is
not done that day, but long time before past. The third speech. Was not
Christ offered up ones for all in his own person? Yet is he neuethelesse
offered in the sacrament mystycally for the people, not only every year at the
feast of Eastre, but also eve ry day, Neither does he lie, which wha^ he is
demanded, shall answer, that he is offered up or sacrifysed.

For if the sacraments had not a Lykenes*
certain symylytude of those things, of which they be sacraments, then should
they not be sacraments at all. By reason of which symylytude, they do for the
most part, receive the denomynacyonor name of those things sygnyfyed. And
therefore after a certain manner, the sacrament of Chri stes body is the body of
Christ, and the sa crame^t of Christ's blood is the blood of Christ, and so
also be the sacraments of faith called faith. This does he yet prove by an
other axample of speech, which is this, It is no^ other thing to believe, then
to have faith. And therefore when answer is made, that the infantes Infantes
have faith, which in deed have it not in full workynge, it is answered that
soch have faith for the sacrament of faith, and that it does convert it self
unto faith, for the sacrament of co^uersyon. For the uery answer it self,
does perteyne to the cele lebracyon of the sacrament, and caet. Thus does it
suffycye^tly apere, that as we use truly to call that good frydaye, or the day
of Christ's passion, which is not in deed the day of Christ's passyo^, but
only Memory all.
a memory all thereof ones done for ever. And as we use to call the next Eastre
day, the day of Christ's resurreccyon, not because that Christ in the same
day shall arise but only for a memoryall of his resurreccyon ones done for
ever, and that of long time passed.

And Christ beynde offered up, ones for all in his own proper person, is yet
said to be offered up, not only every year at Easter, but also every day in
the celebracyo^ of the sacrament, because his obla cyon ones for ever made, is
thereby repre se^ted. Eue^ so (says Augustyne) is the sa Augustyne.
crame^t of Christ's body, the body of Chri st, and the sacrament of Christ's
blood, the blood of Christ, in a certain wise or fas hyon. Not that the
sacrament is his na turall body or blood in deed, but that it is a memoryall
or representacyon there of, as the days before showed, be of his very and
natural body crucyfyed for us, and of his precyouse blood shed for the
remyssyon of our sins. And thus be the holy signs or sacraments truly call
led by the names of the very things in them sygnifyed. But why so? For they
(says Augustyne) have a certain symy Symylytude.
lytude of those things whereof they be signs or sacraments. For else they
shul de be no sacraments at all. And therefore do they commenly, and for the
most part receive the denomynacyo^ of the things whereof they be sacraments.

So that we may manyfestly preceyue that he calls not the sacrament of Chri
stes body and blood, the very body and blood of Christ, but as he said
before. But yet he says, i a certain manner or wise. Not that the sacrament
absolutely and plainly, is his natural body or blood. For thye is a false
argument of Sophystrye, Sophystry.
which they call secundum quid ad simpliciter, to say, that the sacrament of
Christ's body, is in a certain wise, the body of Christ, Ergo it is also
plainly and expressly the natural body of Chri st. For soch an other reason
might this be also. Christ is after a certain manner a lion, a lamb, and a door.
ergo Christ is a natural lion and lamb, or materyall door. But the sacrament
of Christ's body and blood, is therefore called his body Memoryall.
and blood, that it is thereof a memoryall, sign, sacrament, token, and
representacy on, spent ones for our rede^pcyon. Which thing is further
expowned by an either speech, that he does here consequently allege of
baptysme. Sicut de ipso baptismo Apostolus dicit and caet.

The Apostle (quoth Augustyne) says not, we have sygnyfyed buryenge but he
says utterly, we* be buried with Christ. For else should all false christian be
buried with Christ from sin, which yet do live in all sin. And therefore
says Augstyne immedyatly theruppon, he called therefore the sacrament of so
great a thing, by no^ other name, the^ of the thing self. Thus A name.
o most gracious and godly prince, do I confess and knowledge, that the
bread of the sacrament is truly Christ's body, and the wine to be truly his
blood, according to the words of the instytutyo^ of the same sacrament. But
in a certain wise, that is to wite, fyguratyuely, sacra me^tally, or
sygnyfycatyuely, accordige to the exposycyon of the doctors before recy ted and
here after following. And to this exposycyon of the old doctors. am I enforced
both by the artycles of my creed, and also by the circu^staunces of the said
Scripture.
scripture, as after shall more largely ape re. But by the same can I not
find, the natural body of our sauer to be there naturally, but rather
absent, both from the sacrament and from all the world, collocat^ and
remaining in heaven. where he by promise must abide corporally un to the end
of the world.

The same holy doctor, writynge against one Faustus, says in like manner. Si
Machabeos cu^inge^ti admiratione praeferimus, quia escas, quibus nunc
christiani licite vtuntur, attingere noluerunt (quia pro tempore tunc
prophetico non li cebat) quan^o nu^c magis pro baptismo Sign^.
Christi pro eucharistia Christi pro signo Christi? Ad omnia perferenda
paratior de bet esse christianus cum ille fueruit premis siones rerum
complendarum, haec uero sunt indicia completarum. In this do I note, that
according to the exposycyons byfo re showed, he calls the sacrament of bap
tysme and the sacrament of Christ's body and blood, otherwise properly named
Eucharistia, he calls the^ signum Chri sti, and that in the syngular number,
for as much as they both do syngnyfye well nygh one thing, In both the^ is
testyfyed the death of our sauer. And more over The death.
he calls the^, indicia rerum completa rum, that is to wite, the tokens or
benefy tes that we shall receive by believe of Christ for us crucyfyed. And then
does he call usually both the sacramen tes, signu^ Christi i^ the syngular
number. As in tractatu. 50. super Euangeliu^ Ioannis, where he says thus. Si
bonus es, si ad corpus Christi pertines, quod signat Petrus, habes Augstinus
Christum and in presenti and in futu to. In presenti per fidem, in presenti
per signum Christi, in prese^ti per baptismatis sacrame^tu^, in presenti per
altris cibu^ and potu^, and caet.

Though Johan Lambert wrote sumwhat more concerning this matter to the king.
Yet came there no more to my hands in the uncorrected, yea rather corrupted
coppye which I received.

In the year of our lord a. M. D. xxx viij. was this seruan^t of God bre^t i^
Smythfelde at London, by the only vyolence of the spirytuall mynysters of
Antichrist, in october.


