A most excellent and LEARNED WORK OF CHIrurgerie, called Chirurgia parua
Lanfranci, Lanfranke of Mylayne his brief: reduced from diverse translations to
our vulgar or usual frase, and now first published in the English prynte by
John Halle Chirurgien. Who has thereunto necessarily annexed.

A Table, as well of the names of diseases and simples with their virtues, as
also of all other terms of the art opened. Uery profitable for the better
understanding of the same, or other like works.

And in the end a compendious work of Anatomy, more vtile and profitable,
then any here tofore in the English tongue publyshed.

AN HISTORIALL EXPOSTVLATION also against the beastly abusers, both of
Chyrurgerie and Physic in our time: With a goodly doctrine, and instruction,
necessary to be marked and followed of all true Chirurgie^s.

All these faithfully gathered, and diligently set forth, by the said John
Halle.

Imprinted at London in Flete streate, nyghe unto saint Dunstones church, by
Thomas Marshe. AN. 1565.

I. H. anno. aetatis suae. 35
portrait of John Halle
R. M.
Corporis effigies quam vides graphice pictam
Hauli est, sic pictor fingere tibi velit:
At modo si quaeris vultum dignoscere verum,
Hos lege, hij vere explicuere animum.
The books verdict.
AS some delighte most to behold,
Each new deuyse and guyse,
So some in works of fathers old,
Their studies exercise.
Perusing with All diligence,
Books written long before:
Wherein they learn experience,
To heal both sick and sore.
Which I allow in deed and word,
In those that understand:
For otherwise it is a sword,
Put in a mad man's hand.
Let Idiotes and betles blind,
Therefore lay me aparte:
Lest contrary mine authors mind,
They rudly me peruerte.
For as he be does honey take,
From every goodly flower,
And spyders of the same do make,
Uenim that will devour:
So all that learned men and wise,
To good purpose can use,
The rude that knowledge do despise,
Will ever more abuse.
Wherefore all those that use me right,
I shall increase their fame:
And vile abusers all my might,
Shall be to do them shame.
UNTO THE WORSHIPFUL the masters, Wardens, and consequently to all the whole
company and brotherhod of Chirurgiens of London, John Halle, one of the least
of them, sends hearty and loving salutation.
Sithe the almighty Creator of all things, of his merciful goodness, only for
love that he had to mankind (who fell by disobedience out of Paradise into
misery) has created medicine out of the earth for man his utility and help
in the time of his sickness, as the wise man says, Eccl. 38. And has ordained
ministers of the same medicine, by a true and perfect order of art, But of
this division look more in my preface to the Reader.
divided now into two parts, as the phisicien for inward infirmities, and
the chirurgien or handeworker for outward griefs: It should seem unto me
that they which despise the said art, despise God his gracious gifts, even
as they which profess either part thereof abusing the same, abuse God his
merciful benefits.

And for as much as such despisers and abusers, are as well offenders to God,
as a detrimente to his creatures: It should seem a thing not vain or void of
profit, to reprehende and warn men of such vices: specially where they are
so frequented, that some by feling, and some by understanding and seeing, daily
cry out with grievous clamores, of the incommodious success of such wicked
factes.

First the despisers thereof oftetymes (as we se) suffer them selves (thorough
hate that they bear to these excellent parts and the ministers thereof) by
negligence to run to extreme desolation: and therefore many times worthily
perish, as a just reward for their contempt of God his ordained remedies.

And yet truly I can not but confess, that the abusers of those things are
the chief cause, of these so great euels and mischiefs: for the experience of
their wicked doings, and the ouerthwarte success of the same, causes the
ignorant to be at defia^ce with that which was made for their own help and
succoure: so that they often perish, because they fear to seek remedy: they
are so often beaten with the painful rod of hateful abusers.

And alas, where as there is one in England, almost throughout all the realm,
that is indede a true minister of this art, there are ten abominable
abusers of the same. Where as there is one Chirurgien, that was apprentice to
his art, or one phisicien* that has trauayled in the true study, and
exercise of phisique: There are ten, that are presumptious smearers,
smaterers, or abusers of the same: yea, Smythes, Cutlers, Carters, Coblars,
Copers, Coriars lether, Carpenters, and a great rabble of women: Which (as the
most excellent Galen feared to happen) forsake their handiecraftes, and for
filthy lucre abuse physic, and chirurgerie. The cause whereof the said Galen
wisely recites: for he says, if these sciences had no coligance with other
needful learninges, that those inconveniences would thereof ensue.

I would to God therefore my dear masters and brethren, that there might no
fault be found in us, concerning these things: For truly if we wear such men
of science, as we ought to be, those false abusers would be more fearful to
meddle as they do. For what a shame were it, that such an abuser in talkinge
with a chirurgien in deed, shall apere more perfect in the knowledge of the
anatomy, and the natures of simples, or the complexion of man his body, then
he that has been apprentice to his art? Surely me thinks this were a great
occasion, not only to cause these abusers more to presume: but I fear me also
that such things have been the cause, that such abusers have been defended,
of those which of right should have subdued them.

Hear me my masters and brethren, is there any philosopher so ignorant in
philosophy, that he wants knowledge, to defend that which he does
profess, against his contrary? does he worthily bear the name of a
Platoniste, that is ignorant in Plato his works? or is he worthy the name of a
Musicia^, that has learned to singe or play a few songs upon an instrument,
without the knowledge of the principles and rules of music? I am sure ye will
answer no. If this be true in deed, as I think none can deny: How can we
for shame call our selves Chirurgiens, if we be not able to defend the same
art, to the confutation of the abusers thereof. And I suppose verily, that
Galen would not have thought him self a true Phisicien, if he had not been able
to confute the error of Thessalus and ye empirickes of his time, that falsely
abused the excellent art of medicine: whereof Chirurgerie is the most ancient
and worthy part, as Cornelius Celsus witnesses: what so ever in the abusiue
division is otherwise pretended.

Seeing therefore that it lies not in us to extincte, put down to silence, or
subuerte these abusers: would God that we might at the least, (through our
excellentie) cause them as they are to seem execrable. So that thereby, they
which have power to redress these things, shall of their own motion, seeing
these abuses subuerte them: I mean that we our selves might grow to such
perfection, that the works and knowledge of us might apeare so immaculate,
that by our iustnes, their falshode may be seen or known, by our cleanes their
fowlnes, by our knowledge their ignorance, by our certain* and true use: their
abusion and uncertain adventures: As each thing is known by his contrary.
So that at the last, they the^ selves (as Iannes and Iambres, the charmers of
Aegipte, although for a while they deceived the king, by counterfeiting the
miracles of of Moises and Aaron the servants of God, yet at the last
confessed, that their own deeds wear done by deceit, and the miracles of
Moses by the finger of God) shall confess them selves also to be abusers, and
we workers by true science. And so at the last I doubt not, but all me^ shall
abhor them. And as abuse grows into hate and contempt, so the right use
shall obtain love and credit: so that the good endeavor of us I trust, shall
be the fall both of the abusers, and the haters, of our excellent art.

For truly my masters and brethern, I can not a little commend your late good
indeuoures in this behalf. For I presently see a number of dilligent hearts,
endeuouryng them selves by all means to excelle in all kind of studies,
belonging to their art and profession: and as it already apeareth unto me, so
shall it shortly to all men, even as choke pears to our adversaries. If we
may but have the favorable defense of you our masters, as we have had
encouragement thereto, by your diligence in repayring our worshipful halle, and
ye order thereof: to the increasement of al kind of knowledge, belonging to our
profession.

I therefore, as preparatiue to the rest that shall follow, dedicate this my
simple labor, in setting forth this excellent compendious work, called
Chirurgia parua Lanfranci, under your aid, help, succor, tuition, and
defense: which was translated out of French into the old Saxony english,
about two hundred years past. Which I have now not only reduced to our
usual speech, by changyng or new translating such words, as now be
inueterate, and grown out of knowledge by process of time, but also conferred
my labors in this behalf with other copies, both in French and latin: namely
with master Bacter, for his latin copy, and Simon Hudie for his french
copy, and other English copies: of the which I had one of John Chamber, and an
other of John Yates, both very ancient, with other mo: whose good help has
not a little farthered me in these things, to the intent that it might
perfectly come forth to a public profit, which to do I was constreigned,
not only because I would not trust to much to mine own rude judgments: but
also that by the authority of diverse men of knowledge, this excellent work
(as it is worthy) may ye more effectually be allowed and accepted.

And this dedication have I made unto you, rather then (as the common use is)
to noble men and princes, because ye being fathers and ancient masters of
the same, are better able by persuasion and instruction of doctrine, to defend
the same, to the satisfiyng of all men, then the only name of any prince, or
magistrate, which defense I do not desire, because I think the most
excellent Lanfranke, to lack authority of truth, to defend him self, but
only that mine own imbesilitie and faintnes of name, in setting forth of this
work, may by your worshipful aid, succor, and help, be fortefied. And thus
doing, ye shall not only encourage me for my part, to enterprise other things
vtile and needful, but other also, with whom I have conferred my studies,
both have done and do intend the like, to the increase of the name, fame,
and worship, of our excellent art, and the company or brotherhod of the
same.

Unto this work also is added a brief Anatomy, necessary for all
Chirurgiens, and a table of the interpretation, as well of all manner of strange
words, as also of all manner of simples, by any occasion treated of in this
profitable work: By me collected, according to mine own experience and the
meaning of good authors, as well ye auncie^tes as the new writers.

The which thing, if it be well approved of you, it will be (as the goodness
thereof deserves) The better accepted and received of all others, the which
thing to see, wear to me for this my good will, a sufficient recompense. And
what profit or commodity, this work shall be, (being now set forth
vulgarly) to all estates of this realm, the excellency thereof will shortly so
prove it by evident experience, that we need not for that cause here to waste
the time with words. Therefore that it may so come to pass, that our endeavors
in general, as well the masters as the rest of the company, may proceed as
it is begone, to the edificatio^ and building up of good science, and to the
subuertion of all haters and abusers of the same: I shall not cease, not only
to pray to God for help therein, who is captain and author of al goodness:
but also with such poor weapon, as the forsaid captain has lent me, I will
not cease while breath is in my body, to lay on with both hands till this
battle be won, and our adversaries convinced and vanquished: which although
as I said before, they are x. to one, yet truth being our weapon, and good
science our armoure, with our general the high author of them, we need not to
doubt, but that one shall be good enough for a thousand, not so strongly armed,
but naked men and bare of all knowledge.

And in the mean time, till we bring forth our main battle, let this worthy
Lanfranke skirmishe with the^, as I. Vigo and other have done. And also let not
us be obliuious, in geuyng thanks to such, good men, as have in these things
not a little furthered our knowledges: as doctor Record, for his Vrinale of
physic, which he dedicated unto us: and also doctor Turner, who compyled
his english her^ale, as he affirms for our sakes* which most learned and
worthy work ought of us to be honorably esteemed: rather then as it has been
of some most spitfully despised, for the fault of the lewd and negligent
prynters: wherewith they seem most shamlesly to charge the author* where as
according to his desire, they ought rather for their own profitable use to
amend the same* that by their good receiving and well using of it, he may be
animated, to finishe al ye rest of that work, according to his former
intentes: the which to do if he be discouraged by our ingratitude, how much
the common weal shall lack that commodity, let the wise and learned judge. I
trust I shall not need to bid you be thankful to master VVylliam
Cunningham doctor of physic, for his so many learned lectures which he red
unto you in our halle, to your great commodity, if the fault be not in your
selves: of the which to be partaker with you, my froward fortune and distance
of place (to my no small grief) would not suffer me. And besides these, diverse
other: which (to abreuiate the time) I pass over without the rehersall of
their names, whose diligence of late has been (as unto you at this day it is
not unknown) to profit the common weal: whose names therefore among us ought
thereby to florishe, and their fame never to die or decaie. And then let us make
a general proclamation, that who so ever has professed the noble art of
chirurgerie, and will fight against the despisers and abusers of the same: let
them come under the baner of good authors, now sent among them, by our
general the creator of medicine: arming them selves well with knowledge and
good science, and go forth to battle against these deceivers, and their
captain filthy lucre. And their wages shall be well paid them: namely good
fame and living in this life, and eternal life after this vale of misery.
The which he grante us all, that dearly has redeemed us with his precious
blood, Amen.

VV. CVNINGHAM DOCTOR in Phisique, unto the professors of Chirurgerie
salutations.
IT has ever ben observed from the first creation, that nature (by divine
providence) has in all ages brought forth excellent, and heroical persons: to
the great comfort of posterity following. For as the Adama^t naturally ceasith
not to attracte and draw to it iron and steel: no more have these ceased,
from the invention of such things, as were needful to man's use. Which at
the first like as tender and small seeds (by times reuolutio^) have grown to
high and mighty trees of small beginnings, by trauelles of noble and ingenious
persons, from age to age, have spro^g so many sondrie sciences* arts, and
professio^s, as we see at this day. But for that in all times the number of
these have been most small, and the multitude infinite of those that follow
ignorance: prouide^t nature, being yet fruteful, has brought forth in this
old and feeble age of the world, as well as in times past, divine vvittes:
by whose labors, the treasures of science and knowledge, unto this present
gotten, should be preserved and defended from perishing, maugre the forse of
doultishe ignorance, and cancard oblivion. Neither in my opinion are they less
worthy honor and praise, whose famous acts maintain, and cause freshly to
floryshe the precious monumentes of forworne age: then the authors them
selves. For as we owe to the one the excellent invention: so are we debtors to
the other, for the diligent propagatio^ thereof to us their posterity. Neither
are we more beholden to Apollo, for the first invention of the nature and use
of herbs: then unto Hippocrates, who first seperating phisique from
philosophy, made of his elders traditions, and his own divine observations a
noble art. And yet does Galen merit no less honor and immortal fame then
either of them. For he has largely uttered, that which Hippocrates did
briefly set out: opening plainly, that which was obscurely written, adding that
which seemed to want: and commendinge their acts unto those that should
succeed. what grateful minds we are of duty constrained to show to those,
that in this our age travel in divinity, phisique mathematicalles, law,
historiographie, poetry Agriculture, and other profitable studies: not only
the professors, but all Christian public weals being tasters of the
commodities (though I be silent) can truly report. And omitting that herein
might be said, I torn my pen only to you, the worshipful brotherhode of
Chirurgians in London. what praise and worthy fame, chiefly of you, and then
of those which have need of chirurgerie, John Halle one of your fellowship
have deserved: these his labors do appara^tly show. For where as for want of
good authors in your own native tongue, chirurgerie have not a little decayed:
she is now again by his painful trauelles not a little restored. And for as
much as in all studies it greatly does profit to have first brief and
compendious introductions: he has translated a short Isagoge of that noble
Chirurgian Lanfranke of Milla^, named Lanfranke his brief. In which, whether
Lanfranke owes more to him for the restoring of his decayed work, or he to
Lanfranke, for the immortal fame hereby obtained: I can not easily judge. But
this I dare boldly affirm, that Lanfranke before being corrupted, and of small
use: is now by the labors of my friend John Halle, purged and made pure so
that henceforth, I may rightly call it Halles Lanfranke. In which is set out
co^pendiously the curation of wounds, tumores against nature (Lanfranke names
them aposteme^) ulcers, luxatio^s, fractures, and of certain griefs and
diseases of the eyes, with a chirurgicall antidotarie. But for because brief
treatises want not obscurity, especially to the younger students: John Halle
has made an expositiue table, setting plainly out as well the perfect natures
of those simple medicines mentioned of Lanfranke, as also of all the terms
belonging to the art. And where as the precepts of the art or approved
medicines, can little profit the body of man in all his parts not exactly
known, he has also added a compendious Anatomy, in which thou may easily
without great labor, learn that is herein requisite: which book of all the
rest, would not only be first read, but also committed to memory. This good
halle yet seaseth not, nor suffers his private gain to call him away: but
with pity beholding decayed surgery, to be daily defaced by a rabble of
ro^nagates, has made against them an historical Expostulation: in which he
shows the difference betwixt the chirurgien, and the ro^nagate abuser. Al
which his works, being set out to your great increase in knowledge, requires
not only present thanks: but a perpetual memory to be made among you of him
for ever. This author also has finished an other work inuaying against vice,
and therefore named the court of virtue: being now in the Printers hands.
Taking these therefore his trauelles in good part, he freely and gladly
offers them to you, you shall both eschew the suspicion of ungrateful
Momus, and give him occasion to attempt greater things, to your commodity
and gain. Fare heartily well,

at my house in Colma^strete, this.xviii. day of April. Anno, M.D.lxv.
Thomas Gale master in Chirurgerie, unto his well-beloved friend John Halle,
sends greting.
FOr as much as translation is the mother of patefaction, and a virtue most
commendable of al me^, because it uncovers ignorance, and illustrateth the
knowledge of many notable matters unto the vulgar people: I thought it most
mete and expedient therefore, with some consolation to comfort you well-beloved
friend Halle, which peradventure being somewhat astonished and afraid of the
common peoples judgment, would detract that laudable and most worthy
enterprise, which you have finished: neither would according unto your vocation
and office publishe your travel, containing in it most profitable fruits, by
ye which the public wealth might be releued, and also your assigned office
discharged. I am certainly assured that you will object unto me, how that you
shall suffer the reprehensio^ of many, in alleging unto you, that you are
worthy rather of contumely and reproach then fame and renown, for your
exercise and labor: Because that every la^dleper and vagabonde thereby shall be
made an artist. I put the case that many should inueye these allegations
against you, will you therefore be discouraged, neither would you fearing their
rude judgment, proffit your native country? Let me never see such causes I
beseech you (being of no force) move you to faint: for if they allege any
such thing against you (as you suppose) it will at the length (as when it
comes to the ears of the wise) redounde unto their own reproach. They can
not for mere shame and impudency say, that you in the publishing of your
book, will make every private person an artiste: specially when as herein they
incur mendacitie and falsifiyng the truth, then the which vice nothing can
be more detestable and worthy of ignominy. For the most part of men do know,
(specially those which are wise and discrete) that you have not taken upon you
this translation into the vulgar tongue to the end every man thereby might be
made an artiste: (which thing could not be brought to pass, if that you meant
the desolation of the art:) but that you do it only for this end and purpose,
that the tyrons and diligent students of the noble art, might have some
knowledge to lead them, as it wear by a light, unto more perfection. Therefore
if you mind the profit of your country, let not such allegations dismay
your enterprise, but publishe it with speed: For the sooner it appears, the
sooner our brethren which are but yet contending to obtein ye knowledge of
chirurgerie our noble art, shall have thereof profit and utility. And though one
of those ignorant Idiotes which seek not to profit their country, but allege
such cauilations as are before mentioned, do contemn both it and you also,
yet will a hundred other for one of those, both contemn them in their bestiall
despite, and commend you in your good indeuoures, which tends I doubt not
to nothing else but the profit of the common wealth. Furthermore in publishing
of your book, you shall purchase the favor and benevolence of many men, and
specially of such as travel in the knowledge of our art: also you shall be
counted herein not only a profitable member of the public wealth, but also a
dilligent imitator of your predicessors which did translate out of other
tongues our famous art into their own proper languages that to diligent
students ye art might be made manifest. Of this sort of men many I could
resite, but for brevity I will name but one or two: as for example, Galen that
famous artist translated our art out of many tongues, as the Scithian, Persian,
Aegiptian and other more, into his own native tongue only, to the end that the
stude^ts might the more easily get ye profit of the same. Auice^ also that
excellent Arabian prince, having a like regard unto his country, collected
both out of Hippocrates and Galens works, the effect of our art, and
translated it into his mother tongue, that the knowledge of it might remain
unto his posterity. And doubt you not as these men for their great pains
taken of love to their country, in the furtherance of this our art, have had
and ever shall have memorial renown, but that you intending none other shall
obtain the same. Aspire therefore and take breath unto you, let no vain and
friuolus opinion ouercomme you, for I see no cause wherefore you should
ex^ruciate your self. Every wise man will accept your endeavors, except
those which neither mind their office, neither the utility of ye public
wealth: every good man will embrase and with great gladness reuolue over your
book as soon as it is published, and will at the first sight of your good
travel have you in more estimacion then ever they had. And why? because you
set forth the most famous and excellent art of medicine: then the which (as I
suppose) there can be none more profitable, and specially unto all men, as well
emperors and kings, as other men of lower estats: For though other arts
do profit and are most fit for a commonwealth? yet for all that the profit
of this all men do know to be more vberius. For without it pleasures were but
painful, riches unprofitable, company annoyance, strength febelnes, beauty
lothsumnes, senses dispersed, and finally all things in the world wear
unpleasant. wherefore lest tediousnes may take place in this my writing unto
you. I will here sease to trouble you any further: loking shortly for the
publishing of your works. Fare you well,

at my house in London, the.14. day of May. Anno. 1565.
To the loving Readers.
IF they which have illustrated,
The noble art of medicine,
Have had unto them ministered,
Both mortal praises and divine:
Then shall not Halle that frutfull tree,
Have like reward and grateful thanks,
(As those that have of such been free,)
which has uncovered ignorance.
O Chirons let me never know,
such famous men as by their pain,
Have opened the buddes that blow,
want fame, their well deserved gain.
You know not what fertility,
Henceforth may unto you redounde,
Ne what impes of chirurgeri
By him may spring within your ground.
Therefore be not in praises slovve,
You chirons that by him may have,
In those your gardens knowledge grovve,
vvherby you may the grieved save.
For why by your encouragment,
This tree may more svvete blossoms bloome:
And where it has you one out sent,
Sondrie may spring and that right soon.
Consider what by courage grows,
And what fruits to men it does bring:
No heart (I think) can well suppose,
what gain alvvayes by it does spring.
But seeing that your mind I see,
And also your intent and fact,
To encourage this odorous tree,
My pen here shall his raze detract.
I. H. To the loving Readers greting in our eternal Lord, the author of all
knowledge.
AS often as I consider, the diligent care of the quncient authors, to be
perfect and exquisite in their art, not only in their own handy work, while
they were living on this earth, but also to put the same in writing, to the
behoue of all that should come after: I can not a little marueyle at the
stubberne disdainful ignorance of many, in this our wretched age, wherein the
noble art of Chirurgerie is as it were fallen into ruin.

For where as in time paste there were few Chirurgiens, and they very cunning,
learned, and exper^^^s whereby they were accepted as precious jewels or
honorable treasures of the common weal: There are now many, and the most
part ignorant, whereby they are found rather hurtful then profitable: yea
very caterpyllers to the public orders. So that in this case, the time
present, being compared with the time past, may be lykened to such people as
would pluck down in a realm, a hundred castles or strong defensed fortes
which were made for the faulregarde of the country: and in stead thereof
build a thousand cotages, more like hogges^yes then houses. Were not this
think you a goodly change (...) a few number for the greater?

What was the cause that Lanfranke wrote so earnestly to his disciple, that he
should keep his work from the sight of ignorant^ and unwise people: But that
he feared that by such means a time might come, that through the abusion of so
many insipient and such rustical professiors of that art, it would at the
last come to ruin and extreme decay: so that whatsoever therein was ordained
to the profit of men and their help in necessite, should now through such
beasts abusing the same, be the next way to perdition of life and members?

Did not Galen here as it were plainly prophecy in his time: which was about a
thousand.iii. hundred, and.lxxx. years past; (for he was famous, and floryshed
in this life, about the year of Christ.178. in the time of Marcus Aurelius
Antonius emperor of Rome.) For he plainly said, (when he wrote against
Thessains:) if physic were not vnitted, with other learnynges, that all manner
of vile ocupaciens, would leave their labor, and become phisitiens: Which is
come to pass at this day. Which doubtless has chanced, not because the
medicinal art, may now better want those worthy points of learning then in
times paste it might: But rather it has chanced, both through want of laws
for the prohibition of the same, and executio^s of them that are: and also (yea
chiefly) by the slothful negligence of the professors of the same. So that to
a number, they have been and are so worn out of mind, that how profitable
(yea and what they are) it is unknown.

Ioannes Fernellius (a right learned writer) deuideth (as also others do) his
manner of instruction, (...)
(and that for the whole art of medicine) into three principal parts: namely
Physiologia. ^. de rerum naturis disputatio: that is a disputation of the
natures of things comprehending the discriptions of the Anatomy, of the
elements, of the temperamentes, of the spirits and natural heat, of the
animal faculties, of the humores and natural functions, and of the sede and
procreation: (...)
pathologia, i. causarum symptoma tumque inquisitio: Which is the inquisition
of causes and accidents: consistinge of the descriptions of diseases of their
causes and accidents, and signs of the vrines, of fevers, etc. Of all
diseases both exterior and interior: and Therapeutica, (...).
hoc est medendi ratio, that is the method or way of curation: containing the
manner of purging, of phlebotomye, and all other ways of curations.

And as these.iij. are together (as most necessary parts of one body) so
jointly united, that neither the last can any thing profit without the first
and second, nor the first he perfect and vtile without the second and
third, etc. So doubtless can the professor of neither part lack any portion
of them, without so great imperfection as is his lack.

What shall we then say of the like defecte in any of the three instruments
of the curatiue part? (...)
namely Diatetice, Pharmaceutice, and Cheirurgiee: (...)
which have been and yet remain divided, into (as it wear) three destincted
and several arts, and they so far the one from the other, as though they
had never been together: as the common term of surgery is, (...)
it is a solution of continuitie: and is come to a necessity, Solution of
continuitie.
that diverse men must profess those diverse parts particularly, even so as
will lists to limite them: which bounds also they may not pass without
farther peril.

But howefarre the mind and opinion of Galen was from this, it is manifest.
For which of his books is not stuffed with manifold precepts belongyng to
Chirurgerie? And chiefly his books entitled de Methodo medendi, and de art
curatiua ad Glauconem, Though in deed it should seem by Cornelio Celso, that it
was not then among all the users of the same undivided: which began says he
about the times of Herophilus and Erasistratus. who in the beginning of his
seventh book calling Chirurgia the third part of medicine, says. Ea quidem
medicamenta atque victus rationem non omittit.

Scribonius Largus also in his book de compositionibus says thus. Implicitas
medicinae parts, inter se ita connexas esse constat: vt nullo modo didu^i
(sine totius professionis detrimento) possint^ Ex eo intelligitur quod neque
chirurgia sine diaetetica, neque hac sine chirurgia (id est sine ea part quae
medicamentorum vtilium vsum habet) perfici possunt. Sed aliae ab alijs
adiuuantur, and quasi consumantur, That is to say.

It is manifest that the entermedled parts of medicine are so connexed
together, that they can in no wise be separated, without the detrimente of the
whole medicinal profession. Whereby it is gathered that neither chirurgerie
without the dietetike part, nor this without chirurgerie, (that is without
that part that has the use of profitable medicines) can be accomplished: But
one is helped and (as it were) finished by the other. These words also does
Philiatros report.

But why should I rest here resiting many authorities about a matter so
evident? seeing that to wise men it needs not, as to the folyshe it booteth
not. But let the present time be judge therein, how much hurt the same
causes. For the persons professing either of these parts are so in hate with
the other parts, that they think it a dishonor to be acquainted one with an
other: For as the said Philiatros says, the phisiciens or professors of the
dieterike part, abhor chirurgerie, as a thing to vile for their profession.
And they that are chirurgiens, estemynge their profession to be only one part
of physic, and that for the exterior parts of man's body, regard not to
be learned. thynkyng that it is not needful to their art. And likewise the
pharmaceutike part, trustyng to the learning of the Phisiciens and
chirurgiens, think it no boot to be learned them selves: In so much that old
women must gather their herbs, unto whom they trust for the truth of
things, rather then to their own knowledge. And the Phisiciens having only
learning, trust to the Chirurgiens and Apothecaries for experience: and yet in
the mean season hatynge either of both, if they meddle in the dietetike part:
so that between trusting and hatyng one an other, they are all void and
destitute of perfection.

But it can not be gathered that Galen, nor yet Hippocrates, which was before
Galen, about.640. years, for Hippocrates lived. from the time of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, unto Artaxerxes Ochus, that is to say, 104. years: in the which
season he healed king Perdicas of his disease. Which Perdicas reigned in
Macedonie eight years, which was before Galen his time.634. years. It can not I
say be found, that any of these two most excellent men did in their time
thus use physic, for it may be proved (as it is before plain enough) that
they playde the Apothecaries, and as well made, as devised their own medi^ines,
and also used in their own persons chirurgeris or the handye work of
physic. For otherwise they could not have written such perfect books thereof?
neither would they have taken such pain in any art, wherein they had not
much delyted: or the same greatly esteemed.

But our pernicious division has as I lately said, brought all to confusion:
so that neither part is now used only of the expert professors thereof, but
rather of every smearer, that lists to abuse them. For as the phisiciens
think their learning sufficient, without practice or experience: so the
chirurgien for the most part having experience and practice, thinks it
vnnedefull to have any learning at all, which also has bold^ed every ignorant,
rusticall, ye and foolyshe woman, to think them selves sufficient to profess
and work, in so noble and worthy an art.

We find also by the testimony of Galen in lib. xiiii. de methodo medendi,
that Cheirurgia, has principally.iii. operations: That is to say, (...)
to dissolve the thing contained, to knit or conioyne the thing separated, and
to separate and take away such things as are superfluous or unnatural. To
dissolve the thing contained, to as well done by euacuation of corrupted
humors, by profitable purgations and good diete: as by blood lettyng, which
the Greeks cell phlebotomian, (...)
and ventosynge, scarification, incisions, ^au^eries, opening of apostemes.
etc. To knyt the thing separate, is as well done by stytchyng and convenient
byndinges, whereby the separate borders of wounds be joined together with
medicines incarnatiues, conglutinatiues, and cicatrizatiues: as also in
restoring of dislocations, and fractures: that is to say, displaced ioynetes
or broken bones. To take away superfluous things, is to mundifie unclean
sores, from their fylthy eschares or cores, superfluous and rotten flesh,
corrupted bones sliuers, arowheades, pellets, or any other unnatural thing:
And also, separatyng from the body, d^ade and mortified members whether they be
legs, feet, toes, arms, hands, fingers, wennes, wartes, or any other
unprofitable, emine^ces, that either pain, anoy, or disfygure the body. Of
these also has every indiscreet personage snached a piece, in such wise, that
they run about and through the country, and each coaste of the same, like
pedlers, tynkers, ratte katchers, and very vacabundes, some only to set bones,
some to draw tethe, some to let blood, some to cut ruptures, and take out
stones: but all this, rather (under such color) to maynteyne an Idle and
theuyshe life, then to profit the common weal, to the great vprobrie of all
the whole profession of medicine.

If (as the learned interpret) this word chirurgia, does signifye a medicinal
operation or working with the hand, which is to be done upon the most excellent
of living creatures, man his body, yea in his tender flesh, among his sensible
sinews, lively ar^eties, and delicate veins: how unmeet is it, that every
vncunnyng and unexercised creature, shall be suffered (be they never so unmeet) to
occupy so excellent an art, playing as it were the merchant venterers, not for
gain or loss of goods and riches, but for life and death, upon the body of
man.

If as (Guido says) the first point of a Chirurgien is to be learned: how
happens it then, that every ignorant and unlearned ass, yea very enemies to all
lerning and knowledge, be suffered to work, yea and prove the strange maistries
of their fond fantasies, upon the body of man.

If (as Auen^oar witnesses) a Chirurgien ought to be expert, and to have seen
other masters work, before he venture or enterprise ^o work him self, and that
he must first learn and know, and then after to work and use experience: how
is it then, that all men and women, without either lernyng or experience, or
any kind of knowledge: yea only standing in their own conceipte, may work and
practice what they will, and that without interruption or punishment for their
abusion, upon the body of man?

If as (Haly affirms) a chirurgien ought to be a man of good discretion, and
no fool nor vnwyttie, nor of rude understanding: but of good memory, good
judgment, and good diligence: why is every rude rustike, braynsick beast, fond
fool, indiscreet idiote, yea every bedle^^ baude, and scoldinge drabbe,
suffered thus (without all order) to abuse this worthy art upon the body of
man?

What avails the goodly orders, taken by our forefathers and ancient
authors, that none should be admitted to the art of surgery, that are
miscreate or deformed of body: Properties of a Chirurgien
as goggle or skwynte eyed, imperfect of sight, vnhelthy of body, imperfect of
mind, not hole in his members, boystrous fingers or shaking hands. But
contrarywyse, that all that should be admytted to that art, should be of
clear and perfect sight, well formed in person, hole of mind and of members,
sclender and tender fingred, having a soft and steadfast hand: or as the
common sentence is, a chirurgien should have three diverse properties in his
person. That is to say, a heart as the heart of a lyo^, his eyes like the eyes
of an hawke, and his hands as the hands of a woman? What avails this order
I say, sith the contrary in all points is put daily in use, and that almost
without hope of redress?

Seeing also, that those ancient authors had not only his regard to the form
of the body, but also and as well to the bewere or ornament of the mind, and
honest conversation of him that should be admitted to surgery, Condicio^s of
a Chirurgien
as are these: He ought to be well manered, of good audacitie and bold where he
may work surely, and contrariwyse, doubtful and fearful, in things that be
dangerous and desperate.

He must be gentle to his pacients, wit^y in prognosticatio^s and forseyng of
dangers, apt and reasonable to answer and disolue all doubts and questions
belongyng to his work. He must also be chaste, sober, meke, and merciful, no
extorcioner, but so to accomplish his reward at the hands of the rich, to
maynteine his science and necessary lyuynges, that he may help the poor for
the only sake of God: what means it I say (these things considered) that so
many sheep heads, vnwytty, unlearned, unchaste, ribaudes, lecheours,
fornicators, dronkardes, belygoddes, beastly gluttons, wrathful, envious, and
evil manered, shall thus myserably be suffered to abuse so noble an art? yea
that they shall also be maynteyned, (in despyghte of those that are men of
science indede,) preferred to lyuinges for that profession, contrary to the
ordinances and laws of a city, being a carpenter, a cobbler, or a corier of
lether, or whatsoever he be: The wyttye, the learned, the man of knowledge, the
citizen, and the free man, in the mean season wantyng preferrement and living?

Well, I beseech god that there may be some occasion given, to procure a
redress, yt none may work without knowledge joined to experience: which no
doubt were the way to have perfect men in this art: where as now it is not
like that ever there shall be many. For who will set his son to schole with
cost and great charge, and then put him to such an art wherein is neither
gain nor hope of preferment? And is not this a wondrous case, that the art of
medicine is so free for all men to use that will: That the very rustians, and
common barators do use the same as a common shifte, whereby to obtain their
wicked purposes with the less suspicion? Under which color they also ^ary in
towns and cities, having their filthy company resortyng unto them, without
danger of the laws: so that this noble art is become (for lack of order) a
covert unto all filthynes and vyc^^ as well theft and murder, as also most
fylthy whordome. To all other wicked persons also, which despysing all laws
and order, do under the pretense of this profession, flete and flee from town
to town, from shere to shere. Through the which there are such filthy vices
maintained, and enormities suffered, as no honest ear would gladly here it:
And therefore I blushe to remember it, and shame to write it. Which euels
could never have been done under that couerte, i^ none but the learned and
expert might have wrought, and they also admitted by the bishop: as it has in
times paste been holsom^lye ordained in this Realm. Which law, if every
bishop would witsaue to execute in his dioces: there should (I believe) be a
greater quietness in the common weal then there is.

But if by this little any man might be stirred with zele, to procure a
redress in these things, truly I should reckon my self among the number of
them that are happy. Alas there are goodly orders taken, and profitable laws
made, for making of clothe, tannyng of leather. making of shoes and many other
external things: The abuse whereof is but a dearth or disprofite of the purse:
and shall there not be a redress had for the true use of a science, whereupon
depends the health of man's body? without which, what is man's life but a very
misery or wretched werines? The abuse of which science is not only a
disprofite to the purse, but of a far greater charge: That is to say, the
loss of health and life.

I wyshe therefore, in gods behalf, that a stay may be had in these things,
as well as in other, and yet not except man his life and health excels all
other earthly commodities: And as man his life excedeth in vain all other
possessions of this world: that there might likewise be the more care and
diligence for the preservation thereof, then for any other thing. For although
chirurgiens from henceforth, teach their science to none but to such as be
learned: yet if all that will may use it without exception, though they were
never traded up in the practyse of the same, there shall remain still a great
disorder.

I am not ignorant, that some men will think, that this book (being
publyshed) will be an occasion for such men to be the bolder to abuse the same
science. But I know and am sure, that they shall not learn in this book any
thing wherewith to hurt: neither have I publyshed the same for them. And
farther if any abuser of surgery read this book, he shall (I trust) so find
himself rubbed on the galle, that he shall be moved (if he have any shame) to
leave his vice, rather then more to use it. But what neded we to doubt to set
worth all science in english, if by the laws (as is aforesaid) none might use
the same, but such as (being expert) are first approved, and then laufully
admitted?

Let all young men therefore, that profess or intend to learn this worthy art,
first learn perfectly their anatomy, then the natures and complexions of their
pacientes, and then the propreties of their medicines: which they shall never
do, unless they study consequentely to know the virtues and temperamentes of
symples: as herbs, seeds, roots, gummes, trees, fruictes, veins of the
earth, stones, metals, beasts, fyshes, and fowls: of which are made the
medicines, wherewith the Chirurgien must work. This is the true way to be a
perfect chirurgien, and otherwise not to be atteined, as Lanfranke him self
the author of this book, (as thou shall read) affirms: who flourished.268.
years paste, in the time of Edward the first king of England, and Philyp the
fair reigned then in France.

I wyshe therefore, that this book and such like, should be red of al estates,
that they may understand how this laudable science is builded upon reason, and
how far from the trade of true science, these abhorfull abusers be: which
take upon them to work in Surgery, by thee only readyng of a book or
books, not being traded up in the true practice and experience thereof. For as
good doctor Record in the Preface to his vrinall of Phisyke says, what is
learning unlearned? or knowledge unknown? any thing else but a vayn name?
learning then increases most (says he) when it is studied of most: and
learning then triumphs most, when it has most favorers and folowers: and
then does ignorance (learnings enemy) rejoice most, when learning reygneth in
fewest, and blyndnes rules most: so that then is lernyng most profaned,
contemned and hated, when she has most enemies: That is to say, when most men
are ignorant. For that old saying shall always be true, learning has none
enemy but the ignorant.

O that this worthy sentence were so wayed and followed, that the Chirurgiens
should not work upon any part of man his body, unless they can by reason
prove and certify their pacientes, that such kind of workyng is behouefull
for their health. For he that has none other reason, but thus have I done, or
this or thus have I seen my master work, is not worthy to work upon the body
of man. But if it were come to this isue, that all men so knew the reason of
this art, that they would suffer none to minister to their diseases, but such
as could prove their work to be good, by reason and true order of science,
these hateful abusers could no longer have place.

This notable brief work of Lanfranke may satisfy those curious katchers,
that find fault with Vigo, for his great co^positonis (which they call
superfluous) and ample doctrine (which they term tediousnes.) For here have
they a brief doctrine of right good effect, and small compositions of
sufficient virtues. Which he wrote unto his friend, as an introductio^ to a
greater work: and that performed he afterward in effect, in the year of
Christ.1296. Which also may be an ensample to all masters unto their
disciples, yt in these days use this art, specially to such as rather hyde
their science from their servants (because perhaps their own store is not
great) then teach them truly. There be to few examples of englysh chirurgiens
that have written books to instruct their disciples: Though these days (gods
holy name be glorified therefore) may thereof less compain then many years
past. I must needs therefore counsel all young me^ (since now they have so good
helps) to be diligent to learn, and not to spare the very stealing of
cunning: that is to say that they will be so vigilant as to obtain it,
although it be hydden from them.

For truly there are many, that take servants and apprentises, not for to
teach them science, but only to be their drudge, and to do their toil and
labor: which is the cause, that so many come out of their years so ignorant.
For their intent is to have servants to do the toil in their house, and not
to make them cunnyng men: yea and some will refuse a young man that is learned,
and apt to understand to have an ignorant slave, to bear the water tankard,
and s^owre pa^^ed such a one (as the common proverb is) that will never do
man of science harm unless he steal away his dynner.

And yet will such a one brag and boaste, at seven years end, as though he
had all the learning and cunnyng under the son, although in very deed, the
most knowledge that he has is, to poule, or sh^ue, draw a toothe, or dress a
broken pate. Alas is not this a great pytye, that such a noble art shall thus
be abused every way, through the filthy lucre and auaricious minds of men? Is
it not a shame to use such roberie? do ye not steal like robers the service
of your apprentyses, when contrary to your couenantes, ye hyde your science
from your servants, to whom ye are bound: to teach it? and yet (in the mean
season) receive the labor of their bodies, more like slanes then men? beside
the great dishonor that thereby you do to your own profession, God grant that
I may see this amended, as I trust I shall.

In the mean season my counsel shall be, that all young men b^ynge servants
spare to take no kind of pain, so that science may be that way atayned. But
have a good regard that ye have your (...) for your penny: that is to say, that
ye may learn cunnyng for your ^^auel: and when time conveniently serves look
and study in good (...) of the which let this Lanfranke be one. Wherein ye may
learn in a small time, in other long time to be sought and not found: for
(...) for my part I must confess, that in so few words I never read so (...)
perfect science contained, as is in this pleasant co^pendious work. (...) for
as much as I know, that diverse young men have need of (...) commodities as
well as my self, I thought it a deed more com^^^dable, to set it forth to a
public profit, then to keep it (...) own private commodity. Wherein what
soever I ^ounde (...) ^atin copy, being yet any thing helpful to the same, I
have put in a smaller letter.

But one thing yet I must warn all young men of, that will profit in such
study as I have instructed, which is in one point to refrain and discente
from the most part of young men: that is to say, from games and spendyng the
time in play: for in my fantasy, who so ever is adicte to play and games shall
never profit in this art. For thou shall find it time little enough for thy
study, if thou occupy all thy leysour from thy masters or thine own business
at thy book, that as thou workest or see thy master work: so thou may
therewith understand the reason how, and how much such work is profitable.

And hereof assure thy self, that if thou have not as great desire to thy
book, as the greatest gamner has to his game, thou shalt never worthily be
called cunnyng in this art. For thou must think and esteem all time of leisure
from thy work and busynes, even lost and evil bestowed, in which thou have
not profyted somewhat at thy book. Let thy book therefore, I say, be thy pastyme
and game which (if thou love it as thou ought) will so delight thee, that
thou shall think no time so well bestowed as at it. Yea thou must desire it
as the child does his mothers pappe: and so will it nourishe thee, that thou
shall worthily grow and increace to a worshypfull fame of cunning and
learning.

And now whatsoever unto this work is added by me, as the Expositiue Table,
and the natomie: I most hartyly desire all the good Readers to interpret it to
the best, regardyng the good will of the worker, rather then thexcellency of
the work, which I confess to be very faint: trustyng that all such as in
those things are my masters and betters, will rather seek the redress and
ame^dement of such things as to them shall seem faulty, then disdaynfully to
reprehende my good will, in setting forth of this work. But as I fear it not
in any godly or charitable personage: so am I past care, what be said of such
disdayners as speak euel of the doings of all men, and yet will do nothing
that good is them selves. Not consydering that a humane creature is not borne
into this world, only to profit himself, but much rather to gratify his
friends and country (as Cicero says) besides Christian charity, which
byndeth us to profit all men. And our savior Christ warns us, that no man
hyde his talent. Thus (wyshyng to the gentle readers their hearts desire, that
travail for the perfectness of this art, even as unto my self in my most
weighty affairs:) I end this my simple Preface.

Unto his faithful friend and disciple Bernard: Lanfranke of Milayne, wysheth
increase of wisdom, and cunninge.
I WILL thee to understand, my dear and loving friend, that (through the grace
of God, the author of all goodness: I purpose to make a book here after,
wherein I will give to thee an ample and large doctrine, sufficyente for thy
fulle instruction, in the most excellent Art of Surgery.

For in this present little work: I intend to give thee but few things and
light, but true and proved, the which allbeit that they be short, yet are they
of great commodity and profit.

Set them not at naught: but dispose thy self, fully to trust in them: for
principally, according to thy purpose, I have written proved medicines, with
the manner of curing wounds, Apostemes, Ulcers, and Fistules, with a little of
Algebra, and some curations for the eyes, after the manner, as reason taught me
to work, and by experiment of a long time, has been by me roborate and
strengthened.

Trusting so much to the subtilty of thine intellection, that by thy wit,
with these few things, thou shall gather sufficient understanding, to
comprehend the knowledge of a greater work, and that thou shall thereby obtain
the name of a great and renowned Chirurgien.

Wherefore as thou fear and love GOD, and as thou tenderest thine own
worship and honesty: I require thee that thou deliver it, to no rusticall
Fools or Idiotes, least by the ignorance of such, and by their rude and
vncunninge ministration, this my work (made for thy love, to a common
vtilitye:) might redownde to some persons hurt or anoyaunce.

The first part of this work, treatinge of wounds, contains.ix. Chapiters
Of the Intention of a Chirurgien in general.
The first Chapter.
AMONG AL OTHER things, it is expedient that a good Chirurgien in every
work, determine a certain Intention in generalle, Intention of a Chirurgien
and namelye in wounds, whereof we intend first to treat, and then to use such
things, as may conveniently help him to his Intent.

First therefore in wounds to be healed, Consolidatio^
the Intention is a true Consolidation or knitting together, which only is
done in a simple wound made in the flesh. For other Consimilare members, (as
bones, sinews, gristles, pannicles, and the skin) be not restored by true
Restoration or consolidation. Spermatike members.
For the first matter of them was Sperme in the parents, and therefore are
called Spermatike.

How be it, when solution of continuitye cha^uceth in such members: there is
a certain mean, where by the void place of that which is lost is filled
again: yet there are diverse opinions among men, For some say, that Nerves
veins, and Arteries, receive true Consolidation, and some say nay, they be
otherwise restored: But certainly I say if the cuttings or departinges be
great, they are never restored by true Consolidation: though sometimes in
small wounds they are, yet that very seldom.

Notwythstandinge, Flesh a sanguin member
the flesh whereof the first matter is blood, and is therefore called Sanguine,
is every day generate, or made in the body; and thereof receives very
restoration. Wherefore, in every wound made in the flesh, let thine intent
always be to consolidate it, except any of these vii. things following, be there
unto a let or hinderance. The first is, Seven things hinderi^g co^solidation.
if there be any Puncture in the sinews, the second if the wound extend to the
bone, the third if with the wou^d be any Aposteme. The fourth if there be any
euel distemperaunce. The fifth is, Pyscrasia.
if there be any holownesse in the wound The sixth if the wound be made with
contution. The seventh, is if the wound be made with any vememous beast for any
of these, of necessity leads the Chirurgien to an other intention. As I will
hereafter express, beginning first at a simple wound, that wa^teth all
the.vii. things aforesaid.

Of a Simple wound. Cap ii.
BE therefore in assurance, whether ye wound be made with the point of any
instrument, whether it be knife, spear, or arowe, or any other like. For they
of all other are sonest conjoined, if it touch no Sinewe, Chorde, Panicle, nor
the Muscles yt cover the bone, (which thou may know, by that it is without
all pain and ache,) It shall be sufficient, that thou only put in a tent,
enfused in Oil of Roses warm, which necessarily shall for one day hold the
skin open: and make the patient rest from all manner of exercise of the
wounded member. And then if it be without al ache and swelling: thon maiste
suffer the wound to close. Provided always, that the patient rest.ii. or.iii.
days, and he shallbe whole: but if there in be any aching or pain, it is a
sign of ye hurt of a Sinewe, Muscle, Panicle, or Chorde. And then it shall be
conueniente, to iniunde or pour into the whole wound, oil of Roses whot, and
make a tente, not to great nor to long, and yt it be such as constreigne not
the sinewe, least that there by pain should be induced, and dip the same in
Oil of Roses, and the yolke of an egg warmed, laying there on a Repercussiue
of ye same medicine, and annoynte the member all about, with a medicine made,
ex Olei Rosati Vncia Vna, aceti Vnciis. ii. Boli armoni Vnciae dimidio, and use
this until the pain be slaked, and that the wound yield Saniem, Sanies.
for then it is sure from Apostemation and Spasme. After that put in a dry tent
of lint, made of soft linne^ cloth, and upon that a mundificatiue, made after
ye ordinance hereafter following. A mundificatiue.
Rec. Mellis Rosacei colati Vncias tres, farine Hordei subtilissimae unci^^. i.
Terebinthinae lotae Vnciae semisse. Boil them a little together to the
perfectness of an emplaster: and note that the Terebinthine ought not to be
boiled with the reast, but should be added in the end of the boiling, and so
at the end he shall be healed. But if the pain cease not, by the infusion of
the Oil of Roses, and defense of Bole Armeniacke before said. Then let the
pacient blood (if he be strong,) on the contrary side, but if he be weak,
make scarification, or box him, daily provoking the duetye of the womb by a
Clyster or suppository if need require, enioyning him a straight and sclender
diet, til the pain of the aposteme and the infla^mation be assuaged, and
annoint it al about with the ointment made, de Bolo armeno, Oleo Rosato, and
aceto continuing still as I have taught. Provided always that for infla^mation
of the pricking of a sinewe, ye administer there to, no manner of plaster, made
of herbs and grease, nor Maturatiues, and for the ache of the member, see that
thou suffer no hot water to touch ye same: for all these are causes of
putrefaction and perdition, which is desolation and loss of the member.

Of wounds cut after the length of the members. Chap. iii.
ANd if the wound be made with a sweard, or any other cutting thing after the
length, and being so small yt only a roll and a boulster, may hold together
the parts conjoined: It shall suffice, yt you bind the parts together,
laying there upon a bowlster, or pressure of tow wete in the white of an egg,
and bind it with convenient bonds, so shall thou need no other medicine. But
if it be so great, The manner of stitchynge wounds.
that binding only suffyceth not: then stytch the wound with a square nedle,
and an even threde wexed. And always let the stitches be odd, if it be
possible, beginning first at the one end of the wound, and then at the other
end, after that in the midst: Then on each side of the middle stytch, make
as many mo as shall be tredeful observing that between each stitch be left the
space of an vnche, Or as we say an inche consisting amesure of three barlye
corns in length for so is vncia here taken as you se, and not the Geometrical
vnch being as some write, a mesure of three finger thick.
that is the breadth of the little finger, or the middle finger, leauinge in the
inferior or dependant part of the wound, an open Orifice, wherein thou may
put a tent, by the which the wound may be expurged. And upon the seame, lay
powder made, de Vna part thuris, duabus partibus Sanguinis Draconis, and
tribus partibus calcis Vi^ae, and sometime Calx Viua alone shall serve your
need. Upon the powder lay a fine clothe, dipped in the white of an Egg,
bindinge it with conueniente ligature, and boulsters, that the seame may be
conserved. And so let it be anointed, and changed, that finallye it may be
consolidate. But if in this time, the wound be altered by the aer, and do
give Saniem, the stitches also losing their hold: then mundifye it with a
medicine, made ex Vna part farine Tritici, Mellis partibus.ii. and Aqua
partibus.iii. boiled together in form of a Cataplasma, and in the end lay
upon the wound stupes of towe, wette in warm Wine.

Of the wounds of synewes, cut for the most part overthwart the member.
Cha. iiii.
IF the Sinews of the arm, Wounds made after ye bredthe.
hand, or foot, or any other like member be cut ouerthwarte, (all be it yt
Theodoricus and diverse others say the contrary): Theodoricus.
yet I say that it is good and profitable, to stitche the sinews with a
needle, when thou sowest the borders or lips of the wound, taking such
hold of the heads or ends of the sinews that be cut, that thou may
justly draw them together. The manner of stytchynge sinews together.
And upon such manner of stitchinge of the Sinews, put Olium Rosarum,
wherein has been sodden Vermes terrectres proprie lumbrici dicti, and
conserve the stitchinge, as well to consounde the Sinews, as the outward
borders or lips of the wound. For by this manner of stitchinge, is made the
more noble Consolidation, and perfecter reparation, so that sometime, and
especially in the bodies of children, by such manner of stitchinge, the mouinge
of the member is recovered, to the which, the Sinews that were cut did
serve, which never could have been restored, unless the sinewe had been
stitched, and have no fear of any ache or pain, that is said to come by the
prickinge of the sinewe in the stitching with the needle, for that is aswaged,
and immediatelye helped with the aforesaid Oil, nor the pain hereof can
induce no Spasme, for so much as the whole sinewe was all ready cut a
sunder.

Annotations Upon this present chapter.
Co^^er^inge the stitchinge of sinews: mentioned here in this Chapter by the
author, I wish no man to stay there on, as an infallible ground, for it
seems much against reason, and the judgment of most learned men.
Notwithstanding many things are tolerable in young children, that may not
be done to old men: and other reasons may be made, as we^^e to defend this
opynion, as the contrary. But hereafter if God send leisure, thou shalt have
farther instruction in this, and other like matters. In the mean season have
this good opinion of Lanfranke, yt the lucky success, of some profes made in
that case, caused him so to write, for we may not judge that such learned men
would publishe, (to the disgrace of all their whole work,) that which they
thought not perfectlye true.

Of the flux of Blood. Cap. v.
IF the flux of blood, To stanche the flux of Blood.
issuing from a vein or artery, do let thee in observing this ordinance,
thou may restreigne it thus. Rec. thuris parts du^s aloes part Vnam, and
make it into poulder, and meddle all together, cum albumine oui, to the
thickness of honey, and pilos leporis, cut as small as may be possible, and
so temper all together, and put thy finger in the place from whence the blood
issues, and touch the pulse, holdinge it so the space of an hour,
administering thy medicine in great quantity, and in the time of chaunginge,
have good foresight, that thou take it not away by violence. But if it clean
fast to the place, lay on more of the said medicine in a more liquide form,
upon the old medicine, till it fall from the wound alone without violence,
and then shall the veins and arteries be knit and healed, and to this
medicine there is none like in restreigning of blood, and knitting the vein.

Of wounds, with breaking of the bone within the Flesh. Cap. Vi.
When with a wound in the Flesh, there is also a wound in ye bone, it
behooves not to heal ye wound of the flesh, Restauratio^.
before the Restoration of the bone, I say Restoration, because the bone is
never consounded with a true Consolidation: but in stead thereof, grows a
hard Callouse substance of flesh, called Porus Sarcoides, or Caro Poroides,
Porus Sarcodes.
serving in place of ye bone lacking, which reparation must be looked for,
before the wound in the flesh be healed, Caro poroides
for otherwise there may be no rep^ration, because the moistness of the flesh
will let it. For so much as there can be no reparation, unless the place be
dried to the vttermooste: For the bones are most dry, and the nourishmente of
bones, is the matter reparinge them, which is naturallye dry: for to nurishe
is none other thing, but to assimulate nurishmente with that which is
nurished. Nutrition.
Wherefore Nutrition is done by the like, as Diminution Diminution.
is done by the contrary.

And now for as much as of all wounds of bones, those of the head are most
perilous: I think it most meet to begin first with them, for if the wound
in the head where cranion or the brain pan is broken, should be healed in
the flesh before the bones be repared, it would surely cause death: both by
reason of ye brains Dilicasie, and nobleness, and also that worse accidents
follow thereof, then of the breakinge of any other bone.

Of the wound in the head, with breakinge of Cranion. Chapi. Vii.
When the wound is made in the head with breakinge of the Sculle: Wounds in
the head.
consider whether it be broken unto the inward parts or no, that is to say to
duram matrem* which thou maiste know by diverse means and ways, partelye by
perseverance, and partlye by infallible experimentes, Signs of brekynge of the
sculle.
the signs be these. The feelinge of great pain, vomiting, tears of the
eyes, crokednesse of the sight, inflammation or rowlinge of the eyes. etc. the
experimentes are these: take a strong threde double twisted, Experiment^
and wereit, and let the patiente hold it stronglye in his teethe, and begin
thou at the mouth of him, and with thy nails stretche and streigne out the
threde, til thou come at the other end of the same, holding it straight a
cubite length from the tethe, and make a sound upon the threde with thy
nail, and do so often times. If the patiente may sustain the sound,
without feelynge of peine, then is not the sculle broken to the Dura matter.
for if it be broken, he may in no wise sustain nor suffer the harping of the
nails upon the threde, or else thou may also take and smite his head, with a
small dry wand of wylowe or of ye Pine tree, and hold thine ear to his head.
And if the sculle be whole, But because neither this, nor the former way is
always certain, the best is to lern also other men's ways, that when we know
all, we may chose and use the best,
it will make an hole sound: but if it be cut or broken, it will make a
dumme noise, after the comparison of a broken Bell and a whole. And have no
trust in the well eatinge and drinkinge, sleapinge, and goinge to the stool
of yt patie^t (and such like: of the which both Rola^dus and Rogerus do
speak, for they are deceyuable. But so^etime it is evident enough to perceive
ye breakinge of the sculle, by the only sight, or touching of the same.
Therefore when thou art certain that the sculle is broken, mark if the wound
in the skin be less then the fracture of the sculle. If it be, make it wyder,
if thou se no token of death. But if thou se any token of death, it wear not
good to enterprise any new thing. And when this wound is enlarged, uncover as
behooves) al ye breach of the sculle, and mark whether the broken part be
entered under the whole bone: or if there be any broken pieces or shiuers,
which might prycke or hurt the Dura matter: for in these two cases thou must
remove the part of the bone vnderputte by the breach, and with instruments
convenient utterly take away the little broken pieces: which thing to do
follow this ordinance. Mark where the under part joins with the sculle, for
there it will be somewhat de^ted, and sometime the whole circumference or
cumpasse about, will be depressed or put down. Then for a day or two pour
in to all the broken sculle Oil of Roses warm: and in the wound above the
sculle* lay small Plegetes of ^^we, or little pieces of oulde clothe, infused
in Oil of Roses, and the yolke of an egg whotte. In the second or third
day; labor gentlye with Instruments to remove the bone: remouinge all that
is to be removed, by most tender, and delycate workinge: that thou touch not
Duram matrem, or the beginning of any sinewe. And remove in like manner; the
little shiver that greueth the Du^^ matter, if there be (...).

When the bone is taken away, look that thou have a fine linen cloth, wete in
Mellis Rosati colati, part Vna, and Ole^ Rosati, partibibus duabus warmed:
conueyinge it very tenderlye and warely, between the bone and duram matre^. and
fylle all the wound of the sculle te^derlye with such clothes wete in the
same manner. And in the wound of the flesh lay towe or ly^te, wete in Oleo
Rosato, cum Vitellooui admisto: and after that have a subtyl Plegete made of
Towe, that may comprehend all the wound of the skin, wete in the same
medicyne. And last of all lay on great boulsters or pressures of towe, wete
in the somer time in cold water, and in the winter in wh^tte water, and well
wrong, and spread over with the medicyne made ex Olei Rosati Vnciis duabus,
aceti Vnciae dimidio, Boli Armeni Vncia Vna, the which boulsters lay over all.

Provided that the head be shaven before, and so do still continuallye, till
the wound show abundant quiture. And then begin to put upon Duram matrem,
of the most subtille poulder of Incence that may pass through a cearse: and
upon that po^lder a fine cloth, wete in Melle Rosato, and Oil of Roses whote:
and dress the clothe even and smothe, and fille all the wound in the bone
there with: fyllinge also the wound of the skin with dry linte, so fulle, that
thou suffer not the flesh in ye wound to cover the bone, until the
reparation of the fracture be made. And upon the woundeof the skyn, lay the
mundificatiue above said of Mel Rosarum and Barlye flower, so much as may
fylle the wound, and the bredthe of thy finger round about the same: and
evermore about the same a defe^siue de Bolo Armeno, and in the end administer
a consolidative, or a cicatrizative, the which I will describe in the end of
this work.

And in all other crackes and breaking of the sculle, whereas be none of the
causes above said, it shall suffyce thee to adminyster to the broken bone, a
sovereign medicyne of Mel Rosarum, and Oil of Roses warmed: and fill all the
wound of the skin, with Oil of Roses hot, and the yolke of an egg, till
quitture be ingendered: and then upon the wound, and about the same, a
defensive of Bole Armeniake, and when thou haste made matter, lay on the scull a
fine clothe wete in thy Mel Rosarum and Oil of Roses, and fill the wound of
the skyn with dry linte, and upon the wound, a mundificatiue of Mel Rosarum,
and barlye meal, and about the same a defensatiue of Bole Armeniake, and thus
do till it be perfectly cured and healed.

Of the governance of all wounds, without breakinge of Cranion, whether they
be Apostemate, Dyscrasiate, Concouate, or made by contution. Cha. viij.
THe governance of all other wounds, without breakinge of cal^^la may be
done by stitchinge, and poulder made of calx Viua, as it is said in the third
Chapter. and ye must not use Melle Rosarum strained with oil of Roses, but
only Oil of Roses and the yolke of an egg, Sanies.
till Sanies or quitture be dulye ingendered: and after that use a
mundificatiue of Honey, of Roses, and barley flower, and a defensatiue of Bole
Armeny about the wound, A defensive.
for truly a defensive of Bole Armeny, is exceeding profitable in all wounds
of the body, to preuente and eschew Apostemations. For nothing is more
profitable to the patiente, nor more to the worship of the Chirurgien, then to
keep the wounded members from swellinge and Apostemation. etc. for an Aposteme
coming upon the wound of the head, is cause of alienation and of death.
And if it happen unto some sinewie member, it causes the Spasme of repletion,
mortification, or corruption of the member, and of death. And the way to
preuente or eschew such Apostemations, stands in good diete and governance
of life. Wherefore in this place I will set a diete, as a common doctrine for all
wounded persons, both in the head and Sinewys members.

First, A general diet for wounds
let this be as a special diete, the croomes of bread washed in winter.v.
times in warm water, and after the last washinge, put thereon white sugar
Roset, and in the Summer, let it be washed only in cold water: and now and
then make the potage with barlye, but let the Barlye first be soked, and after
beaten and hulled, then sodden, and seasoned with Penidies, or Sugar Roset, or
with Almonde milk, in all manner of wounds save only of the head. Almondes
to be refused in wounds of the head.
Wherein I approve not Almondes, for they have a manner of fumous propertye,
noisome to the head, and if the patiente be very weak, or have naturallye a
feeble stomach, he may take small chickens sauced with Agresta, and the flesh
of a young Kidde, and the fete of Hogs, all seasoned with Agresta, or with
wine of sour Pomgranates, and let their drink be wine of Pomgranates: and
especially for men wounded in ye head, and sinewye members, geuinge.x. parts
of water with one part of wine, I think Sirupus de Agresta, is here to be
understood.
or Agresta with clear cold water, and one part of wine. Or this excellent
drink folowinge, which comfort the stomach, and defends the vapoures to
assende, it quenches heat, and makes not costiue: Rec. Hordeimundi, Vncias
duas, micarum panis, Sacchari Rosati, Granoriam Granatorum, Singulorum, Vncia^
Vnam, Primoru^ siccorum, numero december. Let all these sethe in.x. pound of
water, til half he consumed, and then cleanse it, and keep it in a vessel of
glass, and let it be administered cold. And let nothing be given
actuallye hot, but if the patiente be young and Sanguine, and have bledde but
little at his wound, Phle^otomye for the wounded.
if also be he strong, let him blood on the contrary side, but if he be feeble,
let him be ven^osed. And see that every day once, the duty of the bellye
be provoked, by a suppositarye if need be, as when it comes not of it self
naturallye. For these things aforesaid, with a defensive of Bole Armeniacke,
defends the wounded member from receauynge of superfluites. For when every
course of humores is ceased, then art thou sure that there shall none Aposteme
come upon thee.

And after this by little and little, and not suddenly, permit thy patyente to
a larger diete, and also to the use of wine, Wine to be eschewed in wounds of
the head.
save only to men wounded in the head, or in the synewye members: and unto
those give no license to drink wine, except for necessitye of faintness of
the stomach, or lake of strength. And then let it be light wine, sour, and
well watered. For there is nothing that does so much damage unto the head,
and sinews as does wine. And therefore in those manner of wou^des it is not
good to grant drincking of wine, but only at the end of the cure. And when
a wound chances in other bones, and those bones broken: thou shall heal
them after the cure of Algebra: the which thou shalt read in a partycular
Chapter of the same.

But if the wound be apostemate, either for that the Chirurgien knew not how
to defend it, Of wounds apostemate.
or that because the tente is to great, or the vnguente put in extreamelye
whotte, or by alteration of the aer, or debility of the member receauinge: for
surely if it chance, notwythsta^dinge the necessary applycation of due
remedies: it is the^ a very evell sign. Namely that the hurt member is
greatly weakened. Nevertheless if such an aposteme be done in a nervous
member, the cure thereof is al ready ta^ghte. But if it be in a fleshye
member, make a Cataplasma, de quatuor partibus Aquae, Vna part Ol^i Oliuarum
maturarum, and farinae triticeae, partibus duabus. and lay it upon the aposteme
made with the wound, applyinge it so long, till the swelling and pain be
gonne, and that the wound cast out matter aboundantlye. And then lay thereto
a mundificatiue of honye, meal, and water, till it be perfectly mundified. For
a wound where in there is an aposteme, neither can nor ought to be
consolidate* for all consolidatiues are there unto hurtfulle: except it be
first ryped, and the pain aswaged, and then expertly mundified, and last of
all consounded.

Also if there be in the wound any distemperance, Of wounds with Dyscrasia.
first let it be cured with his contrary: as cold with heat, and heat with
cold, and so of other* and when this distemperance is removed: then turn
again to thy principal cure.

Moreover if there be in the wound any concauitye, Wounds with concauyte or
^olownesse.
or holownesse, it shall first be replenished again with due flesh: for if
it wear healed above and holowe under neathe: of very necessitye there
should remain in the concauity fylthe and corruptyon. The which would
putrefye the place, and constreigne the Chirurgien to open the wound again:
and so the last labor should be more then the first. Replenish it first
therefore with the above said mundificatyve, laid on the wound: and with the
poulder of Incence put therein: or with some other incarnatyue, or regeneratyue
vnguente, such as shallbe written in the end of this book* and then in the
end let it be healed up.

Also if a wound be made with contusion, Of a wound made by contusion.
or brusyng, as by a fall, by the stroke of a stone, or a staff, or any
other thing that is not sharp: thou shalt not at the first administer thereto
a consolidatiue: for in everye brusure, the Flesh and the Sinews are of
necessitye smytten together, (if the member be Sinewye:) and needs will
putrefye. Then would consolidatiues constreigne the fylthe to tarry with in
the member, and so all the member should be corrupted, or else constreigne thee
to open the wound again: which should be dowble pain and labor, both
unto thee, and to thy patyente. For long feblenesse of any member in^u^eth
all the body to corruptyon.

Therefore it is first to be Or rather digested.
riped, secondly to be mundified, thirdly (if there abide any holownesse,) to
regenenerate and incarne it, fourthlye and last of all to consolidate it.
Four intentions to be noted and observed.
Sauinge only that if the bruise be but little, it will then be soon healed,
by annoyntinge the place about the wound with Oil of Roses, and upon the
iuncture strewe poulder of Myrtles, and mundifye the wound with a
mundificatiue of Mel, and then conuenientlye heal it up.

Of wounds made with venomous Beasts, as of the bytinge of a mad Dog, or
otherwise. Chapter ix.
IF the wound be made with the bytinge of a mad dog, Wounds venomous.
(which thou may know by this, a Hen will not eat the bread that is
infused or infected in the wound, Experiment to know^ venomous wound.
and if she eat it, she dies thereof) my counsel is, that no Chirurgien go
about to heal or consound such a wound at the first, but keep it open.xl.
days at the least, and in places where no danger is of such work to be doe^,
it is good to make an actual cautery, and put there to hot medicines: as
Salt and Musterde, mixed with Honey, and make Phisicalle remedies, of the which
this under written is the best. Rec. de Cinere cancrorum fluuialium adustoru^,
Physical remedies,
parts quinque, Gentianae, parts tres, terra sigi^latae, parts sex. All
these together make in fine poulder, and give the patiente every day to drink.
drach. ii. the space of a month, with the water wherein Crabbes or Crefishes
are sodden: and after.xl. days, make Consolidation effectually. and this
understand likewise of al venomous wounds.

All these things considered, thou maiste surely proceed in the cures of
wou^des: and I leave the rest to thine own discreation.

Thus ends the first part of this work.

The second part of this work ensues, which treats of Apostemes, and
contains xv. Chapiters.
Of the causes of Apostemes in generalle.
The first Chapter.
OF Apostemes, understand that the causes of them be double: Cause of
Apostemes.
that is to say, of an outward cause, or of an inward cause. Of an outward
cause, Cause Procatar^tike, or primitive.
as of a stroke, or of a fall, or of a wound altered by the aer, or other
like. Of an inward cause, as of abounda^ce of inward superfluities. Cause
intern or antecedent
The cause materialle is in.vi. manners: for either it is Humoralis, namelye
Sanguine, Cholerirke, Phlegmatic, or Melancholicke, or else watery or windye:
and that also either simple or co^pounde: although an Aposteme be most rarelye
ingendered of one only humor, as I will here in order express: beginning
first at a Sanguin Aposteme, and so after of the reaste.

Of sanguin Apostemes. Cap. ii.
IF blood abound over all the body, Apostemes Sanguine.
inflaminge and heatinge the heart, and so the body, and yet not defiled:
there is engendered a continual Fever, called Sinocha, Synocha.
but if it be defiled: then is the Fever a continual Sinochus. Synoch^s.
but if it occupye not all the body, but only some particular member, the
blood being most thin in substance, and flowynge in quality: it makes a red infla^mation dispersed abroad in all the outward face of the member,
Erysipelas nothum.
which is called Herisipila notha: because it is made of blood reduced like
to the nature of choler. But if the blood be gros^er naturally in substance,
and hot in quality: Carbunculus.
then it makes Carbunculum. Which is swarte in colors, and hard in felinge,
and in the uppermost part, of color like ashes: which comes of adustion.
But if the blood be to much in quantitye, and yet natural: then it makes
Flegmonem. Phlegmone.
The signs whereof is redishnesse in sight, because of the similitude of the
humore: hardness, for the lightness: a deep swellinge caused by the matter in
the depenesse of the member, (that is: contained in the flesh): pulsatyon, or
beatinge, by flowinges, which are caused by heat, working in the matter:
infla^mation by the presence of heat multiplied: and sumtime is made the fever
Effimera: Ephemera.
specially about the br^dinge of the matter, or quytture. At which time all
the foresaid accidents are more grenous, then when the matter is corrupted, and
fullye ryped.

Of Choleric Apostemes. Cha. iii.
IF choler bear rule, or have domination in the body, Apostemes Choleric.
(as sometime it has:) either it is putrefied and defiled, or not: Icterus.
If that which is not putrefied be in all the body, it makes Icteritiam.
Serpigo.
If it be in one only place, it makes Serpiginem, Tyria.
or Thiriam. And when it is defiled, being among the veins, Tertiana continua.
and continuinge in all the veins: it makes a continual tertian. But if it
be specially about the heart, Causon.
or the mouth of ye stomache: it makes a Causon. Tertiana i^ter ^nittens.
If without the veins. It causes a tertian interpolate. Erysipelas Verum.
But if any such Choler not putrefied Destitute, left, or forsaken.
destytute of nature, be gathered in any outewarde member ^ it makes
Herisipilam Veram, the signs whereof are these. A red color myxed with
yelownesse, according to the similitude of the matter: a swellinge which is
caused of the fiery lightness of the matter which ascends: hardness it has,
caused by the dryness thereof: with a prickynge heat, greuynge the hand that
touches it, which comes by the reason of the sharpness of the matter.

Of Phlegmatic Apostemes. Cha iiii.
PHlegm^, Apostemes Phlegmatiue
having domination in the body, either it is defiled, or undefiled. If it be
defiled: it is either within the vessels of the body, and makes Anfimerinam
continuam sin^ rigore: Amphemerina conti^^a.
or else without the vessels and makes an interpolate quotidian, (...).
with rigor. Also if it be not putrefied, it i^ either over all the body, and
makes (...) (...).
which is one of the kinds of Hydropsye or else in one only place, and
makes in Aposteme, called (...) O^dema.
or Vnd^nia. The signs whereof are these. witness, of the likeness of the
matter softness, as when a man thrusts in his finger, there remains a
pitto, which is caused of mouistnesse: cold in the feling, because the (...)
whereof it proceeds is colds: and with little ache or none, because there is no
assault of heat. Nevertheless this aposte^e is much more painfulle when it
is fully putrefied, then it was before because every aposteme, though it come
of cold matter, after the fulle putrefaction, receaueth a strange heat* and by
this reason is every exiture, Exiture what it is.
(that is every famous apost^me), judged to be whotte, although it come of a
cold cause. As the quotidian and quartane fevers, are judged hot sicknesses:
and yet they come of a cold matter.

Of Melancholic Apostemes. Chap. v.
NOw melancholy superabounding, either it is putrefied, or not putrefied: and
being putrefied, either it (...) all the body, or one place. If it occupye all
the body, Lepra.
either it is externallye, and makes Lepran: or else inwardlye. Quartana
cont^^^^.
And then, either the matter is within the veins, and makes a continual
quartane: or else without the veins, Quartana Intermittens.
and makes a quartane interpolate: or else in one place only, and makes
Cancrm^^^. Cancer.


But if it be not putrefied: either it is over all the body and makes
Melanchiron, Melanchiron scirrhus.
that is the black Jaundies: or else in one place, and makes a hard
Aposteme, called Sclirosin. Whereof these are ye signs, hardness because of ye
dryness and grosenesse of the humor: without pain, because heat is absente,
and for that an insensible comparion of matter occupies the place: and the
color is like the colour^ of the body, or inclininge somewhat to leadinesse.
for although Melancholy be black, yet because it is ponderous or heavy, the
color thereof is not presented to the utter part of the body or skin. and
in these signs it differs from the Cancer. Signs.
for a Ca^cer which comes of putrefied Melancholy, because it has gotten
unto it a heat: does ache and burn, by reason before showed, and the veins
that are about it are diverse. for though the humor be melancholic whereof it
proceeds: yet in the putrefaction thereof, it receives a strange lightness
and heat. Whereof the veins comprehendinge the Cancer be of diverse colors,
so that they do assimulate or show the likeness of the disease. and for this
cause was it called Cancer, for that it represents the form and shape of a
sea Crabbe, which is round, and has many feet.

Of watery Apostemes. Cha. vi.
THe watery Aposteme comes of abundance of cold upon the liver, Apostemes
watery.
ingenderinge much waterinesse: and is of the nature of Yposarca:
Nevertheless this waterinesse, Hyposarca.
is sometime gathered together in one only place of the body, and that
chieflye about the navell: the signs and tokens whereof are these. The color
is like the color of all the body: in so much that if thou felest it with
the.ii. fingers of thy.ii. hands, puttinge the one finger a good distance from
the other, thou shall feel a a floude under thy fingers, so that thy one finger
shall put away the water under the other: and it is ponderous, and heavy,
without any akinge. I have healed such an Aposteme with incision, and dryinge
of the water, in a woman that had it about the navel* which was as great as
two pound weight of bread.

Of wyndye Apostemes. Cha. vii.
THe wyndy Aposteme is ingendered of a vapor or wind, Apostemes wyndie.
resolved by the working of feeble disoluing heat, not of power to consume it,
which vapor is set between the coats of the members, and especially in the
region of the mouth of the stomach, and in the gryndes, so that many believe
it to be a Rupture. yt signs whereof be these. It is hard, with stiffenesse
against thy finger when thou touchest it, and like a bladder it is full of
wind, and if thou smite thereon it foundeth, and the color of the place is
not changed from the color of the body, and know that this Aposteme, is
much likened to the hard Aposteme made of pure Melancholy before specified.
But he that ca^ decerne the difference of ye hardness of a stone, from the
hardness of a hogs bladder full of wind: or between a hard thing, and a
thing extended or stretched, may sone know how to discern the difference,
between these.ii. Apostemes. And it is also likened to the waterye Aposteme:
but the waterinesse which is in the waterye Aposteme, and the absence of water
in ye windy Aposteme, shows difference enough between them.

Of the Aposteme called Botium. Cha. viii.
THere is also another cold Aposteme, Botium.
called Botium, which is often placed in the throat, and it is made in two
manners. That is: either by matter ingedered of hott apostemes, or of diversity
of putrefied Phlegm. Of which some have matter wtin, like curded chese, some
like claye, and some like dregs of Oil, some thick like potage, and some
other all grainy, and full of gobbets, of which some be mouable in the upper
part^ of the member, onlys under the skyn: and other immovable, and infyred in
the bothome of the member, and yet have no color.

Of Apostemes of compounde humores. Chapi. x.
BY these things that are written of simple Apostemes, Apostemes of compound
humores.
the knowledge may be had of those that are compound. For if Choler be
compounde with blood, in the ingenderynge of Apostemes: the more part being
blood, Phlegmone erysipelatodes
it is called Flegmon Herisipilades. But if there be more part of choler, then
of blood: then is it called Herisipila Flegmonides, Erysipelas Phlegmonodes
and they are known by signs above specifyed. There is sometime compounde
together, blood, choler, and melancholye: and then they make Anthracem.
Anthrax.
The signs whereof be these, hardness, diuersitye of color in the circuit:
and that thing it has common with the Cancer. But yet there is dyfference:
for in this thing is more infla^mation and feblenesse of heart: sometime
swoundynge, and tremblyng of the heart, with profundity, or depenesse of
sleep: yet not true sleep, but abusedlye so called. And in the upper part is
a manner if bladder, ash colored: which seems to be drawn down to the lower
parts, as if it were drawn with a thr^^e. And thou may well know^, that it
is made of diverse humores, if thou mark the diversity of the matter, which
shallbe purged after the maturation, in the time of mundification. For thou
shall find in the mydest of ye toughe matter a hard gross substance, which
is (of the common sort) called the foot or core of the disease, the which
being taken away, there remains an holowe place: after the which, it
neadeth nothing but regeneration of the flesh, and healinge up of the Ulcer.
And this aposteme is malicious, by the reason of the admi^tion of contrary
things. Also if Melancholye be co^pounde with Phlegm, Phlegm having the
upper hand: it ingendereth Glandules. Glandulae.
But if Melancholye overcome the Phlegm, Scrophulae.
it ingendereth Scrophules. The signs whereof are these: absence of color and
in feshyon like an Almonde. and also they move as it wear in swimming, and are
many together of one color. And commonly they come under the arm holes, in
the throat, and in the grindes. And what so ever is all ready spoken of
Apostemes, is spoken of those that be made of natural humores.

Of Apostemes of unnatural humores. Capi x.
IT remains now yt we speak of apostemes yt come of humores unnatural, of
the which some be very euel and perilous. And who that would know perfectlye
the nature of apostemes, which come of unnatural humores: let him endeavor
him self to know the generation of humores in the body, as well those that be
natural, as those that be unnatural: And frequentlye mark the Apostemes that
come of the same, with the fashion and colors of them. And the accidents that
follow of them, with also the matters that proceed from them. And so by good
Theoricalle knowledge, and long experience: he shall obtain the
understanding thereof, and otherwise not. And having this, let him give praise
to almighty God, who is the author and geuer of all good knowledge and
cunninge. And here it would be very necessary, to speak of the generation of
humores, both natural and unnatural: teaching how they be generate, and of
their matter and substance. But that we here omit, because the intention of
this work is breuity, and is but a forerunner to a greater work: which by
the grace of God, hereafter shall be set forth.

Understand therefore, that of Apostemes made of unnatural humors: some be
hot, and some be cold. The cold: are knottes, and knobbes, which are
round in form, which are oftentimes in the forehead, in the back of the
hands, and of the fete, and in the joints: and their matter is glasy Phlegm,
destitute of heat. And so^etyme there is mingled a sweet Phlegm, with
Scrophules Scrophules.
and Glandules, whereof mention is made before. Th^re are also made Glandules,
and Scrophules: Scrophulae
which when they come to rypenesse, are called Squamos, the mundification
whereof is hard and difficille. Squamosae.


Of Apostemes made of Choler and Melancholye aduste. Cha. xi.
OF Choler aduste, and of Melancholye aduste, and of the admistion of them
together: are caused diverse Apostemes, after the diversity of the quantity of
the humores. and they are according to the diuersitye of the place, and the
variety of the strength, and feblenesse of the member receiuinge to be feared,
the danger or peril whereof is more or less: according to the nobility, or
ignobilitie of the member, and specially in the legs: of Auicene they are
called Can^renae. If they occupy the depest or lowest part of the member,
Gangrena.
although not all the member, it is called of Auicene Ascachilos. But if it
occupy all the member it is called Herpes, Aschachilos.
this Herpes is made of euel ulcers, Herpes.
whereto much corrupt and venomous matter descends. And it may also come (as
Auicene says, and as I have seen,) by openinge of any feeble or inflated
member in the cold aer: for by yt means the extreme parts are mortified,
because the liuelye heat may not come there at. So that those mortified
extremities corrupt the member, except it be restreigned: so that sometime of
very necessitye, the foot must be cut offe even to the ioynte to save the
leg. Sometime there are also made by the admixtion of the said corrupted
humores, Bladders, Formica, Miliaris, and Prima, called Ignis persicus. The
which are all diverse, after the diuersitye of their co^posytion. And of these
names is much diversity among authors: for which diuersitye thou need
not care, but only have respect to their colors and accidents. For almost
to them all belongs one manner of cure: as thou shalt perceive hereafter.
Nevertheless, these bladders are made of the foresaid matter: sharp, light,
and seking way outward to the skin, by reason of the lightness. This Formica,
Formica.
is also a pustule, but is deper in the flesh, and sone turns to vlceration.
Miliaris, Miliaris.
is made of the same matter: but it is more ashy, because of adustion: and it
makes many small pustules like the sede of Milium, with great heat and
itche. Prima.
Primae: are also Pustules, swarte, and hard, having about them a citrine
color: which are made of yt more part of choler aduste, and the less part
of aduste Melancholye.

Of the cure of Apostemes made of an outward cause. Chapi. xii.
Now that we have brieflye declared, Apostemes the cure of them.
the differences of apostemes: it is mete that we resort to our purpose, that
is to say to the cure of them: followynge the doctrine of good authors, and
our long experience. The cure of an aposteme comming^ ^f an outward cause,
if it be of a wound: is all ready taught. But if it be of a bruise, a stroke,
or of a fall, the stroke of a staff, or of a stone: the best curation is, (if
he that is hurt be young and strong:) to let him blood on the contrary
side: but if he be weak to ventose him, To this medicine in other coppies is
added pul^^s corticis fraxim^.
and annoint the place with warm Oil of Roses: strewinge thereon, when it is
newlye anointed, powder of Mirtilles, for this manner of cure establishes, and
stays the place: except it be to great a bruise. But if the place be not
defended from apostemation by this medicine, but comes to exiture: namelye
the generatyon of quitture: let it be ryped, and sone opened, where the matter
most depends: and mundify the place with a mundificatiue, made ex Farina
tritici, aqua, and Melle, and after let it be regenerate with flesh, and then
let it be confounded with incarnatiues and consolidatiues. Putting always
about the hurt place, a defensive de Bolo Armeno, Oleo Rosacto, and Aceto,
Vnguentu^ defensi^^m.
to the conservation of the whole parts: least they be also corrupted. Of
those consolidatiues, and incarnatiues thou shall read in the antidotary.

Of the cure of Apostemes, coming of an Inward cause. Chapi. xiii.
OF apostemes that come of an inward cause, it is to be noted, that either
they are resolved, (if they will be put back,) or Indurate: or else they co^^e
to Saniem, or to putrefaction. and although resolution is so^etymes made by
repercussio^, as is also somtymes maturation, yet is neither the one nor the
other done properly, but improperly. And if it behooved to note exactlye, the
cures of these apostemes: It wear nedefulle now to amplifye our matter, and
to describe the cures of them, each particulerlye.

But for as much as I have purposed, and promised, to write the most notab^^
and shortest cures, in the most shortest manner, for the breuitye of this book:
I intend not now to delay the time in words. Therefore know this, that thou
may reduce the cures of all apostemes, unto one brief division, A whotte
aposteme.
namelye to the cure of whotte Apostemes and cold. It is the propertye of an
hot Aposteme, either to be repercussed, resolved, or maturate. And the
propertye of the cold, is to be maturate, to be resolved, and indurate by
exterior heat. A cold aposteme.
For it is seldom seen that cold Apostemes be repercussed. Begin therefore
in the cure of hot Apostemes, with Plebotomye on the contrary side, if he be
strong, and that in the beginning of the aposteme, before the confyrmation:
For after the confirmation, Phlebotomye is to be done on the same side where
the aposteme is. Or if he be feeble with ventosynge: enioyninge him a streighte
and cold diete, according to his strengthes: for all apostemes that come of
an inward cause are with repletion.

After the foresaid euacuations: begin to repercusse the matter, and to
comfort the member, that it receive no superfluities* except one of
these.vii. things following let thee, Seven things contrary to repercussio^
of aposteme^.
which be hinderable to repe^^^ssyon. The first is if the aposteme be in a
child. The second is, if it be in an oulde manne. The third is in a man new
recoueringe from some disease or sycknesse. The fourth if the matter be much.
The fyueth is, great contagion. The syxte is, if it be in the emunctoryes, as
in the neck or the throat, in the arm hole, or in the grynde. The seuenthe is
if the Aposteme be made by way of Deriuation: As when the member that
expels, is nobler then the member that receaueth. But if none of these seven
things appear in thy way, then repercusse the matter, with the juice of some
could Herbs, as of Solanum (which repercusseth with preuye Resolution. Or
cum Succo Portulacae Slluestris, Vel Vmbilici Veneris: cum Oleo Rosato, pauco
aceto, and pauco Bolo Armeno: or with some one of the good repercussiue
vnguentes, to be mencyoned in the end.

If the matter by these means be not repercussed: either because it inclyneth
to some quantitye, or that it be somewhat gross: When thou haste first purged
the body, begin to dyssolue it: administrynge a little honye with the a
foresaid repercussiue medicine, and after resolve strongly, according as thou
see the course of the matter to sea^e, and the pain and the sharpness waste
away, with some of the resolutiue medicynes, written in the antidotarye. But
if the matter enclyne to Saniem, in the time of Repercussyon, (which sometime
is made by means of accidents, and not properly,) or in the time of
resolution: Then hasten maturation with maturatiues. And being fullye riped,
look for the ripest, and for the most dependente place, and there open it:
making great openynges in great exitures, and small openinges in small
exitures: and thrust out all the matter softlye, except it be very much:
for then it is not good to thruste out all at one time, but by leisoure,
especially when the patiente is feeble. And when the place is open, and the
matter voyded, in part or in whole: mundifye the foresaid place with
mundificatiues that hereafter shall be written, and then incarne the flesh: and
after consolidate it, with medicines for the same purpose, described in the
antidotary. But beware thou make none incisyon, till the matter be fullye riped:
except it be nighe the noble members, or the fundament, or yt joints: or if
the matter be ready to corrupt the members. For in these cases it is
necessary to make incision before the ripnesse, layinge thereto such plasters
as may not only mundifye, but also maturate the rest that is not ripe. And
see that in no case in the time of resolution, maturation, and mundification,
that the Emplasters resolutiues, maturatiues, and mundificatiues: be not of to
whotte nature, nor to hard, but temperate. For sometime such things make the
aposteme furious.

And know that whotte sanguine apostemes, need little repercussyon, and much
resolutyon: and choleric apostemes, neade much repercussyon and little
resolutyon* and as in this case Phlebotomye belongs to sanguine men, even so
to choleric men, belongs the purgynge of choler in the body. And those
apostemes that are made of aduste humores, need only repercussyon before the
vlceration thereof: and after the vlceration lay no cold things in the
vlcerate. But lay about it a defensive of ^ole Armeniake, to defend the
ambulation and corrosion.

Of the Anthrax and Carbunculus.
ANthrax, and Carbunculus, because one is made of diverse humores, and the other
of gross blood, as is aforesaid: do require (after Phlebotomye and
purgations) emplasters, and meats and drinckes, comfortynge the heart, because
of their malice: especially the Anthrax, which is common with all other
venomous Apostemes. Give therefore to the patient, a cold and streighte diete:
as Pomgranates, Aples, Pears, Quinces, and wine of Pomgranates, with.x. parts
of could water: and let him abstain from all kinds of Flesh, if it may be:
If not, permit him the Flesh of Chickens, dressed with Agresta, or wine of
Pomgranates. Unto such also may Theriacamaior be profitablye given. But if
they have Stuporem Stup^r.
called also S^c^pen, (...).
and commonly swoundynge: Of this matter, look farther in my table at (...).
let them be raised, with the great sowndes, of trompetes, and timpanies:
Calling them very loudlye, by their proper names. And lay upon the heart a
could emplaster, made, ex Rosarum rubrarum, Sandali citrint, ana Vncia Vna,
F^rinae Hordeace^ Vnciis duabus, and Caphurae, drachmis duabus. Tempered
together cum aqua Rosacea, Velsucco pomorum Agrestium. But if the sore be in
the former part, about the ma^milles, or the breast: let the same emplaster
be laid between the shoulder blades.

But some peradventure may me^uaile at the giving of Theriacamaior, (...).
because it is whotte: but although it b^s^me not the breuitye of this work,
to dispute of every thing: yet because there has been, and yet now is
among the auncientes, diverse opinions: and because some have, and do approve
it, and some not: Thou shall understand although triacle he whotte: yet by his
nobility, and most profitable composition, there resulteth a most worthy
spirit, and friendly to man his complexion. And therefore we have found it
valiente against venim, both whotte and cold: and against venimes, that are
contrary to man his nature of the whole kind. It is found also to move the
bellye, and to stay the flux: and therefore I surely say, that as every
thing, emonge things engendering a common complexion, Complexio elementalis.
(which is called Complexio elementalis), has morouer a proper hid nature,
which is of the whole kind* of has Theriaca, beside and above the
elementary complexion, in yt doing and sufferinge of things, enteringe
together his composition, a hid property, against all kinds of venim, to man
his body contrary. And therefore it profits against every venomous a
posteme: for the example and profit whereof I say farther, that there came to
me in the City of Milaine, a young man, (brought by an Apothecarye his
friend,) having Anthracem in the parts of the face, whose malice was so
excedinglye increased, that the whole head, face, and neck, was incrediblye
inflated: and the sick man was even now in the signs of death. For he had
no pulse, and also he swounded: In so much that I willed the Apothecarye to
lead him home to his house, for he is a dead man. And the Apothecarye said,
is there then none other remedy with him? Then I a little bethinkynge my self,
said. Truly if thou had of the best Triacle, and gave it him in great
quantity, perhaps he might yet live: but I believe it not, otherwise then very
doubtfullye.

The apothecarye then led him to his house, (scante able to go), and gave to
him, of approved Triacle about ii. drachmes, and laid him in a bed,
coueringe him, and immediatlye he fell into a swette, which begane about the
head, and diseased place. And within a while he swette over all: and lo his
pulse returned, and he was comforted. And when his swette was dried up, the
apothecarye (of his own motion), gave to him the same day one drachme more of
the same Triacle, and so was he healed: saving that there remained on him a
certain bladerye Ulcer, which after was easilye cured. And surely I never
saw any other man escape, after swoundinge, tremblinge of the heart, and
(which was the greatest maruelle) without pulse. But I have seen an infynite
sort, that (speaking and fealinge as it wear no grefe,) wear by me judged to
dye, and have died: to the great meruail of their friends, at the
Prognostication.

And thus much have I said to thee of Triacle* that thou may perchance
through these words, deliver some man from death. And I beseech the
omnipotente God, whose name be praised for ever, to grant me synfulle man
through his mercy, that this my little book may be to his honor, and the
profit of his creatures. But now to our purpose.

After the comfortinge of the heart, and euacuation of the matter: the
Carbuncle, and Anthrax, shall be ryped, with their proper maturatiues, whereof I
will make mention in the end of this work. By the which remedies, all other
furiouse apost^mes may be cured: namelye, by comfortinge the heart and the
member. And after vlceration, proceed with the curations that shall be given
thee in the Chapter of ulcers.

Of cold Apostemes. Chapi.xv.
Cold apostemes are healed with the purging of the body: to the which,
Trocis^us de Turb^t^ is a specialle medicyne. Which was of our master, as we
will show in the antidotarye. and after the body is purged make resolution, or
maturation, (if r^so^ution can not be made^) And in the antidotary thou shalt
read resoluti^^s, and maturatines for these apostemes, Scrophules, Glandules
and Nodes. And also mundificatiues for the apostemes, called Botia.

The third part of this work, contains three Chapiters, namelye of
Ulcers, the Cancer, and the Fistula.
Of Ulcers in generalle. Chapi.i.
VLcus, and Vulnus, do manifestly dyffer* for Vulnus is a wound or a cut
newly made: and an ulcer is a sore, corrupt, or oulde. Although in Physic
it be sometimes found, Art of medicyne.
that an old sore is of some named Vulnus: Vulnus.
but there Vulnus is taken for Plaga, Plaga.
and not properly. An Ulcer also differs from the Cancer, and Fistula, eue^
as That is ye general from the special, or the kind from the form.
Genus aspecie. For every Fistula is an Ulcer, and so is every vlcered Cancer:
but not contrariwise. and hereby shall the error of Rogerius, and Rolandus,
(...) and Rolandus their errores
be manifested: (who say, that every wound remaining uncured, ii. or.iii.
months, is not then Vulnus: but is called Cancer, or Fistula.) For all sores,
coming of vlceratyng Pustules, or of the coldness of the aer, or of any
corruptyon, or (properlye speakinge) by the incision of an aposteme: and also
all filthye, and putrefied sores, are ulcers: And yet are they properlye
neither Fistules, nor Cancers. For the Cancer, and Fistula, have their proper
differences: where in they varye from ulcers, as it shall appear. In Ulcers
therefore, there is some virulencye, with much liquide corruption: and that
corruption, if it have a color tendinge to citrine, or read: let it be
washed with could, and stipticke lotions: as the water wherein Alumen has
been resolved, and with aqua Hordei and Lenticularum and Bal^istiorum, both
composed and simple. But if it be not colored, let it be washed with Aqua
Mellis: and if the member be could inoughe, cum Melle and Vino, which lotions
thou shalt put into the ulcer. Or if it be holow, cast them in with a
s^ring: continuinge the same, until they come forth again, as fair as they
were put in. But now if the ulcer should be crustye, or should have
corrupt flesh, or flesh myred cum Sani^: Then ought it to be mundified,
(...) and Vnguento apostolorum, and Vnguento Viri^^, which all shall be
prescribed to thee in the end. But if the ulcer be fraudulent: or corrosiue:
let the contagion be repressed, by layinge about it, the medicyne of Bole,
often before showed. And upon it some stiptike corrosiue, such as shall
hereafter be given thee. After a perfect mundification, made with the
emplasters mundificatiues that are showed and to be showed: regenerate the
flesh, and cicatrize the ulcer, with medicynes for the same: whereof thou
shalt have plentye, But mark this well, that the purginge of the body by
vomyte, healpeth much, if the evil ulcers be in the ne^her parts: and by a
laxatyue medicine, if they be in the upper parts. For this is a way most
sure, because the matter that ran to the ulcers, is turned from the vlcer^
(...), and goes away: whereby the ulcer is the better mundifyed.

Of the Cancer. Chapi. ii.
Understand that a Cancer is either vlcerate or not. Cancer.
A Cancer not vlcerate, either is mad^ by growinge even from the beginnynge of
putrefied melancholye, as we have said in the Chapter of melancholic
Apostemes: At which time it begins to show like a Lupyne, and sometime it
grows like a great Melon: or else it is made by conuertion of a hard
aposteme, coming of naturalle melancholye not corrupted, by layinge to it
emplasters that are made of hot infla^mynge things: or by things to much
atractiue, inducinge humores to yt place. And this being Ulcered, is then
called a Cancer vlcerate: which also may come ^f wounds vndiscretlye healed.
A Cancer not vlcerate, in the beginning thereof, is not easy to be known:
Notwythstandinge the perfect signs thereof are all ready declared. But the
signs of a Cancer being vlcerate be these. First the brimnies thereof be
gross, hard, reuersed, and curn^^ly within: and it ^tinketh much. And also
this is thereof an infallible sign: If thou wash it with lie, For the which
look more in an annotation, set at the end of the. 4. part
there will come out superfluityes like slimye spittle. The first general
rule in the cure of a Ca^cer, is, that it is never perfectlye healed, unless
it be utterly extirped, with all his roots. And therefore of this rule
springs a second necessary rule, that it ought not to be cured by
cauteryes, either actua^le or potentialle: except it be in such a place where
it may utterly be had away. If therefore the Cancer not vlcerate, be in a
place replet^ with veins, s^ewes, muscles and arteries, as in yt neck, or in
the mammilles, or such like: see then that thou enterprise not to ripe it, nor
break it, nor cut it, nor cauteryze it: but purge the body with some
medicyne, that purges choler aduste. And give him a temperate governance of
life, forbiddinge all meats, ingrossinge and burning the blood: as Lentiles,
Cole wortes, Chese, Beef, Hares flesh, Goose flesh, Duckes flesh, and
Peper: and al other sharp things. And anoynte the place, and about the same,
with this Unguente folowinge: which will alaye and aswage the malice, and
defend it from vlceration. Rec. Tutiae lauatae, Cerussae: Ana, parts equales.
Incorporate these, cum Oleo Rosato, and succo portulac^, or of some other cold
herb. Incorporate this medicyne in a mortar of lead, putting in now of the
Oil of Roses, and now of the Juice, till the oyntmente be perfectlye made: And
anoynte therwyth the place. But if it be in such a place that it may be taken
utterly away: Then cut it away roots and all: lettyng it blede largelye,
and thruslynge the blo^de out of the corrupted veins, that thereby the
melancholy blood may be clean wasted. And then canterize it with a whotte
Iron, or a burninge medicine. Laying to it after that, a Cataplasma de Succo
Apii, Melle, and Farina Tritice^, till it be mundified. After the which,
regenerate the flesh, and consounde it. But if the Ulcerate Cancer be in any
place nouryshed, so that it may not utterly be taken away: Then is it not best
to cure it with a whotte iron, or a caustike medicine. But it may be palliated
by annoynting it with the vnguente of Tatiae and the diete aforesaid: and so
may the patyentes life be prolor^ged.

Of a Fistula. Chapi. iii.
AFistula Fistula.
is a deep ulcer, whose orifice is straight and the bothome large: having a
callous ha^dnesse in the circ^ite inwardlye, like the quill of a bird: And in
this thing it differs from an holowe ulcer. For a holowe ulcer that Rogerus,
and Rolandus, and a great many mo, do now a days call a Fistula: has no
inward callous, hardness, as a fistula has. And because of that hardness, a
Fistule is not perfectly mundified by Lotions and Iniections, as is a holowe
ulcer: but requires (after the Lotions written in the cure of Ulcers:) that
the callous hardness within be removed and mundified by cauteries, either
actualle or potentialle. After the which thou shalt adminyster unctuous
things: as Butter, and other such like as will supple and lose, the hard
eschare or core, that was made by the Iron, or caustike medicine. And after
that, mundify it with iniections, and Emplasters mundificatiues. And then let
it be incarned, with incarnatiues: and at the last consounde it with
consolidatiues, and Cicatrizatiues.

Nevertheless note this for a common remedy, as well in Fistules, as in
holowe Ulcers, which is also good in a new wound: namelye, that thou induce
the matter to the place most dependente, if it may be possible, that the
venomous superfluitye of the said Wound, Fistule, or or holowe ulcer, may
the more competentlye be dried up, or else prepare the member so, that the
Orifice may be always dependente. Of cauteryes or corrosiue medicynes, to
corrode and cauterize the Fistule, and Cancer: And also the unctuous medicines
to make the eschare fall (made by the^,) thou shalt read in the antidotarye.
And note that the said eschare, made by the cauterie or sharp medicine, ought
not to be had away by vyolence, but must be suffered: Layinge to the sore,
the foresaid medicynes: till it fall away gently, without compulsyon.

The fourth part of this work, treats of Algebra, or Restoration. And
contains ii. Chapiters, the first of Dislocation, the other of a Fracture.
Of Dyslocation. Chapi. i.
THe Intention of Algebra, Algebra.
is the restorynge of Dislocation, Dislocation.
or breaking of bones. R^storation
Dislocatio^ called Laxatio, is the remouynge of the bone out of his natural
pla^e. Know therefore that almighty God, Co^nexion of bones.
(whose name be euerlastinglye glorified; and praised,) has made many bones
in the body of man, for diverse necessary wor^kes, and operatyons. Whereby
necessarilye one member in the body of man, moves without another. Know
therefore that the conjunction of one bone with another, is in. a. x. manners.
One manner is by way of insertion of one with another, like as two sawes were
joined together, the tethe of the one saw, fillinge the voidnesse of the other,
as do sometimes caruers of tables, and as the bones of the head do ioyn, which
are.vi. b. An other manner, is the appodiation, or congregation (that is to say
the gatheryng together) of one bone to another, Sterron.
as do the.vii. bones of the breast. The third manner is, the fixion of one
bone into another, as are the tethe into the Jawe bones. The fourth manner is
the conjunction of one bone with another, by ligamentes going between: As in
the ioynte of the shoulder bone, with the ad^utorio: and so in all other
joints. For in yt joints is made a conjunction of one bone with another, by
the mediation of a hard body, insensible, and flexible: which passing out
of the extremity of the one bone, enters into the other: bindinge the bones
together. But yet the flexibilitye thereof, obeys to the lacertes that move
the member: so that the member may be bowed, as it is accordante to the same,
to do his conueniente, and proper office. And as for all other manners of
conjunctions of bones, there is in them no natural, nor voluntarye mouinges:
Therefore Dislocations be only made in joints. Notwithstanding certain
openinges, remouinges, diss^uerings, or departings, may other while be made in
the conjunctions of other bones. Saying then that dislocatio^ is made only in
joints* First join thou bone with been, as they were at their naturalle
begi^nnyng. And when thou haste so done, take a great linen cloth, and wete it
in a medicine made de Farina Cicerum, Vel Volatica Farin: Tritici, disteperata
cum (...), and bind it with gentle bonds, holdinge the place steadfast in his
ioynte. And do not as many do now a da^es in the time of reduction: for they
foment the member with warm water, which is most hurtfulle. For thereby the
member is eff^blished, rarefied, and prepared to receive superfluityes, namely
apostemation. But it thou fear peynes* anoynte the place, cum Oleo Rosato
calido. But if thou wear not with him at the beginnynge, and that it has
now remained certain days displaced, and that so, the place be grown to
hardness, the humores also ceasynge their naturalle course: Then that the
member may be the better restored, it is good that thou fomente the place, not
with whotte water only: but cum Aqua Calida decoctionis Chamaemeli,
Fenograeci, Seminis Lini, Mal^^e and Bisimaluae: that by these things the
place may be the better restored.

Annotations upon this Chapter.
a. Whereas Lanfraneus hear speaks of.^. manners of loyninges, and describes
but. iiii. read for thy larger conte^tation: the first chapyter of my first
treatise of Anatomye: where thou shall learn, as well the names, as the forms,
or all manner of ioyninges of bones.

b. Because here also, he names the.vi. bones of the head, to prove this
manner of co^nexion of bones: thou ma^ste not gather thereof, that all those.vi.
bones are so joined together, for that wear false. As by reading the third
chapter, in the first part, of the third tr^^tite* of my Anotamye, thou
may perceive.

Of a Fracture. Chapi. ii.
IF any bone be broken, first reduce him into his place: and then wete a
lynnen clothe in Oleo Rosato, Fractura.
and lay it about the member. And then lay over and about that, an other
clothe, Broken bones
wete in the forsaide medicyne, written in the Chapter of Dislocation. And
upon that clothe, lay small boulsters of towe, wete in Album^^e oui, and
over that towe, bind splintes with cords. And see that the splintes be made
according to the figure and quantitye of the member: bindinge it so that it
remove not, least the remouynge of the member hinder the restoration. lettinge
it not to be opened until the.x. day: except one of these.iii. things
following, constreigne thee to open it. That is to wete, much pain, caused
through hard bindynge: or by the course of humores, Three causes which (...)
the Chirurgien to open a broken bone before the ordinarye time. ^
gatheryng to an aposteme: or great Itch. If pain and ache, or the flux of
humores be ye cause: unbind it and anoynte the place cum Oleo Rosato, and
let him blood on the contrary side. And restreigne the patientes diete:
taryinge so till the flux of humores be ceased, and then bind it up again.
But if Itche be the cause: then unbind it, and wash it with warm water, and
then bind it up again: Lettyng it so continue till it be consounded. I will
also write among other consolidatiue medicynes, in the antidotarye: a medicine
that is best in Fractures, and in Dislocations. But note this, that in every
work of Chirurgerye, it is nedefulle and necessary, that then endeavor thy
self to work, above and beyond that which thou find written in books, and
especially in Algebra. For every science that depends upon workyng by the
hand, is much fortified by experiment and practice.

An Annotation upon the. ii. Chapter of the third part.
Ba^^e Viscose are the words of Lanfranke, about the which I was somewhat
troubled: for Ba^^e is a word out of use among the learned, and therefore not
to a few of them unknown. How be it I thinkinge (because Lanfrancus was of
Milayne,) that it might perhaps be some Italian word: thought good to
confer the same with some learned Italians, of whom I received this
interpretacion: Ba^^e say they is the dr^uling spitlle of suckynge children.
And therefore have I englished Ba^^e Viscose slimy spittle, which though I
thought I might safely so do, ye^ do I willinglye abide the censures of the
learned.

The fifthe part of this work ensues, containing.viii. Chapiters, and
treats of the diseases of the eyes.
Of the Composition of the eyes, and the diseases of the same.
The first Chapter.
THERE is no disease, in any officialle member of the body, so hardly known
of the Chirurgien: as are the diseases of the eyes. And that for the subtiltye
of arts composition in them. For the eye is meruailouslye composed, of.iii.
humores, and.vii. coats. Which all do serve to the composition thereof, and
are bodies most subtille, and to syghte as it wear incomprehensible: but by
understanding, they are very well comprehended, with also their composition
and vtilities.

Unto the eyes (thus noblye composed,) do come certain veins, bringinge to
them their nurishment: and also arteries bringinge life unto them, both so
small, and fine: that they are to the sight almost insensible. And from the
first conjugation, of the.vii. paier of sinews of ye brain, in the fore
part of the head, comes.ii. sinews, passing out of the brain, by the
fore part of the sculle: which payer do make one holow conjunction, before
they pass the sculle, after this manner. X. and as they pass the sculle, are
again divided in.ii. which do bear the visible spirit to the Crystalline
humore, which is the Instrumente of sight. And yet is helped in the visible
action, of ye humores Albugineus, and Vitreus, and also of the.vii. coats
Other Anatomistes judge the (...), to be but guardones, or as it wear several
(...) to ye humores and no workers in the visible action.
. One of which coats called Vuea, is through persed, which percinge is
called Pupilla: whereby the proper colors, forms, and figures, are sent to
the visible spirit, through a clear aer. There are also made outwardlye eye
liddes, having lacertes to move them, which by their closinge, defend the
eyes from outward hurtes, and also rest them from labors: and by a small
passage do work their actions, which are to se things visible. It were
very profitable in this place, to multiplye words upon the declaratyon of the
Anatomye of the eyes, and exactlye to notifye all diseases, that might happen
unto them, the which are very many. But if I should do so, I should pass
yt bounds of this little book. But I will give thee here the cures of
infirmities, which come to the hands of Chirurgiens, although not all, but
some that are common and best known, as Obtal^nia, Pruritus, Lachrima, Scabies,
Vlcera, Maculae, Catoracta. etc. which all do often come to yt hands of ye
Chirurgien.

Of a disease in the eye, called Obtalmia. Cha. ii.
OBtalmia is an aposteme or inflation, (...).
or a course of humores to the eyes, which sometime is litell, and sometime
great, sometime very great and euel, that which is litell, is made of small
humores, and so^time only of an euel whote complexion, or of the heat of the
sun, of duste, of smoke, or of much watchinge, which will sone be dissolved,
and made whole, with tempera^er of diete, and the white of an egg beaten and
skummed, and so laid to the eyes. This medicine is good for burninge heat, and
redness of the eyes, when it is but little: and unto many other infirmities,
which comme of heat, because ye white of an egg is cold, washing and apt for
collyries, having a certain gl^ines being applied to ye eyes, which is not
found in other simple medicines. The great Obtalmia, is when the eye aketh.
The Coniunctiua, being red, and the eye vexed with heat, sharpnes, and tears.

The greatest and worste Obtalmia, is that wherein there appears no part of
the Coniunctiua, but is covered over with a great read fleshinesse: the whole
eye being inflated, and also the eye liddes, which are as it wear reuersed:
and this does sone vlcerate ye eye. In the greater, and greatest kinds, it is
necessary (according to their quantities) to draw blood from the Cephalica
vein, and also to purge whotte humores: geuinge him lastly a diete so
sclender, as the patiente may continewe with: geuinge him also all his meats
actuallye cold, and in like manner what so ever is put into the eye: which
when it waxes whotte, must be removed. You may also for this purpose, lay
to the eye Collyrium Album, distemperatum cum lacte mulieris puella^
nutrientis. And emplaster the eye (until the infla^mation be removed,) with an
emplaster made, ex Rosarum Albarum and Santali Rubriana Vncia Vna, Farinae
Hordeaceae Vnciis duabus. Caphurae, dram Vna, distemperatis cum Aqua
Rosacea. And when the course of humores, and the pain is ceased: make
fome^tation cum aqua decoctionis Rosarum, and pauco Sale. But if this help
not, it is nedefulle to aplye thereto Collyrium de Thure, to maturate it, and
after that Puluerem Citrinum, to mu^dify it.

If after the Obtalmia, or by the same, there be made an ulcer in the eye:
(whereof these are the signs, that in Coiunctiua there is a red point, and
in the cornea is a white point. (Then use again collyrio Albo, to aswage the
peine, or if the Ulcer be so great, that thou feareste the going out of
Vuca, or that the disease called Bothor should ensue, (which is a certain
eminence, appearinge in the eye, resembling the grain of a grape:) then
shall Heles^r be necessary, which is to say Penetratiuum. But if thou fear
not this, and would heal the ulcer, use collyrio de plumbo. If farthermore
after consolidation of the ulcer, there do remain Albula id est Cicatrix, you
may cure the same, cum collyrio de Stercore Lacerti.

Collyrium Album.
Rec. Cerussae Ablutae, drachmas december. Sarcocollae grossae, drach. tres.
Amyli. drach duas. Tragacanthae. drach vnam. Opii, drachmae, semissem.
Beat all these well, and incorporate them with clean rain water. Then let
it be very well wrought on a marble stone, and after make it up in small
pelletes, like lentilles, which at your times of need, you may temper with the
milk of a woman that nourishes a maide^ child, and administer it with a
fether.

Collyrium de Thure.
Which maturateth apostemes of the eyes.

Rec. Thuris. drach. x. Antimonii. Singulorum drach. v. Sarcocollae. Singulorum
drach. v. Croci. drach. ii. Conficiantur cum aqua Foenugraeci, ac fiat
Collyrium.
Puluis Citrinus.
Rec. Sarcocollae. drach. x. Aloes. ana drachmas. ii. Croci. ana drachmas. ii.
Lycii. ana drachmas. ii. Mirrhae drachmam. i.
Bruise all these together, and use them.

Confectio Collyrii de Plumbo.
Which mundifieth and heals the Ulcers of the eyes

Recipe. Plumbi vsti. Antimonii. Tutiae ablutae. aeris vsti Gu^mi arabici
Tragacanthae Singuloru^ drach. viii,
Opii drachmam dimidiam.
Confectio Helesir.
Which is to be used when thou fear the eminence of Vuca to pass out, or
the disease of the eye called Bothor.

Rec. Antimonii Hematitae ana drach. x.
Acaciae drach. iiii. Aloes drach. i.
Bruise them, and form them, after the manner and bigness of Peper, cum succo
Verbenae, Vel corrigiolae, and when need shall be, temper one of the^ with the
white of an egg, and apply it.

Of Itche in the eyes.
Pruritus, called in English Itche, being in the eye: is cured by washinge
the eye, eueninge and morning with white wine, wherein has line Aloe
Succotrina, poudered, enclosed in a piece of linen clothe.

Of Scabbes in the eye.
Scabies, englished scabes, if they be light and new, are cured by washinge
the eye with white wine, wherein has been disolued Coperosa, sieve Vitriolum
Romanum.

Of Tears.
Lacrymae, or tears, are cured cu^ collyrio de Mirobalanis, whose composition
follows.

Rec. Tutiae drach. x. Coralli Ossium Mirobalanorum Aloes Succotrinae. Sing.
drach. ii.
Piperis drach. dimidium.
Make these in powder most subtillye, and put thereof a little in the angle of
the eye, with a fether.

Of spots in the eyes.
Maculae, or spots, are removed cum collyrio de Stercore lacerti made on this
wise.

Rec. de Raspatura Vasorum terraceoru^ Vitreatoru^, id est. Massacimia. (Which
comes from beyond the seas.) Spumae maris. (Which is a kind of Spongia
Marina, and is hard.)

Stercoris lacerti. Viridis Baurach.i. Salis Gemmae Sacchari R^bei ana.
Make of these a most subtle powder upon a marble stone, and after boil it
in libra Vna decoctionis Acori, and Chelido^^, and drach.x. tille half by
sethinge be consumed. Wherewith being strained, mix the former powder, and
thereof make Collyries. Use one of these, disolued in Aqua Rutae, Vel Foeniculi,
or else ye may put in the powder dry.

Of the web in the eye.
Vngula, may in the beginning, be cured with a Collyrie, which is also
common to the oulde scabbe of the eye, and the inuersion of the eye liddes,
thus made.

Rec. Floris aeris drach. iii. Vitrioli Romani Vsti, drach. v. Auripigmenti
rubri Baurach. ana dra.i.
Spumae Maris. Salis Ammoniaci. drach. ii.
Dissolve the Sal Ammoniake in Succo Rutae, and therewith corporate the rest
being poudered, and make Collyries, whereof dissolve one with white wine, and
administer it to the eye.

But if it be great and confirmed, take away then, what so ever may with
Instruments be taken away, and after cure it with a Collyrie.

Of the disease of the eye, called Cataracta. Chapi. viii.
A Cataracte confirmed, Cataracta
is not helped, but only by ha^dy work, and to do that, it is nedeful a
Chirurgien do first learn, and se it done, of a cunning man, that can well
remove, and put it away, with an instrument made like a nedle, which must be
pressed into Coniunctiua, fixing it inward Transueraslie, till the nedle (which
the workman shall still behold, as it passes under Cornea,) shall come to
the water, which is placed before the hole of Pupilla, which does prohibit
the sight. And then thou maiste put it dowen til the patient may see: and after
that put him.x. days in a dark house, in silence, without noise and bind
upon the eye an Emplaster, de Bolo armeno, distemperato, cum albuinine oui, put
between.ii. pieces of linen cloth. But note well, that this cure is deceiuable:
for it is seldom seen, that it turns not again. But yet I have seen some
not turn again. But if the Cataracte be not confirmed, it is healed with
often purginge of the head, cum pilulis chochiis, Pichra.
and Picra: and with abstinence from strong wine, and such things as cause
fumes in the head, prouocations to vomit, and indigestion, and with a
Collyrie of Galls, which is made as follows. Rec. Fellis aquilae, Vel
alterius Cuiuslibet auis, Collyriu^ de Fellibus.
seu auium, ex rapina Viuentium, drachmas december, and let them be dried.
Euforbii, Colocynthidis, Serapini, ana drachmam Vnam. Of these make Collyries
with the juice of Fenell croppes.

But see that thou look not, for a fulle doctrine of all diseases chauncynge to
the eyes, in this little book, which it conteyneth not: yet haste thou therein
certain good documentes, which shall in their cases be proffitable. But if
thou desire a fulle and perfect doctrine: tarry thou for the end of the
treatice, which I purpose by Gods grace to perform. In the mean time,
(besechinge God to grant me time, and place, to fulfill my purpose,) fear
not to work after these present doctrines.

And now take in good part, this proffitable Antidorye, promised in many
places of this book, conteinynge not only such medicynes, as are by any
thing treated of therein necessarily required: But also their commodious uses.
Which though they be few, yet are they such, as I have often proved.

As Repercussyues, Resolutyues, Maturatyues, Mollificatyues, Mundificatyues,
Conglutinatyues, Consolidatyues, Regeneratyues, Mollificatyues of stiff or
hardened joints. Ruptures, Corosyues, and Caustike medicines, with the making
of Oils.

The Antidotarie conteinynge. xi. Chapiters.
Of Repercussiues. Cap. i.
AS often as thou would Repercusse, it shall be good to purge the body: as
to euacuate whotte matter, by Phlebotomye if thy patie^t be strong: or with
Scarification if he be weak, and to pourge the womb by this sure medicyne.

Recipe. Prunorum numero december. Violarum siccarum drachmam vnam.
Which must be added in the end of the Dccoctyon, which must be done, by
boylinge these in one pound of water, till half be wasted. Then add thereunto.

Thamarindorum Mannae. Medullae Cassiae Sing. vnciae dimidium.
And so let it boil. ii. walmes. Then strain them out, pressynge them
strongly with thy hands. To the which straininge, add in the evening.

Corticum Mirobalanorum Citrearum. Pistaciarum in puluere ana drach dimi.
Lettinge it stand so all night, and in the morning rathe, strain it
again, and so administer it warm, or else with Pills, which are made as
follows.

Recipe Mirobalanorum Citrearum. Rosarum rubearum ana drach vnam. Aloes
succotrinae, drachmas duas. Scammonii, drachmam semissem.
Fiant pillulae, whose dose is.iii. at one time.

The matter thus being euacuated, or at the least diminished, use thy medicines
Repercussiues, either symples or compoundes, as cause requires.

Simple Repercussiues, without stoppinge the pores are these, Oleum Rosarum,
and Solatrum.

Repercussiues that stop the pores, are such.

Portulaca domestica. Cucurbita.s. caro eius. Semper viuum. Crassula mayor.
Fabaria.
Simple Repercussiues, with little stoppyng of yt pores.

Cotyledon. Crassula minor. Intubum. Cichorium. Dipsacum.
Repercussiues, which are also Stupefactiues, are such as follow, but they
are not to be used, but in great necessitye of intolerable pain.

Succus. Lactucae hortensis. Mandragorae. Papaueris. Hyosciami.
Opium.
Of things that are to be powdered, these following are good repercussiues.

Rosa. Santali omnes. Spodium. Gleba armeniae. Terra sigillata.
Of these simples, thou may make and use co^pounds, but if thou use iuises
of herbs, and would make them more penetratiue: ^dde unto them a little
vinegar.

Thus also may thou make a good compounde repercussiue. Rec. De succo
alicuius Herbae de praedictis drachmas duas. Olei Rosati, vnciam vnam. Aceti,
drachmas quatuor.


Or thus: Rec. Olei Rosacei, vncias duas. Boli Armeni, drach semissem Aceti,
vnciae dimidium.
But if thou shalt fear the corruption of the member, add thereunto.

Terrae sigillatae, drach duas.
And this may thou apply (as a good Repercussyue, and proffitable
defensive) to any member: whereunto thou fear any course of the matter to
resort.

But if it be now come to the place, and so grown an Aposteme confirmed, or
the place be vlcerate, thou shalt then lay no Repercussyue thereon. But about
it, nyghe to the beginnynge of the pain, or place thereof. As for example* if
the pain be about the joint of the foot, lay thy medicyne upon the same
ioynte, extendynge it somewhat vpwardes on the leg.

Of Repercussiues, and Defensines, if thou desire a fuller doctrine: read the
sacrade book of Rasis, de ^unct^ais, or else tarry for the finishinge of our
book that is to come.

Could matter properlye is never repercussed, but sometimes the collection of
such humores, may be prohibited in the beginning, by euacuation of the
matter, and comfortinge the member. Whereunto does much avail the exhibition
of Trocisces, of our master of famous memory, Guilbelmus de Saliceto, whose
composition is thus.

Rec. Turbith albi carnosi and Gummosi. Diazingiberis ana drachmam vnam.
Hermodactilorum alborum, drach semis.
Of these make one Trocisce cum pauco Sirupo Violarum.

This Diazingiber, wherewith this present Trocisce is made is good to be taken
symplye every morninge.

For a preparatiue to consume the residue of the matter, to whose composition is
required this order.

Rec. Zingiberis Albi mundati, vnciam vnam. Glycirhizae Ra^ae, drachmas tres.
Granorum Paradisi. Cardamomi. Cubebes Caryophilorum, ana Scriptulos duos.
Sacchari albi panis, libras duas.
Comfortalyues, comfortynge and deffendynge the member, that it receive not
could matter are these.

Absynthium. Schoenanthum. Abrotonum Spica Mastiche.
Rosa and Oleum eiusdem, because it cale^yeth could members, (unless they be
vnmesurablye could,) and coleth whotte members. Boil these things, cum Oleo
in diploma. And with the oil anoynte the member, or else thou may boil them
in wine, and make an Emplaster, otherwise they may be made in powder, and
tempered with Oil, to make Epithema, and let this suffice for repercussiues.

Of Resolutiues, and Mollificatiues. Capi. ii.
ALlthoughe it be euidente, that Resolutyues with Maturatyues, have great
affinitye in their qualityes, (for they are temperatlye whotte:) yet herein
they differ, that Resolutyues have their substance and heat. temperate, with
subtilitie. And therefore they open ye pores and draw the matter moderatlye.
They also comfort Radicalle heat, and help nature to expelle.

Now be it if they find much and gross matter, so that the pores suffice not,
(for their smallness,) to the excluding of the same, they do sometime
maturate.

Maturatyues have (beside their moderate heat,) a viscouse substance, whereby
in stoppinge the pores, they conserve natural heat in the place, and so do
they maturate. But if they find matter little in quantitye, and subtille of
substance, they resolve it. Wherefore it is found, that one, and the same
plaster, does sometimes resolve, and sometimes maturate.

Resolutyues simple are these.

Chamaemelum, which resolves, comfortynge also the member.

Melilotum and flos eius. Oleum Anethinum and seme^ eius. Malua siluestris.
Parietaria Sulphur Pinguedo Anseris, Anatis, and Gasmae, And all fatnesses more
or less. Sambucus Acanthus Brassica and seme^ eius Styrax liquida Ladanum
Mastiche Oesypus Lana succida, and many other. Oesypus, or Hysopus Humida, is
thus made? Rec. Lanae ouium, ad Libitum.
And lay it all night in water, after boil it well, and press it out, from
which being could, scomme of the swimminge fatness, which is a good
resolutiue.

A good Resolutyue Emplaster.
Rec. Maluae siluestris Foliorum Brassicae Florum Chamaemeli, ana manipulum.i.
Boil these in water and strain them, after this make a poulder, ex Vna part

Seminis Anethi Seminis brassicae tantundem Furfuris, partibus duabus, de
quibus fiat Emplastrum
A Resolutyue Vnguente.
Reci. Olei Chamaemelini vel Anethini drachmas sex. Cerae drachmas duas.
Pinguedinis Anatis and Galinae, ana drachmam vnam. Seminis Anethi. Florum
Camaemeli puluerizatorum, ana drachmas duas. Fiat vnguentum.
An excellent Diachilon.
VUhiche resolves could matters, and mollitieth hard matters.

Rec. Lithargirii minutissime triti, libram vnam, Olei. Chamaemelini. Anethini.
Liliacei. Yr^ni, ana drachmas. viii.
Mucaginis Altheae. Seminis Lini. Foenograeci.
Ficuum siccatarum. Passularum enucleatarum. Succi yreos. Succi Scillae Oesypi.
Collae de corio, ana drach duodecem. Terebinthinae, vncias tres. Resinae Albae.
Cerae Citrinae, ana vncias duas.
Let all these be boiled together, till the substance incorporate, become
harder then an Unguente, and softer then an Emplaster.

Yet it is to be noted, that sometimes, although by resoluynge the matter, it
be also deminyshed: the residue nevertheless, is over much indurate. And then
thou must mollifye it, which thou may very well do* by washinge the
member lightlye and softlye, cum Aqua calida, until it ware read, and after
by anoyntinge it with an Unguen^e made, ex Olei Veteris, partibus quatuor, and
Cerae part Vna.

Another Resolutiue, very profitable for this purpose, which mollifieth
Scrophules and Glandules, and prepares them to resolution, made thus.

Rec. Olei veteris, libras duas.
And put it in a glass cum radicibus Altheae, and Cucumeris asinini mundatis,
ana Vnclam Vn^^. and put the Glass, with the Oil and roots, in an other
vessel of Water, su^e-sufferynge it so to boil, by the seethynge of the
water, until the rotes be somewhat fried. After strain it, adding to that
straininge, Cerae, Vncias tres, in summer: but in Winter duas. and so shalt
thou have a very good Mollificatyue, wherwyth thou shalt mollifye, one,
or.ii. or.iii. days, and an other day thou shalt resolve, or as to thee it
shall seem necessary. And if thou put thereto, one tenthe part of Euforbium: it
shallbe very good for the Spasme.

Of Maturatyues. Capi. iii.
MAturatyues are these.

Malua Hortensis, Pinguis radix Altheae Radix rumecis acuti. Radix Lilii albi.
Alium. Cepa. Rapa. Baucia
With also many other roots and herbs, and also

Foenumgraecum. Semen Lini. Medulla Tritici. Fermentum. Axungia porci.
And all compoundes having temperate heat, with slymines.

A very good Maturatyue.
Which maturateth Sanguine Apostemes, and all Apostemes mixed with heat, and
also such as are prepared to quitture.

Rec. Foliorum maluae Hortensis. Violariae ana,.M. vnum. Altheae Radices duas.
After thou haste boiled these perfectly in water, strain them, and stamp
them finelye, and of the decoction strained, reserve one pound. Then take.

Olei veteris, vel axungiae veteris porcinae, non salitae, vncias tres. Farinae
seminis Lini. Farinae seminis Foenugraeci, ana vnciam vnam. Farinae Tritici
subtilissimae, vncias duas.
Incorporate all these, with the herbs and rotes, in the reserved decoction,
and thereof make up an emplaster, meanly thick and liquide.

But note this, that it behooves thee not, to putt Foeman^ graecum therein, if
thou fear the inflammatyon of the matter.

Cold matters, thou shalt maturate with this Emplaster.

Rec. Cepam vnam. Alii, restam vnam, Oua duo.
All roasted under whotte ashes, and stamp them finely, whereunto add Fermenti
Acerimi, pondus omnium Ceterorum, and so temperinge all together cum Oleo
Veteri, make an Emplaster.

For as much as Anthrax, and Carbunculus, are made of gross matter, (as is
aforesaid,) and are both, hard to touch, and ready to receive inflammation
of the matter: They will not other wise be maturate, but with a medicyne of
incisyue nature, with maturation. Which is found in no one simple medicyne, but
in Fermento, which (for as much as it is sweet, sharp, and viscous,)
maturateth, by virtue of his swetnesse, and s^^nynesse, and also cutteth and
sondereth the matter, by his sharpness so that it equallye maturateth. Wherefore
in every hard matter, it is the fundamente and substance of Emplasters.

Take also this profitable compounde plaster, which aggregateth these
intentions, (namelye maturation, and incision, to Carbunculum and Anthracem.

Reci. Ficuum siccarum pinguium numero duodecem. Passularum, vnciam vnam
Piperis. Salis Nitri, ana vnciae semissem Fermenti acri pondus omnium. Olei
veteris. Aceti fortissimi, ana quantum sufficit.
To the confection of your Emplaster.

Scabiosa pilosa, also (which has leaves somewhat broad nighe the ground, and
a stalk of a Cubite length, with a Flower of a blewe color, whose leaves
are, the nigher the roppe, the fyner and smaller.) Being bruised with Axungia,
does (as I have a thousand times proved) meruailouslye maturate Anthracem and
Carbunculum.

Of Mundificatyues. Cap. iiii.
OF Mundificatyues, some do mundifye, with maturatien of the remanentes, and
they are very necessary, when we are constreyned to open the apos^me, before
perfect maturity. Also when the matter is partly thynne, and soon maturateth,
and partlye gross and disobediente to maturation: as in Scrophulis, Clandulis,
and Bubonibus. And there are other simplye mundificatyues.

To Apostemes well maturated, and to new Ulcers, thou may co^modiously
apply this mundificatiue, which does mundifye, incarne and aswage peine.

Rec. Vitellos Ouorum crudos, and incorporate them, cu^ subtili Farina
Triticea, in the manner of a Cataplasma, and spread it on a clothe, layinge
thereupon an other, de Melle and farina, mixed by equalle porcions.

If thou would have it more desiccatyue, put Farin^m Hordei in place of
Farina Tritici.

An other very good, and general mundificatiue, which mundifieth, with
maturation and opening of the pores, specially mete for apostemes opened
before due time: And is proper principallye, to the mundification of the
Anthrax, and Carbunculus, and of all ulcers.

Rec. Mellis Albi boni. Farinae Triticeae subtilissimae, ana vncias duas.
Temper them first together, after add thereto.

Succi Apii vncias quatuor.
Then boil them on a soft fire, stirringe it continually till it come to
perfection.

And if thou would mundifye fraudulente Ulcers, whose malice thou feareste.
and their mutation into a Ca^cer: Then supply the place of Succus Apii, cum
succo Absinthii.

But if thou would maturate hardness, as in Scrophulis, and Bubonibus, add
unto yt medicyne de apio, half so much as that whole recepte. de Cepa, and
Lilio Albo boiled in water, and well stamped.

A good mundificatyue, with comfortation of the place made, ex Melli Rosati
colati, Vnciis tribus. Farinae Hordeaceae subtilissimae, Vncia Vna.

And if thou need this mundificatiue, for wounds in sinewye places, add
thereto Terebinthinae lotae, quartam totius partem.

Again, if thou would it should mundify more stro^glye, adioyne therewyth
Sarcocollae, and myrhae sextam totius partem.

And note, that the medicynes regeneratiues, here to be mentioned, are not
without some mundifyinge facultye. But yet are they more desiccatiue.

Vnguentum Apostolorum.
Which mundifyeth mortifyed Fistules, and Crustous ulcers, and allmoste all
oulde ulcers, whose confection is this.

Rec. Ceraealbae. Picis. Resinae. Hammoniaci, ana drachmas.xiiii. Mirhae,
Galbani, ana drachmas quatuor. Opopanacis, drach duas. Bdelii. Aristolochiae
longae. Thuris, ana drachmas sex. Litargirii, drach nouem. Floris aeris, drach
tres. Olei, libras duas.
Let such gummes as will not be poudered, be infused in vinegar, and after
that put them in a Calderon, melting also therwyth your wexe, and resine in
your oil, and then streine them all, adding afterward the powder of your
triable things, and stir it strongly with a Spatula.

As medicines aggregatiues, and Conglutinatyues, (which are al one:) do differ
from regeneratiues, and incarnatiues (which are both one:) So also, both the
one, and the other, do differ from Consolidatyues, Citrikatiues, and
Sigillatiues, which are all one, and the same.

Of Conglutinatiues. Cap v.
First therefore, medicines Conglutinatyues, are such as gather together the
lips of wou^des, wherein there is no loss of substance: and they are
desiccatiues, with a manner of Conglutinosity, without Abstersion. And there are
certain symples, which do this meruailouslye, as.

Calx. Folia Segetis syluestris Folia Liliialbi. Folia Plantaginis. Folia
Malorum. Folia Cypressi.
With many other.

Of Compounde medicynes, there is one made de Calce, before described, in the
cure of wounds.

An other common medicyne in Conglutination, and Consolidation, of the brymmes
of wounds.

Rec. Rasurae panni linei veteris albissimi, ad Libitum.
Then take Oleum Rosatum, and infuse therein.

Parum Galbant.
And with these incorporate thy ^nte, in form of an vnguente, and it will
work the stronglier, if thou add parum corticum Thuris.

Of medicynes Regeneratiues. Cap. vi.
MEdicynes Regeneratyues, or incarnatyues, it behooves to have Abstersion, with
Exiccation, namelye to scour away gross superfluityes, and to exiccate the
subtiller: which ii. kinds are the gross superfluityes of the third
digestion: which are of necessitye ingendered, in every holowe wound. But
this do they differentlye. For in wounds of moiste bodies, as of women,
children, E^^^chus.
evnuches, or of such as are naturallye fat, medicines of little dryinge,
are necessary as. Thus. Vernix. Foenumgraecum. Litargirum. Mastiche. Aloe.
Farina Fabarum.
And such like.

But wounds of dry bodies, will of consequence require dryinge medicynes. As
are these.

Aristolochia. Iris. Farina orobi. Farina Lupinorum.
And these are much the dryer, if they be burned.

And farther if the wound have much quitture, it neadeth the stronger
oxiccation, but if it be little, less is required.

Of Compounde regeneratyues, this powder is very good.

Rec. Thuris, vnciam vnam. Vernicis. Foenograeci, ana vncias duas.
Make of these a most fine powder, and put thereof into the wound abundantlye.

Litargirium nutritum also, ingendereth excellentlye good flesh, corrodeth the
euel, and remoueth the scabbe of the eye lidde, and is nurished thus.

Reci. Litargirium, ad libitum, in very fine powder, and put thereto first,
de Oleo Rosato, and after de Aceto, by little and little, beatynge it continually
in a mortar, until it be much augmented, and has received the force of an
Unguente, and this rectefyeth, whott veterate Ulcers.

Of the symples aforsayde, thou may also make an Unguente, by adjoining,
Vnciam Vnam de puluere pradictoru^. Olei Vncias quatuor and Cerae Vnciam Vnam
in Semmer, or Vnciae dimidium in Winter.

Of Consolidatyue medicines. Cap. vii.
MEdicynes Consolidatyues, Sigillatiues, and Ci^atrizatiues, which engender
skyn are these, and such like. Litargirium. Ce^taurium minus Ossa Combusta.
Cerussa Cortices pini. Resina sicca. Abrotonum assatum. Cortices Olibani.
Gallae. Nuces Cupressi. Curcuma. Balaustia
And many others.

Of compoundes, the best in Summer, is Vnguentum Rasis de Cerussa, which is
good to inge^der skin, for burning of fire, whotte water and Oil. For all
excoriations, and all whotte vlceratynge Pustules. To the alteration of any
part into heat, with many other. And thus may you make it.

Rec Olei Rosati, vncias quatuor. Cerussae. Cerae, ana vnciam vnam.
Incorporate all together, addinge in the end.

Albumina ouorum duo, and Caphurae drachmam vnam.
Another good Consoliditatyue.
Rec. Resina^ Albam, and boil it in ^ceto acerimo, and power it out all
together, into a basin of could water, through a strainer. Then malaxe and
labor it, with hands first anointed, cum Oleo Rosato: until it be white,
and reserve it to your use. But in the Summer adioyne Cerae, partis dimidi.

Of the said simple medicines, if one part be taken well powdered: and de Cera
and resina ana pars media, and de Oleo Rosato, parts quatuor, a good
sigillatyue vnguente may be made.

A very good Consolidatyue medicyne, which consou^deth broken bones, and
confirms luxations, being reduced by cunninge hand.

Rec. Farinae Cicerum, vel volaticae Molendini, librae semissem. Mastiches.
Tragacanthae. Gummi Arabici, ana vnciam vnam. Mummiae. Armeniae glebae, ana
vnciae dimidium.
Make them in fine powder, and mix them with the fine meal, incorporatynge
them altogether, cum albumine Oui, to the thicknes of honye.

Of medicynes, supplynge stiff members. Chapi. viii.
WHen in any member being healed, (after fracture, luxation, or vlceration,
there remain hard, or stiff mouyng: then shall such medicynes be
proffitable, as have power to mollifye, to comfort the sinews, and to consume
the matter, received and contained, in and among the synewes. Whereof this
ensuinge, is a very good one, which I have often used.

Rec. Bdelii. Opopanacis, ana vnciam vnam vel sem.
Mollifye them in Vino, and melte it at the fire. Pinguedinis. Porci, vncias
tres. Anseris. Anatis. Galinae, ana vnciam vnam.



So mixinge with them the Gummes. Or otherwise this. Rec. Terebinthinae. Cerae,
ana vnciam vnam,
adding thereto. Farinae foenograeci. Farinae seminis lini, ana vnciam vnam.
Mastiches. Thuris, sing* drachmas quatuor.


Vnguentu^ de adipibus also, is very good to mollify the hardness, and helps
Phthisin, and Tussim aridam, if the breast be anointed therewith, and is thus
made.

Rec. Pinguedinis. Anseris. Anatis. Galinae, Porci, omnium recentium and
insalitarum Cerae Citrinae, ana.

Melte them all and strain them, which being coled, will be a good
resumptyue vnguente, profitable for many things.

Radices Altheae, and Cucumeris asinini.
Also boiled, cum partibus tribus Olei, and part Vna Cerae, will make a good
mollificatyue. And if thou add Euforbii part duodecimam, it will be a
profitable vnguente, for a Spasmate member, and this of Mollificatiues
suffices.

But note this, that as often as thou will mollify, with these vnguentes: Thou
must first foment the member, cum aqua Calida, decoctionis.

Radicum Bismaluae. Foliorum Maluae. Florum Chamaemeli. Foenograeci, and
Seminis Lini.
And after use the vnguentes.

Of medicynes vlceratiues. Cap. ix,
Simple medicines vlceratiues, and Cauteries are these. Cortices viticellae.
Apiu^ Haemorhoydarum Pes milui. Thapsia, Cantarides, Alliu^ mundatu^, Cepa,
Scilla, Mel anacardi, Alumen fecum, Realgar, Calx viua, Vitriolum, Virideaes,
Flamula, Apium risus.
and many other.

Of compound medicines, that open apostemes, without instruments. Note these
insuynge.

Rec. Mellis anacardi. Picis naualis, ana parts aequales.
If thou have not Mel anacardi, thou maiste thus make it. If thou will put
Anacardos, into a whotte payer of smithes tongues, and bind them: There will
sweat out of them a honye, which is a Cauterye. Or else.

Rec. Saponis nigri liquidi, and corporate it, cum Calce Viua, and thou shalt
have a ruptorie vnguente.

Also incorporate Ventres Cantaridum, cum fermento, and pauco aceto, so shalt
thou have a good vlceratiue medicyne.

An other medicine, which valientlye, (but not violentlye,) corrodeth and
wastes superfluous flesh. Rec. Hermodactilorum. Floris aeris. Aristolochiae
rotnndae, ana.
Make them in powder.

An other stronger Corrosiue medicyne, and is very profitable in veterate
crustous Ulcers, and Fistules, and in some Cancers.

Rec. Succi Asphodeli, vnc sex. Calcis viuae vncias duas. Auripigmenti, vnciam
vnam.
Of these make Trochisces, and dry them in the shadow. The best time of making
them, is in August to be kept.

And when need is, to mundifye putrefied flesh, or crustous ulcers: break one
of them to poulder, and apply it to the ulcer.

And note, that as often as thou use these medicynes, they ought not to be
removed: but suffered until it, with also the eschare thereby made, do of it
self lose, and fall away. And farther, if all the corrupted flesh be taken
away, or the Orifice sufficientlye enlarged: it is well and may be mundifyed.

But if thy medicyne, have not at full wrought thy will, in manner aforsaid:
Then Iterate thine Intention, so that thy later medicyne, be less forcible, or
of less quantity, then the former.

Although we know, many other medicynes of this kind, and also of other
sorts above said: yet sparynge to lengthen time, now we omit them:
puttinge here but few light, and only proved things, according to my
promise, in the beginning of this work.

Of supplyng or losing medicynes. Cap. x.
MEdicines symples, to be laid on the eschare, made by Cauteries, actual or
potenciall, to souple or lose the same, are these.

Axungia Vetera porcina. Butirum insalitum. Lardum.
And all manner of vnctuouse things.

Compounde medicynes of this kind are made, ex Brass^ca Rubea, baked cum
axungia Vetera, and also Cataplasmata, made ex Oleo, pinguedine, and aqua.

Allbeit that this last written, of supplynge or losyng medicines as well as
the Chapter of Oils folowinge, be not found, in the common prynted Latin
books: yet because I have found the^ in other written copyes, both English and
Latin. I thought it not good to omit them: namelye the former, because it
is promised before, in the Chapter of the Fistula, and that following, for the
necessary vtilitye thereof: which I translated out of a Latin written copy,
(lent to me, by my very good and benign friend, master Bacter as follows.

The manner of making Oils. Cap xi.
THe manner of making generalle oils, is variable, for they are of diverse
sorts, as Oleum de Ligno, Oleu^ de Fructibus, Oleu^ de Semi^ibus, and Oleum de
Floribus, etc.

And first Oleum de Ligno, is thus made. Cut your wodde in pieces somewhat
small, and get you a pot, made fulle of holes, in the bothome, and fille it
full with your wodde so cut. Then get you an other whole pot, and set it
so deep into the earth, that the other pot which contains the wodde,
being set right upon it, may be with his upper part, even with the earth.
Then cover your vppermoste pot, as close as you can, cum luto Figuli: and
then make a great fire over them, upon the claye, continuinge the same, by the
space of a day, or a night. This done, take up your pottes, reseruinge to
your use, all that you find in the lower pot.

Oleum de Floribus.
You may make thus.

Rec. Florum, vncias quatuor. Olei libram vnam.
Boil them together a long time, in duplice Vase, then strain them through
a clothe, and put your Oil in a glass, addinge thereto new flowers, as
many as before. Then set it in the Sun, the space of.xl. days. And farther,
if you would have your oil, could oil, you must put to it a little water of
a strong spring: and so let it stand a long time in the Sun.

Oleum de fructibus: vel de Baccis.
May be made sunderye ways, whereof this is one.

Take a good quantitye of berryes, and bruise them well, puttinge them in Aqua
Tepida, and make them soft with your hands, put then your water and beries,
together in a Caulderne, and boil them a long time: after strain all
through a cloth, into a broad vessel, and flete that clean off, which
swimmeth above, kepinge it for your use.

Oleum de Seminibus
Is otherwise made thus.

Rec. Seminis Sinapii, or of some other seeds a good quantitye. Bruise them
small, layinge them in a vessel, between ii. clothes, the space of.ix. days,
then put them in a little bag, and let the Oil be strained out.

Of the manner of making specialle Oils, take these few examples.

Oleum Laurinum.
Is good for the vehemente could of Fevers, if you annoynte the patiente
therwyth, on the reins of the back and other exteriore parts of the body
against a fire, whether it be the Oil of it self, or of the beryes, which
is otherwise made as thus.

Gather first your beryes, and boil them in Tribus libris Vini, then strain
out your liquore of beryes and wine, and put thereto Olei libras tres, lettyng
it boil together again, till the wine be consumed.

Oleum Sabinae.
Rec. Sabinae, librastres.
Bruise it small and boil it, in libris Tribus Olei, till a third part be
wasted, and that the Oil wax grene: Then strain it through a clothe and
reserve it.

Oleum de Absinthio.
Is a sovereign Oil, as well for fevers as all other doloures, and pains.

Rec. Absinthii mundissimi and optimi, libra^ vnam.
Bruise it, and put it into as much Oil, as by reason you think sufficient,
and make it up, as in Oleo Sabinae is said.

Oleum ex Ruta.
Which is good for peynes of the ears, and also for peine and ache of the
head, and is made as is Oleum Sabinae.

Oleum Sinapis.
Is good ad Paralisn, and such other maladyes.

Rec. Sinapii, libram vnam,
Bruise it, and infuse it.iii. days in libris duabus Olei, after boil it well
and strain it. etc.

Oleum Hederae.
Which is profitable ad Phrenitidem, and for the hedache. Take the beries
thereof and bruise them, and boil them in sufficient quantity of oil
effectuallye, and strain it. etc.

Oleum ex ouis Formicarum.
An oil very profitable against deafness, and pain in the ears.

Rec. Ouorum Formicarum, ad libitum.
Put them in a glass, cum Oleo, ad quantitatem sufficientem: lettinge it so
stand the space of.ix. days. After that set an other vessel over the fire
with water, into which water when it is whot, put in your glass of oil, yt
by the boilynge of the water in the greater vessel, the Oil in the glass
may also boil: and this is called Diploma, id est Vas duplex, and of some
Balneum Mariae. When they have thus boiled, a sufficient space, strain your
oil from the eggs, through a clothe.

Thus ends the Antidotary.
The Conclusion.
WIth good will therefore, take in good part this little work, and by the
doctrine therein written, do thou surely work. For in it are contained,
(allthough it be short,) many good, sure, proffitable, and aproued things. But
if thou desire to obtain the perfection of this science, learn the principles
of Phisike, as ye knowledge of things naturalle, things not natural, and
things against nature. Learn also the Anatomy: which teaches the forms and
natures of compositions, In all the body, of all the members of the same, and
also of their helps: namelye the offices which they have in the body, and to
what vtilitye almighty God created them such, and so. And moreover frequent the
multitude of sick persons, and of their diseases, and meditate diligently,
the exquisite works of men learned, and expert. Note also, the causes and the
ends of diseases: with also their accidents, in the beginnynge, state, and
declination. And so by good reason, and long experimente, thou may at the
last, become a worthy Chirurgien, otherwise not: except allmightye God work
it, by pouringe on thee, his special grace. Whom I beseech to give thee his
grace, and me the forgiveness of my sins: to whom be all honor, and glory,
eternally. Amen.

Here ends Lanfrankes brief.
A necessary Table, leadinge redilye by the number of the Page, to any thing
that thou shall desire to find, in this present book of Lanfranke.
A.
AGgregatiue medicines 61 Albula. 42 Algebra. 36 Almondes to be refused in
wounds of the head. 13 Amphemerina continua. 19 Antecedente cause. 17
Anthrax. 22. 29. 58 Antidotarie. 48 Apostemate wounds. 14 Apostemes and the
cause of them. 17 Apostemes choleric. 18 Apostemes cold. 27. 31 Apostemes
the cure of them. 25. 26 Apostemes made of an outeward cause. 25 Apostemes
melancholic. 19 Apostemes of choler and melancholy aduste. 24 Apostemes of
compound humores. 22 Apostemes Phlegmatike. 19 Apostemes sanguine. 17 Apostemes
watery. 20 Apostemes whotte. 26 Apostemes windy. 21 Aschachilos. 24
B.
Botium. 21. 31 Bothor 42. 44 Bubones. 59 Blood, flux of blood. 8 Broken
bones. 38
C.
Cancer. 19 20. 33 Cancrena. 24 Carbunculus. 18. 29. 58 Caro Poroides. 8
Catarecta. 46 Cause antecedente. 17 Cause materialle. 17 Cause Procatarctike 17
Cause of apostemes. 17 Causon. 18 Cauteries. 67 Cholerike apostemes. 18
Ci^atrizatiues. 61. 64 Cold apostemes. 27. 31 Collyrium Album. 43 Collyrium
Corrosiuum. 45 Collyrium de fellibus. 46 Collyrium de Mirobalanis. 44. 45
Collyrium de stercore lacerti. 45 Collyrium de Thure. 43 Complexio elementalis.
30 Composition of the eyes. 40 Confectio Helesir. 44 Conglutinatyues. 61
Connexions of bones. 36 Consolidation. 3. 4 Co^solidatiue medicines. 61. 64
Consolidatiues for luxations and broken bones. 65 Contusion. 15 Corrosiues. 67
Cure of apostemes. 25. 26
D.
Desensiues. 5. 12. 26 Diachilon. 54 Diazingiber. 51 Diete general for the
wounded. 13 Diminution. 9 Diseases of the eyes. 40 Dislocation. 36 Dyscrasia.
4. 15
E.
Emplastrum resolutiuum. 53 Ephemera. 18 Erysipelas nothum. 18 Erysipelas
phlegmo^odes. 22 Erysipelas Verum. 18 Exiture what it is. 19 Experimentes of a
fracture in the sculle. 9 Experymentes to know a venomous wound by. 16 Eyes
their composition and diseases. 40
F.
Fermentum. 58 Fistula. 35 Flesh a sangu in member. 4 Flux of blood in
wounds. 8 Formica. 25 Fractura. 38
G.
Gangrena. 24 General diete for the wounded. 13 Glandulae. 23 Governance of
the wounded in the head. 12 Gross and whot meats. 34
H.
Herisipula. 18 Herpes. 24 Hidropsies. 19. 20 Hot and gross meats. 34 Hot
and gross meats. 34 Hot apostemes. 26 Hyposarca. 20 Hysopus humida. 53
I.
Icteritia. 18 Icterus. 18 Ignis persicus. 25 Incarnatyues. 61. 62 Intention of
a chirurgien. 3 Interior causes. 17 Intermittens Tertiana. 18 Intermittens
quartana. 19 Itche in the eyes. 44
L.
Lacrimae in oculo. 44 Lepra. 19 Leucophlegmatias. 19 Litargirium nutritum. 64
M.
Maculae in oculo. 45 Manner of stitching sinews. 7 Manner of stitching wounds.
6 Maturation. 26. 58 Maturatyues. 52. 56 Mel Anacardi. 68 Melanchiron. 20
Melancholic apostemes. 19 Members sanguine. 4 Members spermatyke. 3 Miliaris.
25 Mollificatiues. 52 Mundificatyues. 5. 59
N.
Nutricion. 9
O.
Obtalmia. 41 Oedema. 19 Oesipus. 53 Oleum de absinthio. 72 Oleum de Floribus.
70 Oleum de fructubus. 71 Oleum de ligno. 70 Oleum de seminibus. 71 Oleum ex
ouis Formicarum. 72 Oleum ex Ruta. 72 Oleum Hederae. 72 Oleum Laurinum. 71
Oleum Sabinae. 71 Oleum Sinapis. 72 Ophthalonia. 41
P.
Phisicalle remedies. 16 Phlebotomye belongs to sanguine men. 28 Phlebotomye
for the wounded. 12 Phlebotomye when it is to be done. 27 Phlegmatike
apostemes. 19 Phlegmone, 18 Phlegmone erystpelatodes. 22 Porus sarcodes. 8
Proprietas elementalis. 30 Pruna. 25 Pruritus oculorium. 44 Puluis citrinus. 43
Puncture. 4 Purgation of the body, before repercussion. 48
Q
Quartana continens. 19 Quartana intermittens. 19 Quotidiana inter^^ttens. 19
R
Regeneratiues. 61. 62 Remedies phisicalle. 16 Repercussiues. 27. 48
Repercussion. 26. 27. 28. 48 Resolucion. 26. 27. 52. Resolutiues. 52
Restoration. 8. 36
S
Sanguine apostemes. 17 Sanguine members. 4 Scabbes of the eyes. 44 Scirrhus.
20 Sclirosis. 20 Scrophula. 23 Scrophulae squammosae. 24 Serpigo. 18.
Sigillatyue medicines. 61. 64 Signs of a fracture in the sculle. 9 Simple
wounds. 4 Solution of continuity. 3 Spermatike members. 3 Stanche blood. 8
Stitching of wounds. 6. 7 Stupor. ^9 Supplynge medicynes. 65. 66 and 69.
Sincope. 29 Synocha. 17 Synochus. 17
T
Tears. 44 Tertiana continua. 18 Tertiana intermittens. 18 Theriaca. 29
Thiria. 18 Trochisces de turbith. ^1. 51 Tyria. 18
V.
Ulcers. 3^ Ulceratiue medicines. 67 Vlcus, 32 Vndimia. 19 Vnguentum
Apostolorum. 60 Vnguentum Rasis de Cerussa. 64 Vngula. 45
VV.
Watery apostemes. 20 Web in the eye. 45 Wh^^o apost^mes. 26 Whot and gross
meats. 34 Windy Apostemes. 21 Wounds. 3. 4. 5. etc. Wounds apostemate. 14
Wound both in the flesh and the bone. 8 Wounds in the head. 9. 12 Wounds
made after the bredthe. 7 Wounds made after the length. 6 Wounds made by
confusyon. 25 Wounds simple. 4 Wounds venomous. 16 Wounds with concauity. 15
Wounds with Dyscrasia. 4. 15 Wine to be eschued in wounds of the head. 14
Y.
Ydema. 19 Yposarca. 20
Z.
Zimia. 19
Here ends the Table.
An expositiue table after the order of the Alphabet, wherein is declared all
strange words; with also the names and natures of diseases and symples, by
any occasion treated of in this work of Lanfranke, gathered by Ihon Halle
Chirurgien Uery commodious to the use of all professors of the medicinal Art,
and especially to the Apothecaries that are desirous of perfect knowledge in
symples.

If reason may the justice be,
Of this my mind, the truth to try:
How can there be, despair in me,
No truth sith reason, can deny.
Happy it is, when men esteem:
All one in truth, the same to tell.
Let no man void, of reason deem:
Lest he against the truth rebel.
A Proheme to the Readers of this Table.
Although it has been the use of authors, to declare in the end of their
books, such strange terms and dark words, as may seem to some obscure: I
think it should not be needful always so to do, but that there is such
slacknesse in men, and negligence to learn, that they remain as imperfect as
a dull boy: who for lack of capacitye could never proceed farther then his
cross row.

Alas is it not necessary that we grow from strength to strength, till we
come to a full perfection? Why should we persuade our selves, to stand at
that stay, with that sect of Phisiciens, which have called them selves
Empiricos, or as we call them practisers: not because they help their art
first grounded on learning and reason, by practisinge of any new thing
them selves: but because they only observe that which they have seen others
do, be it never so base or slender, without any farther consideration: even
as some also at this day think one salve sufficient for all sores, or with
one water to heal or cure all diseases, which is as possible, as one shoe to
serve iustlye every man's foot. Or should we not rather solow the learned
sect named Dogmatici: sekinge still for learning, and vsinge the same by
reason, till we have perfect knowledge? And what is more co^ducible to
perfection, then the knowledge of symples, with their names and natures: in
such wise that knowinge the nature of the infirmity, there may thereby,
through natural reason, (ye though there were no practice,) be procured a
spedy remedy? Oh that ever we should call our selves men of science, and yet
as though there were no science, we be ignorant of those things that we
should chieflye know, being planted amongst us.

In this case we are like the cock, that Esope speaks of, which in a dunge
heap found a precious stone, and only wondering thereat, wished rather for a
barlye corn, to satisfy his hunger: what is a man the better for a Jewel, of
the which he understands not the virtue, nor knows the value? Let us
therefore endeavor our selves to know the symples, specially herbs, with
their virtues, that we need not seek for strange drouges, of far countries:
For truly I think, nature here in our natural country has not brought us
forth, leaving us destitute of necessary medicines to help our diseases, but
rather has created here amongst us, more apt things for our bodies, then
strange drouges fet so far from strange nations: which err they come here,
have sustained so many wethers, and abide^ so many markets, that they are
through age withred to dust. Therefore, as in this little book of Lanfranke,
there be excellent medicynes, to cure diseases with small composityons and
light cost, and that chieflye with symples: so for the necessary knowledge of
the natures and names of those symples, I have made this table, after the order
of the Alphebet, that any such as shall happen to be doubted of, may easily
be found: so that consideringe the natures of the symples, natural reason may
persuade the mind, of the noble and assured virtues of the medicines. For the
good Chirurgien knows by the natures of the symples, whether it stand with
reason, the medicyne to cure the disease it was ordained for or not: therefore,
among all other, it is a most laudable study, to know the natures of
symples. And in this work ye shall perceive that (in diverse things) I differ
from the common opinion, which many times erroniously uses one thing for an
other: even as the Apothecaries also (for lack of knowledge) do often sell one
thing for an other: as by occasion in this table, ye shall find the same by
the truth confuted.

For though some may note it a kind of presumption, to vary from the common
opinion: yet may I answer with Aristotle, that Plato is my friend and so is
Socrates, but the truth before them both. And as mine opinion agrees with
the truth, I wish it only accepted, and where it will not stand with reason
and truth, to be rejected as an untruth, and a thing not worthy of credit.

For as Plato that divine Philosopher says: if men in resoning, as much
desired the truth of the thing it self, as they do the maintenance of their
own opinions, and glory of their wits, there should not bread so much hatred
as there does, nor half so many matters be left vnconcluded. And as seems to
me this worthy sentence of good Doctor Record, (in the.iiii. book of his
castle of knowledge, in the 129. page), may serve well in the like sense.

Often have I read in Galen (says he,) and more often have I seen it by
experience, yt better it is for men to want all art of reasoninge clean, then
to have such confidence in a mean knowledge thereof, as may cause them to
deceive them selves, and to seduce other. As truth therefore with reason will
approve these judgments, I only wish them to be credited of the studious
reader, and otherwise not. For as I would gladlye my self embrace the most
truth, so would I desire my doings to be considered with most true authors,
without partialitye.

But saying I have moved here, the study concerning the knowledge of herbs,
I think it good to remember, the scornynge ignorance of some, which because
they are not expert in the knowledge of symples, scorn the dilygence of all
other that travel therein: as though it were a thing without fruit or
profit, thinkinge thereby to cover their negligence, while they vpbraide with
opprobry the diligence of other men.

For as (in the year of our Lord a thousand five hundred fifty and seven,) I
came through Bucklersbury: lo a certain woman came to sell herbs, to the
Apothecaryes: and asked if they would buy maiden hear. And they desieringe
to see it, she showed to them an herb.

Nothing agreinge with that which she named: But only that it had round
leaves, standinge in good order on each side the stalk, as maiden hear has:
but it had little flowers like belles, somewhat redishe, mixed with white, with
a grene stalk, and thick leaves full of iuse: and in all points most
agreinge in likeness to Nummularia, otherwise called Centum Morbia, and in
English two penny grass: saving that it was many parts less, and almost as
small in deed as Trichomanes, which we call in English maiden hear.

Because I never saw it before, I took a small part thereof, and bare it with
me, if happily I might meet with any, that knew it, and so to attain the name
thereof. And truly, before that hour were fullye at an end, I fortuned
(through the societye of my reverend friend master Gale Chirurgien of London,)
to come into the company of a Phisicien a stranger borne: whom (after diverse
communications,) I desired to show me his opinion of that herb: which when he
had well vewed and also tasted, he answered, yt he knew it not. And because he
esteemed it a dishonor unto him without some excuse or cauilation, he said it
made no matter to be so precise in the knowledge of herbs: for said he, what
need I occupye many herbs in a medicine, whereas one will serve? or what need
I confecte together Solanum, Papauer, Hiosiamus, Mandragora, and Lactuca, when
only Hiosiamus, or only Papauer will serve my turn? unto whom I thus
answered. Sir (under your correction) I grant it to be true, that many
symples need not be put together, where one will serve the turn, and affirm
farthermore that it ought not: for as much as Galen him self gives counsel
never to use compoundes, where symples will serve. But how shall I know that
Mandragora will serve the turn of Papauer, or Lactuca of Solanum, or Hiosiamus
of any of them, if I first know them not all? does not diverse regions bring
forth diverse herbs, according to the diversities of soyles, and natures of
heavenly climates? some place brings forth Hiosiamum and none of the other
that ye named: and an other place, an other, without the rest. If now I know
not the natures of all, I shall sometime think that it is impossible to do a
thing, because I lack there mine old practice. As for example. I would do
it with Malua, and none grows there: whereas yet the earth brings forth
herbs of the same nature in an other form: which nevertheless serves not
my want, and that because I know them not. Wherefore I conclude, that although
diseases may be cured with never so few, yet is it necessary to know them all.
And though he could not deny this, yet he fell in rebukinge of Uigo, because
in his medicines he uses such great composityons, and said plainlye that
Uigo in that point was a fool: so grossly master doctor termed him. But I
perceive what procured master Phissicien to be offended with Uigo, he plays
the Phisicien so much in all his works: for in the most part of diseases
that he writes of, he describes an order of life, and also purgation, to take
away the original cause: Happy was he, that he dwelte amongst the Phisitiens
of Rome and Italye: for if he had dwelte in this region, he must not have put
his own knowledge in use, but have left that to our doctores. Well the time
would not then serve us any more to reason, but here will I say somewhat in
Uigo his defense. Whereas ye call Uigo fool, because of his great
compositions and costlye medicynes, I answer. Then was Galen also a fool, so
was Auicen and Mesues, with diverse other, who devised the great compositions
of Theriaca and Mithridatium: which (for all your wisdom) in your most
weighty affairs ye are constreigned to use, for your gain and worship. Or
why may not any man put in wrytinge a great composition, wherein he has
found vtility, that other after him may do the like by his example? But if
any man can ^oe the like, with any one or two, the symples chosen out of so
many: what hindera^ce is the composition to the simple medicine? But I say,
that in the most part of medicines, ye must of necessitye use compositions,
for otherwise truly the wisest may fortune to err and work folishly, and
that specially in inward medicines, namelye purgations: for as Mesues says,
there is no simple purginge medicine that can be taken, that leaves not behind
it some hurt in the body. For the which cause, it is necessary to compose
with them, such things as have power to defend the body from the said hurtes,
by qualifyfying the hurtful proprety of the medicyne.

It may please you therefore, to leave your blamyinge of Uigo: or elsse if his
doings like you not, set your pen to the book, and make a more perfect
work: So shall the common wea^ give you thanks. Otherwise we must
necessarily judge, that ye speak such vprobrious words against Uigo, out of
the mouth of envy.

In the mean season, Jexhort all my brethren Chirurgiens, that they (after due
travels taken in the former parts) most diligently study, the knowledge of
symples and the natures of them, from the most to the least, so shall you have
perfect knowledge how to work: whether it be with symples or compoundes, many
or few.

For though Diogines threw away his drinking dishe as a superfluous thing,
when he saw an other poor man drink in his bare hand, yet is it not evil a
man to have in his house pottes and glasses, yea goblets of silver and cups
of gould: for his hand is never the farther from him, wherein he may drink if
he lift, or when need constreigneth him, for lack of an other vessel. What if
Diogenes had seen a man lie alonge by a river side, drinking of the water
only with his mouth as does a beast, would he also (trow ye) have thrown
away his hand?

The laboring man, the poor ploughe man, lives as long in good health, with
martelmasse beffe, bakon, homely cheese, course bread and ^hin drink: as the
richest noble man, withal his deintye fare he can devise. Is it necessary
that princes and noble men therefore, shallbe driven to that fare, because pore
men can so live? There are diverse barbarous nations of people, that live only
with herbs and roots, is it necessary therefore, that we shall leave our
flesh, and fish, and wholesome bread? It is an old saying, that store is no
sore, and plenty no deinty. Is it not better to know so much, that I may take
and leave, then to know so little, that I shall many times lack?

Hinder not the diligent minds therefore, of such as would learn: for though
some think it a thing unmeet for their age to learn, yet wherefore should they
discourage young me^, for whose estate and age, it is most meet to seek for
knowledge? For which cause Aristotle councelled men in their youth to learn,
ye (says he) allthough it be painful for it is less pain for a man to
learn in his youth, then in age to be vncunninge.

Oh worthy saying. This sentence of Aristotle, I wish rather to be weyed and
followed, then that any man's mind should be removed from study and diligence
to learn, with fond persuasions. Some will say, I am an old man, and have
done great cures, and never knew so much: and my master before me was an
ancient man, and was never so curious.

Surely science at some time florisheth, which in time to come is darkened
again by ignorance: so that time makes all things old, and after brings
forth that old things again, causing them to be called new.

The fruitful books of Dioscorides, Hippocrates, Galen, and Plini, are old
and ancient things: ye they were counted so old, that some of them with most
men were worn out of mind, and the goodly doctrines also contained in them.
Yet time bringing forth the same things again in other men, they are called
new lerning, ye of some new fa^gles: though it be the very same ancient
things, and no thing elsse. Such an enemy unto knowledge is ignorance,
evermore murmuring and grudging thereat, with heinous reproach.

Therefore let all men, that mind to have perfection of any good science, arm
them selves with patience and consta^cy, and regard not such vain iangling:
but go forth to your business, not caring for their bablinge, even as you may
see the very great and stout horses, showing the like example: which pass
forth on their way, not once regarding the barking of curres, nor showing any
token of reuengment: for even such iangling will time wear and wast, and
consume also such envious disdain. Accept my good will therefore I most
hartelye desire you, all ye that love, to learn: for as I look at your hands
to find good report and love (which is the fruit of a good gentle inclination:
(so I look at the hands of the envious ignorant for none other, but the fruits
of their beastly nature. So that in fine it seems that of them I may thus
justly conclude.

LIke as the fly, that fedeth still,
In vile corrupt degree:
Does still despise and hate as ill,
All herbs that wholesome be.
And as the man, whose trade was aye:
To scour the filthy gonge,
Of spicers shoppes was wont to say:
They stinked very strong.
Or as the swynes filthye desire:
Does flee each wholesome place,
And for to walow in the mire,
More gladlye does embrace.
In wicked men so wickedness,
Will always have a sway:
Dispraising still, through hatefulness,
Each good and perfect way.
Fare ye well.
Thomas Halle to the gentle Readers, that thirste for science, wishes the
increase of knowledge in good things, and as to him self a Christian
felicitye.
Seeing that (dear brethren) to publish these gestes, to the prospect and
judgment of the rude multitude (from whose face then it can not be kept,) is
an enterprise no less dangerous, then to commit a skiffe or small whirey
charged, to horrible tempests on the raginge seas: how great cause has my
brother had, to detracte or delay the time of publishing the same? yea how
little marvel had it been, if when it was finyshed, he had never done it? So it
might otherwise have ioinde to our hands: for whose sakes he both took the
pains, and is content to bear the bitter wounds of scornful sclaunders
darts, shot always by the arm of ignorance. Not doubtinge thy good nature
to be ever pressed, to think and say the best, and to take all things
tolerable in good part, whereby thou may render to him his hearts desire:
which is also no more then duetye, for of mere good will I ensure thee he
has done it. Though perhaps it may more please some man to judge with less
love, yt vain glory was hereof the efficient cause. to whom I say, that
vain in deed are all men and their thoughts: nether is there any thing as
the Apostle says, wherein we should rejoice, or whereof we should boaste,
but only the cross of Christ: yt is, his pacie^t death and giltlesse
suffera^ce, for us wretches. In respect whereof all other things are very vain.
And Gloria says Seneca, vanu^ and volatile quidda est, aura^ mobilius. That is
glory is a vain and fletyng thing, and more wavering then the wind. Which
vain glory in deed (as he also notes in an other Epistle, couplinge it with
ambition,) has doubtless caused diverse high potentates to attempt many
dangerous, yea and sometime most wicked enterpryces. And is no doubt at this
day one vice cleauinge almost in every man's bosom: so large is follyes
reign.

But as like Parasites with frivolous adulatyons, to rock such fools a
sleep (to whom it wear much more meet with bitter tauntes to bridle their
endless arrogancye,) it is not a womanlye follye, but a very wickedness, yea
more then bestiall: so to withholde good report, (which is Vera virtutis
gloria,) from any that has of mere good will (by any virtuous travel)
profited the common weal, or (which is worse) in stead thereof to calumniate,
is a heathenish injury: (but I might more rightly say an injury, which ought
among ye godless heathen rather to be sought, but alas which is now among
us chrystians much more frequent.) For who planteth a vyneyarde, and tastes
not of the fruit? who fedeth a flock, and cateth not of the milk?

Of this glory (as contrary to the former as light unto darkness) Seneca
speakinge in Epistola. 80. ad Lucilium says, Gloria vmbra virtutis est, etiam
inuitos comitabitur. Sed quemadmodum aliquan do vmbra antecedit, aliquando
sequitur, vel a tergo est: Ita gloria aliquando ante nos est, visendamque se
praebet, aliquando in averso est, maiorque quo serior, vbi inuidia secessit.
That is: glory is the shadow of virtue, and will accompany even such as are
not desirous of her, or covet her not. But as the shadow goes sometimes
before, and sometime follows, or is behind: even so is glory sometime before
us, and offers her self to be seen and sometimes after or behind us. And the
later, the greater it is, when envy has given plac^.

Hereof also Cicero in Laelio says, Praestantes viri nunquam tanta conati
essent, quae ad posteritatis memoriam pertinerent, ni animo vidissent
posteritatem ad se pertinere posse. Nonne melius multo fuisset, otio sam
aetatem and quietam sine vllo labor and contentione traducere? Worthy men
says he, would never attempt so great things, that might continue unto
posteritye, unless they did foresee that the posteritye might belong unto
them: For wear it not elsse much better to lead an idle and quiet life,
without any labor or contention?

And who so will from time to time, mark the conditions of all ages: shall
skant find one, that for his labors taken, and perilles sustained, Cicero
proarch poeta.
desires not glory as a reward for his deeds. For the Philosophers them
selves, even in the books that they wrote in the contempt of glory, have
written their own names: so that wherein they despise fame, and nobility, yet
would they have them selves named, and made famoue.

And again he says. Nullam virtus aliam mercedem laborum, periculorumque
desiderat, praeter laudis and gloriae: Qua quidem de tracta, quid est (...) in
hoc tam exiguo vitae curriculo, and tam breui, tantis nos in laboribus
exerceamus? To say, virtue desires none other recompense of her labors and
perils, but praise and glory: which being taken away, what is there, for the
which we should in so small and short a course of life, vex our selves with so
great labors. A like saying he has in his Philippicis.

Nullam mercedem tanta virtus, praeter hanc laudis et gloria de siderat: qua
etiam si careat, tamen est seipsa contenta. Quanquam in memoria gratoru^ hoi^m,
tanquam in luce posita letetur. which is, Virtue only desires none other
reward, but laud and glory: which truly if she lack, yet is she contented:
although she rejoice in the memory of thankful men, as placed in the light.
Lo hear see you that true glory or honest fame, is the good report of just
men, for virtuous travels, and honest deserts: a debt which the benefyte
receivers ought most willyngly to pay, though not of the deseruers to be
over busilye craved, seeing that as of the wicked, (whose love is envy, and his
praise sclaunder,) it can not be had: so of the virtuous, who is never
unthankful, it can not be wythholden.

And whether I may in my brother his behalf, require this at your hands, as a
well deserved duetye, let the thing it self with his fruits be judge (least I
should say more then me besemeth.) Is first in tra^slating, and reducing to
perfection, Lanfrancus his little work of surgery, (not the worste writer
of that age, as his so much profitable doctrine, in such breuity, does right
will declare.) Then for his exposityue table thereof, which he has gathered
and adjoined thereto. And lastly for his Anatomy in the end: both the which,
he has (at my suit partly) decked with the Greek, as well as the Latin names,
of symples, diseases, members. etc. as the purpose of teachinge the you^ger
sort gave occasion: that such as are as well as I, desirous of knowledge in
both the tongues, might layntlye receive some vtilitye, (or at least delight)
thereby: Trustinge that others will fauorablye permit the same, as a thing to
them though not delightful, yet no impediment.

In reading all the which, I trust you will not repent your pains, for truly
these for the most part are not his, but (as ye may easily see,) the
authorityes of the most worthy, and best approved writers, wherein if you shall
find any thing, (whether it be his own, or among the authorities,) to be
misliked: Examine it first with reason, vpryghte judgment, and like
authorities. By all the which if it be found faulty: Consider, that hominis
est errare, (neither has any man as I suppose in humane sciences, otherwise
written,) and that much better it is to err, with the learned and under
correction, then singularly of self will or stubberne opinyon.

But opinyon is now a days so beloved, that men had much rather with toothe
and nail defend the same (yea though truth be thereby utterly defaced,) the^ to
give over to reason or good authority. which thing right well notes Seneca
saying. Inter cetera mortalltatis incommoda, and haec est caligo me^tiu^, nec
tantu^ necessitas errandi, sed erro^u^ amor. That is among other discommedities
of mortal men, this is the darkness of minds: not only the necessitye of
errynge, but also the love of the same.

Whom therefore shall I judge more happy and wise, then him that is free from
error, or at least no slave to opinion: Then the which there is not a greater
enemy to truth and perfect knowledge. Both the which loving brethren, I
beseech the eternal God to plant in us, to his endless glory, and the
profit of his creatures, and to the utter banishment of that ougly monster
Ignorance.

Valete.
LIke as an artiste base and rude,
All men do him repute:
who knows not the instruments,
wherewith to execute.
The parts belonginge to his art:
Even so of right good skill
A perfect artist must them know
And use them at his will.
But if base arts do this thing crave,
As that most needful is:
What shall surgerye then think you?
Has she no need of this?
Yes yes, none more, if ye do mark,
That without instrument,
The surgyen can not use his art,
Nor compass his intent.
Then if to know the instruments,
It is so great again:
How are we bound with thankful minds,
To recompense their pain:
who by great labors do attempt,
Those instruments to show?
Among whom Ihon Hall lately did
His diligence bestow.
Setting out to his country men,
That surgerye profess,
The medicinal instruments,
with their true use doutlesse.
As herbs, roots, seades, flowers and iuse,
Gum, bark, fruit, and eke wood,
with sundry earthes and mineralles,
And stones with metalles good.
what earth or water forth do bring,
To serve the surgiens need,
Exactly penned in this book
Most easily you may read.
Be thankful to this Halle therefore,
Or elsse be thou silent.
Harpocrates be, let Momus
From thee be far absent.
Ihon Yates Chirurgien.

SInce now dear reader for thy sake,
Such profitable fruits to find,
Thy friend refusde no pains to take,
Shevve not thy self to him unkind.
For nothing else does he desire,
But honest fame and glory true:
Which virtuous travels do require,
A recompense as small as due.
But envy and vain pride so flovves,
That no man may so well do ought,
That scorn and sclander shall not know,
Though his good will else what have boughte.
The Preface
But one thing yet I must warn all young men of, that will profit in such
study as I have instructed, which is in one point to refrain and discente
from the most part of young men: that is to say, from games and spendyng the
time in play: for in my fantasy, who so ever is adicte to play and games shall
never profit in this art. For thou shall find it time little enough for thy
study, if thou occupy all thy leysour from thy masters or thine own business
at thy book, that as thou workest or see thy master work: so thou may
therewith understand the reason how, and how much such work is profitable.

And hereof assure thy self, that if thou have not as great desire to thy
book, as the greatest gamner has to his game, thou shalt never worthily be
called cunnyng in this art. For thou must think and esteem all time of leisure
from thy work and busynes, even lost and evil bestowed, in which thou have
not profyted somewhat at thy book. Let thy book therefore, I say, be thy pastyme
and game: which (if thou love it as thou ought) will so delight thee, that
thou shall think no time so well bestowed as at it. Yea thou must desire it
as the child does his mothers pappe: and so will it nourishe thee, that thou
shall worthily grow and increace to a worshypfull same of cunning and
learning.

And now whatsoever unto this work is added by me, as the Expositiue Table,
and the natomie: I most hartyly desire all the good Readers to interpret it to
the best, regardyng the good will of the worker, rather then thexcellency of
the work, which I confess to be very faint: trustyng that all such as in
those things are my masters and betters, will rather seek the redress and
ame^dement of such things as to them shall seem faulty, then disdaynfully to
reprehende my good will, in setting forth of this work. But as I fear it not
in any godly or charitable personage: so am I past care, what be said of such
disdayners as speak euel of the doings of all men, and yet will do nothing
that good is them selves. Not consydering that a humane creature is not borne
into this world, only to profit himself, but much rather to gratify his
friends and country (as Cicero says) besides Christian charity, which
byndeth us to profy^e all men. And our savior Christ warns us, that no man
hyde his talent. Thus (wyshyng to the gentle readers their hearts desire, that
travail for the perfectness of this art, even as unto my self in my most
weighty affairs:) I end this my simple Preface.

Unto his faithful friend and disciple Bernard: Lanfranke of Milayne, wysheth
increase of wisdom, and cunninge.
I WILL thee to understand, my dear and loving friend, that (through the grace
of God, the author of all goodness:) I purpose to make a book here after,
wherein I will give to thee an ample and large doctrine, sufficyente for thy
fulle instruction, in the most excellent Art of Surgery.

For in this present little work: I intend to give thee but few things and
light, but true and proved, the which allbeit that they be short, yet are they
of great commodity and profit.

Set them not at naught: but dispose thy self, fully to trust in them: for
principally, according to thy purpose, I have written proved medicines, with
the manner of curing wounds, Apostemes, Ulcers, and Fistules, with a little of
Algebra, and some curations for the eyes, after the manner, as reason taught me
to work, and by experiment of a long time, has been by me roborate and
strengthened.

Trusting so much to the subtilty of thine intellection, that by thy wit,
with these few things, thou shall gather sufficient understanding, to
comprehend the knowledge of a greater work, and that thou shall thereby obtain
the name of a great and renowned Chirurgien.

(...) don, Kent, and Essexe. The third is Santonicum, so called of Santonia,
Absinthium Santonicum.
(a region in France named now Xantongue,) and therefore in English not
vnaptlye French Wormwode. The best of these to be put in inward medicines, is
the Po^tike or Roman Wormwode: neither ought any other kind to be used in
stead thereof: though none of them be without their singular virtues. Pontike
Wormwode, (says Galen) is less whot then all the rest, De sym. med. facul.
li. 6.
having much adstriction, but no less drying. Santonicu^ is next in
faculties, but somewhat weaker then Scriphio: in heating, drying, and
extenuation. Scriphium is colder then Abrotono, but whotter then Pontico, and
enemy to the stomach: for that it has (with his bitterness:) a certain
saltness, and also some adstriction, though but little: so are also Abrotonum,
and Santonicum: only Ponticum is acceptable to the stomach, and of
te^perament whot in the first degree, and dry in the third.

Acacia.
MEn use commonly the juice of Sloes for Acacia, which is not so* for Acacia is
a thorny tree, growing in Egypt, having white seeds closed in coddes, wherowte
is pressed a juice: which being dried is occupied in medicines, De sym. med.
facul. li. 6.
under this name Acacia. It dries after Galen in yt third degree, and cools
(being washed) in the second: but unwashed in the first, (for by washinge it
loses his sharpness:) and is of an earthly substance, having therewith watery,
and also whotte and thin parts. Where it is laid, it leaves the place dried
and contracted. The gum of this tree is the true gum Arabike.

Acanthus.
BRanca Vrsina: Acantha.
(which is called in Greek (...), in latin Acanthus, Paederota.
and Paederota,) is called in English bears breche, and not bears foot, as
some abusiuely both say and use, despysinge such as would reform their
accustomed error. Dioscorides appoynteth to Acantho leaves like letuce, but
larger, longer, and indented as Eruca: whereby it is evident, that it can not be
bearefote.

Bears breche grows in gardines, the leaves whereof (says Galen) obtain a
moderate digestinge faculty. Li. 6. de sym. medi. facul.
The root is desiccatiue, and lightly incisiue, consisting of thin or tender
parts, and is one of the.iiii. principal mollificatiues.

Accidentia.
ACcidens generally, betokens things chauncing, or belonging to substances,
which they may have or lack, without corruption of the same. But accide^ts
are Phisicallye of Galen thus defined, in the end of his first book. De
methodo medendi.

Those things, that do necessarilye follow that constitution, from whence
grows an action: in us being whole are named Accidentia: Symptomata. (...).
id est in cursus concursus, uelcasus.
but if we be sick (...). Yet are accidents notes also of griefs, after his
mind, li. i. de locis affectis, saying. Ex propriis accidentibus etiam
innotescit affectus locus: nam ore Ventriculi affecto, f^^tidium infestat. That
is a place affected is known by his proper accidents: as the mouth of the
stomach affected, lothsomnesse infesteth the same. And these are termed of
our English Phisike writers, to falls, or wythfalles.

Acetum.
CAlled in Greek (...), Oxos. Galenus de sym. med. fac. li. 8. and de
co^positione medicame^toru^ se cu^du^ loca li. 3.
consists of substances, both whotte and cold, and they both of tender
parts, (wherein yet cold has the masterye,) and dries in the third degree,
and has Repercussyue, Tenuatynge, and discussyue virtues. But yet dyffereth
it in facultyes, according to the temperamente of the Wine, whereof it is made.
As if it be made of small wynes, if coleth effectuallye inflammations, and
repelleth whotte colerike swellings, as in Oxicrato.

Acorus.
Which the Grecians call (...), Acoron. Galenus de symp, medi. lib. 6.
has a root somewhat bitter, and of pleasante odor, and is whotte and dry
in the third degree, and of subtille consistence: and therefore moves urine,
dissolueth indurate splenes, extenuateth, and wypeth away the hardness of the
panicle Ceratocides: For the panicle Ceratocides look in rain Anamye.
whereunto ye juice serves best. And because it is thought not to grow with
us, we may after the minds of some, substitute for it Calamum odoratum: or as
Galen wills, Radicem Asari. For truly they err very much, Calamus adoratus.
that use Gladiolo luteo for Acoro. But Doctor Turner takes rather Galangam
maiorem for diverse reasons to be Acorum, Radix asari.
then Calamum aromaticum, as diverse have thought. Galanga mayor


Adeps.
FOr yt better understanding of these words Adeps, Oxyngion.
S^uum, Axungia, S^uum.
(called in Greek (...)) and Pinguedo, (named in Greek (...)) and their
differences: Pimele.
I refferre you to my Anatomye a place for that most mete. All the which are
in compositions of medicines (though the Interpretors of Galen do much
frequente this word adeps,) without precise difference used for such
greases, suets, or fattines as are tried from the bodies of beasts. etc.

Of the which Adeps Leoninus, (says Galen) does most valientlye as well
heat as digeste. Galenus li. 4 5. et. ii. de symp. med. facultatib.
Whereunto adeps pardi, has the next place, which mollifyeth moderatly. The
power of adeps anserinus, is less heatynge and digestynge, but somewhat more
mollifyinge, and consists of subtille parts, as does the fat of all
birds. A little differynge from this is adeps galinaceus, ac li. 7. de comp
medi. secundum gnera.
consistinge as in a mean: and is a most familiar medicyne, for
infla^mations. Adeps suillus, is of all other fattes, the softest, moystest and
weakest and therefore is conueniente for tender bodies. Now Adeps Capraru^, and
Boum: how much the stronger they are, then adeps porci: so much the more
fyttlye agree they, with bodies of harder, or stronger nature, and unto
scirhous hardnesses. etc. The fattes morouer of masculyne beasts are always
the whotter and dryer: of the female contrary, and of ye male gelded, it is
ever like to that of the female.

Adustio.
ADustion, is as well the burning of medicynes, by materialle fire, as of
humores in the body, by the excessive distemperature, of potencialle heat
therein: Whereof they are called aduste, or burned humores.

Aerugo.
Look for it at Flos aris, and at Viride as.

Aes vstum.
BUrned brass is of a desiccatyue, and vehemente scouringe faculty: but
whotter, and more abstersive, Dioscoride^ li. 5.
then burned lead. It binds, dries, represseth, thinneth, and draws. It
purges also and heals ulcers, amendeth the faults of the eyes, co^sumeth
fleshye excrescentes: and restreigneth crepinge, and corrodinge ulcers.

Aggregatiua medicamenta.
MEdicines aggregatiues, are such as have virtue to gather, or bring
together, the brimmes of a wound, or ulcer. Which is to be done after perfect
mundification and Incarnation.

Agresta.
Although Agresta which the Grecians call (...): Omphacium.
be properlye the liquor of unripe grapes, Latin etiam.
pressed out, Omphacion.
(which some have ignorantly interpreted the juice of Sorell.) I think the
juice of Crabbes, which we call commonly veriuce, may be safely, or without
great error, used for Agresta. And that the rather, because Lanfrancus in the
cure of Carbunculi. Wills Succum pomorum Agrestium, to be taken in such
sort as he often before had done Agrestam.

Ueriuce is of cold and dry facultye, whereby it aswageth and represseth, the
inflammations of ardent humors, and sharp, whereby it cutteth and thinneth
gross, and tough Phlegm. And is much praised, in comforting the weakness of
the heart, and in swounding. The Crabbe tree is named in Latin Malus
Syluestris. Malus Syluestris.


Albula.
THat whytnesse of yt Puppill, or utter part of the eye, which Lanfranke
calls Albulam, interpretyng it Cicatricem, is called of others Albugo, and of
some Panus, accomptyng thereof Albugo.
. ii. sorts: namely Albugotenuis, called in Greek (...) id est Nubecula,
Nephelion.
that is a little cloud, and Albugo Crassa, which is thought to be called in
Greek (...), Argema.
wherein the black of the eye is white, and the white of the same read.
Argemos.


Algebra,
THis Arabye word Algebra sygnifyeth as well fractures: Fractura aut
restauratio ei^s.
(as of bones, etc.) as sometime the restauratyon of the same.

Allium.
ALlium domesticum uel Satiuum, Scorodon (...).
which the Greeks call (...), heateth and dries by the sentence of Gale^ in
the. iiii. excess, Ophioscorodon.
wherein (...), (id est Allium Agreste, Scorodon Agrion.
that is wild Garlike) is the more potente.

Aloe.
ALo^ is commonly numbered (among writers) of two kinds only, although there be
found among the Apothecaries in common practice three sorts to be sold:
namely, Aloe Succotrina.
Succotrina, Hepatica, and Cabalina. But who so reads Dioscoridem, Aloe
Hepatica.
and other ancient writers, shall perceive that they knew but of two sorts,
as one fine and pure, which some call Aloen Hepaticam. The other, which
(because it is full of dross and sand) seems to be the bothome or refuse of
the pure juice, they name Aloen Cabalinan, Aloe Cab^lina
because (as I suppose) it not being mete for man his body, was only used to
heal the diseases of horses. But of yt purest I judge there is none other
difference, but that the same which one author calls Hepaticam, another
calls Succotrinam, which also moved Iacobus Syluius to report that
Dioscorides and Haliabbas praise Aloen Hepaticam: but Auicenna and Mesues Aloen
Succotrinam. It is the juice of an herb, called in Greek (...): and in Latin
semper Viuum Marinum: In English herb Aloes, or sea Aigren: whose juice is
brought to us from Indi^ (for there grows the best,) is a proffitable medicin
for many things, Galenus, de sym. med. li. 6
through the drying that it has, without corrosion. It binds moderatlye,
but is very bitter, and therefore loses the belly. It dries in the third
degree, and heateth stronglye in the first, or lightlye in the second: and is
grateful to the stomach. It glueth together holowe places, and heals ulcers
hard to be cured: Maxim quae in ano and pudendis simt, and stieped in water,
healpeth the inflammatyons in them, and also in the mouth and Eyes. In sum*

Of the flux of Blood. Cap. v.
IF the flux of blood, To stanche the flux of Blood.
issuing from a vein or artery, do let thee in observing this ordinance,
thou may restreigne it thus. Rec. thuris parts duas alo^s pa^te Vnam, and
make it into poulder, and meddle all together, cum albumine oui, to the
thickness of honey, and pilos leporis, cut as small as may be possible, and
so temper all together, and put thy finger in the place from whence the blood
issues, and touch the pulse, holdinge it so the space of an hour,
administering thy medicine in great quantity, and in the time of chaunginge,
have good foresight, that thou take it not away by violence. But if it cleave
fast to the place, lay on more of the said medicine in a more liquide form,
upon the old medicine, till it fall from the wound alone without violence,
and then shall the veins and arteries be knit and healed, and to this
medicine there is none like in restreigning of blood, and knitting the vein.

Of wounds, with breaking of the bone within the Flesh. Cap. Vi.
When with a wound in the Flesh, there is also a wound in yt bone, it
behooves not to heal yt wound of the flesh, Restauratio^.
before the Restoration of the bone, I say Restoration, because the bone is
never consounded with a true Consolidation: but in stead thereof, grows a
hard Callouse substance of flesh, called Porus Sarcoides, or Caro Poroides,
Porus Sarcodes.
serving in place of ye bone lacking, which reparation must be looked for,
before the wound in the flesh be healed, Caro poroides
for otherwise there may be no reparation. because the moistness of the flesh
will let it. For so much as there can be no reparation, unless the place be
dried to the vttermooste: For the bones are most dry, and the nourishmente of
bones, is the matter reparinge them, which is naturallye dry: for to nurishe
is none other thing, but to assimulate nurishmente with that which is
nurished. Nutrition.
Wherefore Nutrition is done by the like, Diminution
as Diminution is done by the contrary.

And now for as much as of all wounds of bones, those of the head are most
perilous: I think it most meet to begin first with them, for if the wound
in the head where cranion or the brain pan is broken, should be healed in
the flesh before the bones be repared, it would surely cause death: both by
reason of ye brains Dilicasie, and nobleness, and also that worse accidents
follow thereof, then of the breakinge of any other bone.

Of the wound in the head, with breakinge of Cranion. Chapi. Vii.
When the wound is made in the head with breakinge of the Sculle: consider
whether it be broken unto the inward parts or no, Wounds in the head.
that is to say to duram matrem: which thou maiste know by diverse means and
ways, partelye by perseverance, and partlye by infallible experimentes, Signs
of brekynge of the sculle.
the signs be these. The feelinge of great pain, vomiting, tears of the
eyes, crokednesse of the sight, Experiment^
inflammation or rowlinge of the eyes. etc. the experimentes are these: take a
strong threde double twisted, and wereit, and let the patiente hold it
stronglye in his teethe, and begin thou at the mouth of him, and with thy
nails stretche and streigne out the threde, til thou come at the other end
of the same, holding it straight a cubite length from the tethe, and make a
sound upon the threde with thy nail, and do so often times. If the pattente
may sustain the sound, without feelynge of peine, then is not the sculle
broken to the Dura matter. for if it be broken, he may in no wise sustain nor
suffer the harping of the nails upon the threde, or else thou may also take
and smite his head, with a small dry wand of (...) moniacon, Ammos.
of (...), which is sand. This shrubbe, with his root and fruit, Agasyllis
de co^positione med. secun. generali. 6.
is called (...). Galen says, that Hammoniacum in mollyfyinge obteineth the
principalitye, and digesteth meanlye.

Amygdala.
IN Greek (...). Amygdala.
Of Almondes, that sort which for their bitterness are called Amara, Amara.
and in Greek (...): have tenuating faculty, Picra.
whereby they purge, both out of ye belly and the breast by excreations, Dioscori.
li. i. Galen, de alimentis, lib. 2. and de symp. med. li. 6.
gross and tough humores: and help obstructions, sprung of gross and viscous
juice. They also help the pains of the side, of the spleen, of Colon, and of
the reins, coming of the same. Howbeit they move not the belly, neither do
they nourishe much. The sweet Almondes, though (in the virtues abouesayde)
the weaker: yet are they moderatly whot, and mete for meats. They also move
urine, and amend the moist vices of the stomach.

Amylum
WHich we corruptly call Amidian: is that which yt Grecians have auncientlye
called Amelon, and is nothing else, but the milk or juice, of wheat certain
days steped in water, and then pressed out, which for his myldnes, is
usually put in ^^llyries, as a most apt medicyne for maladyes of the eyes.
For being exactlye washed, it has says Galen, De com. med. ii. loca, lib. 4.
neither sharpness, nor adstriction: neither beating nor coolinge.

Anacardus.
OR after Ruellius anacardiu^: is the fruit of a tree, growing in Sicilia, and
Apulia, called vulgarly, Pediculus Elephantis. The juice whereof is called Mel
Anacardi: Pediculus Elephantis.
which is a ruptory medicine. Anacardiu^ (says Ruelltus) of yt later Grecians,
(for ye au^cients make thereof no mention,) Mel Anacardi
is a familiar tree among the Indians, and grows also in the villes of
Sicilia, yt throw out flames of fire: Aetna.
with a fruit like a birds heart, (whereof it is thought to have his name,)
having therein a red or bloody juice, which flows out like blood.

Anatomia.
(...)* Anatome.
is the dissection or cutting up of man his body, or the bodies of beasts:
whereby knowledge may be attained, by discerning, and considering the parts
thereof, with their forms, offices, processes, and colligations, one with an
other: Whereby certeintye is had, as well how warely to work, as wiselye to
Prognosticate.

Anethum.
DIlle: Anethon.
which the Greeks name (...), heateth either so^what beyond yt second degree,
Galenus de symp. li. 6.
or within the third: and dries either in the end of the first degree, or in
the beginning of the second. And therefore being boiled in Oil, it deuideth,
asswageth pain, causes sleep, and digesteth raw humores.

Antimonium.
CAlled also Stibium and Sti^^i, Stibium.
is a vein of earth found in silver mines, Stimmi.
like in color unto lead, but it differs from lead which will melt and not
be pouldered. Antimoniu^ will be pouldered but rather will it burn, the^ melt
otherwise the^ by a certain art, and then not easily as lead will.

It has says Galen with his desiccatiue facultye (being unwashed) a mighty
adstriction, Galen de sym, li. 9. de comp. med. secura^^ loca. li. 4.
which by washing is made well nere utterly without biting, it is necessarily
used with medicines for the eyes, and for his virtues therein, obtained to he
called (...), Platyophthalmon.
because it opens the eyes.

Anthrax.
ALthough many have ignora^tly divided Anthrace^, from Carbunculo: Carbunculus.
as though they were sundry and several tumores: it is most evident that it is
one thing: and that (...), is the same in greek, whereof Carbunculus, is yt
name in Latyne* and signifies a burning cole, which this tumore does very
much resemble (in the augmentation,) both in color and nature, having also
in the declination a black crustons eschare, made by adu^^ion, representinge a
quenched cole, which euidentlye shows, how excessyue heat, joined for the
most part with venomous matter, is cause of this tumore.

Yet is it notwythstandynge, divided into kinds: whereof the greatest and most
dangerous sort, In lib. det^imoribus praeter naturam.
appears commonly in the time of Pestilente infection: and consysteth (as
says Galen,) of melancholye aduste. The other sort (being not so fearfulle,
In lib. de differentiis Febrium. Cap. iii.
and coming at other times,) is made of whotte boylinge or burned blood*
which seems to be made, or turned into Melancholy, or as he says in an other
place, of whotte blood, turned by adustion into the nature of Melancholye. And
surely thus is Lanfrancus, and other writers of his time to be understood,
when they speak of Anthrax, or Carbunculus, for so shall they in the rest
agree with Galen, and other aunciente writers.

Apium. Palustre. Risus and Haemorrhoidum.

APium is of diverse kinds. But where Apium is found in Receptes or otherwise,
Namelye in the aunciente and most learned writers.
without any other addition in the name, it is only mente of Persly: though
Smalache have abusiuelye been used for it. And for the better understanding of
Apium and his kinds: take this note.

(...). Selinon Cepaeon.
Apium Hortense. Persley, or gardin persley

(...). Selinon Agrio^
Apium Syluestre. Wild Persley.

(...). Oreoselinon.
Apium Mo^tanum, uel Montapium. Mountain Perslye.

(...). Elcoselinon.
Apium Palustre, Paludapium Sieve, Apium Rusticum. Smalache, March, or Marshe
Persley.

(...). Hydroselinon
Apium Aquaticu^, Water Persley.

(...) Apiu^ Saxatile, Petroselinon.
uel Saxeu^. Saxapiu^, aut Petrapium. Stone Persley.

(...). Hipposelinon
Apium equinum. Equapium sieve. Olus atrum. Alexanders, or great Persley.

(...) Apium sepis, Selinon Phragmites.
uel Apium sepiculare Hedge Persley.


And whersoeuer thou fyndest any kind of Apium, disagreinge, (whether in
sense or Interpretation) to this order, hold it for false.

As for Apium Haemorrhoidum, and Apium Risus: It is but an abuse and confusion,
to reckon them emonge the kinds of Apium: among whom, (either in form or
faculties,) they can have no place. Batrachion.
But are kinds of Ranunculus, called in Greek (...), in English Crowfote, and
Frogmarche whereof also there are very many kinds, and all of whotte and
blistering property: whereof look more in Fl^nula.

Apium says Galen, De sym. med. fac. li. 8.
is so whotte: Vt Vrinam and menses c^eat. It breaks wind, but that does
the sede, more then the herb, and is to the mouth of the stomach most
acceptable. The seade of Oreoselinum, and Hipposelinum, are of like virtues,
but Oreoselinum is the stronger, hitherto Galen. Apium is whotte in the second
degree, and dry in the mids of the third.

Apostema.
AS (...). Apostema.
Hoc est Spatium, sieve interuallum, which signifies distance or space,
Abscessus.
is the same which the Latins caul Abscessum, Di^uctio particularum.
of Abscedo. And Galen calls it Particularum diductionem, and are certain
dispositions, wherein such bodies as before touched together, Li. de tumori
praeter natura.
are now distante, and severed one from an other. Whereof (says Galen,) De
art curatiu. ad Glaucorem lib. ii. Cap. 6.
there must needs be made a void space, contening some substance, either
flatuous, or moist, or compound of both. Which (if it hang, or tarry long
therein,) receives diverse alterations. Whereof the greater, is vsuallye called
Apostema, Pustula.
and the less Pustula. So is for Exitura, in La^franke and others of that age,
Exitnra. li. 4. fen. 3. tractacu. 1
and also of a Auicenna, to be understood Tumor suppuratus: that is a
suppurate aposteme, or riped tumore. But of these I need here make the less
declaration, for so much as master Gale, has so worthilye, and most
exquisitly in his Institution of a Chirurgien, opened these things at large.
Where thou may, both in this and many other matters, be right sufficiently
satisfied.

Aqua.
WAter is of temperament cold, contrary to fire: and of all other things
(says Galen) the moistest: lib. 1. de compositione medicamentoru^ and lib. 1.
de symp. med. facul. ca. 8. and. 5
and that, as it is utterly without qualities, (as without taste, without
savor, and most clear,) so is it most pure: And as it be^deth from this, so
receives it qualities, to heat or cool, according to the things, therewith
mixed.

Aristolochia.
(...) is of.iii. kinds, as Dioscorides says: and obteineth that name, of the
precious help that women receive thereby, in their hard labors of children:
which doctor Turner has therefore most aptly called in English Birthworte.
The first is called Aristolochia rotunda. The second Aristolochia longa. The
third Clematitis: bisyde these Plinius adds a fourth kind, Pistolochia.
called (...).

The Apothecaries have of long time erred, in sellinge Holoworte for
Aristolochia rotunda: but some of late, have in the selves reformed this euel,
and do sell the true thing. But surely many women and midwiues do err much
more grievously in my judgment, who pla^t in their gardens, and use in women's
labors. Bistorta.
Bistorta in the stead of Aristolochia: calling it Astrologia: which is of a
coolynge and very astringente nature, and therefore causes rather retention,
the^ expulsion: I advertise all good women therefore, that are willing to help
them selves and others, to seek for the true thing, which they may be sure
to obtain, by the advice of some learned Phisicien, or expert Chirurgien, at
the trusty Apothecaries hand. It grows plentiouslye in Italye, and
Aristolochia longa, or at the leasre Clematitis: grows now in diverse
gardens in England, as in London: in a garden of master Holande, late
Chirurgien to the Queen's highness: of whom I had rotes, which grow now in
my garden at Maidstone. Of Aristolochia and his kinds, read more in master
Turners Herballe. And for Bistorta read Fuchsius, Galenus de symplicibus lib.
6.
de historia Stirpium. The rote says Galen is bitter and somewhat sharp, but
the round is the subtillest. Of the other.ii. Clematitis smells swetest, but
yet is the weaker. The long is so subtille as the round, and has heatinge,
and scouringe power, degesting, and scouring away, less then the round: but
heateth rather more then less.

Aschachilos.
Even as Aschachilos: In libro de tumoribus praeter naturam.
(which Galenus calls (...), and Syderatione^,) is (says he) an universal
corruption of solid or massiue bodies, not sparing the very bones: So is
Gangrena, Sphacelos.
the mortification of such solid bodies, without corrupting the bone,
Syderatio.
and follows great inflammations. Gangrena.


Asphodelus.
CAlled also Albucum, Albucum.
and Hastula regia, and of the Apothecaries Affodillus: Hastula regia
Asphodelos.
is called in Greek (...) and in English Affodill. And this doubtless it is,
that Lanfranke means: Libro secundo
whose virtues, (as by Dioscorides it is evident), do most exactly serve to
that intent* and not the herbs that we call Affodils, Narcissus.
or Daffodils: which are no kinds of Albuci, but rather of Narcissi.

Au ripigmentum.
IS called in Greek (...), Arsenicon.
and in English Orpiment. It has power or facultye to gnawe, to bind, to
repress, to corrode, to excoriate, and to raise blysters, even like fire, Lib.
5. and. 6. Sandaracha.
and is found: as says Dioscorides, in such mines of metalles, as Sandaracha
is.

Axungia.
Look in Adeps.

Balaustium.
(...) is after Dioscorides the flower of the wild Pomgranate, Cytinos.
as (...), Sid^on.
Latin Cytinus is of the tame: and (...). Mali Corium.
Latin Sidium uel Malicorium is the roughe rynde or shelle of the same fruits,
all the which do mightilye cool and dry: and therefore says Galen, li. 6. de
symplicium facultatibus. They Cicatrize ulcers, and are used of all men in
medicynes for reiections of blood, flux of the belie, and Dysenteria.

Baucia.
THat which the Apothecaries call commonly Baucias, Elaphoboscon agrion.
is cauled in Englysh wild Persnippe, in Greek (...), Elaphoboscu^ Syluestre.
in Latin Elaphoboscum Siluestre, and of the Herbaries Branca Leonia. It is of
temperament after Fuchsius, Bra^ca leonina
like to Elaphoboscum Satiuum, sauinge that by reason of a certain
bitterness, and light Abstertion that it has it is dryer.

Baurach.
Whether it wear the mind of Lanfrancus, or of some other that has since
corrupted his work, to interpret Baurach, (so called of the Arabians) Sal
gemmae, it is somewhat doubtfulle: but by the oulde learned writers, it seems
far otherwise, for Baurach, as by them it is evident is (...), id est spuma
Nitri, that is the spume or scumme of Nitrum. Aphronitron.
It is by the testemonies of Galen and Mesues: of the facultye and nature of
Nitrum, Sp^na Nitri.
though somewhat weaker. What Sal Gem^ is, you shall find at Sal.

Bdellium.
(...), Bdellion.
which (as says Dioscorides) some call (...), and others (...): Bolchon.
Is the tears, or gum of a tree, which should be bitter in taste,
Madelchon.
shininge like glue, fat within, easily meltynge, without wode or
filthiness, and smells being burned like a houe: De com. med. secundum
locos, li. 8.
It heateth, and, mollifyeth hardness, moves urine, breaks stones. etc. It
mollifieth says Galen sufficientlye, digesteth, and discusseth moderatelye.

Bolus Armenus.
TErra, Libro. 9. de sympli^^^m medicamen. facultatibus.
Lapis, Gleba, or Bolus Armenus, after the sentence of Galen, is of color
pale. And concerning substance, most apt to be resolved into an equal
smothnesse, as lime, and is of a mighty drying power: and therefore is
precious, for the Dysenteria, the flux of the womb, spittinge of blood,
Catarhes, and putrefyinge ulcers of the mouth. Howbeit ye kind thereof, which
is commonly used in exterior gre^es: as it is much more gross, the^ this here
of Galen described, so is it in each point, of much less virtue, or efficacy.

Bothor.
Though this Arabye name Bothor, he (after the mind of diverse learned,) taken
for Pustula generally: yet is it taken of Lanfrancus, Guido de Cauliaco, and
others of yt ag^ more straightly for a kind of pustule, or exiture, growing in
ye eye: which is of Jesus Hali, thus described. Bothor (says he) is a certain
eminence, or little Aposteme, as they call it, which comes of moisture,
Staphyloma*
gathered between the rindes of Comea: whereof says he there are.iiii. Galen in
his definitions, calling it (...), (id est Vua uel acinus Vua) says, that it
rises in part of the pupille, like the grain of a grape. And is made, when
through pain and inflammation, the pupille is raised upon high, shewinge the
figure, of a grain of a grape, as before.

Botium.
About this Aposteme, Bronchocele Tumor gutturis.
called in greek (...), hoc est Tumor gutturis. Lanfrancus, and others about
that time, (though they agree of his place,) do vary in the substance, and
matter thereof. For Guido says, it is an aposteme growinge out of the neck,
engendered of humores, turned into euel matter. Brunus, and Theodoricus, say it
is a fleshye aposteme, ingendered in the throat: Which happens chiefly to
women, and is of color like their skin. and Lanfrancus in his greater work,
(agreing well with nether of them:) says it is made of corrupt humores, and
chiefly of Phlegm corrupted: But often of whot Aposteme, corrupted by long
retention of the matter, in the place affected. How be it we ought not to be
astoned, at this varietye: since neither of them, is thereof a true description:
But rather do severally serve, to several kinds thereof. Which are of Celsus
severally described.

Brassica.
IN Greek (...), Crambe.
is of.iii. kinds. Esculenta, Agrestis, and Marina, but Esculenta, or Satiua
Brassica, (which is our common garden Cole,) is that which Lanfranke
mentyoneth: as well forbidding the use thereof, in the diet of those yt have
Cancrum, (because it ingendereth gross, and mela^cholike juice:) as also
teachinge proffitablye to use the same, in resolution. It is of temperamente
whot and dry in the first degree. It has by the testimonye of Galen dryinge
power, both eaten and outwardly applied, but is not very sharp. It cures
Erysipelata, Phlegmonnasque, that are indurate and hard to heal.

Bubo
(...) (id est tumor lingi^inaribus), Boubon.
(...), Bubo, Phyma, and Phygethlon, says Ga^enus, are affectes of the
Glandules. Bubo being only an inflammation of them. Libro. i. cap. i. de art
curatiua, ad Glauconem.
Phyma, is that which forthwyth augmenteth, and hastes to supuration. And
Phygethlon is either Erysipelas in them with inflammation: or inflammatio^ with
Erysipelate. But Guido (alledginge Auicenne in the end) takes it three ways
thus. Phyma.


First says he, Phygethlon.
Bubo is properlye a sole Aposteme, lurkinge in the arm holes, as does the
Owl in the walls of houses. Otherwise it is more larglye taken, for the
Aposteme, For the em^^e ^orye places, look in mine Anatomye.
that ingendereth in any of the emunctorye places. And thirdlye for all
apostemes (generallye,) that grow in glandulous members. Theodoricus also
defines it to be a great hard, and deep collection of matter, expelled from
the principalle members, to the places aforesaid: with heat and burning. But
hereof in Lanfranke I find no description. And note that as of Guido it may be
gathered, this tumore to have this name Bubo, of the Owl so called in Latin:
so is as well the herb Aster atticus, Aster atticus.
(of the curinge Bubonem in the grindes,) Bubonium.
called Bubonium, as also those parts, it receiving Bubones.

Butyrum.
For the substance and nature of butter, look under Lac.

Calx viua.
OR lime vnsleked: Gale. de sym. med. li. 8. and. 9.
does vehementlye burn, and Cauterize. But being utterly extincted, it
remoueth the eschare: and in process of time, it will make no eschare:
although it heat and liquify the flesh. And being often washed, it dries much,
without biting. It is a kind of ashes, but of substance more subtle the^ the
ashes of wood. Titanos.
The Grecians call it (...).

Cancer.
OF the Aposteme Cancer,) which the Greeks call (...),) Carcinoma.
with his causes, signs, and cure: has Lanfrancus so largely and sufficiently
spoken, that here needs no more thereof be said.

but only to advertise men of understanding, rather to believe, not only
Lanfranke, but also Galen: then by fool hardiness, (standinge to much in
their own conceytes,) to deceive them selves and others, by taking on them
things incurable.

(...), Carcinos.
id est Cancer fluuiatilis. The river Crabbe, as it is a specialle medicine
against venim, Galenus de Theriaca, ad Pisonem.
and the hurts made by virolente beasts: so is it of power to draw out
thorns, and sliuers in the flesh.

Cantharis.
(...), Galenus, libro de theriaca ad Pisonem.
is a certain fly, of a grene color. Which being given with other mete
diuretike medicines, does purge the renes, and helps the difficulty of
pissing: otherwise it does as well exulcerate the blader inwardly, as burn and
blister the skin, whersoeuer it be applied outwardly.

Caphura.
OF Camphora, there is varietye of opinyon, because the aunciente Greeks write
not thereof, neither any save only the Arabians. For Platearius denies it
flatlye to be the gum of a tree, affirminge it to be the juice of an herb,
cold and dry in the fourth degree. But Pandacta^rius and Antonius Musa,
Brasauolus, alledginge Auicerma^ and Serapionem, say it is the gum of a tree,
or rather says Brasauolus, the pithe of the same, cold and dry in the third
degree: of a red and spotty color. And is by sublimation (as by the heat of
the sun, or of fire,) made white, err it come to us: taking the name Camfor
Camfor.
among the Arabians, of Pa^zor the place where it grows. Or otherwise,
because it will hardlye be kept. It coleth inflammations, stays the fluxes
of blood, of the hellye, and of the eyes. And heals whot ulcers, comfort
the senses, and takes away watchfulness.

And because it colynge (as before) in the third degree: yet is easilye set on
fire, and yeldeth a clear flame: and also because nothing is more
odoriferous: Pandactarius moved belike with the common principle, that every
odoriferous thing is also whotte, accounted it a miracle: contrary to the
mind of Galen, De sym. med. fac. li. 2. cap. 3
who judges them to err, that guess the faculties of medicynes by their
odores. For neither is every thing whotte, (says he,) that smells well:
neither does every thing smell well, that is whotte. Neither yet ought any
man to pronounce, every thing that stinketh could: nor every cold thing,
to have a stynckinge sauore.

Carbunculus.
Look for it under this word Anthrax

Cardamomum.
CArdamomum, is of the later writers distingued into ii. kinds, Maius and
Minus. Antonius Musa Brasauolus reconeth.iii. seeds to be among the Apotheries
under that name extant, but neither of them as he also notes, agrees with
Cardamomo-Dioscoridis, Dioscorides.
who having first showed from whence it is brought, says thus. It ought to
be chosen which is fulle, libro. 1.
fastened, and hard or toughe to be broken, (for that which is not so is
judged old,) sharp in taste and bitterish, whose odore greueth the head. With
this says Brasauolus agrees iustlye both in descriptyon and facultyes
Cardumeni Serapionis: but so do none of the former of the Apothecaryes, and
therefore men think we have it not. libro. 7. de symp. medi. facultatibus.
Galenus measuringe the qualities of Cardamomum, with the temperamente of
Nasturtii says, how much the more sweet, and fragrante it is, then
Nasturtio. So much the weaker is his facultye of heat: neither is it mete to
vlcerate* yet has it therewyth adjoined a certain bitterness: whereby it
kills worms, and with vinegar, mundifieth scabbes strongly. Look more for
this in Grana-paradisi.

Carnes variae.
THe ingenderinge of flesh, and what it is: you may read in the nynthe
Chapter, of the first treatice, of mine Anatomy. Flesh (says Galen,) being
well sodde, De alimentis. li. iii.
makes good blood: namelye if it be flesh of good juice. Of al meats Caro
Suum nourishes most. Carobubula also gives not a little nourishmente, Hogs
flesh Beef.
but is hard to put over, bredeth blood to gross, and apt to cause
mela^cholike affectes. And as to young men in good habit of body, the flesh of
a grown hog, is better then a pigge: so is veale better then beffe, and
kiddes flesh, better then gotes flesh: which are much better and easier
concocted. Lambs flesh is very moist and Phlegmatike: but mutton makes worse
juice, and more excrementes. The gotes flesh has a sharp and vicious juice.
The he gotes Flesh.
Kiddes flesh is not euel for old persons. Caro hircorum is both of juice and
concoction the worst. The like may be said of beffe or rams flesh: but of
all these the gelded are the better: as the old flesh is worse. Hares flesh
bredeth gross blood, but better juice then beffe. Hearts flesh or buckes
flesh, is hard to concoct. And make as euel juice as any of the rest: De
sanitate tu^nda. li. 5.
and therefore are Hearts flesh, Gotes flesh and beffe, profitable neither for
old nor young. To yo^g men mutton is admitted, though to old men it be not
commodious: and much less lambs flesh.

Every kind of flying foul, gives very little nouryshment, in respect of
beasts. The flesh of souls is easy to concoct, chiefly of yt bird called
Attagen, (which some think is the woodcoke.) The flesh of the black bird,
the owsel and the small sparowes, are harder: but harder then they, is the flesh
of the turtle dove, the wood dove, and the ducke. But to conclude. De sym. li.
11.
Cum Cibis etiam a^^^alium mutantur carnes. That is ye flesh of beasts and
fowls are altered, by their fedinge. And therefore are the birds allowed, that
are conversant on the sweet hills, in the wholesome grauelly woods, and
pleasant groves as such as live in marshes, or ^ennes, and feed in the water,
are utterly eschued.

Caryophilli.
Look at Garyophilli.

Causon.
(...), id est febris ardens: is one of the continual fevers, and has to name
Tertiana continua: caused of yelowe choler, putrefied in the veins, (none
otherwise then Quotidiana co^tinua, comes of putrefied phlegm and Quartana
co^tinua of corrupted melancholy,) and differs from Tertiani intermittente,
for that therein the choleric humor is carried over all the body. But in
Ardente febre, it is together with the blood, contained in the vessels: De
symptomatum causis li. ii. ac de tremore, palpitatione, conuultione, et rigore
causyng much pain and burning. Whereunto (says Galen,) if rigor at any time
chance: the Fever is thereby disolued.

Yet some nevertheless, make a certain obscure differe^s between Causon and
Tertianam continuam: affirming the cause thereof, to be contained nigher about
the heart. And his accession to have no rest, or at the most very little in the
morning, (as in Synocho,) and that rather of the cold te^perature of that
time, then of his own nature.

Casia.
CAsia Fistularis, or Cassia Syringa, is (by the testimony of Auicen and
Mesues,) mean between whotte and cold. But inclining rather, to heat and
moisture in ye first degree. It is the fruit of a tree, brought forth in hard
black coddes. Whose inward pulpe, is resolutiue, and lenityue, cleanses the
blood, and purges ge^tly Choler and Phlegm. And this out of the Arabians, for
among the old Grecia^s it is not found: who yet have their Cassiam fistularem,
which is of some taken for our Cinamome.

Cataplasma.
(...), quasi figme^tum Crassum: Is that gross kind of Plaster form, that is
made of sodden herbs, Oils Meals, poulders. etc.

Cepa.
CAlled in greek (...), Crommyon.
is of diverse kinds, as this our common Onion, called Cepa Escalonia, and
winter onion called Holekes, in greek (...), Id est Cepa fissilis. Siues also
are thought to be a kind of Omons. etc. Onyons are of gross substance, whot
and dry in the fourth degree. They do maturate, attract, and inflame, being
laid to, they open the Hemorrhoides, and sharpen the syghte made dulle by
gross humores.

Cera.
WEre: Tyrhenica cera. uel po^tica. Li. 4. 7. and. 9. de sym. med. fac. and li.
8. de com. med. secu^ genera.
(whereof Galen prayseth that for the best, which is called Tyrhenica, or
Po^tica:) is of it self among things concoctine, but weak. Yet has it a
certain whotte, and digestive power, leaning to the nature of Honey. And
being put with other medicynes, both liquide and dry, it is to them as a
body: or common receptory substance.

Cerussa.
IS of coolinge, dryinge, and astringente faculty, called in Greek (...), and
is made of Lead: by hanginge plates of the same over the bapor of vinegar,
Psimmythion. Gale. li. 9. de sym. med. fac. and li. 1. de co^. med. secun.
genera. Sandyx.
close covered. It is used with profitte, and good effect, against whot
inflamed ulcers. Cerussa burned til it become in color like Sandaracha, is
thereof called (...), and is thereby the more subtle, but heateth not: so (...)
keeps the coldness of Cerussae but lacks the subtiltye thereof.

Chamaemelum.
CAmomille is called in Greek (...). Anthemis.
There be sher of three kinds. Leuca^themo^.
That is to say (...), id est Chamaemelum Album, Chrysa^themo^ Heranthemo^.
(...). hoc est Chamaemelum Luteum. (...), Chamaemelum Purpurcum. The first
having white flowers. The second yelow^. The third Purple. They are whotte
and dry in the first degree, Galenus de sym. li. 6.
consisting of tender parts, and have tenuatyng, losing, and digesting
facultye.

Chelidonium.
CAlled in English Salendine, Chelidonion.
or Swallow Wurte, in Greek (...), hoc est Hirundinaria, Hirundinaria.
(so called either because it blows, about the return of swallows in the
spring, and wythereth again at their departure: or else as Plinius writes,
because the Swallows did first find and use the same, to restore again their
birds to syghte, being made blind:) is of heatinge, and scouringe
propertyes. calenus li. 8. de sym. medi. facultatibus.
His root is given (in Vino albo cum aniso,) to the Jaundies that come of the
liver obstructed: and being chawed, helps the tothake. The juice of the
herb is used in the eye, to sharpen the sight. And thus much of Chelidonium
Maius. For there is also Chelidonium Minus: which (as it is sharper then the
greater,) does swiftly exulcerate. And the juice thereof purges the head by the
nosethrilles. It heateth and dries in the beginning of the fourth degree,
the greater only in the third. Wherefore that the herb called of the Latin
writers and apothecaries Ficaria, Ficaria.
and Scrofularia minor, Scrofularia minor.
in English Pyle worte, (whose Picture is usually put, and that not of the
worste Herbal writers for this:) is not Chelidonium Minus, it is evident. Whose
temperamentes, (though the description of Chelidonium in Diosecoride
Dioscorides libro secundo.
will suffer it in form to agree:) are one to an other clean contraries.

Surgery.
(...) is said of every art, (...)
whose function consists, in manualle action or handye operation. But here is
it to say Curatio manualis: that is manualle or handy curinge.

Cicatrizatiua med.
CIcatrix is the scarre or token, where a wound, ulcer. etc. has been,
Whereof comes Cicatrizo, id est ad Cicatricem perduco, to heal or bring to
askarre. And thereof rises Medicamina cicatrizatius, Cicatrisinge, consounding,
or skin bringing medicynes.

Cicer.
IS a flatuous pulse, of great nurishment, mouynge the womb, apt to engender
milk, and to provoke urine and Menses. E^ebinthos.
Called in Greek (...), and is after Dioscorides of.iii. kinds: Diosco. lib.
ii. Cicer satiuu^. Cicer arietinu^ Cicer syluestre.
namelye Satiuum, whereof before. Aretinum, whose decoction breaks ye stone in
the reins, (which is also of.iii. sorts,) and Syluestre. They are all whotte,
moderatlye dry, and partners of bitterness. Whereby they purge the spleen, the
liver, and the reins. They mundifye scabbes, Galenus, li. 6. de sym. med. fac.
and lepryes. They also discuss the hardness of ye stones, and Apostemes
under the ears, and do heal in composition, malign ulcers. Though Cicer
agreste, be so much the whotter and the dryer then Domestico: as it is (then
it) sharper, and bitterer.

Cichorium.
IT is plain by Dioscorides and others, Seris.
that this Greek word (...), Picris.
is a name common and indifferente, both to Cichorium, Dioscori. li. 2. cum
Galeno li. 8. de symp. ^nedi. facultatibus. and li. 8. de compositione
medicanie^ torum secundum locos.
(which is also called (...),) and to Intubum, with also al their kinds. They
are cold, somewhat bitter, and moderatly astringente: and therefore most
comodious for the stomache, and conueniente in chief for the heat of the
liver. Being eaten with vinegar, they stay the belly. Intubum domesticum is
colder then Agreste, which is cold and dry in the second degree, and bitterer
then the tame, (and is surely the right Cichorium,) and therefore not at
each point so commodious to the stomache. They are (in Cataplasmatibus,) good
medicynes for the gowte of the feet, and the inflaminations of the eyes. Their
iuyces cum Cerussa, and aceto, are for all griefs profitable, that need
coling. And yet that does it so moderatly, that even to cold distemperatures
it hurts not.

Colla de corio.
LAnfranke means hear by Colla de Corio, that glewe that some (says
Dioscorides) caul (...), Xylocolla.
and others (...), Tamocolla.
hoc est Glute^, Vel Glutinum taurinum, Gluten, Glutim^m taurinum.
made of Bullockes hydes. The best is white, and shinyng through, but the
blacker it is, the worse. It resolved in Aceto, delivers the skin of ring
worms, and lepryes. Burned blisters, are by washing them in the decoction
thereof kept from breaking. And Cum Melle aut aceto, It is profitable for
wounds, and consoundeth them.

And as this being made of the skins and ears of diverse beasts, is of
diverse sorts, and may so varye in name: so is there glewe made of diverse
sorts of Fyshes, which is generally called (...), and may in names
particularly vary as the other.

They have all drying faculty, but do vary in heatynge and cooling, as the
substances whereof they are made.

Colocynthis.
(...), Cucurbita Syluestris, Diosco. li. 4. and Galenus de sym. med. faculta.
li. 7.
called in Latin Cucurbita Syluestris, and of the Apothecaries Coloquintida,
is whot and dry in the third degree. It purges vehemently, and aswageth the
pain of the tethe: being plastred to the nauel, it kylleth worms. And the
juice thereof grene, helps the Ischiada pain.

Concauitas.
Holownesse.

Conglutinatiua medicamina.
ARe medicynes that conioyn, and fasten together the sides, or borders of
wounds, ulcers. etc. Which comes of Conglutino, that is to fasten, or join
together, as with glewe.

Contusio.
Contusion is here brusing, of Contundo, to beat or bruise.

Consolidatiuae medicinae.
COnsolidatyue medicynes, of Consolido, to make fyrme and found. Lanfranke
says, that they are all one with Cicatrizasiues, because their effects do so
well accord, in finishyng the cure of wounds, ulcers, fistules. etc. which
says Galen they do, De symp, li. 5
not by drawing and liquyfyinge the flesh: but by hardeninge and dryinge the
same.

Coperosa.
It is by Lanfranke all one with Vitriolo. Vitriolum.
Look there.

Corallium.
Which some have called (...), Dioscor. li. 5. Lithodr^dron
seems (says Dioscorides) to be a shrubbe of the sea, which being drawn out
from the depthe: as soon as it comes into the aer, does by and by congeyle
and harden. But Brasa^oius notes it to obtain the second degree in heat, for
it is bitter says he, and has a certain sharpness.
It grows in Syracusa, about the Promontory Pachyno. It is of diverse colors,
(other say kinds,) whereof the red is the best. It coleth and binds
moderatly, it takes away the scarres of the eyes, and fills holowe ulcers
and wounds. It is against reiections of blood, very efficacious and helps
the difficultye of urine: drunk also with water, it wastes the spleen. The
black coralle (which resembles a bushy tree,) called (...), Antipathes.
agrees in virtues with the former, and is thought to differ only in Specie.

Corrosiua medicamina.
MEdicines that eat and consume such parts as they are applied unto, inducing
an eschare thereon: and comes of Corrodo, properlye to eat or gnawe about.

Corrigiola.
SO called of the Apothecaries, and of the French men Corrigiole, is our
common knottgrasse, called in Greek (...), Polygonon.
in Latin Seminalis, and Polygonum mas. For (...) Centum nodia, Seminalis.
Sanguinaria, or Proserpinaca, Dioscorides and Galen make only two kinds, as
Mas and Femina. Though Pl^tius and other later writers have more. Pylogonum
after Galen is of such a watrye coldness, that it cools in the second
excess, Galenus li. 8. de sym. med. fac. Cum Dioscoride. li. 4.
or in the beginning of the third: And therefore being applied cold, is a
remedy for whotte burning stomaches, for the tumor Erysipelas, and whotte
inflammations. And farther it stays all sinxions, by the which reason it
seems to have drying power, and therefore is a good remedy to Ulcers, and
Teters, and glueth together bloody wounds. But the male says he (aledginge
Dioscorides,) is in all these the more potente.

Cortex pini.
Look at Pini Cortex.

Cortex Olibani.
Look at Olibanum.

Cotonea malus
COtonea malus, Cydomos ^^^lea.
in Greek (...) is the Quince tree. Ouinces called Cotonea Mala, or Cydonia,
are profitable to ye stomache, and move urine: but yt being roasted more ge^tly.
Dioscor. lib.
They are good for ye Dysenteria, for ye flux of the belly, and for rotten
coughes: and that chiefly being raw. And ye juice of the^ infused is given to
the fluxions of the stomache and belly. Being boiled with honey they are the more
pleasant, both to the mouth and stomache, but then they thycken less. They
are put raw in Cataplasmatis, to restreigne the belie, for heat of the
stomache, vomites, inflammatyons, and hard Splenes.

Cotyledon.
VMbilicus Veneris, (called in Greek (...), in Latin of some Acetabulum,
Acetabulum.
and in English Penyworte.) Is could of temperamente, somewhat moist, and
fulle of juice. Li. 7. de sym. med. fac.
It grows on stone walls, and has after Galen, a light bitterness, and also
a certain obscure adstringente facultye. Whereby it does cool, repercusse,
scour away, and discuss. And therefore heals well Erisipelatous
infla^mations, and Phlegmonus Erysipelata, and is to a whotte stomache in a
Cataplasma most commodious. Cotyledon aquaticum.
An other kind of this herb there is growinge in marshes, which is called
Cotyledon Aquaticum, and is of nature very whotte, like to the whottest kinds
of Ranunculus.

Crassula.
IS among the Apothecaryes of two kinds: Mayor for the which look in
Fabaria, and Minor which you shall find at semper Viuum.

Crocus
SAffron called in Greek (...), Crocos.
does heat in the second degree, Dioscori. li. 1. Galenus de sym. med. fac.
li. 7. and de com, med. secun. loca. Li. 2. 6. and.9.
and dry in the first. Whereof the yelowest, and most odorifferous is best. It
mollifyeth and digesteth, namelye Erysipelatous infla^mations, raw humores,
and virulent affects. It moves urine and makes a good color. being drunk
cum Passo, it defends surfetynge: and applied with woman's milk, restrains
the fluxions of the eyes. How be it the continualle use thereof, and the
smelling thereto, hurts the head.

Cubebe.
THe thin odoriferous fruits, Galenus de simplici. lib. 7
(tasted like the roots of Phu,) which the Arabians call Cubebas: is that
which Galen calls Carpesium, as Auicen, Aetius, Actuarius, and Ruellius,
write, (which yet Leonicenus denies, and others make thereof a doubt.) And is
says Scrapio, the fruit of a tree, growinge beyond the seas, whose leaves
are sharp like a spear. The fruit is found among the leaves, round and
somewhat flat. Whi^he when it is ripe, is of color redishe. Wherein is found a
trianguled grain. But this is by the judgment of Antonius Musa, the
description of Myrtus Syluestris, and the fruits of the same does Scrapio call
Cubebas, Carpesium.
which differ from our vulgar Cucubis. Carpesium, says Galen is like to
Ualerian, both in taste and facultyes, but has more subtiltye, and therefore
cleanses, and scoureth more, the obstructions of the bowels, moves vryne, and
purges the renes, pained with stones.

Cucumis asininus.
Though there be diverse kinds of Cucumers, S^cys Agrios, Dioscorides li. 4.
and Galenus, li. 8. desym. med. facultatibus.
(and they not without their singular, and eximious virtues:) we have here only
to speak of the wild, or leaping Cucumer, called (...), and of the
Apothecaries Cucumis as^inus. It is very bitter, and being laid to with
Barlye flower, breaks every old coughe. The juice of the leaves, instilled
into the ears, helps their pains: and being applied with Terebinthin resin,
it breaks small Apostemes. It eases also the gowte, the totheache, and the
Ischiada pain.

The root thereof is of abstersive and mollificatyue facultyes. The juice
whereof and the rynde, (which dries more strongly,) given together do purge
Choler and Phlegm chiefly in Hydropicis, and puts forth deiections, without
hurting the stomach.

Out of the fruit says Dioscorides, is prepared a juice, (or else pressed out
of the rotes and leaves says Galen,) Elaterium.
called Elaterium: whot in the second degree, and marvelous bitter. And
therefore digesteth, moves vryne, and heals pains of the head. And finallye
it does all, that the herb, rote or fruit does, and that more strongly.

Cucurbita.
Called in greek (...), Colochitha. Dioscor. li. 2. Galenus li. ^. de sym.
medi. fa^ultatibus.
is a fruit apt to be eaten raw, and is of diverse sorts, differing rather in
form then in faculty. It is cold and moist in the second degree, and therefore
staieth thirst. The juice of gourds, mixed with the juice of roses, is
profitable to ye pains of ye ears, caused of inflamatio^. The slyces or pieces
thereof, are laid to the nodle of children, Syriasis.
against the vehemente heat of their heads, called Syriasis. They cool also
the inflammations of the eyes, and the gowte of the fete: and do help
moreover, the adustion of the skin, and the vehement heat of fevers. The juice
also drunk, cum Melle and Nitro, does easilye loose the bellye.

Cupressus.
CIpresse is a tree called in Greek (...), Cyparissos.
in Latyne Cupressus, and of the Apothecaries Cypressus. It cools and dries
as Dioscorides says. Libro. 1. The leaves and nuttes thereof, are used for
those purposes in medicynes. The leaves, branches, and yo^g tender nuttes of
Cypres do dry (says Galen) without great sharpnes or heat, De sympli. 7.
and heal great ulcers in hard bodies.

Curcuma.
AS says Syluius upon Mesuen, is that with the Arabian, swhiche the Grecians
call (...), the Latins Rubiam and Rubeam tinctorum, Erythrodano^.
and we Mader: Rubia.
Though some apply that name to Chelidonio, and others corruptly to Saffron.
And as this his assertion has many learned fautores, and therefore seems
most true: so is it very like to be that which Lanfranke means, for that
it agrees with his purpose, (Who puts it among his consolidatiues,) which
the other do not.

The root of Rubia is sharp, and bitter: and therefore expurgeth the Liver and
the spleen: Galemis de sym. li. 6.
Provoke much gross, and sometime bloudye vrines, and scoureth meanlye. And
therefore helps Morbum Regium, Diosco. lib. 3.
or the yelowe Jaundyse. The Ischiada pain also, and loosed members.

Defensiuae medicinae.
Defensive medicynes (of Defendo to guarde, defend and prohibit.) Are of no
small profit to the Chirurgien his work, whose use and vtilityes may by the
circumstances (where so ever they are mentioned) be easily gathered.

Desiccatiua medicamina.
DRying medicines (which comes of Desicco to dry up) serve often the office
of Cicatrizatiues, look there.

Diminutio.
Diminution or abatemente.

Dipsacum.
DIpsacum called also Labrum Veneris, Labrum Veneris.
and of the Apothecaries Carduus Fullonam, is called in Greek (...), and in
English Teasell. Dipsacos.
There are two kinds thereof. The one the shermen occupye: The other which is
called Dipsacum album, serves after the mind of some,) chiefly for medicines.

Radix dipsaci (says Galen) dries in the second degree, Galenus de sym. li.
6.
and has not a little abstersion. It heals (by the testimony of
Dioscorides,) Dioscori. li. 3.
fistules, and chappes of the fundamente, being bruised and boiled with wine,
til it be as thycke as were. And further is thought to be a remedy, for
ryngwormes, and hanginge wartes.

Dyscrasia.
(...), De symptomatum causis li. 2.
id est Intemperies, (that is distemperance) is after Galen Aequalis, which is
without pain, because there is in the place affected, a desired nature, (for no
body is by his own nature infested) or Inaqualis, which is when a body is
troubled both with heat and cold at once, or with dryness and moisture, De
methodo medendi, li. 7. 8. and. 9.
more then to nature is convenient. Which sometimes chances, though it
seem unlike: and how great so ever it be, so much does it moleste. These
are eighte in number, and may severally chance, to the eyghte simple members:
requiringe also, so many differences of curation. De art curatiua, li. 2.
And are either simple, which may be. iiii. ways, whot, cold, dry, or
moiste, and may be cured by their contraries: or compound as many ways, as
whot and dry, whotte and moist. etc. With these dispositions one part, or
more, or the whole body may be affected.

Embrocatio.
(...). Embroche.
i. Infusio, Irrigatio, Inspersio, uelliquor e sublime defusus: a pouringe on,
waterynge, sprinklynge of Oil. etc. or lettynge it fall, on the affected
part. The late learned writers call it in Latin Embrocha, whereof comes
Embrocation, as we call it.

Ephemera.
Which (by changinge.^. into.i.) has accustomablye been written Ephimera: De
differe^tiis sebriu^, li. 1. 2.
Is a fever happeninge chieflye to melancholic persons, De methodo medendi,
li. 8. 9. ac. 10.
though sometime it chance of rawnesse, to biuous temperamentes: springinge
of a procatarctike cause, (which is thereof an inseparable token, yet thereto not
proper:) De art curatiua ad Glauconem.
as weariness, drunkenness, wrath, furye, sorrow, and such other vehemente
affectes of the mind: and sometime of blood inflamed, or of the tumor Bubo:
contynueth with a sweet or pleasant heat, and inclyneth with some sweet dew
or good vapor: after ye which comes health. The naturalle time of
continuance, is one naturalie day: wherein it is apt to be resolved, and
therefore is called Febris diaria, Pyretos Ephemeros, Febris diaria,
and in Greek (...). But this end it takes, by good governance in the
beginning: which if it pass, it sometime changes both name and nature, and
sometime only the name reserving the nature. And this state of Ephemera I
judge Lanfranke to mean where he speaks of Ephemera continua.

Erysipelas.
(...): Galenus, de atrabile, de tumoribus praeternatur^ de meth. med. li. 14.
de art curatiua. li. 2.
Is properlye an affecte of the skyn, sprunge of pure choler (being made
whot;) of color yelow, or pale, or of both mixedly consisting: much whotter
then Phlegmone, and is therefore called Ignis sacer, uel S. Antonii, and of
some Ignis persicus. which names I think in deed may all be applied, to it or
his kinds.

And as for Erysipelas n^thunt, which Lanfranke mencioneth, Erysipelas Nothum.
I take rather by his own narration, to be Inflammationem Erysipelatosa^. For
Erysipelas nothum, may come.iii. ways, by receiuinge into it self by
admixtion, any of the other three humores in less quantitye: and has to
name (...), Erysipelas Phlegmon^^des.
hoc est Erysipelas Phlegmonosum, uel inflammationis particeps* if blood be
therwyth mixed: (...) quasi Erysipelas pituitosum, ^el oedematis particeps,
Erysipelas oedema^^^des Erysipelas (...).
when Phlegm has a part. Or (...), idest Erysipelas indurantum, aut
duritiei consors, because it is hard, through the fellowship of Melancholye
therwyth.

Euphorbium.
(...): Euphorbion.
Is the gum or tears of a tree, called Euphorbia, growinge in Lybia, Galen.
ibro. 3. de symp. li. 6. de co^^ned. secum. genera li. 3. de comp^med. secum.
loca. li. 1.
found out (by the testimonye of Dioscorides,) in ye time of ^uba: and was
called by that name, (as says Ruellius) of his Phisicien. It has a vehemente
whotte, and burninge facultye and profits very much against the Spasme,
caused by the pricking of tendones. But for that ought it not to be used to
new, (which is of color clear white,) for the vehemente heat thereof*
Neither to old, (which then wareth yelow or pale,) because it is numbered among
such symples, as do soon lose their heat and virtues. And yet continues
it.vi. years.

Eunuchus.
A man is called (...), Eunouchos.
idest Castratus, when he is gelded, and therthrough becomes foggy or fat.

Excoriatio
Excoriation: is a taking off ye skin, by ^^aing, or blistering, which comes
of Excorio, to flea, or take away the skyn.

Exitura.
Go to Apostema.

Faba.
CAlled in Greek (...) coleth and dries meanelye. Cyamos.
Yet has the meal thereof, some abstertion, as also the hulles have not a
little adstringente facultye. To be eaten they are flatule^t, though they be
never so much sodden: hard to be concocted, and cause spittinges out of the
breast, Dioscorid. li. 2. Galenus de sym. med. li. 7.
and lunges: but they nurish much. In medicynes outwardlye, they dry
vnhurtfullye: and being boiled in water, were often used of Galen, cum adipi
suillo, to the goutes of the fete. The meal is incarnatyue, and is put to
bruses, and in wounds of sinews, cum Oxi^^ilite, and to inflammations cum
Polenta. And is in Cataplasmatis most apt, for swellings of the pappes and
stones.

And although many learned men by diverse reasons (which I omit) moved of
late, do doubt whether our Bean may be taken for Faba, Phasiolus.
or for Phasiolo, or otherwise how: Yet need no man doubt (in my judgment)
that Lanfranke as well as many other writers both before him, and long time
since: have for Faba understood the Bean.

Fabaria.
THat which the Italians call Fabariam, is thought of some to be Telephium,
Telephium.
and called of others Cymbalion, but neither of both truly. Cymbalion.
The later writers call it Crassulam maiorem, Crassula mayor.
Licobus Manlius with diverse other, Fabam grossam, we (and also the French
men,) call it Orpin, and aunciently Lempke. whereunto some have added, (as a kind
thereof,) the herb that D. Turner, thinks to be Caepea of Dioscorides,
calling it Fabaria minor, or Fabaria aquatica, and englishly brook Lempke.
Crassula minor.
But Crassula minor, is (by the common consent, of almost all the learned,)
that kind of stone croppe, that grows commonly upon stone walls or houses,
as Sedum does, having round blunte leaves, like puddinges or little worms,
full of juice, called also of the form aforsayde, Ver^icularis, in English
Wormegrasse: whereof more at Semper Viuum.

The later writers, (for the old make thereof no mention,) do praise their
Crassulam maiorem, for the great efficacy that it has, incurynge wounds, in
stoppynge of blood, chieflye for inward wounds and ulcers: and for the
mernailous profit it gives, in healinge ruptures.

Farina Volatica.
THe flyinge meal of the mylle, commonly called mill stuff: being not one,
but the meal commonly of many graynes together, must needs possess such
facultyes, Galenus de alimentis. li. ^. ac de atenuan te Victus ratione.
as the composition makes: (As wheat is of temperament whot in the first
degree, but neither moisteth nor dries manifestly: And barlye cold and dry in
the first degree. Yet does wheat flower manifestly moiste, as also Barley meal
does, somewhat more then the grain: though Polenta do dry much more.) But
Farina Volatica, is commonly cold and dry of complexion, and therefore is
conveniently put into restrictiues, and consolidatiues.

Felles auium.
CHoler naturalle, Chole.
or the gaul, called in Latyne Fell, and Bilis, in Greek (...): Is of all
iuyces in every living thing the whottest. Whose heat is yet variable,
Galenus de symp. med. li. 10.
according to the creatures their temperamentes. For as the gaul of the Hog,
is of al other beasts the coldest: so is the gaul of the sheep, of the got,
of the Bull. etc. every one in their degrees whotter.

But the gauls of fowls, (which only Lanfranke has, are both sharper and
dryer, then of.iiii. foted beasts. Of the which also, the galls of Hens
and Pertriches, are most allowed in medicynes: The gauls of the Rite, of the
Egle and such like are (...) dinge sharp and bitinge: yea of a grene col^^es,
and sometime s^^rte. And therefore Galen does warn the same, that Lanfranke
neglects not: That is; to put unto any of them the juice of Fenell, Mel, and
Opobalsamum: whenever you use them to the eyes.

Fermentum.
CAlled in Greek (...): Zyme.
is meanlye, whot, consistinge of subtille parts coparcioner of a certain
cold sharpness, Galenus de sym li. 6. and de comp. med. secun. genesis ra. li. 3.
and also of heat, sprunge of putrefaction: and has in common, both the
nature of salt and meal.

Wherefore leven, especially if it be old draws from the depthe gross
spirits and superfluous humores, and dygesteth them. But what needs here thus
much, when Lanfranke has so (...) spoken thereof in his antidotarye.

Ficus.
THe Fig (and also the tree,) Syce.
is called in Greek (...). The dry Figs have a certain subtiltye, Galenus
de symp. li. 8.
and do heat in the first degree, or in the beginnynge of the second:
wherefore as well they, as their decoction, do concocte, and digest hard
swellings. But where concoction is chiefly required, they ought to be (...)
with (...) And where rather digestion, Hor^^acea. Fat fygges have the more
concoctiue power, and sour Figs do both scour more, and digest. Grene
fygges are weaker, yet do both ye moist, (which hurt the stomache) and the
dry, purge the belly. But the flux by them moved, is (...) stayed.

Fistula.
FIstula says Galen, (in his book of tumores against nature,) Sinus est
angustus and longus. etc. A fistule is a straight and long bosom, like to
other bosoms, which is much drawn together, and after also again opened.

That cave or holowe room in the flesh, Sinus.
which I have Englished a bosom, is there also of Galen thus defyned. When
rotten matter, does excoriate bodies, and deuyde the conteniynge from the
contained, or subiect^: And farther, it being emptyed how so ever, the parts
d^^^dente one from an other, can not recover their pristinate constitution:
this affecte is called Sinus. Which (if it be not with speed cured) does
gather to it self Callum, and in time be comes hard: and then can not be
adglued to his parts subject. etc. And then doubtless it is no longer Sinus,
but Fistula.

Flammula.
FLammula: is one of the kinds of Ranuculus, (whereof there are very many,) as
are also the herbs, called of Lanfranke and others, Apium risus, and Apium
Haemorrhoidi^t, and also Pes milui (as above under Apium:) and has so
exceeding burninge, and blisteringe power: (as have also all the rest,) that it
exulcerateth, the e^^raelles, but chiefly the ly^er: and therefore is most
pernicious for sheep, and other beasts feedinge thereon. Lanc^ola.
It is called also of some Lanccola, and in English spear work, for that the
leaves thereof, have the form of a spear head.

Flos aeris.
IS called in Greek (...): Chal^uanthos.
some men says Dioscorides have called it Clauorum Veterum, psegma, that is
the scraping, rubbish, or dust of old brass nails, or rivers. But a little
after showing the making thereof, he says it comes of melted brass, by
pouring cold water thereon, forth with as it runs by certain conducts, out of
the furnace. Whereby this Flos aris breaks forth, and congealeth in many
small parts, which of their forms, some have called little grains. De symp,
li. 9
It is by the sentence of Galen, of more subtle substance, then aes Vstum, or
Squa^ma aeris: and does vehemently scour, and also biteth much. Wherefore with
collyries made thereof, the great roughi^esse or ruggedness of the eye brows
are taken away, and other superfluous excr^scentes.

And although it be (as you see) most evident, that Aeris go and Flos aeris
are two things: yet may the one in some cases, be circumspectly used for the
other: after the minds of diverse learned. Look more at Viride aes.

Foeniculum.
FEnell, Marathron. Galenus de sym. med. li. 7
which the Grecians call (...), doothe heat in the first degree, and dry in
the second, which eaten, or the seade drunk with barley water, sylleth the
pappes with milk: Whose juice also heals the web in the eye, and sharpeneth
the sight most commodiously. The root and seade of Hippomarathrian do dry
more then Foeniculum domesticu^: Dioscorides. li. 3.
and therefore seem to stay the belly, and also are able to break the stone,
and to heal the ^aundies.

Foenum graecum.
IS called in Greek (...). Telis. Dioscor. li. 6. de sym. li. 8. dt com. med.
secu^. genesis li. 7 de com. med. secun. locos, li. 4.
The seade whereof being well sodden, discusseth and mollifyeth, chieflye with
some kind of fatness. The dicoction thereof has discussyue, and moderate
heatinge propertye, and therefore loses, and maturateth: and is wont to
mitigate many pains. It is whotte says Galen in the second degree, and dry
in the first: Whereby it kyndleth, and augmenteth inflammatyons. For the which
cause Lanfranke has frendlye warned us, to eschew the layinge of Fenigreke,
to whotte inflamed members. Yet does it by his dividing power, heal such
inflammations, as are more hard then whotte.

Formica.
OF this tumore called in Greek (...), My^mecia. li. 4. fen. 3.
Aulce^^a, (of whom Lanfranke seems to take his definition thereof,) Primi
tractatus.
says* it is a pustule, that comes out, and causes a pure aposteme, and is
ambolatyue, Which perhaps vlcerateth, or else will be resolved: having a
substance, Li. 4. De methodo mede^di.
round like a little warte, inflamed, and of color somewhat citrine. But
Galen (rekening it with Veruca, Acrochordine, and other like affectes of the
(kin,) teaches how with a holowe quille to pluck it out. Affirming also,
that some men at Rome in his time, used to byte them away with their teeth.
Neither of the which ways, can in any wise be mete for pure apostemes, either
vlcerated, or apt to be resolved.

Of the little Ante or pismire, Myr^ne^.
called (...) does this tumor take his name, both in Greek and Latin. Of whose
eggs Lanfranke makes an oil, whose use and utility: there may you find.

Fraxinus.
IT should seem that Lanfranke, takes the rynde of ash, to be of virtue like
unto myrtils, in driyng up the bruised places, keeping the same from
putrefaction: If it be not added by some other, for I have perused some copies,
which have it not. But Ash is virtuous against the swollen spleen, and has
diverse properties, agreyng with the Mirte tree, Melia.
as in learned authors ye may farther read both old and new writers. Fraxinus.
The Ash tree is called in Greek (...), and in Latin Fraxinus.

Furfur.
BRan has qualities variable, De symp. med. sac. lib. 5.
after the kind of grain that it comes of. How be it, Furfur is commonly
taken for bran of wheat: which is says Galen, not so whotte, but dries
more then the meal, and does somewhat scowre.

Galbanum.
GAlbanum, or as some write Chalbanum, after the Greek, which is (...)*
Chalbane.
is says Dioscorides, the liquor of a tree, called Metopiu^, of a country in
Syria, where it grows. Which name does the Gum also sometimes obtain: For
the vnguente Metopion is so called, of the admirtio^ of Galbanum therewith. And
he says that it is adulterate with hulled beans, resin, and ammoniake. De
symp. li. 8 De com. med. secun. genera. lib. 3. 5. and. 7.
Diosc. lib. 1. cap. 6. and lib. ^. cap. 79.

It ought to have Similitudinem Thuris, uel Ammoniaci. It takes his name ab
Albedine (says Antonius Musa Brasanolus:) and therefore the whiter it is the
better, and contrariwyse, the worse. Wherefore the Galbanum that we commonly
have, may well be judged adulterate, or else the dregs and dross of right
Galbanum. It heateth after Galen, in the end of the second degree, or in the
beginning of the third, and dries in the beginning of the second. Whereby it
has comforting, mollifiyng, and degestiue power, aswageth pain, and is put in
maturatiues: and in the pricks or hurtes of sinews, it helps not a little to
mitigate pain, if the nerves be not bare, for it has (as have all other
multificatiues) some putrefiyng property.

Gallae.
GAlla (says Dioscorides.) is a fructe of the Oak, whereof the less is
rugged, without holes, and as it wear but half grown, and called (...), and
is the best: The other (which is greter) is plain, light, and perced through
with holes. They are to us well known: as well by the use of perfect Galls,
which we receive from other regio^s, as also that we see the^ yearly growing
plentifully in Kent: (which are there of ye common sort called oak appuls.)
Though they be never indurate. And whether there be several kinds of oaks,
whereof (as master Turner reasons,) some bear Galls, and some not, I can
not say: For with us, few oaks for the most years are without.

How be it, of master D. Cunningham I am (through his most friendly
conference) informed, that he has by observation found on oaks growyng about
Norwich, (where they are in certain wooddes very plentiful,) three kinds of
fructes: the Acorne, the Oak appull, and the Galle: All the which I have also
by observation found in Kent. The Acorne, and the Appull, growyng on the
sprigges or branches, but the Galle, on the leaves of the tree. The Galle
(says he) waxes hard, and the outward covering wrynkled, and has been by
trial proved good (beside the native adstringent^ virtue,) to make ink, and
black colors. Affirming also, that the appul is hard in Julie, but has
growing on it a soft substance, not unlike to moss, inwardly more massy, and
very stiptike: within the which also are those things found, that are in the
Galle. Whereof also some old expert husbandmen of Kent, have no small opinion to
judge by them the sequel of the year. For they breaking them about their time
of withering, do find in them some living thing. As sometime an Ante, whereof
they judge plenty of grain: sometime a white worm like a gentill, whereof they
prognosticate morreine in of beasts: And sometime a spyder, whereof they
presage the pestilence, or some other like sickness, to follow among men. Which
thing also the learned have not omitted to note, though not in the same order.
For Matthiolus upon Dioscorides has these words.

Illud sibi peculiare maiores Gallae vendicauere, In prim^^^^. Dioscori^i^^.
lib. Cap. Vero. 124. (...).1. Galla.
ut quota^^is aut annone fertilitatem, aut sterilitatem, aut pestilentem auram
praenu^cient: Nam si rumpantur integrae (and quae perforatae non sunt,) aut
muscam, aut araneum, aut uermiculum exponent. Si ruiscauolat futuri belli, si
repit uermiculus, (...) penuriae: si currit araneus, pesulenti^^ morborum
praesaguim est. Neque cuiquam mirum uideatur, quod ex omnibus Gallis ista
oriantur animalcula: eterim ego huius rei saepius feci periculum, nullamque
unquam sum co^sequutus prius no^ perforatam, quae ex tribus animalibus unum
intrase non contineret. Nam foramine conspecto facile iudicium sumi potest, iam
animal exiisse. Dicamus igitur licet, quaercum and fructum, and animal gignere.
Cuius rei haud ignari ueteres illi patres, non sine causa quercum dixeru^t Ioui
summo esse dicata^. Which may in effect thus be Englished. This thing have
the greatter Galls challenged peculiar to the selves that they can yearly
forshewe, either plentye or scarcity of victualle, or a pestilentiall air:
for if they be broken in sond^e, namely those that are not already through
pierced. They confeine either a fly, a spyder, or a worm. If a fly be
found, it is a prognostication of war to follow: if a crepyng worm, of the
scarcity of victual: but if a runnynge spyder, of pestilente sicknesses.
Neither let any man merueile, that out of Galls those little living things
should apeare: for this thing have I often proved, neither did I ever find
any, (being not before pierced with holes,) which contained not within it self
one of the fornamed animalles: for the hole being seen, it is easy to judge
that they are now gone forth. Wherefore we may say, that the oak brings
forth fruit, and living things. Of the which, the old fathers not being
ignorant, have said (not without cause) that the oak was ^edicated to the
high Jupiter.

Galla (says Galen) which is called Omphacitis, De simpliciu^ facultatibus
lib. 7.
is a sower medicine and of substance for the most part earthy and cold:
whereby it dries and repercusseth fluxions, constreyneth and fasteneth lose and
feeble parts. It coleth in the second degree, and dries in the third. The
other (which is great, yelow, and soft) dries also, but that so much the
less as it has less sower or sharp qualities.

Gangraena.
GAngraenae says Galen, De tumo. praeter not. and de art curatiua. lib. 2.
are such mortifications not yet absolute, as are made by the greatness of
infla^mations: and are raised when blood boiling whotte, annexed to
infla^mations, burns the skin. Look more at Aschachilos.

Garyophilli.
GAryophylli, (...).
(others write Caryophylli,) in Greek (...): so called, says Paulus Aegi neta,
quasi folia nucis habentes, that is, having the leaves of nutte trees,
odoriferous, and of very good taste. This has neither Dioscorides nor Galen:
but Pliny makes mention thereof, saying. There is a fruit in India called
Garyophilon, like a pepper grain, but greater and britler, of color reddishe
upon black, headed like a nail, with four denticles spredde like a star:
within the which lies bowlyng out a little round button. The tree is of
heyght three cubits, having little thick leaves, and a broad woody root.

Cloves are whotte and dry in the third degree, very aromatike, and have
almost the virtue of pepper, but do hurt the stomache less, and are good
against poison. In lynimentes they have virtue to consume, dissolve, comfort
sinews, and assuage pain, specially coming of cold matter.

Gentiana.
GEntian is an herb: Gentiane, lib. 3.
called of the Grecians (...), whose first invention as fayeth Dioscorides, is
assigned to Gentius king of Illiria. The root thereof is whot and dry, Galenus
De simp. med. li. 6
as the adstringencie and extreme bitterness thereof witnesses: And therefore
does most effectually purge, extenuate, and scour away. Whereby it helps
obstructions, and is drunk In Vino, cum ruta and pipere against the danger
of venomous wounds: and is somtymes put into fistules, and hollow ulcers, to
enlarge their orifice.

Gingiber.
Gingiber is written otherwise Zingiber, look there.

Glandulae.
GAlenus in lib. 13. and. 14. De methodo medendi, defines Glandules and their
natures double, saying. Some Glandules there are, placed in the mids of the
vessels, and of their branches, to defend their strength, whose use is not
great. Other there are (whose use is greater,) made to receive, and make
spitle, milk, seade, etc. (as thou may farther see in mine anatomy, neither
are they otherwise cured, when they are affected Cum scirrho, then other parts
of the body: But the other require the part, with also the corruption to be
taken utterly away. They are parts most apt to receive fluxions, as well for
their weakness and losen^s of substance, as also because among all other parts,
they have (except the alteratiue) almost no natural faculty: and therefore are
most swiftly taken, of the tumores Bubones.

Gl^ndulae in Lanfranke, are to be understood of the first sort of Glandules
contained in the vessels, being affected of Phygethlo^r* Scrophula.
but chiefly after his mind, of humores phlegmatike. Str^^a.
For if by mela^choly they become scirrhous, he calls them Scrophulas,
Cbo^ras.
but Galen names them Strumas, and in Greek (...).

Glycyrrhiza.
(...), which is Radix dulcis, and we call it liquerice, Galenus De simp. med.
li. 6
After the Apothecaries who call it Liqueriti^, is endued with a certain
warming property, and yet more cold then man his nature: and must needs
also be moderatlye moist, as it is moderatly sweet. And therefore to stay
thyrste it is most mete, Diosc. lib. 3.
and smotheth or softeneth the roughnes or ruggednes, as well of the bladder,
as of the sharp artery. It is convenient for the heat of the breast,
stomache, and liver: And drunk Cum passo, heals the p^ines of the renes. The
powder of the root also dried, heals says Dioscorides, the web of the
eye.

Grana paradisi.
GRana paradisi, are commonly taken for Cardamomo, and are so usually sold of
the Apothecaries. Cardamomu^.
Not withstanding others among the learned, think the common little graynes,
to be Grana paradisi.

It is a spice of whotte and dry nature, and odoriserous of smell. Which I
could never find so perfectly descrybed of any man, as of Rychard Eden, where
he writes of the two first viages* of our Englyshemen to Guinea: saiynge that
our men might have lade^ their ships with those grains, by the river Se^^o.
These Graynes (says he,) grow and come forth, in a fruit much like a
fygge* which (when they are gathered,) are as red as blood. They grow not
paste a foot and a half, or two foot from the ground: And as the fygge
has in it many graynes, so has this fruit. Through the which the
inhabitants there make holes, wherein they put strings, and so hang them to
dry, that the said Graynes may he the more easily taken out: as all seades
and graynes, may most aptlye be taken from their coddes vessicles or ears,
when they be very dry. These last have been taken for Cardamamo minori, and
the former sold commonly for Granis paradisi,) for Cardim^^o maiori. And this
is the opinion of the later Phisitiens: for Brasauolus notes three sorts of
seeds, which have been of old among the Apothecaries, Meligetta. Nigell^^^
trina.
under this name Cardamomum. The one is the trianguled grain, which they sell
as is above said, bath for Cardam^mo, and (...) p^ralisi. The second he
calls Meligettan. The third (says he is Nigella Cirrina.

But it is the opinion of some learned men, grounded upon diverse reasons, that
Cardamomum of the auncientes, is to us utterly unknown.

Gummi Arabicum.
GVmmi Arabicum found (and also so called) of the Arabi^ns, because it is
there most plentiful, and also Bi^ilonicum and S^rasenicum, upon like reason,
is ye tears of the thorn^ tree called Acacia and Spina Aegyptia, described
before in ye letter A) and therefore may it be called Gummi Acaciae, or Gummi
Spinae Aegyptiae, Though the Gum that is under that name commonly sold, be
the gum sometime of the bitter almonde tree, which is next of goodness to
the best, sometime of the Cherry or prime trees, and sometime of the Elm: and
this is the cause why it is found of so diverse colors. It is (as the tree
whereof it comes) of cooling and drying faculty, without sharpenes or biting:
And therefore a commodious lenitiue medicine, for the grefes and peines of the
eyes.

Hammoniacum.
Is to be sought at Ammoniacum.

Haematites.
(...), idest lapis sanguinaria, in English the blood stone* So called l^yeth
Galen, of the lykenes in color that it has with blood: Gal. De symp. lib. 9.
being of so much coldness, as it has adstriction. Wherefore it is found a
medicine profitable to the eyes: and may be used alone, to the roughnes of the
eye brows, if it come of inflammatio^. And thus much of his faculties
efficient, which are by reason known. For the faculties that it has after
the property of the whole substance, are neither known by reason, nor
method, but only by experience. Whereby it stays the flure of blood, the
wound being only touched therewith. It is convenient for all ulcers, and the
poulder thereof represseth excrescentes.

Hedera.
IUye (of the Grecians (...),) is after Dioscorides of.iii. kinds, Cissos,
lib. 2.
namely Candida (which Pliny calls foemina,) Nigra, (of Pliny mas,) and
Helix. Whereof the white rejoices in watery places, the black to grow upon
walls or trees, and Helix barenly crepeth on the ground.

It consists (by the sentence of Galen) of contrary qualities: De symp. lib.
7.
as of a certain adstryngente substance, which is cold and earthy, having
also some sharpnes: which to be whotte even the taste proves. And farther if
it be grene, it obteineth a warm and watery substance.

The grene leaves therefore boiled in wine, do glewe together and bring to
healynge, great and malign ulcers, and ulcers made with fire: though by
experience, we see them also attractiue, and apt to keep long open, such
sores as we would not have healed. And being boiled with vyneger, they help
the sick of the spleen. The tears or gum thereof kylleth nittes, and makes
balde, and is so whotte, that it privily burns. Which yet I have found, to
be a meruaylous desiccatiue, and with oil to assuage pain.

Hermodactylus.
THough that kind of (...), Ephemeron.
(so called because it kylleth in one day him that eats the root thereof)
that is also called (...), Colchicon.
(of the country Colchis, where it did plentifully grow) have among many
learned men, borne the name of Hermodactylus, and may be one of the worste or
nocyue kinds of the same, according to the descriptio^s of A^iicenna, Serapio,
Mesues, and other Arabia^s: yet it is not the Hermodactylus that is sold of
the Apothecaries. First because the root of this is round on al parts, black
or reddyshe, and when it is dry rugged, or wrynkled: whose stalk goes forth
at a rifte or creaste, in the upper or smallest end. That of the Apothecaries
is round on the one side, and flat on the other: white, and smothe, and
without rifte: but has on the flat side, a certain shalowe dinte, as it
wear a cloue cleauynge to the side of a stalk. Wherein it very well agrees,
with Hermodactylo, as Paulus Aegineta descrybeth it. The same also does Cordus
infer, because Colchicum strangleth, which Hermodactyli do not. Who
affirms Hermodactylus to grow in mowne meadows, and sonny places.

Mesues making two kinds of Hermodactili, says. It is the root of an herb
that grows on the hills, whereof the one is of a finger length, the other
round: and this is either white, read, or black. Among the which, that
which is white, both within and without, is the best: as the red and the
black are evil. Which (says Scrapio) do strangle, and therefore may one of
these be that kind of Colchicum, or wild saffron, that grows in certain
gardyns in England.

But who so would note more exactly, Mesues order of division of
Hermodactilus, may behold it thus gathered.

Of Hermodactilus there are two kinds. Long, as of a finger length. Round
whereof the sorts are three, differyng in colors, as 1 White whereof ye 2
Read. 3 Black. Best is 1 Uery white both within and without. 2 Compacte. 3
Mean between hard and soft.
All others how much so ever they want of the fornamed tokens, so much are
they inferior in goodness to the best. Both the which are evil.



It is whotte and dry in the beginning of the second degree. whose moisture
is excrementous, fatulente, abhorfull, and hurts the stomache: chiefly when
the excrementes of other parts flow into the same. It draws principally
from the ioynctes gross phlegm: And therefore helps the gowte, and other
pains of the lymmes, either taken in, or laid to in Cataplasmate, Sperma
quoque auget.
cum uitellis ouorum, farina hordeacea, uel mica panis. It makes fat, and is
proffitable for ulcers: in that it consumes the putrefied flesh, and wypeth
away the filthiness in the^. Hermodactylos.
It is called (...), Quasi mercurii digitus, that is, Mercuries finger, or else
as others will Hermetis digitus.

Herpes.
(...), De methodo medendi. lib. 1. 2. and. 4.
is one of the tumores against nature, that are referred to Erysipelas, and an
affecte or exulceration of the skin, springing, (by the testimony of Galen)
of the same cause: as of bilious excrementes, setlyng in some place. Saving
that the humore thereof, is thinner and subtiler then of Erysipelas, wherein also
they differ. It is says he, of two kinds. De tumorib. praeter natura Herpes
exedens.
For when the substance is gross, it perceth through the skin with his
vlcerations, even to the flesh, and is called Herpes exedens: which ryghtly
in quality resembles the serpente, (whereof it has his name) in crepyng, and
devouring the parts adjacent, and is of the kind of Erysipelas vlcerate. But
when it is engendered of choler not so whotte and sharp, or (as to some it
seems not all without reason) myngled with some phlegm: It makes no ulcer,
but little pustules like the grains of Milium, and therefore is called Herpes
miliaris: Herpes miliaris.
Which yet within a while do degenerate into ulcers. And in his second book
De art curatiua, he mentions a third kind after Herpes exedens, saying.
But if the humores be thinner, and do only burn the upper part of the
skin: it also obteineth a name, and is symply called Herpes.

Hordeum.
BA^ley is called in Greek (...), and thereof are there diverse kinds. Crit^e.
As Hordeum distichum, wiche is our summer barley. Hordeum tetrastichon, big
barley. Hordeum polystichum, of some winter barley. Hordeum Hexastichu^, which
D. Turner calls duche barley. Gy^^ocritho^.
(...).i. Hordeum nudum, uel corticis expers, naked barley, etc. Which farther
to dilate, here is neither place nor need.

Barley coleth and dries (after Galen) in the first degree, De alimentis. lib.
1.
wherein it differs from wheat, and has also a little abstersion, De sym.
medi. fac. lib. 7.
and in meats excels beans: because it is not wyndy. Barley bread
nourysheth less then wheat, but provoke the belly more: and is unto men of
small or no exercise, of large nuryshement. So is also Polenta, which is of
nature more dry: although Ptisana, do naturally moist. And in Libro de
attenuante uictus ratione, he says: that among all other breades, barley is
vnhurtefull to a sclender diete. Barley meal outwardly resolves, mollifieth,
and maturateth, chiefly whotte affectes, and choleric tumores.

Hyosciamus.
HEenbane is called in Greek (...), Hyosciamos.
in Latin Hiosciamus, Apollinaris, Faba suilla, and Altercum: of Apuleus
Symphoniaca: of others also Fabulum, and Eabulonia: and of some Cassilago, or
Caniculata: of the Apothecaries Iusquiamus. Of Henbane there are three kinds:
the black, the yelowe, and the white. The black is our common kind: Whose
seade causes madness, and is not allowed. The yelowe grows in my garden, the
seade whereof was given me, of master Roger Lee Doctor of physic: which is
better then the black, but yet to be eschued as hurtful. That whose flower
and seade is white, I never saw as yet. It is only allowed wholesome, beymg
cold in the third degree, Galenus De st^^p. med. li. 8
and is a narcotike, or stupefactiue medicine: asswagyng pain, and represseth
the inflammations of the eyes: helps the gowte, Diosc. lib. 4
and asswageth the swellynges of the breast and stones.

Hyposarca.
(...), Anasarca. Gale. De dignoscendis pulsibus. lib. 4.
called also Sarcites, Hyposarca, and Leucophlegmatias, is that kind of
Hydrops, which (spreadyng it self larglyer then the other two Ascites and
Tympanites,) possesses the whole habit of the body, with much moisture: De
pulsuum causis. lib. 4.
though the other two do yet send affectes, to other parts then they
possess, which is the belie. As to the great arteries, Ascytes, colyng,
stretching and aggrauatyng them, and Tympanites, filling the^ with wind. Whose
coats Anasarca does lose and mollify. The Hydropsy comes diverse ways. As
by the obstruction and refrigeration of the liver, or by Scirrho therein: by the
faults of the breast the spleen and the renes, of the gutte Pylorus and
Mesenterium, or of some one of the small guts: of the immoderate flux of the
Haemorrhoides, or of Menses, and of the suppression of the same: and sometime
of the vntymly drynkyng of cold water, coolyng the liver: Without some
unnatural affection whereof, there can spryng no Hydropsie, says Galen. De
locis affectis. lib. 5. cap. 6.

Icteritia.
(...) (which takes that name of the yelowe bird Icterus, Icteros.
called also Galbula) is called in Latin Arquatus, Arquatus* Aurigo. Morbus
regius.
Aurigo, and Regius morbus: in Englysh the Jaundies, or Guilsouth. Which is
when Choler natural, (through the abundance of the same, or the whotte
distemperance of the liver and veins, Galen. de sympto^. causis, lib. 1.
or through the obstruction or inbecilitie of the blader of Choler, for then it
is mixed with the blood) is poured out over all the body: in so much that it
occupiyng the eyes, (...)

A Resolutyue Vnguente.
Reci. Olei Chamaemelini vel Anethini drachmas sex. Cerae drachmas duas.
Pinguedinis Anatis and Galinae, ana drachmam vnam. Seminis Anethi. Florum
Camaemeli puluerizatorum, ana drachmas duas. Fiat vnguentum.
An excellent Diachilon.
VUhiche resolves could matters, and mollifieth hard matters.

Rec. Lithargirii minutissime triti, libram vnam* Olei. Chamaemelini. Anethini.
Liliacei. Yrmi, ana drachmas.viii.
Mucaginis. Altheae. Seminis Lini. Foenograeci.
Ficuum siccatarum. Passularum enucleatarum. Succi yreos. Succi Scillae Oesypi.
Collae de corio, ana drach duodec^m. Terebinthinae, vncias tres. Resinae Albae.
Cerae Citrinae, ana vncias duas.
Let all these be boiled together, till the substance incorporate, become
harder then an Unguente, and softer then an Emplaster.

Yet it is to be noted, that sometimes, although by resoluynge the matter, it
be also deminyshed: the residue nevertheless, is over much indurate. And then
thou must mollifye it, which thou may very well do, by washinge the
member lightlye and softlye, cum Aqua calida, until it wax read, and after
by anoyntinge it with an Unguen^e made, ex Olei Veteris, partibus quatuor, and
Cerae part Vna.

An other Resolutiue, very profitable for this purpose, which mollifieth
Scrophules and Glandules, and prepares them to resolution, made thus.

Rec. Olei veteris, libras duas.
And put it in a glass cum radicibus Altheae, and Cucumer^s ^sinini mundatis,
ana Vnciam Vnam. and put the Glass, with the Oil and roots, in an other
vessel of Water, sufferynge (...) sinews, etc. It purges with honey, dry
ulcers, and fills them: so does it also fistules, and hollow ulcers.

Lacertus.
LAcertus, or Lacerta, is a worm or little beast, having four feet, and
formed in body like our efte or ewght (which therefore some judge a kind of the
same,) of color in germany ashye or black, and of a spanne or of a foot
length at the most. In Italy longer, of color grene, and venomous, but yet
most friendly to man, (whose face he delyghteth to behold,) enemy to
serpents: and for man his cause, (whose spittle he will lycke when he fyndeth
him fleaping, using it as a defense) he fights against serpents, and
therefore obteyneth worthilye the name (...). Ophiomachos
Almanzoar, describinge the same medicine for the eyes, that Lanfranke does,
has Stercus magni lacerti, that is ye dunge of the great Lizarde: For they are
of two kinds. As a greater now expressed, and a less, which is called of
some Stellio, because it has spots on the skin like to stars.

The dunge of the Lizarde, is a medicine proffitable for the eyes, as to
sharpen the sight, and to take away the itche, and the web in the same. The
head of the Lizarde, (as says Dioscorides) bruised and laid to, Lib. 1.
draws out all pricks or stynges fixed in the flesh, and takes away
spots, and the wartes called Formicas, (...).i. Ver^ca pensilis.
and Acrochordonas. The liver of the same put into holowe teethe, takes away
their peynes. The Lizarde broken, and laid to the stroke of a Scorpion, eases
the same.

Lac muliebre.
Milk called in Greek (...), Gala.
(whose substance primitive is blood:) is of temperament, mean between blood
and phlegm, consisting of three substances diverse, and in effects contrary.
Galenus De sanitate tu^da lib. 1. and. 5.
Namely whayey, which is cold and moiste, and loses the belly: Curdie, which
is tough, and byndeth the same: and fatty, whereof butter is made, and used
(says Galen, De ma^^smo.
Lib. 3. De alimentis,) in cold contreis for oil. De methodo medendi, lib. ^
Of qualities as variable as the bodies are diverse, wherein it is made: As cow
milk is most gross and fat, (which heals the Dysenteria.) De sym. med.
lib. 4. and. 10.
Camels milk lean and most liquyde. But of all the thynnest and most whayey
is asses milk: De compo. secu^ loca. lib. 4
And therefore to dry affectes is most convenient: The mean between these
holds goats milk: which taken without honey is perylous, De Theriaca ad
pisonem.
because if it congeyle in the stomache it suffocateth. Galenus De Euchymia,
and Cacochymia) Thicker then which is shepes milk, etc.

Milk generally nurysheth, makes good juice, and purges the belly moderatly,
is profitable for the breast, and heals the ulcers of the lunges: but to the
head that is not very fyrme it is unprofitable, and the use thereof to the
teethe very hurtful. But of all other woman's milk, (as of the same nature) is
to us most famyliar, and to phthisick persons an excellent medicine: convenient
also for sharp and bytyng fluxions of the eyes, and inflammations of the same,
and to the ulcers of the panicle Cornea. It mitigateth the inflammations of the
mouth, throat, and Vuula, and eases the squincie: and is given as a help to
them that have taken corrodyng venyms.

The best milk is very white, and without sensible temperament: that is having
no odor or little, and the same pleasant: but having in taste some swetenes,
like wholesome blood. As that which is in any wise thereunto contrari, is always
evil.

Lactuca.
(...) is of kind first double, Thridax.
as Lactuca satiua, or Hortensis, yt is gardin letuce: And Lactuca syluestris,
called grene Endyue. Of the first there are diverse kinds, (as there is also
of this:) Dios. lib. 2.
as Crispa, so called of his wryncled or curled leaves, Galen. de alimentis.
lib. 2.
Rotunda taking his name, of the round leaves. and Capitata: that is cabbege
letuce, of his headlike rou^dnes or Cabbeginge. De attenuate uictus ratio^e.


Letuce cools and moisteth by the testimony of Galen, according to the
temperament, De locis affectis lib. 3. and de symp. med. facul. li. 3. et. 6
of fountain water, and therefore is commodious to whotte inflammatio^s, and
Erysipelata of the worste kinds. It cools the stomache* and stays thyrste:
and therefore says Galen, that he used it in his youth to cool with, When
choler infested his stomache, And in age, as a help against wakfulnes: For the
seade provoke sleep, and stays Geniturae profluuium. The juice thereof
neither resists concoction, nor ^yndeth the belly: But the large drynkyng
thereof is very dangerous.

Laudanum.
LApdanum as we barbarously use to call it, is called of Dioscorides in Greek
(...), of Galen (...), and in Latin Ladanum: Lad^non.
but more commonly of the Apothecaries Laudanum. Cisthos.
Galen affirms Ladanum to be whotte beyond the first degree, De symp. me.
lib. 7.
of a subtyle substance: and has virtue to mollify, resolve moderatly, to
digeste, and concocte hard things, to amend the deformity of scarres, to
disolue the duration of the matrixe, and to amend other vices thereof. It
stays the faulyng of hear, but yet is not able to heal Alop^^ias, or
Opthalmia, which require stronger medicines. Being drunk with wine, it
stops the belly and provoke vryne. Dioscor. lib. 1. cap. 10.


It is the Gum of a certain shrubbe or bushe, called Cistus, Ledon.
or (...), which master Turner called therefore Cistus ladanifera: and is
gathered by drawing ropes, or such like things, De com. med. secun. loca. li.
1
through the bushes: or else as says Galen from the beardes of gotes, which
they have gathered by feding among the same.

Laurus.
THe Laurel or Bay tree, Daphne.
is called in Greek (...), and in Latin Laurus. Dioscor. lib. 1.
The leaves whereof do vehemently heat and dry, but the beries more
vehemently: and therefore do help the diseases of the lunges, caused of cold
and reumatyke matter, pains of the ears also, and deafnes. Galenus de symp.
lib. 6.
The rynde of the root, is neither so sharp nor so whotte, but more bitter,
and has also some adstriction: and therefore is with sweet wine profitable to
the breast, and breaks the stone. The leaves do sensibly bind, offend the
stomache, and provoke vomit. Bruised and aplyed, they help the stingyng of
waspes or bees: And Cum polenta and pane, assuage inflammations.

Other kinds of this there are, as Nerium, Laurus Alexandrina, and Daphnoides,
which we call laurialle: but because they are for the more part rare unto us,
and not seruyng to any thing written in this book: I here omit to speak any
more of them.

Lenticula.
(...), Phacos.
Latin, Lens and Lenticula, and in English Lentilles, Phace.
Is a kind of pulse. whose grain says Fuchsius, Galen. de alimentis. lib.
1. and. 2.
is of all other the least: of temperamente mean between whotte and cold,
but dry in the second degree. Of substance gross, earthly, austere, and
myghtly adstringe^t. Wherefore both their substance and second decoction,
Euchymia and Cacochymia.
suppresseth the flux of the belly, and comfort the stomache: though ye
juice yet be losing, De sym. lib. ^.
and the first decoction do purge the same. It is of little juice, and of
nurishment gross and melancholyke, to melancholyke persons dangerous, and
bredeth on them Elephantiasim, and Cancrum, and dulleth the syghte.

Lepra.
LEpra says Auicen, is as it wear Cancer com^t^^is toto corpori, that is a
Cancer common to all the body: wherein he shows him him self to mean,
Elephas. Elephantiasis Leontiasis. (...). i. Morbus foedus.
that lothly affecte, which the Grecians call (...), and some (...), of the
greatness of the disease, making the skin lose, rugged, and of diverse colors
like the skin of the Elephante: and is of Galen thus described. Elephas
says he, is a melancholicke affecte, having his beginning of melancholicke
blood: Lib. de tumor praeter natu. and de sympto. causis. lib. 3. (...).
but in process of time, black choler superaboundeth that blood in quantity,
and then does the body stynke, and seems filthy, deformed, and the flesh
black, and sometimes is exulcerate. Of the same kind also is Lepra graecorum,
and comes of a like cause, but is more common to the skin, and is not
always so universal: Which some (of the lykenes and community of the one
with the other) have called (...), Psora.
id est scabiem, but not without confusion. Guido de Cauliaco, and others of
that age, have rekoned four kinds of Lepra, for the which resort to Serpigo.

Leucophlegmatia.
(...), is that kind of the Hydropsie that is called also Anasarca, Sarcites,
and commonly Hyposarca, look there.

Lilium.
(...), Crinos, Crino^ Leirion.
Latin Lilium, atque Rosa iunonis, whereof Dioscorides, Lib. 3. mentioned two
kinds: as Album, and Croceum. The leaves and roots of the white lilyes (for
that chiefly is used in medicine,) do dry, digeste, and moderatly scour
away: and therefore Cum oleo rosato are good for burnynges of fire. The flowers
thereof consiste of a mixed temperament: as of a substance partly subtle, partly
earthy, partly watery, and that temperate. Whereof it follows the oil made of
them, to be of digestinge and mollifiyng faculty, without biting: and
therefore is most convenient, for the hardnesses of mother, inflammations of
the coddes, and apostemes.

Linum.
Flax, Linon.
which is named in Greek (...), (as well as the seade thereof called (...),
Linospermon.
id est semen lini,) is of temperament whotte in the first degree, and mean
between dry and moist, obteininge the same faculties that Fenigreke has,
and is in meat flatuous: yet does it scatter and divide, and with boiled honey
mollyfieth both inwardly and outwardly hard inflammations: and being raw,
takes away the frecles and little swellynges of the face. Their brothe leads
out excrementes, and profits as well against the gnawyng of the guts, as
also against inflammations and other diseases of the mother.

Lithargyrus.
DIoscorides in his fifte book and.62. Chapter (treating of Lithargyros,)
notes three kinds thereof. One to be made of a certain leady sand in the
fornaces, an other of silver, and the third of lead. We of a common opinion
also reckon three sorts, as of lead, silver, and of gold: which two last
are indede both one thing: (though we have of a long time by reason of the
name) though Lithargyrum aureu^ to come only of gold. Lithurgyros,
For (...), is by common consent interpreted Spuma argenti, and comes thus:
as out of Brasauolus, and Matthiolus, I have gathered.

When the finers of metalles (having taken a mass of silver out of his own
vein,) would try it from the metalles, myxed therewith, (which are lead and
brass:) They put it into a certain furnace, being first wrapped in plates of
lead, or into much lead already melted, in the furnace or meltyng pit:
which is prepared of ashes after their manner. On the which (being melted
together) ryseth a certain spume, which is gathered together with an Iron
instrument, and is called Spuma argenti. And the same (if the greater store of
brass therein do give unto it a goulden color,) Chrysitis.
is called (...), and vulgarly in Latin, by the imitation of the greek,
Lithargyrum aurcum, and that only for the color: and yet is it not to be
doubted, but that of goulde there ryseth also a Spume in the triyng, which I
think may most worthily be called Lithargyrum auri. An other frivolous
variety of opinions there is, about the sole or simple namyng of the same: for
the common opinion is that Lithargyrum so written in receptes, without any
other addition of difference, ough to be taken for litarge of lead. Platearius
would have it taken for the litarge of goulde: but the ancient and true
interpretation, is above showed.

Lithargyros dries by the witness of Galen, De symp. li. 9.
most moderatly, De com. med. secun. genera. lib. 1.
consistynge in a certain measure, both of qualities and faculties: yet does
it meanly bind and scour, and is by right as a mean among other metalles.
And therefore use we it, as the matter or substance of others: none otherwise
then wexe, among things lyquide. It heals gaulynges or chafinges: and being
broken with wine, avails against ulcers, that are for their moisture hard
to heal, and that without gnawynge, if it be washed.

Lumbrici.
Look at Vermes terrestres.

Lupinus.
CAlled in Greek (...), Thermos. Galen. de sym. lib. 6.
is a kind of pulse, described of master Turner at large, (who calls it
fig been) whose immesurable bitterness shows it to be whotte and dry, and
has virtue digestive, and scowryng away. Being watered before, they lose their
bytternesse, and may be eaten: but they are of gross nuryshement. They kill
worines either laid to, or eaten: they purge also the liver and the spleen,
and draw out Menses and foetum, cum myrrha and melle. The meal of Lupines
boiled in vinegar Cum posca aut oxymelite, digesteth blewe hurtes, wennes, and
scrofules: and mondyfieth scabbes, scalles of the head, and all malign ulcers,
without mordication: and purges the skin of frecles, spots, and blewe
marks. And thus much of Lupinus Satiua, for there is also Syluestris, which
I have growing in my garden at Maydstone. whose virtues are like the former,
but they do all these things more strongly.

Lycium.
IS the Juice of a thorny tree, growyng chiefly in Capadocia and Lycia, of
three cubits heyght, (made by boylynge the infusion of the roots and
branches thereof, to the thycknes of honey,) Pyxa^^ntha. Lycion.
called in Greek (...), and of Theophrastus (...), hoc est Buxus asininus,
O^opyxos, Dioscor. lib. 1.
which we may call an ass box tree: having leaves like the bore tree, with a
light, fast, and bitter fruit, like pepper: a pale colored rynde, (not unlike
to washed Lycium,) and many crooked roots.

Lycium (that liquide medicine,) De symp. me. facult. lib. 7.
says Galen, digesteth, and dries in the second degree, heateth moderatly,
and consists of diverse substances: as one of thin parts, whotte and
digestynge, an other earthlye and cold.

Whereof it has not a little adstriction, and is used to the blewe marks of
bruses, to the infla^mations of the mouth and fundame^t, to exulcerations,
teters, rottennes, froward and stubbern ulcers, to chafinges, to sanious
runnynge ears, and to nail wheles and puts from the eyes, the dulnes of
syghte. It is convenient both in drink and Clisters, for the flux of the
belly and Dysenteria: and is given for the coughe, and spitting of blood. And
thus far of the true thing. For the Lycium that is now used and sold of the
Apothecaries, is of the learned judged conterfeite, and deceiuable: for that it
is not apt to burn, neither yeldeth a red spume when it is quenched, as
Lycium should. And where Lycium should be black without, and red within It
is black both without and within.

An other kind of Lycium also does Dioscorides mention, called Lycium Indicum,
Lonchitis.
made of a plant called Lonchitis: which Dodonaeus affirms to be sold of the
Apothecaries, under the name of Sanguinis draconis, Sanguis draconis.
for the which look under the same title.

Malua.
(...), Malache.
so called of the Grecians (of (...), Id est mollire,) Fuchsius de historia
stirpiu^.
because it mollifieth the belly, (and Varro conte^deth also it to be called
Maluam, quasi moluam, for the cause above said) is of Dioscorides and Galen
divided into two kinds: namely Hortensis, (for it is planted and grows in
gardines, (and Syluestris so called not because it grows in wooddes or roughe
places, but wildly of it self in lay, and untilled grounds: And so of a
great number more. Hereof there are two kinds: whereunto some do also reken
Althaea, Dendromalache. Aristalthaea.
or Malua uiscus, called of Aetius (...), and of Galen (...): whereof under
Althaea.

Malua agrestis, De alim. li. 2.
(says Galen) has some digestinge, and light mollifiyng faculty. De sym.
li. 7.
But Hortensis is apter to be eaten, and friendly to the belly, but yet hurtful
to the stomache, and how much the more it has of watery moisture, so much
the weaker are the virtues thereof. So is the sede also so much the stronger,
as it is dryer, but Althaea does of all other digeste most effectuously. Of
temperamente he says it is whotte, which the Arabians seem to deny. Malowes
says Dioscorides, both heals the stynging of bees and waspes, and
withstandeth the same, and is good for the griefs of the mother, the guts,
and the bladder: and being drunk in time, is a remedy against al venims.

Malum punicum.
THe po^granate is ye fruit of tree, Rhoea.
called in greek (...), Rhoa.
in Latin Malus punica, seu granata, and is of two sorts: as Satiua and
Syluestris, (whose flowers severally and their faculties, are touched under
Balaustium.) A third kind also there is, that keeps a mean between the wild
and the tame: of whose temperame^tes Galenus lib. 8. De symp. med. fac. says
thus in effect. Every pomgranate has some adstringent faculty, (...). i. est
ulcus quodd^ profundu^ uel foetidum.
but that surmounteth not in all: for among them that are sharp, some are more
sweet then sour: and by the reason of those their chief qualities, either the
one or the other is used for best. Their graynes are of a driyng and byndyng
juice, (...). i. tuberculum subrubru^ multis radicibus sieve pedibus praedi^um.
so are also their flowers and ryndes: of them altogether may medicines be
made, very proffitable for ye stomache. Which in Li. 2. De com. med. secundum
loca. he affirms him self to have used, to the griefs of the nose called
Ozaena, and Polypus. And in his book De attenuante uictus ratione, he
disprayseth the pomgranates of Pontus, (...). i. Oris u^triculi mordicatio.
as also he does al other hard, and pontike fruits. But others says he, ye
may moderatly use, for they are profitable to them that are grieved with
Cardialgia. lib. 2. De alimentorum facultatibus.

Malum.
Appuls are called (...), Melon. Malu^.
and Mala, (as the apple tree is called (...), Melea.
and Malus) and are generally of two kinds: Hortense and Syluestre, Malus.
(whereof somewhat at Agresta) other wise infinite, and of diverse natures (as are
also their leaves and ryndes.) Galen. de alimentis. lib. 2.
The appuls that are adstringente, have a cold and earthy juice, and do cool
inflammations of heat and moisture. The sharp ones are both cold and
subtyl, and incysiue: of mean temperamente are the sweet ones, which do
inclyne to heat, as those that are watery and without taste do bend to
coldenes. De sym. lib. 7.
Of these used according to their qualities, may the distemperatures of the
stomache be cured: as with the meanly sharp and with very tarte appuls, you
may roborate the lose and feynte stomache, glewe together wounds, and
repercusse the flux of great inflammations: but such as are more watery, do
put away less inflammations, (...). hoc est alui fluor.
that do but now begin.

They are generally of hard digestion and ill juice, but may be given after
meat to such as lack apetyte, and concocte slowly, (...). i. Viscerum
exulceratio.
to such also as are vexed with womyting, Diarrhoea, and Dysenteria. Whereunto
very tarte appulles are most commodious.

Manna.
MAnna so called of the Arabians, is says Mesues the dew of a vapor, lyfted
up and concocted in a temperate and fertille air, falling (in the twye light
times says Matthiolus) through pleasant aspectes upon certain plants and
stones, whereof there are two differences. That which falls upon stones, is
coagulated round like drops or seeds, which ought to be new, sweet,
whytyshe, or at least a citrinyshe color. That which falls on plants,
both takes of them some quality, and has myxed therewith some of their
leaves and flowers, though not much: whereof that which is new, and whytyshe
is best. Of this doubtless did Galen write, In Lib. 3. De alimentis: where he
says, that in the mount Libanus, men use yearly to spread skynnes on the
ground, and after they beat the trees, gathering up that whche falls, and
fille pottes with the honey: (...).
which they call (...), Hoc est mel roscidum, and mel (...). Though Auerois
Cordubensis affirm (^ot without the opinion of diverse great clerks of late
days) Manna to have been unknown to Galen, and it to have comde in use since
his time, because in deed in all Galens works, there is no mention thereof
under that name Who mente by Manna (and also Dioscorides with other old
Grecians) a far other thing, as hereafter will apeare. But Mesues procedynge
says, that it somewhat excedeth the mean in heat, scouteth and smotheth the
throat, the breast, and the stomache: purges choier gentilly, and quenches
thyrste: and mixed with strong medicines, it bettereth their actions. And thus
much of Manna Arabum, Theremiabin. Manna Th^ris De methodo medendi. li. 13.
(who call it also Thereniabin) uel Recentium, named also Manna Orientalis: for
Manna Graecorum, called also Manna Thuris, are certain fragmentes taken out of
pure frankincense, which Galen calls the dross of the same, affirming it to
be of the same nature, De com. med. secun. loca. li. 5
how be it somewhat more adstringent, by reason of the frankincense ryndes that
are somewhat myngled therewith, whereof also at Thus. somewhat more.

Mandragora.
(...), Mandragoras. (...).
is also called (...) (says Fuchsius) a Circe, because it is thought to work
amorous affectes, and of Pythagoras Anthropomorphos, (...) humanam referens.
of the humane form, that the root seems somewhat to represent. About the
which the dotyng folly of some, and the guylfull knavery of others: have
Fuchsius and master doctor Turner (our countreyman,) Mandragoras Candida.
rightwell detected. Hereof after Dioscorides, there are two kinds: as the
male, called Mandragoras mas, uel Candida, and also Mandragoras morion, which
is with us not very rare, And the female called Mandragoras foemina, uel
nigra, and (of the lykenes that it has with the leaves of Letuce) (...),
Thridacia.
unknown to us as yet.

It cools, De sym. med. facult. li. 7.
by the testimony of Galen, in the third excess, though says he in the
appuls there is not a little heat and moisture: which therefore provoke deep
sleapes. The rynde of the root does both cool and dry. The leaves of
mandrage are profitable, as says Dioscordies, for the inflammations and other
affectes of the eyes, caused of ulcers in them, or in other parts how so
ever: and mete to divide every hard tumore. It is of such mollifiynge
virtues, that Iuory (as some think) being boiled with the root thereof, may be
made soft, and apt to be wrought.

Massacunia.
MAssacunia, (for so find I it written in the prynted latin copy, and
interpreted the fylinge or scarpynge of earthen pottes glased,) is written of
Almanzoar (who for Albula in oculo, makes the same recept) Masacuma, and
Pandactarius writes it Massicuma: Who says it is a color wherewith earthen
vessels are nealed, and called also of them Petanum. Showing moreover the
opinion of diverse, as that some say it is the water of glasen vessels, and
others that it is glass not perfectly boiled, and is the matter whereof glass
is made, and vulgarly called Massacocta, etc. Whose virtues, because the matter
is uncertain, and the autorities scant probable, (for in Galen, Dioscorides,
and other auncientes I find it not) I leave to silence.

Mastiche.
(...) commlo^y called Mastix, Dioscor. lib. 1.
and of Dioscorides Resina Lentiscina, for it is the gum or liquor of the
tree Lentiscus, (called also in Greek (...)) is of temperament whotte and dry
in the second degree: Whereof Galen makes two kinds, Galen. de sym. faculta.
lib. 7.
namely Candida, and Nigra. The white mastike says he, (calling it also
Mastiche Chia, because the best and fairest grows plentifully in Chio) does
bind and mollify: Chius is an Isle of the sea Aege^^.
and therefore is proffitable, for the inflammations of the stomache, the belly,
the liver, and the bowelles: To the old coughe also, and as says Dioscorides
to the reiectio^s of blood. It is friendly to the stomache, but moves
belchyng, and is used to scour the teethe and the face.

The black mastike (called Mastiche Aegiptia) dries more but byndeth less,
and therefore is the meter for such things as require stronger digestion, by
euaporation.

Maturatiua.
MAturatiua medicamenta, sieve pus mouentia, are rypyng medicines, De methodo
medend. li. 4.
or quitture breders. Which heat and moist says Galen, reducyng substa^ces
of diverse kinds ad pus uel saniem, De sympt. causis. lib. 5.
that is to matter or quitture: and comes of Maturo, to maturate or make ripe.

Mel.
IS called of the Greeks (...), Meli.
which some think to be the humore of the air purging it self, for it is
sometimes found to cleave upon men's hear and apparel, that are abroad very
rathe. wherefore Pliny judges it the swette of heaven, or else a certain
slymines or spittle of the stars. Mel Vernum.
And thereof are three kinds: as Melanthinii, uel Vernum, Mel (...).
which is gathered in the spring: Mel horaeum, ^ut aest^^um, gathered in the
summer: Mel ^riceum.
and Friceum, which is smally esteemed, Erica.
for that it is gathered in Autumn, when Erica only blows in the wooddes.
Galenus de symp. medi. fac. li. 4. and. 7
The best honey is gathered in summer, of Thyme and such other odiserus
plants, which heateth and dries in the second degree, and mundifieth.
Others either allow or disprayse it, in respect of the place where it is
gathered: praysinge Mel atticum for the best, next to that Mel Siculum, and
chiefly that which is called Hybleum of Hybla, a city of Sicilia, and that
because of the plenty of Thyme growing there. But Mel Sardoum and Ponticum,
are (as evil and hurtful) abiected.

Galenus. lib. 3. De alimentorum facultatibus, says that it is found on the
leaves of plants, but neither can it says he be said, either any juice,
fruit, or part of the same.

And here must you take Galen to speak of the primitive matter, or first
substance thereof. For if there should not be granted to honey such a variety
of qualities, according to the plants whereon it is, As Mesues notes in Manna:
Why should, it have been esteemed the worthyer, or the vyler, for the plants
whereon it is found.

Honey not well boiled, bredeth certain wyndes in the stomache and bowels: but
being well clarified, it is vnwyndie and moves vryne. It taken without the
admy^tion of water, nourysheth weakly, but emptieth the belly aptly, and eaten
largely it moves vomit: being boiled without water, it neither causes
vomit, nor loses the belly. To old and cold persons, it is most
commodious: In young and whotte persons it turns into choler.

Melanchiron.
OF Melanchiron I need not here say much, for Lanfranke interpretynge it
Icteritia nigra, shows him self to mean thereby that universal effusion of
melancholy, which we call the black iaundies.

The iaundies which the Greeks call Icteron and the Latins Regiam and arquatam
passionem, Icteros. Regia passio. Arquata passio.
is an universal effusion of choler, sometime yelowe from the gaul, and
sometimes black from the spleen, caused dyuersly, as by those members
inflamed, obstructed, weakened, etc. as before at Icteritia.

Melilotus.
THe herb that we in England use for Melilote, lacks not in my judgment
the virtue that should (...) in Melilote: though it be not in deed the true
(...) (...), but rather a kind of Lotus syluestris, by the (...) master
Turner, (who takes it to be Mel frugum, (...) phrastus) and also of Dodonaeus,
who by reason of his (...) calls it Meliotum Germanicam, and Fuchsius Saxisr
(...) But the right Melilote grows in Italy, and is therefore called Melilotus
Italica, and of some Sertula Campana, and Coronaregia. De sympone. lib. 7.
It is whotte and dry in the first degree, Galen says it has more heat
then cold, and is somewhat adstringent, but yet does it digeste and concocte:
And the emplaster called Melilotum, is potente in mollifiyng hardnesses, by the
testimony of Galenus and Mesues.

Mica panis.
CRommes of bread are generally resolutiue: but that does it more or less,
according to the composition and handlynge thereof. Galen. de alimentis. lib. 1.
For bread says Galen made of light corn, well leuened, and moderatly baked,
is most easy to co^cocte, so is it of power outwardly to digeste and deuyde:
and of consequence if it vary from these points, it is the unfitter for the
one and the other.

Miliaris.
THe opinion of Lanfrancus, and of many more about his time, concerning the
likeness of Miliaris with Formica, seems to come from Auicen: who also
teaches for them both almost like curations.

But how far is it from the mind of Galen? Who numbereth Miliarem among
erysipelatous tumores, and Formicam among Scirrhous excrescentes.

Miliaris named also in Greek of that form (...), Cenchros.
is a tumore uttering certain little pustules like milet, coming of a
choleryck fluxion somewhat sharp. Whereof lock more in Herpete. Herpes.


Mirobalani.
Go to the title Myrobalani.

Mumia.
OF Mumia (so called of the Arabians.) There is an uncertain variety of
opinions, for diverse great learned men think it to be (...) Dioscoridis,
because that as Dioscorides says, Pissasphaltos is driven by land floudes
from certain hills of Apolonia, called Ceraunii montes, and being after cast
up on the river banks: is by heat baked into Cloddes, which do smell like
pytche, myxed with Bitumine, Bitumen.
whereof it has that name. Even so and with the same words, has Scrapio
descrybed his Mumiam. But differing from this is that which the most of the
Arabians do mention: who affirm it to resulte of the imbaumyng or spicery of
dead bodies at their burialles, as Ex Croco, Aloe, myrrha, and Balsamo, being
coagulated and grown together (with the fat and moisture of the corpse) into
a body, and therefore called Mumia sepulcrorum.

But as this composition is very costly, and therefore used for the bodies of
the nobles: That which is don to dead bodies as with spices etc. is called
imbalming though there be no Balsame therein.
so are men of some less reputation imbaulmed with Aloe, myrrh, and saffron:
neither of the which bodies are easily spoiled of their tombs and spicerie,
namely by strangers. How be it the poorer sort, (which are the greatest
number, the openinge also and remouyng of whose bodies is the more tolerable)
are enclosed with Pissaphalto only, because it is of less price: for they use
customably to imbaulme all bodies.

But that which is now among our Apothecaries extant, varieth from all these
substances, and is the very flesh of man's body, as it wear burned to a cole:
for both whole arms and whole legs, have been here not rarly seen, being
dried as black as a cole. Wherefore it must needs be thought, that either the
merchantes bring from thence whole buried bodies, or very parts of the same:
or else that it becomes so, by that means that diverse merchantes make report
of, (if it be worthy credit.) Who say, that in the farther parts of Aegypte,
great driftes of light and most subtyle sand, are at certain times removed
(by the change of wyndes) from place unto place, and thereby rolled up into huge
heaps like great mountains: and that often times both men and beasts,
happening in the way, are violently swalowed up and buried therein: so
remaining until by a like tempeste from the object coasts, it be again
turned over, and all such buried things are again uncovered: being by the
whotte and dry nature of the sand so dried, and preserved from putrefaction.
All the which how true it is or may be, for the lack of experience I am not
able vndoubtfully to say, neither can I (through lykelyhodes) yield for the
same a better defense, then that baked or dried sand, has been proved to
preserve fruits longtyme vnputrefied: wyshinge that some man of more experience
therein, would make the matter more manifest. But certainly it is man's flesh,
either thus or otherwise dried into a cole.

It is used as well in outward plasters, as inward drinks, to confound
broken bones and veins, and to disolue congeiled blood, and stays the flure
of the same. It helps Hemicraniam and Paralism, and the peynes of the head
that come of cold without humores. For it is of heating and driyng faculty in
the second degree, as says Matthiolus: to whom I remitte the explication of
all other his eximiouse virtues.

Mundificatiua med.
MEdicinae mundificatiuae sieve abstergentes, are medicines that have power to
mu^dify, purify, scour, or cle^se wou^des etc. Which if they do meanly, they
are mete incarnatiues for ulcers. It comes of Mundifico, to mundifie or make
clean: Which also rises a munditie of, cleanes.

Myrobalanus.
THe etymology of this word (...), Myrobalanos.
requires it to be called Glans odorata, sieve unguentaria: though this name
Glans unguentaria be much more fitly applied to (...): Balanos myrepsice.
for from it differs Myrobalanos, in figure, Balanus myrepsica.
color, and faculties, and ought rather says S^yluius, to be accounted of
the kind of appuls or prunes.

Of Myrobalanes there are five kinds. whereof these these three Citreae Nigrae,
and Cepulae, are thought of some says Mesues to be the fruits of one tree,
whose property is to bear twyse yearly: whose first fruits are Citreae, being
gathered unripe, and Nigrae or Indae, gathered when they are ripe. The second
and last fruits are Cepulae. (These all are cold in the first degree, and
dry in the second.) But Andreas Marinus upon Mesue, says plainly that they
are.v. destincted fructes, of so many several trees, and has lively painted
out three of them: which also many other have thought before, because they
vary in faculties. Lo so bountiful has God ben unto this our age, as to open
mercifully unto us (with the lands so long unknown) many things, that to
the worthy fathers wear either unknown, or much in doubt: For so does
Marmus confess him self to obtain this certeintie. They are benign or
gentill medicines, and do strengthen the heart, the stomache, the liver, and
the rest of the body.

1 Myrobalani Citreae (which are of color inclining to grene, great, weighty,
massy, and within when they are broken, gummy,) do purge choler abone the
rest: and therefore are wholesome for whotte and bilious natures, and cum
omphacio, uel aqua rosarum, uel succo foenicula they scour the eyes, and take
away their inflammations: their poulder also stays the flux of them, and cum
mastiche dries ulcers.

2 Myrobalani Cepulae are blackishe, inclining to rednes, and are phlegm
purgers, namely from the stomache, they stre^gthen also the same and the
spirits rational, and sharpen ye sight.

3 Myrobalani nigrae, are of color black, great, flesshye, and gross, whose
virtues are to purge melancholy, and choler adust: and therefore are profitable
for tre^bling, pensiuenes, leprosies, quartanes, and other melancholic
affectos. But they are all apt to bread obstructions.

4 Myrobalani Emblicae do cole so^what, Empelica.
and dry in ye first degree.

5 Myrobalani Bellericae are gentill, and do strengthen, of te^perament like
the first three: They both do purge putrefied phlegm from the stomache, and
strengthen the same, The brain also, the heart, the liver, the synewes, and
relaxed parts. etc.

Myrrha.
MYrrha, Smirna.
which the Greeks call (...), heateth and dries in the second degree:
Galenus de symp. medi. lib. 8.
and therefore glueth fresh wounds, especially of the head: Having also much
bitterness, whereby it kills worms. It has moreover a moderate abstertion: by
reason whereof, it is mixed with medicines made for the eyes, for the old cough,
and for peinfull breathing. It has also power to comfort and to defend from
putrefaction, and to expel superfluities. It mu^difieth rotten ulcers, So was
myrthe in Galen his time adulterate.
and provoke sleep. How be it the use of Myrrh is not altogether hurtles,
both for that the only smell thereof causes head ache: and also because in
the best myrrh is found Opocarpasum, De antidotis. lib. 1.
a thing says Galen, very hurtful and deadly, and has killed many
vnwittynglye taking it with myrrh.

Myrrha is the tears or droppyng of a free growing in Arabia, not unlike to
Spinae aegiptiae, whereof there are diverse kinds. Pediasmos being fatty, from
the which being pressed, comes Stacte. Gabirea, which is most fat, and
sweateth out Stacten habundantly. Then Troglodytica, which is of a grenyshe
color, shyning and biting: which is the best and is also of two sorts. The
fourth is Cancalis, which is very old, black, and parched: And this is
thought of some to be it, that is commonly sold unto us. The fifthe and worst
is Ergasima: And the sixth Aminea, not well approved. An other kind also there
is, called Myrrha Boeotica, because it comes from the root of a tree,
growyng in Boeotia.

Myrtus.
MYrtles are of an earthly cold property, De symplici. lib. 8.
as Galen affirms, having yet some subtlety and heat, wherthrough they dry
myghtily: and therefore are very profitable to help the restoring of broken
bones, and streigned joints, and also to dry up bruses, keeping thereby the
places from putrefaction, and apostemations. The Mirte tree, Myrsine uel (...),
Myrhine.
is called in Greek (...), and in Latin Mirtus. The fruits or beries whereof,
do the Apothecaries call Myrcillos.

Nodi.
NOdus signifies a knotte, and is here to be understood of certain kinds
of tumores, which in roundnes, (and sometime hardness,) resemble a knotte: De
tumoribus praeter nature Atheroma.
coming principally of phlegm, and are chiefly referred to the three special
tumores, called of Galen (...), and (...), so called of the substances like a
white potagie confection (called Pulls) fat, Steatoma.
or honey, Meliceris.
contained in them. And sometime the nerves become knotty, De met. odo meden.
li. 14.
but that differs from Nodo says Auicen, in that it is not every way
mobyle or seperable.

Obtalmia.
Is showed at Ophthalmia*

Oedema.
OIdema, Galenus de tumoribus praeter naturam.
is one of the four chief and principal simple tumores against nature,
soft, lose, and without pain, spryngyng of thynne phlegm or vaporous
spirits, De methodo medendi. li. 1*
and is the same that in the time of Lanfranke as well as before and since, was
called Vndimia. De art curatiua. lib. 2.
which (when it has adjoined partly therewith, any of the other three) is
called either (...). i. Oedema phlegmonosum, uel Oedema inflammationis
particeps, of blood: (...). i. Oedema erysipelatosum, aut sacri ignis
particeps, if choler be his partener, or (...), hoc est oedema induratum, sieve
duritiei particeps, when melancholic is adjoined. More at Vndimia.

Oleum.
Oil which the Grecians call (...), Elaon.
is the juice of Olyues named Oliuae, which are the fruits of the tree, Olea
in greek (...), Elaea.
consisting of.iii. substa^ces (as does milk,) as of gross dregs, called
Amurca, of an aerie essence, and of a whayey substance. Oil is of temperame^t
mean as it wear, between whotte and cold dry and moist: yet does it rather
inclyne to heat and moisture. But from this mean may it three ways vary, as
first Omphacinum (made of unripe Olives) is somewhat cold and adstringent: as
the oil of through ripe olyues (which they call Drupas) does moderatly heat
and moist. Drupas.
Secondly new oil is by comparation cold: so sweet oil kept until it be
old, is whotte and euaporatyue. Thirdly it does most aptly or redely receive
the qualities, of what so ever by art (...) with composed: be they whotte or
cold, etc. And therefore says Galen, De symp. me. fac. li. 2.
is it worthily accounted, the matter of all other medicines.

It moves the belly: and the reddyshe wheye, being taken away (as by washing
or else howsoever) the rest is made whyter, and without biting. The vnctio^s
therewith are rather to be used to whole bodies the^ unto plethorikes, or to men
possessed with raw humores.

Olibanum.
OLibanum says Platearius, is whotte and dry in the second degree, and is
none other thing but Thus. Which Galen says, De sym. lib. 7.
dries but in the first. It is thought of diverse men, Dioscor. lib. 1. (...).
quasi Thus stillicidiare.
(not without great reason, to be that round white droplyke gum, and within
fatty, which Dioscorides prefers for the best, and calls Thus
masculinum, and in Greek Stagonias. Not far from this is Lanfranke his mind,
who by Cortice olibani means Corticem Thuris optimi. Cortex olibani


Ophthalmia.
(...), in Latin Lippitudo. Is the inflammation of that panicle that covers
all the other panicles and parts of the eye, called Tunica adnata (of Galen
Agnata) and Coherens, and is of two sorts. Vera, coming of a cause
antecedent or interiore, as of fulness in all the body, of the influxion of
sharp humores, or of gross and flatulente spirits: and non uera, which
comes of a cause proca^arctyke or exterior, as of a stroke, duste, smoke,
etc. Such a difference of Obtalmia (for so he calls it) makes Lanfrancus as
thou see, calling it Parua, magna, or maxima.

Opium.
(...), Opio^.
Id est lacrima papaueris, which is the juice of Papaueris nigri, De com. med.
secun. loca. li. 5
brought by art into a mass, must needs be like in temperament to the popye,
whereof it is made: and is says Galen the myghtiest among narcotike medicines,
De methodo medendi. li. 12.
and causes dead sleep, but ought rarly, in great extremities (and then
warly) to be used. For it strangleth, and vehement pains are often eased
thereby (being used alone) for some small time: after the which it returns
more violently then before. But in every doubt of this and his use: let
master Turner be to you a sufficient satisfier.

Opopanax.
(...), Panaces heracleion.
Succus panace, that is the juice of the herb (...), or Panax heracleum: for
of Panax there are other two kinds, Asclepium and Cheironium. It is an herb
(says Dioscorides) growyng in Boeotia and Arcadia, Countries in Greece.
with rough her bycoloured leaves, liyng on the ground, indented with five
divisions much like to fygge leaves, a high stalk, as has Ferula, which is
white through a certain mosines, and also beset with little leaves: having
moreover a top like dylle, a yellowe flower, and a sede fervent and
odoriferous: with many roots also, springing from one beginning, being white,
of heavy sauoure, thyck rynded, and bitter tasted. De sym. med. facultat. lib.
8.
Opopanax says Galen, does both digeste and mollyfie: and therein excels
Chalbanum. It heateth in the third degree, De com. med. secundum genera. lib.
7.
and dries in the second, (as does also the rynde of the root, though less
then the juice) and that without adstringencie: and therefore is used to
stuberne ulcers, and as an incarnatiue to broken bones.

Orificium.
ORificium, is the orifice, mouth, or entrance of any thing that is holowe.
Wherefore Orificium sinus, uel fistulae, is the orifice or entrance, of a
fistule or holow ulcer. etc.

Orobus.
SO called of the Apothecaries, following the Greek, (which is (...), Eruum.
and the Latin Eruum) is englyshed of D. Turner, a bitter fitche: who treats
thereof at large. Galenus De alimentis. lib. 1.
It is a certain pulse, and a food (for his vnpleasantnes) meter for bullockes
then for men, but are used in medicines that purge gross humores, De
attenuia^te uictus ratione De symp. me. facult, lib. 8.
from the lunges and the breast. The white bitter fitches, are less
medicinable then the yelowe or the pale. Eruum dries in the third degree
fully, and heateth in the first: and farther, how bitter so ever it be, in the
same measure does it cut insonder, scowre, and open obstructions: being
twyse sodden, it loses his vnsauorines, and also his scowring and incisiue
power, and so dries without great bytternesse. It is diuretike and (copiously
taken) causes pyssyng of blood. Dioscorides says, that of them by parchyng
and gryndinge is made a meal, which with honey mundifieth ulcers, keeping
diverse angrye sorts of them, from crepyng and corrodyng: being made into paste
with wine, it heals venomous bytinges, and scowreth the skin of freckles
and spots.

Ossa combusta.
OF burned bones thus says Galen. De sym. med. facult. li. 11. (...) Morbus
comitialis.
They dry and digeste, and chiefly as some say, the bones of a man. I have
known certain of our contreymen, that by geuyng man's bones burned in drink,
have cured in many Epilepsiam and Arthritin, all this Galen. A great
desiccatiue they must needs be, for that burning adds to the bone more
drynes, (...), i. articularis morbus.
which was before of his own nature cold and dry.

Oua.
Eggs says Galen in his book last cited, Ouum.
are not parts of animals, but answer in proportion, to things superfluous or
more then nedeful. Galen. de alimentis, lib. 3.
They are made for propagation and perpetuity, and are profitable, as for
food. Whereunto the eggs of Phesantes and hens, are the best: As of the
Goose and the Ostriche, are the worste. Eggs that are meanly sodden, Oua
tremula, Ouum sor^ilium.
(called therefore Tremula) are for nourishment best of all other. Sorbilia oua
(which be sodde in water till it be white) do nuryshe less, but are easyer to
put down, De euchymia et cacochymia
and smothe the roughnes of the sharp artery. Sodden eggs are of hard
concoction, of gross nourishment, and are hardly put over: but grosser and
more fumous juice do roasted eggs make, and tarry longer in the stomache. But
fried eggs are every way of worste nurishment, and do corrupt other meats
eaten with them. Lastly, eggs prepared with oil, wine, and the sauce Garo,
and after meanly baked or roasted, Oua suffocata
and called Oua suffocata, are better then sodde eggs or roasted, and are
colder then the equal temperament.

The white of the egg is accounted of the number of medicines not biting,
Albumen ou^
and is used not only to the eyes, but also to all other things that require
gentle medicines: as ad Vlcera co^tuinacia and pudendoru^ ac^edis: so is also
the yolke, (which aswageth pain. (...)
The whole egg is used Cum oleo Rosato, for inflammations: but in all these
things ought new eggs to be taken, and the old refused.

Oua formicarum.
SO unspeakable is the careful love of our merciful God toward his creatures,
that he makes ye little Ante and her eggs, medicines for their health. They ar
food for Bears, and their eggs (says Pliny) are to them a wholesome
medicine, when they are grieved.

Oxalis.
(...), so called as well of the Apothecaries as of the Grecians, Rumex.
of the sharp taste that it has, is one of the. iiii. kinds of Rumecis,
Lapathum.
or Lapathi in Dioscorides, called also of some (...), Anaxyris.
and commonly Acetosa, and is of two kinds, Mayor and Minor, the first known
to all, the other not so.

It cools with a pleasant sharpnes, and is therefore with us in great use. The
juice thereof cools and represseth choleric inflammatio^s of the stomache
and the liver, and preserves from pestilent infections if the leaves be
chawed, and the juice swallowed down: as have diverse learned men of late
practice written, by whose judgment it is of te^perament cold and dry in the
second degree.

Papauer.
OF Popy with the Grecians called (...), Mecon emeros Mecon agrios Mecon rhoeas
Meco^ ceratitis Papauer cornutum. Mecon aphrodes. i. Papauer spumeum.
there are many kinds, as (...). i. satiuum, (...). i. syluestre, (...). i.
fluidum uelerraticum, (...) cornutum uel corniculatum, (...) Spumeum and
Herculeum: of every of the which there are also diverse kinds, which here it
were to long to discuss. They do all cool.

The white seade of Papaueris Satiui, provoke sleep moderatly, and therefore
it is eaten in bread and with honey. But of the wild ones, the seade of
Papaueris fluidi, called also Rhoeas, Galen. de sym. Lib. 7.
(because his flowers do suddenly fall,) does cool more myghtyly, and
therefore can not be used alone without hurt. Galen. de alimentis. lib. 7.
That of the kind of Papaueris syluestri, or wild Popye, which has a
sittynge bowl, has in the same a black medycinable seade, which cools
myghtylye: but the seade that is found in the long wild popye bowls, is of
all other the metest for medicine, somniferous, and stops such spyttinges,
as the cough brings from the lunges and the breast, and is convenient for
Catarrhes and thynne destillations from the head. It cools so much, that it
may induce both dead sleapes, and death also, unwarily used: for it cools in
the fourth and last degree.

Parietaria.
VUlgarly Muralium, Muralium
because it deliteth to grow on stonewalles: Of some Vrceolaris, Vrceolaris
because it serves well to scowre glasen vessels. It is called in Greek (...)
(says Fuchsius, He^^^^.
of the rough scade thereof, which will hang on men's clothes, Perdicion.
and (...), because the bird Perdix (which is englyshed the Partriche,
Perdici^s.
) deliteth to feed thereon. It constreigneth or binds strongly, and scoureth
away with cold moisture: Galer* de sym. Lib. 6.
and therefore heals whotte inflammations, from the beginning to the state,
and is also laid in Cataplasmatibus ad Phygethlon in the beginning. The juice
thereof dropped into the ears, helps their phlegmonous pains.

Passula.
CAlled also Vuapassa, Astaphis and Staphis e^^ros.
and in Greek (...), with us reysons, ar grapes prepared by art as are
fygges: and therefore (says Galen) have Vuae passae, Dried or prepared fygges.
the same affinity with grapes, that Caricae have with figs. Galenus De
alimentis. lib. 2.
Which being made of tame or tylled grapes, have concoctiue, adstringente,
and mean digestive faculty: but the wild are vehement sharp, De atten^^^
uictus ratione
and therefore do purge and scour the head myghtyly. Grapes do not exquisitly
maturate in cold regions, much less reysons: Desymp. li. 6.
and as they being sweet, are the whotter, so are the sharp ones colder,
which do roborate the stomache, and constipate the belly, and that, the
tarter the more: among the which, the reysons that are of a mean swetnes,
keep a mean constitution. In these as there is a moderatiue virtue, so have
they also a mean cleansing faculty: whereby they put away the small gnawynges
of the monthe of the stomache. If they be not adstryngent, they help not the
liver or ye spleen, but the affectes of the breast and lunges. Of reysons they
are best that are fat, and have a tender skin: which if they be cold are
made the better, by taking from them their graynes, when they have been steped
in water. Though in Cilicia there do grow reysons, both full and small,
without graynes.

Pes milui.
It is mentioned under the title Flamula.

Phlegmone.
(...), (...), enim sanguis est.
Id est inflammatio, uel collectio, (...), hoc esta sanguine dicta, written
most commonly hitherunto (with much rudenes) Flegmon, is properly a simple
tumore (as Galen says) and an affecte of the fleshie parts, De tumoribus
praeter natural De methodo med. li. 5. 14.
coming of a greater flux of blood then they need, or can naturally
sustain. Which sweateth through the coats of the veins like a dew: wherein
they gather together to them selves a tumore, with heat, rednes, stretching,
resisting, and pulsatiue or beating pain: which is propre to great
inflammations. And thus much of the simple tumore. For when so ever it
chances to have some portion of any of the other three humerall tumores
adjoined therewith: there resulteth a compounde name, such as the mixture
requires, as choler therewith co^current, makes the name (...), quasi
inflammatio ignis srcrae seu ignitae rubedinis particeps. Phlegm coupled
therewith, names it (...), id est inflammatio laxa, uel Oedmatis particeps: But
melancholy therewith, is called (...), in Latin inflammatio dura, sieve duritiei
consors, as of the rest.

Pili leporis.
Seeing that hears (whose cause efficient as Galen witnesses, is of gross and
slymy superfluities) is colder and drier then any other part of the body,
Demetho^^ (...) li. 14
yea then the bones: By the minds of Aristotle, De temp. lib. ^.
Co^stantinus, Galenus, and Albertus Magnus: needs must the hears, of the Hare
be most cold and dry, (and therefore restraining and bynding) which is of
all other a beast most melancholic and timorous. For the which cause
(says Galen) is he and the Heart, Deusu partu^^ lib. 1.
endued with swifte bodies.

Pinguedo.
PInguedo, is with us the grease or oylye fat of bodies, of men or beasts,
for the which look more at Adeps.

Pini Cortex.
THe rynde of the Pine tree, (...).
(called in Greek (...), and in Latin Pinus,) bruised and laid to, is
profitable by the testimony of Dioscorides, Lib. ^.
for chafinges and ulcers that are over all the body: and also for burnynges
cum Manna and Spuma argenti. Being used cum Serato myrtino, it heals such
ulcers of delicate persons as refuse sharpnes. Bruised cum atrimento sutorio, it
restrayneth crepyng ulcers: and in suffitu, and partus and secundas eiicit. The
leaves of the same bruised and applied, do mitigate and repress inflammatio^s.
They ease with vinegar the totheake: and a dragme weighte of the same druncke
in Mulsa, is profitable for me diseased in the liver. The ryndes of the appuls
or nuttes of the Pine tree, do in drink as do the leaves. Wherefore
Lanfrancus, by Cortice pini, must be understood to mean the rynde of the
tree, whose properties do best agree with his intent.

Piper.
OF the Grecians called (...), Peperi.
is of three kinds, beside Piper siluestre, as Longum, Album, and Nigrum. Which
all (says Galen) do heat and dry, De symplici. lib. 8.
and are used (as in Di^trion peperon,) to digeste raw humores: and drunk Cum
Vino, do help the stomache cooled by cold alimentes. Black pepper is to be
chosen, that is neither sclender, rugged, nor having a gross rynde: which
two notes do also commend the white. De sanitate tuenda. lib. 4.
The long pepper ought to be sound, without holes, and that neither by brusing
nor steping will be resolved, but will keep still the nature of pepper.

And where as the old writers (led thereunto, as it should seem, rather by
heresaye then experience,) Esteem them all the fruits of one tree, gathered at
several seasons: The opinion of the later writers, for diverse considerations
thereunto repugning: I refer you to Matthiolus, and to master D. Turner, his
worthy work, wherein he has not only made hereof out of each sort large
demonstrations, but also most learnedly has he explicated many doubts:
which unknown, might through ignorance have wrought many euels (as no
doubt) long time here tofore they have done.

Pira.
Of Pira I have written benethe at Pyrum.

Pistacia.
(...), so named both in Greek and Latin, and vulgarly Fistici, are the
fruits of a tree, growyng (as says Dioscorides,) in Syria, like to Pine
nuttes: which Doctor Turner describes also at large. They are after Galen,
friendly to the stomache, De sym. med. facultat. lib. 8.
subtle, bitteryshe, aromatike, and somewhat adstryngente: And therefore of
small nuryshment, mete for a sclender diete, good to comfort the liver, and to
open the obstructions of the same.

Pisum.
(...) (says Galen) does in his whole substance resemble the bean, Pison.
(if I may so english Faba, De alimentis. lib. 1.
) and are in like manner taken. They are not so wyndy and do in all things
excelle beans, De euchy^ria (...)
save that they have not so much stowring power, and therefore do tarry longer
in the belly.

But to know how Pisum, (whereof neither Dioscorides nor Galen have made
description.) may be our peason or no: have recourse as before to master D.
Turner. For to repete that here, which an other has already so commodiously
said: would but make my book vnne^efully to swelle, and with known things
satigate the reader.

Pix.
NAmed in Greek (...), Lib 3.
is after Dioscorides of three sorts, Piss^.
Liquida, Viscosa, and Arida. Pix liquida (says he,) is gathered out of the
fattest portions of the trees Picea and Pinus, (...)
which of some was called (...), in Latin Teda, (...).
affirming it to be a vice or Canker of the trees before said: confoundyng the
vanity of some that have counted Teda a tree special. Teda.


Hereof the best is sincere light, and shining, which by boylynge waxes
thycke, Palimpissa B^s^as.
and is called (...), Idest Spissa pix uel Pix bis cocta: whereof one part
waxes clammy, and is called (...), quasi pix Viscosa, the other is dry, and
named (...), Colophon^a Pix arida.
(of the city Colophon of Libia or Graecia, from whence it was wont to be
brought.) In Latin Pix Arida, and commonly Pix Graeca, which ought to be
pure, fat, odoriferous, resinous, of reddyshe color, and heateth and
dries, De sym. lib. 8.
by the sentence of Galen in the second degree: but does more dry then heat.
The liquid contrarily does more heat then dry, having also subtle parts,
and therefore helps asthmatike persons. They have abstersive concoctiue, and
digestive power, as in taste a light sharpnes and bitterness: so being mixed
with wexe, they take away leprosy nails, and scour Lichenas. They also being
put in Cataplasmatis, do concocte hard tumores: and to all these is Pix
liquida the better, and fills up the holownes of ulcers: but the dry is more
apt to glewe together wounds.

But Peter Martyr, in his Decades of the Spanyardes their voyages and gestes in
the west Indies, shows of a harder and stronger kind of pyche: (and therefore
better for ships,) flowyng out of a roche in Hispaniola. Which (or the like
thing) might be the cause of the name in that which we commonly call stone
pyche. In the which Isle says he, there is also pyche made of two several
trees: the one is the Pyne tree, (commonly known,) the other is called in that
country language Copeia. Copeia.
The leaves whereof is a spanne broad, almost round, thicker then double
parchment, merueylous tough, and is apt to be written on with wyers of metal
or wood, and that on both sides. And while the leaf is fresh and new, it
shows the letters white upon grene: but when it is old and dry, it
becomes hard and white, like writing tables of woodde, and the letters
yelowe: for it will never lose them, by washyng or any other ways, save only
by fire.

Plaga.
PLaga, is taken as well for every ulcer or sore generally, but chiefly for
such as had their beginning, Procatarctice that is from without, Vulnus.
Plaga noua.
as for every new wound or cut, strype or hurt. And so does Lanfranke use
it, calling Vulnus Plagam nouam aut recentem: Vlcus. Plaga antiqua
and Vlcus he calls Plagam putridam, uell antiquam.

Plantago.
IS of the Grecians called (...), Arnoglossos uel arnoglosso^
quasi agnina lingua, and is (though Dioscorides mention but two,) of diverse
kinds, as Mayor, media, and minor, Aquatica also and Marina: Whereof Plantago
mayor, Galenus De symp. me. facult. lib. 6.
which Lanfranke means, both cools and dries in the second excess, and
has some sowernes by reason of her earthly parts. The medicines that are
both cold and adstryngente, are mete for rebellious ulcers, rottenes, and
fluxions, and therefore for Dysenteriis: for they stay the flowynges of blood,
and cool things burned. They heal wounds, both new and old, and glue
together their holownes. But of all other such medicines planteyne is chief,
or at the least second to none, by reason of his mean and convenient
temperamente, for it is dry without bitynge, and cold without stupefaction.
The seade and the roots are of like faculties, saving that they are dryer, but
not so cold. The seade is subtle and the root gross. The leaves also dried
are subtle, and of less coolyng. The roots are used for pains of the
teethe. The leaves also (but much more the seades) are given for the
obstructions of the liver and spleen.

Plumbum vstum.
Lead is called in Greek (...), Molybdos. Galenus de symp. medi. lib. 9.
and is of coolyng faculty, having moreover, not only much moiste substance
congeyled by heat: but also some acry and earthy essence. It being burned and
after washed, helps to fylle up and heal ulcers, as well such as are
cancrous, as those that are called Chironii, but unwashed it is a help for
froward ulcers.

Porus sarcodes.
THis Greek word (...), Poros.
permits diverse interpretations, and is taken for a way, a passage, a
tracte, a journey, a cave, a bosom, a covered hole, a vessel, (and (...)
plurally are small sweatyng holes,) for luere also, sometime for money, and
lastly, (which is nyghest our purpose) it is a stony hardness. And Tophus
articulorum, is called Poros, (for Tophus is also and that more proprely a
stone: Tophus, (...) stone which is apt to be resolved into sand.
which Uergill in his Georgikes terms Tophus Scaber.) Whereof Galen thus
says. When raw phlegmatike humores, by liyng long hid in the lymmes or
joints, do becomme grosser and more viscous: De com. med. secun. loc. li. 10
there are of the^ engendered Tophi, and Calli. Wherefore this substance
repletiue, the work of nature, of the gross nu^^shment of the bone (coming
as a lygature between the ends of the broken bones, De art medicinale.
of substance hard, but not britle) may well be called (...), Poros Sarcodes
Callus.
quasidurities Carnosus, as it is of Galen called Callus. Which also sometime
sygnifieth the circulare or quilly hardness of fistules, De methodo medendi. li.
6.
and is commonly taken for the hardness both of the palms of the hands, and
soles of the fete, engendered by labor or exercise.

Portulaca.
POrtulaca, Andrachne.
called in Greek (...), is of two kinds. Hortensis (which Lanfranke calls
Domestica), De symp. li. 6.
and Syluestris: and is after Galen, of a cold and watery temperamente, and
coolyng in the third degree, and moystynge in the second: having also some
tartnes, and therefore stays whotte and bilious fluxions, and by a certain
clammynes that it has without bytynge, it eases the teethe when they are on
edge. It helps greatly the burning beats of the belly, laid to the waste or
the mouth of the stomache, and that in hectike fevers. And (because it is
restryngente) is profitably given to Dysentericis, mulitbri profluuio, and to
reiections of blood: but to these the juice is much more efficatious then the
herb.

Another herb there is also, called Portulaca marina, only of the likeness that
the leaves thereof have with porcelane, which yet (in other points unlike) is
not to be numbered with these. Neither ought I here to ouerpasse, that the
third little kind of Sedum, Illecebra.
called Illecebra is of some Grecians named (...). Andrachne.
Agria.


Pruna.
AVicenna. lib. 4. Fen. 3. tract. 1. describes Prunam, Ignis persicus.
and Ignem persicum, both in one chapter, not without some confusion of the
one with the other, and both with Formica. First estemyng both the names, to
serve for every blysteryng, corrosiue, and eschare making pustule. And a
little after he says, that Pruna is that, which makes the place black as a
cole, without moisture, having a small eminence like a lupine, sometime with a
pustule and sometime not: having itche over all. And sometime does Ignis
persicus or Pruna, more larglye blyster, and purge such a quitture, as a place
burned or cautrized does. The place being ash colored, black, or leady, and
compassed about with a vehement inflammation without perfect rednes. And
again, Ignis persicus is the more sharp, and of the swyster apparition, and
motion: Pruna the slower, and lying deper. The beginning of both is of burned
choler myxed with melancholy, (and thereof comes the black eschare in both.)
Ignis persicus consisting of the vehementer choler, and Pruna of the myghtier
melancholye. It they chance in the flesh, they are the sooner resolved: but if
in the sinews, they stick the faster, and resolve the slowlyer. Thus far
Auicen. And yet confessyng after, that the name of either, may be given to
both: and affirms them often to come of a pestilentiall fever.

Now Pruna and Carbunculus, in the quality of names as you see differ not:
and how much their efficient causes, signs, and propreties do vary: After
these descriptions thereof, by comparing them together, it is easy to see.

Prunum.
THe plumme tree or Damsen tree, called in Greek, (...), Coccymelos.
and Prunus is of many kinds, both tame and wild: whereof master Turner has
egregiously written. Coccymelon.
The prune (called (...),) is a fructe says Galen, Galen. de alimentis. lib.
2.
of small nuryshment, but does meanly moist and cool the belly, and by his
moisture and stimines, subdueth the same, De sym. lib. 7.
and that the better if it be boiled cum Melicrato: But this do the new
moist ones, more then the old and dry. The damascen prunes also, (which are
acounted best) less then the Spanysh prunes, which are praised next. The
best prunes are great and lose, having some adstriction.

The wild prunes or plummes, are evidently adstringent, and therefore do stay
the belly, and are convenient, for the inflammations of Columella, and other
parts of the throat.

Pyrum.
Pears are called in Greek (...), Apion. i. pyru^ Apios pyrus. Galen. de
alimentis. lib. 2.
(as the tree is called (...),) and consiste of three parts, as an earthy, a
watrie, (which are both cold,) and a temperate. Wherefore to be eaten, they
are friendly to the stomache, stay thirste, and nuryshe somewhat. Pears thynne
slyced, so dried, De symp. me. fac. li. 6.
and after boiled, are used in winter for meat.

Outwardly applied, they dry and cool moderatlye, and therefore do they glewe
together wounds. Achrades
Which to do the wild pears, (...). i. pyrum syluestre.
(called Pyra syluestria, in Greek (...)) because they are most adstringente,
are most mete.

Quartana febris.
THe quartane fever, is either interpolate, and named Quartana intermittens,
uel exquisita, or continual, and thereof called Onartana continens, or
continua. The first is engendered of a melancholic humore putrefied, Galen. de
differe^tiis febrium. lib. 2.
or a splenatyke affecte, whose rigor is in the beginning not vehement, but
like the cold that men commonly feel in most vehement frostes. De art
curatiua. lib. 1.
Which yet in process of time augmenteth even to the state, with cold so
vehement, as if the bones would break, but not pungitiue as in the tertian.
The pulse is slow and rare: The augmentation, vigor, and mouyng of of heat,
are contrary to the tertian. The humore kyndleth slowly like to a stone, or
other like cold and dry thing, which is the cause of so much longer
intermission therein, then in the Quotidiane.

Quartana continua (which is rarly seen) is engendered of melancholy, De
morborum temporibus.
putrefied in the vessels, even as is Qnotidiana continens, or continua,
caused of phlegm in like manner putrefied wherein they both differ from the like
named intermittent fevers, and in that they are never without a feuerous
habit, until they cease for all: though yet they have some remission between
every fit, and therein differ they from the fevers Synochis, wherein there is
no remission but continual burning.

Quotidiana febris.
Quotidiana uera, sieve exquisita, is described in the title Amphemerina febre,
and Quotidiana continua, immediately above at Quartana.

Rapa.
RApa or Rapum, Congylis.
is (of the round form that the root ^iath,) Gongyle.
called of the Greeks (...), ^uasi bolus rotundus, Galen. de sym. lib. 6.
in English a Rape, or Turnep: and is of temperament, whotte in the second
degree and moist in the first: Dioscor. lib. 2.
and therefore may Lanfranke well place it with his maturatiues. The root of
the same sodde does nuryshe, but is hard to co^cocte, and ingendreth wind and
sede, troubles the stomache, and sometime byteth the same: Galenus De
alimentis. lib. 2.
and the more if it be raw. The decoction thereof is sometime applied to ye
gout. The root roasted under ashes cum cerato rosacco, is good for vlcerated
kybes. The tender stalks eaten, do move drine. The seade is put among
anodyne medicines, and is drunk as a helthfull medicine against venim. Condite
in brine, they nurishe the less, but increase apetite the more.

Realgar.
A Most vehement corrosiue medicine, and is made (as is said In opere
pandactarum) ex sulphur, Calce uiua, and auripigmento: which mortifieth
fistules, and corrodeth deplie. And is also called Soricoria, because it
kills rattes, as it does also the worms of horses.

But Brasauolus in examine suo symplicium, says, that they are deceived that
think the true Risagallum (for so is it more fitly named) a thing artificial,
for it is found says he, in the same mine with Auripigmento, and is of the
same kind: being in deed a medicine hurtful and venomous.

Regeneratiuae medicinae.
REgeneratiue medicines, are of nature like to intarnatiues, as in restoring or
renewing of flesh, bone. etc. and comes of Regigno, to regender or bread
again.

Repercussiua medicamina.
CAlled also Repellentia, De com. med. secund. loca. lib. 3.
are after Galen things sharp, tarte, and adstringent: having by the same
power to put away or drive back the fluxions of humores, and ryseth of
Repercutio or Repello, to constreygne or drive back.

Resina.
REsina, Rbet^^.
which the Grecians call (...), signifies the oily tears of trees, which
will burn with fire, and easily be commired with oil, and most hardly with
water. As Gummi signifies the watery tears of the same: for in the fire it
will crackell, and will in water be easily disolued, but not so in oil.

Resines do al heat and dry. Dioscor. lib. ^.
Whereof Resina terebinthina, is of Dioscorides called the best: which also
Galen approves, beginning with Resina lentiscina, De sym. med. facultat. lib.
8.
and gives to it the first place, saying. Beside the little adstriction that
is therein, (whereby it is so commodious to the weakness and inflammations of the
stomache, the liver, and the belly,) it also dries without bytinge: for it is
very subtyle without sharpnes. Of Terebinthinae resinae he says, that it is
preferred to the rest: having a manifest adstriction, but not like to mastyke.
How be it, it has adjoined a certain bitterness, and therefore digesteth more
then mastike, etc. of diverse other. But this word Resina, so written alone, is
always taken for our common Rosin.

Resolutiua medicamina.
MEdicynes resolutyues, are called also Discutientia, a Discutiendo, aut
resoluendo: That is of discussynge, dysoluynge, vnlosynge, dischargynge, or
wasting away.

Restauratio.
Restoration, unition, or reparation, is the first and principal intention,
of the Chirurgien in every dyuorse of unity.

Rigor.
(...) is that swifte and frequent motion, Rhigos, Palpitatio.
(contrary to Palpitationi,) whose motion is little, soft, and rare, which
Galen calls compounde, De sympto. causis. lib. 2.
as of a cause against nature and of a faculty animal (as of the virtue
expulsive) procuring a sensible coldness, De palpitatione tre^. co^. and rigore.
and an unequal and inuoluntary moving of the whole body, wherein it differs
from Horore (which is an universal affecte of the skin only,) and from
Tremore which possesses sum one member, Horor.
and may by the will be resisted. Tremor.


But that rigor that is wont to come on sick persons, and called Rigor
morbosus, is by the opinion of Hippocrates, a certain peynfull coldness, De
Crisibus.
with an unequal mouinge or shaking of all the body. This may dyuersly
chance, even to whole bodies as of heat, or of cold, or of a viscouse
humore, (to the first coolyng is a remedy, to the second heat, to the third
concoction or euacuation, or both.) Sometime of the heryng or seeing of horrible
and fearful syghtes, or noyses, phlegm also bredde without a fever by
idleness, ill order of diete, and entryng the bathe after dynner: to the old
auncientes unknown. De differe^tiis febrium. lib. 2.
And though it be evident, it to come of a native heat, yet comes it also
dyuersly, as well of cold viscous phlegm as of whotte and sharp humores, De
morborum temporibus.
and sometime of a juice myxed of heat and cold, as in quartanes, but in
mixed compounde fevers, the rigor is never vehement. It to chance to a weak
body, in a continual fever is an evil sign: and also when it will not at all,
or hardly be put away.

Rosa.
IS named in greek of the pleasant savor thereof (...) quasi been olens, Rhodon.
and is divided into kinds diverse, whereof the auncientes have left no memory.
The power of roses consists says Galen of a whotte and a watery substance
together: De sym. lib. 8.
And also of two other qualities, as bitterness and byndyng. The flowerwhereof
is more adstringent then it self is, and therefore desiccatyue. Mesues
appoynteth them the faculties of coolyng in the first degree, and driynge in
the second. The juice of Roses says he, which is severed from the earthy
substance thereof, heateth nyghe to the first degree. It opens, mundifieth,
resolves: and purges gently by experience (says Syluius,) both choler and
water, though the old writers say not so much. Like properties to these has
Syrupus and Vnguentum rosarum. They strengthen the heart, the stomache, the
liver, and the retentyue faculty. They are good in bilious fevers, to cool
inflammations, to mitigate the pains made by the^, and provoke sleep. They
move sternutatio^s, and are hurtful for catarrhous persons: but they bind and
strengthen the Vuula and the throat, and take away surfetyng. The white roses
do purge little or nothing, but do bind and strengthen more then the red.

Rumex acutus.
CAlled in Greek (...), Oxylapathon.
is one of the kinds of (...): Lapathon.
so called (...), quod uacuat uentrem, because the leaves of each kind thereof
do lose and empty the belly. The kinds of Rumex are four, Rumex acutus,
whereof here. Rumex satiuus, called for his greatness (...), Hippolapat^o^
Anaxyris.
and of other fondly Rhabarbarum. Rumex syluestris, called also (...), and
(...), Oxalis.
whereof before. The fourth has leaves like planten. About the which kinds,
because there is some controversy risen, in that Aetius describes his
Oxilapathon, otherwise their Dioscorides does, appoynting his sharpnes to
consiste rather in taste then in the hard and sharp substance of the leafes
point: and that to speak of it here so largly as D. Turner has done, would
unnecessarily augmente this brief work: I sendethe thither.

Of Rumex acutus, De symp. me. fac. li. 7.
Galen says, that it does (of a mixed temperament) both digeste and
repercusse: The seade whereof is of so manifest adstriction, that it staieth ye
Dysenteria, and the flux of the womb. De alimentis. lib. 2.
The rusticall women, (lustyng when they are with child) and gredy boys, do
use now and then to eat it raw: which nurysheth but little more then
Lapatho. But that the root of Lapathi acuti does maturate, I find not in any
other autentike author: and therefore is Lanfra^kes experience only to be
trusted unto. Or else perhaps he might mean some other herb: but what, it is
doubtful. They praise it in the healyng and dryuing away of diverse apostemes:
Which to do it seems of them rather to be gathered by deuydinge, then by
maturation.

Ruta.
RUe is called in Greek (...), Peganon.
because by the great heat and drynes thereof, it coagulateth sede, for (...)
(id est coagulare, uel in glaciem co^trahere) signifies to congeyle or
coagulate, Test Plutarcho. It is of two kinds, Hortensis and syluestris:
whereof the one is as rare, as the other is common. Dioscor. lib. 3.
It is in taste both sharp and bitter, kylleth worms, Galen. de sym. lib. 8.
and is of temperamente whotte in the third degree. The wild Rue in the
fourth, and dries myghtely: and therefore is of power to divide and cut
inso^der gross and tough humores, and to move bryne. And is good for pains of
the joints, and the dropsy.

The juice thereof heated in a pome granate rynde, is put in to the ears to
ease their peynes: It also sharpeneth the eye sight. Eaten raw or condite
with salt, and laid to cum melle and succo foenicult, it puts away their
dimnes: and mittigateth their peynes, being laid to cum Polenta. It is morouer
of subtle parts, and destroys wyndes: and therefore pursues strongly the
inflammations of Colon, and other interior parts, and restreyneth venereous
appetites: beside the incomparable virtue that it has against poison, and all
venomous wounds.

Sabina.
SAuyn is that continual grene shrubbe, that is called in Greek (...),
Brathy. uel Brathys.
seu (...). And thereof are there two kinds after Dioscorides. The one with
leaves like to Cupresso, to us well known: The other resembles in form, the
leaves of the Tamariske tree, and is here rare.

It heateth (by the sentence of Galen) and dries in the second degree, De
symplici. lib. 6.
Consisting of most subtle parts, of taste like the Cipers tree, but that it
has more sharpnes, and less adstriction: And therefore is whotter, and does
more myghtily digeste. It stays spreadyng or eating sores, aswageth
inflammations, and breaks Carbuncles: But for his great heat and drynes, is
unmeet to heal wou^des. Being drunk with wine: Menses, Vrinasque prouocat by
his subtle substance, and dryueth out even blood by the urine. Foetum etiam
uiuentem interficit, and mortuum educit.

Saccharum.
SAccharum, Sal Indicus. Mel arundineu^
is called of the most ancient Archigenes, and other old writers Sal
Indicus, and Mel arundineum.

Dioscorides. lib. 2. Cap. 74. Having spoken of diverse kinds of honey: says.
There is also an other kind of co^creted or hardened honey, Saccharon.
which they call (...), found in India and Arabia felici, in the redes,
coacted or fastened like salt, and breaks between the teethe as salt does.
It is mete for the belly, and profitable to the stomache, and helps the
griefs of the reins and bladder: being laid to, it puts away ye causes of
darkness or dimnes of ye eye sight.

Galen in his.vii. book of the faculties of simple medicines, in the chapter of
Mel, says. But Saccharon which is brought from India and Arabia Felice,
grows together or becomes hard on redes, and is a kind of honey: not so
sweet as ours, but of like virtues, in scouryng and digesting. And in that it
is no enemy to the stomache as is ours, nor causes thirste: so much differs
it from our honey in substance. Pliny says, it is honey gathered together as
bygge as hasell nuttes, white like gummes, of great use in medicine.

Alexander Aphrodisaeus says, that which the Indians call Saccharum, is the
curdes or heavy parts of honey, the son thyckenyng or hardenyng the dewes,
and conuertyng the^ into the swetnes of honey. By these and like authorities,
does Fuchsius seem very learnedly to prove our sugar not to be Saccharum
Candum, or Salem Indum of the auncientes: affirming our sugar to be none other,
but the juice of a plant of a proper kind, well bruised and pressed out, (and
is then of color, rather black or reddyshe, then white,) and by heat of the
fire, in boiling and purifiyng or scumming, it hardens and becomes sugar:
and the more it is boiled and purified, the whyter it is. Ioannes Manardus
says he, a man of most sharp judgment. Lib. 2. Epistolarum suar^^^
medicinalium writes, that by the Portugales and Sicilians he knew the plant,
from the which sugar is pressed: and says that it is sowed of seade in moist
places, and is outwardly like a great read, but inwardly most unlike: as fnll
of pulpe, heavy, soft, and full of juice. A read contrarywyse is hard, light
and empty.

Now seeing that the sugar of the auncientes, came of a natural dew says
he, and the matter of honey, first made glewye by the cold of the night, and
after hard by the heat of the sun: white by nature, and breaking between
the tethe like salt, (Ours being soft, and may as honey be swalowed, Saccharum
Tabarzeth.
till by fire it be hardened.) That hanging upon redes, and after Galen,
should not move thyrste so much as honey, Candum. uel Candidum.
which ours does: It can not be our sugar.

But contrary to this are the minds of Brasauolus and Matthiolus, who deny
Saccharum, of the auncientes to be any kind of honey, or to come of the air:
because what part of the air so ever (say they) does coagulate by cold, the
same will by the heat of the sun not harden, but euaporate or vanyshe away,
as will Manna recentium: which never waxes so hard, that it will break
between the teethe like salt, but will rather be chawed as it were wexe.

Who also judge that plant (about the which Fuchsius thus argues) to have
been of his exterior form called Harundo, Harundo Saccharifera.
though it be not holowe or empty as a read, and do call it Harundine
Sacchariferam: confessyng yet with Fuchsius, that our sugar is Factitium
quoddam, non natural, and of the same juice made perfect by boylyng, as
before. But Sal Indus (say they) is of the same substance, and for very fulness
issues or sweateth out, at certain ryftes of the same, and chiefly about the
joints or knobbes: where (say they) it is by the heat of the sun hardened
and whytened.

Claymyng also herin Plinies former authority to lean with them, in that he
lykeneth it to gummes: Noting also that the auncientes did never say, that
their Saccharon did fasten or grow together on the leaves, as dewes are most
apt to do.

Brasauolus also seems to prove, that the making of sugar of the juice of
Canes, and of the roots of the same, was in use before the times Galen and
Dioscorides, by the testimonies Marcus Varro, Statius Papinius, and Strabo: who
lived al before Galen. But Matthiolus allows not the sweet pressed out
liquores, which they mention, to be of necessity Saccharon: because the
Indians pressed out such iuyces from the roots of diverse plants and trees,
as well as of Canes. Neither yet (though it be called Saccharum Tabarzeth or
Saccharum Candum) is it our sugar Candy: which is not brought from India. But
the Uenetians immitating nature as much as may be, do make it, by boylynge
our white sugar four or five times, puttinge redes therein, whereon it may
hang like lumpes: And wrappe it in cotton, as though it came from the easterly
regions. Neither know I any thing at this day extant with us, that may so
well be lykened to Saccharum Arundineum, as may the whytest sugar Candy, that
we have amongst us: for the other is also not natural, but artificial: nor
white but yelowysh. And that judge I Lanfranke to mean by Saccharum rubrum.

Lo, thus do we se, how this our unfortunate and miserable age, is not only
bereft of this and many other Jewels and commodities: but also (which worse
is) so drowned in oblivion of the same, that what they are or wear, we are
either utterly ignorant or very uncertain.

Sal.
SAlt, generally called Sal, (whereof there are diverse kinds, Hales ex libris
Galeni De symp. facult. li. 4. 9. 11.
) is also in Greek in like manner called (...), and is made partly by art, of
sea water in the bays, dried through the heat of the sun, and called
Marinus: and of certain salt lakes by boylyng (which is called Lacustris sieve
Stagneus: Sal Marinus.
and partly natural, dug out of the earth, and is therefore called Fossilis,
Sal Fossitius.
which do both alyke dry mightyly, but differ in this. That Sal Fossilis is
of substance more compacte, gross, and more adstringent: and being put in
water, will not disolue as the other two sorts will. They have also an obscure
adstriction, whereby they thycken and bind such flesh as is salted therewith:
for it wastes away moist substances, and byndeth the solid parts. For the
which Sal Fossilis is best: next good to it is Sal Marinus. The third rome
holds ye salt that is made in the wells, and salt pooles. Of all the
which, we have only the use of Salis Marini and Lacustris. Howbeit, in some
parts of Calabria and Germania, and in all Pannonia, Sal Fossitius is their
usual salt. For the which (says Brasauolus) they dig and undermine
certain hills, of two miles in length, estemyng that for best which is
white, fast, and shyning: but that which is most bright and glistering like
to Crystal, do the Apothecaries (following the Arabians) therefore (or else for
the rarenes of the same) call Salem Gemmae. Which for a truhe Manardus does
auouche: affirming him self to have seen in Pannonia diverse lumpes or cloddes
of dug salt, shynynge so bright, that such as saw it, thought it to have been very Crystal. This says Matthiolus, being cast into the fire, neither
cracketh nor leapeth out, as the other sorts will: but gloweth as Iron therein.

Salt says Dioscorides, does bind, scowre away, purge gentlye, scatter
abroad, repress, and extenuate. But in that, one more the^ an other as
before. It defends from putrefaction, and is put in medicynes that mundyfie
scabbes. It represseth ye excrescentes of the eyes, and co^sumeth the webbes in
the same, and takes away other fleshye eminences. It put in Clyscers, loses
toughe and glasye phlegm from the belly. Outwardly applied, it puts away
werynes, helps hydropicall tumores, and in fomentations does mitigate
pains: Cum oleo and aceto, it stays itche, and eases the quincie, cum
melle, aceto, and oleo. It is drunk cum Oximeli, after Opium and musheromes,
to resist strangling: and is profitable to all poisoned wounds, and venomous
hurtes.

Howbeit, Sal by Mesue, is divided into four principal or notable kinds, as
1. Sal panis, wherein are contained all the former sorts, as Marinus, Stagneus,
(each of the which is called Factitius) and Fossitius (called also of Syluius,
Hammoniacus, and Communis) which ought to be white, bright, not stony, thick,
and equal. Sal Geme^s is as you see a kind of Salis Fossitii or else must it
vary from Sale Gemmeo Dioscoridis.
2. Sal Gemmae which will easily cut or rent, and is like to the Cristal. 3.
Sal Naphthicus, of color blackysh, and smells like Bitumen: and 4. Sal
Indus. Which is reddysh, or rather blackish, and is the strongest: next to it
is Naphthicus: Thirdly Gemmeus, and the weakest is Fossitius. Salt is whotte
and dry (says he) in the second degree, and how bitter soever it be, so
much the whotter and drier it is.

Of Sal Naphthicus, Dioscorides makes no mention, but Galenus lib. 4. and. 9.
De symp. says yt a certain salt called Sodominus, is made in ye sea of
palestin of Syria, called Mare mortuu^, wherein much Bitumen is engendered: and
Naphtha is a kind of Bituminis, whereof ye said salt is called Sal Naphthicus:
whereof also in Pliny is almost a like sense. What the Arabians meant by Salem
Indum, it is hard to know. But what the Grecians meant thereby, is showed above
under Saccharum.

Salt consists of an carthye substance, bitter by adustion, and of an
unsavory watery substance. Which two if they be equal, make a salt sauoure.
If the earthy substance be the stronger, it will be bitter: but if the watery,
it will have an easy saltnes.

Sal Ammoniacus.
(...), Hammoniacos Halos.
quasi Sal arenarius, so called because (as some write) it is by dyggyng found
in long pieces under sand, or else of his native place (as above of the Gum
Hammoniacum) is more commonly and most corruptly called Sal armoniacus, and is
of two sorts. Namely, the natural called Natiuus, Sal Ammoniacus natiuus.
which is thought to be contained under the sorts of Salis panis, and should
in color be like Alumen Siston, and shyning: being so salt, that it is of
unpleasant taste, but profitable in medicine.

Sal Ammoniacus is (says Dioscorides) peculiarly praised, Dioscor. lib. 5.
if it may be easyly cut or clefte into streighte flakes or sclyces, with us
both out of use and knowledge, though in time long since better known. Sal
Hammonia cu^ factitius.
The other which we have is artificall, and therefore called Factitius, and is
chiefly occupied of Goldsmythes: and ought not to be used in stead of the
true thing, otherwise then in much less quantity. But Galen bids us
substitute in his place Salem Capadocum. Sal Capadocus
And diverse other learned men, Salem Gemneum. His virtues are like the virtues
of salt.

Sal Nitrum.
ALbeit (as most true it is) that our Salt petre is not (...), Nitron.
of Dioscorides, Litron.
Galen, Pliny, and other ancient writers, which is natural, coming of
certain waters in lakes: and should be light, rose colored or white, cleauyng
or openyng it self into many pores, like a spungy substance. But our Salt
peter (which is artificial) is glisteryng white, (if it be good) or else
blackyshe, (if it be not made perfect by boylyng) solid and weyghty.

Nitrum also is taken cum Lacerpitio, of such as feel not their meat
(whereunto salt peter is not the metest:) yet surely is it evident, that
Lanfranke and many others right learned, both of his time and long since, meant
according to the vulgar opinion, (though not without great errore,) that which
has been commonly called Sal petrae, When they wrote Sal Nitrum.

But Mesues says, The old translators use this Araby word (...). But let yt
be no prejudice to any truth.
that of Nitrum, there is one mineral or natural, and an other artificial
called Spuma Nitri, white, light, salt, and bityng, and weaker then the
natural Nitrum. An other artificial Nitrum also there is says he, stronger
the^ Nitrum, and called Flos parietis uel salis. Hitherto Mesues. And this do
I with Syluius take to be Sal petrae, (if it may in any wise be found among
the auncientes) better known as it seems now, to the Apothecaries and to
Gu^ners, then in old time to the ancient writers.

Nitrum says Mesues, is dry in the third degree, and and whotte in the
beginning of the same: But after Auicen only in the second. De sym. lib. 9.
It is (says Galen) of power mean between Aphronitrum and Salem, and by
burning is more subtyle: and therefore draws the nygher Aphronitrum.

It dries and dygesteth, Dioscor. lib. ^.
and is put (says Dioscorides) into emplasters, yt draw out, discuss, and
extenuate: and scowreth away leprosies. Which (if it be taken inwardly)
cutteth, and thinneth, gross and toughe humores, much stronglier then salt:
and is taken both raw and burned, against the suffocations of Musheromes.

Sambucus.
SAmbucus, which is called in Greek (...), seems says Fuchsius to be so
called of Sambix, the first fynder thereof, or of the musical instrument
Sabuca: and therefore (after Quintus Serenius) ought it rather to be called
Sabucus. There are of the Elder two kinds, the one a tree called symply, by
that general name Sambucus. The other a shrubby herb called Ebulus, Chamaeacte.
and in Greek (...), Quasi Sambucus humilis, in English Wall worte, or
Daneworte. Which to have both heatyng and driyng faculty, the bitterness and
mean bynding thereof, does sufficiently declare, according to the mind of
Galen: though some write that it cools. It dygesteth also and glueth
together. Dioscorides says that they dry, draw out water, and hurt the
stomache.

Their leaves sodde and eaten, do purge choler and phlegm: and with wine, do
help the byte of the viper. It molly^ieth the mother, correctynge the affectes
of the same. The fresh and tender leaves, applied cum polenta, mitigateth
inflammations, helps burnynges, and the bytinges of dogs, Sambucus montana
sieve syluesiris.
and glueth together deep and fistulous ulcers. Two kinds more hereof are of
ye late writers me^cioned as Syluestris, being a more shrubby tree with beries
always read: and Palustris growyng always in ye fennes.

Sanguis draconis.
Blood says Galen, Haema.
called in Greek (...), varieth as the natures of the beasts, from whence it
flows. The blood of one being thin and liquide, of an other dryer, an
others blood is whotter, but no blood is cold.

Sanguis draconis, sounds dragons blood: about the which there are not a few
opinions. Some judge it the juice of an herb, Cinnabaris.
others the gum or liquor of a tree, and Pliny calls it Cinnabarin. who
says that the Elepha^t, being in the conflicte between him and the dragon,
(whose mutual hatred never cease,) strangled: falls with great weight on
the dragon and dasheth him in sonder. The blood of both the which running
forth together, Who reproves Pliny in many things
is after gathered made in a lump, dried and kept for medicine: and this
Leonicenus as well as diverse others, disapproueth not. But that Cinnabaris, is
Legitimus sanguis draconis, is far from truth, as here after shall appear.
First Dioscorides treats of Cinabaris, in his fifth book (as Galen also
does,) among mineralles, (not speaking a word thereof in his second book, where
he treats of diverse bloudes) saying: that some men esteemed it to be Sanguinem
draconis, because that such as then was, would scantly serve the painters to
vary a color with. Secondly, (...).
Theophrastus makes it a metal, growing in Hiberia and Colchis. None
otherwise says Aucrois also, of Cinnabaris.

But that which we have commonly to be sold of the Apothecaries, But the
^^^son of the name is hard to be known.
seems (not without the authority of diverse learned men) to be the tears or
gu^me of a tree growyng in Aphrica, whose rynde may be seen in the lumpes of the
same: which as Matthiolus judged, might be Ginnabaris Dioscoridis.

Scrapio also mencioneth a kind of Sanguinis draco^is, to be the juice of an
herb, which he describes both in form and faculties, as Dioscorides does ye
fourth kind of Sideritis, called Achillea Sideritis: which Brasauolus wysheth
to be in use among the Apothecaries, rather then the gum that they have. Thus
do you se here three sorts of Sanguinis draconis, variyng each from other as
notably as may be.

Sanguis draconis says Platearius, has byndyng and consolydatiue power, and
is profitable for the spyttyng of blood, bledyng at the nose or else where.
Vnde, menses cum Corrigiolasistit.

Sanies.
SAnies, is generally taken for that superfluous liquide substance that flows
from every ulcer, regularly or otherwise, of what kind or quality soever it
be, and as it differs in color, substance, or qualities, so is it known
and called by several names, (as well as the ulcers from whence it flows,)
As by destinction a pure, Sanies purulens: a sorditie, Sanies sordida, or
filthy matter: a Viro ^irulens, or venomous. But thou shall perceive Lanfranke
always (for the most part,) to mean by Saniem, the same quitture, white and
thick to behold, light to touch, and equal, or each way like to it self,
and not stinkyng: which Galen calls Pus laudabile, Lib. 1. de differentiis
(...) cap. 6.
and we good or well digested matter. But in apostemes otherwise as before.

Santalum sieve Sandalum.
OF the wooddes called Sanders (written commonly Sandali,) there is among the
old Grecians no mencio^ found, unless their opinion should be of force, that
would have Santalum rubrum, Aspalathus.
to be Aspalathum Dioscoridis: which Serapio does manifestly confute. For in
writing of Santali, he yeldeth no testimony of Dioscorides (as elsewhere he is
wont,) but the authorities of his own country men: writing also of Aspalathi
under the Arabik name Darsisaban. And farther Santalum is the woedde of a taule
straight tree, but Aspalathus is a low shrubbe, odoriferous, and bitter in
taste: neither of the which is found in Santalo rubro. Of the Arabians
therefore, was it first found and described.

Santalum (says Matthiolus) grows in certain great and thick wooddes of
both the Indies, and is of three kinds: whereof Santalum Pallidum or Citrinum
is best esteemed. The next place has Santalum Album. The third and worste, is
Rubrum, which is without odore: but the other do smell well. They are cold
(by the testymonies of the Arabians) in the third degree, and dry in the
second, having byndyng, coolyng, and alteratiue virtue: And therefore are used
to mitigate thirste, and the whotte distemperance of the liver, and for
choleryke vomites. Santalum rubrum does pryuatly resist defluxions, and is
profitably applied Ex succo solani, uel Sedi, uel portulacae, to vehement
inflammations, and the gowte of the feet. Santalum Candidum atque pallidum
laid to the forehead, cum aqua Rosarum, do ease the peynes of the head: and
being drunk, do merueylously help whotte stomaches. They do (says Auicen)
most effectually make glad, and strengthen the heart.

Sapo.
Soap, Quoniam sicut spatha incidit
which the Arabians call Sabon, is of diverse kinds in opere pandactarum. As
Sapo Gallicus, Sapo muscatus, and Sapo Spatharenticus, so called of his
excedyng sharpnes and cuttyng, and is also called Mollis, niger, and Iudaicus,
wherewith they wash sylke. Gutta uel (...) qua pri^a (...) ponariorum.
The soft or graye soap, is made of the strong lie called Capitellum, and
oil together. Hard soap has in composition in the stead of oil, shepes
talowe. They are of a hot^e and composed exulceratiue operation, and do
scour, putrefie, and maturate, hard apostemes.

Sarcocolla.
IS the Gum or liquore of a tree growyng in Persia, as witnesses
Dioscorides, Like the poulder of Frankynsence, read or pale, or as Mesues
says white, and bitter: and is called in Greek (...), id est glutinum
carnis, De sym. med. facultat. lib. 8.
because it glueth excellently flesh together. Galen says that it dries
without bytyng, and therefore is of power to adglutinate wounds, and to stay
the flux or runnyng of the eyes. It heateth after Mesue, in the second
degree, but dries less. It concocteth or maturateth, scoureth, opens, and
digesteth. Inwardly, it purges raw phlegm and other gross humores, from the
brain chiefly, from the sinews, the joints, and the lu^ges: And therefore is
profitable for old phlegmatike, asthmatike, and coughing persons, and pelpeth
Ophthalmia, and other diseases of the eyes.

Scabiosa pilosa.
SCabiosa, Psora.
which Actius calls (...), quasi scabiem Sanante, (because it heals
scabbes) is an herb whereof ye grecia^s neither old nor late writers, have
left any light. Though Mathaeus Syluaticus, (as reports Iacobus Manlius)
affirms it to be (...) of the Grecia^s: Sto^be.
whose sentence has few learned fautores,) Whereunto there are referred five
kinds: whereof the first two differ not but in greatness, for the one is much
less then the other. The third is called Scabiosa Ouina. The fourth Iacea
nigra, and vulgarly Materfilon. The fifthe which Fuchsius (imitating a
certain old written herball,) calls Succisam. Succisa.
The common sort (led by a most vain superstition, that the devil of
envy to mankind and his felicity, should have bytte away, this precious
root:) have named Morsum diaboli, Morsus Diaboli.
quasi a diabolo praemorsa, and in english devils bytte, of some Matfelon, but
most aptly heary scabiose. This does most justly agree, both in form and
virtues with Scabiosa pilosa, that Lanfranke describes. For it is used says
Fuchstus, as a present remedy to maturate and heal Carbuncles, either bruised
grene and applied to the same, or the wine drunk wherein it was boiled: and is
now found to have discussiue, and incisi^e faculty, and used to dissolve
coagulated blood. This Succisa, has been thought of some to be Geum Plinii:
Which with greater reason, is more aptly aplyed to Caryophyllata. They are all
unmeasurable bitter, and therefore must needs be hot and dry, and are in
qualities like Succisa.

Of Scabiosa, in opere pandactarum, I find as follows. Men say that S. Urban
at the peticions of a certain asthmatike sister of his, (that used scabiose
continually,) sent to her the^e verses, of the virtues thereof.

Vrbanus pro se nescit pretium Scabiosae.
Nam purgat pectus quod comprimit aegra senectus.
Lenit pulmonem purgat laterum regionem.
Apostema frangit, si locum bibita tangit.
Tribus uncta foris anthracem liberat horis.
Which may with a few more words thus in verse be englyshed.

To Urbane him self, it is uncertain.
How many virtues, in scabiose reygne:
But excellently it cleanses the breast,
Of sick aged folk, that there are opreste.
The pypes of the lunges, if rough they apere,
It makes them smothe, yea gentle and clear.
The roumes of the breast, that we the sides call,
It purges well, from incombrances all.
If it be drunk, so that it touch the place,
Apostemes it breaks, by peculiar grace.
Without to Carbuncles, if it laid be,
It does lose and break them, within hours three.
Scammonium.
(...), Scammoni^^ (...) Scammonia. or^um est.
so called Per Antonomasian, is the juice of the herb (...) prepared, and
called them Diacridium. The Romans also do (after the place) name it
Colophonium.

Scammonia, says Dioscorides, puts forth gross, fat, and many branches,
from one root, of the length of three cubits, with the leaves of Helxinae
(which we call byndwede,) or of Juie: Dioscor. lib. 4.
but softer, rough, and triangled, a flower white, round and holowe, like a
maunde basket, or bell formed cup, and of heavy smell. The root is very
long, of a cubite thycknes, and white, with a heavy sauoure, and a heavy
juice. Which is thus gathered.

The root (the head thereof being first cut of) is made holowe with a knife,
that the juice may run out into the holownes: which is taken in vessels,
and dryde. The sca^monie is praised that is light, clear, thin, of color
most like to glewe of lether, called Glutinum taurnium: Like a musherum, with
fine pores or fistules, such as is brought from Mysia, a region of Asia. And
trust not it that will only ware white, being touched with the tongue: for so
will that do, that is adulterate with the juice of Tithymali, whereof the
greatest token is, that it burns not the tongue vehemently, as the right
Sca^monie does. One drachme of the juice drunk ex aqua pura uel muls^, purges
downwards choler and phlegm. Volubilis Conuoluulus.
Mesues writing of five kinds of Volubilis or Conuoluulus, describes the
fifth kind thereof (which grows in Antiochia, Armenia, Arabia, and Turchia)
to have a root like to Bryonia or bigger, like a great gourde, a stalk.ii.
cubits long with little narowe leaves, formed like a fethered arowe, and
falling of at every light occasion: having more plenty of mylky juice then the
rest, whereof sca^monie is made: and therefore is called the mistres of milk
giving herbs. It is hot and dry in the second degree (or rather with Galen
in the beginning of the third.) etc. In the chapter of Scammonium he says,
that Sca^monie is of purgynge medicines the strongest. And after he has showed
diverse manners of gathering, driyng, workyng it in paste, and sealyng it: he
says that it should be clear like gummes, or whityshe, or of diverse colors,
chiefly that which flows first. The same touched or rubbed, with spittell or
water, gives milk. It ought also to be tender, brittle and easy to be
pouldered, light, and referring the propre odoure of the herb: but that good,
not stynkyng. From the which notes how much the more it differs, so much
the worse it is. It may be kept twenty years, but the older it is the weaker.
It is hot and dry in the third degree, bitter and sharp: but not so sharp
as the herb. It cutteth, scoureth, and purges yelowe choler, by attraction
from out the blood, even from the extreme parts: so much is his furious
vehemency. It hurts the heart, the stomache, the liver, and the guts, and
troubles the other bowelles, subuerteth the stomache, takes away appetyte,
moves abhorfulnes, stirs thyrste, and ought not to be given to choleric
persons, and such as are apt to take fevers. When it is taken, heat, cold,
cold fruits, cold water, long sleep, exercise, wrath, and other vehement
affections of the mind, ought to be aduoyded: and so goes he forth to the
corrections of the same.

But now whether Scammonia Dioscoridis, and Volubilis quinta Mesuae, be one
herb under two names, or not: whose descriptions, though (being precysely
examined,) they do not exactly agree: yet are they (as you see) of no small
affinity. And may have the more, for that Mesues dispraiseth for naught, both
the herb and the juice of his country: Whereof belyke he made his description,
or else perhaps of such a one, as he knew not otherwise then by report of
others. For so are right well approved authors, some times found to do. I
leave it to the wise and learned to discuss: rather then rashly to affirm any
thing, whereof I have neither sensible knowledge, nor just assurance: and that
the rather because right worthy writers do leave it in doubt. But that
Scammonium Dioscoridis is as utterly out of use as unknown, there is no
doubt. For we have none that may in any wise be compared thereto: for our
best may rather be adjudged Scammonium Iudaicum, uel Syriacum, which
Dioscorides estemeth most vile. And farther.xv. graynes of the common
Scammonium, has been seen to purge the belly often, or with diverse stools:
which by the testimony of Dioscorides a whole drachme should scarsly do.
Wherefore Andreas Marinus, wysheth us diligently to search out, and prudently to
use our own native medicines. For we have in our regions (says he) medicines
that (if they were ryghtly known and prepared,) would purge much more luckily
then Scammonium, or unknown Turbith. For if the best bear with it so many
nociue qualities, as above is showed: what then does the worste, whereof we have
the use? Which truly moved Brasauolus to wyshe, that it had never come to the
hands of men: as a thing more hurtful then profitable.

Scarificatio.
SCarificatio uel cutis Sculptura, Charac^^a.
englishly Scarfication, is called in Greek (...), Hoc est Sculpo, Rado, uel
Scarifico,, to raze, garse, or scarifie the skin.

Schoenanthum.
(...), Schoen^^th^^ Schoenos aromaticos. Lib. 1.
quasi Schoeni, uel Schini flos, It is the flower of the sweet rushe called
(...), hoc est iuncus odo ratus. This rushe says Dioscorides, must be chosen
read and new, bearyng fine flowers with read fragmentes, which being rubbed
in the hand smells like the rose: and byndeth the tongue with a fyery
biting. The flowers, the stalks, and the roots whereof, are in use. The flower
says Galen (which we handle,) Galen. de sym. lib. 8.
does heat and bind moderatly, neither lacks it a subtle nature: and
therefore Vrinam and menses mouet, given in drink, or in fomentations: and
profits also the inflammations of the liver, the stomache, and the belly. But
the root is more adstringente, (though the flower also do bind with all his
parts:) and therefore is myxed with medicines that are given for spytting of
blood. Hitherto Galen.

And for as much as these flowers are not now brought unto us, yea and in
Uenice rarely seen: (whereat our merueile may be the less, since Galen notes
the^ in his time to be very rare:) The learned phisitie^s have therefore
councelled to use, The tenderest or uppermost parts of the herb or rushe. But
our Apothecaries, (say they) going to Uenise, are deceived in Iunco odorato:
and buy either in the stead thereof, or mixed therewith, certain tender
strigges of Iunci^ palustris, that is the marshe rushe, or rushe of the fennes.

It is commonly called Pastum uel palca Camellorum, or Camelles straw.

Scilla.
(...), called also of some Scylla, Cepe muris, and Cepa marina of the
Apothecaries Squilla, in english squille or sea onyon, has sharp fervent,
and cutting power, and heateth in the second degree. It mollifieth the belly,
moves urine, is good for the hydropsie, for the iaundis, for the pains of the
belly and the old cough. Whereunto it helps much (by ye mind of Galen) to be
roasted or sodde, Galen. de sym. Lib. 8.
rather then raw: for so is his vehemency diminished. Hereof see more in D.
Turners herball.

Scirrhus*
(...), Scirrhos. Sclerotes.
Id est durities, written of old Sclirosis, is (as I gat her of Galen in diverse
places) a tumore against nature, (...)
and an affecte of hard and thick parts. (Which yet to take, the liver and
the spleen are most ready) hard, without pain, and sometime without sense.
Whose first cause says he, in his book of tumores against nature, is
double: as of gross and toughe phlegm, and of the dregs of blood. Which
also is double, whereof the one does Hippocrates call black: The other also is
black, but properly called black choler. And in his fifth book of simple
medicines, he affirms it to spring of cold and gross humores: De art
curatiua. lib. 2.
as of melancholy, or of gross and viscous phlegm, (ouermuche dried, and
impacte in the pores of the skin) or of both: and chances often by
ignorance, (through the use of vehement byndyng and coolyng things,) De com.
med. secun. loc. li. 6
to inflammations, and Ignibus sacris. If it come of phlegm, it has some
obscure sense, and is curable with mollificatiues, though hardly: but that
which comes of melancholyke juice, is cancrous (the parts affected utterly
without sense,) and incurable: and is by mollyficatiues exasperate.

And as the pure Scirrhus, made of melancholy, may in mixtures receive any of
the other three humores: Scirrhes oedematodes.
so may it in name variably change, and be called of phlegm (...), Scirrhos
phlegmonodes.
Id est Scirrhus oedematosus, Of blood (...), Hoc est inflamationis consors,
Scirrhos Erysipelatodes.
or of choler, and is named (...), quasi ignitae rubedinis, uel sacriignis
particeps.

Scrophula.
Scrophula, (so called of Auicenna, Guidone de Cauliaco, Bruno, Theodorico,
Lanfranco, and others, a Scropha, a pregnante soowe: because it or the like, is
a disease common to hogs) is a hard Scirrhous tumore, in the glandules of the
share or arm holes, but chiefly in the neck, and called in Latin Struma,
Struma. Cho^as.
in Greek (...): as the inflammatio^ in them, has to name Phygethlon. Look
more at Bubo and Glandulae.

Seges syluestris.
SEges, signifies most commonly standing Corn. And where Lanfranke has
Folia segetis syluestris, I know not how to understand him therein, unless he
mean thereby some kind of the wild corns, that usually grow in Italy: as
Milium, Milium Indicum, (which they call Sorgos,) Panicum, Bromus, etc. Whereof
the poor nedy wretches there, make their bread, especially of Sorgos. But
which of these (if any) he means, De symp. li. 7
it is hard to guess. But Galen in gluing together wounds, and healing
ulcers, (which is Lanfranke his purpose) prayseth Milium for the best.

Semperuiuum.
SEmperuiuum, which we may most aptly call Aygrene, is called in Greek
(...), Aeizoon.
id est semperuiuens, because it lives still and keeps grene, both winter and
summer: neither dies it by any injurious wether. Truly a singular miracle of
nature, that an herb so cold and moist, growing on the house top, (a place
most dry, and subject not only to the parchyng bemes of the Sun in summer,
but also to the most cold frostes, and vehemente storms of winter,) should
yet live and be grene. Whereof indede, many such as are ready to convert
those merueylous works of God, (that their brutyshe eyes can not otherwise
behold) into most horrible supersticions: have conceived a most vain
opinion, that lightninge could not hurt the house on whose top it grew:
and have therefore called it Barbam Iouis, Barba Iouis.
and is of three kinds: as Sedum maius, whereof hitherto.

The second is Sedum minus, Sedum Trithales.
called also in Greek (...), for that it blows thryce in the year, and thereof
is there Mas and foemina. The male having a yelowe flower, the flower of the
female is pale or white, and is called Vermicularis, and Crassula minor. There
seems also (says Dioscorides) to be a third kind, Andrachne agria.
Telephio^
called of some (...), id est portulacasyluestris, of other (...), and of the
Romans Illecebra, of nature very hot, contrary to the rest.

Sedum says Galen, De symp. ^e. fac. li. 6.
(both Maius and minus) dries lightly, and byndeth moderatly: yet cools it
in the third degree. Wherein also a watery essence, bears the maisterie: and
therefore avails ad erysipelata, Herpetes and Phlegmonas, coming of a
fluxion: and is an excellent repercussiue.

Serapinum.
COruptly so called of Apothecaries, but more trulys Sagapenum, Dioscor. lib. 3*
is the juice (says Dioscorides) of an herb like to Ferulae, growyng in
Media: whereof the best is shyning through, and of a bright or shining yelow
color without, and white within: with an odore mean as it were between Laser
and Galbanum: De antidotis.
sharp in taste, and will (says Galen) sone resolve in water.

It profits in the peynes of the breast and the sides, to old coughes,
conuulsions and ruptures, and expurgeth the gross phlegm of the lunges.

Sagapenum (says Galen) is whotte and of subtle parts as are other
liquores: De sym. med. facultat. lib. 3.
But obteyneth a certain abstersion, whereby it purges and extenuateth the
scarres of the eye: To the dullness also, and the dimnes of the sight, coming
of the grosnes of humores, It is a good medicine. But the plant like to Ferula
(whereof it comes) is weak and unprofitable.

Serpigo.
I Ca^n not better express Lanfranke his mind of Serpigo* then him self has
done, in the third treatice and first doctrine of his greater work, saying. I
say therefore that Serpigo is an exasperation of the skin, which crepeth
hither and thither, called in French Derbes, in Lumbardy Dembeda, or Volatica,
of others Ignis uolaticus, and comes of burned humores, assaultyng the skin
with exasperatio^ or roughnes* whereby I judge him (and others without number)
to mean none other thing, then Galen does by Herpete symplici. But look more
at Herpes.

How be it, of Thiria, (which he joins as a partener, with Serpigine, and
to come of the same causes:) Look more at his place in the letter T. For in
his works I find thereof no farther explication.

How be it, Guido, Rolandus, and Rogerus, with diverse others living about that
time, make four kinds of leprosies, (a division in Galen and the auncientes
not found,) which may come of the four humores burned, as Alopecia, which
comes of burned blood, Alopecia.
(though Rolandus say of phlegm.) Lepra leonina Lepra Elepha^tia.
Leonina, that springs of burnte choler, infecting the blood. Elephantia
coming of melancholy, (Rolande says of blood.) Thiriasis lepra
And Thiriasis, caused of salt phlegm putrefied, after Rolande of melancholy:
so called say they a Thiro, that is of an adder or viper: because it is scaly
and loses the skin, as does the adder. Wherein there is putrefaction, both of
the skin and flesh, and also pustules. Which name (if it may be of the Greek
derived) I judge to come, (...), Hoc est a serpente, uel fera aut noxa belua.
That is of a serpent or some cruel or hurtful beast, Vt uipera uel lupus.
(...) have ye old grecia^s generally taken pro bestiis uenenatis, Therion.
that is for venomous beasts, and such as leave venim behind them, Theriomata.
(...) enim tetrum ul cus est.
with their stroke or bite: whereof comes (...), Id est tetra, uel uenenata
ulcera. That is cruel or venomous ulcers. And so of Theriacalia, that is
things or rather medicines that resist venim. But at Thiria you may read
somewhat more.

Sinapis.
SInapis, Napy.
is called in Greek (...). Of Sinapis, Pliny makes three kinds, Sinepy.
but it is of Dioscorides vndeuyded. Dioscor. lib. ^.
Who me^cioneth but one, calling it Sinapi horrense, which we call garden
mustarde or sendew sede: and therefore may a wild also be there understood:
For the third Rapistrum of the late writers, is usually put.

Musterde heateth and dries, De symplici. (...). lib. 8.
(by the mind of Galen,) in the fourth degree. It is profitable for the
diseases of the throat, causes nesyng, and draws down rewines from the
head. etc.

Solatrum.
OF Solanum, Strychnos.
which the Greeks name (...), both Dioscorides and Galen, Strychnos Cepaios.
do make four kinds. The first is (...), Solanu^ hortense, with us night
shade, Strychnos Halicaca^os, Physalis.
or petimorell. The second (...), Id est uesicaria, which we call winter
cherie, and followyng the Apothecaries Alkakenge. Strychnos hypnoticos.
The third is called of Galen (...), a consiliando somno, somniferum, of
prouokyng sleep. The fourth (quod ad insania^ adigat,) they call (...),
Strychnos Manicos.
Id est furiosum. A fifth also have the late writers found and added,
Vesicaria perigrina.
calling it Vesicariam peregrina^. So^anum hor tense, which doubtless
Lanfranke means by Solatrum, does Galen also call Esculentum, De alimentis.
lib. 2.
because in time past it was planted in gardyns, and usually eaten, but we use
it rarely, says he as an aliment, (because it nourishes little,) but as a
medicine often. De symp. li. 8.
It cools and byndeth in the second degree: outwardly applied, they heal
malign ulcers.

Spica.
SPicanardi, for so says Nicolaus in his recepte of D^azingiber, or as some
have it Spicaindica, or Nardus indica, is so called says Galen, in his first
book, De antidotis: because it in form resembles an ear of corn, for it is
in deed a root, and is called also of like reason in Greek (...). Nardu
Stachys.


It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the end of the second, De sym.
me. facult. li. 8.
consisting of a sharp adstringent, and light bitter substance: Therefore is
the root both drunk and outwardly applied, convenient for the liver and the
stomache. It moves vryne, heals the gnawinge of the stomache, and dries the
fluxions of the head, breast, and belly. Whereunto Nardus Indica, which is the
blacker, is stronger then Syriaca. Nardos Celtica. Nardos oreia.


Other two kinds there are, (...), Hoc est Gallica, and (...). id est Montana.

Spodium.
POmpholix says Dioscorides, differs from Spodio, only in specie, not in
kind. And as the two kinds of (...), Cadmia.
are the earthy or stony parts of the our of brass, driven up from the
furnace, when the brass is in melting or purifying, as ashes or soote: and
cleaves to the sides, vaultes, and walls, of the furnace or melting house.
Some for the lyghtnes thereof rising, Cadmia botryitis quasi asinosa.
and cleauynge in the higher parts, and called (...): The other weyghtier
parts, that cleave therefore in the lower places of the walls, Cadmia placitis
uel (...). quasi crustosa.
they call (...): So not only of brass, but also of Cadmia broken, and by the
industry of the founder or workman, sprinkled in the furnace, and at the last
burned, comes both Spodium and Pompholyx. Which by the cunnyng blowyng of
the bellows, do rise from the furnace. Whereof some ryseth, Pompholyx.
and hangs to the walls and couerynges of the house, Spodion.
and is (...): white, fatty, and so light, that it may fly away in the air:
and part, which is (...), so called (...), id est a cinere sordido, That is
of ashes myxt with dead coals, and rubbyshe: falls on the flower: and is of
color black, weyghtie, and full of hears, and chafe, as the swepyng of the
brasyers flower. Whereunto says Gallen, De sym. lib. 8.
that seameth to be like in faculty, which is called Antispodium, which is
not to be used where Spodium may be had: neither yet Spodiu^, if you may get
Pompholyx. Which if it be washed, is well nere the best of all other medicines
that dry without bytyng. And therefore is a mete medicine for cancrous and
malign ulcers: and is also put into collyries that heal the webbes of the
eyes, and stay the fluxions of the same. And farther is a very good remedy, ad
pudendorum, acsedis ulcera.

Spuma maris.
(...), is called of the Apothecaries Spuma maris, that is the spume or foam of
the sea, whereon the birds called Alcyones, are said to make their neste, and
is therefore called Alcyonium: though Pliny (whose sentence therein is less
allowed) affirm it to come of ye Alcio^s nests. It is after Dioscorides and
Galen, of five kinds, (whereof Pliny does mention but four.) Galen. de sym.
Lib. 11.
The first is gross, weighty, sharp in taste, without like a sponge, of
heavy smell like rotten fyshe: and is found chiefly on the shores. An other is
like the pin in the eye, or a sponge: light, full of holes, Phyc^s, id est Alga.
of form somewhat long, and smells like the sea wedes, called Alga and
(...). The third is in form like a worm, Sea girdle.
soft and of purple color: which they call Milesum. The fourth is light and
full of pores like the second, Milesum.
and resembles the moist woulle, called Lana succida. The fifth is fashioned
like a mosherome, without smoothe, within rough, like the pumyse stone, of no
sauoure, but of taste sharp. They do all scour away and dygeste, having all
a whotte and sharp quality. The first two do help scabbes, skuruynes,
leprosies, and take away spots and morphewes, and scour and bewtifie the
skin: which the fifte can not do. The third is of all the rest the
subtillest, and is good for the affectes of the reins, and bladder, and for
difficille p^ssynge: And being burned, does cure with wine Alopecias. The
fourth has also the same virtues, but is much weaker. The fifte is of all the
rest the whoteste: inso much that it burns the hear, and excoriateth and
exulcerateth the skin.

Styrax.
(...) or Styrax calamita a most pleasant gum, is the tears of a tree,
Dioscor. lib. 1.
says Dioscorides, like to the quynce tree: whereof the best is fatty, pale or
yelowe, and gummy, with white lumpes, yeldyng when it is melted a liquor like
honey: and keeps long his good savor. De sym. med. facultat. lib. 8.
That which is dry, is of Galen dispraysed: who says that it does heat,
mollify, and concoct. De com. med. secundum genera. lib. 7. Stacte.
And therefore helps the cough, catarrhes, distillations, and murres. Menses
prolicit, either dru^ke or laid to. That which is commonly called Storax
liquida, is the fatty substance, called (...), pressed out of Myrrh: and
chiefly of that kind that is called Myrrha gabirca. Wherefore look more at
Myrrha.

Sulphur.
OR Sulfur is named in Greek (...), Theion.
and is of two kinds, (under yt which Pliny reconeth. 4) The one (which is
the best) is called (...), Apyron.
Hoc est uiuum, uel ignis non exexpers, Theion pepyromenon.
and is taken out of the vein without any boylyng. The other (...), id est
igne incoctum, that is boiled sulfur. Dioscor. lib. 5.
The best Sulfur uiuum, ought by Dioscorides to be fattye, green, not stony:
but bright, and shyninge like the glowe worm. Every Sulfur (says Galen) has
drawyng power, is whotte of temperament of nature discussiue, De symplici.
faculta. lib. 9.
also swiftly concoctiue, and of so subtle essens, that it laid to, resists
the peryls of many venomous wounds: and is a medicine approved, to heal
scabbes, leprosies, scuruines, and itche.

Syncope.
(...), Id est animi deliquium, uel praeseps uirium lapsus, that is the defecte
of the mind, or a sodeine slyding away of the strength of the body, and
commonly called swoundynge, and is caused dyuersly. Galenus de methodome. (...)
Sometime of euel and sharp juice, or of raw humores, about ye mouth of the
stomache: of unmeasurable bledyng, swetyng, and flux of the belly, great pain,
vehement moving, immoderate watch, or emptines: of teror also, and fear, and
of such like perturbations of the mind, and conversation in stynkyng air.
Whose signs are rare and obscure pulse, coldness of the extreme parts, sweat
of the face, the skin of the same losing his beauty, and almost a
resolution of the whole body: which must be cured as variably as the causes
efficient are diverse.

How be it, the paroxisme present, is after the mind of the learned, (led by
reason and knowledge) Thus to be succurred. First throw into his face violently
rose water, with vinegar, or cold fountain water: whereby the astonished spirits
may be reuyued: And that in Summer, a burning fever or the cause whotte. The
extreme parts ought also in eruptions to be bound. And rub the legs, if
the eruption issue above: the arms if beneathe. But principally and with
speed, are the nosethrilles, and the mouth to be stopped (and as some will
also the ears:) That the air alreddy drawn in, and passinge into the inward
parts, and by and by is ready to issue out, So made whotte by often mouyng to
and fro, may go again unto the heart: that by heatyng the same, the spirits
may be quickened and revived. And then forthwith is it expedient, to reuocate
the mind with things odoriferous. For nothing by the testimony of Hypocrates,
lib. de alimento, does sooner call again the spirits. etc. By the which, and
by bowyng moderatly the body: I have often brought again, even such as all men
present have thought dead. And thus much, because Lanfranke appoints the^ to
be revived, by the noyses of Tru^pettes and tympanies: Which (if they were
necessary) yet are they instruments, at so sodeine exigentes to unready, and to
call the person loud by his own name. Which truly I judge as vain and
rydiculous, (or worse) as the strokes and buffettes, that the rude multitude
use. For if it be (as by the authority of Galen above, and as we see it is)
the defecte of the mind, a loss of strength, and a general deprivation of
sense: what can the ears do more by hearing, then the eyes by seeing? Or
rather, how can the ears hear more then the eyes see? or the hands and
other parts of the boby feel. But this notwithstanding, I deny it not, but
that the sodeyne noise of trumpettes or drums, may in the times of great
incisions, and such like dangerous enterpryses, both reteyne and quicken so
the spirits (not yet lost,) that swoundyng may thereby be euited, whereof also
I have had the experience.

Synochus.
THose fevers (says Galen) that have one only accession or fit, De methodo
medendi. li. 9.
continuyng from the beginnynge to the end, Synochos.
and that many days, are called (...), id est continentes, seu continuae,
whose cause efficient is yelowe choler, and is of nature double. Synochus
putrida.
The one having a manifest putrefaction, and is therefore called Synochus
putrida: and the other utterly without ye same, Synochus non putrida.
called Synochus non putrida, which is a kind of diarie fever: (and are of
Lanfranke, and diverse other for distinction sake, called Synochae.) And because
the remission of the fit is wont to chance, by the transpiration or
breathyng out of fervent humores, (for they never breathe out at all, in
vehement stipations,) A fytte of many days must needs be made. When in such
fevers there is no occasion, that may raise the beginning of an other
accession: It persisteth a fever, both of many days, and of one accession,
without the invasion of an other: neither referryng quotidian, tertian, nor
quartan. For as much therefore, as of these two, De differe^tiis febrium. lib.
2. cap. 2. and ulti.
a fever may be maynteyned: both that all the vapor may not pass out, and that
the same may heat whatsoever it touches: There must needs be three
differences of Synochus. For some continue from the beginning to the end,
Pyreti.
of one greatness: and are called in Greek (...), Homotoni, uel A^mastici
Anabatici su^e epa^mastici. Paracm. ^stici.
hoc est eodem uigore permanentes. Others do augmente and still add to
somewhat, called (...), quasi incrementum suscipientes. And some deminishe by
little and little, which they call (...), Id est decrescentes.

Tamar indus.
OXuphonx, Oxyphoenix
is called in Latin Syluestris palma, that is the wild or sower Date tree,
whose fruit is called of the Arabians Tamar indus, and may be called in
Greek (...), Oxyphoenicobal. ^os.
and of some (...), quasi fructus uel dactilus palmae acetosae, uel syluestris.
Which last has not withstanding some learned adversaries. But their opinion
seems most false, that think Tamar indum and Myrobalanon to be all one: for
Tamar Indus has a curnell or stone, which Myrabolani have not.

They are says Mesues, sharp or sower dates (like says Syluius, unto the
sede of Cassia) and the fruytes of the wild Indian date tree: A medicine
excellent and hurtlesse. Of the old ancient writers either unknown, or under
these names vnmensioned, cold and dry in the second degree: After Auerois in
the third. By the which reason, it represseth the sharpnes of humores,
purges choler, and mitigateth the feruoure thereof, and also of the blood: and
heals the iaundies, and sharp continual fevers. It stays vomiting,
quenches thyrste, and every burning of the liver and stomache. But to cold
stomaches, it must not be given alone. The best Tamar Indi should be fresh,
fatty, sincere, and tender, in taste sharp sweet, of color blackyshe, and
shynynge, myxed with hears, as it wear with certain roots.

Terebinthina.
(...), Terminthine Rhetine.
Resma terebinthina, is the liquide gu^me of the tree Terebinthus, among the
Greeks called (...), Terminthos.
and sometime (...): The leaves and flowers whereof are dry, Terebinthos.
and bind and heat in the second degree. De sym. me. facult. li. 9.
Terebinthin says Galen, is preferred among other gummes, having a certain
adstriction: but not so manifest as has Mastiche. De com. med. secund. genera
lib. 2.
But it has a certain bytternes, whereby it digesteth and scoureth, more then
Mastiche. It purges strayte passages, and draws from depthe more then the
rest: De com. med. secun. loc. li. 8.
and because it is of qualities most moderate, it is most safely admyxed with
medicines that heal ulcers, which should be without biting. But neither is
this our Terebynthine, which is the gum of the tree Laryx, and called
Larigna, Larigna.
(not without his special virtues,) nor yet as some suspect the finest that we
have, Terebinthina ueneta.
calling it Terebinthinam Venetam: For it is (as many learned affirm) A resine
taken out of the rynde of the young white fyrre tree, Abies.
called Abies, Resina oleosa.
and was of the auncientes called Resina oleosa. The determination whereof I
refer unto them again.

Terra sigillata.
Earth called of the Latins Terra, Ge. Chthon.
in Greek (...), is usually that, which being put in water dissolueth: and is
diverse kinds. For so much as the body of the earth is of nature dry, and
utterly void of fyrie substance, every earth dries without bityng: Whereof
many, (namely such as are mete for medicine) are in Dioscorides treated of at
large. Dioscor. lib. 5.
Among the which (...), Ge Lemnia, id est terra le^nia.
Id est terra lemnia, (says he) grows in holes, like cunny borowes, and is
brought from a fenny place out of the Isle Lemno. which the inhabitants
gather, and myxing it with goats blood, they make it in little cakes or loves,
and sign it with the image of a got: and therefore call it (...), Sphragis egos
Hoc est sigillu^ caprae, or rather as Galen will, De symp. me. fac. li. 9.
(who of purpose to se it, visited the place above said) because it is
impressed with the sacred signet of Diana: but now is it marked with the
Turkyshe sygnet. He makes thereof three differences. Lemnia sphragis.
The first he also calls Leminam phragidon, which it was not lawful for
any to touch, Lemnia miltos
but their women priests, and differs from Le^nia rubrica, (called in Greek
(...), It est terra sigilla^a rubea,) in that it defiles not the fingers when
it is touched, as Lemnia rubrica does: and is of color yelowe, like the hill
in Lemno. whereon there is neither stones, trees, or plants, growyng: So much
says he is this earth visited. To the third, he gives neither name nor
description, but says that it has scouring faculties. The other two ar of
driyng faculty, and are used for the Dysenteria, against the venime of
beasts, or hurtful medicines, and also for all old and malignant ulcers.

Tertiana febris.
THe tertian fever, is either continual, and called Tertiana continua: Galenus
de differen. febrium lib. 2.
or else has intermission, and is named Tertiana intermittens. (Lanfranke
calls it Interpolata,) which is double. That is Tertiana pura, uel
exquisita: and tertiana notha, sieve spuria. Exquisita tertiana intermitte^s, is
caused of yelow coler, dilated by the sensible parts of the body, and keeps
her own pure and sincere nature, and chances to young choleryke persons, in
Summer, or in whotte and dry regions: inuadynge with a vehemente rigor,
(wherein it differs from Febre ardente,) like the pryckynge of nedles (and
therein differs from a quartane) which indureth not long: De tamoribus
praeter natural De art curatina. lib. ^.
but soon follows vehement heat, and much sweat. This fever endures not
above seven Paroxysmes, neither do any of the^ excede the space of twelve
hours, Tertiana notha intermittens, is made for the most part, when choler is
mixed with phlegm, either gross or thin, and sometimes though rarely, with
mela^cholie, which passes often, both in number and space of time, the
paroxysmes above said. But not so vehement, neither do the signs of digestion
so sone appear. For Tertiana continua resort to Cau^on.

Thapsia.
(...), Dioscor. lib. 4 Ideo aliquibus ^erula syluestris nominatur
so called (says Dioscorides) because it was first found in the Isle
Thapso, is an herb like to Ferula, in his whole nature, having a sclenderer
stalk, with leaves like fenel. And on every branche a spokye top like to
Dylle, with yellowe flowers, and a sede like Ferula, but brother somewhat, and
less: having also a long (...), black without, and white within: sharp also,
and covered with a thick rynde. The rynde and the milky juice thereof, do
purge choler, but is perylous to take without great prouydence. It is by the
testimony of Galen, De sympto. causis. lib. 6.
of a sharp, and a mighty heatyng faculty, joined with moisture: And therefore
draws violently from the depth, and that which it draws it digesteth. The
juice hereof, (which is by art gathered from the root) is so vehement
sharp, that the very breathe of the same, makes the face and other naked
parts of the^ that gather it, to swell excedyngly, and to rise in pustules.

Thymum.
THymum or Thymus, is also called in greek (...), which name also it has
almost in every language, though not the same thing every where: for
Theophrastus and Pliny, Thymum albu^ Thymum Creticum.
mencioneth two kinds, calling them Album and nigrum, as also Dioscorides
does, though not where he describes Thymum creticum, that is Thyme of Candy,
which is called (...), Thymos Cephalotos.
Hoc est Thymum capitatum: but in his chapter of Epithymum, which he
affirms to come, a Thymo duriore satureiae simili, that is of a harder Thyme,
like to Sauerie: Serpyllum hortense.
which I take to be our Thyme, and is of the odor that it has like to
Serpyllum, called Serpyllum hortense. Thymu^ says Galen, De symp. li. 6.
cutteth and heateth vehemently, and therefore Vrinam and menses prouocat,
foetumque potum euellit. It purges the bowelles, and joins with other
medicines attractiues, prepared for the breast and the lunges.

Thus.
INcence (called in Greek (...)) as well as the tree, Libanotos.
whereof it comes (called (...), Libanos.
) is called in Latyne Thus: Dioscor. lib. 1.
and grows in Arabia. Hereof Dioscorides makes four sorts. Libanos
stagonias, quasi (...) licidiare.
The best says he, is Thus masculinum, of his own nature round like a
drope, and therefore called (...), white, vndeuisyble, fat within when it is
broken, and burns spedely: hereof at Olibanu^. That of India is of swarte and
reddishe color, and is made round by industry: as first by cutting it in
square pieces, and then tournyng it in vessels till it wax round, Syagrum.
but in time it wareth yelowe: Libanos atomos, quasi sectiones nullas ostendens.
and this they call (...), or Syagrum. The second place has Thus arabicu^,
growing in Smilo: which some call Copiscum, of color dark yellowe. An other
kind there is, Thus Copiscu^ Thus amomite Cortex Thuris
called (...), of some Candidum, which cleaves to the fyngers, as does
masticke.

Cortex thuris, which is the rynde of the Incense tree, is here also to be
remembered: which ought to be new, thick, fatty, sweet smellyng, not rough, and
without skins. Hereof also comes Manna thuris or Manna graecorum, having
also says Galen, some of the rynde therewith, whereof in his place. Thus
heateth (says Galen) in the second degree, dries in the first, De symp. li.
7.
and has some adstriction. The rynde dries in the second degree, and byndeth
evidently. It is of grosser parts then Thure, having little sharpnes: and
therefore is used for the griefs of the stomache, spitting of blood, flux of
the belly, and Dysenteria. Thus mollifieth, swageth pain, co^cocteth, and
bredeth quitture. But that in temperate natures: for in moist bodies it
ingendreth flesh. It puts away the dymnesse of syghte, purges, fills,
and heals, the ulcers of the eyes, and all other hollow ulcers: g^ueth
bloody wounds, and stays all eruptions of blood.

Thiria.
(...) is a disease of the head, Ophiasis uel de mede^di methodo.
and has says Fuchsius (in his first book De medendis morbis) no latin name,
but is called of the Arabians and barbarous phisiciens Tyria. By the which
word they understand all serpents, but chiefly the Uiper: which therefore I
think to come of this greek word (...), and so of that kind of leprosy,
which is among that sort called Theriasis, as above at Serpigo.

Even as plants says Galen are of two causes vitiate, De methodo medendi.
li. 14
namely some by the utter lack of nuryshyng juice, De com. med. secun. loc.
li. 1.
dried and withered: other by the same contrary to their own natures, are
infected: so are the hears through the utter defecte of their slymie nutritive
juice, and also by the same vitiate corrupted. For through the utter lack
thereof comes Caluities, but of the same corrupted, rises (...), and (...).
De definitionibus.
And as in Alopecia the falling of the hear is circulare, changing into a
golden color or like the fox, (whereof it has that name, (...) quide^ uulpes
est: so in Ophiasi, yt affected part of the head is pilde, Alopex.
after the manner of Serpents, receiving thereof also his name: Ophis enim
serpens est.

Tragacantha.
(...), Dioscor. lib. 3.
is a bright shyning gum, lean, light, sincere, and swetishe: which runs
out of the root of a pricky shrubbe, called also Tragacantha. whose root is
broad, woody, and stiff in the top of the turfe: From the which do strong
low branches spread very broad: whereon do grow many small thin leaves,
hydinge under them selves white, stiff, and straight thorns. The gum,
which we call commonly Dragagantum, stops the poores of the skin, as
gum does: whose most use has been in medicines for the eyes, for the cough,
for horsenes, and roughnes of the pypes and yawes, and other distillations:
against pain of the reins, and corrosions of the bladder.

Triticum.
Wheat called in Greek (...), Pyros.
is after Galen, of fyrme nurishment, De (...) uictus ratione
and bredeth a juice gross and tough, and therefore is Alica (which also
nurisheth strongly) forbidden in them that are apt to breed the stone, or to
have obstructions in the liver: exterially used, De sy^p. li. ^.
it heateth in the first degree, but neither can it dry nor moiste manifestly.
Whatsoever is made of Amylum, is then it, both colder and drier. The Cataplasma
that is made with bread, digesteth more the^ with wheat, by reason of the
salt and leven: which has power to draw up and digeste, things that lie
deep.

Turbith.
TVrbith is esteemed a barbarous name, given to a root, which is called
Turpetum, whereof among all men, there is no small ambiguitie, nor a few
opinions. For Syluius and Manardus, do make thereof a destinction, in.iiii.
sorts, which I thought good thus to gather.

Turbith sieve Turpetum. The one, which some call Turbith Dioscoridis. Radix
pityusae, which has the leaves of Pinus.
Serapionis. i. Radix Tripolii Dioscoridis.
Vulgar. i. Radix Tithymali foeminae sieve myrtites, so called because it has
leaves like to Myrtus. Or Radix Alipi, after Matthiolus under the autorities of
Actuarius, who calls it Turpetum album.
Mesuae. Is the root of an herb, whose leaves are like Ferula: whereof they
dare not give sentence. Howbeit Brasauolus judges it the root of Tithymali
myrs^^ites but that would Matthiolus refute: who seems by reasons to prove
that Turbith Mesuae and Actuarii is none other thing then the root of
Alipiae. And so of our common Turpetum.


Wherefore knowing that there are at this day, not a few diligent men in this
kind of study: namely in the serching out of such unknown symples, and the
certeintie of things so uncertain and doubtful: (least they should want a
just occasion, to examine such conditions of plants or roots, as shall in
anywyse be like to any of these.) I have set here (for the sakes chiefly of the
meanly learned) the several descriptions of the kinds of Turbith here
me^cioned: Namly such as have not before in the English tongue been
publyshed. For Pytiusa and Tithymalus myrtites, are of D. Turner right well
described. Which therefore I touch not.

Turbith Scrapionis sieve Tripolium, Dioscor. lib. 4
Graece (...), grows by the sea sides, in places that are by the tides
washed, and by the ebbes left again: so that it grows neither in the sea,
nor on the dry ground: with a lefe like to Glastum, but thicker, and a stalk
like the Date tree, divided in the top. whose flowers (as men say,) do
thrice in one day change their colors: being white in the morninge, purple
at noone, and crimson at night: whose rote is white, odoriferous, and whotte in
taste.

Of the which, two dragmes drunk in wine, draws out water and urine by the
belly, and is put into medicines that resist venym.

(...), Dioscor. lib. 4
in Latin Alypum or Alypia, is a bushie and reddish herb with sclender stalks
and thin leaves: having a soft thin flower, and of them plenty, and a
sclender root like the root of Beta, full of sharp juice, with seed like
the seeds of Epithymi: which purges black choler, if it be taken with an
equal portion of Epithymum, with salt and vinegar: but it does a little
exulcerate the intraelles.

It grows in places nighe the sea, chiefly and most ple^tifully in Libya:
though much of it do also growels where.

Turbith says Mesues, is a mylky herb, having leaves like Ferula but less:
whereof there is Hortense and Syluestre, of the which also some is great, and
some little: white (also) yelowe, ash colored or black. Praysinge that
which is Gummie, white, empty, and like a reed, with a plain and ashy rynde,
or as it wear baked under ashes, being meanly new and easy to be broken: but
that says he, which is not gummie, is weak and troubles the belly:
dyspraysing also the yelowe and the black, the gross and the lean.

The curled or wrynkled rynded also, which is as it were sinewy within when it
is broken, which is the wild. The old is weak: The new does less trouble
and ouerturne the bowelles. Some do adulterate it, by anointing the rynde
outwardly with melted oil: but being broken, it is not gummy within.

And where as the root of Thapsia is numbered among the sorts of Turbith:
which the Apothecaries think to be theyrs. Andreas Marinus, calls it
Turbith apulum, affirming it to be that which mesues calls Crassum. The
fraud whereof being at the last discovered, it was rejected and put out of
use: for though it purge phlegm as does the right Turbith, yet that does it
violently, and with the great damage of the principal members. Whose faculties
you may farther read before under the propre title thereof.

Mesues of his Turbith says, it is whotte in the third degree, purges
meanly by attraction, rayseth wyndes, that ouerturne the stomache ad nauseam:
and dries, being purged from the thin excrementes thereof. Turbith cortected
draws out gross, toughe, and putrefied phlegm, from the breast, the
stomache, and the sinews: Even from the joints and farthest parts.

Tutia.
TVtia or Tuthia, Pomph^lyx.
is called in Greek (...), for the which look in Sp^dio.

Verbena.
VErbena or Verbenaca, is of two kinds, described of Dioscorides in two
several chapiters, calling them both (...), Peristereon.
but the second (...), Hoc est sacram herbam: Hierabotane.
for whose virtues and larger description, Look farther in master Turners
herball.

Vermes terrestres.
VErmes terreni, Lumbrici.
called also Lumbrici and Intestina terrae, being drunk in passo, do provoke
urine, heal the iau^dise, and drive away tertian fevers: bruised and laid to
cut synewes, they glewe them together merueylouslye, and are good for the
crampe. Being boiled ci^n adipe anserino, and poured in, they heal the peynes
of the ears: If they be boiled in oil, and put into the contrary ear, they
help the pain of the teethe.

Vernix.
OUt of the Juniper tree sweateth certain tears, in the spring time chiefly:
and therefore called Vernix, quasi Vernus ros, being of the color and smell of
frankincense: Which hardened by heat, becomes a gum. Which says
Fuchsius, (the Arabians, not without a great confusion of names,) have called
Sandaracham, which says Serapio, is whotte and dry, hard, and somewhat
bitter: and is brought from the land of the Christians. And the Apothecaries
call it Vernicem. Sandarache.
But far is it from (...) of the Grecians and Latins: which is a stone,
found says Pliny, in the mines of gold and silver.

Brasauolus says, that Sand^racha is nothing else but the red parts of
Auripigmentum, so made by the more natural boylyng: for there may a kind of
Sandaracha be made, by the artificial boylyng of Auripigmentum. And therefore
may the one, (namely Sandaracha,) be called Arsenicum rubrum, and the other
(that is Auripigmentum) Arsenicum Croceum.

Matthiolus also says, that Sandaracha and Auripigmentum, are both of one
kind and faculty, neither differ they in any thing, but only that the one,
(to wit Sandaracha) is more concocted in the bowelles of the earth then the
other, which is Auripigmentum: and are therefore by the same reason in
subtilties of virtues, more excellent the one then the other.

Dioscorides (the surest ground herein) says, that Auripigmentum is found
in the same mines that Sandaracha is, alowyng that which is fyerie read, or
like to Cinnabar: plain, pure, brittle, and smelling like Sulphur.

It is given cum mulso, to them that spytte rotten phlegm. The smoke hereof is
taken in, against the old coughe. Lycked in with honey, it clears the voice:
and in pylles is given, to hard breathyng. Unto which virtues, not only
Pliny, and other Latins do agree of the same: But also the Arabians, the
more to augmente their error, of their gummy Sandarachae: two things both in
substance and nature, (as you see) most contrary.

Wherefore, when you shall among the Greek authors find Sandaracha, you must
understand the same that Dioscorides writes of, called before Arsenicum
rubrum: But if among the Arabian writers, you must take Gummi iuniperi.

An other kind of artificial or adulterate Sandaracha there is, made of
Serussa burned in the fire, till it have changed his color, and is called
Sandix: whereof Pliny makes mention.

Vernix out of the later writers has the faculty to stay the flux of blood
at the nose: if it be laid to the forehead, cum Candido oui. And taken with
the poulder of Frankincense, or the poulder thereof supped in a rere egg,
suppresseth vomityng: and laid to, or taken with the same, firmeth the
laxatyue bellye, defends the falling of destillacions, dygesteth the phlegm
in the bowelles, and kylleth worms, and other living things in the same.
Mensium fluxus continet: being put in, it dries the moiste holownesses of
fistules: And helps the ryftes, cones, or chappinges, of the hands and feet.

Vinum.
OUlde wine hurts the synewes, and other wynes the senses: Dioscor. li. 4.
though they be in taste sweet. And therefore ought they to be ware thereof, that
feel weakness in any of their bowelles: But being taken in small quantity
according to strength and delayed, it is unhurtful. New wine infiateth, does
hardly concocte, and breeds many vain dreams: and moves urine. That which
is of mean age, wants both the fourmer faults: and therefore is used in the
diet, both of sick and whole. The white and thynne wine, is to the stomache
profitable, and easily dispersed into the members. Black wine is gross, hard
to concocte, nourishes flesh, and causes dronkennes. Yellow wine, as it
holds a middle color: so has it faculties mean between both. But when
health quaileth, or is crased, the white wine has most praise. Wynes also
differ in sauoure. For sweet wine as it consists of gross parts, so does it
difficilly breath out of the body, inflateth the stomache, and troubles the
belly and bowelles, as does new wine: but moves dronkennes less, and is
most apt for the reins and bladder. De methodo medendi. li. 3.
Tarte wine does more swiftly pass through by the vryne: but makes pain in
the head, and bredeth dronkennes. De art curatiua. lib. 2.
Sharp wine is for the digestyng of meats into the members, most commodious:
restreyneth the belly and other fluxes, etc. Wine says Galen, gleweth
together holownesses, Oenon uel Inon.
and is a convenient medicine for all ulcers. The Greeks do call it (...).

Viola.
Viola, so written symplie without an adjective, is always taken for the blewe
or purple violet, called in Greek (...), Idest Viola nigra or purpurea: and of
some Viola muraria. Some hold that it is called (...), because the nymphs
called Ioniae, gave first the flower thereof unto Jupiter as a gift. Others
because when Jupiter had turned the Nymphe Io into a cow, the earth gave forth
violet flowers, as a pasture or food for the same. But many other herbs there
are, that are called Violae, whereof here to speak wear as nedelesse as
superfluous. Mesues gives to violettes, coldness and moystnes in the first
degree. They are somniferous, purge choler, stay thyrst, and quench all
inflammations: and therefore are applied, for the burning heat of the mouth
of the stomache and the eyes.

Viride aes.
IS called also Aerugo, Aerugo rasilis uel rasa.
that is the ruste of brass. Of this Dioscorides makes two kinds. The one is
called Aerugo rasa or rasilis, and is made says he, by coueryng a vessel of
most strong vinegar, with a cauldern or other like vessel, or with plates of
brass, so close that no air may pass between: which after the tenth day
being opened, that Aerugo that is, must be scraped or rubbed of, etc. Otherwise
dyuersly. The other he calls Aeruginem scoletiam, and notes thereof two
sorts. Aerugo scoletia.
The one he calls Fossile^, that is dug, for it is taken out of the earth:
The other Factitiam, which is made by beatyng or laboring the sharpest white
vinegar, Aerugo fossilis
in a brazen mortar, Aerugo factitia.
with a copper pestell, till it receive a thicknes of filthe: Then must it be
beaten together in the Sun in the canicular days, cum alumine rotundo, and
sale fossili, uel marino, uel nitro, till it grow to a thicknes, and receive
the color of Aeruginis: and when it becomes like worms, Aerugo uermi
cularis.
it must be kept. This therefore has been called of some Vernicularis. A
fourth kind also of Aerugenis, says he, Aerugo aurificum.
is made by the goldsmythes, of the vryne of children, in a brazen mortar, with
a pestell of the same: where wherewith they soulder gold. Of the which kinds of
Aerugenis scoletiae, Fossilis is the best: next to that is Aerugo derasa: the
third place has Factitia, which yet is most adstringent and bytinge. Aerugo
aurificum, answers to Aerugini rasae. Here may thou see good reader, the
difference between Aeruginem and florem aeris, Aerugo.
which is in his place described. All the Aerugines, Flos aris.
do bind, extenuate, and heat. They amend the scarres or blottes of the
eyes, cause tears, stay creping and eating sores, and defend wounds from
inflammations. They purge filthy ulcers, and cum cera and oleo, they heal the
same. Put into fistules with Ammoniaco, in yt manner of a collyrie, they errode
the callous substance of them: and are profitable for the swellynges, De
methodo med. li. 3.
and excressentes of the gummes. The poulder of Aeruginis (says Galen) put
alone into ulcers, De comp. me. secund. genera lib. 2. and. 4.
suffers them not to putrefie: but it brings pein, and biting, not a
little: gnaweth, and makes infla^mations.

Virulentia.
VIrulentia uulnera, uel ulcera, virulent or venomous wou^des or ulcers: a
uiro, which is venyme or poison.

Viticella.
THe herb vulgarly called Viticella, Bryonia.
is called in Greek (...), Psilothron.
in Latin Vitis alba psilothrum, Ampelos leuce
and of the Apothecaries Brionia: in English white vine or brionie. The root
and the juice of Briony (says Mesues) purges the brain, the synewes, and
the breast, of rotten phlegm moves vryne, and opens the obstructions of ye
bowelles. But he appoints the te^perame^t out of Dioscorides, (who yet
leaves all things without degree of temperament,) to heat and dry in the
third degree.

They use says Galen, De symp. li. 6.
to eat the branches thereof in the spryng time, as a meat (for the
adstriction thereof,) acceptable for the stomache. But to that adstriction it is
sharp, and somewhat bitter: and thereby moves vryne moderatly. The root has
a scouring, driyng, and moderat heating power: and therefore drunk, softneth
the hard spleen, and laid to cum ficubus, heals Psoram, and lepram. etc. It
is somtymes mixed with corrosiue medicines.

Vitriolum Romanum.
DIoscorides writing of Chalcanthum, (which the Greeks call (...), the Arabians
Zeg, the Latins Vitriolum, because it shines like glass,) and Atramentum
sutorium, ad atro color: because it was used to dye leather black,) says that
in kind it is but one thing: but deuydeth it into three differences. As one,
which congeileth of certain humores, gathered together drop by drop into
certain holes of the earth: and therefore is called (...), hoc est
Stillatitium. An other is made by a simple reason in caves, being after poured
out into certain diches that are made holowe: Chalcanthum.
which is properly called (...), Id est Concretitiu^. The third is called
Coctile, Stalacticon.
and is wont to be made in Spain: Pecton.
being most weak and unprofitable. But among the late writers there is not a
little confusion of names therein. For Matthiolus speaking of the time present,
says, that of Chalcanthum there are two kinds in Hetruria. The one growyng
of it self in the earth by concretion, and is vulgarly called Coppa rosa.
Coppar osa.
The other is arteficiall: whose chiefest v^e is for dyers. which is either
the better or the worse, as well for the dispositions of regions and celestial
climates, as for the matter whereof it is made: But it is proved that Vitriolum
Romanum, excels the rest of the arteficall kinds, though it be of weaker
or vnperfecter color. The second place has Cyprium, but was of the
auncientes praised for the best. That which is brought from Germany, is
weaker then any that is in Italy: and for that it has blewe color, it
deceyueth many.

Among the Apothecaries there are two kinds: namely Vitriolum symply so
called, (which says Brasauolus, some have falsely called Cholcothar,) and
Vitriolum Romanum: (which is says he, Antiquorum misy.) And is hard, like
unto gould, shyning like the stars, and being broken, glistereth as with
golden sparks: All the which notes he affirms exactly to agree with Vitriolo
Romano of Germany.

And for the better understanding of his mind therein, take these notes, as he
for the same reason, drew and gave forth the same.

Vitriolum, Atramentum, and the Arabike word Zeg, are says he, common or
general names, to all the sorts thereof as they follow.

(...) Antiquorum. i. Zeg rubeum Serapionis. Sorry.
(...) Antiquorum, Chalcitis.
i. Colcothar Serapionis. For ye late writers err says he that call Vitriolum
Vstum Colcothar, which ought rather to have been called Chalcitis.
(...). i. Zeg uiride, Misy.
Vitriolum Romanum. But out of Germany says he there is brought romain
vitriole which is more hard and of yelowe color.
(...). i. Bities, Melanteria.
atramentum metallicum. Chalcanthum, atramentum Sutorium, Vitriolum.
Hereunto it is to be noted, that Chalcanthu^ does by le^gthe of time, or by
present burning the same, degenerate into Chalcitin: which yet is such as
being disolued in water, will again become Chalcanthum. And these names says
he, do so mutually answer to them selves, that hereby thou can not err.

How be it, (as Matthiolus most truly says) Calcitis Mysy and Sorry, have been long unknown, neither is there almost any that can say that he has seen
those very things: yet does the said Matthiolus report, that it chanced him,
(after long diligent search but al in vain,) to come at the last to the sight
of them, by the means of a certain Apothecarie: Whose diligence God grant
ours to follow. They were found says he, about Trident.

But in that Musa Brasauolus, affirms that kind of Chalcanthum, which is
called Romanu^, to be the true Misy, seems to stand says he, But note what
is said before of vitrioleum of Germany.
both against truth and reason: both because Vitriolum Romanum, is neither of
a golden color, nor glistereth as with sparks when it is broken, but is more
like the substance of glass: And also that Misy is no medicine arteficiall,
but is without art made in the bowelles of the earth.

Chalcanthum has power to bind, to heat, and to induce eschares. Latas
uentris tineas necat, drachmae pondere deuoratum, aut cum melle linctum, and
moves vomit. Being drunk with water, it helps against the venim of
Musheroms. It purges the head being watered, and dropped into ye nosethrilles
with woulle.

Of Chalcanthum, that is esteemed best which is blewe, rare, fast, and
shyning: such is Stillatitium, called of some Lonchoton. The next is
Concretitium, but the arteficiall is apter for dyers, and to make blewe colors
with, then the rest: but for the use of medicine weaker.

Vlceratina medicamina.
OR exulceratiua medicamina, are such medicines as by Corrosion do excoriate
or exulcerate: and comes of Vlcerare, or exulcerare, to blister or make
ulcers.

Vlcus.
GAlen in his fourth book De methodo medendi, says: Est itaque morborum
genus, diuortium continui uocatum. Quod quidem in carnosa part, ulcus: in osse
fractura: in neruo conuulsio appellatur. etc.

That is. There is one kind of diseases, called the sundryng of unity. which
in a fleshie part, is called Vlcus, In the bone Fractura, and in the synewe,
conuulsio. etc. Whereunto quitture is always incident: and makes an exact
distinction, between it and Vulnus. More of it, and the deuisions thereof, you
may see in master Gales institution. It is called in Greek (...), Elcos.
whereof comes (...), Hoc est lethale, Elcos aniaton.
seu insanabile ulcus, a mortal or incurable ulcer.

Vmbilicus veneris.
Look for it at Cotyledon.

Vndimia.
OR Ydema, Ydema.
or after others Zimia, but more rightly Oedema, Oedema.
is after Guido, and diverse others of that age, of.ii. sorts: natural and
unnatural: the natural caused of natural phlegm, or thinner then the same.
The unnatural is none other wise made, but either by the admirtio^ of other
humores: as choler, phlegm, etc. Or by their affectes in ye same, as by
heating driyng. etc. Look more at Oedema

Vngula.
OR Vnguis in oculo, is that which we call the web in the eye: Vnguis.
Which grows says Galen, to the pannycle that covers the eye outwardly,
De symptomatii causis. lib. 1
Vsque ad Iridis coronam, called agnata, or coh^rens. Which pannycle (says
he) being compased with inflammation, De trem. palpi. con. and rigore.
may by accidens impedyte the sight of the eye: but Chymosis and Vnguis, do
by a chief and principal reason, hyde and darken the pupil: even as the
great unnatural tumores of the cheake. Chymosis.


Vulnus.
IS proprelie Plaga noua uel sanguinea, in English, a new and bloody wound,
or not ^anious: For then is it no longer a wound, as before under the titles
Plaga and ulcus.

Zingiber.
OR Gingiber, in Greek (...), has of an old opinion been judged the root of
pepper: but that does Pliny deny. And Dioscorides describes ginger in a
several chapter, after he has spoken of pepper, saiynge. Gingiberis, is a
plant of his own kind, growyng in Arabia Trogladytica, which they use grene
for many things, as we do Ruta, mixing it with their first meats and
drynkes. The roots of this are little, Cyperus.
like the roots of Cyperus, white, and odoriferus, and in taste like pepper:
they ought to be chosen that are without woodwormes. They are kept with salt,
because they will otherwise soon putrefie: and are brought into Italy, in
earthen vessels. Ginger is convenient in meats and in sauces, having healyng
and concoctiue power. It gently mollifieth the belly, is vtile for the
stomache, And efficatious for the dymnesse, or dullness of sight. It is put in
medicines against venym, and answers in sum, to the virtues of pepper.
Hitherto Dioscorides.

Galen says it heateth, De sym. lib. 6.
but not at the first as pepper, and therefore is to be esteemed of subtiller
parts: and seems to retain in it self a certain gross and unlabored
humiditie, Piper longum.
like Piperi longo: And therefore does the heat continue longer, that is made
by ginger or long pepper, then of the white, or black. They that have seen
Ginger in India, (says Ruellius,) affirm it to have a creping root, with
knottes and joints: From the which, and from the stalk, comes often new
roots, giving twice or thryse in the year leaves like a reed, but not so
long: and that it resembles wholly Gramen, neither is there any thing in that
region more common.

FINIS,
THough envy me accuse,
In such as will disdain:
It can not make me muse,
nor nothing vex my brain.
For they that do misuse,
Their tongues in such a case:
Will still them selves abuse,
In runnyng of that raze.
But reason is mine aid,
To take my cause in hand:
And I nothing afraid,
With her in place to stand.
Having my hope so stayde,
That those that list to rail,
Wylbe right sore dismayde,
When reason shall prevail.
For truth by reason strong,
Will have the upper hand:
When envy vile and wrong,
shall fayntly flee the land.
And truth has always been,
A daughter unto time:
Which as it has been seen,
Detecteth every crime.
A very ample and necessary Index or register, drawn after the Alphabet,
which leads very redilye by the numbers of each Page, to all such names
and necessary notes, in this expositiue Table, as are without the Alphabete
in the titles of the same: namelye all such as are in the matter, by the
occasion of the entitled names treated of.
A.
ABies. 126 Abscessus. 13 Acantha. 2 Acetabulum. 30 Acetosa. 82 Achillea
sideritis. 107 Achrades. 92 Achras. 92 Achrocordon. 41 Acmastieos Pyretos. 145
Acoron. 4 Act. 105 Aeromeli. 67 Aeizoon. 116 Affodillus. 15 Agasyllis. 10
Albucum. 15 Albugo. 6 Albumen Oui. 81 Album Piper. 85 Album Santalum. 108 Album
Thymum. 123 Alcyonium. 121 Alexanders. 13 Alexandrinus Laurus 59 Alga. 121
Alica. 131 Alipia. 132 Alipion. 132 Almondes. 10 Alopecia. 118. 130 Alopex. 130
Altercum. 52 Alum. 8 Aminea Myrrha. 76 Amomite Libanos. 129 Ampelos Leuce. 138
Amphemerinos Pyretos. 125 Amygdale Picra. 10 Anabaticos Pyretos. 125 Anasarca.
53 Anaxiris. 82. 97 Ancerinus adeps. 4 Andrachne. 90 Andrachne Agria. 91. 117
Anethon. 11 Anfimerina. 9 Antes eggs. 81 Anthemis. 24 Anthropomorphos. 67
Antipathes. 28 Antispodium 121 Aphrodes mecon. 82 Aphronitrum. 16. 105 Apion.
92 Apios 92 Apium haemorrhoidum. 39 Apium risus. 39 Apolinaris. 52 Apulles. 65
Apyron Theion. 122 Aquaticum Apium. 12 Arabicum Thus. 129 Ardens febris. 23
Argema. 6 Arida pix. 87 Aristalthaea. 64 Armeniacum. 9 Arnoglossos. 89 Arquatus
morbus. 53. 78 Arsenicon. 15. 134 Asari radix. 4 Ascites. 53 Asclepium pariax.
79 Ash tree. 41 Ass box tree. 63 Aspalathus. 108 Astaphis. 83 Aster atticus.
19 Astragaloton Stypteria. 8 Atheroma. 76 Atomos libanos. 129 Atramentum
metallicu^. 139. 140 Atramentum Sutorium. 139. 140 Aurificum aerugo. 137
Aurigo. 53 Auripigmentum. 94. 134 Aygrene 116
B
Balanus myrepsica. 74 Barba Iouis. 116 Barley. 52 Baye tree. 59 Beans. 56
Bears breeche. 2 Belericae myrobalani. 74 Bilis. 37 Bismalua. 8 Bistorta. 14
Bitterfetche. 80 Bities. 140 Bitumen. 72 Black iaundies. 54. 70 Blewe flower
deluce. 55 Blood stone. 48 B^otia myrrha. 76 Bolchon. 17 Bones burned. 80
Boscas. 87 Botryitis Cadmia. 120 Boum adeps. 5 Bran. 41 Branca Leonina. 16
Branca Vrsina. 2 Brass burned. 5 Brathy. 99 Brathys. 99 Brimstone. 121 Bromus.
116 Bronchocele. 18 Bryonia. 138 Bubonium. 19 Burned lead. 89 Buxus asininus.
63
C
Cabalina aloe. 7 Cadmia. 120 Calamita Styrax. 122 Calamus aromaticus. 4
Calamus odoratus. 4 Callus. 39. 90 Chamaeacte. 106 Camelles straw. 114 Camfor.
20 Cancrena. 20 Candida hedera. 48 Candum Saccharum. 100 Caniculata. 52
Capadocus Sal. 104 Capitata lactuca. 58 Capitatum Thymum. 128 Caprarum adeps. 5
Carbunculus. 11. 91 Carcinoma. 19 Carcinos. 20 Cardialgia. 65 Cardumeni. 21
Carduus fullomim. 33 Cariophyllata. 110 Carpesium. 31 Cassia Syringa. 23
Cassilago. 52 Caucalis myrrha. 76 Causos. 23 Ceitica nardus. 120 Cenchros. 72
Centum nodia. 29 Cepa marina 14 Cepe muris. 114 Cephalotos Thymos. 128 Cepulae
myrobalani. 74 Ceratitis mecon. 82 Chalbanum. 41 Chalcanthum. 139. 140
Chalcitis. 140 Chalcuanthos. 39 Chamaeacte. 106 Chara^ma. 113 Cheironium
panaces 79 Choeras. 46. 115 Chole. 37 Choler. 37 Chrysanthemon. 24 Chrysitis
lythargiros. 62 Chthon. 126 Chymosis. 142 Cinnabaris. 106 Cipressus. 33
Circaea. 67 Cissos. 48 Cisthos. 58 Cisthus ladanifera. 58 Citreae myrobalani.
74 Citrinum Santalum. 108 Clematitis aristolochia. 14 Cloves. 44 Coccymelon. 92
Coccymelos. 92 Coctile chalcanthum. 139 Colchicum. 49. 50 Colewortes. 18
Colocintha. 31 Colophonium. 111 Coloquintida. 27 Concretitium Chalcanthum. 141
Continens febris. 124 Continens quartana. 92 Continens tertiana. 23, 127
Continua quotidana. 93 Conuoluulus. 111 Conuulsio. 141 Copeia. 88 Copiscum
Thus. 129 Coppa Rosa. 139 Coral. 28 Cornutum Papauer. 82 Corona Regia. 71
Crambe. 18 Crepinge teter. 117. 118 Creticum Thymum. 128 Crinos uel Crinon. 60
Crispa Lactuca. 58 Crithe. 52 Crocos. 30 Crommion. 24 Crommion Schisthon. 24
Crommes of bread. 71 Crowfoote. 13 Cucumers. 31 Cucurbita Syluestris. 27
Cyamos. 36 Cydonios Melea. 29 Cymbalion. 36 Cyparissos. 31 Cytinus, 16
D
Damsen tree. 58 Daphne. 59 Daphnoides. 59 Darsisahan. 108 Das. 87 Date wild.
87 Dembeda. 118 Dendromalache. 64 Derbes. 118 Diaria Febris. 38 Diarrhoea. 66
Diductio particularum. 13 Dille. 11 Dipsacos. 33 Distichum Hordeum. 52 Dockes.
97 Dragagantum. 130 Dropsye. 53. 60 Drosomeli. 67 Drupas. 77 Durities. 114
Dysenteria. 66
E.
Ebulus. 106 Effimera. 34 Eggs. 80 Elaea. 77 Elaeon. 77 Elaphoboscum. 16
Elaterium. 31 Elcos. 142 Elcos Aniaton. 142 Elder. 105 Eleoselinon. 12
Elephantia. 118 Elephantiasis. 60 Elephas. 60 Emblicae myrobalani. 74 Embrocha.
34 Endive. 26. 55 Epacmasticos pyretos. 125 Ephemeron. 49 Ephemeros Pyretos. 34
Epithymum. 129 Equapium. 13 Equinum Apium. 13 Eranthemon. 24 Erebinthos. 26
Ergasima Myrrha. 76 Erica. 69 Eruum. 80 Erythrodanum. 32 Escalonia Bras^ca. 18
Escalonia Cepa. 24 Esculentum Solanum. 119 Eunuchos. 35 Euphorbion. 53
Exquisita quarta^^ae. 92 Exquisita quotidiana. 93 Exquisita tertiana. 127
F.
Faba grossa. 36 Faba suilla. 52 Fabulonia. 52 Fabulum. 52 Factitia arugo. 137
Fat. 4. 85 Febris ardens. 23 Febris diaria. 34 Fenell. 40 Fenigreke. 40
Ferula. 117 Ficariae. 25 Fig. 38 Fistici. 86 Flax. 61 Flegmon. 84 Fleshes
diverse. 22 Flos Parietis. 105 Flos Schini. 112 Flower deluce. 55 Fluidum
papauer. 82 Fossilis aerugo. 137 Fossitius Sal. 102 Fractura. 6. 141
Frankincense. 129 Frogmarche. 13 Furiosum Solanum. 119
G
Gabirea Myrrha. 76. 122 Gala. 56 Galanga mayor. 4 Galinaceus adeps. 5 Galls.
42 Gallicus Sapo. 108 Gardine persley. 12 Garyophillon. 44 Gaul. 37 Ge. 126 Ge
Lemnia. 126 Gemmeus Sal. 102, 103. 104 Geum Plinii. 110 Ginger. 142 Gladiolus
Luteus. 4 Glans Vnguentaria. 74 Glewe. 27 Glutinum. 27 Glutinum carnis. 109
Gongyle. 93 Gongylis. 93 Gourdes. 31 Graeca pix. 87 Great persley. 13
Guilsoughte. 53 Gummi arabicum. 2. 47 Gummi hederae. 49 Gummi Iuniperi. 135
Gymnocrithon. 52
H.
Haema^. 106 Haemorrhoidum apium 13. 39 Hales. 102 Halicacabos Strichnos. 119
Hammoniacos halos. 104 Hares hear. 84 Harundo Saccharifera. 100 Hedge persley.
13 Helxine. 83 Henbane. 52 Hepatica aloe. 7 Heracleon panaces. 79 Herba Sacra.
134 Herculeum papauer. 82 Hermetis digitus. 51 Herpes. 118 Hexastichon Crithon.
52 Hiera botane. 134 Hippolapathon. 97 Hippomarathron. 40 Hipposelinon. 13
Hirundinaria. 25 Holekes. 24 Holithocke. 8. 64 Holowe wurte. 14 Homotonos
pyretos. 125 Honye of the air. 67 Horned popye. 82 Horor. 96 Houslike. 116
Hydrops. 53 Hydroselinon. 12 Hygra Stypteria. 8 Hypnoticos Strichnos. 119
I
Iaceanigra. 109 Ibiscos. 8 Icterus. 53. 70 Icthyocolla. 27 Ignis persicus. 91
Ignis Volaticus. 118 Illecebra. 91. 117 Indae myrobalani. 74 Indicus Sal. 99
Inonsiue oenon. 136 Intemperies. 33 Intermittens quartana. 92 Intermittens
tertiana. 127 Intestina terrae. 134 Ion. 137 Iudalcus Sapo. 109 Iudaicum
Scammonium. 113 Iuncus odoratus. 113 Iuncus palustris. 114 Iusquiamus. 52 Iuye.
43
K.
Knotgrasse. 29 Knottes. 76
L
Labrum Veneris. 33 Lacrima papaueris. 78 Lacustris Sal. 102 Ladanifera
Cisthus. 58 Ladanon. 58 Lanceola. 39 Lapathon. 82. 97 Lapdanum. 58 Lapis
Sanguinarius. 48 Larigna resina. 126 Laurel. 59 Lauriole 59 Lead burned. 89
Leapinge cucumer. 31 Ledon. 38 Leirion. 60 Lemniage. 126 Lemnia miltos. 127
Lemnia rubrica. 127 Lemnia Sphragis. 127 Lemnia terra. 126 Lens. 59 Lentilles.
59 Lentiscina resina. 68. 95 Lentiscus. 68 Leonina lepra. 118 Leoninus adeps. 4
Leontiasis. 60 Leontion. 60 Letuce. 57 Leucanthemen. 24 Leucophlegmatias. 53
Leven. ^8 Libanos. ^9 Libanotos. 129 Lilye. 60 Lime vnsleked. 19 Linon. 61
Linospermon. 61 Lippitudo. 78 Liqueritia. 49 Liquida pix. 87 Litarge. 61
Lithargyros. 61 Lithodendron. 28 Litron. 104 Lizarde. 56 Lonchitis. 64
Lonchoton. 141 Longum piper. 85 Lotus syluestris. 71 Lumbrici. 134 Lycion. 63
M.
Madelchon. 17 Mader. 32 Malache. 64 Malicorium. 16 Malowe. 64 Maluauiscus. 8.
64 Malus. 66 Malus granata. 65 Malus Syluestris. 6 Manicos Strichnos. 119 Manna
Thuris. 67. 129 Marathron. 40 March. 12 Marina portulaca. 90 Marinum
Absinthium. 1. 2 Marinus Sal. 102. 103 Marshe malowe. 8 Marshe persley. 12
Masculinum thus. 78 Massa cocta. 68 Mastiche. 126 Mastix. 68 Materfilon. 109
Matter. 107 Mecon. 82 Melanacardi. 10 Melarundineum. 99 Melaetherium. 67 Mela.
65 Melea. 66 Mel Frugum. 71 Meli. 69 Melia. 41 Meliceris. 76 Meligetta. 47
Melilote. 71 Mellago. 67 Melon. 65 Melroscidum. 67 Mercurii digitus. 51
Metopium. 41 Milesum. 121 Milium. 116 Milium indicum. 116 Mill stuff. 37
Mirrhe. 75 Mirtles. 76 Misy. 140 Mollis Sapo. 109 Molybdos. 89 Montapium. 12
Morbus Regius. 53. 70 Morsus Diaboli. 110 Mountain persley. 12 Muralium. 85
Muraria Viola. 137 Muscatus Sapo. 108 Musterde. 119 Myrcillos. 76 Myrmecia. 40
Myrmex. 41 Myrsine. 76 Myrtites Tithymalos. 131 Myrtus Syluestris. 31
N.
Naphthicus Sal. 103 Napy. 119 Narcissus. 5 Nordos. 120 Nardos Celtica. 120
Nardos Oreia. 120 Nardus indica. 119 Nardu Stachys. 119 Nasturtium. 21
Nephelion. 6 Nerium. 59 Nigella Citrina 47 Niger Sapo. 109 Night shade. 119
Nigra hedera. 48 Nigra Viola. 137 Nigrae Myrobalm. 74 Nigrum Piper. 85 Nitrum.
104 Nitrum. 104 Nubecula. 6
O
Obtalmia. 78 Oenon uel Inon. 136 Oleosa resina. 126 Olus atrum. 13 Omphacinum
oleum. 77 Omphacitis. 42 Omphacium. 6 Onions. 24 Onopyxos. 63 Ophiasis. 130
Ophiomachos. 56 Ophioscorodon. 7 Opion. 78 Opocarpasum. 75 Oreoselinon. 12. 13.
Orpin. 36 Ouina scabiosa. 109 Oxalis. 97 Oxos. 3 Oxylapathon. 97 Oxyngion. 4
Oxyhoenicobalanos. 125 Oxyphoenix. 125 Oil. 77 Ozena. 65
P
Paederota. 2 Palea Camellorum. 114 Palimpissa. 87 Pallidum Sant^lum. 108
Palpitatio. 96 Paludapium. 12 Panaces heracleon. 79 Panax. 79 Panicum. 116
Pannus. 6 Papaueris Lacrima. 78 Paracmasticos pyretos. 125 Paraphoros
Stypteria. 8 Pardi adeps. 4 Parietis flos. 105 Particularum diductio. 13 Pastum
Camellorum. 114 Pears. 92 Peason. 87 Pecton Chalcanthon. 139 Pediasmos myrrha.
76 Pediculus elephantis. 10 Peganon. 98 Penyworte. 30 Peper. 85 Peperi. 85
Pepyromenon Theion. 122 Perdicias. 83 Perdicion. 83 Peristereon. 134 Persley.
12 Petymorell. 119 Petrapium. 12 Petroselmon. 12 Phace. 59 Phacos. 59
Phasiolus. 36 Phlegmos. 84 Phorimos Stypteria. 8 Phragmites selinon. 13 Phycos.
24. 121 Phygethlon. 18 Phyma. 18 Physalis. 119 Picea. 85 Picris. 26 Pilosa
scabiosa. 110 Pimele. 4 Pinus. 85. 87 Piper. 142. 143 Pismire. 41. 8* Pison. 87
Pissa. 87 Pissa spalthum. 72 Pitche. 87 Pitys. 85 Pityusa. 131 Placitis uel
placodes Cadmia. 120 Placitis Stypteria. 8 Planten. 89 Platyophthalmon. 11
Plinthitis Stypteria. 6 Plume tree. 92 Polygonum. 29 Polystichon hordeum. 52
Pomgranate. 65 Pompholyx. 120. 133 Pontica cera. 24 Ponticum absinthium. 12
Popie. 82 Porci adeps. 5 Poros. 89 Proserpinaca. 29 Prunes. 92 Psilothron. 138
Psimmythion. 24 Psora. 60. 109 Pura tertiana. 127 Purcelane 90 Purpura Viola.
137 Purulens sanies. 107 Pustula. 14 Pyretos ^phemeros. 34 Pyros. 131
Pyxacantha. 63
Q
Quartane fever. 92 Quotidian fever. 93 Quince. 29 Quitture. 107
R
Radix alipi. 131 Radix asari. 4 Radix dulcis. 46 Radix pityusae. 131 Radix
tithymali foeminae. 131 Radix Tripolii. 131 Ranunculus. 13. 39 Rapa. 93
Rapistrum. 93 Rasa aerugo. 137 Regius morbus. 53. 70 Resina lentiscina. 68. 129
Resina oleosa. 126 Restauratio. 6 Reysens. 8^ Rubrum santalum. 108 Rhetine. 95
Rhetine terminthine. 124 Rhigos. 96 Rhoa. 65 Rhodon. 96 Rhoea. 65 Rhoeas mecon.
82 Risagallum. 94 Romanum absinthium. 1. 2 Rosa Iunonis. 60 Rose 96 Rosin. 95
Rotunda lactuca. 58 Rubia. 32 Rubea tinctorum. 32 Rubrum santalum. 108 Rue. 98
Rusticum absinthium. 1 Rusticum apium. 12
S
Sabucus. 105 Saccharon. 99 Sacra herba. 134 Saffron. 30 Sagapeman. 117 Sal
gemmae. 16 Sal indicus. 99 Sal Petrae. 105 Sandaracha. 16. 134 Sanders. 108
Sandix. 24. 135 Singuinaria. 29 Singuinarius lapis. 48 Sanguis draconis. 64
Santonicum absinthium. 2 Salt. 102 Sarcites. 53 Sarcodes poros. 90 Sauin. 99 S
Antonies fire. 35 Saxatile apium. 12 Saxifragalutea. 71 Scabiose. 109
Scammonia. 111 Schinos. 68 Schinos aromaticos. 113 Schoinuanthos. 113 Schiste
stypteria. 8 Sclerotes. 114 Sclirosis. 114 Scoletia aerugo. 137 Scorodon. 7
Scrosularia. 25 Scrophula. 46 Sea onion. 114 Sea wormwoode. 14 Sedum. 91. 116
Selinon. 12 Seminalis. 29 Sepiculare apium. 13 Seriphium absinthium. 1. 2
Seris. 26 Serpillum hortense. 128 Sertula campana. 71 Seuum. 4 Sharp dock or
sower dock. 97 Sicys agrios. 31. Sideritis. 107 Sidium. 16 Sinepy. 119
Singrene. 116 Sinus. 38 Siues. 24* Smalache. 12 Smyrna. 75 Solanum. 119
Son^^iferum solanum. 119 Sondering of unity. 141 Soap. 108 Sorbilia oua. 81
Sordida sanies. 107 Sorell. 81. 97 Sorgos. 116 Sorry. 140 Sothernwood. 1
Spatharenticus Sapo. 108 Speareworte. 39 Sphacelos. 15 Sphragis agos. 126 Spina
aegiptia. 49 Spissa pix. 87 Spodion. 120 Spuma nitri. 16 Spumeum papauer. 82
Squilla. 114 Squinantum. 113 Stalactichon Chalcanthon. 139 Stacte. 76. 122
Stagonias libanos. 78. 129 Staphyloma. 17 Staphis. 83 Steatoma. 76 Stibium. 11
Stimmi. 11 Stillatitium Chalcanthu^. 139. 141 Stoebe. 109 Stone croppe. 36. 37.
117 Stone persley. 12 Storax. 122 Strongyle stypteria. 8 Strychnos. 119 Struma.
46. 115 Stypteria. 8 Succisa. 110 Succorie. 26 Succotrina aloe. 7 Suffocataoua.
81 Sugar. 104 Suillus adeps. 5 Suppuratus tumor. 14 Sutorium atramentum. 140
Syagrum thus. 129 Syce. 38 Sycis agrios. 31 Syluestre apium. 12 Symphoniaca. 52
Symptoma. 3 Syriacum Scammonium. 113 Syriasis. 32
T
Tabarzeth Saccharum. 100. 101 Taurocolla. 27 Teasell. 33 Teda. 87 Telephium.
36. 117 Telis. 40 Terebinthos. 126 Terminthine rhetine. 126 Terminthos. 126
Tetrastichon Crithon. 52 Tetter. 117 Thapsia. 133 Theion. 122 Thereniabin. 67
Theriasis. 130 Therioma. 118 Therion. 118 Thermos. 63 Thiria. 118 Thiriasis.
118 Thridacia. 68 Thridax. 57 Titanos. 19 Tithymalos myrsinites. 131 Tophus 90
Tremula oua. 81 Tremor. 96 Trichites Stypteria. 8 Tripolium. 131. 132
Trithales. 116 Tumor gutturis uel inguinarius. 18 Tumor suppuratus. 14. Turnep.
93 Turpetum. 131 Time. 128 Tyrhenica cera. 24 Tyria. 130
V
Ueriuce. 6 Vermicularis. 37 Vermicularis aerugo. 137 Ueruen. 133 Vesicaria.
119 Vesicaria peregrina. 119 Uineger. 119 Virga pastoris. 3 Virulens sanies.
107 Viscosa pix. 87 Vitis alba. 138 Ulcer. 88. 141 Vlcus. 88 Vnguis. 142
Volatica. 118 Volubilis quinta Mesuae. 111. 112 Vrceolaris. 83 Vua passa. 83
Vulnus. 88
VV
Warte. 41 Water. 14 Water persley. 12 Wexe. 24 Wheat. 131 White wine. 136
Winter onion. 24 Wormwode. 1. 2. Wild date. 125 Wild persley. 12 Wild plum
or prune. 92 Wild rue. 98 Wine. 136
X
Xylocolla. 27
Y
Ydema. 142 Yelowe flower deluce. 4 Yelowe iaundies. 53
Z
Zeg. 140 Zime. 38 Zimia. 142
JOHN HALLE CHIRVRGIEN,
unto the young students of Chirurgerie, and to all the loving readers sends
greting, beginning first with this sentence of the divine phylosophier
Socrates.
He that will seek, and knows not
How much in more or less,
Can never tell when he does find,
An aid for his distres.

Therefore Galen, the Prince of phisiciens, in the.vi. book of his therapeulike
method affirms, that Chirurgiens being ignorant of the Anatomy, may err in
many things, specially in their incisions. For (says he) if they knew what
unity and combination the members of the body have one with an other, and how
they proceed: If hurt happen unto the^, they might perceive whether the
nerves, or other members having proper office or nedfull action be cut or not:
and so to judge truly of their work, and to be certain in their incisions.

To the confirmation of which sentence, Henricus de Ermunda villa, compares
the chirurgien ignorant in Anatomy, to a blind man which would hew a piece of
timber: For as a blind man, that heweth on a logge, knows not how much he
should hew thereof, nor in what manner, (and therefore commonly erreth, in hewyng
more or less then he ought to do:) so likewise does the chyrurgien that
works on the body of man, not knowing the Anatomy. And that it is of
necessity, the chirurgien to know the Anatomy, the said Henry approves by
an evident argument: for every workman (says he) should know the subject of
his work. But the subject of chirurgerie is the body of man, which therefore
ought to be known of the chirurgien. Which knowledge of man's body or any part
thereof, can no wayse be attained but by Anatomy.

Anatome so called of the grecians is says Carolus Stephanus, the dissection
of man his body, by reason and judgment, administered as as well in the simple
parts as in the co^pounde, to the perfect knowledge of them. For truly, the
perfect knowledge of parts does chiefly consiste in indagacion or diligent
exquisition, of substance, quantity, form, number, situation and connection.

The utility of Anatomye, (as the said author defines) is, that those
incommodities and dangers, whereunto the body is often subject, may be the more
easily prevented or defended. The which incommodities do run in diverse
parts and offices of the body, and also may greatly offend: For there are
very few members (or rather none) that are formed unto no use, or that do
not exercise their gift, either in their own office or in helpyng some other
action.

And in the proheme of his second book, vehemently praising the utility
thereof, he says: for what in comparyson, is more to be wyshed for then the
absolute knowledge of Anatomye? What is more excellent? what to the physicien
more profitable? What to the chyrurgien more worthy? The which who so endeavor
to get and the same obtain, are only worthyly called physiciens and
chyrurgiens: neither is there ought that may more commend the phisicien or
chyrurgien, then the same Anatomy. Which study who so sets at naught, I
know not what in such men and their arts may be praised. For when the
minds delectation is coueted, or perfection and an absolute art sought for:
what does so much delyght or move ingenious wits, as the dilygent editions,
difficultly searched out of our founders, in the procreation of this Micro
cosmos or little world? and surely Medicine without Anatomy, shall be neither
art nor any thing else.

This being true, as I think no learned or reasonable man will deny, how
untruly do (in these our days) a great number bear the names of physike and
chyrurgerie: or how ill deserve they to be called by those honorable names,
(being not only ignorant in the Anatomy them selves, but also disdainfully
contempne and reprove, both the thing it self, and all such as travel there
is, either to profit them selves or others) let wise men judge.

These things considered, it may seem necessary, that the neglygent minds of
such, as little esteem this delectable fountain or sweet well spring of
their profession, be spurred forward unto understanding by some compendious
treatise, that may farther there travel, or cause them at the least (their
dull slouthfulnes set a part,) to proceed forward, not turnyng backwarde nor
loyteryng by the way, til they have scaled the forte of perfection, and wunne
the city of science.

But if I shall at this time determyne a treatise of so high a profession, of
which also so many noble clerks have written before, which shall be perused
of so many at this present, ye judged also of those that are to come: how
shall my hands refrain from fearful shaking, or my face from bashful
blushynges: sithe my simple and indigested frase, must show it self before so
many excellent, even such whose intellection will them lead my rudnes to
controwle. Which I fear much the rather may chance, because that of some
one thing many times diverse authers make diverse difinitions: for diverse me^
have diverse minds, and diversity of minds, causes dyuersitie and variety
in opinions: which happens not only in this profession, but also in all
sciences, yea and most of all (which is lamentable) among the diuynes or
teachers of christen theology.

Yet not withstanding I doubt not, but whosoever shall indifferently behold
this simple treatise without parcialitie, conferring the same with the most
accepted authors, they shall find the same both soundyng with truth and
reason.

But truly the malice of men so excedyngly increases, that no man no not the
best learned, (much less I,) can do ought without reproach and slander: yea
and that chiefly by men of his own profession. Oh how hateful and vile a
matter is this, and a plain demonstration of envy, when one man of science
shall be asked by a stranger. what opinion he has in an other man of science
that he knows, he shall answer, he is a good herbarian, he knows well
herbs: or he is good at the Anatomy. I know nothing else of him. They that are
perfect in nothing them selves, have ever in readynes such disdeynfull
reproach to hyde their own ignorance: as though a man, being excellent in any
other thing, it proved him to be ignorant in all other: Which thing if it did
prove I might thus answer. It is better to be perfect in some one thing, then
to meddle with many things being perfect in none. And yet as it is euydent to
prove, it argues no such thing but rather the contrary: for he whose
capacity has atayned, to the perfect knowledge of any one part of science, is
the better to be hoped in that he shall proceed to the pure sincerite of all
the rest. For the philosopher compares the wit of man unto Iron: for as
Iron, the more it is scoured the bryghter it is: so the wit of man, the more
it is used or occupied, is alwayse the finer and the better.

Certainly the remembrance of such disdainful obiectio^s, (when I had already
finyshed this thing) made me in doubt to put forth this work: but that my
friends with whom I conferred my doings, earnestly persuaded me not to regard
the rage of envy, so long as truth would bear out it self, while time
consumed both selander and also envy, the author of all reproach: and that I
should in no case cease to do that should profit many, for the evil of a
few: which think it an high point of knowledge, to munte and speak evil
of the doings of all other, while they them selves do nothing wherewith to
profit any.

Seeing therefore I shall proceed in this simple work, I think it good first to
declare what names the learned Anatomistes have given to the body of man. For
though diverse have used the bodies of beasts for Anatomies, yet seeing that
the body of man is the subject of our work, we (setting a side all other)
will treat only of it. Which is called in Greek Mycro cosmos, in Laun Minor
mundus, in English a little world: because in the same (even as in the frame
of the great world) so many wonders may be seen of natures works, to the
high honor and glory of almyghtye God.

May it not be proved, that the brain (like unto the heavens,) hangs
without any manner of stay or proppe, to hold up the same? nay, It is so
evident, that every learned Anatomiste writes of the same, as a thing not to
be doubted of: and therefore judge the same to have a certain lykenes with the
heavenly nature. And as the world has two notable lyghtes to govern the same,
namely the Son and the Moon: so has the body of man, planred likewise in
the highest place two lyghtes, called eyes: which are the lyghtes of the
body, as the Son and the Moon are the lyghtes of the world. And it is also
written of some doctors, that the brain has.vii. concauites, being
instruments of the wits: which answer unto the.vii. spheres of the
planetes. And to be brief, it is a world ^o behold, and a wonderful wonder
to think, that as great merueyles may be seen, wrought by God in nature in
this little world man his body, as there is to be considered in any thing in the
universal great world, above or benethe at any time.

Secondly, it is called a common weal, for as much as there is therein
conseyned as it were a ryghteous regiment, between a prince and this subjects:
as for example. Let us call the heart of man a king, the brain and the liver
the chief governors under him, the stomache and the guts, with other
aperteinyng to nutrymente, the officers of his court, and all the members
universally his subjects. And then let us see, if any man can deuyse any
necessary instrument of a common weal, needful for the wealth of the same,
from the highest to the lowest, that the like shall not be found in the body
of man: as it is so well known, to all those that travel in the knowledge of
Anatomy, that I need not here much thereof to write. Can it be perceived that
the hand or the foot, or any part of them or such like (which we may lyken to
the laborers, or as some call them vile members of a common weal,) at any
time to resist or rebel against the heart their sovereign lord, or any other
officer under him their superiors? no truly. The body of man is a common weal
without rebellion: the king so loving his subjects, and the subjects so
loving their king, that the one is ever ready to mynister unto the other all
things needful: as if the heart by any occasion sustain damage, as we may
see in the disease called Sincope, or swoundyng. At such a time I say the
face, the hands, and the fete, are found cold and without feeling, strength
or life: and what proves it, but that as loving and obedient subjects, they
think nothing their own whereof the heart has need, which is their lord and
governor? yea they utterly depryue the^ selves of altogether, to serve and
please their lord. Immediately as the swoundyng cease, the blood resorteth to
the face, she hands and the feet are warm again: as it were benefits done,
rendered again with thanks and joy. And is not such a lord and king
worthy of good subjects, that for the help of one of the least of them, will
spend all that he has, so long as lyte endures? as if a member be hurt,
whereby any vein or artery is cut, the blood or spirit will issue in such
wise that it will not cease coming thither so long as any is let, if it be
not in time prevented. Oh kind and gentle governor, oh well wyllyng and
obedient subjects.

Thirdly, the body of man is called in greek Anthropos, and in latin, by
interpretation Arbor euersa, as we might say in Englysh, a tree turned vpside
down. For as a tree has his root in the earth, growyng with his body and
branches from the earth up toward the heavens: so contrariwyse, man has his
root (which is the head) upward toward the heavens, and all other parts
descendyng downwards to the earth: which stands by good reason, that for this
cause man of al otherthinges under heaven should be most excellent, and by the
use of reason received of the soul (and of the same immortality) most like
unto god.

Considering therefore that the body of man is so precious, it should seem that
the science that serves to keep the same in health, or to restore health
being lost to the same, should be a thing of no small value, but rather of
great regard. Therefore as I judge, they err not that esteem the medicinal
art next unto divinity: for as much as diuynitie is the mean whereby the
soul is saved, and surgery the mean to save the body: which is next in
value unto the soul. Wherefore as they which little esteem that art, (whereof
the office is so precious) seem very unwise, and to want utterly the use of
reason: so is it a great enormitie for any to enterprise to use that art, not
able to co^prehende the knowledge of the same.

For the which cause, that I might partly help young students, (as I am one
my self) to the ataynyng of some perfection, I have here gathered a little
work, conteynyng three short treatyses of the Anatomy or dissection of the
parts of man his body. Wherein I will not he so curious, as to take upon me the
precise numberyng of every small and difficulte part, nor to be exquisite in
the dyuersitie of names: but only showing such number and names briefly, as
serve most to the commodities of the chyrurgiens intelection, with an order of
conducible notes, how to use our handy work of medicine, (called in greek
Chirurgia) upon the body of man or any part thereof: whether it be ^ncisions,
cauterizations, bloudlettyng called phlebotomy, or ventosing called also
cuppyng or boxyng, scarification, or openyng of apostemes on what part of the
body so ever it be, that none error be committed in the same. For of the
contrary, as of the vncunnyng doings of any of these, comes diverse dangers,
as the deprivation and loss, both of members and life. And (as it may
evidently apeare) for that cause was the cutting out of dead bodies first put
in use: and the large volumes written thereof by ancient authors, declare their
intent to be chiefly for that thing. So that as Guido affirms, Anatomy is.ij.
ways to be learned, The first and best by cuttyng of dead bodies: The second
by doctrine written in books.

Of this later manner, we shall by the grace of God in this short treatise say
a little, as occasion serves, and as the smalnes of the volume will give me
leave. Being thereto somewhat encouraged, by the example of good master U^carie,
late sargeante chyrurgien to the que^nes highness: Who was the first that ever
wrote a treatise of Anatomy in English, (to the profit of his brethren
chirurgiens, and the help of young students,) as far as I can learn.
Wherein I have omytted narracion by tables or payntyng out of pyctures: thinkyng
it more profitable for learners, to exercise the cuttyng out of bodies them
selves, then to behold the grauyng or paynting of others. For Galen says in
his second book of the use of parts, that whosoever will be a dyligent
beholder of the works of nature: It behooves him not to believe only books of
Anatomy, but rather his own proper eyes.

Notwithstanding if hereafter it shall seem good to my friends, that I I^erate
this work with augmentations: I will surely not refuse to do whatsoever
shall be thought profitable to the common weal, and commodious to the students
in this art. Wherein I desire the studious readers not to judge of me, that I
trust ever ye more to mine own judgments, because I have so boldly done this
thing, but rather that as I affirm all that I allege by authority, so would
I gladly be taught where I make any fault, of those ye are my betters. For I
esteem not my head so good, neither think I it so clear and void of error,
that I should in this work be so exquisite as to satisfy all men in their
variable judgments: but verily thynkyng my self faint of perfection, desiryng
in my heart that the faults of this my work, may cause some man of charity
to set forth a more excellent work, to dashe this out of name and
countenance: so that I might thereby be instructed of that which I long most
for, earnestly desire, and thirste to learn.

If this my simple work may give that occasion, at the least I shall heartily
rejoice therein: for though I be imperfect, yet if mine imperfectness may be a
cause of perfection, both unto my self and other: it were as I suppose a good
chance. For (as ye divines interpret) the unbelief of Thomas, was a great
help to the faith of us all that come after: for because of his unfaithfulness
Christ showed him self, and his precious wounds also, after his resurection:
which caused not only Thomas to believe unfeignedly, but us all to be put out of
doubt and acertayned of the glorious resurection of our mercy seat Christ
Jesus. Whom I most heartily beseech to keep you most gentle Readers, that
wytsafe me your good will and favorable report. And to send both unto you
and me, (through the shyning beams of his eternal grace,) A bright, clear,
and fruitful understanding of that which we most earnestly covet to learn.
Amen. ()

The first treatise OF ANATOMY, WHICH brieflye shows the natures numbers
and names of all the simple members, with the diuersyties of their uses and
vtilities, whether they been Spermatike or Sanguyne, and conteyneth xiiii.
Chapiters.
The Argument of the first treatise.
FOr as much as no man is perfect in the composition of any thing, that is
ignorant in the simple parts thereof: it is necessary that I declare first,
the knowledge that I have collected of experience, Simple members.
and out of good Authors, concerning the simple members of man ne his body,
Consimiliaria membra.
before that I speak of the anatomye in general. These are called simple
members, or consimiliares: The nerve, ye vain and the artery ar also organ^ca
membra Galen. lib. 19. Vtilit.
Bones, Gristles, Lygaments, Synewes, Chordes, Muscles, Panicles, Arteryes,
Ueynes, Flesh, Fat, and the Skin, beside the hears, and the nails. Which
although, some have called members, are not members in deed, but rather the
superfluities of members: As I intend to declare in this work, through the
permission of God, for whose help and grace it is needful that I pray, that
in these.iii. little treatyces I dissente not from the truth.

Of the bones. The first Chapter.
Wherefore after the example of good buylders, (who begin at the foundation
ascendyng vpwardes) I will begin at the bones, (which are the foundations
whereon all other members are supported and borne) and so proceed outward in
order to the rest. (...). Sicca anatome cadauer assiccatum.
The doctrine of bones observed in anatomye is called of Galen Osteologia and
Osteotome. The whole frame whereof being dried and reserved to anatomye, is
cauled Sccletos in Latin Cadauer assiccatum and vulgarlye Sicca anatome.

The bones then called in Greek Ostea, (...). i. Os.
and in Latin Ossa are simple members, similare, spermatyke, cold and dry of
complexion, insensible and inflexible, that is, without feeling, and not able
to be bowed. Of bones there are many and diverse in man's body, as well
concerning their number as their form or figure, and that because of the
need or necessity of their diverse and variable offices, which they have in
the body: their connexions and ioyninges together, being also diverse, have
diverse names accordingly. Which ioynynges are divided, First into.ii.
special sorres. (...) Articulatio.
The first is called in Greek Arthrosis and in Latin Articulatio, which is the
most open and evident manner of Joining. (...) Vnio naturalis
The second, which the Greeks call Symphisin, is named in Latin Vnio
naturalis, and in English a natural union, which is a more hid, and
obscure ioyninge.

The first manner called articulation is also farther divided: first into two
sorts, as a privy or hid connection (such as are seen in the bones of the
sculle) called in Greek Synarthrosis, (...) Coarticulatio.
and in Latin Coarticulatie: and a plain conspieuous manner, as in the arms
and hyppes, called in Greek Diarthrosis and in Latyne Dearticulatio. (...),
Dearticulatio
This dearticulation is farther of the Greeks divided into.iii. manners, as
Enarthrosis, Arthrodi^ and Gyng^ismos. (...).
Enarthrosis is when the large holownes of one bone receives the fullnes of an
others eminence, (...)
as in the hippes. Arthrodia is when ye shalowe holowne^ of one is moderatlye
aperynge upward, the headde of the other depressed down into it: as ye se
between the spondilles, and the rybbes. Gynglismos is when they so Join, as it
seems they enter mutuallye one in to an other, as the spondylles one to an
other, also the shoulder, the cubyte, and the mydle Joyntes of the fyngers.

Coarticulation is also triplie divided, (...). i. Sutura (...)
as Sutura, Comphosis and Hormonia* Sutura is when bones join like a seame
Sewed in most evident and conspicuous manner, which in the head may
diversely be seen. Comphosis is when bones are infixed one to an other as are
ye tethe in the iaw bones. (...) (...)
Harmonia called also Comssura is a joining by a simple line with out
inde^tinges, as in the Chin, the Share, and some bones of the head. Comssura.
But note here that chirurgiens co^monlie call al seames in the head
comissures: which common manner I also have observed in my general anatomy,
lest yt otherwise I should of the most part of readers not be understood.

The second special manner called Symphysis has also.ii. differences: (...)
as in soft bones, which excrescentlie or musheru^ like join simply together:
and in hard bones which by somewhat coming between, are so by nature united
and co^ioyned, that they cleave together. and this later manner is of iii.
sorts, (...),
called of the Greeks Synchondrosis, Synneurosis, and Syssarcolis.
Synchondrosis is, when grystles beneficially enter between the^, as in the
wrest and diverse other parts. (...)
Synneurosis is, where sinews helpingly go between the bones, and Syssarcolis
(so called of Galen) is when by the help of flesh going between bones are
joined together. And as bones have variable names according to their places
forms and offices, Ceruix (...) Collum, Capita Nodi.
and likewise their ioyninges: so have their parts formably also. As the
sclender processes or forth goynges of bones are called in Latin Ceruices and
colla as we may say the necks of bones, (...) i. Tuberculu^.
whose extremes being blunte and round, are called Capita Nodi, (...) Apex
alic^ius rei.
and Condili, the headdes or knottes of bones: and such is the thighe bone,
where it enters the share bone. But yt which ends in a pointed process
without a round head, does also cease to be called Ceruix, (...), id est Pixis.
and is called in Greek ^orone or Coronon, the crown or top of a bone.

The holownes of a bone (receiving the head of an other) being large and deep,
Acetabulum a^que o^^e cauum.
is called in Greek Cotyle, in ^atyne Acetabulum, and vulgarly Pixis, in
English, the bore or cup of the ioynte. But such a holownes as is more
superficial and shalowe is called of the Greeks Gl^ne, (...)
of the lykenes it with the bosom of the eye, which is the holowe entrance
toward the eye.

The number of bones in man's body, after Auicen. are. 24 8. but other which
more preciselye number the bones in the hands and feet, (...). Os sesaminu^
uel sesamiaeu^.
cauled Sesamina or Sesamiae^ossa, with diverse other acompte them to be. 370.
and I find reasonable causes, why that the bones are so diverse, and many in
number: namely that one member may move, and remove without an other. I
mean that an other be not forced to move with it: Which otherwise could not
be, if there were not diverse bones. Secondly that some (having their form or
figure for that use) might defend, as the walls of a strong defenced forte,
the principal members: and those are the bones of the head, and the breast.
Thirdlye, that some should as foundacions bear up and sustain all the rest:
and those are the bones of the rydge (called in Latyne Spina, (...). i. Spina,
Sentis, uel Aculeus, Vertebra
in Greek Acantha, and particularly Vertebra, in English Spondilles or
tournyng joints) and also those of the legs. And finallye, that some may
fulfylle and strengthen holowe places, as do the bones of the hands and fete.

Of the Cartilage or Gristle. Chapi. ii.
THe second of simple members is the Gristle, which the Greeks call Chondron,
(...). i. Cartilago.
and the Latins Cartilaginem: and is in hardness next to the bones, (the
Anatomy whereof is called in greek Chondrotome:) but they are somewhat
flexyble, (...)
and cold and dry of complexion, and insensible, as are the bones. And I
find six causes, or commodities why the grystles were ordained. The first
cause is, The use of grystles.
that the continual mouynge of the hard bones in the Junctures might not be
done without detrimente to the lygamentes, if the grystles or Cartilages were
not a mean between the said lygamentes and the bones. The second cause is,
that when any contusion, or bruise, happens in soft members, the said
delicate members are the better defended, from the hard extremities of the
bones. The third cause is, that in the Joynctes the ends of the bones,
(which are gristlye) might more easelye, and with nymblenes be foulded, and
freated together, without offense or hurt of one toward another. The
fowerth is, that in some places that are mean between hard and soft, it is
necessary to set a gristle, as in the throat boule, or wind pype, called
Arteria aspera: For there it does howlde and bear off the flesh, that the
passage of the wind or breathe be not interrupted or let. And also in that
place the grystllye substance helps much to the sound of the voice. Fyftlie
I find, that a gristlye substance is necessary in the borders of the eyes.
Sixtlye, they are behouefull in the nose and ears, for there they do both
draw abroad, and sustain, and bear up the soft parts: where as otherwise
they would nether be formable, nor yet do their office, or naturalle
operations.

Of the Lygamente. Chapi. iii.
THe third sort of simple members are the ligame^ts called in Greek of
Hyppocrates Syndesmi and in Latin Vincula or Lygamenta, (...) Vinculum sieve
ligamentu^.
which are spermatyke and flexible, (...).
but yet insensible, and cold and dry of complexion: whose anatomy is called
in Greek Syndesmotome. And I find that ligamentes in the body have.iiii.
necessary uses: Utilities of lygamentes.
The first is, they bind the bones together. The second is, they profit
much in adioynynge themselves to synewes, to make the chordes, and the
muscles. Thirdlye they are resting places, to diverse of the synewes. And
fourthlie diverse inward members, as the matryr, the renes, and such like, are
by them vpholde^ and sustained. And they are made flexible, because that
otherwise the ioyncte which by them is houlden together, would not have
moved, without an other had moved with him. And they are made insensible,
because otherwise they might never have suffered the labor and pain, in mouyng
and turnynge of the ioynct. And note that some lygame^tes bind the bones
inward, and some outward. For the which cause some Authors Judge them to
bread of the bones, although they be of the nature of the synewes. And Galen
says, in the.ii. book of the use of parts, that the couplynge of bones
together, is by the byndinges of strong branched lygamentes.

Of the Nerve or Synewe. Chapi. iiii.
THe fowerth of simple members is the synew, named in Greek Tonos or Neuros,
(...).
in Latyne Neruus, and his dissection Neur^to^e, which is spermatike, cold and
dry of complexion, flexible, and sensyble, strong and tougbe, mean between
hard and soft: having their beginning from the brain, and the marrowe of
the back. For there come from the brain. vii. pair of synewes, that are
called sensityue: Nerui sensorii
and from the marrowe of the back, proceed xxx. pair of synewes, according to
the number of the spondils: and one more, which spryngeth alone by him self
from the last spondill, or loweste of all in the end of the rydge, and
therefore named Neruus sine pari. And these synewes that proceed from the
marrow of the back ar called motyue synewes. Nerui motorii
So that from the brain, and from the marow of the ridge together, Number of
synewes.
proceed or come forth.xxxvii. pair of synewes, and one odd one.

From all the which do proceed diverse and many synewes, ramifying and
spreadyng themselves, into innumerable branches, extendyng even to the extreme
parts: by the which we not only feel and perceive in every place as they
pass, both the comfort of healthesome and semblable things, and the greffes
of vnhelthsome and contrary things (which we call pain:) but also we have by
them only, the power of mouyng every member, namely sense of the sensityues,
which therefore are the more delicate: and moving of the motyues, which for
that action are more strong, after this saying of Galen. Quoniam enim sensus
nonsine dispositione quadam nerui, motus autem in faciendo sol^ actionem
obtinet: merito sensorius mollior, durior autem motorius neruus factus est:
that is, Seeing that sense has his workynge by a certain disposition, but
motion only in doing: The sensityue sinewe is conuenientlye made the softer,
or more delicate, and the motyue the harder. And to end with ^^^rolo Stephano
we may say, non esse omnino motum neque sentiri dolorem, nisi ubi neruus est,
aut partibus uicinus, aut iis counitus. That there is no mouyng, neither pain
felt, but where there is a sinewe, either nighe the parts grieved or conjoined
with them.

Of the Chorde or Tendon. The.v. Chapi.
THe fyfthe are the Chordes or Tendons, (called in Greek Tenonta and in Latyne
Tendines) that bear the name of simple members, (...) Tendo.
Official, and spermatike: but they are compounde of Lygamentes, and toughe
synewes: and therefore are they strong and towghe, cold and dry of
complexion, mean between hard and soft: (or as Galen says, De motu
^^^culorum libro
so much harder then the synewe, as it is softer then the Ligament), sensible,
and flexible. And there are certain causes to be considered: why the chordes
were compounde, as I said, of synewes and ligamentes together. The first is,
that the synewes, being altogether sensitive, suffice not alone to susteyn the
great labor and travail that the tendon necessarylie does suffer: wherefore
being compounde with the insensyble ligament, there is made a temperature
between sensible and insensible, yt so the moving may neither be pai^ful, nor
utterly without feling. And by reason of the synewie substance of the chordes
they have motyue virtue, according to the appetyte, or will of the soul, or
desire of the mind. Moreover I find that these chordes or tendons grow out
of the fleshy muscles: and that for good consyderation, and great skyll: for on
these muscles have the chordes a restyng place, after their great travail. The
muscle. Musculi sieve Lacerti.
And these fleshie muscles are clothed with a thin skyn or panicle, which
panicle serves as well, to keep the flesh of the muscle in due form: as also
that the said muscles should move alone according to the will, without the
disturbance of the parts adjacent, or next them. And I understand, that this
musculous flesh has within it many small fybers or thredes of a synewie
substance, Will in muscles.
wherein there is noted to be will, and those thredes come to the composition
of the tendons. And three properties is to be noted in the will of these
aforesaid muscles: that is to say, length wherein is contained the virtue
attractiue: bredthe, wherein is the virtue expulsyue, and ouerth wartues: in
which is the virtue retentyue: and at the ends of those muscles, these fybers
or thredes, gather themselves together again, and make an other muscle: and so
have they their generalle procedynges, through out all the body. Number of
muscles.
Johannes de Vigo aleagyng Auicen. numbereth the muscles to be. 531. but here I
omytte, to declare the proof of the said number, by resiting them
particulerlie, according to their places, trusting that this is sufficient,
in this brief treatyce. The muscle is called in Latin Musculus a mure,
Musculus Mus.
that is of a mouse, and therefore in Greek also (...), for as a mouse is
biggest in the myddest, and smallest at both ends, so is a muscle. And it is
likewise called a lacerte, of the little beast named a Lyzarde, and in Latyne
Lacertus. Lacertus.
Thus in this.v. chapter I have showed as well the nature, and making of the
muscles: as of the cho^de or tendon. The description of the mnscles by order of
anatomye do the Grecians call Miotomen. (...).


Of the Pannicles The vi. Chapter.
^

Of the Artery or Pulse. The.vii: Chapter.
SEuenthlye, (...) i. spiritus. semita.
the Artery or Pulse, called both in Greek and Latin Arteria, and in old
English the Wosen, (whose dissection also the grecians call Arteriotomen,) is
a member simple and spermatike, sinewye and holow, having his beginning at the
heart, (...)
and it brings from the same spirit and life, unto all the members of the
body: Arteria.
and it is of complexio^ cold and dry. Wosen.
And every artery has two coats, except only Arteria Venosa, Arteria Venosa.
called in English the ve^nalle artery, (because he has but one coat as
has the veyn:) whose office only is (being implanted in the lunges) to convey
fresh air always to the heart. That the great heat of the heart, caused by
his continualle motion, may thereby be refrigerate, cooled, and mitigated, by
entering yt least ventricle thereof, even as the arteriall^ vein, called Vena
arteriosa, Vena arteriosa.
which (coming as some affirm, from the bothome of the heart, on the right
side) bears blood and spirit from the heart to the lunges, to quycken and
nourish them. And hereis to be noted a notable error or ouersyght in (...)
book of Anatomye, whereas this arterialle vein is acounted all one with
Arteria magna* and allo the offices both of the venalle arterye and the
arterialle vein, are applied to the venalle arterye only. All the other
arteries, have each of them two coats, Utilitye of arteries.
that the spirit of life in them contained, may the better and more certainlye
be preserved from hurt outewardlye: and also that the said liuelye spirit,
may be the better retained within, that it pass not out before his time,
till all the extreme parts have it minystred unto them. Where as if it were
prevented before it came at them, there would follow mortyfication of the
members: for the arteriall spirit is more subtle, and pearceth sooner unto the
quickenynge of the members, then doothe the venalle or nutrimentalle blood.
Therefore one coat would not suffyce to carye it to those extreme parts, but
that it would be prevented and wasted by the way, before it come to the^:
Whereof would follow the incommodities before resited.

Of the Vein. The.viii. Chapter.
EIghtlye, (the vein named in Latin, Vena, (...), as some will, because blood
comes thereby to all parts of the body, (...).
in Greek Phlebion, and the dyssectyon of them Phlebotome, is a simple member,
as is the artery, cold and dry of complexion, and Spermatyke, but as the
arterye has his beginnynge from the heart, so has the vein his beginnynge
from the liver: The use of veins.
and it brings from thence nutrityue blood, unto all the members of the
body, to nourishe them with. And I understand as well by experyence, as by
that which I read, that there is no more difference between the vein and the
arterye, but that one (having two coats, and coming from the heart,) is
the vessel of vital and spiritual blood, and the other (having but one
coat, coming from the liver,) is the vessel of nutritive blood. And this is
generally in all veins, except only the arteriall veyn^ which (as in the
seventh Chapter I said) proceeds immediatlye from the heart.

And among all the veins there are two most pryncipalle, from which the
branches of all the reast proceed: that is to say, Vena porta, Vena porta.
and Vena Coele, which some call Vena Caua, Vena coele.
^r Magna, and these two have their beginnings in the liver. Vena caua.
I find ^n Regi^ine sanitatis salerni, the number of veins in man's body to
be three hundredth, Number of veins.
three score, and five with these words. (Ex tricentenis decies (...) But I
thyncke this number to be mente of ^^tay^e notable veins, which by order of
Anatomye, may be made open to the senses, and not precyselye of all: for they
branch out into innumerable branches, till they come to the very smalnesse
of hears, as it may be perceived in the pannicles, and some thyn skynnes, as
the eye lyddes, and the skyn of the yard, and diverse other places, and are
therefore called Venae Capillares.

Of the Flesh. Chap.ix.
NInthelye, (...). Caro.
the flesh (called in Greek Sarx, and in Latin Caro,) ^ a simple member, and
sanguine, ingendered of blood, and congeyled by natural heat, therefore it
is whotte and moist of complexion.

And I understand, that there are three kinds of Flesh, found in the body of
man. Flesh is of three kinds.
The first kind is very or true flesh, where of there is but little fore
found in the body, and that is among the gummes or tethe, and in the head
of the yard. The second is universal, mixed with the muscles, The use of
Flesh.
^asertes, or brawnes. The third is found in knottes, and curnels. And the
profitable uses of the flesh, in the body are diverse, and many. For some are
as clothes, or garments, so defend the body from distempera^ce. And some
defend the bru^ynge of hard things, and other some serve to keep the body
moist, and temperate, in the time of heat, True Flesh
and labor. More over the true and pure flesh, whereof I spoke first, serves
to fulfylle the void places, and is found in the parts aforesaid. And of the
use of musculous flesh I partly spoke before, Musculous Flesh.
where I treated of the chordes or tendones. Glandulae sieve adenes.
The use and profitte of the glandulous or curnelly flesh, is to turn the
blood which it receives into his own color: Glandulous Flesh.
as the flesh of the man (...) or woman's breasts, turns the (...). And as
the ^esticles, through their glandulous or (...) substance, turn the blood
unto sperms: and likewise I read that the curnels under the iawe, Providence
of nature.
turn the blood into ^^ttell, to moist the mouth and the tu^ge: Oh wonderful
providence of nature, that ordeyne (...) nothing without a special cause,
(...) ever one thing, serves in help and supply the necessitye and lack of
another.

Of the fat^* The.x. Chapter.
TEnthlye the fat called Pimele, (...).
and in latyne Seuu^, is a simple member, but not Spermatike. And three kinds
of fatnesses are found in the body: namelye Pinguedo, Pinguedo.
Aleps and Axungia. That which is called in latin Pinguedo is made of a
subtle portion of the blood, being congeyled together by the coldness of
the outward parts, and it is of complexion cold and moiste, Insensible, and
intermedled between the skyn and the flesh. Adeps.
A^eps dyffereth not much from Pi^guedine, saving that it is departed from
the flesh, The use of Fat.
and is much like unto a fatty oil, being poured or spread out, among the
synewye or thin skinnye parts: that their dryness might always be
moisted, with such natural lyquor, or fatness. And this Adeps is ingendered,
out of the fatter parts of the blood in Vena porta, and spredde forth by
thin and small veins, which as it approaches to the cold and dry parts,
congeyleth to such a thick substance. Fat is in qua^^t^, more or less
according to complexion and place.
For the proof whereof as well those persons, whose bodies are cold and
Phlegmatike, as those places that are in both, most cold and temperate, (by
their distance from the liver:) have more quantity of fat, then such as are
of hotter complexion, or the nygher to the liver: as witnesses Galen, in
libro. 16. de Vsu partium, ac in libro. 1. de tempera nentis. Much like unto
this is Seuum, which yet is somewhat thicker. Axungia.
Axungia which the Greeks call Oxyngion is of the kind of, (...). Adeps.
Pinguedo sauinge only that it is outwardlye departed from the flesh, where
it moysteneth the dry parts, by reason of his vnctiousnesse, as does Adeps
in the parts above specifyed.

Of the skyn. Cap. xi.
THe eleuenthe, and the last of the simple members is the skyn: which is
official; and partly Spermatike, strong and toughe, flexible, and sensible,
thyn and temperate: and two kinds of skynnes principallye, are found in the
body.

The first is called Panniculus carnosus, Membrana. carnosa.
or membrana carnosa, and this skyn be wrappeth all the body within, and under
the vttermoste skyn. Panniculus carnosus.
And as Galen says, in libro. 3. de anatomicis administrationibus, and libro.
16. de Vsu partium, there comes unto this Fleshye panicle, and through it, the
veins, fibers, and stringes of the sinews, that nourishe and give felyng to
the outward skyn. The second skin, is that which covers, and be wrappeth all
the body outwardly; and is the very true skyn, which is properly called in
latin Cutis, and in greek Derma. (...). i. cutis Vel pellis
And this skin has diverse natures and properties, according to the
dyuersityes of places in the body. For as Galen writes in his second book De
Vsu parti^^^, the skin of the palms of the hands, of the soles of the feet,
of the forheade, and allmoste all the face, with other parts, can hardlye be
fleyne, by reason of the muscles and tendones, that are graffed and rooted in
it. ^^position of the skyn.
And this skyn as I read and learn, is through the cunning of nature, made
and ordained, of diverse and sondrye parts: as of Fybres, of Nerves, of veins,
and arteries, and such other. And this work has nature wroughte for diverse
causes. The uses of the skyn.
The one is, that thereby it might be temperate, by the having of part of
every qualitye. Whereby also it obteineth the virtue of feeling and sensible
judging, of every qualitye: as excess of heat, or cold. etc. and might
thereof inform the common wits, that the parts agreued might attain from
them some help, or succor. Another cause is, that by the means of veins and
arteryes so produced, it might ever be nouryshed, made moist, warmed, and
comforted: Whereby also the parts lying and being under it inwardlye, might be
the better preserved: And also that wounds, ulcers, contusions, with other
like chances, might be the sooner and the easilyer cured, healed, and closed up
again by the reason thereof. And note that on the uppermost parts of this
skin, is a very thin insensible rimme or skyn, which is of the Grecians called
Epidermis, (...). i. summa cuticula.
and of the Latynes Cuticula, or Eflorescentia cutis: and ryseth in blisters
when the skin is burned, scalded, or by any means excoriated.

Of the hears and nails. The.xii. Chapter.
FInally, Pili and imgues Superfluityes of members.
Anatomistes reckon the nails, and the hears: which yet are no members, but
rather ye superfluityes of members, as I said in the beginning. Which
superfluityes come of gross vapores, my^ed and condescended with viscous
matter, by reason whereof the pores in the skin suffyce not to avoid,
Gener^^yon of hears and nails.
or expel them, wherefore they grow forth in such hard toughe, and dry
substances: yet though it be true in deed, that they are but superfluities of
members, The uses of the nails.
they have uses very necessary in the body. The nails defend the fyngers
and the toes from great bruses: and they comely beutifye the fyngers, causynge
them to take the better hold, Gross humores expelled by nails.
and serve to clawe and scratch the body when it itcheth: whereby much noyous
and fylthys humores are the better avoided. For the skin, whereof we last
spoke, being full of pores or small holes, ordained of nature, Pores in the
skyn.
to expel such moistures and vapores as are noifull to the body, has often
times the said pores opilated, or stopped: through the which stopping not
only itche, but diverse other euels happen to the members. Wherefore the clawing
or scratchinge of the nails, is in such case vtyle and profitable: for as
much as the said scratchynge is a mean to open the pores. The uses of hear.
And the hears, are also necessary for diverse uses: the first is, it
defends the brain from to much heat, or to much cold, and from other
incommodities. Also it makes the figure or form of the face, the more comelye
and decentr: and by the hear of the face, man and woman differ much, and by
the color of the hear, we know the complexion of the brain, and the other
principal members. Gross vapores also and ^umosities, Gross vapores purged by
hear.
in places needful, are by the hears the more easilye expelled: as experience
proves ye swette and gross vapores come sooner forth, where there is much
hear growing, then where there is little hear, perceived or seen.

Of the difference between the simple members and the compounde. Cha. xiii.
IT is mere now, sithe I have called these members simple, that I show
wherefore I call them so, and to show the difference between those that are
simple, and them that are not simple. For how may they be called simple, if
there be not also compounde members, whereby the simple may be known, as each
thing is known by his contrary? I say that the simple members are two ways
to be known from those that are compound, by two notable dyfferences. First a
simple member, if it he divided in never so many parts, The difinition of a
simple member.
the least part bears the name of the whole, as though it were the whole
thing: As for example, the least part of a bone, is called bone, the least
part of a synewe, is synewe: and the least part of the flesh is flesh, and
so forth o^ all the reaste that are called simple. For Totum similare
praedicatur de suis partibus.

For the which cause, as I said in the beginning, they are also called in
greek Homocomres, (...) i. similaris. cuius pars eandem rationem idemque nome
cum toto obtine^.
in latin Similiaria, or co^similaria membra that is to say like for the
least part is like it self in the whole. Contrariwise, it is nor so of the
compound members. For if a piece of a hand, an arm, a leg, a foot, a face,
or a head be separated from the whole, it can not bear the name of the whole
thing, from which it is separate: and therefore are they not called
Co^similaria, as are the simple members, The definition of a compound member.
but rather Dissimilaria, and in Greek Anomocomeres, that is to say, unlike,
because a part of them, being separated from the whole, is not like, but
unlike it self in the whole: (...). i. quod ex dissimilibus co^positum est
partibus.
for I can not call a pere of a hand, a hand nor a piece of a head, a head.
etc. Secondlye the compounde members are so called, because they are composed
together of diverse of those that are called simple. As for example, my hand is
a compounde member: for it is composed of bones, gristels, pannicles,
ligamentes, muscles cortes, synewes, arteryes, veins, fat, and skyn. etc.
Contrariwyse the simple members, whereof we have spoken in all this little
treatise, as a bone, a gristle. etc. are alone simple of them selves, without
any other to be named in them. And thus have I proved sufficientlye, the
difference between ye simple members and those that are compounde: And have
showed, how that every member that is called compounde, has his
composition, of diverse of them that are called simple.

Of the difference between the Spermatike and the Sanguine members. The.xiiii.
Chapter.
ANd now also since I have called some of those simple members spermatike, and
other some sanguyne: I think it good also, that I show you how I
understand, The definition of the spermatike members.
for what cause they are so called. I say therefore, that spermatike members
are so called, because they have their bredynge and beginning of spermatike
matter: And are once engendered and made, by the sperme or seed of the
parents, and never after. For the which cause we say in chirurgerye, that
spermatike members never receive true regeneration, nor true consolidation,
when any solution of continuitye, as a wound, ulcer, Fistule. etc. happens
in them: But are feign an other way to be helped, through the great providence
of nature, which as I said before, leaves nothing destitute of succoure, in
necessitye: for a certain substance resembling flesh, (...).
called therefore Poros Sarcodes, or as Lanfranke terms it, Caro Poroides, is
gathered together, fulfyllinge the place, and seruinge in the stead of that
which was lost, or separate. And this is the help of spermatike members,
which of complexion are cold and dry: wantinge all other matter of
perfection, whereby they might be truly consolidate or regenerate. The
definition of a Sangume member.
But contrariwise, the Sanguine members, so named because their bredynge, and
beginning is of blood, (called in Greek Haema and Phlegmos,) (...). i. sangu^s
are daily regenerate, and made in the body: Because their said first
matter, which is blood, is evermore renewed, and made again in the body. So
that when such solution of continuitye, as is said before, happens in them,
there is made again perfect restoration, or true consolidation For blood
they^ very substance, and first matter, is ever redye at hand, to make
perfect again the same thing, so wasted or separated. And truly this
seems to me a necessary thing, for the chirurgien to knew: that when he
sees a wound, or any disease in the members, Solution of continuitye, what
it is.
that makes solution of unity: that is to say, that separateth, that which
before was whole and grew together, he may Prognosticate, and judge truly,
whether there may be made true consolidation or not. For such true and
certain Prognostication brings the Chirurgien to estimation and worship.
Prognosticatyon.
And thus I understand the difference between the spermatike and the Sanguine
members, and what vtilitye it brings to the Chirurgien to have the true
knowledge of them.

The Conclusion.
Peradventure it will now be thought meet, The definityon of members, what
they are.
that I should have defined what a member is. For why should such words be
multiplied, without perfect knowledge upon what ground they are spoken? I
say therefore by the authority of Galen, in the first book of the use of
parts. A member is a body, that is not wholly separate, nor wholye conjoined to
an other. And after Auicenn in the plural number. Members are bodies, that are
engendered of the first commixtion of humores. And finallye I find* that in
the Anatomye there ought.ix. things to be sought, for the furtherance of
knowledge. that is to wite: the composition, the complexion, the substance, the
quantitye, the number, the figure, the operation, and the vtility or use of
members, and what diseases may chance unto them.

The end of the first Treatise.
The second treatise OF ANATOMY, WHICH compendiouslye declares the
necessitye, and necessary use, of.ix. knowledges, to be considered in the
Anatomy of members, throughout the whole body.
The argument of the second Treatise.
BECAUSE THAT IN the end of my collection of simple members, or first
treatice, I resited.ix. things to be considered in Anatomye, leaving the same
without farther declaration: I think it good now to prove the necessity of
those.ix. knowledges in a short treat^se by it self, before I enter any farther
into the Anatomy generally. For if the meaning of things be well discussed,
and declared before hand, it shall make the matter manifest, and void of
obscurity, when a man shall talk of those things, in time and place
requisyte. The which thing to do, it is nedeful that I crave the gentle pardon
of those that in this thing are my betters, in bearing with mine imbecility or
weakness. For truly I came but latelye out of the shell, even as a bird that
is not fully fledge, nor able to fly: trusting yet hereafter to have my wings
better fethered, that now be so stobbed, and unapt to serve the turn. In the
mean season, to show you what I am willing to do, if I could bring it
about: Lo here is the collection, that I have gathered of these.ix. things
to be considered in Anatomy. That is to say, the composition, the complexion,
the substance, the quantitye, the number, the figure, the operation, and the
vtility of members, and finally what dyseases may chance to any of them.

Of the composition of members or Combination. The first Chapter.
First the composition of members in Anatomye, Membrorum Compositio uel
Combinatoi.
is needful to be known, which some call combination, or knitting together
of members. And this combination is as well understood, in the composing
together of qualities or temperamentes, in the simple members: as in the
composition of diverse simple members in making a compound member. Therefore
although this word composition, belong chieflye to the compounde members, yet
is there also a composition, Composytion in simple members.
or combination, to be sought in the simple member, Although not in substance,
yet in quality, as for example: When we say whot and moiste, whotte and dry,
Qualityes.
or cold and moist, cold and dry. For when there is more then one qualitye
named in a member, then is there in that member combination, or couplinge
together of qualityes. So that we may say, though the member be simple in
matter and substance, yet is it of a compound complexion: for otherwise it must
be called hot only, cold only, dry or moiste only: Which we find in no
writer of Anatomye. Composition in every member.
Therefore it must follow, that in every member there is a composition to be
sought: though not (as I said in substance yet in temperament of complexion.
And how necessary, both these compositions, or combinatio^s are to be
considered of the Chirurgien, I think there be none so ignorante, but that he
doothe perceive if ever he read or saw Anatomye, or has heard it read. And
the composition of every member in substance, is so euydente in every work
of Anatomye, that to prolonge the time therwyth in this place, should be both
vain and tedious: therefore we leave this matter aus will speak of the
complexions of members.

Of the complexion of members. The.ii. Chapter.
SEcondlye, Complexio membrorum.
the complexion, of every member is much to be noted, whether it be hot,
cold, dry, or moiste. But truly, I have read of no member symply so
esteemed, but rather of a compounde complexion, as I said before: As cold and
moist, as is the brain: hot and moist, as the liver: and so forth, as ye
may read in any written Anatomye: and as I intend by the grace of God to
declare in mine. And the complexion of all the simple members I have
sufficiently declared in my first treatise. But hear note, that when we call
any member, cold and moist, or cold and dry, it is not for any peculier, or
precise facultye therein, as in the first Elements: but only by comparison
of one member with an other, or one part with an other. For we can not call
the brain cold and moiste simplye, or absolutelye, but in comparynge it with
the liver or heart, (which in respect of it are hot,) and not otherwise: for
as Guido says, all members be naturallye whotte.

The complexion of every member thus known, it shall be the easier to cure
diseases in them. For what avails it that we read in Galen, that whot
members must have hot medicines, for the preservation of their natural
temperature, and likewise that cold members must have cold medicines: If I
understand not which member is hot, and which is cold: which is dry,
and which is moist? For who can preuente the danger that he suspec^eth not,
or take away the enormitie that he knows not? or how shall the Chirurgien
cure the excess of any distemperature: as excess of cold or heat, dryness
or moistness by coolinge the heat, heatinge the cold, moisting the dry, or
dryinge the moysts, as Galen teaches: If be understand ^ether the temperature,
nor distemperature of any member? I may therefore conclude, that it is
necessary that a Chirurgien know the complexion of every member in the body
of man: Which body of man is the subject of his science, as Guido says.

Of the substance of members. The.iii. Chapter.
THirdlye in order follows the substance, Membrorum substantia.
which in every member is much to be regarded. Of the substance of simple
members, I have allredy sufficiently spoken in my first treatise, whether they
be hard or soft, or mean between hard and soft: and when these words,
hard, soft, or mean, be spoken of in any member, by order of Anatomy, it is
always me^t of ye substance. And truly it is very necessary for ye exact
knowledge of every disease, and ye redye curation of the same, to consider the
substance. Foreuery member when it is diseased, the said diseases thereof,
receive their names according to the substance: as I will in the end of this
treatise show, when I speak of the diseases, that may chance unto the
members. And as ye disease receives a name, according to the substance of the
member: so every member receives diversely diverse remedies, according to
their substance. For the bones, whose substance is hard, requires remedies:
altogether diverse from any of the other members, whose substance is either
soft, or mean between hard and soft. Which members also, whether they be
soft or mean, require remedies also according to their substance. I mean
here, by remedies handye operations: for as medicynes are made according to
complexion, so must hand^e work be done, according to the substance: Whether
it be in bynding, rowlyng, bolstering, or any other work. For if I know not
what remedy, every member in the body, according to his substance, may
sustain, or rather does necessarily require: how can I any otherwise do
but err? for if I shall work in the bones, as apperteyneth to the Flesh,
and in the Flesh, as apperteineth to the bones: Who can doubt, but that of
necessitye I must make a great confusion? and this as it seems to me, makes
a sufficient proof, that it is necessary in members to know their substance.

Of the quantitye of members. The.iiii. Chapter.
FOurthlye, Membrorum quan^itas.
the quantity is nedefulle to be considered in members. That is to say: much
or little, great or small, for how can we exactlye know any vein,
arterye, or synewe. etc of other members in the body: ^s if we shall use
Phlebotomye, (...).
or any other handye work in the body, if we lack this principal
consideration of quantitye? For every vein is known and named much what by
his quantitye, in respect of others.

And as thysis an easy thing to do in conspicuous, large and great veins:
so is it a thing of more cunninge and difficultye, to take a vein, that is
tender small and obscure. And also in the aforsayde work, and all other
operations of Surgery, the consyderation of quantity shall much farther
knowledge, in auoidynge of dangers.

For if we know what quantity, every member bears in his place, by mesuring
and consideringe the quantitye, we shall avoid the more easily all dangers,
that may hurt or offend them. And every member bears quantitye according to
ye place. For all veins, arteries synewes and muscles bear diverse quantities
according to their diverse places: as veins and arteries, at their first
beginning of their procedinges from their originalle places are great: and wax
ever smaller, as they approach to the extreme parts. The bones also, through
the wonderful providence of nature, are much or little in quantitye,
according to the necessytyes of the places where they are: For where the
members be great, and much nourishmente required, there are the veins also
great, to supplye and serve that need.

And where there is much need of lyuelye spirit, there be great arteries:
Where much neade of mouynge is, great sinews and Chordes: and where great
neade of strength is, there are great bones: as in other places that are
less, less members serve in every degree. And this is the mesuringe of
quantitye, through out all the whole body, even as necessitye requires.

The quantitye of each member particularlye, is to be showed when they be
particularlye treated o^: as I have done sufficientlye, of the simple members
in my first treatise.

But note, that there is an other consideration of quantitye of members: for
diverse members have diverse quantities in much or little, according to the
complexions of the body. That some members varye in quantitye, according to
complexion
For the ph^egmatike have much fat, and the chol^rick^ little fat or none:
The Sanguine have much flesh, and the melancholic have very little flesh.
And that it is necessary for the chirurgien, to know these things, no
reasonable man doubts, as I think.

Of number in members to be observed. The fyfthe Chapter.
FIftlye the number of all sorts of members, Numerus membrorum.
are to be had in mind: as I said in my first treatise, of the number both
of the veins and sinews, and also of the bones and muscles. For as it was
exactlye considered, of ancient authors, what quantity members were of: so is
it noted, what number there be of them. For as it is a wonderful plesante
consyderation of natures works, so is it much commodious in the handye work
Chirurgerye, to understand how number and store of every sort of members, is
given to each part of the body, to serve turn according to need. Who can
but wonder at natures providence, God of Nature.
(why say I not rather the God of nature) to ordeyne the order of number so
well in the body of man. There been ordained two ears, that if one be
interrupted of his office, by any mean or chance, the other may serve the
office of hearing. Like wise there are two eyes, that if one be hurt, the
other may serve: that the body be not left without that help. Have we not
also two legs and two arms, for like consideration? so are there also payers
of synewes, going forth through all the body, both sensityue, and motyue:
That by the reason of store, when hurt happens to one, Prognostication by
number.
the other may serve. Which is necessary for the Chirurgien to consider, that
he may Prognosticate in every wound, the danger that must of necessity
follow. For if he know the number of sinews, and how many of that number are
offended: he may easilye judge both the qualitye and quantitye of the
offense, and also what defecte may thereof ensus. And likewise is to be
understood of the number of veins, arteries, and all other members.

Of Figure to be considered in members. The.vi. Chapter.
SIxtlye the figure, Membrorum figura.
form, or proportion, of every member, is much to be regarded. For there was
no member formed in the body, without a special cause, why the same figure, or
proportion was given to it. The bones of the head are knytte together with the
comissures or seames, making by that joining a round shape or figure. Round
form
For as the Philosopher says, that form of all other is most certain, from
danger and harm. For all stripes, and all chances that happen to a round
proportion, are forced to slip, slide, Flat form.
or glaunce: but on all plain and flat forms, the force or violence of all
hurtes tarry, stay, and pearce, to the greater detrymente of the parts so
hurt or stricken. Therefore it is ordained, as I said in my first treatise,
that all bones, that are set to defend from hurtes the principalle members,
have their figure or form for that use most co^ueniente, and sure: that is to
say round For as well, the bowt form of the ribs, in their knittying
together, make a round figure, for the surer defense of the heart, and the
members within the breast, as the bones of the head, for the defense of the
brain. The veins are formed round and holowe, to carye the blood through
the body, as water pypes carye water from the conduict head to serve a whole
city. The arteries have like proportion, to carye likewise the liuelye
spirit, whereby all the members of the body live. The muscles, or braunes,
are formed like a mouse, as I said in my first treatise, big in the
midst, and smallest always toward the ends: that the body in no place
lack a comely figure. The brawnes of the arms, ye caulfe of the leg, the
fyllets of the back, the comelye figure of the face, and all the other parts:
are made in such comely decente, and beautiful form, through the variable
figures of the muscles.

The ligamentes, are made in the form of bands, to bind the ioynctes
together. And to conclude brieflye, each thing in the world, as well as the
body of man, is of small regard, if it lack the decente figure, or proportion
that it ought to have. And finally, no chirurgien can work assuredly or
cunningly, in the body of man, if he know not the figure of every member or
part.

Of the operation of members. The. Vii. Chapter.
Seventhly the operation that is in members, Operatio Membrorum
is to be learned, of him that will be a chirurgien: And how those operations
are conveyed and carried, to serve the need of every part. And to talk of
operations, it were mete to use this word parts, because it includes more,
then this word members: for we can call none of the. iiii. humores members,
yet are they parts of the body. So are the three spirits to wite the animal,
vital, and natural: (though in deed many learned men, have upon diverse
reasons, Sense, motion Spirit and life.
denied any third or naturalle spirit to be:)

The animal spirit giving the operatio^s of sense, and motion. The vital,
geuinge spirit and life to all the members. The natural, nurishment to all the
body. The vital spirit being made in the heart, the animal in the brain,
the natural in the liver. And both these last, animal, and natural, are
made of the first called vital. The vital spirit is carried into all parts,
by the arteries. The animal, by the sinews, the natural in the veins. And
of the operations of these, all other parts of the body, take their
operations. As ye operation of feling, of moving, of hearing of seeing, of
smelling, of speaking: yea all operatio^s proceed of the first operations: of
which first operations proceeds ye forsaide spirits. The first operations
are these, which are also called virtues, or faculties, and are in number
four, namely attractiue retentiue, alteratiue, and expulsive. And these four
are in every part of the body that is nurished, or yt serves to nurish other:
The attractiue faculty being done by hotnesse and dryness, the retentiue by
coldness and dryness, the alteratiue by hotnesse and moistness, the
expulsive by coldness and moistness.

And through these natural virtues or faculties, are the iii. digestions
wrought and accomplished in the body. The first of these digestions is in the
stomache, the second in the liver, the third is universally in the veins. I
understand also yt there are iii. poures in the body: Animal, vital. and
Natural: and this last pour called natural, is divided into these iiii.
forsaid operations or virtues. And as I said before, all operations of every
member, are received of these first operations: whether it befeling, moving,
tasting, seeing, hearing, smelling, or any other, yt any man can devise or name.
For of the first four is made nutrition, without the which no member may
live, nor grow. Much less have any operation or facultye. Therefore, when
any member is hurt or offended, we ought to call to mind, what operation
belongs to the part so hurt: and how that member receives the same. As for
example: the operation of felyng and mouynge, is carried by the animal spirit
in the synewes, unto all members.

So does heat and lyte come to all members, by the vital spirit in the
arteryes. And the nutrimentall blood, by the naturalle spirit in the veins.
If therefore in any member, any of these be so offended that there is no hope
of recouerye: we may boldlye Prognosticate, that the operatyon of that member
so received is void and frustrate: Because the mean whereby it was atchiued is
destroyed. Even as no water can come by a conduict, to a house or a city, when
the pype is cut or broken by the way. But farthermore, if any member lack
his natural or due operation, so that he can not do his office, nevertheless
no hurt perceived in the outward parts: then must we consider, whether it
be feeling, mouinge, or strength that is lacking. Which thing known,
knowinge also by what mean, the said member received his operation now
being lost: It shall be the easyer to devise a remedy to cure and help the
same. Therefore, that it is necessary for the Chirurgien, to know the office or
operation of every member, as I think, neadeth no farther proof.

Of the vtilitye or office of members. The.Viii. Chapter.
EIghtlye the vtilitye or office, Offitium uel Vtilitas membrorum.
that every member has in the body, is greatly to be noted: for every member
in the body has a special office by him self, whereby he is necessary to
the body. And therefore when he is lackinge, the body is destitute o^ that
necessary thing: even as a common weal that lacks his officer. What
members in the body are called official, ye shall understand in ye general
Anatomy. Notwithstanding, there is no member in the body, that is without his
vtility: yt is to say, that has not a profitable use in the body. But for as
much as in my collection of the simple members, every member has his
vtilitye declared, where he is spoken of: I shall need the less in this place
to tarry upon it. But this brieflye I say: the bones are the susteiners of the
body. The gristles are formable additions. The ligamentes bind the joints
together. The muscles make a comelye form. The synewes carye the feeling and
mouinge virtue. The vein caryeth the nutrityue blood. The arterye caryeth the
vital spirit. The flesh fills the void places. The fat moysteneth the
dry parts. The skin covers and clotheth the body. These are brieflye the
offices or the vtilities of all the simple members. By which the chirurgien
takes great note: As well to keep the body in health, as to cure it when it
is diseased.

Of the diseases that the members are subject Unto. Capi. ix.
NInthlye and last, Diseases cha^tynge to the members.
we ought to note, what diseases may chance to any member, and which been
curable. For there be diverse members, that when they be wounded, receive no
curation. Namelye the brain, the heart, the stomache, and such guts are not
fleshye, and other such like. And farthermore, as I said in my first
treatise* that spermatike members receive no true consolydation. Therapeut.
And as Galen says, in li.iiii. therapeut in ye cure of ulcers, (confutinge
the error of Thessalus:) The diseases, namelye solution of continuity, (...).i.
fractio uel fractura.
receive diverse names, according to the diuersitye of the members, and their
substances. For the breaking of bones are called in Greek Catagma, and in
Latin Fractura. To the flesh happens wounds, ulcers, bruses, (...),.i.
(...)
tumores and Apostemes. Solution of continuity in ye synewes is called Spasmos
and in the lygaments Thlasma in the muscles Apospasma, (...) contusio.
or Rhegma. Or as we say in plain English. The synewes suffer crampes,
palsyes, and conuuition: The bones breakinge: The joints displacynges, The
Flesh wounds, (...).i. (...).
bruses. etc. And to all the other members happens diverse peines, of diverse
names, as well by the excess or corruption of any of the.iiii. humores: (...).
i. eruptio sieve ruptura.
as also of ventositye, or windiness, and waterye humores. The joints or
sinewye members, are grieved with aches, and gowtes. And fathermore apostemes,
ulcers, cancers, fistules, and such like: Do happen among the members, diversely
in diverse places of the body: receuynge their names often times according to
their places, as it is written of, by our ancient authors. whom I judge it
expedient to read and discretlye to follow.

The Conclusion.
LO, thus have I ended this second treatise, although grossly, and
unlearnedly: trusting notwithstanding that it will be gently borne withal.
Truly my masters and brethren, these are but ears of corn, that I gleaned in
times paste after the bindinges of the plentiful sheues of others: trustinge
to God that hereafter (though not yet,) I shall be able to bind sheues of
mine own, and scater some ears, for such as must gleane, and gather their
handfuls of other men's leuinges: Nether wish I, yt we should any longer live,
then we should show our selves profitable one to an other. In the which, as we
may learn in holy writ, and as the deuines, continually blow in our ears,
we shall be known to be the servants, of our Lord and sauyoure Jesus
Christ. Who taught his discyples to love an other, Saying, by this ye shall
be known, to be my discyples, in that ye love one an other. The which love
God grant us all. Amen.

The end of the second Treatise.
The third treatise OF ANATOMY, BRIEFLYE showing the form, the making, and
the natural operations or offices of every member, inwardlye and outwardly,
from the head to the feet. And how the handye work of Chirurgerye ought to
be done, in each part of the body.
The argument of the third Treatise.
Though I mean here according to promise, to write generally of Anatomy:
mine intent is not to name or express every small and difficult deuisyon of
parts. For though the body of man be finyte, and may be comprehended, as
concerning all that is nedeful and necessary unto knowledge: yet I esteem it as
unprofitable as impossible, to make explication of every extremity. for sure it
is not possible otherwise the^ by cogitatio^ to know exquisitly every small
member. wherefore the ancient Chirurgiens deu^ded ye body into diverse members,
so far as was requisite to surgery, and the necessary knowledge how to
work in the same. The rest (being over curious, and thought as vnnedefull of
such plain deuisio^s, as ye work intricate,) was left by arguments to be
ministered to ye senses of the ingenious, by cogitation and reason. But to the
baser sort of less capacity: it was thought sufficient to warn them of
dangers, by certain brief and general rules. as to know where veins wear by
bleding, and arteries by beating or pulsation. And in all members that did move
and feel, they judged nerves or sinews to be, both motive and sensityue. And
as those ways are very brief, so seems their end and commodity very small.
But to our purpose.

That offense and error may be aduoided in surgery, through ignorance of
Anatomy: as when incision. Cauterizations, Phlebotomy, ventosyng,
scari^ications, openyng of Apostemes, and such like are to be done on the
body of man.

I mean here to declare the names, natures, operatyons, compositions,
beginninges and endinges of as many members, as to the Chirurgiens intellection
is convenient.

Aduoiding nevertheless as nere as may be, all obscuritye and tediousness,
least in goinge about to be so precise and exact in the extreme deuisions and
spreadinges of every part, (garnishinge and paintinge the same with such
large expositions, as it would necessarily require:) I should rather become an
heavy fatigation or weariness to the readers, then any thing vtile or
profitable to their understanding.

Wherefore ye shall note by the way, that the body of man in the order of
Anatomye, is divided into. lii. ventrycles or principal parts, beside the
members called Artus. The three ventricles are these: the head, the breast, and
the belly: whereof I will treat in the first, the third, and the fourth
parts.

The members called Artus or the lymmes, are the arms and the hands, with the
legs and the feet: and of these I speak in the second and fyfte parts.

The syxte part is of the names, (both in Latin and English) from the head
to the fete, of all exterior parts of the body, as they are called of the
most learned Anatomistes.

ventral view of male anatomy

dorsal view of male anatomy

The first part of the third treatise, wherein is declared the Anatomy of the
head, with all his parts, as well conteinynge, as contained, and also the
neck and throat, unto the shoulders.
Of the brain, with his substance, complexion, form, and office, with the
number of his ventricles, and the marvelous motyons of the same.
The first Chapter.
AS IN THE FIRST treatise I began with the bones, the foundations of all other
members, because by them all others are supported and borne: so it hear seems
unto me best, seeing man is called of the Grecians Anthropos, (...).i. homo.
(...) atque (...).
(as I have before opened) to begin at the root of the tree: and first at the
inner part thereof, and from thence to proceed to the utter, and then in order
to the trunk, or stock, and lastly to the branches.

Then, sith the brain, and head, by consent of all learned authors, is the
root of the body: at the head, (called in Latin Caput and in Greek Cephale,)
Caput.
will I begin, by consideration of Anatomye: (...).
first of the contained, and then of that which conteyneth. The brain
therefore I say, which the Grecians (lackinge for it a propre vocable*) have
called ^^cephalon because that (as some will,) (...) Cerebrum
it is (...), that is in the head, and is called of the Latins Cerebrum, is a
principal member: whose substance is said to be ma^^wye, and it is also soft,
and white of color: The more outwardlye the softer and the duller white: but
the more lower and inward, the more massye, toughe, and perfecter white it is.
Of complexion it is cold and moiste: and of generation Spermatike: for as
says Galenus, libroprimo de semine. Generationem ex solo semine habet. The
form ever agreing with the shape of the sculle inwardlye. In the inferior, or
lower parts inwardly thereof, Uentricles.
are certain ventricles, which after the mind of diverse authors, are diversely
divided of some into three, and of others into four: yet do they consonantlye
agree in the whole, concerning their particular offices.

The aforsayde substance being opened, Glandulouse parts.
there are seen certain glandulous bodies, here and there among his parts
of substance diversely dispersed: which are neither so firm nor so white, but
wannishe, and also more moist and clammye, then the brain it self: among
the which, the recrementes of the brain are thought to be gathered, from
whence they pass into the ventricles. These ventrycles, (as is said) are
most commonly numbered three, yet Galen confesses four, which Lanfranke
grants, for the manifest deuisyon of the large holownesse in the fore-parte
into two. Which as says Carolus Stephanus, being ouerthwartlye divided: that
is the upper part from the nether mosie by an ouerthwarte incisyon, does with
his boughtes and Cryckes on each side much represent the form of a man's
ear.

The third then is the myddlemoste: and the fourth is behind, in an other
little brain, called also in ^atyne by diminution Cerebellum, Cerebellum.
and of the Grecians Parencephalis, (...).
and also of Erasistratus, Epencranis.

And this part is compacte together, differynge euydentlye from the reasie of
the brain, (...).
interhedged with the Pia matter, as the other substance is: but it is divided
outwardlye, as it were into many thyn, and sclender cy^cles, neither is it so
white as the reasie of the brain, bu^ composed, as of certain hillockes
couched together: of (...) curdy and britle substance, wherein is contained
abundance of spirit.

Furthermore, Humore in the ventri^l^^
in the concauityes or celles of the former ventrycles, there is found
contained, a certain yelowishe waterye substance: which is judged to be the
repurgynge or syncke, of the humores of the brain, transcente from the
glandulous bodies before mentioned. Which humores, when so ever they
superabounde, do fall down by common passages, into the trenche over the
rouffe or palate of the mouth, ordained to receive ye same: from whence it is
expelled, as well forward by the nosethrils, as backwarde into the mouth.
Whereof in his place more shall be said.

But upon this humore, in these former ventrycles, is a certain body, wouen
together of infinite veins and arteryes, coming from the heart, growing
about the meruaylous net called Rete Mirabile confirmed with a coat of Pia
matter: and this contexed body, is peculiarlye called of some Choriformis
membrana. Choriformis membrana.
And it so swymmeth in the foresaid humore, being so slacklye bound and
loselye tied, both to the bothome, and the sides of the holownesse, that it
deerreth, and strayeth to and fro, in the said humore: following
notwythstandynge, the exact form of the Crickes and corners of the said
ventricles, even to the arche or vaulte.

Whose office is to work in the ventrycles, inspyratyon, e^pyratyon, and
efflatyon: unto which mouinge, doubtless the whole substance of the brain
gives place, The brains motyons.
and is thereby caused to move and heave. The proof of which operatyon may be
manifestlye seen, and the brain euydentlye to move: both in young infantes,
err their mouldes be closed, and also in such as by chance have their
sculles broken.

Whereof Galen, (...). i. di latatio, uel destinctio.
upon good reason did attribute Diastolen, and Systolen also to ye brain: and
also by this workinge, the vital spirit in the arteries, is there made
animal. In the boughte or bosom of this Choriformis: (...). i. contractio,
uel correptio.
are the spirits received and contained, as yet gross and vnpure: that by the
former ventricles, they may there be wroughte and prepared, before they enter
the middle ventricle, and the se^ses thereof. Wherein they are made also yet more
perfect, that afterward they may descend, into the.iiii. or last ventricle
of Cerebellum: and to this purpose certain passages, ways or pores, are
ordained, to lead the said spirits from one cell into another. Which that it
should not to sone, or vntimelye be done: There is a certain delicate
glandulous body ordained, vnderlyinge the holowe pore, (whereof I do
immediatlye make mention) called Conarion, because it represents the form of
a Pine apple, (...). i. ^ux pinea, uel figura ex lato in acutum de^ine^s
called Conus. Which by his natural propertye stops the pore, in such
wise that the said spirits may not be carried before their time, into the
Cerebellum. The like whereof may be seue in a glandule, lyinge upon the gutte
Pylorum: which will suffer no substance to pass out of the stomache into the
said gutte, before the full time and complete end of digestion.

There is moreover a certain holowe pore, The pore deuidynge the ventricles.
which of some is called the third ventrycle, and of other a perforation
only: Constitutynge the third ventrycle to be ye vaulted body, above the
common holownesse of the former ventrycles, (which because it is like an arche
or vault) is called of the Grecians Camarion, (...) Fornix sieve. Corpus
fornicatum.
and Psallio^ides, the common sort call it Fornicem and Corpus fornicatum.
Which vaulted body was of nature made in the brain, that the upper substance
of the same, might be the stronglyer sustained.

But now concerning the said pore, which some, yea and Galen him self,
constituteth the third ventrycle: It is dyuerslye wouen together, his upper
parts being covered, of a subtle panycle, but there not weak: which also
reaches even to the holownesse, of the hyndermoste ventricle. There are also
on the sides belonging to the said pore, certain long and sclender
emynences, growing out from the substance of the brain, Glutiae*
called Glutiae, or Naticulae: whose nighe concurse and vicinitye passinge
together, Naticulae.
thou may says Galen, liken aptly to buttockes, touching together one an
other: though some likeninge them to the testicles, (...).
had rather call them Didymia. Anceformes
But they are called of the late writers Anceformes, because they are like
boughtes, or buttockes. And these Anceformes do strengthen and thrust together
ye wormlike process, Epiphysis. Vermiformis
called Vermiformis epiphysis: whose function is chiefly, to stop and open
the pore, by contractinge together, or distending it self by length in the
same, whereof also it has his name: whose end or extreme part is about the
lower part of the third ventricle, called of ye Grecians Scoleco^ides. (...)
(...).
But for the copiouse declaration of the causes of these and other names, with
many other circumstances hereunto belonging, for briefnesse sake here I leave
the loving reader, unto the perfect ennarratio^s of Galenus, Vesalius, and
Carolus Stephanus: where thy desires may be satisfied at the full. And now
according to the grounded judgments of the learned, Sense^ (...) wits.
I will proceed to the senses, or wits, contained and wroughte in these
celles.

In the first part of the former ventricles, are founded the common wits or
senses, Common (...) or.v. wytte^.
called otherwise the.v. wits: as hearing, saying, smellinge, feeling and
tasting. And in one part of this also is said to be the virtue of searchyng,
called Phantasia: (...) (...)
which virtue takes all the forms or ordinances, disposed of the
aforsaide.v. wits, according to the mouinge and remouinge of sensible
things. In the other part of the said ventricles, is ordained the virtue
imaginatiue, which represents to the virtue memoratiue, what so ever it
receives of the common wits: Virtue imaginatyue.
as ye shape or form of sensible things etc. as they were received from
without.

In the mydell cell or ventricle is constituted the virtue cogitatyue, Virtue
cogitatiue, or estimatyon.
or estimation: which pondereth, wayeth, judges, and declares, all such
things as are thereto offered and brought from the aforsayde virtues. Now
lastly, the fourth or hyndermoste ventricle of Cerebellum, contains and
preserves in it self the virtue memoratiue: The virtue memoratiue.
Whereby it is noted the cell or store house, of that excellent virtue of
memory, or remembrance. From the which Cerebellum (at the extreme parts
thereof) proceeds forth the Medulla, or pithe of the back, Nucha.
which as Galen says, is of one substance with the brain: and is clothed
with like panicles, passing down in the holownesse of the spondilles, or
turning joints, (...). i. Spina dorsi.
even to ye end of the ridge And as the whole frame of spondils together, is
(of the likeness it has by reason of his manifold scraggy processes with
the thorn) called Spina dorsalis in Greek M^tiaea acantha: (...)..i. medulla
dorsalis.
So is this marrowe called N^tiaeos myelos, id est dorsalis, uel spinalis
medulla, and vulgarlye Nucha.

The.ii. Chapter.
Of the soft and also the hard panicles of the brain, and the vicinitye that
they have with the skyn coueringe the sculle, and necessary notes thereof
gathered. Then of the brains increasyng with the moon, and by what means the
brain is purged of his excrementes.
ANd immediatlye above the brain and the reast before spoken of, is ordained a
very tender skyn or coueringe, called in English the soft pannicle, in
Latin Pia matter, (...). i. pia matter sieve tenuis meninx.
and Tenuis meninx* being yet of a more strong and toughe substance then the
brain, that it may defend and save the brain and his delicate parts, from
the hardness of the harder pannicle, and the bones of the scull. And this
soft mother or tender pannicle, is thinlye and fynely wouen together of veins
and arteries, in a fine netlyke, or copweblyke sort. And it is divided, lying
lose from the brain, least it should be a burden to the same, offendynge it
thereby: saving in certain places, where veins and arteries proceed from this
tender pannicle, entering into the spaces and deuisyons, of the parts and
ventrycles of the brain. Whereby (or by such rather as he gathers together,
from al parts of the brain) he sucketh of ye brainy substance, yelding also to
ye brain, by those veins and arteries, nurishmet, and lively spirit: which
spirit being there farther digested, or by the natural workynge of the brain
altered: is made accordant to the virtue animal. And in this pa^nicle are
these veins implanted, least otherwise lyinge lose, they might be thruste
together or disordered, by the beatynge of the brain.

Then next above this tender pannicle or soft veyle, is constitute the
strong mother, or ^oughe veyle, called the hard pannicle, Dura matter.
in latin Dura matter, or Crassa meninx: Crassa meninx*
which is harder and tougher to the end that it may defend the brain and
the soft pannicle, from the hardness of ye bone, by the valiente strength
thereof. And it is wouen together clothlyke, by a strong holdinge or compaction
together, of arteries and veins whereby it is thick and strong. It is also
severed and divided from the soft pannicle generallye, save only where
certain veins and arteries go from him to the said subtle veyle, or
delicate pannicle, to help, comfort, and corroborate the same. Neither has
this hard pannicle, his continuance with the scul, called Caluari, after any
touching or cleauinge sort, but is separate from the same, least it should
receive general hurt thereof, by reason of the bones hardness: except only in
the seames or commissures of the sculle, whereas certain fine and small ^eary
veins and arteries, (...).
proceed from it through ye said seames: as well to preserve the same from
falling down on the brain as also to the making of the skyn, (...) (...)
immediatlye coueringe the scull, called therefore Pericarnion. Wherefore it
appears by reason, that all cuttynges, raspynges, trepanynges, or boringes,
are to be avoided in the seames of the scull, unless very great necessitye
constreigne: least dangerous and deadlye accidents follow, both to the hard
and soft pannicle, and also to the brain and that by the natural affinitye
and unity, they have ^ne with an other.

The like fear and consideration ought to be, as well at the conjunction, as
at the opposition of the moon with the Son. For the brain has then a
merueilous semblance, with the sea and waters, which at those times, have
their full and spring tides. For even so does the brain seem to flow,
bearinge up the said pannicles so nighe the sculle, that it might be sone
hurt with instruments at such a time. And here is to be noted a marvelous
provision of nature in the scull, that at such risinge of the pannicles by
flowinge of the brain, the conspicuous veins and arteries of Dura matter be
not hurt: nor by the hardness of the bones pressed together: whereby ye course
of the blood might be let. For every such vein, and branche of vein, has in
the scull an holowe gutter, to lie in safelye without hurt, or let of course,
as in the insyde of every scull may be seen, both great and small gutters,
according to the quantity, form, number, and diuersitye of vein branches in
the hard pannicle. Now the superfluityes of the brain are expelled in this
sort. Purgation of the brain.
From the former and middle ventricles, they fall down by two euydente ways
into a round and holowe receptacle, commonly called in Latyne Lacuna, Lacuna.
which doctor Langton englisheth a dropynge pan: but the grecians (because of
the form, which is wide above, (...).
and ever the lower the narower, with a perforation in the bothome after the
man^er of a funnell) most proprely call it Choanen, and the latynes
Infundibulum. By the which funell hole, Infundibulum.
it passes the strainynge glandule, called Aden colatorius: Ade^ colatorius
(...) os cribrosum* (...) hoc est Spongiosum.
and then through the strainynge holes of the bones, having the office of a
syue, and the form of a sponge, and are therefore called in Greek Ostea
Isthmoidea, but more proprelye of Hippocrates spongoidea. Whose passages end
into the holownesse of the palate over the mouth, which holownesse being
destingued with a pillourlike process, has two perforations into the nose,
called in Latin Nares, that is the nosethrilles: through which the said
superfluitnes are purged forward. Nares.
And it has also by the Gargarion backwarde other sufficient passage,
Gargareon.
whereby by snuffing into the mouth, there may be sufficient purgation, as
necessitye requires.

The third Chapter.
Of the scull with his form and office, the number and names of bones, whereof
it is composed: with their form and propre^y^s, and the like of the seames or
comm^^res thereof.
Upon these.ii. pannicles, (...) (...).
Duram matrem, and Piam matre^, is ordained the bones of the scul, (called in
greek (...) and in latin Caluaria:) (...).
^hiche is divided into ^ire, beside the bone called Paxilla. (...).
Whose beginning is at the end of the hinder bone of the head: (...) (...).
whose shape or form is like the letter. (...)
V. or as some write like yt Greek letter Lamb^a, ^ or as Johannes de Vigo
says, like this figure 7. And the aforsayd Paxilla, vnderbeareth in ye hinder
part all the bones of ye head, (...)
and therefore is called the bearer up or ye wedglike bone, of the Greeks
Sphenoide, and of the latins Cuneus, for it is like a wedge. (...) (...).
The first bone of ye scul is the bone of the fo^^ead, and it is called
Coronale, whose form and shape is in manner of half a circle, procedynge
forth into the fore part, and is fastened with the bone of the nose in the
forepart thereof, in the manner of a saw, with the temple and with other parts.
And he is fastened to the upper iawe also in the manner of a saw: and there is
made a kind of fasteninge, in the (...) or fashion of a cross, Parietalia
(...) lateralia
whose upper seame is long. Then ye two wall or side bones of the head called
Parietalia, or Lateralia (...) in greek Bregmatis ossa are joined together in
the myddest of the head, with a seame in the manner of a saw, between them
selves, (...).
and with the bone called Occiput, or Os la (...), which is ye hinder bone of
the head, like this letter. ^. as I said before, (...)
which Lauda, is also vulgarelye called Occipital^ and under this bone is set
the bone called Paxilla as it is above written, called also more commonly
Basilare: and it is not fastened, with such evident seames to him, as other
are: but it only vnderbereth him. And upon the side bones, or wall bones on the
left side, and on the right side are, ii. bones (under the which be the eaces)
called Ossa mendosa, and in greek Lepid^s, which be not fastened to the side
bones with seames, but by joining or setting of part unto part, in the manner of
scales.

For the which cause Galen calls them Cortices and squa^nas, Cortices.
and other Ossa Squamosa, Squa^ae.
and in the lower part of this bone (being hard and stonye, Os Petraeum.
and therefore called Petraeum, or Petrosum being also a part of the bone
Mendosum) behind the upper iawe, Os Petrosum.
is (in each of them) a great hole by the which passes the synewe of
hearing. The commissurres of ye scull (...).
Thus may you see, that the bones comprehendynge the brain, are numbered to be
six, beside the bone which bears up all the react, fulfillynge the form or
shape of the head, Sutura. (...). Similis.
named ^axilla as is aforesaid. And note that the seames of the scull, as it is
wytnessed (ex Galeno de ossibus, (...). i. Sutura arct^alis aut Coronalis.
in all the whole do represent the figure of this letter. H. Notwithstanding,
the seame of Osis Laudae, being like the Greek letter Landa. is called
therefore Sutura Landoeides uel graece, Labdoeides Raph^. And the seame of ye
Coronall, is called in Greek Stephan^aea, (...). enim coron^ significat.
in latin Coronalis and Arctualis or the ship seame, because it represents
the form of a boat or ship. The third right or streighte seame passinge
between the bones Pari^talia, (...). i. tunica Caluariam contegens.
and touching with his ends the coronal and occiptall bones, is called of the
Grecians Obeliaea Raphe, and in Latin S^tura Sagittalis.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Of the skyn covering the scull, then o^ the fleshy skin, and the vitermoste
of all, where in is the near, with a convenient note concerning incisyons of
the head.
IMediatlye then upon the scull, (...).
is fixed and set the pannicle, called Pe^icranion: which enuironeth,
compasses, and incloseth all the whole substance of the scull: and is tied to
the pannicle wythinforthe, called Dura matter. by small veins and arteries,
passing through the seames of yt scul, as before is said. And upon this skyn
is situate an other thick, Membrana carnosa.
lacertous, and fleshy skin, which is Membrana carnosa, commonly found each
where under the true skyn, above ye which is ye said true skyn, Here of the
head.
(in which grows the hear of the head:) which is wouen together with
veins, arteries, and synewes, coming from within forth: and especially it is
wouen of the synewes, which come from the holes of the first and second
spondilles of the neck, which meddle them selves with veins and arteries,
weauing together the skyn covering the scull. And this skin is made hard,
having in him self a thin little fleshy substance, which makes it the greater
and the thicker. NOTA*
And understand well here, that when cuttynges must be made in the head,
that they shall be best and most formable, that be made according to the
growing of the hears: for why the sinews of the fleshye skin proceed that
way for the most part. Incisions of the head.
And it is to be noted, that incisions ought not to be made generallye after
the procedinges (by length) of the graynes: as for example. In the foreheade,
the grains of the skyn go ouerth warte, and yet the cuttynges, and
especially those that be deep, ought to be made after the length, cross and
overthwart the grains: for the synewes of the head proceed according to ye
length, and not after the graynes.

The.v. Chapter.
Of the nose.
IN the fore part of the head, between the eyes is constituted the nose:
Which is made of bones and grystles, lacertous flesh and skin, called in Greek
Rhia and in latin Ni^us. For the better declaration whereof, first note, yt
there are two notable processes, (...).
holowe, and of a sinewye substance, coming from the brain, taking root not
far from the synewes of syghte, which some men (estemynge them sinews) call
Neruos Olfactibiles: (...).
affirming them to proceed of the third conjugation of the brayns sinews. But
other more diligently waying their beginninges and procedynges, deny them to be
proprelye synewes, (with whom I consent) naminge them only the organes of
smelling. And these organes have at their extreme ends within the forheade,
at the upper end of the nosethrilles certain eminences like in form to the
tetes or neples of women's breasts, and these receive the odoure, Virtue of
smelling.
smell and sauoure of all things, plesante or noisome, through the
nosethrylles. which nosethrils or nose holes, (...). Nares.
call them as you list, are common with the gutter over the palate of the
mouth, which gutter as is before said, has also ways by the gurgulion
into the mouth: by reason whereof, when the mouth is shut, the air may
pass in and out through them, Utiiltyes of the nose.
by the drawinge of the lunges. And as Galen says, the nose is the principal
setter forth of the face, concerning the favor or due proportion thereof: For
where the nose wants says he, there the face is much deformed and
lothelye. And the nose is an offyciall member, and the instrument of smelling,
by the means of the aforsayde Organes, and stands out a little convenient
way, without the rest of the face. And because the creast bone of it, which
deuideth the nosethrils, and makes them twain, has a gristlye addityon, The
gristlye addityon of the nose.
the nose is flexible, and may be somewhat bowed, according to the will, which
is so ordained by nature, that it may the more conveniently, be purifyed and
cleansed from the filthe which the brain is purged of, by that necessary
mean. And finally the nose, through his foresaid office of smelling, presents
to the common wits, the savor of all things, either pleasant or noyful to the
same.

The.vi. Chapter.
Of the eyes.
THere are also in ye forepart of the head, Oculus.
under ye forhed ordained.ii. eyes, which be called yt watch me^ of yt body and
therefore have their place so high, as it is most mete for that office. And as
Galen witnesses in the.vii. book, de Iuuamentis, and the second chapter, the
brain and the head were chiefly made for the eyes, that they being the
instruments of sight, and the guiders and leaders of man, might be set in the
highest place, of all the frame of the body, there to be as* vewers, and
espyers of all manner of things. Even as it were watch men, which are for
that intent set in the highest place of a city, (...), i. oculus.
and they are called in Greek Ophthalmi, and in latin Oculi. And they are
constitute and made of three humores, (...). l. V^siuus, uel perspectiuus neruus.
and. vii. coats or tunicles, after this manner as follows. First out of yt
forepart of the brain, proceeds, ii. holow sinews called Nerui optici,
which as Gale^ declares in the.iiii. book, de morbo and accide^tibus in the
first chapter are holow as a read, and that for.ii. principal causes. The
first is, yt the visible spirit might pass aptly to the eyes. Uisible spirit
The second is, yt through the^ the form of visyble things might redily be
presented to the common wits, and they are ye first pair of ye synewes of
ye brain. And immediatlye after their procedinges they unite the^ selves into
one sole holownes, and from ye holownes they go forth in twain, and as they go
out at the holes of the scull, they be clothed with the.ii. panicies of the
brain, each panicle giving a propre coat of his own substance unto them. And
of these synewes with their two clothinges aforsaid, and of the skin covering
the scul are br(...) the foresaid tunicles or orbs, (...): Retiformis Ocul^
Tunica.
in which the.ii. humores are holden and contained. These coats are
numbered.vii. by reason of their diversities, in place, form, and office, as ye
shall hear. First of the optike sinews bredeth the most fine and tender
tunicle, called of Galen backwardly, or inwardly Amphiblestrocides, (...)* i.
tunica arar^osa uel aranae (...) Humor Crystallinus.
and in latin Retiformis tunica, because it rese^bleth a net: but forwardly,
or outwardlye, it is called in Greek Arachnoeides, and in latin Aranea tela:
because it is like a copweb: and herein is holden the cristal humore which is
likened of diverse authors to a hail stone, and is called in latin Humor
Crystallinus.

Then of Pia matter bredeth a skin, whose inward part, (...). i. tunica
Similis secundis.
because in some point it is like to Chorion, (which is the second birthe
covering,) is therefore called in greek Cheroeides, and in Latin Secundina:
but in the forparte it is called in Greek Rhagoeides, and in Latin, Vuea,
because there it resembles the grain of a grape, (...). i. Vuea ocula tunica.
being as some write of a black color. A part whereof is planted in the
myddest, being in form like the cover of a mortar, composed of many fine
streams, like the hears of the eye lyddes or beams of the Sun, Humor
aqueus, uel Albugineus.
deuyding through yt form the waterye humore before, called Aqueus, and
Albugineus, and the glasy humore behind (called Vitreus,) Humor Vitreus.
a sonder: and having a round hole in the midst, contains edglynge the
crystalline humore, much like as the Horizonte comprehends the Globe. And
then the rest of V^^ea forward, (which has in the midst a certain hole,
wherein is made the pupille:) conteyneth in his circuit the humore Vitreus.

Thirdlye of dura matter, is made an other tunicle, named in greek Ceratoeides,
(...).
and commonly in Latin, in the hinder part or inwardlye Sc^erotica, and in
the forparte outwardly Cornea: because it has there the likeness of a most
brighte or clear lantern horn: Tunica Cornea, uel translucida.
and this contains within it all these coats, and humores all ready said.

Then last of all, of the pannicle Peric anaeum bredeth an other tunicle,
Sclerotica.
called Cohaerens* and Agnata, and vulgarlye Coniunctiua: Cohaere^s, Agnata.
which covers all the eye, sauinge that part of Cornea, which appears in
the midst of the eye outward, and covers the Pupilla, Coniunctiua.
which is the black of the eye, about the which is a circuit called Iris,
Pupilla.
or Corona. And this Coniunctiua is it that is called the white of the eye,
Iris. Corona.
and the circles of these tunicles, in their endinges, or goinge together in
the fore part of the eye, do make the circuit above said: which being of
diverse and for dry colors, is called Iris, because in that propretye it
resembles a rainbowe.

Thus lo have I showed as briefly as may be, how and whereof these tunicles are
constitute: in what manner also and order, they contain the.iii. humores of
the eye, and for what cause these tunicles are numbered seven: although it may
be as truly said, that there are but.iiii. as the ingenious of the words
before may easilye gather. And from the second conjugation of sinews of the
brain, do proceed the sinews which enter into the making of the.vii.
muscles: whereof the eye has power to move, and turn every way, according to
the will.

In the corners of the eyes are fartharmore curnels, by the which are
ingendered, and from the which are shed the tears that at any time flow
from the eyes, after the opinyon of diverse learned.

Outwardlye also the eyes have lyddes, (...) i. Palpebra^ aliquibus ta^^ Gena.
whose offices are as well to preserve by winckinge, the eyes from hurt
outwardlye, as also to close them from the light, geuyng them rest in time of
sleep: but chieflye of all, they defend and cover the eyes, from to much
vehemente brightness of any light, or from the sodainnesse thereof least the
visible light of ye eyes, should thereby be confounded. For by this benefit of
liddes, the eyes are meruailously eased, comforted, and the sight (as it were
by renewing) refreshed. And the veins that come to the eyes, and eye liddes, do
come brau^chynge from the vein of the temples: whereof it appears, that when
any course of humores, as whot blood or any other moisture, do run from
the brain and the head into the eyes: it shall be profitable to cut the
branch (that comes from the temple vein) ouerthwarte, or a cross: for so
shall the superfluous course of such humores be stopped. And I find also in
good authors, NOTA.
yt the Phlebotomy of the foreheade vein, and also of the veins by the nose,
called Triplices, are most necessary for to help the diseases of the eyes.

The.vii. Chapter.
Of the upper and the nether Jaws, with the number, figure, and several
offices of the teethe.
Under the eyes (in the forparte) and under the nose is the upper iawe, Maxilla
superior.
called Maxilla superior, the bones whereof are of diverse authors diversely
nu^bred. For Guido (aledginge Galen for his authority) says, that there be
ix. bones in the upper iawe: unto whom Brunswike consents without
contradictyon: which opinyon Geminus thinckinge to disprove, reasons thus.
There can not be found.ix. bones (says he,) unless the nether iawe be
accounted with the upper, and then there should be.x. for the nether iawe is
made of.ii. bones: whereof I gather that Geminus accounted but.viii. though he
after (forgettyng him self) where he numbereth generally all the bones
affirms xii. But Lanfrancus and Vigo account upon.xiiii. not shewinge their
compactions, but affirmynge the same to be unknown, or at the least hard to
be found. Notwythstandynge Carolus Stephanus notinge their negligence does
prove xv. particular bones in the upper iawe. But that is by accomptinge the
Basilare bone among them, where the two former authors put it among the bones
of the scul, so that the number of.xiiii. as well as.xv. are both true, their
minds understood, and their order considered. But who so will understand
their several names and numbers, with also their true seats and conexions,
let them read Carolus Stephanus, where they may be satisfied, which here for
briefnesse sake I omit.

And now of the tethe called in latin Dentes. (...) Dens.
in Greek Odontes (whereof as well in the upper iawe, as also in the nether iawe
are fastened in some.xvi. and in others but.xiiii) there are (...). i.
incisores dentes (...). i. Canini dentes.
.iii. sorts or orders. The first are the fore teethe called in Greek Odontes
tomici, and in Latin Incisores or cutters. The second are those sharp or
poynted ones, among which are the eye tethe, so called because dangerous
accidences do follow to the eyes, by the drawing or pluckynge out of them: and
these are of their sharpness called dog tethe, and therefore in latin
Canini, and in Greek Cynodo^tes. The third^ sort are the tuskles which the
Greeks call Gomphious and Mylas, (...) i. molares (...) enin m^la. est.
the latins Maxillares and Molares, yt is grynders. And upon this upper iawe
is fastened a pannycle or skin, growing of the pannicle coueringe the bone of
ye forheade, and of the third pair and of part of the fourth pair of
synewes of the brain, and the part next unto him, and of the second pair of
synewes of Nucha. And thus is there made a conueniente skyn to cover him. And
the synewes that come to this making, come partly from the brain, and partlye
from Nucha: which give feeling and mouyng to the face, and to the palate in
the roufe of the mouth, and to the nose: and that mostelye, in the entrance
of the making of the muscles, at these aforsayde parts. Wherefore the
incisyons that ought to be done in these parts, as in the upper iawe or the
nose, Incisions of the upper iawe and t^nose.
must be done according to the goinge of the grains of the skyn. For the
goinge of the grains, and the procedynge of the synewes in the nose, and in
the upper iawe, is all one way, and nothing contrary.

And from the second, third, and the fourth payer of sinews of Nucha, Of
the nether iawe.
comes synewes to the muscles of the jaws, which move the nether iawe or
cheke hone. This nether iawe is made of two bones, Maxilla inferior.
which he joined together in the manner of saw: and in the hinder part they
are joined with the knottye part of the iawe. Galenus de Anatomica
administratione. lib. 4.
In which nether iaw also be fired in some.xvi. and in some but.xiiii. tethe:
and as well the tethe in the upper iawe, as also those in the nether iawe, are
bound with the coupled bindinges and skins, that proceade of Pericranium,
which is made of the hard pannicle of the brain, NOTA.
as is aforesaid. And this is the cause that ache of the tethe is oftentimes
cause of pain in the head and brain, Emu^ctorye place of the brain.
and brings disease and offense, to all the whole head. And under the iawe
and ears, where the glandules or curnelles are, is the emunctorye place, where
as the brain purges it self of all venomous and unnatural things, by
putting forth of Apostemes.

The.viii. Chapter.
Of the lyppes, the chekes, the mouth and the Tungue.
Upon the upper and the nether jaws are fixed yt lips called in greek Chiloi
in latin Labia, (...). i. labru^, uel labiu^.
which are doors to the mouth, ayders of speech, and instruments of
pronunciations. (...). i. Gena.
And also the chekes (called Gena, in Greek Blephara) the seats of
shamefastness, the prospectes of man his complexion, and the walls of the
mouth: Whose offices are many and diverse. But to avoid all ambiguity, these
chiefly are in them to be noted of the good chirurgie^. They are consimilare,
compound, musculye, sinowye, skinnye, and of spongye lose parts, such as (if
they be wasted) are impossible to be restored. Wherefore great head ought to
be taken that no substance in them be wasted or lost, for if there be, the
Cicatrix will puckar them together (like the gatheringe or shrocklynge of
lether or parchmente at the fire, in such wise that the mouth will be drawn
a wrye. And farther if (they being worn through) their substance be in great
quantitye wasted, it is not possible to be so repaired, that there shall not
ever after remain a whole through. So that in such case many times, the
tethe ever after are seen through the chekes, and the substance of meat and
drink is redye there always to issue out, when the party so grieved eats.

Within this compass then is the mouth enclosed, of the which all writers of
Anatomye note.v. things to be considered. To wete the tungue, the tethe, the
lyppes, the palate or roufe of the mouth, and the Vuula: of all which
(because I speak particularly of them:) I need not here to say any more
generallye: Wherefore I will now proceed to the tungue.

Betwixt the upper iawe and the nether, The tunge. (...). Lingua.
is set the Tungue, called Lingua, in greek Glossa. The which is made of a
soft flesh and white, veiny, chordy and sinewy: and it takes his sinewy
substance of the syxte payer of synewes of the brain: and is called there the
synewe of speaking.

And of the seventh pair of sinews of the brain, ye tongue receives the
synewe of moving. And it is to be noted, that the tungue, the roufe of the
mouth, and the stomach, with the pype thereof called Oesephagus, are clothed
all with one sensible synewye pannicle, coming from the brain: as experience
proves, that who so touches the tongue or roufe of the mouth nere the
throat, the stomach will tikle, and cast up by vomit, Utilityes of the tungue.
all that is in it. And iii. causes I find why that the tungue was ordained
The first is, that it is a help to turn the meat in the mouth, that it may
the more effectuallye be ground small, and chawed with ye tethe. The second
office of the tongue is, to decerne the taste of things, whether they be
sweet or sour, bitter, sharp, or any other: presentinge or enforminge the
same to the common wits. Thirdlye it is the instrumente of speech, for
without the tungue, there could be perceived no distinction of voices, Ueines
under the tu^gue
nor of words. And under ye tungue are.ii. veins, NOTA.
which appear, when it is lifted up, which are opened for diseases of the
tu^gue and the throat: Angina greece. (...).
as Angina, and other affectes. But here ought heed to be taken, that
Phlebotomy be not done in the tu^gue, unless there be a general blood
lettynge before, or elsse ventosynge in the shoulders, or elsse that the body
be purged, with a medicyne or a clister. For the Phlebotomye of the tongue
draws, augmenteth, and multiplyeth the disease in the root of the tungue:
and especially if the body be replete or stiptike, unless some of those
remedies go before, of which I have spoken.

The.ix. Chapter.
Of the ears.
Next after the jaws, (...). i. Auris, plurale (...) aures. Vnde (...). i.
auricula.
and under the bones Parietalia, on the right side and on the left side, are
ordained the ears, (which are called in Greek Ota, and in Latin Aures:) and
set on each side upon the hard bone Petrosu^, which is a part of the bone
Mendosum, having in the holownesse thereof a wrinckled crookedness, endinge
with a number of pores. By reason of which crookedness, there may pass no
instrument into the ears, be it never so fine no not a bristle, (as Galen
says in the nynthe and eleuenthe books of the use of parts.) Unto which
holownesses on both sides do come the synewes of bearinge, called Nerui
audibiles, Nerui audibiles.
which are of the fifthe conjugation of synewes of the brain, which are said
to be holow. And whereas they come to the holes of the ears, they are wrythed
much like a vine press, and are made at the ends like the heads of worms,
and upon these bones is made and grows a broad gristle, which we call ye ear,
whereon are planted certain se^syble synewes, coming from the skin that
covers the scul: wherwt also are conjoined some soft fleshy parts, and
certain wryncles of veins and synewes half round. NOTA.
Which the chirurgien must cut acco^dinge to that form, when any cuttynges
be needful in that place.

The.x. Chapter.
Of the neck with the.vii. turnynge joints thereof, and his other contents.
Under the head in the hinder part is the pith or marowe of the back called
Nucha, Nucha.
and in greek Notiaeos Myelos, (...). i. Me dulla Spinalis. Spondils of the
neck are vii.
(under and about ye which are ye.vii. spondilles or turning joints of the
neck called Septem Ceruicis uertebrae.) Out of the which Nucha between the
spondilles, go out.vii paier of sinews, so yt the first payer go out of the
first holes of the spondilles. The which holes are set against ye beginning of
Nucha, whereas the said Nucha departs from the brain. And this first payer,
spread the^ selves upon ye skin of the head, and there are made part of the
muscles. The second pair go out of the second hole, between the first
spondill and the second, and it goes to the skin of the head, and gives
mouinge unto it: and in some parts, it joins it self with the muscles of
the neeke, and the cheke bones, and gives moving unto them. Or rather at a
hole that is made on each side between every.ii. spondilles.
The third pair go out of the third spondill, which are spread and departed,
unto the moving of the broad bone of ye shoulder. The fourth pair, in like
manner go out of the upper holes of the fourth spondill, procedinge from thence
to the muscles, as well of the forepart, as the hinder part of the back. The
fifthe pair goinge out of the upper holes of the fyfthe spondille, are spread
upon the muscles of the midriffe, and to the muscles moving the head, and
after to the muscles of the shoulder blades. The sixte pair goes out of the
upper holes of the vi. spondil. The.vii. pair likewise goes out of ye upper
hole of the seventh spondil, which in their goinge out are departed upward and
downward, upon the muscles of the neck, the head, the breast, and the throat.

And after the synewes and muscles, Ueines of the neck.
there are ordained in the neck, veins and arteries, both open and hid. and
in the neck be.ii. veins openly appearinge behind the ears: Of the which the
cuttinge is dreadefull and dangerous, because of the natural heat in the^
received of the heart, and the affinity they have with the brain. For when
they are cut, there follows ^wounding, and diseases of many kinds, of their
great bleding. And after the cutting they will not lyghtlye be stopped:
whereupon oftentimes follows death. And therefore it plainly appears, yt in all
the apostemes of ye neck, or in what case or disease so ever happen in the
neck, wherein cutting must be had: that those cuttinges must be done according
to the length, because of ye growing of the sinews, and members of the neck.
NOTA.
And the aforsaid veins and arteries the which he there tied together, ought
to be considered, for from those manifest veins and arteries under the ears,
there proceed together other veins and arteries, in such wise, yt ye can not
perce nor cut the veins, but that the arteries also must be perced and cut: of
which doing should succeed the dangerous accidents aforesaid.

The xi. Chapter.
Of the throat and the contents thereof, as the wind pype, and the Epiglot,
the Uvula, and Almondes of the throat. etc.
IN the forpart of the spondils of the neck beside ye throat, is set the pipe
of the stomache, (...)
(called Meri or Oesophagus) by whom meat and drink passes to the stomache,
which is made of stringes, veins, and arteries, (...) coming from the sixte
pair of (...) And it is fastened in the throat with the sharp arterye or pype
of the lunges called Arteria aspera in greek Tracheia artesria, (...). i.
aspera Canalis qua Vox editur.
Pharynx and Larynx (though some dividing it somewhat more exactlye apply
these two last names, and that most truly, to the upper part of the same)
which is made of gristles and of synewes, (...). i. fistula spiritalis
coming from the syxte payer of synewes of the brain: and it is grainye and
has little hoopes, in the utter part. And where as it grows with Oesophago
(or the pipe of the stomache,) in the upper end, it is even and soft.

And the throat is the beginning of the said conductes or pipes, in which
there is an emptye place, where as are fixed the two amigdales: Amigdales of
the throat.
that is to say, the two pieces of flesh of the form of two almondes, one on
the right side and an other in the left. And these amigdales be fleshye and
sinewye, that they may be the stronger: for they give entrance to the meat
and drink, that it may easily pass into the conduicte (called Oesophagus.)
And they also help the aer, (...). i. Ligula. Lingula sieve minor lingua.
to enter into Tracheia arteria by the Epiglot, for upon the upper end of
these ways or pipes is a certain coueringe, which the greeks call
Epiglottiden, and the Latins. Ligulam. That in the time of eating, there enter
into ye sharp artery and so to the lunges no hurtful thing, nor any thing but
aer, or things like unto aer. And thou shalt understand by Epiglottiden, the
knotte in the throat, at the end of the pipe, which knot falls down, and
makes diverse voices. And when a man eats or swaloweth his meat, it covers
Arteriam asperam, or the way of aer: but when one speaks, it is turned
vpwardes, so restinge erected between both the passages, until through the
occasyons above said, there be need of lyinge down again as before. For as
we may see, when men do talk and eat both at once, it often chances, that
a cromme falls into ye sharp artery: at which time they can not leave
coughinge, til the said cromme (or what so it is) be cast forth again.
Operculum Laringis.
And this Epiglottis is also called in Latyne of some Operculum Laringis.

And above the root of the tungue is a certain instrumente, (...). ^. Columus
Columella aut Gurgulio
that cleaves to the palate in the inner part of the mouth, called in greek
Kion, of the ancients Gargareon, and in Latin Gurgulio: which is necessary
to break the aer, and to make diverse voices. And sometime it happens, yt it
excedeth his due form by diverse affectes, by the which also it varyeth by
names: as when it excedeth in length, it is of that form called Columella,
and when in roundnesse like a grape, Vuea. Vuula.
it is called Vuea, or Vuula.

Upon these pipes are ordained diverse synewes, great and small, open and
priuye: which come from the syxte and seventh pair of synewes of the brain,
and they are meddled with the muscles of the neck and throat, with the third
and fourth pair of synewes of Nucha.

Upon the right side and upon the left side of the pype of the longes,
Guidegi Iugulares.
called Arteria aspera, are certain great and manifest black veins, called
Guidegi and Iugulares and under them are. ii. arteryes: of whose cuttinge and
persynge, the blood runs from the heart and lunges, NOTA.
from whence they come. Whereby the lunges are diseased and hurt, and their
natural pour hindered and let, and also it brings diseases to the heart,
whereupon often times sudden death follows: Incisions in the throat.
And therefore all the incisions that be made in the throat, ought to be done
after the length. wherefore it is necessary that we eschew the veins of the
throat, and especially those that be great, and those that ^e called
Iugulares or Guidegi. For under every vein of the throat, is hid an arterye,
in the which, there proceeds spirit of life and natural heat, immediatlye
from the heart and the lunges. And therefore it openly apeareth that all
cuttings of this place are dreadful and perilous. NOTA.


Understande that the throat is fastened to the furcle of the breast, Pixis
gulae.
in the place called Iugulum, or Pixis Gulae* which is the box, or holownesse
of the throat: and the neck is fastened with the hinder part of the seuenthe
spondill, which is the first spondill of the breast: and also it is fastened
with the spade bone of the shoulder, that it may move the better, and the more
mightilye, when need requires: That the shape and form thereof, may also be
seen the fayrer and the better. And between the shoulders behind, at the
nether end of the neck, Place for vent^synge.
are ventoses used, for diverse diseases of the head, and the parts thereof:
both with scarification and without scarification, as in good authors ye shall
read, and as the expert Chirurgien, knows by experience.

THE SECOND PART OF the Anatomy, treatinge of the form and shape of the
shoulder, and the adiutory of the arm, the hand, and the fyngers.
The.i. Chapter.
Of the shoulder and the chan^ll bone.
AFter the neck and the throat, as well on the right side as on the left,
Humerus.
is ordained a shoulder, called Humerus, in greek Omos, and of some Brachio^.
Wherein there are (...) i. humerus.
.iii. bones knyt, that by the means of that form and shape, the making
thereof may be the more noble and fair: and also the more profitable to mouynge
and workynge. The first of these bones, is the broad bone of the shoulder,
which many learned men call Scoptulum opertum, (...). i. Humerus latus.
and the Grecians O^oplatan. i. humerum latuni, and we vulgarlye Spatulam:
whose form and fashion in the hinder end or part toward the neck, Spatula.
is broad like a bakers pele. And in his length he has an edge, that
stretches to the head of this bone toward the shoulder, passing endlynge to
the broad end, which is toward the neck. In which broad end is knit a
gristle, which spreads a long beside the spondilles of the breast, unto the
seventh spondill of the neck. And on the other end, toward the shoulder,
this bone waxes great, in the end whereof is a holownesse, which is called
the box of the shoulder bone. Wherein the round head of the adiutorye
turns, as it accords to necessitye in the workinge of this member.

This bone was made in this manner, that the bones of the breast and of the
neck, should be the stronger and surer in the shoulder, and that the
adiutorye should not be dislocate or put out of ioynte, for every light
cause. And by this it manifestlye appears that the bone of the adiutory, can
not be dislocated backwarde.

In the former part of the shoulder, (...) i clauis (...) ut Clauis a clau
dendo. Iugulum. Iurcule.
is ordained a bone called Clauis, or Iugulum, in greek Cleis, and in English
ye furcule or canel bone, which is tied with the broad bone, being the
second of the.iii. bones of the shoulder: and it is there set, that this
member may abide the better in his strength, and to bear up that place, that
it go not out forward by any small or light occasion. And this bone is
less then the broad bone of the shoulder in his knitting, that the shape of
that place may be the fairer and ye more formable, and also that it should
not let the mouynge of the adiutorye. And so it plainlye appears, by reason
of the being less of this bone in that part: that the roundnesse of the
adiutorye may be dislocate forward.

And after these bones, there are insensible ligamentes, which bind and knit
those bones together. And there is a certain lygature in the middle of the
aforesaid box or holownesse, entering the round end of the adiutory: which
knytteth the said round end with the aforesaid box. Of the breakinge and over
stretchinge of which, NOTA.
succedeth a continual departinge: so that thereby the restoringe of the
dislocation is let or hindered: In so much that other while when the bone is
reduced, and brought again to his situation and being, after the restoringe
thereof, it will leap or spring out again. Emunctorie place of the heart.
And under the shoulder, between the arm and the body, is the place
emunctory, whereas the heart does send forth (in the time of Pestilence or
other venomous fevers,) such things as are unto him noious and contrary: as
experience proves, of the filthye Apostemes that there come forth at such
times in that place.

The.ii. Chapter.
Of the bone adiutorium, then of ye elbow, the arm and the hand, with the
number, figure, and offices of the bones, and other parts in these contained.
THe third bone of the shoulder is the adiutory, which is round without, Os
adiutoriu^. (...)
and holow within, called Brachion.i. humerus* and commonly Aditorium os.

This bone is great, thyn, and in his holownesse full of marowe, of which
marowe he receives necessary moystnesse. And his upper end is round, goinge
into the bore of the shoulder bone, where it is knytte and turns about:
holde^ between his ligatuues, with the other two bones in that place, as it is
a boue said.

The other end of the adiutorye is fastened with the ii. cubite bones or
fociles, whereas he has.ii. knottes in form like pullyes, which enter into
the holowe cups and cauities of the two Focilles per Enarthrosin, whose names
are beneth written: whereof the upper focil or cubite bone is the less, and
stretches from the thumb unto the ioynte of the elbowe. But the other bone is
somewhat greater and longer, stretchynge from the nether part, that is from
the little finger to the elbowe: and lies upon the ^ther with a little
bearinge out like a birds bill, in length to the adiutorye: which bunche or
knobbe makes the form of the elbowe when it is bowed* which was made, that
this fasteninge with the end of the adiutorye, with the roll or pulley
thereof in the holowe cup, should be the more strong. And that it should
not be dislocate or unjointed, with any small occasion: Therefore is the upper
focile supported upon the head of the adiutorye. And this place is bound with
strong insensible bonds, that by that means the situations of the bones may
be strong: and that they may abide when a man lifts burde^s, and that the
arm go not backwarde, nor outward. And there the nether focill or mayor bone
of the cubitte, about this passing out, has his shape or form somewhat
bowing. Then next after the elbowe, are the.ii. focilles aforsayde: The upper
most whereof is called in Greek Cercis, in Latin Radius and Focile minus. (...)
Radius sieve focile minus.
The nethermoste Pechis, in Latin Vlna, Cubitus, and focile Maius: which are
knit together endlonge, (...). i. Vlna Cubitas, uel focile minus.
by the means of ligamentes goinge between. And the less bone goes into the
greater, being made both as one. And they are joined, with the compaxion of
bones in ye wrest, called Carpus, or Brachiale: which is made together of
the.viii. bones called Rasseta, four of them being ordained without the
hand, (...). i. Carpus, uel Brachiale.
to the ends of the two focilles: and the other.iiii. be knit and bound
together with the bones, of the holowness of the hand, Ossa Rasseta manus.
called Ossa metacarpii. And these bones have no marowe in them, because of
their thick and hard substance: But the focilles have marow in them, for the
cause before told in the bone called Adiutorium. And allthoughe it show not
in the less focill, so manifestlye as it does in the greater or mayor bone,
yet in the less focill is a certain holownesse, in which is found moistness,
in ye manner of marow, which serves there in the stead of marowe.

And after these bones Rasseta, are constitute the bones of the palms of the
hands, called Ostea metacarpi^.i. Post^rachialia, (...), id est Postbrachiale,
palma, uel manus pectus.
Palma, uel manus pectus, which are four in noumber, and are joined closelye
together, per synarthrosim with ye forsayde bones Rasseta. And they are
ioyntlye knit together at the other end, with the bones of the.iiii. fingers:
and not with the bones of the thumb. For the first great bone of the thumb,
For Synarthrosis, look in the.i. chap. of the first treatise.
is knitte to the end of the upper focill in the ioynte, and is thereby made
more strong in mouynge, then the other four: and also by that means it is the
more semelye and comely joined. So of the palm together with the fyngers is
made up the hand, (...). i. Manus
called Manus in greek Cheir. In every finger whereof are three bones, called
Digiti, or Ossa digitorum, Digiti, uel ossa digitorum.
save in the Thumb which has but it: so yt in the fingers and the thu^be of
each hand, are.xiiii. bones. Wherefore with the bones Rasseta, which are eight
in number, (beside the bones Sesaminat) all the bones of the arm from the
shoulder to the ends of the fyngers, are in number.xxx.

Upon these bones and ligamentes hitherunto descrybed, are ordained synewes
which come from the.vi. and.vii pair of synewes of Nucha in the neck: and from
the first of Metaphrenum. Of which synewes (being co^pound and mixed with
ligamentes, and intermedling of flesh,) are made muscles or brawnes, which
move the shoulders, the adiutorye, the elbowe, Muscles of the brain.
and the arm. In the end of these muscles, come out Chordes, whereby the
fyngers are moved, and the lower members. Of which muscles, there is one
great and manifest, in the midst of the adiutorye, so that some part of him
is within, and some part without: from ye which are departed the Chordes or
tendones, that move the arm after diverse parts. And in the arm is an other
open and manifest muscle, being without the arm, and bespredeth the arm
about: from which departs diverse tendones, which move the fingers inward
and outward, as need requires.

The.iii. Chapter.
Of the veins of the arm, with their beginninges and procedynges, and how
incision is to be done in the arm and hand.
AFter these muscles are ordained veins, open and privy, which serve to
Phlebotomy: of the which there be.vi. in number. Whereof the first is departed
from the vein under the arm hole, Ueines of the arm.vi. for Phlebotomy.
or from the veins showed in ye arm holes* which passes by the shoulder (and
is therefore called Humeralis) in the nether part or side of the arm, going to
the upper part of the elbow: Cephalica uena. Humeralis uena.
and there it is called Cephalica. For he proceeds of the vein, of which the
one part, goes up to the brain, and nurisheth those parts, and the other
part nourishes the members of the arms, by reason whereof, he is so called.
And secondlye from Cephalica, there proceeds a branche, which apeareth
between the thombe and the forefinger, Cephalica ocularis.
and there it is called Cephalica ocularis.

Thirdlye from this shoulder vein, comes forth a great conspicuous branch,
beneathe the boughte of the arm in the insyde, and from thence passes
slopewise over ye small of the arm, and there is called Funis brachii, Funis
Brachii.
spreading from thence with diverse branches to and on the back of the hand.

From the arm hole in the inside, comes the fourth vein seruinge to
Phlebotomy, which goes by the inner side of the adiutorye unto the elbowe,
Basilica sieve Hepatica Vena.
and apeareth in the nether side of the boughte of the arm, and is called
Basilica or Hepatica, which proceeds toward the hand, by the lower focille:
and then there departs from him a branch, which lies in the back of the
hand, between the little finger and the next adioyninge, and there is called,
of diverse men by diverse names, Saluatella sieve. Splenatica
as Saluatella or Plenatica, with such other: and it is the.v vein of
Phlebotomye. Sixtlye in the midst of the boughte of the arm, there appears
an other vein, which is made of.ii. branches conjoined together in one:
whereof the one springs of Vena Cephalica the other comes from Vena
Basilica. This vein is called Vena Purpurea, Mediana sieve.
or Nigra, Communis also, Mediana, and of some Cardiaca: Co^munis sieve.
and commonly with each of these veins preuilye or apertlye, Cardiaca uena
there is accompanied an arterye. Also the muscles of these places are made of
sinewy fibers, with mixinge of flesh and sinewye pannicles, procedinge still
after the length. Of veins, arteries, and of feelynge synewes, is made the
utter skin: whereby it is nurished, and made sensyble.

And as well the vei^^* whereby it is nourished, and the arteries whereby it
ha^^^ ^se, as the sinews, whereby it has felinge and mouinge, proceed in the
arm, all according to the length. NOTA.
These have we made open and plain, to the understanding, because it behooves
the Chirurgien to have respect, how he makes incisions, (as in opening of
apostemes or otherwise) in these places. For why, for as much as all the
muscles, synewes, tendones, arteryes, and veins of this place: (namely from
the shoulders, to the ends of the fingers,) go and proceed after the length:
it requires, Incisions in the arm.
that the incisions and cauteries of those places, should be done always,
according to the procedynge of the aforsaide members in length.

And it seems that the vein Cephalica, which is in the bought of the arm,
and shows him self in the upper focile, goinge for the between the thumb
and the forefinger: serves to the head, and the parts thereof. And likewise
the vein that is in the lower part of the bought of the arm, called
Basilica, whose branche (as I said before) appears between the little finger
and the ringe finger, (and there is named Saluatella, serves to the liver and
the spleen: because it proceeds from a part of the vein that nurisheth the
lower members. And also the common vein, which apeareth in ye midest of ye
bought of ye arm, seems to serve both to ye upper and the nether parts: and
that because he grows both of the shoulder vein called Humeralis, Humeral^
Vena.
and of the arm hole vein called Axillaris, Axillaris Vena.
as it evidently appears.

And note, that all the veins here specified, proceed of that part of Vena
concaua that ascends up to the heart, putting forth one great branch into
the holownesse of the same. And after so ascendinge, is yet divided on each
side into.ii. branches: of the which one branche spredeth to all the rybbes,
to Pleura and Diaphragma, nourishing them. The other goes to the fore part of
the breast, and so to the place of the furcle: where it is again triplye
divided. Whereof one branch ascendynge by the neck up to the head, is
divided into all parts of the same: The second goes to the shoulder, and the
third to the arm hole. Of which two do proceed all the deuisyons, whose
names and places of section, are here declared: whereby it appears what
coligance and unity, these veins have with the head, the heart, and the liver.

THE THIRD PART OF Anatomy, which shows the shape and form of the
furcules, and of the ribs, of the breast, and the chine bone of that part,
unto the mouth of the stomache.
The.i. Chapter.
Of the breast and the.xii. turninge joints of that region, with the rybbes and
other bones, and parts, as Pleura. etc.
Under the throat, in the foreparte thereof, are ordained the.ii. bones called
Claues and Furculae, Clauis, Furcula.
and of some Iugula, Iugulum.
in english the canell bones: which he round without, and holowe within. And
they are fastened at the one end in the shoulder, as I have showed in the. ii.
chapter: At the other end they are fastened together with the vppermoste part
of the breast, (...).
at the pit of the throat.

At which pit begins the region of the breast, i. Os prectoale
holdinge in the forepart of Pectorale called of Galen Sternon, which is
constytute but of. iii. bones, although some number them vii (as you se
Lanfranke does,) according to the. vii. long ribs of each side joining to
them, which are in deed fastened to those ribs, and each of them to other,
with a gristelly substance, that extends it self with a sce^lder flexible
point, beneathe those bones, (like ye point of a sword,) over the mouth of
the stomach: and therefore is called of diverse authors in greek Xiphocides,
(...).
and in latin Scutiformis, or Ensiformis. i. ensiformis, uel in ensis effigiem
exiens.
Which by his bowing gives room to the stomache: and yet by his gristlye
hardness defends it from hurt. And in that place, or nighe to the same
beneth, is the mouth of the stomache, (...). enim ensis est.
And this length, with the knittinges together, (...). i. pectus, uel
Spiritalu^^ p^^ium domicilium and mummentum.
of gristlye substances, and the making of these bones, with the ribs in the
ridges, is proprelye called the breast, in Greek Thorax, and in Latin Pectus.
And of ryb^es there are on each side.xii. called Costae, which are fastened
with. xii. of the spondils, which are proprelye the spon^ils of the breast,
(...) est Spinae pa^^ a Ceruice ad cinctu^ prote^sa. metaphreni Vertebrae.
and called therefore Metaphreni Vertebrae: as the next of the spondilles
down ward, which be.v. in number are called Lumborum Vertebrae, the
spondilles of ye reins. And those. xii. ribs are bowinge, in the manner of
half a compass: of the which there are vii. called Costae Verae which being
fastened at the hinder ends, with the spondilles of the back, (...). i.
Vertebra uel secundum Vulgos Spondyliu^ Costae Verae* Costae Spuriae*
are byggest in the myddest: whose former ends are fastened with the gristles
of the. iii. bones of Sternon: and v. of those. xii. rybbes are short, and
reche not to Sternon, as do the other. vii. but are only fastened in the
spondilles behind, and therefore called Costae Spuriae, in English falls ribs,
or backwarde rybbes: because when the formoste ends of them be bowed down,
they bow upward again. For they have no fastening at the fore ends, (...). i.
Costa secu^du^ Aristot. aliis Latus. at (...) pro Pleura intelligitur me^brana
Costas succingens.
as have the. vii. great ribs: which are fastened as I said ere while with
the bones of the breast, and take their knittinges of them. and note that alonge
the side, under or within these ribs, is a pannycle or skyn called Pleura,
wherein is engendered the infla^mation called Pleuritis, and in English the
pleurisye.

The. ii. Chapter.
Of the heart.
ANd within those bones, (...). i. lateru^ dolo^, and co^punctio, Costalis, at
uere Succinge^ti^ mebra^^ morbus, uel i^^^^matio.
that is to say the bones of the breast, the rybbes, and the spondilles of the
same, within the holownesse that is made of them, I say is the heart, named in
Greek Cardia, and in Latyne Cor, confyrmed and set. Which because he is the
pryncipall member, (...). i. Cor atque (...)
of all other members, and the beginning of life, is thus set in the myddest
of the breaste, as ^orde and king to all the rest: of whom he is obeyed and
served, as a prince of his subjects. And the heart has blood in his own
substance, whereas all other members have it but in arteries and veins: and in
the heart is the nutrityue blood made liuelye spirit, and carried forth in
the arteries, which in the heart have their beginnynge, as I said
sufficiently in the first treatise. And the heart is covered with a strong
pannicle called of the latins Capsula cordis, (...). Tunica Cor contegens.
and of the Grecians Pericardion. And from the heart proceeds the great
artery, which is called in latin Arteria magna, from whom brauncheth and
proceeds all the other arteries, yt are in any member of the body: by which
means the spirit of life is carried to all the members of the same, Arteria
magna.
as it is sufficientlye said, in the first treatise and the. vii. chapter.
And the heart is an offyciall member, spermatike, and of a lacertous
substance: The great end whereof in his being, leans and inclines most
unto the right side, and the small end leans most unto the left side. And
in the heart have the venall arterye, and the arteriall vein their
begynninges: of whose processes and offices I speak immediatlye hereafter in
the lunges.

Here also might be to great purpose declared, the great secrets of these
first mouinges, which are in the heart, called in greek Systole, (...).
and Diastole, in latin Contractio, and Dilatatio, 1. contractio, uel
compressio
which are compared in this orbicle, (of diverse learned men) to the primum
mobile or first mouer, in the great orb. For these mouinges are the first
cause of all other mouinges: (...). i. dilatatio, destinctio, and in terdum
diuisio
as of pulses in the arteries, and so of all the rest. But because those
secrets pass the capacitye of the common sort: and also that I should break
my purpose of briefnes, I omit them, and will now speak of the lunges or
lights.

The. iii. Chapter.
Of the lunges, and their parts and offices.
THe lunges also called in Greek Pneumon and in latin Pulmo, (...). 1. Pulmo.
are set in the same holownesse, which are cold and moist of complexion, and is
divided into v. lobes or parts: iii. or the right side, and. ii, on the left.
And there is also the pannicle Mediastinum, being of like composytion with
Diaphragma. And as Diaphragma deuideth the region of the breast and the parts
thereof, from the belly, so does Mediastinum divide the lunges and the breast
into. Mediastinum.
ii. several parts, after the length. And this deuisyon of the lunges in
parts was ordained, that if one part perish, an other may serve the turn.

And. iii. kinds of vessels we find in the lunges worthy of note. (...).
The first is an arteriall vein (mentioned in the first treatise, chapi. 8.)
coming from the heart, and brancheth into ye lu^ges: bringyng from ye heart
lively spirit and nutrimentall blood unto them. The second is a venal
arterye, (whereof I have spoken in the first treatise cha. 7.) conueying from
all parts of the lunges into the left ventricle of the heart, fresh aer: as
well to temper and mytigate the great heat thereof, as also to be made there
(by mixinge with most fine blood) pure and lively spirit, by the workynge of
the heart, to be sent to the great arterye: and from him by all other
arteries, to all and every part of the body. Arteria aspera.
The third is Arteria aspera, through whom the lunges draw in and put
forth aer: for whose farther description, look in the end of the first
chapter of this treatise.

And from the first spondill of the breast, which (if ye begin to number at
the upper end of Nucha) is the. viii. spondill of the ridge: (...). Stupor
(...).
from this spondill I say, comes two sinews, which give felyng and moving
to the whole breast: for of them are made the muscles, and the moving synewes of
that place. And note, that some of the mouinge synewes and muscles of the
breast, move according to the will, which for the most part come from the. vi.
and. vii. pair of synewes of the brayn, and of Nucha: and some synewes move by
the natural making of the breast. Which is known by the disease or sickness,
called Apoplexia: The condition whereof is such, that before the time of the
sycknesse, the breast moves: but in the hour of sycknesse it can not move.
For in the time of sickness in this disease, the brain is found stopped,
from whence these synewes proceed: so that by the said stoppinge of the
brain, the animal spirits be suffocate, and may not distende in the said
synewes, to do their operation in mouynge.

The. iiii. Chapter.
Of the veins of the breast, and their beginnings and procedinges, and how
incisyon should be done in the breast, and the parts thereof.
THe veins that are in the aforesaid skin deuidinge the breast, (nourishynge
those parts,) come from the second branche of Vena caua: Vena caua.
which is the less of the two great veins, that have their beginning, in
the holownesse of the liver. Which branch comes into Diaphragm: or the
midrife, and from thence it goes endlo^g into the forsayde skyn, which
deuideth the breast called Mediastinum. And with these go other veins, which
come from the third branche of unknown veins, in the right ear of the
heart. (...).
But the arteryes, which come to the forsayde skyn and the breast, proceed or
issue of a branch that comes from the great arterye, which grows in the
left ear of the heart. And every arterye brancheth forth under the veins,
so that every member that is nouryshed by veins, is quickened and kept by
the liuelye spirit of the arteries: which proceed universally under the said
veins. And know that all the veins and arteries, which come openly to the
nurishinge of the members of the breast, and especially in the utter part,
proceed in their going, according to the length of the ribs, and of the bones
of the breast: ye and so do also the great synewes, which come to the making
of the muscles of the breast: having their beginning of Nucha, NOTA.
within the spondills of the same. Wherefore it euydentlye appears, how and in
what manner the apostemes of these places should be cut, and how cauteries
ought to be done in the same, when need requires.

Therefore as much as may be, they ought to be done in those places,
according to the goinge of the rybbes in length: and so shall there no synewe
be hurt, nor errore committed. For when incisions and cauteries be thus done
according to the length, and that in the utter most, lowest, and most
dependente places: of such work I say, comes the spediest, shortest, and
fairest end of ^urations. And most prone, apt, and ready to digestion,
mundification, consolidation, desiccation. etc. as experience manifests.

THE FOVRTHE PART OF Anatomye, which declares the form and shape, of the
whole sircuite of the womb, namelye from the mouth of the stomache unto the
hanches, and of the spondilles of that region.
The. i. Chapter.
Of the region of the bellye, and the pannycles of the same, and the bones of
that part.
THe third ventricle is the belly, called in latin Venture, Venture.
which albeit that we here recite last, is ye first piece of work, to be begun
in order of di^ection of the body, least otherwise putrefaction hinder the
whole work. It begins at the lowest ribs, and ends in the grindes and
share, and this whole circuit is very lose and soft.

First then upon all the rest is the utter skin, common to all the body. In
the which about or very nere the mids of the bellye, is seen as it were a
little round py^te or hole: which is an ornamente not unseemly to that
part, commonly called in English the navel, (...).
in greek Omphalos, in latin Vmbilicus. i. Vmbilicus.
From which a certain holow tying, like in form to a gutte, proceeds:
infestinge it self in the holowe side of the liver. The office whereof was in
the mothers womb, to bring both blood and spirit from the mother, to the
liver of the child, and so from the liver to all the members of the body: and
also to expel (after digestion) the superfluous juice, which after the birthe
is the urine, and passes by the yard: and afterward the navel has no
office that we read of in Anatomye.

Next under the skin of the belly is ordained fatness, and also under that
fatness. viii. muscles, which accord to the necessitye of that place: the
making and office whereof we will anon declare. And note that all this whole
substance of muscles, fatness, and the skin together, upon the regyon of the
bellye, is called of the Arabians Myrach, of the Greeks Epigastrion, (...). i.
Abdomen. Venture exterior, uel su^mus Venture.
and of the Latins Abdomen, de Abdendo, that is of coueringe: because it
covers and closelye hides, all the entraels. Wherein by the way their errore
is to be noted, that take Myrach to be a simple and particulare pannicle,
whereas in deed noe such pannicle as they imagine, can be found by Anatomye.
And farther Galen councelleth, that in all wounds of the bellye, wherein
Siphach Syphac.
is cut: that in stitchinge of the wound, we should sewe or take hold (in
the stitchynge) of Syphach with Myrach: which council can stand with no
reason, if Myrach be any other wise to be understood then as I have said
before.

And vnder^^^ese muscles in the forepart, (...).
is ordained an other skyn or pa^nycle, i. omentum uel zirbus adi pinus.
(under the which is the call, which is called in Greek Epiploon, in latin
Omentum, or barbarouslye zirbus adipinus, and also the guts, unto the
testycles and coddes. And this pannicle or skin, is called Siphach or
Peritonaeum: Siphac.
of the breakinge of which Siphac, it happens that zirbus and the guts fall
out into the codde. (...). i. Tunica incestina circunde^s.
But sometime of the said going out of zirbus and the guts, there falls
only a swellynge in the flank: and then may the chirurgien know, that the
rupture or breakinge of Siphac, is not great. Which may lightly be helped with
emplasters, conuenyente and resting, by lyinge upon the back, with under
shorynge and proppyng of the body: as for that cause and place shall seem
conuenyente.

And under this Siphac, Ossa (...)
is ordained the bones of ye share, called Ossa pectinis, or Coxendices: which
bones are made after the form of a half circle or compass: saving in the
upper part toward the navel, they have some going out. And in the share, the
ends of them are bound and knytte with the hanche, and there they become
sundry: that they may sustain those parts with their hardness.

The. ii. Chapter.
Of the yard, and the coddes, and of the matrix.
Under or between the lower parts of these bones, is placed the yard or
instrument of generation: which the grecians call Caulon, Caulis. (...), i.
Virga^iri^^ Penis.
the latins Caulem, Virgam and penem: and consysteth in substance, partlye of
ligamentes, (namely. ii. and they holowe each way, as it were all one thing:
such as else where are not found. These being replete with spirits, do
erecte the yard, with the help of two muscles lyinge to the sides of the
same.) Partlye of notable veins and arteryes, coming from the great
vessels about Os amplum: and of synewes that spring from the common stock
of such as descend to the moving of the inferior parts. The head or extreme
end whereof, is thought to be pure and simple flesh, (...). a similitudine
eius, ideoque latin Glans.
and is called in greek Balams, in latin Glans, being covered with a double
skin named Posthe and Praeputium: To the end yt the said fleshye head may be
preserved from hurt: and also, that by rubbing up and down, (...). i.
Praeputium aliqu^ti^ns que ipsa Virga.
or forewarde and backward of the skin, upon the head of the yard, there be
provoked and styrred, the greater, and more aboundante appetite, in the act of
generation. And that by such rubbing, and mouynge of the skyn, upon the
head of the yard: the seed by the swellynge of the same, may be the more
aptlye, and better cast out, into the vessels of generation in women, in time
of the said act.

Farthermore from the Syphach go down two pipes, the lower parts whereof be
made, (...). Geminus, at hic paniculus duplici sinu testes contine^s. (...). i.
Testis sieve Testiculus.
and becomes there a double bagged pannicle or skin in the codde, conteyninge
the stones: and is therefore called Didymos. Which stones or testicies, called
in Greek Orchees. in Latin Testes, are of substance says Galen, holowe,
lose, fleshy, and soft: Whose first coueryng is white, and bloudlesse, called
Dartos. Under the which as some write, is an other tender white tunicle or
covering, which they call Erythroeida. Whereunto belong sundry vessels, of
substance (for the most part) hard, De Vsit pars tium. li. 14. (...).
thick, and strong: As some to bring blood and spirit, from Venacaua and
Arteria maxima, to the testicles, and called therefore Vasa semen adferentia,
and also Praeparantia: because they do not a little alter such blood as they
bring, and prepare the same. i. Tunica de^sa testes tegens (...).
But yet work they it not to perfectyon, for so should the testicles be
deprived of their office, of in genderinge sperme: for the which errore Galen
reproves Aristotle. i. Tunica tem^is, testes interne tegens. (...).
Which vessels as they enter the substance of the stones, do pass through
a manifest glandule, cleuing to the upper part of each stone: which helps
much the preparatiue facultye, and is called Epididymis, and of some also
Didymos. i. Semen genitale sieve prole ficum. (...)


Other vessels also there are to the stones belonging, called Vasasemen
deferentia, (or rather Eiaculatoria,) that carry the sede (now labored) to the
yard, and there and thence, through the urine passage out of the same. etc.
Least any man should judge two passages to belong to the same: i. non
nullis testium muolucrum, at Galeno Glandula quaedam est, utrique testi adnata.
one for sperme, and an other for urine. Yet are there notwithstanding two
holowe ligamentes, (and they not with out deuisyons,) which by receiuinge
spirit into them selves, do erecte the yard, as before.

Over those pipes or conduictes, (coming from Peritonio,) and also the stones
is appointed the vttermoste skyn, (...). i. (...) at hic (...).
or purse of the testicles, called in Greek Oscheon, in Latyne Mentula and
Scrotum. And in women in stead of the yard, is the neck of the Matrix,
called Ceruig Vteri, whose port or entrance is called Vulua. Which is made of
a stretchyng synewye substance: That it may conuententlye stretche in the time
of child bearinge, as need requires.

And it has inwardlye therewyth, V^l^^s.
(as a man has outwardlye) two testicles or stones. Nevertheless, they be
smaller, flat, and round, in form of an Almonde: and the neck of it in
comparison to the testicles or coddes, is of the form and shape of a man's
yard, as it were turned inward. And the head of this neck, in the time of
casting forth of the seed touches these testicles, and moves them to cast
forth their seed the better, into the holownesse of the matrix. And next after
this neck inwardly is the matrix it self, or the womb, called in greek
Metra, (...) Vterus sieve matrix.
and in Latin Vterus: which is the field of generation of mankind, and is
placed between the gutte Longaon, and the bladder: and is much like the bladder
in form, and inwardlye (as some will,) like a painted heart. Of compounde
substance: as sinewye, veinye, and of arteries. The rest of the making with
the offices and propreties whereof (: as in Coitu, and conception, the growing
of sperme into Embrio, and of Embrio to a lyuinge creature, of delyuerance or
birth, the issuinge of the secundine, abortion and the causes thereof, with
also all their circumstances: as the vartetye of vain opynyons about the
number of celles in the womb, the opening and closinge of the same, the
course of menstruous terms: With also the consection and taking out of a
lyuinge child, from a dead woman, or a dead child from a living woman:) I
here willingly omyt as things only appertaining to the wise, discrete, and
learned: who are well able to seek the same, in such learned authors, as have
largelye and plainelye written thereof: and I will proceed orderlye, to the
bones and muscles of these parts. Notwithstanding note this, that the flesh
and skynnes of these parts, are to be delte wythall to chirurgerye, as is to
be done with the yard, the coddes, and the parts to them nyghe adiacente.

The.iii. Chapter.
Of the bones of the back part of these parts called turnynge joints, and
the muscles of the belly, with their form and proprety,
IMmediatlye, after the.xii. rybbes, and the spondilles of the breast, are
ordained as I said in the first chapter of the third part, Lumborum
Vertebrae. (...).
Lumborum uertebrae, which are the v. spondilles of the reins. And they are
fastened and joined in ye nether part toward the fundament, with the broad
bone of the rumpe called Platy and Hieron in greek, in latin Sacrum Latum and
Amplum: i. Os Latum, Sacrum uel Amplum.
which after Carolus Stephanus, and others is made of.v. bones (ye some say
of.vi.) joined by Symphysin. How be it Gale^ says, in li^* de ossibus but of.
iiii. being unlike in form to the rest of the spondilles. (...). i. Apendix.
caudae icuruae similis ossisacro adnato.
Whereunto at his inferior parts, is the last gristiye bone of the ridge
knytte, called in greek Coceyx, in latin Os caudae, being also made of. iii.
parts: The last and third part whereof is simply gristly. And from every. ii.
opposite holes of the spondiis, is duly brought forth a pair of synewes: and
from the tail or end of ye chine, goes forth but one syne we alone, for it
has but one hole: and is therefore called Neruus sine pari. And these synewes,
that come from these. v. spondilles, come to the making of the muscles of the
belly. And from the holow vein comes certain branches of veins, to the
nurishing of the said muscles: as from the great arterye comes also
branches of arteryes, unto the said muscles of the belly, which bring
quickness, and heat unto them.

And of these muscles of the belly, are.viii. as I said before, Muscles of the
belly.viii.
of the which there be.ii. that come down straighte a longest the bellye,
having their beginning at the sharp gristle, or shield of the breast, and
end at the bones above the privy members called Ossa pectinis: and therefore
are called Musculi recti. Musculi recti.
Then there are other two fixed to the rydge which go transuers from the
sides, cross the bredthe of the bellye: Musculi
and therefore are called Musculi transuersi, or Laterales. Then are there.iiii.
that are called Musculi obliqui: (...)
of the which there are.ii. that are called Obliqui ascendentes, because they
spread as it were cater cornered upward: and the other ii. (...)
are called Obliqui descendentes, because they cross slope wise, the other.ii.
cater cornered downwardes. So that the graynes of the descendentes, cross the
graynes of the asce^dentes, The power attractiue.
in manner and form of this letter.X. and by the virtues of the long strayte
muscles is made the power attractiue: through the which is drawn down as
well by the intraels, as otherwise, all the superfluities of the dygestions: as
urine, wind, and earthly ercrementes. And by the virtues of the transuers
muscles, Retentyu^
is holden the power retentiue: whereby all things are kept, and contained til
nature has wroughte in them, her kind and office in digestion. Expulsy^e.
And by the oblique muscles, is made the power and strength to expel, avoid,
and put out such void excrementes, as nature wills to be expelled: whether
it be urine, NOTA.
ventosity or ordure. And note, that after Galen in his treatise De iuuamentis,
all wounds or incisyens made in the myddest of the bellye are more dangerous,
Wounds made in the bellye.
then those that are made in the sides: because the parts on the sides are
more apt to be handled, to take forth the entraels, then the middle parts be:
And also that the wounds, persynge the womb, will scarselye receive
incarnation, except Siphach be stitched to Mirach.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Of the midriffe, and the parts next under it, as the liver, the gaul, the
milte, with the.ii. great veins, as Porta and concana
WIthin this holownesse of the belly are the nouryshing members, The nuryshing
members
above the which and under the spiritual members, is a certain sinewy
member, broad and flat wouen together of muscles, great arteries and veins,
and is therefore of Galen numbered among muscles of the breast: Which does move,
and is caused to move, by the drawing in and out of aer. This member departs
and deuideth the spiritual members, from the nourishynge members: (...). i
interstitum, uel septum transuers^r, sieve Septum pectorale
and is called of the Grecians Diaphragma or Phrenes, and in latin Septum
transuersum, in English the midriffe: Which holds his place like the flappe
of a bellows in that operation. And when that member is hurt or wounded, it
is said to be incurable and mortal: because of his noble making, and
delicate substance, and his needful and profitable workinge: which when it is
wounded, is made void and of none effect.

Under the mydryffe is the liver set on the right side, called in Greek Hepar,
and in latin Iecur: which is a pryncipall member, (...). i. Iecur
official, and concerning his first creatyon spermatike, and of substance as
it were coagulated blood.

And to him is knyt and bound a little net, which is the root of all the
veins in the body, The liver.
both inwardlye and outwardlye: and he is clothed with a synewy pannicle.

And of this net (being the spermatike substance of the liver) there is by
natures providence ingendered.ii. great veins. Vena Porta, Porta Hepatis sieve
porta Iecoris.
Whereof the first is called Vena porta, Porta Hepatis, (...) Porta Iecoris:
from whom proceadeth the number of veins called Meseraicae, which are unto
Verae portae, as the branches of a tree unto the root or stock of the same.
The office of which veins is to draw the Chilous juice from the bothome of
the stomach and diverse guts, Venae meseraicae.
to the liver: where the second digestion is made. Vena Choele.
The second vein is called Vena choele, Vena concaua sieve
or Vena concaua, and of some Vena Ramosa. And this vein with his roots,
draws all the blood from the liver, Vena ramosa.
caryinge the same by his vniuersalle branches, into all the body: and in this
vein with his branches is the third digestion fulfiiled and made. From this
Vena Choecle, there are certain veins, which go from him to the reins,
Ve^rae emulgentes.
called Venae Emulgentes, or Vasa Emulgentia: which draw the waterye thin
substance, from the blood into the reins or kinde^s, Vasa emulgentia.
as it wear whey divided from pure milk. For which cause the Phisitiens call
the urine, Serum Sanguinis, Serum Sanguinis.
the whaye of blood.

And in ye midest of ye chest of ye liver, is set ye blader of choler,
commonly called the gall, (...)
in Greek Cystis choledoche, and in latin Folliculus fellis, or Vesicula
fellis: Which is an official member, spermatike and sinewy. From the which
departs two holowe pipes, Vesicauel Folliculus fellis. ^ istis fell^^ (...)
i. fell (...) bill^, tum flaua, tum ^tra.
whereof one bears choler, (called Fell and Bilis, and in Greek Chole) to the
stomache, to help thereby digestion: which also being sharp and bitter, does
mightilye scour away the remanentes: The other caryeth of the same matter to
the gutte Pyloron, which by the aforsayde qualityes purges from the same and
from the rest of the guts, their sliminesse and excrementes.

On the left side (as in the vnworthyer place) is set the spleen, commonly
called the milte, in Greek Splen, and in Latin Lien: which is a member
spermatike, and official. And is fastened with the liver, by certain ways or
vessels that go between them: whereby the gross and feculente parts of the
blood, are brought from the liver unto the same. Which keeps them (by
converting them as it were into his own substance,) until by nature her
impulsyon it be set out, to serve else where some necessary purpose. where in
the mean time it is divided, and extenuated, and made a commodious nutriment to
the spleen: and that by the means of certain arteries proceeding from the
great artery, immediately as it is passed through Septum transuersum.

Of this melancholic juice (called Chole or rather Mela^chole, (...). Bilis
Atra.
and in latin Atra bilis) That which is left or spared of the above said
nutriment, does nature use (even as she does yelowe choler) to stir up
appetite by his sharpness and sournesse in the mouth of the stomache. And also
(conueying the same each way by passages convenient,) to help ye virtue
retentiue both in the guts and stomache.

The.v. Chapter.
Of the stomache and of the guts, of Mesenterium, and of the veins called
Haemorrhoydes.
IN the myddest of those members is the stomach, called Ventriculus, in greek
Stomachos: which is a member compounde and spermatike, (...). i. Ventriculus
Os Ventris.
synewye, and very sensible, and is made of.ii. coats: of the which the
innermoste is synewye, and the outmoste is fleshy. And is to all the members of
the body, as the earth is to all things ingendered in the same: so that all
other members of the body, require of him the substance whereby they are
nourished, (as Galen says in the first chapter of his book De Iuuamentis.)

Whose upper part is straighte and narow, and his nether part very wide and
large, and his lower part is ended in the place of the navel: (...). i.
intestuium. (...) i. intestinu^ stati^ ex pyloro.
and is called the first vessel, wherein nature makes and fulfilleth her
first naturalle dygestion. Wherefore it is called the chest or store house, for
all the meat belonging to the body, and the cook also which dresseth meat for
all parts of the body: for in the bothome of the stomache, is made
principally the digestion, whereby all the members of the body do grow, and are
nourished.

And to the stomache is tied, (...). i. Agnatio uel ortus.
fastened, and continued one gutte, which after the difference of places is
divided, and called by diverse names: generallye Entera in greek, Intestina in
latin: whose diuisyon is into.vi. parts. Whereof the first being in length
(...). i. Ianitor sieve ostiarius, hic enim infimum Ventriculi orificium, quod
dum coquitur ad Vnguem clauditur.
.xii. inches, is named Dodecadactylos and Ecphysis, in latin Duodenum. The
upper end whereof, which is fastened to the nether orifice of the stomache,
being as it were the gate of the same: (for by the help of a glandule therein,
it stops so closelye the passage, that nothing can pass out thereat, till
concoction be fullye fynished,) is called Pyloros, in latin Portenarium: that
is the porter or door keeper. The second or next gutte unto this, is called
Exortus and Ieiunium that is the empty or fasting gut: Exortus. Ieiunium.
so called because it is ever found void or emptye. (...).i. gracilae le
intest^^^. (...). i. Vnum (...) Ventre^uel cauum.
In this chiefly (in Duodeno, also and in the bothome of the stomache,) are
fixed certain clean and subtle veins, (whose continualle drawinge, is the
cause of emptiness in the same.) which before and also hereafter, I call
Meseraicas. By the which they expel and the liver draws to him self, the
best and purest juice of the meat and drink, (...). i. Intestim crassioris,
pars superio^.
that are in those members concocted. With the lower end of Ieiuni, is knit
the long gutte, that we call the small guts, the greeks Ileon, the latins
Tenue uel Subtilae, and is of length.xvi. cubits. Heart unto this is
Monoculos called also Caecum intestinum, or Saccus, in English the sack or
blind gutte, because it seems to have but one hole in the upper end: for the
other end is like the bothome of a sack or bag. Unto the which is adjoined
Colon or the round gutte: whereunto also is anexed the last gutte, (as a part
of the same,) Longaon Intestinum rectu^.
called Langaon, and Intestinum rectum: which comes straighte down by the
spondilies of the reins, and is ended in the fundamente.

Note also that the guts have their situation with a certain member, (...).
i. Mesenter^^. Mesaraica uasa.
called Mesenterium, in Greek Mesaraeon: which is a notable texture of
innumerable veins and arteries, which are called Mesaraica Vasa, being ye
first veins: through whom the nutrityue juice as yet but raw, is drawn
out of the stomache, at the bothome of the same, and carried to the gates of
the liver, there to be the second time concocted. Porta Hepatis
And these veins do spring out and ramifye of the vein, called Porta
Hepatis, and are wholly covered and defended with pannycles and ligamentes,
which are also common to the guts: and this Mesenterium, being taken out
of the body, is like the cape of a shepheardes cloak, the back part whereof is
full of kurnels, or glandulous flesh: which as I remember, the butchers when
they take this member out of swyne and other beasts, do call the Trow. It
growinge fast to the back, is the stay to all the guts, that they move
not, from their due and conuenyent places. And from the liver and the spleen
come five veins, to the fundamente or end of Longaon, called Haemorrhoides,
for the melancholy blood that they shede: and when they be swollen or open,
(...) quasi fluxus sanguinis, quonia^ ab his fluere saepe solet.
the disease is called Haemorrbois, and commonly the Emeroydes or Piles.

The.vi. Chapter.
Of the bladder, the kidneis, the water pypes, and the ways generallye of
vryne.
Upon the gutte Longaon, or between Longaon, and the share in a man, and
between the matrixe and the share in a woman, is set ye blader, called in
latin Vesica, (...). i. uesica
and in Greek Physe: The which is the vessel of urine, being of a sinewye
substance, and the neck thereof is fleshye or musculye. And it is made of.ii.
coats, the which be ii. skins: and in the bladder are many small veins and
arteries, of which it purchases nurishmente and life. The neck of it passes
for the under the bone of the share, which in his goinge forth unto the
outmoste parts, is made small: and the way of urine that comes from it, is
made in the manner of a great vein, and it enters the substance of the
yard, passing forth through the flesh, in the lower parts of the bladder:
and parts in a manner the flesh of the yard in the midst, and by that
part goes out the urine.

In the yard there are Two holes in the yard.
.ii. holes, though both not through persing the same. One passing through, by
the which urine is cast out, and that is fastened with the neck of the
bladder: The other cominge from the stones enters the aforesaid, by the which
the sede of man is cast out. And this is fastened with the vessels of sperme,
Vas Fiaculatorium.
and is called Eiaculatorium Vas, whereof also above. And in the beginning of
the yardes holownesse, these two are made one.

And in the neck of a woman's blader, there is nothing sought, nor purchased,
concerning knowledge: for it is very short and strayte, and the nature of her
is not cast out in this manner: but comes a fundo Vteri per ceruicem eius:
nether does the urine passage help any thing thereto but serves only for
the expulsion of urine: wherein yet both great and small stones, are often seen.

In the end of the.xii. spondils of the rybbes, and under the first spondill
of the reins, The teynes. (...). i. Ren.
are set the reins or kydneis, called in Latin Renes, in Greek Nephroi,
within the holownesse of the body: the right kydney being ever placed higher
then the left. Whose office is to convert the aforesaid whayey substance of
blood, conveyed into them by the means a little before in the.iiii. chapter
mencyoned into perfect vryne. In echo of the which kidneis is a certain fine
straiuynge way implanted, called of Galen Porus Vreticus, Porus Vreticus.
through which the whey of blood, sucked in by Vasa Emulgentia, from the
holowe vein and great arterye, Vasa Emulge^tia.
is conveyed out of the kidneis into the water pipes, called in Greek
Vretheres, and in Latin Meatus Vrinarii: which from thence descend, (...).
i. Vrinarii meatus (...)
passing crokedlye down, till they be joined by the nether ends, with the
utter skyn (nyghe the neck) of the bladder: percynge also immediatlye the
inner skyn thereof. Whereof it obteyneth a certain little covering like a
flappe, (...). i. uri^^^.
resembling both in form and function such as we see in pumpes and sluices:
which by the falling course of urine, is driven open at the entrance thereof
into the bladder: but after wards falling to again, it so closelye shuts
the entrance, that (as Galen says) not only urine, but also air is
prohibyted to go back again into the said water pype.

And it is manifest that the synewes of those places, come from the spondilles
of that part, and the veins and arteries of those members, go as do the
veins of the bellye and the flank: That is to say, after and according to
the riuels, wrinckles, grains and the growinge of hear in those parts.

And therefore it is good, that the incisyons of those places, be done after
the procedinge of the grains: and also openinge of apostemes, and workinge
with cauteryes, ought to be done in these places in the forsayde manner, that
we commit none error.

THE FIFTHE PART OF ANAtomye, which expresses the form and shape of the
hanches, the thighs, the hammes, the shynnes, and the feet, and of the
members contained in them.
The i. Chapter.
Of the hippes and hanches, the grindes, the thighs, and the knee with their
parts.
IT behooves now that we speak orderlye of the bones of the hanches or
hippes, which are two in number, one on the right side, and an other on the
left, fastened by gristles and ligame^ts behind to the holy bone, and
likewise before, one with an other: whereas the upper parts of the^, Ossa Ilium.
(bearing up the guts so named) are called Ossa Ilium, Anchas.
and vulgarly Anchas: and at the nether parts dependynge Ossa pubis, Ossa
Pubis.
or Pectinis, where also they are streighter, and narower together in men then
in women. Ossa Pectinis.
Toward the sides (furthermore) outwardlye, they have in each a manifest
greatness, wherein is a holownesse, called the bore or cup of the hippe:
(...). i. Os Coxen^^^.
and there are they called in Greek Ischia, and in latin Coxendices. Through
at which box, passes a hard and strong insensible ligament, from a muscle
lying within the share, enteringe the round end of the thyghe bone: whereby it
is therein firmlye fastened. Which ligame^t if it be broken by the dislocation
of the thighe bone: ye bone can never be restored to endure in his place, nor
the ioynte made perfect gain. Wherefore the chirurgien may help the ache, and
pain of the member, caused by the dislocatyon: but restore it to continue he
ca^ not, for it will eftsoon leap out again. Outwardlye is this ioynte bound
with strong insensible ligamentes, and also with synewes and Chordes.

And in the insyde of this ioynte between the legs, Emunctorye place of the
liver.
are the emunctorye places, called the grindes or shares: where as the liver
has his cleansing place, in the time of Pestilence, or any like venomous
infection, as ye may perceive by the apostemes there put forth, at such
times: even as the heart puts forth in the arm holes, and the brain under
the ears, or in the throat. And in the grindes are found certain curnels or
glandulous flesh, even s^che as are found under the jaws, and in like places.

Then after the joints of the hyppes, are ordained the thigh bones, (...).
called Femora, Femina, and of some Coxa, which within are holow, and full of
marow, and without round: and the upper end of this bone, as I said before, is
fastened with the cup or box of the hippe: where as it turns and moves, in
the time of moving of the thigh, leg, or foot. And the nether end enters
into the box, or cup of the focill of the shinne: and there it is fastened
with the shinne bones. This ioynte is also bound with strong insensible
ligamentes, which be ordained in every iuncture, that the rubbing or mouinge
of the joints, should not be felt painful or uneasy, as we sufficientlye
have declared in the first treatise of the simple members, in the third
chapter.

And upon this ioynte of the knee, in the forparte thereof, is set a round
gristlye bone, (...). i. Os seu Conchula quaedam genu contegens.
called in greek Epigomatis and Mola, in latin Patella uel Rotula Genu, in
English the rotule of the knee: whose office is to defend the ioynte, and to
make the mouinge thereof the more easy. Patella sieve Rotula genu.


The.ii. Chapter.
Of the shynnes, of the ancles, the feet and the toes, the bones and other
parts: of their composityon, with the figure and number of them.
ANd after the knee, (...). i. Sura atque pass^^ uertitur ^i bula, uelacus.
are ordained the.ii. bones of the leg. (...). i. Tibia, aliis tame^ co^fuse
interdu^ Crus atque fe mu^ Vertitur.
Which are fastened after the length, in the nether end, with the ancle and
the hele, and are planted in them. And they are called the.ii. focils of the
legs: that is to say the greater focill and the less. The biggest is that
which is vppermoste on the shin, called in greek Perone and in latin Sura,
Malleoli.
and Focile maius. And the least is that which they commonly call the splint
bone, (...). i. Os quoddam aliquotiens ipse Talus.
in the calfe of the leg, called in Greek Cneme, and in latin Tibia and
Focile minus.

And in the lower ends, these ii. bones have.ii. additio^s called Malleoli,
which are the ancle bones: unto which is knytte, (...). i. Os Calcis, Os call
caneum.
(next forward under them) a bone called in greek Astragalos, and in latin
Talus. Nerte unto these behind is joined the hele bone, called of the Grecians
Pternan, of the latins Os Calcis, (...) i. Similis Scapha nauiu^ quo runda^
generi.
or Calcaneum. Then next before is the insteppe bone called (of his form) the
shiplike bone, and therefore in greek Scaphoeides, and in latin Nauiforme.
Then follow the.iiii. bones, called Rasseta pedis, and with the^ together
Tarsus. Of the which one in ye innersyde of the foot, is called in greek
Cyboeides, in latin Cubiforme, and in English the cube bone or the dye bone:
(...).i. Speciem Cubi refere^s, hoc est quadratum (...) ^^aeri similis.
because it is every way square like a cube or dye: and the other.iii. are
called Chalcoidea: Unto this Rasseta are immediatlye joined the.v. bones of the
plant of the foot, called in Greek Pedion, in latin Pecten, or Planta pedis:
which answers nighlye to that part of the hand called Metacarpium. (...)
i. Pla^a pedis pars, uel platapedis
Immediatlye unto these endlonge join the bones of the two toes, (as in the
hand of the fingers, Digiti pedis*
) called therefore Digiti pedis, which are.xiiii. in number, for in every toe of
the foot are.iii. bones, save only in the great toe, in the which is
but.ii. bones: because that toe needs no great mouynge, neither is it
necessary to his form and shape. Bones in the leg numbr. ^.
And thus it apeareth, that in the leg and foot, from the hyp to the toes,
are contained.xxxi. bones.

The.iii. Chapter.
Of the synewes, veins, arteryes, and muscles of the wh^le leg, of their
beginninges procedynges, forms and offices, and how incisyon or other like
handye work ought there to be done, with also the veins of section for
Phlebotomye.
FRom the holes of the.v. spondilles of the reins, and from the holes of the
last bone of the ridge, Synewes of the legs.
(as Galen says, in the.xiii and.xvi. book of the use of parts,) Come
synewes, which proceed by the hinder part of the hanches or hippes, after the
length thereof: and these synewes, give unto these places feling and mouyng,
and wilful stirring. Muscles of the legs.
They are there also meddled with flesh, making muscles, whereby not only those
members are seuerallye moved: but also such forms and fashio^s as they have,
are thereby so institute and made. For from the ends of the muscles thus made,
proceed chordes, which move the nether and the upper end: and especially the
knee, the shin, and the legs. And there appear under the knees or hammes.ii
great chordes, the which move and draw the leg both in and out: and all
these synewes, muscles, bonds, and tendones, of the thigh and leg, proceed
longwise. After the length of those members, there come also branches from the
said sinews: which come from the holes of the spondilles of the reins, into
the great and small muscles of the legs. From the nether ends whereof come
the mouynges of the fete, and the members thereof: as the hele and the toes. etc.

And from the sides of the knee, and also from the bone called Patella genu,
and in the calfe of the leg, proceeds a certain knitlynge together of synewes
and muscles, which are noble and delicate. Of the woundinge and prickinge of
which, proceeds great pain, accidens, and disease unto the roots of them:
in such manner, that oftentimes the chirurgien can by no wisdom and cunnyng,
bring remedy to the patient, or save him from death. wherefore the wounds of
those places, are dangerons and dreadful, and many times incurable, as some
authors have written.

And from the great holowe vein, called Vena Coele, or Vena Caua, (...). i.
Concauus. Vena Caua.
which has his beginning in the liver, as as it was aforesaid, and from
the great arterye, which comes from the right ear of the heart, as it
was also said: From this vein and arterye. I say, comes branches of veins
and arteries, down to the gryndes or shares, from whence they proceed,
branchinge down with the synewes and muscles of the thighs, legs, and
feet: and proceed still after the length, as do the synewes and muscles,
even unto the ends of ye toes, giving nourishment and life, unto those
members. And of these together, is made and wouen the vttermoste sensible skyn
of those parts. And therefore it manifestlye appears, how the openinges of
apostemes ought to be done in these places. Incisions in the thyghe.
That is to say in the thyghes, the legs and the feet: yt the cuttinges and
cauterizations, ought to be done according to ye length of the spondilles, and
of the body.

And from the great branches of Vena concaua, that come into each thighe,
there are certain branches procedinge, the which are veins necessary to
Phlebotomy for diverse causes: Vena popletica.
as in phisike, and also in surgery it is to be red. whereof the first
appears in the hamme, called Vena popletica. The second in the inside of the
ancle, Saphena.
called Saphena, and of some Malleolaris. Malleolaris.
The third in the outsyde of the ancle, called Ischiatica. Ischiatica Vena.
The fourth is between the little toe and the next adjacent, called Renalis. And
this seems sufficient in respect of the rest of the work to be spoken,
Renalis Vena
of the veins of the legs, and fete: namely such as serve to Phlebotomye.

THE SIXTE PART, WHICH briefly in one Chapter shows the names as well in
Latin as in English, of all the exterior or outward parts of man his body,
from the head to the feet.
First, the crown or upper part of the head, where the hear grows or
turns every way, is called in latin Vertex: the fore part whereof is
called Sinciput, and the hinder part C^ciput.

Then the face, which is called in Latin Facies: the upper part whereof,
which we call in English the forhead, is called in Latin Frons: the brows
of the eyes are called Supercilia, the eye lyddes Palpebrae, the corners of the
eyes Anguli Oculorum and the eyes Oculi.

The nose is called in latin Nasus, the cheeks Genae, the nosethrilles Nares,
the lips Labra, the mouth Os, ye tunge Lingua, and the rouffe of the mouth
Palatum: the jaws are called Maxillae, as the upper iawe Maxilla superior, and
the nather iawe Maxilla inferior, Dentes the teethe, and the chynne Mentum.

The parts above the eyes and ears, which we call in Englysh the temples,
are called in latin Tempora: the ears are called Aures, the hear Capilli,
and Barba the bearde

The part of the neck behind, reachinge from the nodle to the nether
spondill or turnynge ioynte of the neck, is called in latin Ceruix: and the
foreparte of the neck, which reaches from the face, to the beginning of the
breast or canell bones is called Collum: the throat is called Gula ye shoulders
are called Humeri, the upper part of the shoulder is lugulum, and the shoulder
blades Scapulae.

The upper part of the arm, continuinge the length of the adiutorye bone,
from the shoulder to the elbow, is called Brachlum the boughte of the arm
Gibber, the elbowe Cubitus* The part between the elbow and the wrest, which we
call in English ye cubite, is called in latin Vlna: ye wrest Carpus, the hands
Martus, the palm of the hand Palma: the thumb is called in latin Pollex, ye
forefinger Index, ye middle finger Medius the ring finger, which is also called
the wedding finger, is called Medicus ye little finger or ear fi^ger, is called
^uricularis.

The arm holes are called in latin Axillae, the breast Pectus, the sides
Latera, the pappes or dugges Ma^mae, the nepples or tetes Papillae, the back
Dorsum, the nether parts where of next unto the hippes, are called in latin
Lumbi, in greek Lagone, in English the loins.

The bellye is called Venture, the nether part thereof Imus Venture, the navel
Vmbilicus, and the side between the bellye and the back under the ribs, is
called Hypochondria, which we may call in English the waste.

The grind or share is called Pubes, between the which are set the priuye
members, under the bothome of the belly: which some call the genitales. whereof
that part which we call the yard, is called in latin Virga* or Caulis: the
fleshye head whereof is called Glans, and the skin covering the same
Praeputium, the coddes or balock purs Scrotum, and the stones Testiculi.

The buttockes are called Nates, the fundament Anus, the hippes Coxendices, the
thighe Femur, the knee Genu, the hammes Poplites, the shinnes Tibiae, and the
caulfe of the leg Sura.

Then follow the feet, which are set under the legs: as the hands are
under the arms: and they are called in latin Pedes, the sides whereof which we
call in English ancles, are called in latin Malleoli, and the hinder part
which we call the hele, is named Calx, or Calcaneus. The holow of ye foot is
called Planta, and the treading place is named Vestigiu^. then proceed there
forth the toes, as in the hands there do fingers, which both are called in
latin Digiti: the toes being called Digiti Pedis. And as well on the toes as on
the fingers are nails growing, which are called in latin Vngues.

Thus to the honor and glory of God, that so wonderfully has wroughte in
natnre, I have showed such things, as in the body of man is to be
considered, in order of Anatomye: as far as my simple knowledge was then able
to collecte: partly as I have observed by experience, and partly as I could
gather of good authors: even such ancient writers, as in this work I have
by occasion aleaged, and also some new writers of Anatomy, of our time: as
Vesalius, Carolus Stephanus etc. as well of ye inward, as of the outward
parts: that young students may have thereof some profit, as I my self have
learned and profited in gathering of the same. Desiering all those, to who^e
any thing herein written shall seem imperfect, gross, or untrue, that of their
gentleness they will bestow their labor, and set forth the fruits of
their good and laudable studies, in amendyng that to them shall seem amysse:
even as I have been to show my good will, in doing of this brief and simple
thing: and will also be most glad, at their hands to receive with condinge
thanks and laud, such learning as may amend my fault, or redress mine error:
that the truth may also in these things be published, to the contentation of
all gentle, and well willing minds. (whereat some might seem astoned, through
ye variety of opinion in writers, which nevertheless shot al at one mark for
ye most part, and utter their se^tences, ye seem so variable, to one end and
purpose, if they be in differentlye wayed, and understand: though yet every
one saw not all, no not the most autentike.) That is to say, that by the
knowledge of the situation of all members in the body, there may be a safe
and cunning workynge in Surgery upon the body of man, to avoid error and
offense. For the which cause I have in this work rather used that order, then
to be precise in numbers, or curiouse in names.

ventral view of male anatomy

dorsal view of male anatomy

The Conclusyon of the whole work.
NOw to conclude this general and third treatise, and so of this whole work,
confessing mine imbesility, and want of perfection: thus much I say that the
body of man, whereof we have brieflye treated, is (as all other creatures are)
made and compacte of the four Elements: That is to say, Fire, Elements.
Air, Water, and Earth. As their very properties may be perceived in the
four humores in manne: Humors.
namelye blood, Blood.
Phlegm, Phlegm.
Choler, and melancholye: For the which cause, Choler.
the said.iiii. humores are called of the learned sort, Melancholye.
the sons of elements. For as the fire is hot and dry, so is choler: and as
the air, is hot and moist, so is blood: as the water is cold and moist,
so is Phlegm: and as the earth is cold and dry, so is melancholye. And of
those four humores are the four complexions named: Complexion.
as Sanguine, Choleric, Phlegmatike, and Melancholic. Yet not wythstanding
we call no man so, because he is made of one only elemente, or that he is
endued with one only humore: But contrary, as I said before, every person
is made of four elements, and has in him four humores, but not every man
in a like temperature: And that is the cause, that one man is named of one
humore, and an other of an other. As when blood excedeth, or surmounteth in
any body the rest of the humores, that person is called a Sanguine man: not
because he is all of blood, but because blood bears in the body most
domination. And so likewise it is to be understand of all the other three: and
to be called of choler, cholerike, of Phlegm, Phlegmatike, of Melancholye,
Melancholic. And also I understand, that in the complexions, is a division of
nine temperamentes: of the which, first there be.iiii. simple. That is to
say, hot, cold, dry, and moist: whereof there are two actiues, that is to
say workers, and the other two been passiues, that is to say sufferers. And
brieflye to say, hotnesse and coldness, be actiues, dryness and moystnesse
be passiues. And by the combination or bindinge together, of two of the
aforesaid four, the one always being active, the other passive, are the
other four made: that is to say, the compounde complexions, as hot and
moist, cold and moist, hot and dry, cold and dry. The ninthe which
differs from all these, is the very true temperamente, and may be called a
just and true complexion* even as it were measured by waighte: nether
exceeding other in any qualitye or quantitye, but being a just temperamente,
measured of equal portions of every qualitye. So that we could not call a man
of such complexion, sanguine nor Cholerike, Phlegmatike nor Melancholic: but
rather a man of a perfect complexion or just temperament. which perfect
temperature, is as it were a trial, or touch stone: to try and prove all other
complexions by. For the nerer to this temper, any man's complexion does draw,
the more perfect it is: and the more it differs from this temperamente, in
any qualitye the worsse it is, and the more dystemperate.

Therefore, he that will judge truly of complexions must always have in his
Imagination, the foresaid perfect temperamente.

To be brief, every creature on earth, or in the world, of these elements,
have their beginninges: yea the world it self, under the stars is nothing
else. And because the body of man above all other things, Mi^^o (...) Minor
(...)
of these four has most perfect temperamente, it is called in Greek Micro
Cosmos: that is to say a little world. For it is a little world in deed, to
be considered in order of Anatomye: yea a wonderful world, such a world, as
the great world in deed, was made for the only sake of it.

And as some have named it a little world, so have other some called it a
common weal, a royal kingdom, and a righteous regiment: For in this common
weal, was never found rebellion, but every subject seruisable to his
governor, and every superior tendering the wealth of his inferyors. Oh worthy
common weal, by whom all commonweals may take sufficient example and vewe,
how to govern, or to be governed. Oh wilful and negligent man ye runnest a
stray, as one not knowinge the rule of righteousness. What nedest thou a
preacher in such a case: where thou art sufficiently taught if thou will
learn in thine own creation? Oh why should that creature be brute, or
insypient, or as a saluage beast, which for his wonderful gifts, given him
of God in his creation, is called a little world, or a common weal? what a
strange thing were it, that he which is a common weal in him self, and
carries continually with in him self, the perfect image of a common weal,
should in a common weal, be a cause of a common destruction?

I leave here many things, to be considered in complexions, with many other
things which were necessary for this place: but because they are
sufficiently treated of all ready in our vulgar tungue, by diverse learned men,
and that of late years, I willinglye omit them: consideringe that it would be
rather a note of presumption or vain glory, then ought else: except I could
mende or better their doings, that have written thereof all ready: unto whom I
co^^esse my self not worthy to hold the candell.

Wherefore gentil readers, wishing you most heartily well to fare, I end this
work of Anatomy: desiring your gentle hearts, in this to accept my good will,
and take it in good part.

Who can but praise, and eke extolle,
The worthy art surgery:
which builded is on reason whole,
As ye may well perceive and see:
And nothing out of reasons reach,
In any point does it contain.
Then to their art they are a breach,
That reason have in such disdeine.
Sith reason does attain the skill,
Of every member in his place.
All men of art, should bear good will,
To reason and the same embrace.
For by her lore ye shall attain,
All knowledge good for to advance.
And shall withstand the proud disdain,
Of those that dwell in ignorance.
Wherefore of truth I can not seace,
To marvel much at momus sect:
Sith nothing can their wits releace,
with ignorance so much infecte.
For what a mome was he that said,
These bokemen can but talk and prate,
And we are they that with our aid,
Do all the cures in each estate.
An other says I can not talk,
But I will work even with the best,
Thus stubbernly these buserdes walk,
Upon their blind customs that rest.
For if their talk any truth had,
A blind man might colors decerne,
And every fool and peuish lad,
Might doctors be and never learn.
But who so does them rightly mark,
Shall find them meter for the carte,
That grope thus blindly in the dark,
Then have to do in such an art.
Therefore who so will perfect be,
To reason let them now resort,
And flee from such as disagree,
From resons rules in such a sort.
A necessary table exactly drawn by the alphabet as the former, directing the
reader uery commodiously by the numbers of the pages to all such names and
notable matters as are in this brief Anatomy contained.
ABdomen. 72 Acanthe. 4 Acctabulum. 3 Actiues. 95 Aculeus. 4 Aden colatorius.
42 Adenes. 12 Adeps. 12 Adiutorium os. 60 Agnata tunica. 48 Agnatio. 80
Albug^neus humor. 47 Amigdales of the throat. 56 Amph^ble stroeides Chiton. 47
Amplum os. 76 Anatome sicca. 2 Anceformes. 39 Anchas. 84 Ancle. 86. 90 Angina,
53 Anguli oculerum. 89 Anomoeomeres. 16 Anthropos. 35 Anus. 90 Apexossis. 3
Apoplexia. 69 Apospasma. 29 Aqueus humor. 47 Arachnoeides Chiton. 47 Aranea
tela. 47 Arctualis sutura. 44 Arm. 61. 89 Arm holes. 90 Arteria. 9 Arteria
aspera. 56. 69 Arteriall vein. 69 Arteria magna. 68 Arteria uenosa. 9. 69
Artery. 9 Arteriosa uena. 69 Ariteriotome. 9 Arthrodia. 2 Arthrosis. 2
Articulatio. 2 Assiccatum cadauer. 2 Aspera arteria. 56. 69 Aspera canalis. 56
Astragalos. 86 Atra bilis. 79 Attractiue power. 77 Audibiles nerui. 54
Auricularis digitus. 90 Auris. 53. 89 Auulsio. 29 Axilla. 90 Axillaris uena. 65
Axi^^gia. 13
B
Back. 90 Bal^nos. 73 Barb^. 89 Basil^re os. 43 Basilica uena. 64* ^5 Bearde.
89 Belly. 71. 72. 73. 90 Bilis. 79 Blader. 82 Blepharon. 49. 52 Bones. 1 Bones
nu^bred universally 4 Bones of the arm. 61. 62 Bones of the breast. 66. 67
Bones of the hanche. 84. 85 Bones of the legs and feet. 87 Bones of the
sculle. 43 Bothome of the belly. 90 Brachiale. 62 Brachii funis. 64 Brachion.
59. 61 Brachium. 90 Brain. 35 Brain purged.ii. ways. 42 Brains complexion.
36 Brains motions. 38 Brains substance. 35 Brains ventricles. 36 Bregmatis
ossa. 43 Breast. 66. 67. 68. 69. 70. 90 Butockes. 90
C
Cadauer assiccatum. 2 Caecum intestinum. 81 Calcaneus, 90 Calcis os. 86 Calfe
of the leg. 90 Calx. 90 Camarion. 38 Canalis aspera. 56 Canell bone. 59. 60
Canini dentes. 50 Capilli. 89 Capita ossium. 3 Capsula cordis. 69 Caput. 35
Caput ossis. 3 Cardia. 67 Cardiacauera. 64 Carnosa membrana. 44 Caro. 11. 12
Caro poroides. 17 Carpos. 62 Carpus. 62. 90 Cartilago. 4 Catagma. 29 Caua uena.
11 Caudae ossa. 76 Caulis. 73. 90 Caulos. 73 Cephalica uena. 63. 65 Cephalica
ocularis. 63 Cephalos. 33 Ceratocides chiton. 48 Cercis. 62 Cerebellum. 36
Cerebrum. 35 Ceruices ossium. 3 Ceruicis uertebrae. 54 Ceruix. 89 Ceruix uteri.
57 Chalcoeides. 86 Cheilos. 51 Cheir. 62 Chekes. 52 Chin. 89 Chiton. 9 Chole.
79 Choler. 79. 94 Chondron. 4 Chondrotome. 4 Chorde. 7 Choriformis membrana. 37
Choroeides chiton. 47 Cistis fellis. 79 Clauis. 60. 66 Cleis. 60 Cneme. 86
Coarticulatio. 2 Coccyx. 76 Coddes. 74. 90 Cogitatiue virtue or estimation. 39
Cobaerens tunica. 48 Colla ossium. 3 Collum. 89 Colon. 81 Columella. 57
Columna. 57 Combinatio. 20 Comissures. 44 Comissura. 3 Common weal. 96 Common
wits or.v. wits. 39 Communis uena. 64 Complexion. 21. 94 Complexio
membrorum. 21 Complexion of the brain. 36 Compositio membrorum. 20 Co^positio^
in every member. 20 Co^positio^ i^ simple members 20 Compounde members. 16
Compounde and simple members how they differ. 15 Compressio. 68 Compunctio
laterum. 67 Conarion. 38 Condylos. 3 Coniunctiua tunica. 48 Consunilaria
membra. 1. 16 Contractio. ^9. 38. 68 Contusio. 29 Conus. 38 Cor. ^7 Cornea
tunica. 48 Corona. 48 Coronale os. 43 Coronalis sutura. 44 Corone. 3 Coronon. 3
Corpus fornicatum. 38 Correptio. 38 Cortices. 44 Costae. 67 Costae uerae. 67
Costae spuriae. 67 Costalis dolor. 67 Cotyle. 3 Coxae ossa. 85 Coxendix. 90
Coxendicum ossa. 73. 84 Cranion. 43 Crassa meninx. 41 Cribrosum os. 44 Crown
of the head. 89 Crystallinus humor. 47 Crus. 86 Cubiforme os. 89 Cubite. 90
Cubitus. 90 Cuneus. 43 Cuticula summa. ^4 Cutis. 13. 14 Cutis eflorescentia. 14
Cyboeides. 80 Cynanche. 53 Cynodontes. 50 Cyste choledoche. 79 Cystis
choledochos. 79
D
Darton. 74 Dartos. 74 Dearticulatio. 2 Definition of members. 18 Definition of
a compounde member. 16 Definition of a sanguine member. 17 Definition of a
simple member 17 Dens 50. 89 Dentes canini. 50 Dentes incisores. 50 Dentes
molares. 50 Destinctio. 38. 68 Diaphragma. 70. 78 Diarthrosis. 2 Diastole. 38.
68 Didymia. 39 Didymos. 74 Difference between sanguin and spermatike members.
17 Difference between simple members and compoundes. 15 Digitus. 62. 90 Digiti
pedis. 87. 90 Digitorum ossa. 62 Dilatatio. 38. 68 Diseases chauncing to the
members. 29 Dissimilaria membra. ^6 Dodecadactilos. 80 Dog tethe. 50 Dolor
costalis. 67 Dorsalis medulla. 40 Dorsalis spina. 40 Dorsum. 90 Dugges. 90
Duodenum intestinum. 80 Duramater. 9. 41
E
Ears. 53. 89 Ecphysis. 80 Eflorescentia cutis. 14 Eiaculatorium uas. 83
Elbowe. 61. 90 Elements. 94 Emoroydes. 8^ Emulgentia uasa. 83 Emu^ctory place
of ye brain. 51 Emu^ctory place of ye heart. 60 Emu^ctory place of ye liver. 85
Enarthrosis. 2 Encephalos. 35 Ensiformis. 66 Entera. 80 Enteron. 80 Epencranis.
36 Epidermis. 14 Epididymis. 74 Epigastrion. 72 Epiglottis. 56 Epigomatis. 86
Epiphysis uermiformis. 39 Epiploon. 72 Eruptio. 29 Erythroeides. 74 Estimation.
39 Exortus. 80 Expulsive power. 77 Exterior uenter. 72 Eyes. 46. 89 Eye brows.
89 Eye liddes. 49. 89 Eye tethe. ^0
F
Face. 89 Facies. 89 False ribs. 67 Fantasy. 35 Fati and the use thereof. 12.
13. 29 Fatie quantity thereof according to complexion. 13 Fell. 79 Fellis
uesicula. 79 Femina. 85 Femora. 85 Femur. 90 Fibers. 8 Figura membrorum. 25
Figure of members. 25 Fyngers. 62. 90 Fistula spiritalis. 56 Five wits. 36
Flat form. 25 Flaua bilis. 79 Flesh and the use thereof. 11. 12. 29 Flesh of
three kinds. 12 Flesh glandulous. 12 Flesh musculous. 12 Focile maius. 62. 86
Focile minus. 62. 86 Folliculus fellis. 79 Form and substance of the brain.
35. 36 Forhead. 89 Foot. 86 Fornix. 3^ Frons. 89 Funis brachii. 64 Furcula.
60. 66
G
Gargareon. 42 Galle. 79 Gena. 52. 89 Generation of nails and hears. 15
Genitale semen. 74 Genu. 90 Gibber. 90 Glandula. 12 Glandula testi adnata. 74
Glandulouse flesh. 12 Glandulouse parts in the brain. 36 Glans. 73. 90
Glasey humore. 48 Glene. 3 Glossa. 52 Glutiae. 39 God of nature. 24 Gomphioi
odontes. 40 Gomphosis. 3 Gracile intestinum. 81 Grindes. 84. 90 Gristle. 4
Gristley addition of ye nose. 46 Guidegi. 57 Gula. 55. 89 Gurgulio. 57 Guts.
80. 81 Gynglismos. 2
H
Haema. 17 Haemorrhoides uenae. 81 Haemorrhois. 82 Hamme. 90 Hanche. 84 Hanche
bones. 84 Hand. 62. 90 Harmonia. 3 Heart. 67 Hear of the head. 44. 89 Hear
and the use thereof. 14. 15 Hearing sinews. 54 Head. 35 Heel. 98 Hepar. 78
Hepatica uena. 64 Hieron osteon. 76 Hippes. 84. 85 Holowe pore dividing ye
ve^tricles of the brain. 38 Homo. 35 Homoeomeres. 16 Humeralis uena. 63. 65
Humerus. 59. 61. 89 Humerus latus. 39 Humores. 94 Humor albugineus. 47 Humor
aqueus. 47 Humor Crystallinus. 47 Humor uitreus. 48 Humor in the ventricles of
the brain. 37 Hypochondria. 90
I
Ianitor. 80 Jaws. 49. 50. 51. 89 Iecur. 78 Ieiunium. 80 Ileon. 81 Ilium ossa.
84 Imaginatiue virtue. 39 Imus uenter. 90 Incisio^s of the head. 45 Incisio^s
of the ears. 54 Incisions of the chekes, the Jaws, and the nose. 51 Incisions
of the throat. 57 Incisions of the arm. 65 Incisions of the breast. 70. 71
Incisions of the thighs legs and feet. 88 Incisores dentes. 50 Index. 90
Infundibulum. 42 Interstitum. 78 Intestinum. 80 Intestinum caecum. 81
Intestinum rectum. 81 Intestinum tenue. 81 Inuolucrum. 9 Joyninges of bones. 2
Iris. 48 Ischias. 85 Ischiatica uena. 88 Ischion. 85 Isthmoidea ostea. 42
Iugulares uenae. 57 Iugulum. 89 Iugulum os. 60. 66
K
Kidneys. 83 Kion. 57 Knee. 85. 86. 90
L
Labdoeides raphe. 44 Labi^. 51. 89 Labra. 51. 89 Lacertus. 8 Lacuna. 42
Lagone. 90 Lamdoides Sutura. 44 Laringis operculum. 56 Larinx. 56 Latera. 90
Lateralia ossa. 43 Laterum dolor. 67 Latum os. 76 Lauda. 43 Legs. 86 Lepides.
43 Lien. 79 Ligamente. 5 Ligamentum. 5 Ligula. 56 Lingua. 52. 89 Lingula. 56
Lips. 51. 89 Liver. 78 Longaon. 81 Loins. 90 Lumbi. 90 Lumborum uertebrae.
67. 76 Lunges. 68
M
Malleolaris uena. 88 Malleolus. 86. 90 Mammae. 90 Manus. 62. 90 Manus pectus.
62 Marvelous net. 9. 39 Matrix. 75 Maxillae. 49. 50. 51. 89 Meatus urinaru.
83 Mediana uena. 64 Mediastinum. 69 Medicus. 90 Medius. 90 Medulla dorsalis.
40. 54 Medulla Spi^alis. 40. 54 Melanchole. 79 Melancholia. 79 Members
compounde. 16 Members defined. 18 Members simple. 16 Members sanguine. 17
Members spermatike. 17 Members vary in quantity according to complexion. 24
Membrana. 9 Membrana carnosa. 13. 44 Membrana choriformis. 37 Membrana Costas
Succingens. 67 Membrorum complexio. 21 Membrorum compositio. 20 Membrorum
figura. 25 Membrorum morbi. 29 Membrorum numerus. 24 Membrorum offitium. 28
Membrorum operatio. 26 Membrorum quantitas. 23 Membrorum substantia. 22
Membrorum utilitas. 28 Memoratiue virtue. 46 Meninx crassa. 41 Meninx tenuis.
40 Mendosum os. 44 Mentula. 75 Mentum. 89 Meri. 55 Mesaraeon. 81 Mesaraica
uasa. 81 Mesenterium. 81 Mesaraicae uenae. 78 Metacarpii ossa. 62 Metacarpion.
62 Metaphreni uertebrae. 67 Metaphrenon. 67 Metra. 75 Micro cosmos. 95
Midriffe. 78 Milte. 79 Minor lingua. 56 Minor mundus. 95 Mirach. 72 Mola. 30
Mola. 86 Monocoelos. 81 Monoculus. 81 Morbi membrorum. 29 Motion. 26 Motions of
the brain. 37. 38 Motorii nerui. 7 Mouth. 51. 52. 89 Mus. 8 Muscle. 8 Muscles
numbered. 8 Muscles of the arm. 63 Muscles of the belly. 76. 77 Muscles of the
legs. 87 Musculous flesh. 12 Musculus. 8 Musculi uentris recti 77 Musculi
obliqui ascendentes. 77 Musculi obliqui descendentes. 77 Musculi transuersi. 77
Mile sieve myla. 50 Myotome. 80
N
Nares. 42. 46. 89 Nas^s. 45. 89 Nates. 90 Naticulae. 39 Naturalis unio. 2
Navel. 90 Nauiforme os. 86 Nails. 14. 15. 90 Neck. 54 Nephros. 83 Neples. ^0
Neruus. 6 Nerui audibiles. 54 Nerui motorii. 7 Nerui olfactiles. 45 Nerui
optici. 47 Nerui sensorii. 7 Nether Jawe. 5^. 89 Neuros. 6 Neurotome. 6 Nose
and the vtilities thereof. 45. 46 Nose thrilles. 46. 89 Notiaea acantha. 40
Notiaeos myelos. 40. 44 Nucha. 40. 54 Number of members.. 24 Number of bones. 4
Number of muscles. 8 Number of sinews. 6 Number of veins. 11 Numerus
membrorum. 24 Nurishing members. 78 Nurishme^t of the body how it comes. 27
O
Obeliaea raphe. 44 Occipitale os. 43 Occiput. 43. 89 Oculus. 46. 89 Oculi
angulus. 89 Odons. 50 Oesophagus. 55 Offitium membrorum. 28 Omentum. 72
Omoplata. 59 Omos. 59 Omphalos. 72 Operatio membrorum. 26 Operation animal. 26
Operation of members. 26 Operculum laringis. 56 Ophthalmos. 46 Opticos neuros.
47 Orchis. 74 Organica membra. 2 Os. oris. 52. 89 Os. ossis. 2 Os amplum. 76 Os
calcaneum. 86 Os calcis. 86 Os Caudae. 76 Oscheon. 75 Os Coxae. 85 Os
Cribrosum. 42 Os iugulum. 60. 66 Os latum. 76 Os lauda. 43 Os occipitale. 43 Os
pectorale. 66 Os petraeum. 44 Os sacrum. 76 Ossa bregmatis. 43 Ossa coxendicum.
73 Ossa digitorum. 62 Ossa ilium. 84 Ossa isthmoidea. 42 Ossa metacarpii. 62
Ossa pectinis. 73 Ossa petrosa. 44 Ossa pubis. 84 Ossa rasseta manus. 62 Ossa
rasseta pedis. 86 Ossa spongoidea. 42 Ossa squammosa. 44 Osteologia. 2 Osteon.
2 Osteos. 1 Osteotome. 2 Ostiarius. 80 Ostium uentriculi. 67 Os uentr^s. 80
Ota. 53 Otion. 53 Ouros. 83 Ouron. 83 Oxyngion. 12
P
Palatum. 89 Palma. 62. 90 Palp^bra. 49. 89 Pannicles. 9 Pa^niculus carnosus.
9. 13 Pappes. 90 Papil^a. 90 Paren^ephalis. 36 Pariet^lia ossa. 43 Patella
genu. 86 Paxilla. 43 Pechys. 62 Pect^n pedis. 86 Pectinis ossa. 84 Pectus. 67.
90 Pectus manus. 62 Pedion. 86 Pellis. 14 Penis. 73 Perceptio. 39 Pericardion.
9. 44 Pericranaeum. 41. 44 Pericranion chiton. 41. 44 Periosteon chiton. 9
Peritonaeum. 9. 72 Peritonion chiton. 72 Perspectiuus neruus. 47 Pes. 90
Petraeum os. 44 Petrosum os. 44 Phantasia. 39 Pharinx. 36 Phlebion. 10
Phlebotome. 10 Phlebotomia. 23 Phlegm. 94 Phlegmos. 17 Phrenes. 78 Physe. 82
Pia matter. 9. 40 Pili. 14 Pinguedo. 12 Pithe of the back. 40. 54 Pixis. 3
Pixis gulae. 57 Place emunctorie of the brain. 51 Place emuctorie of ye heart.
60 Place emu^ctorie of ye liver. 85 Place for ventosing. 58 Planta pedis. 86
Platy osteon. 76 Pleura. 67 Pleuritis. 67 Pneumon. 68 Pollex. 90 Poplites. 90
Pore dividing the ve^tricles of the brain. 38 Pores in the skin. 15 Porta
hepatis. 78. 81 Porta iecoris. 70 Portenarium intestinum. 80 Porus. 17. 38
Porus sarcodes. 17 Porus ureticus. 83 Postfrachiale. 62 Posthe. 73 Powers
attractiue, retentiue and expulsive. 77 Praeputium. 73. 90 Prognostication. 18
Proleficum semen. 74 Providence of nature. 7 Psallioeides. 38 Pterna. 86 Pubes.
90 Pubis ossa. 84 Pulmo. 68 Pulse. 9 Pupilla. 48 Hurgation of the brain. 42
Pylorus. 80 Pymele. 12
Q
Quantitas membrorum. 23 Quantity of fat and other members varieth according
to place and complexion. 24 Quantity of members. 23
R
Radius. 62 Raphe. 3 Raphia. 3 Rasseta ossa manus. 62 Rasseta ossa pedis. 86
Rectum intestinum. 81 Ren. 83 Renalis uena. 88 Rete mirabile. 9. 37 Retiformis
tunica. 47 Reins or kydneis. 83 Rhagoeides chiton. 47 Rhegma. 29 Rhin. 45
Rhinia. 46 Ribs. 67 Root of the body. 35 Rotula genu. 86 Round form. 25
Ruptura. 29
S
Saccus. 81 Sacrumos. 76 Sagittalis sutura. 44 Saluatella uena. 64. 65 Sanguine
members. 17 Sanguine and spermatike members how they differ. 17 Sanguis. 17
Saphena uena. 88 Sarx. 11. 12 Scaphoeides. 86 Scapula. 89 Sceletos. 2 Schiatica
uena. 88 Sclerotica tunica. 48 Scolecoeides. 39 Scoptulum opertum. 34 Scrotum.
75. 90 Sculle. 43 Scutiformis. 66 Secundina tunica. 47 Semen genitale. 74 Semen
proleficum. 74 Semita spiritus. 9 Sense. 26 Senses or wits. 39 Sensorii
nerui. 7 Sentis. 4 Septum pectorale. 78 Septum transuersum. 78 Serrata
consutio. 3 Serum sanguinis. 79 Sesaminum os. 4 Sesamodes ostea. 4 Share. 90
Shinnes. 86. 90 Shoulder. 59. 89 Sicca anatome. 2 Sides. 90 Similaria membra.
1. 16 Simple members. 1. 16 Simple and compound members how they differ. 15
Sinciput. 89 Sinews. 6 Sinews numbered. 6 Sinews of hearing. 54 Sinews of
nucha. 6. 54 Sinews sensitive. 6. 7 Sinews of the breast. 70 Sinews of the
legs. 87 Siphac. 72 Skyn. 13. 14 Skin and the use thereof. 14 Solutio^ of
continuitie. 18. 29 Sspasma. 29 Spatula. 59 Sperma. 74 Spermatike members. 17
Spermatike members from sa^guine how they differ. 17 Sphen. 43 Sphenoeides. 43
Spina. 4 Spina dorsalis. 40 Spinalis medulla. 54 Spirit and life. 26 Spirit
visible. 47 Spiritus semita. 9 Splen. 79 Splenatica uena. 64 Spondilles of the
breast. 67 Spondilles of the neck. 54 Spondilles of the hanche or reins. 67.
76 Spondilion. 67 Spondilium. 67 Spongiosum os. 42 Spongoidea ostea. 42
Squammae. 44 Squammosa ossa. 44 Stephaniaea raphe. 44 Stephanos. 44 Sternon. 66
Stomache. 80 Stomachos. 80 Stones. 74. 90 Stupor corporis mentisque la^^guor.
69 Substance and form of the brain. 35. 36 Substance of members. 22
Substantia membrorum. 22 Subtle intestinum. 81 Summa cuticula. 14 Summus
uenter. 72 Supercilia. 89 Superfluities of members. 14 Sura. 86 Sutura. 3
Sutura arctualis. 44 Sutura coronalis. 44 Sutura labdoeides sieve libdoides. 44
Sutura obelaea. 44. Sutura recta uel sagittalis. 44 Sutura Stephaniaea. 44
Symphysis. 23 Synanche. 53 Syncondrosis. 3 Syndesmos. 5 Syndesmotome. 5
Synneurosis. 3 Syphac. 72 Syssarcosis. 3 Systole. 38. 69
T
Talus. 86 Tarsus. 86 Tela aranea. 47 Temples. 89 Tempora. 89 Tendo. 7 Tendon.
7 Tenon. 7 Tenue intestinum. 81 Tenuis menhoe. 40 Testiculus. 74. 90 Testis. 74
Tetes. 90 Tethe. 30 Thighe. 85. 90 Thighe bone. 85 Thlasis. 29 Thlasma. 29
Thorax. 67 Throat. 55. 89 Thumb. 90 Tibia. 86. 90 Toes. 86. 87. 90 Tomici
odontes. 50 Tonos. 6 Torning iointes. 4. 54. 66. 76 Tracheia arteria. 56. 89
Translucida unica. 48 True flesh. 12 Tuberculum ossis. 3 Tungue. 52. 89
Tunica. 9 Tuskles. 50
V
Vasa emulgentia. 79 Vasa semen adferentia. 74 Vasa semen deferentia. 74 Vas
eiaculatorium. 83 Vena. 10 Vena arteriosa. 10. 69 Vena caua 11. 70. 78. 88 Vena
cephalica. 63 Vena coele. 11. 78 Venae capillares. 11 Venae emulgentes. 79
Venae iugulares. 57 Venae mesaraicae. 78 Vena humeralis. 63 Uenall artery. 9.
69 Vena ischiatica. 88 Vena magna. 11 Vena malleolaris. 88 Vena popletica. 88
Vena porta. 11. 78 Vena ramosa. 78 Vena renalis. 88 Vena Saphena. 88 Venosa
arteria. 9. 69 Venture. 71. 72. 90 Venture exterior. 72 Uentosing. 58 Uentricles
of the brain. 36 Ventriculi ostium. 67 Ventriculus. 80 Venniculi forma. 39
Vermiformis epiphysis. 39 Vertebra. 4. 67 Vertebrae ceruicis. 54 Vertebrae
lumborum. 67. 76 Vertebrae* metaphreni. 67 Vertex. 89 Virtue cogitatiue. 39
Virtue imaginatiue. 39 Virtue memoratiue. 40 Virtue of smelling. 46 Vesica. ^^
Vesicula fellis. 79 Vestigium. 90 Ueyne. 10. 11 Ueyne arteriall. 69 Ueynes
numbered. ^^ Ueynes of the arm. 63. ^ Ueynes of the (...). ^ Ueines of the
neck. 55 Ueines of ye legs and feet. 88 Ueines under the tungue. 53
Vinculum. 5 Virga uirilis. 73. 90 Uisible spirit. 47 Visiuus neruus. 47
Vitreus humor. 48 Vmbilicus. 72. 90 Vngues. 14. 15 Vnio naturalis. 2 Upper
iawe. 49. 89 Vretheres. 83 Vreticus porus. 83 Vrina. 83 Vrinarii meatus. 83 Use
of chordes or Te^dons. 8 Use of fat. 12. 13. 29 Use of flesh. 12. 29 Use of
gristles. 4. 28 Use of nails and hears. 15 Use of sinews. 7. 29 Use of the
skin. 14. 29 Use of veins. 11. 29 Vtilitas membrorum. 28 Utilities of
arteries. 9. 29 Utilities of bones. 2. 28 Utilities of members. 28 Utilities of
the nose. 46 Utilities of the tungue. 53 Vuea. 57 Vuea tunica. 47 Vuula. 57
VV
Waste. 90 Water pipes. 83 Watery humor in ye eyes. 47 Ways of urine. 83 Will
in muscles. 8 Wormy body or wormlyke process. 39 Wosen. 9 Wounds in the
belly. 77 Wreste. 62. 90 Wind pipe. 69
X
Xyphoeides. 66 Xyphos. ^^ensis. 66
Y
Yard. 73. 82. 90 Ymen. 9
Z
Zirbus adipinus. 72
An historiall expoSTVLATION: AGAINST THE beastlye abusers, both of
Chyrurger^e, and Physyke, in our time: with a goodlye doctrine, and
instruction, necessary to be marked, and followed, of all true chirurgiens:
gathered by John Halle Chyrurgyen.
EOr as much as in the Epistle and Prefaces, I have declared the dishonor that
the noble art of medicyne susteyneth, by deceauynge Fugitives, and other false
abusers: I think it good here to blasen the deeds of some, in this our time,
that it may apere, that not without a sufficient cause, I have so there of
them complained.

First there came into the town of Maydstone, In the year of our Lord. 1555.
a woman which named her self Jone, having with her a walkyng mate, whom she
called her husband. This wicked beast took her Inn at the sign of the Bell,
in the town aforesaid. Where she caused within short space to be published,
that she could heal all manner, both inward and outward diseases. One powder
she carried in a blader, made of the herb Daphn^ydes, and Anise sede together,
which she (as an only sufficient remedy for all grefes) administered unto
all her folishe patientes, in like quantite to all people, neither regardyng
time, strength, nor age. All the time of her being there, (which was about.iii
wekes) there resorted to her company, diverse Ruffians, and vacaboundes, under
pretense of being diseased, and sekyng to her for remedy: so that her false
profession, was unto their wicked behauioure, for the time in that to wae a
safe supportation.

This is beastly deceauer, among many others took in hand an honest ma^s
child, who had a suppurat tumor in his navel, percynge dangerouslye the
panicles of the belie: to whom she administered the said powder in great
quantitye, in so much, that the child did vomyte continuallye, for the space
of half a day and more, without ceassynge: whereby the said aposteme brake.

The parents of the child then feared much, by the grenousnesse of the
syghte, that his stomache would break: which may be thought that in very
deed it so did. For in process of time, there issued out by the orifice of ye
same, vii. worms at.vii. several times (such as children are wont to avoid,
either upward or downwarde, from the stomache and gutte^ called ^eretes.i.
Rotun^) with also a certain yelowe substance not stinkynge, such as we
sometimes find, in the stomaches of dead men, when we open them.

This fearful sight I say, caused the childs parents to send for me, to
know therein mine opinion and counsel: unto whom I prognosticated (as I saw
good cause,) that the matter was very dangerous, and not like to be cured. But
this beastly form of a woman, hearing me so say: answered that she douted
therein no danger, and farthermore offered hirselfe to be locked up in a
chamber with the child, and that if she healed him not, she might be
punished: with a great deal more circumstance of prating and deceytfull
bragging words. Unto whose most wicked and diulyshe boldness, I thus
answered. Where as you say that ye doubt not any danger in this child, I
very well believe you: for ignorante fools can doubt no perils, and who is
bolder then blind bayerd? how should they doubt that know not what a doubt
means. Notwithstanding, this pre-eminence you deceauynge re^negates have, ye
may brag, lie, and lace, till ye have murdered or destroyed such as credyte
you, and then are ye gone, ye show your heles, and that is only your
defense. But honest men of art must have truth for their defense, and
experience of their true work, and may promise no more then they may perform.

What should I make many words, the parents of the child all to late
discharged this deceauer. And the child notwithstanding the counsel had of
diverse learned men, dyed afterward of the said grefe. But the said deceauer
according to my Prophecy, after.iii. days ran away, she and her walkyng mate,
robbynge their host where they lay, of the shetes, pillowheres and blankets
that they lay in. And by their entysement of one of the maid servants of
their said host: They had muscadell served them in stead of bear, while
they lay there for the most part: which entyced servant ran away also
with them, and could not since be herd of.

Secondly in the year of our Lord. 1556. there resorted unto Maydstone one
Robert Haris, professynge and pretending an high knowledge in Physike: under
cloak where of he deceived meruaylouslie with vile Sorcerie. This deceauer could
tell (as the folish people reported of him,) by only lokyng in ones face, all
secret marks and scarres of the body, and what they had done, and what had
chanced unto them all their life time before. Wherewith he had so incensed the
fond and waueryng minds of some, that pitye was to here. Among whom one
woman (who for her years and profession, ought to have been more discrete:)
When I reasoned with her against his doings: she earnestly affirmed, that she
knew well that he was then dystant from her, at the least.vii. miles, and yet
she verelye believed that he knew what she then said. Oh great beastlynes and
infydelitie, specially in such as have borne a face to favor the word of God.

Well for iestyng a little against the madness of this deceauer, I had a
dagger drawn at me not long after. The words that I spoke were to his
hosts, when I saw him go by, in this wise. Is this (quod I) the cu^nyng
sothsayer, that is said to sye at your house? Sothesayer quod she: I know no
such thing by him, therefore ye are to blame so to name him. Why quod I,
such men and such informed me that he can tell of things lost, and help
children and cattle bewitched and forspoken, and can tell by lokyng in ones
face, what marks he has on his body, and where, and tell them what they
have done, and their fortune to come. Yea and all this in deed he can do quod
she. Why then he is a Sothesayer and a Sorcerer quod J. Well quod she if he
have so much cunnyng in his bellye, he is the happyer, and it is the more joy
of him. Nay quod I, it were mere folyshnes for him to carye his cunning in his
bellye: and why, quod she. Why quod I, think you that men of lerning and
knowledge carry their cunnyng in their bellies? Where else quod she, and why not?
Mary quod I, if he should bear his cunnyng there, he should always waste it
when he went to the priuye, and so in time he should lose all his cunnyng. This
being merylye spoken: turned me afterward not to a little displeasure, even at
their hands, where I had deserved and looked for friendship as of duty: but I
must cease to marueyle any longer at this, when almost every such
abominable vylaine is defended vpholden, and mayntayned, by such as of
right, and according to the wholesome laws of this realm, should punish
them for these their abusions. Yet surely the grieffe were the less, if only
the blind, and supersticious antiquity, had a regard and love to such
deceauers. But now a great number that have borne an outward show of great
holiness, and love to Gods holy word: We see them seek daily, to such
o^^elishe Wyches and Sorcerers, If their finger do but ache, as though they
were Gods, and could presentlye help them wit words: although they know
that God in his Israel, has called them an abhominacion, and has farther
commanded, that none such should be suffered among them to live.

Thyrdlie in the year of our Lord a thousand syue hundred fyftie and eight,
there came to Maydstone one Thomas Lufkyn, by occupacion a Fuller, and burler
of clothe, and had been brought by (by report of diverse honest men,) at the
fullyng mylles there beside the town, nevertheless he had been long absent from
that contrie, in which time he had by rouing abroad becomde a Phisicien, a
Chirurgien, an Astronomier, a palmister, a phisiognomier, a sothsayer, a
fortune deuyner, and I can not tell what. This deceauer was the beastliest
beguiler by his sorcerys that ever I herd of, making Physike the only color,
to cover all his crafty theft, and mischieues, for he set up a byll at his
first coming, to publishe his being there, the tenor whereof was in effect
as follows:

If any manne womanne, or child, be sick, or would be let blood, or be
diseased, with any manner of inward or outward grefes, as al manner of agues,
or fevers, plurises, cholyke, stone, strangulion, impostumes, f^stulas kanker,
goutes, pocks, bone ache, and pain of the ioynes, which comes for lack of
bloudlettyng: let them resort to the sign of the Sarazens hedde, in the east
lane, and bring their waters with them to be seen, and they shall have
remedy. Byme Thomas Luffkin.

Unto this Devil incarnate, resorted all sorts of vain and indiscreet
persons, as it were to a God, to know all secrets paste and to come,
specially women, to know how many husbands and children they should have,
and whether they should bury their husbands then living. And to be brefe,
there was not so great a secret, that he would not take upon him to declare,
unto some he prophesied death within a month, who thanks be to God are yet
living, and in health. All this he boasted that he could do by Astronomy. But
when he was talked with of one that had but a young and small skyll in that
art. He could make no direct answer no more then puppe my dog.

This beast could with a wodden face, brag, face, and set out his matters
with boulde task: that the simple people was by him, meruelously seduced to
believe his lies, and boastinge tales.

Among many that talked with him, one of mine acquaintance asked him this
question: sir quod he, if you be so cunning as ye are named, or as you would
feign be esteemed to be, Wherefore go ye, and travail ye, from place to place?
For being so cunning, ye can not lack wheresoever ye dwell: for people will
resort unto you far and nere, seeking upon you: so that you should not
need thus to travail for your living. Unto whom he made this beastlye
answer, I know quod he by Astronomye the influence of the stars and thereby
perceive, when and how long any place shall be unto me fortunate: and when I
perceive by the stars, that any evil fortune, is like to chance to me in
that place: I streighte way wiselye avoid the danger, and goo to an other
place, whereas I know it will be fortunate and luckye. For what use they to
cloak their vilanies with, but Astronomye, Physic, and Surgery, as I
showed you before.

But this false knave had answered more truly, if he had said thus. Though
for a time as all new ^angels are highlye set by and meruailed at, among
the folishe and rude people, so naughtye false merchantes with their craftye,
and vilainous feseightes, may for a time have credits and success according
to their wicked expectations: yet in a while with use, the people will begin to
smell out, and be werye of their doings, which they at the first so
gredelye did seek, for the strange news. For such false deceauers, perceive
and know, that the fond minds of the common rude multitude of people, at the
first, in seekynge to see strange things, are mad of desire. And as they
are unreasonable in seekynge the news, so are they sone werye of the use
thereof: for much familiaritye engendereth contempt, even in good things.
Therefore when men begin to perceive, and to espy the craft and subtilty of
such deceauers, it is time for them to change their place that they may the
easilyer deceive again, where there: falshode is strange and new, and all
together unknown. If I say he had thus answered, he had said the very
truth. This deceauer had sufficient audacitye, with talk to set out his
falshode, and to bear down all that be ignorante, so long as his knauerye
knackes were unknown. Well the end of his being there, was as it is common
with them all, without any difference, for he sodainlye was gone with many a
poor man's monye, which he had taken before hand: promisinge them help,
which only he recompensed with ^he winge of his heles.

Fourthlye, in the year of our Lord a thousand, five hundred and three
score. One Ualentyne, came into a Paryshe, in the welde of Kent^ called
Staplehurste: whereas he changed his name, calling him self master Wynkfylde:
affirmynge him self to be the son of a worshipful Knight of that name. This
abominable deceauer, made the people believe, that he could tell all things
present, past, and to come: And the very thoughts of men, and their diseases,
by only lokinge in their faces. When any came to him with vrines: (which
commonly in the country they bring in a stone cruse,) he made them believe,
that only by feling the weight thereof, he would tell them all their diseases
in their bodies, or without: And other while made them believe, that he went to
ask council of the deuel, by going a little aside, and mu^^blyng to him self,
and then coming again, would tell them all and more to. For what care or
shame of evil have these hell hounds who see their abomination: but even as
the Ape tourneth his filthye parts to every man's syghte: so shame they not
to acknowledge the^ selves to have conference with the devil, yt so yet all wise
men may know their deeds to be all devilish. wherein the vain opinion of some,
(though not of the wysest sort,) helps the^ not a little* who esteem those
dampnable arts to be high points of learning. Oh Eth^ike madness.

This beastlye beguyler so incensed in short space the vayn minds, of the
rude and wauerynge multitude of people: that he was sought unto, and esteemed
more a great deal the^ God (oh Heathenish and Idolatrous people, not much
unlike this was their outrageous madness to their peuysh pilgrimages: wherewith
in times past they were most miserably bewiched). Yea such a wonderful fame
and brute, went abroad of his doings, that some of the very worshipfulles
of those parts were stricken with admiration, and desire to seek to him, to
know many good morowes. Whereof also he would not a little brag and boaste.
But as time reuealeth all things, so this deulyshe beast in short time was
known in his right kind and name: and that he had.iii. wives living at that
present: of which the first lived very porelye and myserably in Canturbury: The
second after she knew his wickedness, departed from him, and married after with
a priest. The third which he at that present had, he married at Westmynster, as
I was credible informed, being there a rich widow. But now after this
vylaynie was known by his first wise coming to Staplehurst, he ran away from
her also, leaving her desolate, undone, and in much misery for he had spent
all her substance by riotous fare. For he was reported to fare at his table
like a Lord, and was served as fynelye as a Prince: but such shameful deeds
can never be without wicked end, at the least at Gods hand, though it be
neglected of the Magistrates.

This last wife being sent on his errande to Maydstone, to an Apothicaries
wydowe for certain drougges, chanced to forgette some of their names:
wherewith the women being both not a little troubled the Apothecaries wydowe
asked why her husband did not write for his things, whereunto his womanne
answered, that Master Wynkfylde was a right Latynist, for he could write no
English. By this ye may perceive he was a well learned manne.

This woman being as I said left desolate, married after with one Thomas
Riden, who was his man, who went together to Westminster, there to dwell:
whither not long after, this Winkefield came, minding again to seduce the woman
to follow him, as before she had. Who, so detested, his late beastly vsance,
that she complained him so to the Archebyshop of Canturbury, and other of the
queen's majesty's honorable council: that he was long imprisoned in the gate
house, He was whypped.
and for his wickedness sore punyshed. Yet in the end being delivered, he
ceased not any whit to use his old practice: for he came immediately, to
Robardesbridge in Sussexe, where he wrought the like wickedness as before. and
being there espied, within a while, with diverse wicked factes, he removed:
puttyng on a brazen face, and came again into Kente* to Staplehurst: where he
freshly renewed, the use of his odiouse feats: for the which master Bisley,
person of Staplehurste, caused him to be ascited of the ordinary to the
spiritual court, as an adulterer, and a woorker by diulishe and magical
arts. Wherefore he removed two miles from thence, to a paryshe called Marden,
thynkinge him self thereby the more salfe: but the law notwithstanding,
proceeded so against him, that he was there upon his contempt excommunicated:
and yet never left his old fashions. He spent in his house weekly six pound
(as diverse honest men reported,) in meat and drink: with such resort
and banketyngee, as it was a wonder to see, whereby he not a little augmented
his fame: the people resorting to him far and nyghe, for he would tell them
such wonders, that all had him in admiration. But especially, he was cunnyng.
to inchaunte women to love, and did for rewards, diverse feats in such
cases: and lastly, he began to work properly for himself as follows.

At a paryshe called Loose, in the hundred of Maydstone, a certain blind man,
called blind Orgar, had a wife who was sick of diverse aches and
swellynges, who hearing of this marvelous monster: sent her daughter upon a
wednesday, down to Marden, with her water, to this master Wynkfelde: who so
inchaunted her, that she forgate her way home to her father and mother, in so
much that her mother thought her loss: for she tarried there till the
saturdaye following. Then taking her way homewarde, and being come half way,
her mind was so intoxicate, that she returned back again to her lover: who
louyngly (fearing least her friends should make exclamation thereof,)
accompanied her, till she was nyghe at home: and then returnyng, he promised
her, to come to her mother by a certain day: which he in deed performed.
And so filled he the simple woman, with such flatteryng, and crafty
persuasions, and fair promyses of health: that she thought nothing to
whotte, or to heavy for him, no, not her daughter, as it apeared: for he
forsook Marden (where he was.xii. pound in debte, and upward) and came to
inhabit at Loose, in this poor blind man's house: in so much that in a
while, all people theraboute spoke much shame, that it was suffered.

The which report, at such time as it came to the ears of the worshipful
Justices thereaboutes: with also the trade of his former life: the complaynte
of diverse honest men, whose money he had taken, and deceived them: and the
clamor of his creditours, to whom he ought, as is aforesaid:) They sent out
their warrante, to all Constables of that hundred, chargynge them to aprehende,
and bring him before them at Maydstone, the thursdaye following. Who being
warned thereof, by certain disemblyng men, and chiefly, a flatteryng minister:
he fled and could not be found, neither was he since heard of in that
country. This la^ter fit chanced in the year of our lord, 1562. in lent.
Many more particular histories could I here write of his detestable factes:
but to avoid prolixitie, I leave them at this time, trustyng that this may
suffyce, to describe what he is, and to give al men warning of him and all
other like deceivers.

The truth was so: he had no learning in the world, nor could read
English, (and as I suppose, knew not a letter, or a. b. from a bateldore,) as
it was well proved, yet made he the people believe that he could speak Latin,
Greek, and Hebrew.

Item in the year. 1562. there came to the town of Maidstone, an old fellow,
who took upon him, to heal all diseases, as a profounde phisitien: whom
(forbecause men had been so deluded, by diverse former deceivers) I caused to be
examined, before the officers of the said town. And when he was asked his
name* he said John Bewly, secondly where he dwelte: and he answered at London,
in the old bailey, against sir Roger Chamley: Thirdly, if he were a phisitien,
he said yea. Fourthly, where he learned that art, and he said by his own
study. Fifthly, where he studied it, he answered, in his own house. Sixthly,
what authors he had read. He said Eliote, and others Seventhly, we asked
what other: and he said, he had forgotten. Eighthly, we asked him what wear the
names of Eliotes books: he said, he remembered not. Then we brougth him an
English bo^ke to read, which he refused: but when he was commanded to
read, he desired us to be good to him, for he was a poor man, and in deed
could not read: and said, that he intended not to tarry there, but to repair
home again. This being done on a sunday, after euensong: his host was bound
for his foorthco^ming the next day: when upon his humble suit, he was let go:
being warned with exhortations, to leave such false and naughty deceytes.

Farther in the same year, one William a shomaker, came into Kente, pretending
to be very cunning, in curing diseases of the eyes. And being brought to a
friend of mine, to have his judgment in ones eye, whereof ye sight was weak:
first putting them in much fear, of the eye: he at length promised, to do
great things thereto. But the friends of ye party diseased, destered me first
to talk with him, to understand his cunning, which I at their request, did at
a time appointed, and asked him if he understood, what was ye cause of her
infirmity, he said he could not tell: but he would heal it, he doubted not.
Then I asked him, whether he were a surgien, or a phisitie^: and he answered
no, he was a shomaker, but he could heal all manner of sore eyes.

I asked him where he learned that: he said that was no matter. Well said I,
seeing that you can heal sore eyes: what is an eye, whereof is it made, of what
members or parts is it composed? and he said he knew not that. Then I asked
him if he wear worthy to be a shoemaker, or to be so called, that knew not
how, or whereof a shoe was made? he answered no, he was not worthy. Then said
I, how dare you work upon such a precious, and intricate member of man, as
is the eye: seeing you know not the nature thereof: and why, or by what reason,
it does see more then a man's nose, or his hand does. He answered, that though
he could not tell this: yet could he heal all manner of sore eyes. And that
where as master Luke of London, has a great name of curyng eyes: he could
do that which master Luke could not do, nor turn his hand to. Thus bragged
this proud varlette against and above, that reverent man of known learning
and experience. And I said I thought so: for master Luke said I, is no
shoemaker. Well said he, I perceive you do but skorne me, and flunge out of
the doors in a great fume. And could not be caused to tarry and drink by any
entreaty, neither have I since that time heard any thing of him.

What other men and women besides these, have come into the forsayde place: If
I should rehearse them, and the discourse of their doings: It wear to
tedious, yea it would abhor any honest man's ears to hear of it. There came a
woman thither (as she reported hirself) a ministers wife, (but I think she
falsely lied,) in the aforesaid year. The officers hearing of her
prophession, called her before them, and examined her: with whom she was so
stout, as to say (when she was warned to depart the town, in pain of
inprysonment,) these words. I have quod the, traveled through all parts of
this realm, and I was yet never forbidden in any place, to minister my
physike, and has (said she) your town a privilege above all other, to
forbydde me to do good, and to heal the queens liege people? Then was she
asked what authority she had, or of whom she was allowed thus to do, or
what certificat she had brought with her, to witness with her, of her good
behauour in places where she was before? And she said she was never before so
examined, neither feared to be put to such trial, neither saw she ever the
place, that a woman could find so little courtesy: especially, sith she
asked nothing gratis of any man, or otherwise then for her money. these stout
words notwithstanding, she was expelled ye town.

And not long after came thither a makeshifte, with two men wayghting on him,
as very rakehelles as him self, bragging that he was a profounde phisicien:
and being called by the officers to examination, was so streyghtly charged, yt
he confessed himself and his men, to be fellows in frendshippe, and all of one
krewe: and that this was a shifte, mutually devised among them to get money: and
so wear they expelled the town: or rather they shifted suddenly away, for
fear of punyshement: which if they had tarried, they could not have escaped,
so good then was the mind of the officers for that year. And now one
history of the time present, to knitte up this my tale of vagabondes, and
rennegates most hateful.

One Robert Nicols, a false deceiuer, and most ignorant beast, and of the
profession of vagaboundes, (as wear his former fellows:) Has in times passed
boasted him self to have been the servant of master Uicary, late Sargeant
Chyrurgien to the Queens highness. But now the matter being put in trial, he
^ayeth he was apprentice with a priest. Among whose wicked and prodigious
doings, (which are infinite,) one very notable chanced in the year of our
lord. 15. 4. the. 26. of September. He poured in a purgation to an honest
woman of good fame, one Riches wydows, of Linton (a paryshe three miles distant
from Maydestone): which within three or four hours at the most, purged the
life out of her body: so violent was this mortal potion. The woman being before
in perfect health, to all men's judgments: being only of simplicity
persuaded to take the same, by the deceiuable persuasions of this Nicols: Who
made fair wether of all things, and her to believe, that he would deliver her
of such diseases, as in deed she had not. For he should have had by
compositio^, xx. shillinges for the said drink.

For this murderous fact, he was by the Queens majesty's Justices,
apprehended, and imprisoned in the Gaile of Maydstone. Where he was communed
with all, concerning his knowledge and doings, and for what cause he gave her
that purgation, and how she was persuaded to take it. He answered, that he
knew by her complexion, that her liver and her lunges wear rotten, and
therefore he could her so. Whereunto one replied saiynge, nay, she was not
sick, but thou tauldest her so for thy filthy lucre, and she believed thee.
And because (as thou saydest) thou knew all this by her complexion, I pray
thee what complexion am I of? He answered, you are sanguine. Then was it asked
him, whether it wear proper to a sanguyne man, to have black hear, as that
party had on his heard? To* this he answered, O, ye will say ye are more a
the Choler. Then the party gave him his hand to feel, which was commonly
cold, saiynge: is a Choleric man wont to be so cold? Which when he had
felt, he said: O then ye would be of the fleme. Then was he asked, what is a
sanguine man, or why is he called sanguine? He answered a sanguine man, is he
that has a good disgesture. Mary as thou say quod the demaunder, here in
haste thou showed how great thy cunning is in iudgyng complexions. Then was
it said to him, ye profess both Physic and Chirurgerit: What authors have
you read? He answered Vigo, and Gasken. Then was it demanded, what medicyne
gave thou the woman wherewith thou haddeste so evil luck? And he said
Catapussis. Then being rebuked, for that he would take on him to give
medicynes inwardlye, whereof he knew not the names, much less the natures:
He said, as stoutely, as obstinatly, that he knew as many purgations as ye
party that reproved him. Then he asked him of four or five, such as came
first to mind, as Tamar indes, Myrobalanes, Agarick etc. Of all ye which he
said he knew none. Then was he required to name them that he did know. And he
said he knew Catapussis and Catapistela. Then was he asked what Catapistela
was: Why quod he to the demaunder, do not you know it? No said the party,
not by that name. And it was further asked, whether it wear an herb, a root,
a tree, a stone, the houe, horn, or tail of a beast, or what it was? Nicols
answered that it was none of those, but a thing made beyond the seas: It is
not made in England quod he, I think it be made in France. Then was he
again reproved, for his beastly braggyng. And here may thou see quod the
person that reasoned with him,) thine own ignorance, in that thou say it
is made, where it is in deed the fructe of a tree, called Cas^ia Fistula (as I
think thou meanest,) and not Catapistela. And he answered (not withstandyng
his former impudency,) it is so: saying also thus, oh, you call it Casia,
belyke because it is like a case.

Then this man beginning to prove his cunnyng, in the natures of symples, asked
him the nature of Peper. He said it was hot in the first degree, and cold
in the second. Why then said the demaundaunt, what say you to the nature of
an oyster? And he (answering as before of the temperamente,) said cold in
the first degree, and hot in the third. Then was it said to the standers
by, here may you see his beastly ignorance, did ye ever hear that two
contraries* could dwell together and agree in one subject? Whereunto this
lewd fellow most proudly answered. Though I can not reason so well as you,
but am confounded at your hand: yet have I done great and many cures, which
said he comes of somewhat: though you say I know nothing. After this one
asked him if he wear by authority admitted, according to the laws of this
realm, to use Physic and Surgery, as a practiser of the sam. To whom an
other said: think you that any such ignorant ass as this is, can be any
where so admitted? Unto all this he said, if none should be suffered to use
the^ but the learned, or such as are permitted: a great many poor people
should perish for lack of help. To this he was answered. Nay, rather a
great number, that are daily killed or lamed. by such ignorant beasts as thou
art, might (by the benefit of nature, and other good helps of cunnyng men)
recover right well and live: If such as thou art wear not.

Among other questions of the Anatomy, to all the which he answered as beastly,
as in other things before: It was asked him what the spleen was, and he
answered, that it was a disease in the side, baked hard like a biscuit: deniyng
that there was any thing called the spleen, but the disease (says he) so
called.

Then was it further demanded of him (because he boasted much of
Chirurgerie,) what a wound was? and he answered a wound is a hurt or a
bruise. What is an ulcer then said the opponente^ he answered, an ulcer is a
wound. And then being asked whether a wound and an ulcer wear all one, he
said, a wound is that which is new, and an ulcer is that which is old. To
this it was replied that an ulcer might also be new, and that it was an ulcer,
though it wear but one day old. After this he said that he knew an ulcer
with a Canker, also a Marmole and a Fistula. Wherefore he was asked what was a
Canker, and he said. A Canker is when an ulcer does by rankling become a
Canker. Whereunto one replied saying. A Cancer may in deed be vlcerate and is
often so: but that every ulcer may by rankling (as thou say) become a
Cancer: it has not been read nor seen. But then he said that he spoke of a
Canker and not of a Cancer: for a Cancer said he is when an ulcer stynketh.

Much more could I write of his beastly answers, if I thought this not
enough, yea to much, except it wear better. And though I think this enough,
to grieve any wise man's eyes to see, or ears to hear: yet shall I desire them
to bear with a word or twain more, that what they are, even the unskillful
may perceive, and learn to beware of them.

A certain pacient of mine, (having lately been cured at my hand,) metynge
with this Nicols at his brothers house, reasoned with him of a pain that he
sometime had in his hyppe: I trow quod he, ye call it a Sciatica, do ye not?
Yea said Nicols: there is a Sciatica, and a Sciitica. Then said my pacient, I
never heard my Chyrurgien name any such. Who is that said Nicols? and my
pacient named me. Then began Nicols to praise a neighbor of mine, saying that
he was cunninger then I: but my pacient praised me, to be cunninger then my
neighbor. Yea said Nicols, in talk: Halle can talk better. Then said my
paciente: I had a grievous sore leg, with great apostemacions and
hollownes: wherefore, if he could have done nothing but talk, he might have
talked long enough to my leg, before it would so have been whole.

Unto the same man also he made his vaunte on a time, that he saw his master,
close a man's head together: that was clefte from the crown of the head, down
to the neck: who said he was after healed, and did live. This shamles lie,
being heard of a merry man: was with an other like lie quited, on this sort.
Tushe (said this merry man) I have heard of as great a matter as this. For a
certain man, falling into the hands of thieves, was robbed: and his head was
so smoothe cut off, that it stood still upon his neck till he rode home:
whose wife metyng him at the door, perceived his bosom bloody, and asked him
if his nose had bledde: which words when the man heard, he took his nose in
his hand to blow it, and therewith threw his head in at the door. And now as
it is time I leave also this monster, least I should to much weary the loving
reader, with the long readyng of these most frivolous co^munications, and
tragedious doings, (which I have with grief of heart written, trusting that
it will not only be a warning unto some, that they commit not their life and
health insicknesse, unto such life purgers: but also that it coming to the
hands of some virtuous mean, may with the pity of other men's myseries, move
them to labor, to the most of their power, to redress these euels.) Omitting
also one Carter, otherwise called Caruell, otherwise May. Who is a Sorcerer,
and a worker by dyuelyshe spirits, clokyng the same under the color of
Physic: and has done much mischief among the people, with his abhorrefull
doings. Which I will hereafter (as leysoure and occasion shall serve,)
farther declare.

I will here also omit to talk of Grigge the Poulter, with diverse other,
whose ends have made their doings known. And also of a Joyner in London, a
Frencheman borne, that is of late becomme a Phisitien: who is esteemed at this
day, among diverse right worshipful, to be very learned, and cunnyng, that
know not his original: yea, they call him doctor James. But an honest woman,
an old neighbor of his, (not long since) at a man of worshyppes house in
Kente, merueyled to see him in such brauerye, and lordly apparel: Who when
she took acquaintance of him, he wrong her hard by the hand, and rounded
her in the ear, saying: If thou be an honest woman, keep thy tongue in thy
headde, and say nothing of me.

For surely, a monstrous great legende should I make, it I should here recite
all such, as I have known and heard of. But if any man would know more, of
the doings of these deceyuers and runnegates: let him read a little book,
called a Galley late come into England, from Terra Noua, laden with
Phisitiens, Apothecaries and Chirurgiens, etc. The author whereof I know not.
Also let them read a little work, entitled A Poesy, made in form of a
vision, etc. lately imprinted. Also let them read the verses of master
Bulleyne, in his Bulwark, In the Dialogue between sorenes, and Surgery:
where he right truly, and pleasantly, describes them in their right colors.
In the which book also in diverse places, he notes ye sleighty practices, of
such abusers as he has known, in diverse countries.

What shall we think Diogenes would say, if he now lived, and saw so many
rusticall crafts men leave their mysteries, and become Phisitiens? seeing he
said to one that was a weak wrestler, (and after became a Phisitien,) these
words in effect: what intendest thou now quod he, craftily, and privily be
revenged of them that wear wont to vanquishe or overthrow thee? Or what
would Socrates now say, who said (upon like occasion) to a paynter, that
became a phisitien? now thou workest subtillye (quod he,) for whereas before
thine errors were espied, and judged of all men: now thou wylt hyde them in
the earth, or bury the^ in ye ground. Meaning (without doubt) yt such
phisiciens are more like to kill me^, the to save, or heal the^.

Well sure if there were good orders in all places, and the wholesome laws of
this realm well executed: there could none such dereyue, with their running
about, and kreping into corners, unsuspected, and examined. For it is easy to
conjecture, or rather perfectlye to know, that no honest cunning man, that
means truly, and instlye, will refuse to dwell and continue, in some esteemed
city or town: (for unto such wise and learned men delight to resort,) and to
run about here and there, through all the realm, thus like vacaboundes, to
deceive the unskillful people, with their beastly doings.

I trust yet one day to see it better looked on. And in the mean season let a
great many abusers (whom I know especially in Kent, both men and women, and
have not here named them,) repent and leave their wickedness. Otherwise let them
assure them selves, I will no more stay to publysh them with their wicked
doings, and knavery knackes, bringing the^ into this register, the^ I have don
to setforth these.

It shall behoue every good chirurgien therefore, to place him self in some
good town, or famous city, and surely the people will resort unto him, and
send for him at their need, to his sufficient profit and living: neither will
any good man despeyre of this.

It can not be without suspicion therefore, either of ye lack of cunnyng, or of
a deceiuable false conscience: that a Chirurgien, or Phisitien, shall refuse to
fire himself constantly in some dwelling place, and to become a wanderyng
fugitive, as these were and are, of whom I have written.

Not withstanding, I am not ignorant that constante dwellers may be also
deceauyng abusers: so long as there is no punishment, nor execution of laws to
the contrary, as for example.

One named Kiterell, dwells in Kente, at a parysh called Bedersoen: that has
been all his life a sawyer of timber and board, a man very simple, and
altogether unlearned: Who at this present is become a Phisitien, or rather a
detestable deceauyng sorcerer. He will give judgment on vrines, and whiles
that he looks on the water, he will grope and feel him self all about: and
otherwhyle, where as he feleth, he will shrynke, as though he were pricked, or
felt some great pain. Then he tourneth to the messenger and tells him
where, and in what sort the party is grieved: which makes the people think
him very cunning. They seek to him far and near for remedy, for such as
are bewyched or enchanted: and as they commonly term it, forspoken. What
stuff this is, let the wise and learned judge. And he has so prospered with
these doings, that in short space he has been able, both to purchase and
build, as I am credibly informed, of diverse men that do know and have seen
the same. For there are many that report, (and they no small fools,) that he
has cured such as all the learned Phisitiens in England could do no good
unto, believe it who will.

Not withstanding Cardanus a learned Philosopher, in his work De Subtilitate,
in the tenthe book thereof, entitled of spirits or devils, seems to prove
that there are certain griefs, chaunsing sometime to man's body by
enchauntement, or the workyng of cursed sciences: Whereof for so much as
physic and chirurgerie, know no cause, they are also to seek of a remedy.
For in these laudable arts, there is a reasonable cause found of every
disease: upon the reason whereof, there is ordained a remedy. But when through
diuilyshe and wicked sciences, there is any sycknesse procured, whereof the
laudable art of medicine knows not ye cause: so can it procure no help. But
only by help of some of those sciences most detestable, must the same be taken
away again: so that it seems to be a common composition among them, the one
to tormente the bodies, both of man and beasts, that an other may be sought
unto, to remedy the same: So one being ever a workynge instrument to an other.
For the said Cardanus being a learned Phisitien, and great Philosopher of our
time, of Mylayne, cites for an example, a merueylous history, done in the
same city: which I will here write, that the gentle reader may by comparing
the same with others: the better understand the great subtilties, and wicked
workings of such kind of persons: the history is as follows.

Dygressing a while from that which we have said, we will now rehearse what
we this last year have seen. A certain wise in the city of Mylayne, being
come of a noble stock, was sick of a whote or burning urine, with a
continual desire to expel the same. About the which the most famous
Phisitiens of our said city (being seven in number, beside other strange
ones, with also the Chirurgiens) were conuocated, I my self being present: and
yet we all could not well agree of the cause of her grief. For some esteemed it
to be a stone, one called it Erysipelas, commonly called sayncte Antonies fire:
an other an ulcer, other named it an hard tumor, called Scirrbus: other said
it was a Cancer, some affirmed that it was an Aposteme, and some that it was
certain vessikes or blisters: but remedies there could none be found against
those affectes. But through whotte fomentations, there were certain vessikes
or blisters made, which were cut. And through the use of those violent
torments, there followed an inu^luntary emission or lettyng go of urine,
whereof there followed to her at.ii. times, a dangerous accidence namely a spasme
or crampe, without pulse or strength. Thus being tormented by this malady,
seven whole months without remedy, she was of the Phisitiens forsaken, and in
utter despeyre of health. And certainly she did not feign her grefe
considering that she drunk so many bitter medicines, with sufferyng so many
fomentations and perfumes, permittyng also that secreate place to to be seen,
of so great a nu^bre of Phisitiens, beholding it by a glass: observing also
the diete so long a time, sufferyng bloudlettyng, suffering the forsayde
vessickes to be cut, and the application and working of so many corrostues or
burning medicines, which procured escares, besides Iron instruments and fire.
Wherefore we being out of comfort, and uncertain of the sycknesse, at the
last, they condescended to my sentence: which was not the greatest absurdity
of all, as hereafter shall apere, which sentence was grounded on this
argument. That the disease did wax worse, and grew more and more, through the
medycines. The pain was continually in the place, where the neck of the
bladder does join with the neck of the matrix: with a great extenuation or
falling away of the body into leanes, with such a face as is described of
Hippocrates. The emission of urine, was not voluntary, though there were a
continual desire to do it. There were ulcers also about the place, which were
made partly through the heat and sharpness of the medicines, and partly
through the importune attraction of Iro^. Nevertheless the burning of urine
did not only remain but increase, she evermore having a fervent desire to
make water, in so much that some Phisitiens did think that there was a stone in
the bladder: albeit the serching with an vrinary instrument, called in Greek
Catheter, took away that opinion: But now at the last when it was published
al abroad, yt this woman was extremely sick, there stepped forth to her help,
one Josephus Niger, a renouined professor of the Greek letters: who was of some
suspected to be an inchanter, or worker in the wicked sciences: This woman
having a son of.x. years old, which was scoller to the said Joseph, and of
him instituted unto letters. This Joseph brought with him a glass of
Cristall, in form of a triangle, wherein he caused the child to look: who
said that therein he saw three foul and ougly spirits, standing on their
feet before his mother. and when he had whistered other words in the childs
ear, the child said that he saw an other spirit on horseback, more high
and great the^ the other.iii. with a sceptour threforked, or of three pricks,
who bound the other three spirits, one after an other, and being so bound,
he did them under his saddel: which done, he delivered his glass to be kept.
Why should I stand so long rehersing this history? This woman having some
persuasion by this art does fall on sleep, her grefe, her burninge, and her
apetite to make water does cease, ye rosiall color came again in her face, her
flesh was restored unto a good liking: so that anon after she conceived: and
thus was she well and perfectly healed. And for the proof hereof, I have to
witness all the familiars of the woman, all the phisitiens conuocated, and the
effect it self. For where as before she was a dead body, now may each one see
her in health.

And now it must follow (seeing that there can be found none other cause) that
this woman was healed by a spirit, or by imagination, or by hope. For if the
child spoke the truth, (Josephus dissembling the matter for fear of ye law:)
she was healed by a spirit. If ye child were taught and instructed before of
Josephus, to speak all that he should require of him, then it was a subtlety,
wrought for the health of his mother: and so it should apeare, that she was
healed by imagination, or by confidence. And surely this doing were merueilous,
seeing Joseph would take no reward, neither know I to what end such a
subtlety or fraud should extend: not only because he took no money, but
also considering, what infamy would succeed, in as much as he knew not,
what good, or ill success would come, of such an enterprise. Wherefore it is
like to be true, that she was healed of a spirit. Thus far Cardanus.

It may chance now, that some whose minds are already affectionate to these
arts, will say: yt it is necessary that such men should be, for the comfort
of them that have need, when as no help otherwise will serve. To whom it may
be answered: that if they be Christian me^, they ought not to seek help at
devils: sith ye holy ghost by the mouth of sayncte Paul has warned, that no
man do evil that good may come thereof. Farthermore, if none such (as god in
his holy law has commanded) were suffered to live, there could no such
inconvenience chance, whereby any man should have need to seek to them for
help: seeing that there is never any need of their aid, but where the effect
is first caused, through the wicked workyng of those damnable arts. But let
this suffice that we have spoken, concerning the wicked abuses of Physic and
Chirurgerie: and let us now proceed to the duty of the Chirurgien, and the
good observation of his office: which will avoid these and all like abuses,
whereunto at this day (God amend it) Physic and Chyrurgery, is made a cloak.
For none of these false merchantes will wyllyngly be called, by the name of
that which they most use: but they will be called Phisiciens, Chirurgiens,
and Astronomers, when they can as much skyll in any of them as brute beasts.
And concerning the behauour, that is required in a true Chirurgien to his
paciente, and of one Chirurgien to an other concerning council, honest
workyng and knowledge: I have thought good to gather the councels, and good
documentes, of diverse good and veterate authors, (and have formed the same
into English verses, or meter:) and here to place the same, for the better
instruction of all young Chirurgiens: that it may as well be easy to learn, as
apt to be kept in memory, of all willing learners.

Hark and draw nere ye young students,
Your ears look ye unclose:
The worthy art Surgery,
To practice that purpose.
And mark what the great masters say,
That here before have wroughte:
And did to their disciples leave,
In wrytinge what they taught.
And to their scholars did descriue,
A brief method or way:
Commaundinge them the same to mark,
On this wise began they say.
When thou art callde at any time,
A patient to see:
And doste perceive the cure to great,
And ponderous for thee.
See that thou lay disdeyne aside,
And pride of thine own skyll:
And think no shame counsel to take,
But rather with good will,
Get one or two of expert men,
To help thee in that need:
And make them partakers with thee,
In that work to proceed.
For in so doing thine honestye,
Thou shalt well keep and save:
Also thy patiente thereby,
Right great comfort shall have.
By this means thou may haplye learn,
right seldom seen before,
Of thee, or him which first thee taught:
Though thou have cunning store.
And also if onghte go a wrye,
Or hinder in thy cure:
The one may mende the others fault,
while friendship does endure.
The wounded or sore man also,
Shall have no cause to grudge:
In you such vniformitye,
while he may see and judge.
And farthermore thou haste thy part,
Both of profyt and fame:
when that your work has good success,
And luckilye does frame.
And if it hap to frame amiss,
Suspicyon can be none:
Sithe thou haste sought all means of health,
And wouldste not be alone.
So each man shall with other bear,
Thy just cause to defend:
All wise and learned men also,
Shall thee praise and commend.
For all that be discrete doubtless,
will judge thee to be wise:
In that thou do desire to learn,
And augmente thy practice.
And will not that through negligence,
And pride of thine own way:
Thy pacient in pain should spill,
To perish and dekaye.
Thy purpose thus thou shalt attain,
with ease and honestye:
where otherwise it may thee bring,
Shame and ignominye.
And farther if thou way it right,
It is easy to guess:
That better two, then one alone,
All errores may redress.
For as all men that here do live,
Borne in this wretched vale,
Are fraughted full of errores great,
Our boot mixed with bale.
From which the prudent Solomon,
was never void and free:
As of him self he writes plain,
who so will read may see.
So if thou in Chirurgerye,
Alone will walk and wade:
Thine errores will thy work confound,
And all thine honor quade.
Sith Bernarde knew not all him self,
Think never in thy mind:
But that at last by painful proof,
Thou shalt thine errores find.
For errores not staide at the first,
But suffered to proceed:
To mischiefs great as Plato says,
will grow in very deed.
But the beginning if thou stop,
By good counsel and pure:
All doubtful things thou shall prevent,
And hard diseases cure,
For all to late comes remedy,
when through thy negligence:
The grief is grown paste aid and cure,
And all experience.
But one thing note, when two or more
Together ioygned be:
About the paynfull patient,
See that ye do agree.
See that no discord do arise,
Nor be at no debate:
For that shall sore discomforte him,
That is in sick estate.
And when alone with your sore man,
One of you is present:
Defame nor dispraise in no wise,
The same that is absente.
For naught can more discomforte him,
That lies in grief and pain:
Then hear that one of you does bear,
To other such disdeine.
wherefore what so ye have to say,
In things about your art:
Let it be done among your selves,
In secret and a part.
with one consent vniformlye,
Comfort the wounded man:
But unto some good friend of his,
Express all that ye can.
And let them know the danger great,
That like is to succeed:
Prognosticatinge wittilye,
And in convenient speed.
wherefore each one of you shall take,
At other his counsel:
How that in most convenient wise,
Ye may the grief expel.
And so that one in any wise,
From other nothing hide:
But by all means consulte, and for
The sick man's health provide.
For in that need if any do,
His counsel keep a loofe:
And so the wounded man decay,
It shall be his reproof.
See that for goulde or couetise,
Ye take no thing in hand:
which incurable for to be,
Ye do well understand.
Or ought unless to cure the same,
Thou have some perfect ground:
For if thou do, it will thy fame
In utter shame confound.
Look of thy self in any wise,
Thou make no praise nor boste:
For that shall turn to thy dispraise,
when thou do use it most.
See thou dispraise none other man,
His error though thou know:
For sure an other for thy plage,
Shall thee like curtsye show.
Commend the deeds of each good man,
The best look that thou say:
So shall good fame redounde to thee,
From all men day by day.
Not only in surgery,
Thou ought to be expert:
But also in Astronomye,
Both preuye and aperte.
In natural Philosophye,
Thy study should be bente:
To know each herb, shrubbe, root and tree,
Must be thy good intent,
Each beast and foul, with worm and fish,
And all that bears life:
Their virtues and their natures both,
with thee ought to be rife.
And in the ground metal and stone,
And veins of earth also:
Their powers and virtues in degree,
Should not be hid the fro.
But chieflye the Anatomye,
Ye ought to understand:
If ye will cure well any thing,
That ye do take in hand.
For by the same above the rest,
Ye shall great fame deserve:
The life of man from many streightes,
To save and well preserve.
without the knowledge of which art,
thou canste not chose but err:
In all that thou shalt go about,
Thy knowledge to prefer:
As if ye cut or cauterize,
Or use Phlebotomye:
Ye can not but err in the same,
without Anatomye.
He is no true Chirurgien,
That can not show by art,
The nature of eurye member,
Each from other aparte.
For in that noble handye work,
There does nothing excel,
The knowledge of Anatomye,
If it be learned well.
Endeavor therefore by all means,
The same to know and cunne,
For when thou haste it perfectlye,
Thine art is halflye wunne.
For thereby shall thou understand,
Of each member in deed,
Their nature and their offices,
And how they do proceed.
And unto what good use they serve,
As well the least as most,
And by their hurt Prognosticate,
what action will be lost.
whereby of knowledge and great skill,
Thou shall obtain the brute,
And men to thee in general,
For help shall make their suit.
wherefore all honor, laud and praise,
To God ascribed be,
The Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
One God and persons three.
Perhaps now some man will object and say, that it is not possible always
to observe these rules. For if I dwell far from expert men of whom to ask
council, and peradventure ammatched in the place where I dwell, with some
bragging proud boy, that came latelye out of his prentishode: who shall for
lack of knowledge and discretion seek mine infamy and dishonor, and is
therefore not mete to associate my self with, but rather to be avoided.

To this I answer that it behooves a good chirurgien to be ingenious, and that
in this case is thy remedy. To be ingenious, is to be apt to devise new
remedies for new diseases, and such as thou haste not before seen nor heard
of. In such a case in deed it behooves thee to be very polytique, and that
allmightye God may the better prosper all thy works and devises. Serve God
faithfullye in hartye contemplacions day and night, desiringe God for Jesus
Christ's sake his dear son our sauyoure, to enspire thee with such grace,
that thou maiste to his honor and glory, end all such enterprises as thou
take upon thee to do: (Of which prayer I will hereafter write an example,)
for if God be on thy side, fear not who so ever be against thee. And that thou
may the better know what thou doste, that wilt be a chirurgien, and what
thou take upon thee to profess: know out of good and learned authors,
what Chirurgerye is. And so shalt thou be the better able wiselye to work
alone, where the needful society of counsel does want.

Surgery therefore (as Angelus Bolognius in the prologe to his book of the
cure of external ulcers says) is ye most aunciente, ye the most sure and
excellent part of the art of medicyne, which works by handy operation.
For the name thereof which was given thereto by most ancient authors,
signifies nothing elsse: For Surgery is Operatio Manualis that is handye
work. Wherefore sith it is a part of Phisike, we can not so rightlye name it
in English, as to call it the handye work of medicine. And farthermore the
art of medicine or Physic (wherein Surgery is comprehended) is an art,
and so it ought to be named, and not a science. And chirurgerye is not an art
properlye of it self without Phisike, or separated from the same, as some do
think: neither can Phisike be an whole and perfect art without Surgery,
as some would imagine. For sithe they are both parts one of an other, how can
they be divided or separate without detriment to them both? For it is not a
whole body, that lacks one of his chief members or parts. For nether can
Chirurgerye be perfectlye learned without theorike, nor Phisike without
Practice. And whereas Theorike and practice go not together, whether ye call it
Phisike or Surgery, I dare boldlye affirm, that there is in them no manner
of perfection worthy commendation. Yet some there be that think that only to
Phisike belongs Theorike or Speculation, and that to Surgery belongs
only practice: but how far their judgments differ from truth let every
wise man judge. What knowledge is there in Phisike, that is not requisyte in
Chirurgerye? whether it be Gramer, Philosophy, Astronomye, Anatomye, or any
other? ye the very judicial of urine, and the pulse: as good Doctor Record our
worthy country man witnesses. wherefore I affirm, according to the sentence
of most wise authoures, that the knowledge of Chirurgerye consists in.ii.
things: namelye speculation and practice: and therefore it is not only a
workinge, but an excellent knowledge and understanding how to work well and
perfectly. But the effectual acts of Chirurgerye in deed (as Guido says,)
consyste in cuttinge, in knittinge, in bindinge, in purging, purifying, and
exercisynge the handye operation: and all this upon the body of man, to heal
or bring health to the same, as much as is possible. Which addition we put to,
because it never has been, is, nor shall be possible for any chirurgien to heal
all that are diseased and sore. Therefore we may thus conclude, that
chirurgerye is an art both workynge and teachinge how to work upon the
body of man, to heal all such diseases as are possible to be cured.

Now therefore let the good chirurgien (that will avoid wicked crafts and
abuses) first learn, and then work and use experience: wherein thou shall
understand that the only readinge in books is not sufficient, as many a one
at this day, (to the great hurt of much people) thinks. For there is no
science that can without saying the practyse and experience of cunnyng masters
therein, be learned: and surely in the art of medicine, (chieflye chirurgerye)
practice and experience is the chiefest learning: although with out other
learning (I confess) no man can attain to the perfection that therein is
required. And for this does learning (in books contained chieflye serve, to
teach men to know the works of learned masters of old time. But assure thy
self (what so ever such masters have written,) thou shall never perfectlye
digest to thine own use, any thing in them: except thou be able to join by
comparison, that which thou haste seen in other men's works before thine
eyes, and in the practice of thine own hands, with that which thou find
written in old authors: for little profit, sweetness, or understanding shall
one get of authors, except he see the same also put in practice. Therefore
when thou haste seen proved by cunning masters ye which thou haste red, thou
art truly learned in thine art, and therefore apt to work and use
experience thy self.

And this regard to experience in learning made Socrates say, that lerning
ought not to be written in books, but rather in men's minds. For this
excellent Philosopher well perceived, that the committinge of cunnyng to
written books, made men to neglect the practice and experience of their
wits, by means whereof they became vncunninge.

Galen also has friendly admonished us, that we ought nor, (if we will be
perfectlye cunninge) to trust only to doctrine written in books, but rather
our propre eyes: which are to be trusted above all other authors, ye before
Hippocrates and Galen. For without the eyes consent (says Socrates) the ears
ought not to be trusted: for the ears are subjects and often deceived: but
the eyes are judges both true and certain.

As I would therefore that all Chirurgiens should be learned, so would I have
no man think him self learned, otherwise then chiefly by experience: for
learning in surgery, consists not in speculation only, nor in practice
only, but in speculation well practiced by experience. Therefore when we say
that a chirurgien must first be learned and then work: It is not meant that
any man by the reading of a book or books only, may learn how to work: for
truly that has caused so many deseiuinge abusers, as there are at this day.

Good chirurgien therefore have a regard to these things, even as thou will
answer for the same at the dredful day, when the eternal Lord and almighty
master, shall call for account of each man's talent: whether they have gained
therewith according to his will, or whether they have abused or vainlye hid the
same.

Furthermore these things considered and observed, it is expedient chiefly and
before all things yt thou have Gods fear always before thine eyes, that
thou lead a virtuous life, and (as nere as God shall give thee grace) vnsported
to the world: doing just and virtuous deeds, abhorring and abstaining from all
viciousness. Let wicked pride be far from thy heart, and rather with all
humility confess, that thou can do nothing of thy self, (as thou canste
not in deed,) but through the grace and merciful favor of God.

Likewise avoid envy and wicked wrath, be neither wrathful nor enuyous,
that an other man of thine Art has better success then thy self: but
rather endeavor thy self in the fear and service of God, to learn to do
better, and to excede others. For to a diligente and willing mind, there is
nothing to hard ne impossible.

Let charity surmounte couetise, so that it have no place in thy heart:
otherwise then it shallbe requisite for thee to live like a man of science with
a decent and honest maintenance of necessaryes. Let no slouthe cause thee to
neglecte thy cures whereof thou haste taken charge, least through thy negligence
they pearishe, and their blood call for vengance on thee at the hands of God.

In any wise be thou no lechoure, but adorn thy life with honest, chaste, and
sober manners: for that unclean and filthye vice is much to be abhorred in a
Chirurgyen: consideringe the secrets of many honest folks, that to his
charge and cure must be committed.

Lastly and above all these, beware of drunkenness, a vice that was never
more used, then it is of many at this time. For when has this vile report
(or rather reproach) gone of so many as it does at this day, he is a good
chirurgyen in the forenone? O abomination of all other in a chirurgien to be
detested. But how unmeet such are to be chirurgiens, I have touched more at
large in my preface.

Let virtue therefore I say be thy guide: let her be both thy rule and
compass, whereby to frame all thy doings. And consider that chirurgerye is a^
art to heal dyseases, which is a virtuous exercise, ye a gift of Gods
spirit as says S. Paul: and therefore can never be well used of vicious
persons, although they have never so much lerninge. For vice and virtue can
never accord, but always one is expelled by the other, for two contraries can
never agree in one subject.

Consider also how by virtuous and holy life, and by faithful prayer the
very angels at Gods appointment have descended from heaven, to aid and
help men in the^e need, teachinge them remedies for diverse griefs: as holy
Raphaell was sent to Tobye. And as thou may read in the.xxxviii. chapter
of Jesus the son of Sirache where he (treatinge of the Phisitien) says. The
hour may come that the sick may be healed through them when they pray
unto the Lord, that he may recover and get health to live longer. Lo here
may thou see that thy duty is to pray unto God for thy pacient, and for
help and grace to heal him. Pray therefore faithfully unto God: serve him
deuoutlye, call rightlye upon his holy name day and night, with an holy
abstinence as scripture teaches, not omyttinge deeds of alms, the fruits of
perfect faith.

Moreover be not ingrate nor unthankful unto God, when he sends good
success to thy business, good luck to thy hands, and grants thee thy
hearts desire. For unthankfulness many times is the cause that our prayers are
not heard. Praise God therefore for his benefits, and pray faithfullye to him
in all thy streightes of need, and this doing be sure that God will prosper
all thy ways, and give good success to all thy works. Take here therefore an
example of prayer which thou may use I trust to the glory of God.

A prayer necessary to be said of all Chirurgiens.
O Almightye, eternal, impassible, and incomprehensible Lord God: which
haste created all things of nothing, and man out of the slime of the earth,
settinge him in paradyse to live ever in felicitye: from which he most
disobedientlye fell into this world of infyrmities. Which infirmities yet
nevertheless thou haste (of thy great mercy) so pityed: that for the help
and cura^ion of them, thou haste (by thy special grace) given virtue unto
trees, herbs, roots, beasts, fowls, fishes, worms, stones and metalles.
And in fine have left nothing, among all that thou haste made without a propre
virtue, for man his vtilitye and help in time of need: and haste also most
graciouslye given knowledge unto men, for to use and minister thy creatures to
the help of their griefs. Grant unto me most merciful God, that (as I
truly believe and faithfully trust, that all health and virtue comes from
thee,) I may so know and use thy creatures to the help of my christen
brethren and neighbors, in that art that I through thy providence, have
from my youth up been trained and instituted unto: that not only I for the
prosperous success of mine art, but my poor pacientes also and all other
together, may praise and honor thy holy and blessed name. which live and
reignest one God in Trinitye, and Trinitye in unity, world without end. Amen.

Another.
O Lord God everlasting and almighty chirurgien, who only art the Lord that
healest Israel: (yt is thine elect). And have created medicin out of the earth
(of no wise man to be abhorred) so that bitter water was made sweet by the
virtue of a tree: that men might learn thereby to know that thou haste given
virtue to all things, and have given wisdom and knowledge unto men from time
to time, that thou may be honored in thy wondrous works. For Solomon spoke
of all rotes and trees, even from the Cedar that grows in Libanon, unto the
Hisope that springs out of the wall. Ye he spoke also of beasts, fowls,
worms, and of fishes. I read also O Lord that by a little meal, the
bitterness of Colocinthis was cured in the potage pot of the prophets
children: And by a plaster of figs king Ezechias was healed of his sickness
sore. I also remember that by ye gaul of a fyshe, the blindness was taken
from old Tobies eyes. Innumerable O Lord are the testimonies of scripture,
beside dailye experience: which provoke and stirs me to laud and praise
thy most glorious name. I beseech thee therefore, oh most merciful Lord, that
I may so use, and all my patientes so receive thy creatures, that thou so
graciously haste ordained for medicine, that health may be obtained, and thy
name for the same everlastingly honored. Grant this oh lord, holy and
euerliuyng god, for the merits of thy dear son our only savior and mercy
seat thy holy wisdom Jesus Christ, in whom is all virtue to cure all things
world without end. Amen.

A prayer to be used of the good Chirurgien before he conclude to take in hand
the curation of any hard and difficulte thing, at any man's importunate suit
and request.
O Almighty lord God heavenly father who by thy divine providence forseest
and disposest all things to thy glory and the profit of thy church. Thou
see all things before they come to pass, and things that yet are not are
with thee as though they were: but man thou have enclosed within metes and
bounds of knowing things after they are chanced: so that we only judge of
things present, and as for things to come, we can not before hand certainly
decerne them. Not withstanding for so much as thou have mercifully decreed
through our lord Jesus Christ, that all things turn to the best to those
thy chosen children, who rightly love and fear thee: Thy strength supplieth
our weakness, thy wisdom our folly, and thy knowledge our ignorance: And
causest us nevertheless to feel by faith in our souls, that which our
carnal senses can in no wise taste. My prayer therefore oh merciful lord, is
that of thy gracious goodness and merciful benignity, thou will so forsee and
provide for me most unworthy and wretched sinner (yet thy servant through
Christ) that I never take upon me to cure either this or any other thing,
unless thy godly will be, that I may through thy grace so end the same, that
not only I may thereby attain an honest fame, and the party grieved joy,
gladness and health: But chiefly that we both and all other good people (the
same considering) may remember thee with thanks, land, honor, and praise, for
thine abundant mercy grace and virtue to our lives end. Grant this O Lord
God eternal and omnipotent, for the sake of thy everlasting word, thy dear
son our only savior and mediator, by whom thou workest all in all things:
who lives and reigns with thee and the holy ghost, one God in Trinity, and
Tinitie in unity world without end. Amen.

Now that after my simple skill I have formed prayers mete for Chirurgiens, I
think it mete to show also an example how to praise God for the good success
of the chirurgiens business, as follows.
O Eternal father, almyghtie God maker of al things, how great and glorious
are all thy wo^derous works, thy loving kyndnes and mercies to mankind
excedyng them all: for thy benefits bestowed on mankind are infinite and
incomparable. Among which thy creatures and works of thy hands, I most
poor unworthy man and wretched sinner, have endless cause to acknowledge thy
grace and mercies.

If oh lord I should once imagine to gratify thy goodness, behold what has
mortal man to give unto God? or what has man that is not Gods? neither have
thou O God any need of man, or ought that man has. But not withstandyng, thy
son our savior by divine providence has satisfied for us thy will, and
apeased thy wrath, justly bente on us for our manifold sins: And through the
holy ghost thy spirit of truth (who leads us unto all truth) we are
informed, that thou askeste of us from henceforthe no more, but a lively
sacrifice of thanks geuyng and praise of thy holy name.

Wherefore not withstanding mine unworthiness, through Christ I am boldened
(fully hopyng that of thy great mercy thou will fatherly accept the same)
most heartily to thank thee with all my heart and soul, for the good success
that thou haste given to the exercise of my hands to bring even wonderful
things to pass. Wherefore O Lord holy and just: all possible thanks, honor,
glory, and praise, be given unto thee. Beseching thee (for Jesus Christ's sake)
to give me grace that I never forgette or put out of mind for any thing while
I live, to remember still to offer thee this sacrifice, so that I receive not
this thy great graces unthankfully unto my lives end: and after this life
that I may with the holy patriarchs, prophets, Apostles, Evangelists,
Martyrs, Confessors, Angels and Archangels, sing with incessant voice before
thy throne, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath for ever and ever. Amen.

Finally, see that ye ascribe al honor unto the holy Trinity, and seek not in
any wise your own praise and vain glory, least ye therein displease GOD and
justly provoke him to withdraw his grace from you, whose instruments ye
are, while ye do well, as is the hammer in the hand of the work manne. For
as says the prophet Esaie, Cap. 10. Number gloriabitur securis aduersus eum qui
^asecat? aut serra magnificabitur aduersus eum qui se tractat? Quod perinde
esset ac si uirga sese eleuaret co^tra eu^ qui ipsam fert, et baculus sese
extolleret quasi lignum non esset. That is, Shall the axe boste it self
against him that heweth therewith? or shall the saw brag against him that
ha^dleth it? Which were even like as if the rod did exalte it self against
him that bears it and the staff should extolle it self as though it wear
no wood.

FINIS.
Our misery and frail estate,
In nothing is declared more,
Then in our errors rathe and late.
That chance when least we look therefore,
Yea and also which yet is more,
we many times put faults in ure,
when from them we our selves think sure,
wherefore since it is destinate,
And none can clearly it withstand,
with love and with most friendly rate,
Before to read thou take in hand
This work, let all the faults be scande,
And by this rule the same redress,
Lest faults good fruits to much opresse.
The errors of Lanfranke his brief.
Page, Line, Error, Correction. 4. 12 14. 14 Contution, Contusion, 6 31
tritici, triticeae, 7. 70. 11.8 olium, oleum, 9 11 dilicasie, delicasie, 11 3
partibibus, partibus, 12 13 concouate, concauate, 15 3 hurtfulle hurtful, 30
13 profit proof, 34 14 actuaile actual, 34 37 Canterize Cauterize, 53 2
Sulphur Sulphur 67 6 Raedices Radices

Errors of the margent.
19 7 Lencophlegmatias Leucophlegmatias, 29 12 fraximi fraxini,

Errors in the Expositiue table.
Page. Line, Errors, Correction. 15 30 (...) (...) 24 2 (...) (...) 32 17
arabian's arabians 43 16 morrein in of beasts morrein of beasts 48 14
Sanguinaria Sanguinarius 58 25 opthalmia Ophthalmia 61 6 of mother of the
mother 82 24 Syluestri Syluestris 104 12 Siston Sciston 109 21 pelpeth helps
111 9 them then 113 24 Scarfication Scarification 114 33 Sclirocis Sclirosis
119 4 sendew senuye 124 7 bobye body 127 5 Leminam phragidon Lemnian
sphragidon, 140 16. 17 Colcothar Cholcothar

Errors in the margent of the same.
6 12 eins eius 18 4 Crambo Crambe 67 7 Theremiabin Thereniabin

Errors escaped in the Anatomy.
12. 16. 20 in ye 28. 36 titles part Treatice 22 9 sussiciently sufficiently
40 12 Motitiaea Notiaea 61 7 Aditorium o^ Adiutorium o^ 64 15 Plenatica
Splenatica 76 30 arieries arteries 81 10 Subtilae Subtle 89 18 nather nether

Errors in the margent of the same.
Page, Line, Errors, Correction. 3 14 Ceruix ossium Ceruix ossis or Ceruices
ossium 6 1 (...) (...) 29 11 contutio contulio 39 4 anciformis anceformes 40 13
teuuis tenuis 56 6 (...) (...) 63 61 muscles of the brain. muscles of the arm


