The right and true understanding of the Supper of the Lord and the use thereof
faithfully gathered out of ye holy Scriptures worthily to be embrased of all
Christen people.

Perused and allowed by diverse godly learned men to the comfort of al ye true
congregation of Christ.

Beati qui ad cenam nuptiarum agni vocati sunt. Apo.xix.

To the most puesaunt and mighty Prince Edward the.vi. by the grace of God
King of England, France and Ireland, defender of the faith, and of the
Church of England and also of Ireland in earth ye supreme head: your most
humble and obediente Servant Thomas Lancaster heartily wyshith all grace and
peace from god with long Reign, honor, health and prosperity.
GRace be with your Majesty and peace from god our father and from our Lord
Jesus christ Amen. And it please your Majesty for this cause have I dedicate
this my simple labor unto your grace. First because I perceive yt god has
called your Majesty to be apreferrer of his holy and blessed word as by
another Josias which Lord of power prosper your most excellent Majesty in all
your divine affairs and godly enterprises Secondarily because there is found
many diverse sects under Christ's name at this prease^te, as Papists
Lutherians, Swynglia^s, Anabaptestes, Laudia^s with other mo, like as there was
among ye Jews, as Hasbutri Hemero. Baptista, Essei, Saducei Pharesei. etc. And
every one of them bostid the^ of the lords word, and would be Christians,
althought yt the most part of these fore rehearsed sects, has not reaceauyd
nether word nor sprit nor no christian lerninge, and therefore ar they so ready
to persecute them that has the word sprite and life, but what helps it, it
has been thus from the beginning, yt the spiritual chyldryn of God must
suffer of the fleshelye, as Abell of Caine, Isaac of Ismaell, Jacob of Esau and
the spiritual children of Israel of the fleshely. For before it pleased God to
restore in to this Realm (by your graces most noble father, and now by your
majesty) the Gospel and Joyful tydinges of his dearly beloved son our
sauyor Jesus Christ, Infidelytie as chief Ruler reyngned in our hearts,
Hypocrisy as a vain glorious Emperesse bear dominion, superstition,
Idolatrye, false sects, men's traditions, confidens reposed in men's inventions,
Pilgrimages, offerynges, Bulls, Pardons, Dispensations, Masses, marchaundice
for merits and works, bieng and selling of the divine misteres, with other
abhomenable baggage more, was crept into the great disquietnes of this your
holy Chatholike Church of England, but without doubt they shall no longer
prevail for the day of the Lord is at hand which shall break Sata^s heed and
destroy both him and al his ministers with the breathe of his mouth. For he will
no longer suffer this great wickedness and abhomynacion, he will be known for
the God and sauyoure alone he is the Lord which alone wylbe exalted and al
Idols shall be utterly bro^ken in peaces. Esaie.ii.
He is that God, which will no longer suffer his glory to be given to other.
He is that lauer which will expulse the darkness of men's tradicions, that fight
with his infallible veryte, and bring in the glorious light of his most holy
word. To be short he will overthrow all the Idollys ye obscure his glory,
and set up his blyssed name to be praised for ever and ever Ame^. Of this his
holy will have we experyens eue^ at this time in which it has plesed him to
send us your Majesty his derely beloved servant our most virtuous lawful
and godly king to ouerthorowe (not aparte) but all Antychrystes kingdom, by
your divine polecy and godly enterpryses. So that the great hoar of Babylon,
Apo. xvii.
the mother of all Hordome and abhominacions of the earth. Has lost her chief
glory and renown. And is now become so vile, that she is made the habytacion
of Deuelles, and the Hold of all foul spyrites, Apo. xviii. Esaie.xii. Iore.
xv Apo. xiiii. ps. xiiii iiii Psa. i.xvi
and A cage of all unclean and hathefull Birds, so that no man now will once
by any of her marcha^des. And without doubt the time is (by gods providence
and your graces) yt Babylon has in this realm such a faule, that it shall
not after this time at any time be repaired. For ye mouth of the Lord has
spoken it, which is faithful in all his words, and whose truth abides for
ever and ever, neither can this Prophecy of Christ by made frustrate by any
humayne polyce. Every plant yt my heavenly father has not planted shall be
pluck up by ye rotes, Math. xv.
whosoever reioyseth not to hear these things: yea who tryu^phes not to se the^.
Blessed ar we your subiets to whom it has chanced not only to here these
things Joyfully, but also to se the^ so plentyfully put in ure by your
Majesty, so that al your faithful subjects being no papists do faythfullye
rejoice. And although, we be occasioned diverse wayse to give god immortal
thanks for diverse gifts, yet we think yt we are most hyghly bound to be
thankful for the restitution of his holy word in this your graces days. And
woo worth them that be unthankful to him in this behalf, and disobediente to
your Majesty, except they repent and amend. Wherefore I desire your Majesty
for the love of god yt your grace read it and judge it with the Lords word,
and cause it to be Judged of them that are godly learned, and not of suspected
Papists. And if they can confute it I will gladly be learned. But and I have the
truth and not they. I desire your grace for the tender mercy of god, and as ye
will answer before god at ye day of Judgment yt ye will protecte and defend it
acording to your office, and that your loui^g subjects because of wekenes of
the flesh be not compelled to come from Christ to Antichrist, from truth to
falsed, from everlasting life to everlasting death. I know well and it please
your Majesty yt there shall be kyckyng against ye prycke, Esaias.xl.
notwithstanding I pass not, ye truth may no longer be hid, i. Pet. i Esaias.
xiiii Jude. i
ye truth may not come to nowght because of the lie, gods word remaynes
everlasting. Was ye good Angels worse because of Lucifers prynde, what hyndreth
it ye.xi. Appostles yt Judas was a traitor every man shall bear his own
burthyne, ye father shall not bear yt vnryghtwysnes of his son, nor the son
the vnryghtwysnes of his father. But the soul that sins shall dye. Was the
pure clean lerning of the.xii. Apostles worse that ye their was so many
damnable sects in their time under Christ's name? which sects were no less
then.vii. The first learned Circumsicion, the second that there was no
ressurection, The third as Philetus and Himeneus that the Resurrection was al
past. The fourth that the day of the Lord is at hand. The fyrte the
Nicholaitans which has had there wyfes in comen. The syxte the Ebionytes that
denied the Godhed of Christ. The seventh the corinthia^s which learned such
abhomynable things, against which.ii. last sects saint Johan did write his
gospel and his Epystles. Now seeing this inestemable benefit of gods word
is so bounteously given unto us. Let us your pore subjects all together
consent with one mind to conserve and maintain this most precious Jewel that
we lose it not hereafter thorough our own neglygences. Let us not hinder your
Majesty's procedi^ges in yt ye go about to repair and buyld again the Temple
of our Lord God, but rather further it yt you may have a prosperous success,
and bring your labor to a fortunate end. In co^sideracion whereof all
though I am no fyt person to be a worckeman in this behalf, yet verily I
desire with all my heart yt this buildi^g may go forward. And I wyshe to ye
labourres yt are under your Majesty, all prosperous and fortunate things, yt
they may bring their work to perfectnes. And although I can not greatly
further there godly labors, yet will I not hinder the^, but help the^ to the
vttremost of my power in all things. Let the^ bring Ceder tres Silver, Gold,
Perle and precious stones to the byldynge. And garnyshynge of this Temple. I
will again with the poor wedowe in the Gospel of Luke, Luce. xii.
bring into the treasure house two Mytes, that is for my part, gather the
stones, fetch the tember and make the mortar, or do such small things as my
lyttel strenghes shall be able to bear and suffer. And to thentent yt your
majesty may have an experience of my good will toward ye bylding of the
temple. Behold at this time I give unto your majesty this my book yt I would so
gladly were put in print if it were lysenced, wherein is declared the right
institucion and use of the supper of our Lord. And likewise desclosynge the
abbomynable Idolatrye and false vsyng of it. And to the intent that both the
persecuter and sclanderer of gods word, may know upon what ground yt the
right congregacyon of Jesus Christ the dearly beloved bryde, that holy
Christen church ye lyttyl flock, to the which it pleased the father to give
that kingdom, and to thentent yt your grace may know which of all these for
rehearsed sects is found vpryght in the learning of Jesus Christ. For I say
unto you in Christ Jesus. Like as there was one Adam and Eua, one Noe and one
Arc, one Isaac and one Rebecca, one house of Israel, one Jerusalem, and one
Temple. So is there one Christ and one congregation, which congregation has
one Gospel, one faith, one Baptyme, and one Supper, one vpryght way and
walkyng to euerylastyng life, acording to the declaracion of gods word. And
al they that has not these things before rehearsed. Namely Gospel faith,
Baptime, Supper, way and waylkynge, he is no member in the congregation of
god, ii. John.i.
here profits another name nor fame, we must be found inwardly and
outwardelye in the lernyng of Jesus Christ or we have no god. Yt cold not help
Israel that they ware Abrams childeryn and had not ye deeds of Abra^, John^.
viii
therefore examyne this supper, and ye shall find it ye right supper of Jesus
christ that everlasting word, Jacob.i. Math. xvi Exo. i.xix.
that word of truth, the word of grace, the saffemakinge word, that word
that is impossible to be ouercom. Yea ye gates of hell shall not prevail against
it, it is the two edged sword that co^myth out of the mouth of the lord it is
the sword of the sprite, and with it shall he smite the hethen. Therefore our hope
and trust is in your Majesty for the building again of this temple that is
in decay, and that ye will not be like unto these mortherars of saints that
has been in time passed, which has not streuen against flesh and blood, but
against him whose eyes is a flame of fire, and in ryghtwysnes does he judge and
make battle, which is Crowned with many Crowns, and his name no man knows,
but he him self, and his vesture is depte in blood, and his name is called ye
word of God, Apo. xix Psalm. ii.
which rules the Hethen with arode of Iron, and tredeth the wine, fat of
fersenes and wrath of almighty God, and has on his vesture and on his thyghe
a name written king of all kings and Lord of al Lords. Therefore I desire
your grace that ye examyne with the Lords word this my pore book. And by ye
help of god your grace shall find nothing sought for, but ye praise of Jesus
Christ, the which he him self has brought out of Heaven, learned with his blessed
mouth and seled with his precious blood. Therefore my desire is to almighty god
the preseruacyo^ of your mayestie, and that he will preserve in you that new
and clean heart and keep open the eyes of your understanding that ye may
avoid the ungodly counselles of the shaven nacio^ that has brought this
church in such rewyne that your grace has much to do to repair it again.
I need not to resite there factes nor there names to your grace, ye know them
well enough they have prycked at the kings preuaye chamber. The lord be blessed
yt has sent us such a godly king and gracious gouerner to deliver us, from
them yt morther Jesus christ in his members out of ye power of death and
tyrants hands, I will not say that they are preuaye traitors, but this is
trwe they are preuey Idolaters, besides this rewmour renneth into al lands,
that they have caused the kings majesty ye deed is (of whose soul the lord
have mercy) to make such laws that no man might have nor rade the Gospel but
men of sertayne degres and that poor men should be occupied with fables, what
ca^ be more blasphemy against god and his anointed Jesus, then to depryue his
members of his godly word, which laws (blessed be god) is by your majesty
abolished. These Antichrystes have always defended there cause with the sword.
But Christ Jesus with mekenes and with his holy word. O bludy wrath and
wryched tyranny which goes above the wrath of al unreasonable creatures. For
ye fearse Lion, the ragyng Bear, and the gry, pi^g wolf, is ever one of the^
at peace in there generation. But these blud thrusty Dogs never faciate,
which should be made like unto the Image of God, which is borne with out tethe,
nails and horn, with feeble tender flesh without wit speech or might, which can
neither go nor stand, which alonely must live by ye help of ye pore mother,
in a token yt he is a creatur of peace, he is so full of males so full of blud,
yt no man can think nor write. O how wide ar ye popysh desiples divided from
our masters learning, and example the^ which has sought nothing in this life
and learni^g save peace, saing my peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you, the son of man is not come to destroy ye soul, but to save yt which
was lost O you excellent prince turn you unto ye wisdom of God, which says.
O turn you unto my creacio^, lo I will express my mind unto you, and make you
understand my words, set your affection upon ryghteousnes ye yt be Judges of
the earth. Be wise now therefore (o ye kings) be learned ye yt are Judges of ye
earth, set your lust upon wysdom yt ye may reygne for evermore. Pro. i. Sapi.
i. Psalm. ii. Sapi. vi.
And remember whereto ye ar called namely to punysh evil doears, as thieves and
murderers, hore-hunters and breakers of wedlock i^ al kinds, wytches,
buggers Raueshers of weme^, mourtherars, extorcyners, stretrobers, to depose al
false and blind learners, let them be of what sect or name soever he or they
be, with there Antichrystes learning, beastly living, blasphemyng and
scla^derynge ye almighty majesty of god Christ Jesus, and the holy ghost and
the everlasting safemakyng word ye holy gospel of Jesus Christ. To these things
are ye called, as it is manifestly learned i^ al ye holy scriptures, Exo. xviii.
and.xxiii.ii. Pa. xiv. Roma. xiii i. Petre. ii
as in Exo xviii.xxiii.ii. pa. xix. To. xiii.i. pe. ii. such princes has
been. Ezecheas Ioseas, David, Iosaphat, zoroba, bell and yet mo, which always
used the office according to the declaracion of gods word. They have done
always their hole diligens to rule the land in the fear of God, and has
roted out all false Prophets, and Prestes with there Alters and Idols. They
have soughe the law of the Lord. The right offering and Cerymones which the
Lord had delivered unto the children of Israel by Moses. Deuteronomy. vi
The fear of God was in their hearts. The book of ye law in their hands,
thereafter have they lived. Judged the folk and prased the Lord that has
called them to such an office, they have submytted them selves with all there
hole hearts, and has given the Glory unto the God of there fathers, Abram,
Isac, and Jacob. Like as David did playeng daunsynge before the lord's Ark,
and was gyrded with a lynnen Ephode, so that he was repreued of his wife
Michol. What has he answered I will play before the Lord, ii. Reg. vi.
and will yet be more vile the^ so, and wylbe meke hearted meke in mine own
sight. O thou excellent Prince believe the Gospel of Jesus Christ, fear the
strong punishment of God, love ryghteousnes, do right to wydowes and
fatherles. Judge right between neyboure and neighbor, fear no man's
countenance, despice no man's sympelnes, punyshe with descretion all evil
doings, let learned men prech Gods word in your land, yt God has given
unto you, and let them live by you, which the Lord has called and chosen.
So shall your seat remain for evermore. The Lord guide your heart to ye love
of god and to the pacient wyghtyng for Christ Amen. Sapi. vi. Pro. xxix. ii.
tessa. iii.


By your poor seruante Thomas Lancaster.

To the (right) Congregation of God of which your grace is supreme head next
immediatlye under God.
MY dearlye beloved in christ Jesus, I learn with Christ Jesus, and that out
chosen vessel saint Paull yt all they that are Baptized through the holy
ghost, and is become one body that is one congregatyon of God, Ephe. v.
or holy church without spot or wrincle or any such thing, builded upon
the fundacio^ of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
head corner stone in whom whatsoever building is coupled together it grows
unto an holy Temple in the Lord in whom ye also ar builded together to be an
habytacyon of God throw the holy ghost, Ephe. ii.
gathered out of Jews and Greeks men and women fre and bond. Yea I say
gathered out of all the children of God, which is strowed in all the hole
world and is become a true bride of Jesus christ. Gala. iii.
These I say that are thus borne from above out of God ye father which new
birth must be alonly throw ye frutful sede that is Gods word.

For our first birth which is out of our first father Ada^ is hole blind defe
without understanding in godly knowledge, e. Cor. iiiii Ia. i. i. Pet. i To.
viii
earthelye minded whose end is death.

Therefore if we will be partakers of the Lords table, we must be borne anewe
out of the frutful sede of gods word they are converted and changed out of
infydelite to fidelite out of earthly into heavenly out of flesh into spirit
out of unrighteous into ryghteousnes out of euel into good, yea out of the
earthly Adam into the heavenly Adam which is Ch^yst Jesus. To. viii
These are like fasshioned unto the shape of Jesus Christ, i. Io. ii Hebre.
iii. Io. i. Phili. ii.
which is the first be gotten among many brethren and walks as he has
walked, these are the right brethren of Jesus Christ borne with him from above
out of god the father and is like mindid as he, these are the new Eua, the
clean chaste bryde of Jesus Christ flesh of his flesh and bones of his bones.
Ephe. v. Gala. v. Colo. iii. To. vi.
These crucify the flesh with lust and desire these have rightly buried there
sins with him in Baptime and ar risen with him in a new life these are
vpryghtly Baptized throw the holy ghost with all the true members of Christ in
that undefiled body of Jesus Christ that is his congregacio, i. Cor. xii Gala.
iii.
these ar they yt have put one christ and prynte him out in there living. These
seeks nothing in all there thoughts words and works, but the praise of god
and the salvation of there brethren, Math. v.
they love them that hates them, they do good for evil, they pray for them
that persecute the^ they are trodden out of al fleshly lust and desires as
couetuousnes pride, vncleanlynes whordom backbiting sclaunderyng, envy,
murder, theft, glottony, false holiness, and al Idolatry. There meditacion is
day and night in the law of ye Lord they rejoice in good and ar sad in
evil. They render not evil for evil, but much more good for evil, they seek
not there own profit, but that is, there neighbors profect both in soul
and body. They give meat to the hungry, drink to the thursty, clothes the
naked, herber the herberles deliver prisoners, they viset the sick comfort
the comfortles, they instruct them that go astraye, yea they set there lives
for there brethren like as our Savior Jesus Christ the Prophets and Apostles
have done there thoughts are chaste, there words are truth and with salt be
sprinkle, ye that is ye, and nay is nay, al there works are done in the fear
of god. To such a congregacyon, is lice^sed to have the Communion of our
Savior Jesus Christ's body and blood as here after shall be declared.

i. Cor. xi.
The Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took bread and when he
had given thanks he brake it and said take ye and eat this is my body which
is broken for you, Mat. xxvi Mar, xiiii Luke. xxiii
this do ye in the remembrance of me, after ye same manner also took he the
cup when supper was done saying this cup is the new Testament in my blud,
this do ye as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me, and they have drunk
al here of. These are the word with which christ has instituted his holy
supper, with which words, ye learned of ye world have wonderfullye foughte^,
and with in few years have shede much innocent blood for it, when they counted
the^ selves wise, they became fools, for ye pryncipallest in this they have
not towched, To. i.
namely what people yt it belongs unto. We have not one title that commau^des
us yt we should dispute of it, but that we should be diligent, that we might be
found worthy, to be partakers of the declaracio^ and benefit, that is received
in it, as S. Paul teaches let every man examine himself and so let him eat of
the bread and drink of the cup. etc. Cor, xi
Wherefore we are constrained, to say goodnyght to all hye disputacio^, where
throw division comes desyring the lord always that we might be found worthy
receauers of it according to the lords commandment.

This holy supper, has our savior Jesus christ left behind him under, Luke
xxii.
bread and wine saying take and eat, this is my body which is given for you,
this do in the remembrance of me. In which holy Supper is declared, unto us.
First ye unsearchable favor and love of our lord Jesus Christ, which is come
in this world, not to co^dempne ye world, but that the world throw him might
be saved.

Io. iii.
O wonderful love of god he has sent no Angel no Patriarch nor prophet, To.
viii.
he is come him self in ye simulitude of sinful flesh. Ye he which knew no
sin made himself to be sin for us, that we by his means should be that
righteousness which before god is allowed, not that christ is any such sin
(that be far) He was that Lamb without spot which did do sin, ii. Cor. v.
Exo. xii. i. pet. ii.
neither was there gile found in his mouth, Esaias. liii.
but he was that frewilling offering for sin as Esaias as says he was wonded
for our offenses and smitte^ for our wickedness, he is offered, for so it has
pleased him, therefore is he called sin that is an offering for sin.

O almyghtiful god, who can keep in secret, the unmeasurable grace and mercy
declared upon us, To. viii
miserable sinners but must break out and confess the before the whole world,
with mouth and work, life and soul, Saint Paul teaches that god spared not
his own son, To. v
but gave him for us all, yea whylle we were yet sinners and ungodly. Christ
dyed for us the righteous for the unrighteous, ye ye undefiled offer lame is
burnt throw the glowynge fire of love upon the Iebett of the cross yea the
creatoure of all creatures, is broken from above to beneth, yea he that is
farer then the children of men has neither bewty nor favor he is despised and
abhored of al men yea he is such a man as full of sorrow, Psalm. lv.
and as one that has good experyence of infyrmytes, yea he is rekened among
the transgressors, the innocent must bear the hole falte of Adam, as ye
Prophet says. I paid them the thing that I never took. All this has our
savior declared unto us not throw our deseruynge but as Saint Paul learneth
the kyndnes and love of our sauyoure god to man ward apered not by ye deeds of
ryghteousnes which we wrought, but according to his mercy he saved us, Esaias.
l, iii.
for there was no grace, Psalm. xl.ix
nor mercy, nor no remyssion of sins by the father, unto the time that our
savior Jesus Christ hade taken upon him the sins of the world. Titus.iii.
For as by one man's dysobedyence many became sinners, so by the obedyente of
one shall many be made ryghteous.

Now for as much as when he was in the shape of God, Roma. v Phelip.ii.
made him selft of no reputacyon goen out of him self, and where he was
immortal, is be come mortal taking upon him the shape of a servant, to the
intent that he might serve us al and was found in his apperell as a man very
flesh and blood and in all things like unto his brethren, Luke.ii. Johan.i.
Hebre. ii. Phelip.ii.
saving sin, he humbled him self and became obedyent unto his father unto
death, even the death of the Cross, throw which death it pleased the
father, that in him should all fulness dwell and by him to reconcile all things
to him self and to set at peace by him throw the blood of his Cross, both
things in heaven and things in earth and is become an offering and sacryfyce
of sweet savor to god his dearly beloved father. Colo i.
This is frutefully declared unto us in this holy Supper namely throw that
bread that flesh that he has given for us, Ephe. vi. Mar. xiiii
and throw ye Cup that blood which he shede for many, for ye remyssyon of
sins, and shall be unto us a remembrance till he come. Now because that it
is a come^ use that a token of remembrance has the name of the thing that is
remembered by it. Luke.xxii.
Therefore has Christ called the bread his body, and the wine his blood,
not that he is in substance in bread and wine, i. Cor. ii. Exodus xii.
but that we should remember him there by. Likewise as the Easter Lamb was
called the passing by, and yet was it not in it self the very passi^g by, but
a token of remembrance of the passinge by. Seeing now that the Earster lamb
has the name of the thing that the Israelites remembered by it, and whereby they
might everlastingly keep in remembrance the benefytes of god therefore it is
conuenyent that Christ called the bread his body and the vine his blood,
because that we should remember thereby his death and passion yea the only
sacrifyce of his body which he has suffered to be broken, and his blood to
be shede for us, not that the materyall body of Christ is in the bread nor his
blood in the vine. Yet nevertheless is the supper of our Lord a partakynge
spiritually of the body and blood of Christ, i. Colo x.
as Saint Paul says is not the cup of thanks gyuing wherwyth we give
thanks a pertakinge of the blood of Christ; and the bread that we break; is
it not the partaking of the body of christ and to the intent that this may
the more plainly appear unto your understanding, ye shall se the comparyson
betwex the Paschall Lamb and our sacrament.

The Pascall Lamb was instytuted and eaten the night before the children of
Israel were delivered from Egypt. Likewise was the sacrament instituted and
eaten the night before we were delivered from our sins. The Pascall Lamb
was a very lamb in deed, and so ye sacrament is very bread in deed.

The Pascal Lamb was called the passing by of the Lord, which destroyed the
power of Pharao, and delivered them. The Sacrament is called the body of ye
Lord which destroyed the power of the deuell and delivered us. The children of
Israel were but ones delivered from Egypt notwythstandyng they did eat
every year ye Lamb to keep ye deed in perpetual remembrance, eue^ so Christ
bought and redeemed us but once for all, although ye sacrament thereof be daily
broken among us to keep the benefyt in continual memory. As many as did eat
ye pascall lamb in faith and believed gods word as touching there
delyueraunce from Egypt ware as sure through faith as they were sure of ye
lamb by eating it. So as many as do eat this sacrament in faith and believe
gods word as touching there delyueraunce from sin are as sure of there
delyueraunce throw faith as they are sure of the bread by eati^g it. Now se
ye what ye pascal lamb was to ye Israelytes, and what ye sacrament is unto us.
So ye saint Paul witnesses clerly, yt the faithful eat the body of Christ
spyrituallye under the bread and wine, As a bryde receaueth her housba^d with
a ryng even so receaueth ye faithful christ to be his own and everlasting
salvation, and where as diverse writers will have that the bodylye presence should
be in ye bread is a great misunderstandyng of Gods word, yea it is agreeable to
ye Papists or Antichrists doctrine, which is contrary both to our faith and
al hole scripture.

To. viii.
For we believe and holy Scripture bears witness, that Christ, after his
resurrection is ascendid up into heaven, Ma. xxviii
and sits upon ye right hand of his almighty father, and abides there as
concerning his bodyly presence. But speritually has he promised to abide with
us in his word to the end of the world.

Mathe. xxviii.

Hebru. x
And seeing now that our Savior Christ as concerning his bodylye presence
abides at the right hand of his father, so can nor may not the body of
Christ be in the bread, and again it is against al truth ye Christ at one
time has been in many or dyuyrse places as towchynge his body. Furthermore
we daily see what dredful Idolatry is spronge out of ye carnal understanding
of this words of christ. This is my body and yet daily springs to the great
abomynable sclaunder of ye honor of god, so ye men worship a piece of bread,
for there god which is grown in the ground, broken in the myl, and baked in an
yrong, yea and hold that to be there maker. And ye do yet as the Papists lock
him in gold and silver, not remembrynge what Paul and Stephen witnesses sayng.
Acts. vii and.xvii
The most hiest will not dwell in Temples yt are made with men's hand take heed
we have mocked long enough with God and his holy word,

Secondarly we are exhorted in this holy supper to ye unity love and concord
yt is in ye congregation of god, because yt we (though we be many) yet are one
bread and one body, i. Cor. x.
yt is one body in Christ Jesus like as S. Paul says we many are one body and
one bread in as much as we al are partakers of one bread. For like as the
members of one body are not in strife one against another but in charitable
unite sarueth one another So may there be no strife nor debate in the
congregation of God. i. Cor. xii
They must al speak one thing there must be no dissension among the^ having one
heart, one soul, one mind, and one meaning. i. Cor. i
There may be no strife in the faith, but yt in mekenes of mind every man
esteem other better than himself to the praise of God and to the alouyng and
faithful service of all the children of god. Phelip.ii.
For likewise as the outward members of one body will gladly comfort help and
serve another, so does ye congregacyon of god, if one suffer, al suffers with him
If one be had in honor al is glad. i Cor. xii.
Also every man shall serve his brother both bodyly and gostli likewise as our
savior Jesus Christ has served us both with his life and death not only to
deal with them, gold, Math. xx. Luke. xxii.
silver and land and house Kowe, calfe or any such thing, Ephe. iiii.
but ye bludy labor yt we get with our own hands so ye no man should only care
and take thought for him self and not care nor look upon his brothers lake,
but the one must help the other in all things necessary where he can or may,
Gala. vi.
and no man must seek that, yt is his, but every one the others wealth.

And likewise as of ye graynes of corn, can not be baken bread, Philip.ii.
but throw fire, even so can not the congregation be a right spiritual life
(whereof paul speaks) but through bunrnynge love and charytye and so the
Chrystyan congregatyon to be one lofe for likewise as many graynes are Sown,
i. Cor. x
to the intent that bread should be baken of them so sows the great father of
ye household his precious wheat into the aker or ground of this world to the
intent that they should become one lofe and also use the supper of the Lord
ryghtlye after the words of Paul we many are one bread and one body in as
much as we are partakers of one bread, i. Cor. x.
for as the body is one and has many members, and all ye members of the body
though they be many yet are but one body even so is christ. Ye at the body of
christ and members one of another. Therefore let every man look well to his
vocation. Sa. xii i. Cor. xli. Ephe. iiii.
For god has ordained in ye congregation some Prophets, some Apostles and some
to believers and hirdes. Let no man bost himself of his birth, lernyng and
Riches, for as we are many members in one body and al members have not one
office. So we being many, are one body in Christ and every man among our
selves one another members. Saying that we have diverse gifts according to
the grace that is given unto us. If any man have the gift of Prophesye, let
him have it that it be agreynge to the faith Let him that has an office wait
on his office, To. xij
let him that teaches take heed to his doctrine. Let him that exhorts give
attendaunce to his exhortacyon. i. Pet. iiii.
If any man give let him do it with synglenes let him that rewleth do it with
diligence. If any man show mercy let him do it with cherfulnes, and let love
be among you without dyssimulation, i. Cor. vii.
and every man abide in the same state wherein he is called, no another wise
than to the edifyenge of the body of Christ, which is his congregation.
Ephe. iiii
And thus is this holy Supper of our Lord. First a remembrance of the death
of our Savior Jesus Christ which he suffered for us, i. Petre. ii
throw which death we are al reconciled. Secondarlye it is an instruction of
the pure clean and undefiled love, which is among the congregation of god
like as I have declared before as ye bread is made of many Corns, and is one
bread and as the Wine is made of many Grapes, and yet is one wine so are we
many members and but one body, which is christ.

My dearly beloved in Christ Jesus, let every man se earnestly to, and prove
himself according to saint Paul's learning, that he come not to the table of
the Lord, because yt it has been so accustomed either throw feigned holiness
or desire of worldly honor or disceat, but out of a pure clean and undefiled
heart and so eat of the bread and drink of the cup for he that eats or
drynkethe it vnworthylye eats and drynketh his own damnacio^. For all they
that will come and sit at ye lords Table, Mat. v.vi
they must be found faithful mercyful, loving, kind, pytyfull and obedyente,
without division without hatred, without pride without covetousness, that wicked
eye must be plucked out, that flesh must be mortyfyed, that evil hearing
ear stopped, that clattering tongue tamed, that fleshelye heart cyrcumsiced
your blouddy hands cleansed, your belyes measured, and your fete compelled
with the Lords word, ye must have afrewilling battle against the Deuel, Vide
quales erunt qui mense erunt perticipes.
the world and the flesh, that ye may be able to resyste in the evil day,
and stand perfect in all things, that is in the will of God, your loins
must be girded with truth having on the breaste plate of ryghteousnes and
having shoes on your feit, that ye may be prepared for the Gospel of peace.
He must be well veaponed with the shylde of faith wherewith he may quence all
the fyery darts of Satan, Ephe. vi.
he must have on ye helmet of salvation, and be gyrded with the swerd of ye
sprete, which is ye word of god, he must be a member serueable and prophetable
according to his power, he must be minded like unto our sauyoure Jesus Christ,
as he was what time he keep this holy supper or communyo^ with his derely
beloved brethren. He took bread and wine and gave thanks gave it to his
disciples and said, this is my body and my blood which is broken for you
herewyth declarynge his godly love, vide beneficia christi erga nos.
favor and mercy upon his derely beloved brethren, even as though he would
say my derely beloved children, so far has your love led me, and your
favor drawn me, that I have forsaken the dominyon of my heavenly father and
has taken upon me to be come your servant to serve you in all things,
Ezech. xxx.iiii.
Hebre. ii.
because I say that ye were all as scattered sheep going astraye, Psa. xxiii.
and that there was no man that sought you, but that ye were all meat to the
grypinge, and and ryuenge wolves, and that there was no man to deliver you.
Ezech, xvi
But that ye were wonded unto death and that there was no man to plaster you.
Luke. x.
Therefore am I come out of ye bosom of my father and become like unto my
brether a stranger a servant, a worm and no man, a very scorn of men and
the outcast of people, wandrynge in this wild wyldernes of this world I have
sought you in cytes and countres, upon mountains and vayelles, miserable have
I found you. Dume, Deaf blind Cryple, Pore and naked, my service have I
declared upon you, your sins, have I repreued your febelnes, I have borne,
yea I have carried you upon my shulders into my fathers house, Luke. x. Re.
xvii. Eze. xxiiii Ioh. wi.
I have delivered you out of ye mouths of hellyshe lions, and bears your
foull stynkynge wondes, I have so softly healed the peace of my father, have I
declared unto you, your nakedness have I clothed, and your pouertye I have
healped. I have given unto you fete hearts, eyes, ears, and mouths, to walk
to understand, to know, to hear, and to speak the words of everlasting
life. I have brought you into the knowledge of al ryghteousnes, I have learned
you the will of my heavenly father. And to the intent that ye may know that I
am the true messenger of my father, so have I declared it unto you by my great
wonders and myraeles Se now my derely beloved children now is my hour come,
the longe-time is full ended, now yt I can serve serve you no longer, with my
life and learning, now will I last of all serve you with my flesh and blood
and bitter death, For this cause am I come among you, and leave you this
bread and this cup, yt whenever ye shall come together, ye shall use it in
ye remembrance of me, and say dearly beloved brethren in christ Jesus we yt are
here congregated together in ye lords name, Quo animo celebretur coena
dominica.
this bread and this cup has our savior Jesus christ left behind him, yt we
should remember him thereby. O how fre^dely has our savior Jesus christ served
us both with his life and death, and declaring here in eating this bread and
drinking this cup, Tales erimus erga alios qualis christus erga nos.
yt we should follow his blissed example seruyng one another like as one member
another with prayer, with learning with instructo^, with compelling, with reproufe, with
mercy, with love and all needful necessares as we have found i^ our savior Jesus
christ towerd us. Now as we are thus co^gregated in such a Christen faith unity
and obedient, i. Cor. xi
so have we gods word, and promise a spirytuall joy mirth and coumfort of
the house of Israel, Mat. xxvi
so reioses the congregation of God in that beutyfull bryde knowenge well that
ye broken bread is a pertakynge of ye body of christ and the cup of
blyssing, a partakynge of the blood of Christ which is shede for many for
the remycyon of sins.

Ecclesia et communio Christiano cum
O what glorious banquet is this where in the hungrye soul, the inward man
recayueth that inuysible bread and heavenly food which is christ Jesus. O
glorious co^gregacio^ wherein ar no sha^ful songs nor unprofitable words, save
al only brotherlye instruction and geuynge thanks to our savior Jesus christ
O glorious congregation where no wanton eyes is casting here and there but all
bente to the help and comfort of thy pore brethren. O glorious congregation
wherein men use not to drink, dans, nor play, but where me^ are drunk in the
wisdom of god, there shall the soul be ioeful in the holy ghost playeng, and
daunsing before the Lord. My derely beloved in Christ Jesus, ye that are so
dearly bought with the precious blood of our savior Jesus christ, wake up
leave of it is more the^ time, fear the lords word, and fle from the
deuilles table, for this is no supper of the Lord, which the blind unlearned
Papystes have learned and used to this time, no I say it is no supper of our
lord, Maximu^ discrimen intercenam dominica^ et cenam Antechristi anam.

Cena mu^di.


which is ministered and soulde of an Antychrystes teacher a Sodomitical beggar
a babylonysh marchande, the which if he do not repent and amend, is
euerlastyngly cursed and banysshed from the prestes of god.

The Supper of our Lord must be ministered of him that is called of a Chrystian
congregation compelled throw the holy ghost to come in to the Lords vyneyarde,
or heavenly harvest which is found without fault, according to the declaracion
of gods word, both in his life and learning. i. Cor v. and.vi.
It is no supper, that is received of dronkerdes, fornycatours worshyppers of
Images, Gala. v.
aduouteres, weakelyng abusers of them selves with the mankind thieves covetous,
cursed speakers, murderers, traitors, and shedders of innocent blood. But it
is a supper to them ye walks before God, and the world in love, joy, peace,
long sufferynge, gentylnes, goodness, faythfulnes, meakenes, and temporaunce,
which desyers to spend there flesh and blood, for the glory of God. It is no
supper where men have no other thing but shryueng, fasting knocking, knelyng,
becking bouing, wessyng setting out of the body, In cena domini non externus
sed i^ternus requiritus ornatus.
with fair clothes, holding up of hands and knocking upon the breast, but to
them that is found with a faithful, thankful heart and a clean conscience
and unfeigned love. All they that have not this faith, and love and is not bound
hollie with the bond of love, to his neyboure, serving him in his need, with all
diligence and will, and likewise set down at the table of the Lord. I fear me
that he shall receive with that Hipocrite Judas not life, but everlasting death,
and eats and drynketh the communion of Balial and not of Christ, though he
speak with the tongues of men, and Angels and though he could prophesy and
understand al secrets, and and all knowledge, Videat sibi quisque qui accedit
ad cenam domni.
and if he had faith yt he could move mountains, and though he bestowed al
his goods to feed ye pore, and though he gave his body to be burned, and yet
had no love, it profyteth nothing, so that he does not love out of the very
ground of his heart, with work and truth which love is the very band of
perfectnes, Cor. xiii. ii. Io. iii.
and the chief of all things.

Colo. ii.
Therefore I exorte every man that will be partakers of the lords supper, i.
Cor. xi.
that he ryghtly prove himself according to Paul's learning For all they ye
trust unto there own ryghteousnes, Qui confidit in aliquo quam in christo
maleidit.
or upon the learnings and commandments of men, and not upon ryghteousnes
and deseruynge, and blood of our savior Jesus Christ, blessed might he be,
and goes likewise to the table of the lord the eats his own damnacyon. Qui
adamat te^po ralia plus quam Christiana in digne man ducat.
Likewise all they yt are baptized and have given themself wyllingly under the
false prophets in heryse and ungodliness, and will not be reformed, and
likewise go to the table of ye lord, they eat their own damnacion. Likewise
all they that love better transitori things than the glory of God, and his
holy word as gold, silver, wife, children, life and living, and goes to the
table of the lord, he eats his own damnacyon. Likewise all they that will not
give them selves frewyllyng to the service of their neighbors with all that they
have received at ye hand of god, viseble and vnuyseble, Qui sibi tantum modo
viuit et non aliis, iudicium sibi manducat.
and goes to the table of the Lord, they eat their own damnacyon. Like wise
he that bosteth himself ogai^st his christen brother of his Birth, riches,
wisdom bewty, Qui gloriatur in vanis et si ep fu^ non cognoscito male edit.
or any such thing and will not know that he is a stinkyng Caryon, and foul
flesh euel and folyshe before the eyes of the lord, and goes to the table of
the lord, he eats his damnacyon, like wise al they that boaste them selves
of the name of Christ and notwythstandinge lives according to the flesh, as
pride, covetousness, aduotrye fornication uncleanness wanto^nes, Idolatrye
witchecrafte hatred variaunce, zele, wrath, strife, sedicio^ sects, iniurye,
murder dronkenes, gluttony and such like, and does daily with there cursed
and ungodly life, Gala. v. Ephe. v. i. Cor. v. To. viii
crusifye the son of God, and and go likewise to the table of the lord, he
eats his damnation. For all they that commyte such things shall not merit
the kingdom of god. Apo. xxi
Aperte mali. pellendi sunt a cenra.
And therefore are they unworthy to come to the Supper of the Lord, because
they have no communion of the body and blood of our savior Jesus christ. No
noman may be suffered to come to the holy supper of ye lord, let him be of what
state or degree soever they be so far forth as his iniquite and sin is
manifest and known to the congregation, i. Cor. x.
which is a communion or congregation of the body and blood of christ. But he
must be excomunicated and cut of with gods word, unto ye time that he do
penance and decleare him self to be obedient to the gospel of our savior
Jesus Christ which excomunicacion is manifest in these Chapters folowinge as in
Mat, vii xvi.x.xvi. i. Cor. v.vi.. Phi. iii.ii. Tessa. iii. i. Timoth. vi.ii.
Timoth. iii. titus. iii.ii. Iahn. i. which excommunicacion, if I live by the
help of God I will set out at large. But as for them that are inwardly well
and covers themself outwardly with the shininge mantell of holiness like as
Judas did with such shall the congregaco^ have nothing to do, hipocritas
iudicabit
but let ye lord judge the^ which is a prouer and knower of yt all hearts, for
by him nothing is hid nor forgotten, he is ye judge yt knows ye hearts and
minds and shall judge, Romans viii. i. Cor. v. Math. xiii Esaias. lxvi.
not only ye euel works but also Idel words, yea yt though and mocion of the
heart. Therefore let every man examine him self flesh well and so let him eat
of the bread. and drink of the cup.

i. Cor. xi.
For he that eats, and drynketh vnworthylye eats and drynketh his own
damnatyon. Luke.xxii.
Thus has our savior Jesus Christ instituted and ordained his holy supper
both in bread and wine to be a remembrance of his death and passion as I have
declared before. i. Cor. xi. Ephe. v.
Throw which death and passion, he has declared his great love toward us,
and secondlye to a renewinge of love and clean holding the congregation of
god. i. Cor. x.
And this is ye only institucion and use of the supper of our Lord Jesus
christ how he and his Apostles have used it.

O merciful God have these ungodly shameless shauelinges altered and changed
this holy and blessed Supper of our lord into abominable blasphemus Idolatrye,
as I shall declare here after unto you. It is so grievous that I shall declare
unto you which shall be nothing, but the truth, that every Chrystian hatte
may tremble and quake at it. Therefore seek with all dyligence ye truth to the
intent that ye may know how pytyfull that we and all the world have sinned,
against our Lord God in this matter. Antechristi oblatio.


First they have converted and chaunued, this holy and Blessed supper, of our
Lord with there false learning and auctoritye out of his right use and have
learned it to be a daily sacrifice for our sins. This is abominable blasphemy
and pitiful blyndnes that men can not imagyn such another. Nota sequentes
abhominationes.
With this same learning have they driven Christ Jesus out of his fathers
stool, out of heaven, and have set in his place an ungodly priest with a
peace of bread, with ye same learning have they robed christ Jesus of his
everlasting and perpetual office that is the office of an advocate, and have
put it upon a piece of bread and a deuylles servant which knows not one
title right of ye word of god With the same learning have they made of no value
al ye fygures and shine of Moses, all the prophicies of the prophittes, all the
promyses of Angels and all the hole new Testament which alonly speaks of
that only sacrifyce for sin, Cur panis ille immolationis (vt voca^t) trangatur
in tres parts.
which is christ Jesus with ye same learning have they taken upon them al
power in heaven earth and hell. Therefore is ye bread of ye Idolles table broken
in three pieces, with the first piece pacify the god with ye second they pray for
ye world with ye third they deliver the soul yt they offer it for, with this
same learni^g ar they risen aloft in gold silver in pomp lordlines and honor
by ye hole world herewith ar they climed up above al princes, and have gotten
unto themselves gold, silver, churches cloisters land, sand, and the highes
places name and power in all lands, to ye intent yt every man should give rume
to their holiness, fear there name and, highlye praise there gloriouse office
desiring always, ye throw this good work which is this daily offringe, yt
they might be comforted in there soul.

Throw this means is yt abominable Anthichryst gotten into his seat so hie yt
the Empriours majesty, Medium in quo eleuatus est Antechristus.
the hiest pote^t upon earth who^ god him self commanded to obey must knele
down and kiss his stynkyng foot, ye this is more fredericus Barborossa yt
excellent emperor, because he would have let his knaueri culd get no
misericordia until the time that Alexander Tertius ye prince of ye Babilonical
coniures had trodden upon this excellent Emperor in ye church door at Venega,
thus has that deuillysh offri^g brought in bondage ye hole world. But the
Lord be blessed, which has delivered us from this feigned sacryfyce, and
golden Calfe, Esaias. l.iii.
and has declared unto us ye only hye pressed over ye house of god, which
remaneth a pressed for ever after the order of Melchisideche, which in the days
of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplycacions with strong cryeng and
tears unto him, Hebre. v.
that was able to save him from death, and was hard because of his godlynes,
he has offered one offering and a sacryfyce of sweet sauoure to God, Ephe. v.
he has says Saint Paul offered one sacryfyce for sins, sat him done for
ever on the right hand of God, He. x.
and from hence forth taryeth till his foes be made his footstole, for with one
offering has he made perfect for ever them that are sanctified. This is the
only sacryfice with which the fathers wrayth is pacyfied, the generacyon of
Adam delivered heaven, opened and hell shut. To. iii. Christus vnica
propeccatis victima
For it pleased the father that in him should alfulnes dwell and by him to
reconcile al things to him self and to set at peace by him throw the blood of
his cross, both things in heaven and things in earth. i. Colo i.
Now come forth al power and might and al ye that are papists with all ye that
reken your self to be learned, that is in England and is of the papists
opinion this word can neither Angel nor Deuell break, Hebru. x.
namely that with one offering he has made perfect for ever them that are
santcyfyed.

My dearly beloved in Christ Jesus, love your soul and look earnest lie upon
the lords words. Know ones under what learning sacraments and congregation
ye are? what shepards feed you, what bread yt ye break, in what bodiye ar bound

O ye children how long will Prouer. i.
you love chyldyshnes? how long will ye scorners delight in scornynge and the
unwise be enemies unto knowledge? ii. Cor. vi. Apo. xviii. Luke. ix.
How long will you remain in your sins? how long will ye be bound with the
chayn of Infidelite in ye botomles pyt. Mat. xi.
Come out from among the^ avoid al false learning exchew all false holiness
and let the dead bury the deed, and follow ye after our master Christ, enter
into his house and take up upon you his easy yocke and light burden and ye
shall find rest in your souls as then may ye bost your selves of the grace
of God the forgyuenes of sins, the deserving of our Savior Jesus christ, and
everlasting life god give you his grace Amen.

Secoundarly, they have taught yt the bread is very flesh, and ye wine very
blood and that have they gathered out of ye words of christ literali spoken
wherein he says take and eat this is my body.etc. not markynge what Christ
says in ye.vi. Ioh. vi.
of John That is to say it is the spirit that quickens, the flesh
profyteth nothing, ye words which I spoke unto you ar spirit and lif, for in
this place he means of his own flesh and one spirit and he deuideth the
spirit from the flesh, yt they might know throw faith not only the vysyble
part, but also the invisible part that was in him and that the words which
he spoke ware not carnal, but spirytual, for what body should have suffised to
be the meat of all the world and eue^ therefore did he make mention of the
assension of the son of man into heaven, that he might with draw them from the
bodyly ymaginatio^ yt they might here after learn yt the flesh was called
heavenly meat which comes from above and spiritual meat which he would give,
Io. vi
for christ the words that I have spoke unto you are spirit and life, John.
vi.
Here you may se that Christ spoke it of his own flesh, and meant plainly that
it did nothing profect as the Papists or infydelles do understand him.

Now all they that will not have ye glory of there redemption changed into a
piece of bread, but desires to have the right ministracion of the Chrystiane
tabell they must be counted and condemned as swarmers, heritykes and
Sacramentates and not only that but must be Burned, Drawn, Miscrrimus error.
Drounned and Hanged. O my dearly beloved in Christ Jesus is not this
amiserable and aboninable herisie, to learn and to make the poor people
believe, i. Cor. xi.
that the everlasting sone of God is changed or transubstanciated into a
peace of bread and suppe of wine, which has given his body to be broken and
his blood to be shede for us in the remission of sins. O beastly, Math. xv.
heritikes. The scripture says that, that which enters by the mouth does
not defile a man, for as Christ says it is cast forth into the drawght and
by the same reason it follows, that it does not sanctyfye or make a man
holy. But the Sacrement enters in by the mouth, therefore it does follow that
of it self, it does not santifie or make holy any man. And of this text should
follow two inconveniences if the sacrament were the natural body of Christ,
first it should follow that the body of Christ should not santifye the faithful
because it enters in by ye mouth and again it should follow that the body of
Christ should be cast out in to the draught which is abominable Wherefore it must
needs follow that the Sacrament can not be his natural body.

Therefore believe Gods word it is John. vi.
the spirit that quicknethe, the flesh profits nothing meaning to eat it
with his tethe, the words that I speak unto you are spirit and life, and if
it be so that ye do not believe this, Filius dei non editur carnaliter nec
digeritur.
yet believe that the everlasting soon of god which is with ye father can not
be eaten with men's teth nor consumed in no bellye, much les be deuored with
fire, worms, myse, rattes and Apes, which is openly known in this visible
bread used in many places, But where the congregation of god is gathered
together in his name, with true faith true love and obedience and with right
ministration according to the declaracion of gods word, there is delivered
unto the outward man bread and wine but ye invisible man receaueth throw ye
promise of christ, yt invisible bread and Drink which is the flesh and Similt
prosimili pascitur.
blood of our savior Jesus christ which men can neither eat bitte nor consume
for like will with like be feed the visible man is feed with vysible meat
namelye bread and wine and the invisible spirit, is feed with invisible meat
which is christ Jesus Therefore remaneth bread bread, and wine wine, for if it
ware otherwise so ware that spiritual man feed with palpable and visible bread
and wine, and so ware that visible creature namly bread and wine changed in
ye spiritual and invisible soon of god the which is not nor can not be as it
is manifest before our eyes and shall remain everlasting.

O Lord have mercy upon us for we are more folish and have lose understanding
tha^ the gentles have had from the beginning. For they have worshipped for god
the son, Moan, and Sterres, which do declare power and might in all waxynge
creatures. They have I say honored open Serpents and Dragons with other
creatures which had power might and a living sprite in them, but we which
boste our selves of the name of Christ prays to and worshippes a piece of
bread, and a suppe of wine, for the son of God which has shed his blood
upon the cross for the redemption of all mankind. O abomynable blasphemye yt
the body and blood of the son of God, that Lord Jesus Christ should be
converted and changed into such a wayke and feeble Idol yea into such an Idol
which can neither speak nor feel, hear, see, go nor understand, yea which
must vanyshe away for age, with all the creatures upon earth, which I say
must be kepped, carried looked, of men like unto the gods of Babylon. Baru. vii.


No my dearly beloved, no the sone of God will not be like unto yt Fabulose
prothens he will not nor he may not be shute up in a house chamber, gold, nor
silver

Read I pray the.vii. and the.xvii. of ye Acts. Esaias.lxvi. Acts. vii. Esaias.
lx.vi iii. Re. vii.
the heaven is his seat, and earth is his fotstole.

And David says, will god in very ded dwell with men on the earth behold
heaven, and heaven above all heavens do not conteyne ye, how much less the
house which I have builded, all power is given unto him in heaven and earth,
yea he has set him on his right hand in heavenly things above all rewle and
power and might, ii. pata. vi Mat. xviii
and dominion in heaven and earth, he has cast all things under his blessed
fete, he has exalted him one hye, and given him a name which is above at
names that in the name of Jesus, Ephe. i philip. ii.
every kne should bone both things in heaven, and things in earth and al
tongues should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, he is ascended up into
heaven and shall not come again fleshy unto the time that he shall deuyde the
sheep from the gotes. Math. xxv
Therefore I say unto you again he can not be eaten with teth nor conciued in
no belly. It is impossible that this inward man which is prophetable before
the lord yt he can eat or drink any outward meat or drink, Externus
externo internus interno pastiturcibo.
namely bread and vine as I have declared before.

But in the right supper of our Lord where we are congregated together in the
Lords name with a faith that is full of good works, and a love unfeigned
desyringe to leave and dye according to the Lords pleasure, there is delte out
to my hu^gre soul and thurstye concience the inuisyble flesh and blood of
our savior Jesus Christ, and my inuiseble man that is my soul receaueth it
and eats it.

My dearly beloved this is the right table and cup of our lord Jesus Christ.
i. Cor. xi.
But the other which ye most part of the world uses is ye table and cup of
the deuel. Cor. x.
I would not says saint Paul that you should be partakers of the table of
deuilles. i. Cor. x.
For like as these above rehearsed have the communion of the body and blood of
Christ, so has likewise the other the communion of the Antichryst Idol and
the deuels table. And if it be so that we use and eat with them their
sacryfice and bread, so declare we our selves to be with them one body and
congregation, for through the eating of the bread and drinking of the cup
declare we how we are with them one bread and one body. O miserable body that
has neither God, nor Christ, nor Spryte, nor Life, nor Light, nor Word, nor
Truth, nor Prayer, nor no manner of promise. I spoke here of the fleshlye
arrogant frewyllinge sinners.

But the simple that fears God seeks the truth and has it not, the^ shall
the Lord judge according to his godly will and mercy. O miserable body which
is euerlastyngly dead before the eyes of the lord, for in the is found all
the innocente blod that is shede upon earth, from Abelles time unto this day,
Apo. xxii.xviii.
who dare apere before the stool of God with such an ungodly dark wrath full
disfigured Lecherous, bloodye body.

O lord keep and defend all thy poor servants and true hearts from such a
body. But this lies hide from the eyes of the world they are Dronken so full
with the wine of ye whore of Babylon. They know well that the scripture will have
used and holden a supper, but what supper, that is not known unto them, It is
to the flesh to painful strayt and narow, that supper that our savior
Christ have left and learned Therefore have they chosen and made themselves a
Supper which they receive, with a beutyfull body and an unclean soul of one
which has confessed them, which is more beastly and deuillysh in all his life
then they them selves are. Yea they have auansed this Diner so hye because of
great perell that the congregation must received but in one kind namely bread
and no wine.

But if it were the Supper of our Lord, it must be ministered and used under
both the kinds. Therefore declare they it not to be the right Supper of our
Lord Jesus Christ but it is and shall remayn the right Supper of Antichryst, yea
I say they have auansed it so hie, that the self bread must be very flesh
and the wine very blood, yea that is the unfaithful peoples nature because
they do not know the inuiseble god of heaven, nor the pour of the scriptures.
Therefore must they have a visible god, with which they commytte fornication
and use all abomination against our savior Jesus Christ.

Out of this unclean stynking fountain that is this learning, is flowed out
all infidelyte and Idolatrye, which is used with this bread as lockynge it up,
caryeng it about leftyng it up, prayeng to it, seaking it indyuers places,
sensyng it, doing godly honor and reverence to it, of the which there is no
title nor letter that can be found in all the holy scryptures. Ye it is said
unto this bread, Exo. xxxiii
thou art he which has delivered us upon the Iebet of ye cross Like as the
children of Israel said to the golden Calfe, this is he that has delivered us
out of ye land of Egypt. Awake up and se the well before you, ye that boost
and bear ye name of Christ, ye have sytt long enough in much darkness, become
wise, and give prays and glory unto the Lord God of heaven, to the intent
that it come not upon you, as it came upon the children of Israel in ye
wyldernes because of there infidelyte, Idolatrye, and disobedience. All though
that the Lord delivered them out of the power of Pharo by his strong hand
and straytched out arm, ii Cor. x
what helped it them, verily nothing, likewise it helps us nothing that we are
redeemed with the read blood of our savior Jesus Christ out of the deuels
power and might so far forth as we make our selves boundmen again through
our Infidelyte, Hebre. iii. Jude. i.
Idolatrye disobedience and fleshly living. Therdly they learn yt this self
bread or sacrament like as they name it, is given and received for ye remissyon
of synsines, my derely beloved where christ Jesus, and his holy word is not,
there is nothing, vbi Christus non est ibi nihil sanum.
but blyndnes, infidilytye vain hope dystrust and an unquiet consiens,

We know well there must be a mediator for our si^nes, but the right
mediatoure Christ Jesus we will not know. Therefore have we elected and chosen
out so many satisfactions for our sins, so many that no man can think nor
write, as Pardons holy water holy fire, holy salt, holy bread, holy palm
holy wax, holy bones, holy cottes, fasting, shryuinge Massinge,, pylgramage
with other abomynable baggage more, which is to long to rehearse, ye and the
dinner of Antychriste and yt only mediator Jesus christ will we not. Truly we
are like unto a seyke febyll, fante wounded man yt goes and gives his money to
one yt is not expert in his science which can not give neither wholesome drink
nor lay no good plaster, which destroys more than he edifyes. And
notwythstandinge, there is declared unto us one expeart doctor which will
neither take gifts nor rewards, for he is of himself rich enough and that he
does, he does it of friendly favor and love, seeks them at there houses,
byndes up there wondes, heals them and that freely, but we will not have him,
we have more delight in destruction, then in salvation. Who shall have compassion
or lamente over such a seek man. It is in like case with this unfaithful
generation of man, they feyle many times great pains and smarte, and runeth
here and there to them, which destroys more and more, with there false
venomous medicines. It cost them much money, they suffer much smarte, and yet
are they never made hole of there diseaces. And that only everlasting rich
perfect doctor and medecyne our savior Jesus Christ which is so abundantlye
declared unto us of all Patriarchs Prophets, Angels, Apostels, ye and of the
father self, him will we not have, which is come out of pure love and favor,
to al them that are wounded and euel healed, and offers his service and has
brought with him a costlye precious salve that is good for all sores, yt is his
precious read blood that he for us and for all the sins of the world has
shede upon the cross for our redemption, we will not have him, we put him away
from us with foot and hand, Touth and Nayl, ye we have shote him away from us
with our horns and will not that Jesus Christ should reygne over us. Who shall
have compassion in the day of vengeance upon our disobedynt hard necked
miserable dampened souls I say unto you in Christ Jesus believe it, and you will
rone where ye will, seake what mean, yt ye will, ye shall find no another in all
the hole scryptures, whyther ye be sick or hole strong or wayke that shall
profect you before the Lord, save only that that I have declared unto you that
is Christ Jesus or else ware all the holy scriptures false and stark lies.

Read I pray you Esaias the Prophet I am, Esaias. xliii
even I am the only god and Lord and besides me there is no Savior, I am he
only that for my own selves sake do away thy offenses and forget, thy
sins, Esaias. liii.
he only has taken on him out infirmytyes and borne our pains ye ye lord
has heped together upon him ye iniquiti of us all, Psalm. lxix.
he paid ye thing that he never had. The Angel said to Joseph call his name
Jesus, for he shall save his people from there sins. Math. i
This is my blood the which is of the new Testament, Mat. xxvi
that is shed for many, for the remyssion of si^nes. Behold the la^be of god
which takes away the sins of the world for he made him to be sin for, ii.
Cor. v Io. i.
us which knew no sin, that we by his means should be that ryghteousnes
which before god is allowed he has borne our sins in his body on ye tree, i.
Peter. ii i. Io. i Apoca. i. Heb. iii. i. Io. ii.
ye blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from al sin He has says
saint John loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood which
blood of the mediator of the new Testament speaks better then the blod of Abel

If any man sin we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the
ryghteous, and he it is that obteyneth grace for our sins. Not for our sins
only, but also for the sins of the hole world.

(...) My dearly belowed brethren, if there were any other advocate or
mediator, the^ this Christ, i. Timo. ii
how shameful had all the holy scryptures lied, and how pitefully had Saint
Paul deceived us where he says, there is one god and one mediatoure betwne
good and man, even the man Christ Jesus which gave him self a raunsom for all
men. If it be so yt throw sekenes any other means wherein thou do trust to
have remyssio^ of sins by let it be so lordly, so holy so bewtiful as it will*
save only that mediator which is given us of god that is Christ Jesus, so
forsakes thou ye death of our lord which he has suffered for the, and thou
denyest the most holiest and precious blood that he has shede fore the.

For all they that are not content with this only mediator, but seeks after
other, he curses gods word, he rentes in pieces the gospel of Jesus christ,
and utterly denies that Christ is ye right Messiah lord and Master, and
savior of the world, and that he is come from the father. My derely beloved
in Christ Jesus al they yt seek any other strange means without gods word
over such lamenteth the Lord, Iere. ii.
by the mouth of the prophet Ieremye, my people have done two euilles, they
have forsaken me, the well of the vater of syfe, and dug them pittes yt can
hold no water. This has always been the the end of all false learning to
forsake Christ Jesus whose ryghteousnes profeteth alonly before the Lord, to
the intent that we would lift up our own ymaginacion, and ryghteousnes to pray
and do reverence unto it as unto a new Christ. My dearly beloved here have I
breffly set you forth ye right learning of the supper of our Lord Jesus Christ
how it should be mynistred in the congregacyo^ of God, according to the Lords
word, here have ye a confutacion of suttel persuasyons and arguments of the
members of Antichryst wherwyth they maintain there meletyde otherwise called
their dinner, for which cause much ryghteous and innocent blood is shede
without pitye or mercy in many places of the world, and all by the means of
these spirytuall couniurers of Egypt. Exodus ix. Exodus ix.
The Prestes of the mountains servants of Ball and the prophets Iezebell,
the destroyers of the vyneyearde of the Lord, ii. Reg. xix
ye defylers of ye holy earth. Sodom blind watchers and dome dogs, the
treaders down of the right pasture and the troublers of the clear water, Iere.
xii. and.xiii. Esa. v.vi. Eze. xxxiiii Math. vii Mat. xxiii John. x.
false prophets and grippi^g wolves Acts.xx. The destrouers of wedowes and
fatherles, thieves and murderers, enemies of the cross of Christ whose end
is danmacion whose god is there belly and glory to there shame which are
worldly minded. Philip. iii
They are false masters and fathers of sects having cursed children, wells
with out watter, ii. Pet. ii
dry clouds wandrynge Stars, Trees without frut, at gatheringe time
wythered, twyse deed and plucked up by the totes, They are the raginge waves of
the Sea, fomynge out there own shame to whom is reserved the mist of Darkness
for ever, Jude. i i. Io. ii
the right and true Antichrists, Apoca. ix
these are the abominable locustes which are come out of the botomeles pit,
to hurt al them, that have not the mark of God in therefore hedes. Somma those
are they that are cursed and damned everlastingly from ye presence of god Luke.
vi.
except they repent and amend not that I Judge them that be far from me
for I know there stands written judge not les thou be judged, condeme not les
thou be condemned, but they are judged by the everlasting word of the Lord,
the which can neither lie nor be disseaued like as our Savior Jesus Christ
says, Io. xii.
i Cor. v.vi
I judge you not but it is ye word that I have spoken that judges you. If
thou do the works yt Paul speaks of, thou shall not inheret the kingdom of
God. If thou do the^ not so thou art not judged of any man, but of Gods
word.

Now my dear beloved lay these.ii. one against another, Gods learning and
man's learning, the truth and the lie, Christ and Antichriste, wey it, mesure
it tell it, with the Lords word, and I trust in the Lord that ye shall find
nothing, that I have here declared, but the right true word and will of our
savior Jesus christ.

My dearly beloved be thankeful unto the almighty majesty of god throw our
Lord Jesus christ that it has pleased him to let shine unto us the light of
the holy Gospel which has be keped from us so many hundredth year in the dark
night of infidelity.

Therefore take it now up as Ierymye says while it shyneth and tarry not lest
it be converted and changed into a dedlye darkness, read it right, it is gods
word, amend your living, serve your neighbor with al diligence, fear God and be
obedient unto his holy word so shall you remain in everlasting life. Amen.

Thomas Lancaster.

i. Cor. ii. For another foundation can no man lay than it that is lay,
which is Jesus Christ.

Praised be the Lord God.

Mark. viii Whosoever is ashamed of me and of my words in this aduouterous and
sinful generacio^ of him also shall ye son of man be a shamed when he comes
in the glory of his father with the holy Aungelles.

Ma. xxiiii He that endures to the end the same shall be saved.


Imprynded at Londone by Johan Turk.


