A COLLECTION OF CERTAIN SCLAVNDEROVS Articles given out by the Bisshops
against such faithful Christians as they now unjustly deteyne in their Prisons
together with the answer of the said Prisoners thereunto.

ALSO THE SOME OF CERTAIN CONFERENCES HAD IN THE FLEET according to the
Bisshops bloody Mandate with two Prisoners there.

1590.

Grace to the reader with wisdom from above, to discern the truth, and to
walk in the same aright.
THese copies of (...) articles and the awnsweres thereunto, as also of these
late conferences had in the Fleet, being come unto my hands, I thought no less
then my duty to impart unto thee, and publish to the view of all men: 1. that:
the true cawses of these controvercies 2. the BBs dealing with Christ's poor
servants: 3. and chiefly the truth yt self might the sooner be brought to light
and appear. The cawses of controversy thou may herby perceive to be no
light or small matters concerning things indifferent or some few trifling
ceremonies, (as they have long labored to make the world believe (although even
those least little trifles being brought into and thrust by way of law upon the
church having no warrant in the testament of Christ ought not to be suffered for
the space of an hour) but most high and weight are these matters,
concerning the whole building of the church: whith is affirmed to be altogether
out of order from the very foundation to the top, and not according to the
pattern of Christ's testament either in the people, ministry, ministration,
worship, government, order, al things out of frame, such as can neither stand
before the face of Christ, neither may any of Gods children join unto with
promise of salvation. Now the course the BBs and their clergy have taken, to
approve themselves unto all men to be no such deceitful work men their
building to be no such vvood, hay, stubble, has not been to bring their
works to the light, and to submit yt and themselves, to be measured by the
golden reed of Gods word, thereby justifying themselves, conuincing and
persuading others: But in stead of this, they first imprison all such as make
any scruple or question of their doings: yea all such as but speak against
them, they shut up in close prison, there to continewe without bail or
mainprice, all the days of their life, except they submit and recant: Some
they cast into most noisome and vile dungeons, without air, food, bedds, or
so much as straw to lie upon, keeping them from their wives, children,
trades labors, to the utter undoing and affamishment of them, their wives, and
children; Others they lade, with as many yrons as they can bear; some others
they a while produced to the Sessions, there indicting them as recusants upon
the Statute made for the Papists; publishing them by their prynt with
priuiledg Anabaptists, Heretics, Schismatics, Sectories, Donatists,
Conuenticlers, seditious, turbulent; sparsing abroad through all the land
certain Articles of their own devising against them, to bring them into
hatred with the whole land. vvher unto also they have not spared their
toungs, in their pulpits, where every one of their priests might forge what
opinion he list against them, and confute it with the same mouth, in their
name: and all this, without once producing them, to any christian trial
where they might have place given them, to defend themselves, and produce
their reasons, or once endeavoring to persuade or confute them by any one
place of scripture; Yet not content with all this, they can take no rest in
themselves, or think their kingdom safe, until they have devoured the pray
they have taken, and rydd them out of the way, which vvil not bow down, and
worship the Beast, and his image. And hereunto (having no hope to accomplish
their bloody purpose, by the common law of the land, seeing they can find no
occasion against these men, except it be in the law of their God) they of late
contrived this new spanish conference, sending certain of their select
soldiers unto them into their prisons, there by way of conference to fish
from them some matter, vvheruppon they might accuse them to their holy fathers
the BBs, who theruppon might deliver them, as conuicts of heresy unto the
secular powers. But blessed be God, that in these points, has hevved their
horns shorter in the beginning of her Mat. reign, not allowing that to be
heresy, which they should so pronounce, but what they by the scrip. should so
prove: again no heresy to be capital or punished by death, but what by the
first. 4. Counsels, and by the scriptures, was so adjudged: else had they by
this, shed more innocent and christian blood, then ever their predecessors did
in this land before them. But now, as they will at no hand, be drawn unto this
peaceable and christian trial, to have these matters decided and judged, by
the word of God; so have they not gained that they sought by these their
messengers, who (through the power of God) were entangled in their own
words, not being able to spurn against the pricks, or to get such matter at
the hands of these prisoners as they sought: Which, they espying, followed not
the suit half so hotely as they were enjoined, coming but twice, whereas they
ought to have com twice every week, at the least: At which times, how they
behaved themselves, let such as were present report; and also such as read
these conferences judge, what cause they have to exclaim, and accuse of
heresy etc. such as call them to the testament of Christ, and would have
their whole Church, and all their proceedings therein, buylt theruppon. Which
course they are so far from receiving, as they open their mouths bouldly into
a most high blasphemy, against God, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in
the heaven; their hands they have armed to violence, their feet are swift
to shed blood, seeking by all subtle and indirect means to suppress the
truth. Wherefore, so much the more is it the duty of every true servant of
Christ, even by all means to publish the same; which has caused me at this
time, to exhibit these things unto the reading and view of all men; not
regarding the blame that I am like to sustain at all hands therefore, so some
may reap any good thereby: Yet see I not why any should justly be offended
with this my doing, seeing thereby no vvrong is don to any man. As for these
prisoners that are named, and had to do in this business, there is no cause they
should be offended, seeing they under their own hands have made relation
hereof unto the Church, and have (for so doing) the practice of the Apost.
Acts. 4. ver. 23. as also of owre late martyrs in Q. Mary's days, in the like
cases. The credit of these vvrytings, I partly refer to the conscience of the
men that vvrote them, as they will answer the contrary before that great
Judge; but chiefly, to the testimony of the vvitnesses present and to the
indifferent consideration of any man, that will compare the arguments and
answers, to the present subject of the discourse. As for the other side, if
nothing should be published, until their consent were had, there should never
any of these things com to light. But if they think themselves iniuryed, let
them set down the particulers vvherin, or, for the further satisfying of all
men, let them yet at length condescend to some christian and free conference,
where both sides may have lyberty to produce their reasons, a true record of
them be kept, by faithful and indifferent notaries, each side be allowed to
have a copy thereof, and time to consider of what is passed accordingly. Thus
might the thruth, sone, and peeceablye be known, where the word of God may
be judge betwixt them: from which, who so departs, and vvil not be reduced,
let him to his wne peril, undergo such censures, and judgments as are due to
his error and syn. Only this is sure; VVisdome is justified of all her children.

Farevvell in the Lord.
To owre Loving friends, Mr. Archdeacon Mollins, Mr. Doctor Andros, Mr. Cotton,
Mr. Hutchinson, and the rest of the preachers, in and about London with in
named.
AFter owre hearty Commendations; I, the Bishop of London, have received order
from my Lords grace of Canterburye with the advice of both the cheiffe
Justices, that conference should presently be had with these Sectories,
which do forsake ovvr Church, and be for the same committed prisoners: for
that it is intended, if by ovvr good and learned persuasions, they will not
be reduced to conform themselves to their dutiful obedyence, that they shall be
proceeded with all according to the course of the common law: Therefore,
these are to will and require you, and every of you whose names are mentioned
in the shedule hereunto anexed, in her Mats. name, by virtue of her high
Commission, for causes ecclesiastical to us and others dyrected; That twice
every week (at the least) you do re-repayre to those persons, and prisoners,
whose names are in this tycket set down, and that you seek by all learned
and discrete demeanure you may to reduce them from their errors: And for that
either their conformitye, or disobedyence, may be more manifest, when they
shall com unto their trial; Therefore we require you to set down in writing
the particular days, of your going to co^fer with them, and lykevvise your
censure what it is of them, as that if occasion do serve to use it, you
will be sworn unto; And for that Mr Doctor Stanhope, Chancellor to me the
Bishop of London, is gone out of the City, therefore we require Mr. Mollins,
to send for all those several preachers, and deliver them the names of the
prisoners together with the prysons whereunto they are assigned to resort, and
to require them as aforesaid, to take the chardg upon them, according to the
trust committed unto them: and in case any of them refuse, that then you
require him or them, forthwith, to repair to me to Fulham, and to certefie me
of their aunsvvers, before their coming: And so we bid you Farevvell: the
25. of Februarye 1589.

Your Loving friends John Land. John Herbert. Edw. Stanhope. Rich. Cosen.


WE have sent you herevvithall a note of some part of their errors, vvherby
those preachers that are associat unto you, may the better consider how to
deal in conference with them.

A brief of the positions holden by the nevve sectorie of recusants.
1 THat it is not lawful to use the Lords prayer publicly in the Church, for
a set form of prayer.

2 Secondly that all set and stinted prayers are mere babbling in the sight of
the Lord, not to be used in public Christian assemblies.

3. Thirdly, that the public prayers and worship of God in England, as it is
by law in the Church of England established, is false, superstitious, popish,
and not to be used in any Christian congregation.

4. That the Church of England as it is now established is no entier member of
the Church of Christ.

5. That the government of the Church of England, as it is now established, is
no lawful government, nor christian, but antichristian and popish.

6. That the Sacraments of Babtisme and the Lords supper, as they are
administered in the Church of England, be not true Sacraments.

7. That infants ought not to be baptized, according to the form of baptism
ministered now in the Church of Englad, but are rather to be kept unbaptized.

8. Many of them make scruple to affirm, that the Queens Majesty has
supreme authority to govern the Church of England in cases ecclesiastical
and to make laws ecclesiastical, not contrary to Christ's laws.

9. That the laws ecclesiastical already established, by the authority of
the Queen and Realm, be not lawful.

10. That if the prince, or maiestrate under her, do refuse or defer to
reform, such faults as are aimsse in the Church, the people may take the
reforminge of them into their own hands, before or without her authority.

11. That the presbiterie, or eldership, may for some causes after admonition,
if there ensue not reformation excommunicat the Queen.

12. That the Church of England, as it now stands by law established,
professes not a true Christ, nor true religion, that it has no ministers in
deed, nor Sacraments in deed.

James Forester prisoners in newgate -- in the Fleet Do: Bancraft John Francys
prisoners in newgate -- in the Fleet Robert Batkine prisoners in newgate -- in
the Fleet Do: Grant Thomas Freeman in the gatehowse Do: Wood Thomas Settel in
the gatehowse John Debenham in the gatehowse Mr. Egerton George Collier in the
Clynke John Sparowe in the Clynke Do: Sallard Edmond Nicolson in the Clynke Mr.
Iackson Xpofer Raper in the Clynke Mr. Dunscombe Xpofer Brown in the Clynke
Quintan Smyth in the Clynke Mr. Smyth Androwe Smyth in the Clynke William
Blakborowe in the Clynke Mr. Phyllips Thomas Lemar in the Clynke Thomas Michell
in the Clynke Do: White Anthonye Clakston in newgate William Forester in
newgate Mr. Spark William Denford in newgate Roger Waterer in newgate Mr.
Erlye Edeth Burrowghe in newgate William Burt in newgate Mr. Turnball George
Smells in the Counter woodstreet Xpofer Bowman in the Counter woodstreet Mr.
Edmonds Robert Iackson in Count: woodstr. Mr. Haughton Nycolas Lee in the
Count: woodstr. Mr. Gylpenne Robert Andrews in Count: woodstr. Mr. Coper
William Hutton in Count: woodstr. Mr. Archpoole John Buser in Count: woodstr.
Do: Hanmer John Fissher in Count: woodstr. Do: Crook William Clarke in Count:
vvoodstr. Mr. Trypp. Richard maltusse in Count: vvoodstr. Mr. Morrison William
Fouller in Count: vvoodstr. Mr. Crow Richard Skarlet in Count: vvoodstr. Mr.
Brown Roger Rippine in Count vvoodstr. Mr. Hall John Clarke in Count
vvoodstr. Mr. Moslee Rowland Skipworth in the Counter poultrye preacher at
Bridevvell. George Knifton in the Counter poultrye Mr. Anderson Richard Hayward
in Count: poult. Mr. Gardener John Lankaster in Count: poult. Mr. Cotton Thomas
Endford in Count: poult. Mr. Cheyne Mr. Mollins Henry Barrowe in the Fleet Mr.
Androvves John Greenwood in the Fleet Mr. Hutchinso^ Do: Sarauea Daniell
Studley in the Fleet Mr. Grauet Walter Lane in the Fleet Mr. Fissher Edmond
Tomson in the gatehouse Mr. Iudson John Nicolas in the gatehouse Mr. Temple.
William Dodson in the gatehowse Mr. Allison John Barrens in the gatehowse Do:
Blague John Cranford in the gatehowse Mr. Herd Richard wheeler in the
gatehowse Mr. Harvye Thomas Canadine -- in the gatehowse
A brief answer to such Articles as the Bishopps have given out in our name,
upon which articles their Priests were sent and enjoined to Confer with us in
the several prisons wherein we are by them detayned.
HOw charitablie soever these forged positions conningly co^triued, may seem to
be framed, in respect of the sclaunderous privileged pamphletts, heretofore
dispersed through the whole land, by the enemies of Christ and suppressors of
all righteousness, to bring us in contempt with all men; yet if we consider the
end, and more sereously way the present drift of these BBs, their priests,
and new reconciled Reformists, set a work in this business, we shall find they
never went more craftily about the spilling of owre innocent blood. For they in
their secret consultations having collected these articles, have also
together with them constituted and commanded certain their priests, twice
every week, during this Lent, to offer us private conference in way of
examination, or auriculer confession, to fish farther cause of accusation upon
these poincts; whose testimony and verdict of suborned vvitnesses, they think
to frame to their bloudthirstie appetites; we in the mean time not suffered,
either to set down owre own positions, neither before equal vvytnesses to
answer or discover their false allegations. Wherefore we thought it good
(being all close prisoners) to relate unto all men that desire the truth, ovvre
simple judgments in these doctrines, vvherat they thus snarrle; we resting
still most desirous of any christian or equal conference before indifferent
vvitnesses set down and recorded, if we might obtain the same upon the
dispense of ovvre lives; yea the God of heaven knovveth, how vvilling and
ready we are to be instructed or corrected in any thing vvherin we err,
when it shall be shevved us by the book of God.

First then understand, that these accusers affirm these to be ovvre
positions, which they have framed of their own brain, without ovvre
knowledge, much less consent. Secondly they pronunce us nevve sectories,
although we hold no other thing in judgment or practice, more then Christ and
his Apostles have taught us in the Scriptures, and confirmed by their examples
and deaths; And whether Christ's Testament in these men's antichristian laws
and ordinances, fetched from Rome, or devised by themselves, be now to be
holden nevve doctrines, let all men consider. Thirdly they call us Recusants,
having neither forsaken the fellowship of the true Church or least member of
Christ that walks in the Communion of the faith, submytting himself to be
guyded by Christ's laws and ordinances, nor refused any truth approved unto
us. Only we, according to the Commandment of God, have forsaken all
sprirituall fellowship with their false Church, as also the inuetions and
popery, yea all the execrable merchandise of that ministry and confused
Babell, even that world of wickedness; Out of which the Lord dravve fourth
all his elected.

1. That it is not lavvful to use the Lords prayer publicly in the Church for
a set form of prayer.
THe Lords prayers we take to be those prayers which himself offered to his
father, in his own person, as he was man upon earth, according to his
present occasions, and the will of his father poured fourth. The form of
prayer given to his Disciples and to all posterities by the record of the
Evangelists, we hold and acknowledge most holy Canonical scripture, to be used
of all Churches in that use, and to that end for which owre Savior gave it:
Namely, to be the perfect pattern and rule of all owre prayers, whether
deprecations, supplications, thanksgyuing etc. Not that we are bound to the
very words saying over, or asking all things therein contained every time we
pray, nether that the words red or said over by rote can be called a prayer,
seeing all prayer must proceed of Gods spyrit from owr own hearts according to
owre present necessities: So that where he calls it the Lords prayer he
falsefieth the text, seeing Christ never did or could use it as his own prayer;
For there is petition made for remission of sins, he never trespassing; And
where he says we hold it unlawful to be used publiquelye in the Church for a
fet form of prayer, he sclaundereth us; we grant it to be the absolute,
perfect, and only form of all true prayers. If any demand further, whether
we may use the words thereof, either wholly as they are set down, or any
sentence of them in prayers, we answer, by explication, or application, tending
to edifying and expressing owre present estate, we may. The same questions may
be demanded of the prayers mentioned in the Psalms and diverse other
scriptures, to which we answer, that we restrain no man of the use of any
parcel or sentence of Scripture, rightly applied; Yet herevppon is not
justified either their five times saying over of their Pater Noster in their
English morrow masses, nor yet their superstitious repetition of these words
in the conclusions of their prayers after or before their sermons, when as
they say they know not what to ask, and therefore pray as Christ has taught
them, (by repeting these words which they call the Lords prayer) where in
they lie.

2. That all set and stinted prayers are mere babbling in the sight of the
Lord, and not to be used in public Christian assemblies.
FOr such forms of prayer as are Canonical, such as be commended to us by
Gods spirit in his word, we have already in the former Article set down the
true and holy use of them to be for instruction etc. But, that any man should
thrust his devises into the worship of God and christian assemblies, we wonder
at their ignorant presumption, and much more that they dare be so bold as to
set and stint the holy ghost, what, when, and how many words to utter in
prayer; So that your annual, monthly, daily, morning and evening prayers,
vvherin you bind men's consciences to the prescript repetition of your own
words as an offering to God, we hold them by the evidence of Gods book not
only a babbling, but apochriphall and Idolatrous, contrary to the second
Commaundme^t, bringing the wrath of God upon the imposers and receauers; For
by these Idols you take away the whole lyberty, fredome, and true use of
spiritual prayer; yea you stop the springs of the living fountain which
Christ has sealed in his Church.

3. That the public prayers and worship of God in England as it is by law
in the Church of England established, is false, superstitious and popish, and
not so be used in any Christian Conngregation.
IF Christ Jesus the author and fiinisher of owre faith have constituted and
confirmed the ministration of the new Testament perfect for all ages and
persons how to serve him according to his will, then your liturgye drawn out
of the Popes portuis is not only Idolatrous, superstitious, and a devised
worship, the inventions and precepts of men in stead of the liuelye graces and
present gifts of his spirit whereby men call upon his name, but a bondle of
infinite gross and blasphemous errors, yea even a (...) or counterfeit
gospel, not only set above the gospel of Christ but dyrectly instituting an
other ministry and ministraco^n then Christ has commended and commanded to
his Church till his apearing in the clouds to judgment: unto which Idol and
huge Chaos of long gathered and patched errors all your ministry is sworn,
vvherby they renounce Christ's Testament and must administer by this liturgye,
babbling over the several parcells thereof as they are lymited, prescribed, and
stinted from year to year, and day to day; By which liturgye or new gospel
the priests of that order are approved sufficient without preaching or the
guyft of teaching, and the repeating of that (...) book accounted sufficient
for all men's salvation; And if any do preach, his doctrines must be conformed
to the orders hereof. The errors in this Idolatrous book contained, would
not be easily repeated in half a day; yet this we are able to prove, that it
instituteth and apointeth another ministry and ministration in all points,
then Christ's Testament has confirmed; not only perverting, and making of no
effect the ordinances of God concerning the worship of his people, but
establishing another in the place thereof, as in their prayers, Sacraments,
fasts, feasts, offerings, purifications, maryages, buryalls etc. manifestly
apeareth.

4. That the Church of England, as it is now established, is no entire member
of the Church of Christ.
THe Common wealth of England, or parish assemblies, as they gennerally stand
under and subject unto the aforesaid worship and ministry consisting of all
sorts of unclean spirits, Atheists, papists, heretics etc. are not the true
apparent established Churches of Christ, or communion of saints; and so by
outward profession, they neither being gathered from the world to the
obedyence of Christ, neither having power or freedom to practice Christ's
Testament, as the truth is revealed, are no entire member of the body of
Christ.

5. That the government of the Church of England, as it is now established, is
no lavvfull government, nor Christian, but antichristian, and popish.
Having in the former articles sufficiently proved their worship and
ministerye to be Idolatrous, forbidden in the second Co^maundment, as all
apochripha and inventions of men; It is evident to all men, and confessed of
owre enemies, that the ministers, laws, and other ordina^cs, whereby the parish
assemblies are governed, are not such as Christ appointed to his Church, of
Pastor, Teacher, Elders, Deacons etc. But by such officers, Courts and Cannons
as are hatched from Rome, as Archb. L. BBs etc. whose titles, office, or
administraco^ns, were never heard of in the scriptures.

6. That the Sacraments of Babtisme, and the Lords Supper, as they are
administered in the Church of England, be not true Sacraments.
THere neither being lawful ministry to administer, nor faithful holy free
people, orderly gathered unto the true true outward profession of Christ as we
have before showed, and consequently no Covenant of grace, the Sacraments in
these asse^blies of Babtisme and the Lords supper, given unto Atheists,
papists, vvhoremasters, drunkerds and their seed, delivered also after a
superstitious manner according to their liturgye, and not according to the
institution and rules of Christ's Testament, are no true Sacraments, nor seals
with promise.

7. That infants ought not to be baptized according to the form of Babtisme
ministered now in the Church of England, but are rather to be kept unbaptized.
NO godly Christians, seperat from the false Church ought to bring their
infants to these parish assemblies to be baptized into that fellowship or
profession, by that ministry, or according to that order; but in the true
Church to seek the Seal of the Covenant so sone as it may be had by the true
ministerye in the Congregation according to Christ's institution, we still
affirm.

8. Many of them make scruple to affirm that the Queens Majesty has
supreme authority to govern the Church of England in cases ecclesiastical,
and to make laws ecclesiastical nos contrary to Christ laws.
ALL true Christians within her Majesty's dominions acknowledge her Majesty to
be the supreme maiestrate and gouernesse of all persons with in the Church,
and without the Church, yea over all causes ecclesiastical and civil; yet
always with this Caveat, that no flesh may presume to add any thing to his
word, or diminish any thing from it. This we make no scruple to affirm.

9. That the laws ecclesiastical already established by the authority of
the Queen and Realm, be not lavvfull.
Seeing the ecclesiastical laws, Canons, Injunctions, Articles, Courts,
ministry etc. vvherby these parish assemblies be governed and guyded, are not
deryued from the book of God, or can be warranted thereby or grounded
theruppon, but are the inventions of men which turn away the truth,
abrogating Christ's laws and ordinances, yea seeing they are culled out (if not
wholly received) from that great Antichrist his Canons, orders and devilish
polecies, as most malignant oppositions against the will of God, confirmed and
perfected with Christ's blood and miracles from heaven; therefore these Canons,
Injunctions and articles how plawsible soever they agree to the world, yet
are they the execrable wares of Antichrist, Statuts of Omry, and not to be
received or obeyed of any, that love the Lord Jesus Christ.

10. That if the Prince or Maiestrate under her do refuse or defer to reform
such faults as are amiss in the Church, the people may take the reforming of
them in their own hands, before or with out her authority.
Neither do we look for any reformation of Babell, that is this world of
confusion your false Church, neither do we take upon us to intermeddle with
the Magistrates sword, but keep owre selves in thought, word, and deed, within
the lymitts of owre calling in all dutiful obedyence, to owre prince and
superiors, for conscience toward God, and teach men both by word and example
so to walk; But that all that vvylbe saved must forsake the false Church, and
by repentance come under Christ's obedience, to serve and worship God aright in
his true Church, we hold it so true a doctrine as that there is no other
means or promise of salvation; Nether may we either neglect the true service
of god nor practice of any part thereof, or have fellowship with the works of
darkness, though the prince should inhibit the one and command the other; no,
herein we show no disobedience to magistrates, whose displeasure we must
rather undergo, then fall into the hands of the euerlyuing god who will
abide no halting. For the vvarrant of those things we have the doctrine of the
prophetts, Christ, and his Apostles who teach us in this case to suffer
persequutio^ as they that fear him that can cast both soul and body into
hell fire; and if the magistrate punish us for well doing we are far from
resistance willingly undergoing unto death their displeasure: But god forbid
they should be guylty of owre innocent blood by such sclaunderous reports,
without due examinaco^n of the truth: It is these wicked false prophetts that
trouble the land, that oppose the magistrates power against Christ, civil
against spiritual, Prince against Subjects.

11. That the presbiterie or Eldership may for some causes, after admonition,
if there ensue not reformation, excommunicat the Queen.
WE detest that Antichristian power of that person or presbiterye usurping
authority over the whole Church as you and others do exercise in your popish
Courts, secret Classes, devised Synods of priests as though they were Lords
over the heritage. The true officers of Christ vsurp no tyrannical
jurisdiction over the least member, neither do any public thing without
the consent of the whole Congregation, much less may the presbiterie
excommunicat any person by their sole power, seeing Christ has given this
power to the whole Church, and not solye to the presbiterie. The Prince also
if he will be held a member of Christ or of the Church, must be subject to
Christ's censure in the Church. That Congregation then, whereof the prince is a
member, may excommunicat the obstinat offenders therein, without exception of
person read of in the whole Book of God; yea great iniurye to Christ his
Church, and to the prince it were, to exempt them from the means of their
own salvation, for which end this power is only given, and ought to be so
exercised; Neither does it derogate, diminish, or take away any part of the
magistrates power or authority, except you would have no lawefull magistracye
that is not of the Church, or that the spiritual power of Christ in his Church
should disanull the magistracy, which were devilish doctrine.

12. That the Church of England, as it now stands by law established,
professes not a true Christ, nor true religion, that it has not ministers
indeed, nor Sacraments indeed.
AS for your Religion, Church, Sacraments etc. we have before showed the
forgerye of them, unto which former Articles we referr the reader; Only now
we must take away Balaa^ his stumbling block, which he lays before men, as
though we denied the true Christ, perfect God, and perfect man, of his tvvoe
natures subsisting, not confounded but united etc. Yea we confess there is
but one body, one spirit, one Lord, one faith, one baptism; and that this
Christ is in all places and the same for ever, howsoever the false Church may
challenge interest in the living Child. But that these parish assemblies deny
him to reign over them, yea to be any true Christ unto them, by their deeds
it is manifest; For do they not put the reed of the Popes Canons in his hand,
in stead of the Scepter of his own holy word? Do they not make him a
minister of an other Testament, by bynding him to this their popish
Apochripha liturgye, and all their other devises made, or to be made? Do they
not make him a priest, a sacrifice, to all the profane and ungodly? To
conclude, do they not hereby deny and abrogate all his offices in his Church,
of kingdom, priesthood and prophecye, and his whole anointing in the flesh?

The brief sum of a conference, had the 9. day of the 3. Month, between Mr.
Hutchinson Arch-Deaco^, and me John Greenwood prisoner in the Fleet, having
been kept close now a year and an half, by the BBs sole commandment. The
particular discourse whereof, were but unprofitable to relate, neither will I
trust my frail memory therein.
Mr. Hutchchinson said he came by virtue of Commission in her Mats. name, to
confer etc.

I denying to make answer to any thing, until I might have indifferent
witness by, and the matter to be written down, obtained to have pen and
ynke, and Mr. Calthrop a gentleman and prisoner to be witness. I desired Mr.
Hutch. to set down the end of his coming, and I would make answer
thereunto; whereupon he vvrote with his own hand to this effect.

Memorandum, that I Mr. Huthchinson being desired by Mr. Greenwood to set down
the end of my coming, show it him to be by virtue of commission, yet not to
examine him, or any way to hurt him, but to confer with him about his
seperating of himself from the Church of England, if I might reduce him etc.

I John Greenwood not desiring Mr. Hutchinson his coming, yet am most vvilling
of any Christian conference, where it shall be free asvvell to oppose as
answer, and on both sides the matter to be recorded in vvriting. The cause
that I will not otherwise reason, is, for that I have been wickedly
sclau^dered, and our cause falsely reported by Do. Some and others etc.

Mr. Hutchinson then brought forth certain articles of their collections,
reading them unto me; Also he shevved me Do* Somes sclauderous book, where he
turned to the positions the author had falsely affirmed to be ours. Having read
his Articles, he demanded vhether I approved or disalovved of them: To the
Articles I said they were their own collectio^s and not ours; And as for
Mr. Somes book, it was full of lies and sclaunders; But I willed him, if he
would confer, to set down some position under his hand, which I would
assent unto, or else disprove. Still he would have me to answer some of those
articles etc. But at length he willed me to set down some cause why I would
not come to their Church; vvhereuppo^ I vvorte thus.

The parish assemblies in England, consist of all sorts of profane people,
generallye subject to this antichristian ministry, laws, Courts, worship,
etc. And therefore are not the true apparent established Churches of Christ To
this he first answered, that if the parish assemblies were a false Church, then
every member thereof was a member of the false Church, which were dangerous for
me to affirm; I desired him first to deny or affirm, the argument being
general, and after infer what it pleased him; at last he made this answer in
writing with his own hand.

HVTCH. Your insufficient Argument has 2. defaults in it. 1. the sequel of
your Argument is not true; 2. Your first assertion cannot be proved.


GREEN: I will reply upon your second exception, as order requires. That
Your parish assemblies consist of all sorts of profane people etc. is thus
proved. They were all by the blowing of her Majesty's trumpet at her
coronai^^^ in one day received without conversion of life by faith and
repentance, and they and their seed ever since generally received to your
sacrament without any separation from the world; Therefore they now consist
of all sorts of profane.


HVTCH. Most of them are now departed by death, which then were (...) received.


GREEN. Therefore I included their seed to stand in the same estate no
separated from the world, and so could not be (...) a people called out.


HVTCH. I know not what you mean by separation.


GREEN. You know what (...) BADAL signifies, and as light is separated from
darkness, so must the Church from the profane.


HVTCH. What mean you by profane?


GREEN. Atheists, men without the knowledge or fear of God, together with the
papists, heretics, and all other infidells. Answer I pray you directly to
mine Argument.

So he began with long circumstances to write, I perfectly remember not what
words, but to this effect.


HVTCH. Mr. Greenwood affirms, that because the people were converted from
popery by her Majesty's trumpet at her coronatio^, therefore they consist of
all sorts of profane, with certain such like words.


GREEN. You falsefie my former Arg. and make no sufficient or direct answer to
it; Answer directly.


HVTCH. The Church of England receaueth none to their sacraments but such as
make public declaration of their faith; therefore consists not of, or
allows any profane people etc. Here we had much to do about declaration of
faith, He said they in every assembly had a general confession of sin, and
other confessions of faith, and so were not to be called profane. To which I
answered the papists also had their confessions, as the Creed and Pater noster,
which they repeated daily in their meetings, yet could they not for that
verbal confession be accounted the true Church.

Mr. Hutchinso^ said the popish Church was the Church, though with many
corruptions; and when I demanded whither the true Church or no, he said they
were the Church of God. To which I answered if yt were not the true Church, yt
was the Church of the devil: At which they were displeased I should judge so
uncharitably. Well, still I denied their saying over their service to be a
true and sufficient confession to make them Christians, affirming they might
teach such a verbal confession to a parrat.


HVTCH. Will you judge men's hearts? even their godfathers do make a confession
for their infants.


GREEN. That is even such confession as the rest, a babbling over certain words
without knowledge; Neither can there any confession be made for infants, but in
mockery. I judge not their hearts, but I know they are not able to give account
of any faith, except the verbal repeating certain words taught them by rote.
But I will answer your former objection. Your parish assemblies never
published their conversion of life with knowledge and fruits of repentance,
seeing they had no doctrine to call them before they were all without
exception received; yet are all they and their seed of your Church; therefore
you receive and allow the profane etc.

This Argment is not fully set down, because Mr. Hutchinson took up the
paper, neither was yt awnswered.

Whiles I was writing this last position, Mr. Huth* was dilating from the 3 of
Matthew, how Ihon Baptist received them that came to his baptism with small
confession, and no knowledge of their former life; yea that the Phariseis and
Saduceis were baptized etc. also the Eunuch very speedily etc.


GREEN. You falsify the text, and deceive the people; where can you prove that
the Phariseis and Saduceis were baptized of Ihon?


HVTCH. Heerupon Mr. Hutchinson turned to the 3 of Math, and began at the 5
verse to read Then went out to him Jerusalem and al Judea; and they were
baptized of him, confessing their sins.


GREEN. Were all Judea and they of Jerusalem baptized?


HVTCH. No, none but they that confessed their sines were baptiz.


GREEN. This makes against your self that none were received to Ihons baptism
but such as confessed their sins, for with you all the world is received as
members of your Church, and their seed baptized. Here he would have made the
people believe I would have none received to the Doctrine of the Church, but
they which were already called, I told him he must put difference betwixt the
hearing of doctrine, and receauinge to be a member of the Church, and to the
sacraments. He demanded whom I accounted a member of the Church. I said such
as both by word and practice joined themselves (in the service of God) into
the fellowship of the true Church etc. Then he demanded vvherin the service of
God consisted; I said in the whole obedience of his vvil: he yet demanded
vvherin chiefly etc. I answered I would not be catechized, but desired him to
bring some more evident proof that the Phariseis and Saduces were baptized. He
said the whole chapter proved yt; I desired him to draw some one argument from
some one verse: so he began again and read the 7 verse.


HVTCH. Now when he savv many of the Phariseis and Saduces come to his
baptism, he said unto them, Generations of vipers who has forvvarned you
etc. Again in the 11. verse John said In deed I baptize you, unto amendment
of life etc. First (says he) they were forwarned to flee from the wrath to
come 2 they came to his baptism 3 the text says Ego baptizo vos etc. all
these prove they were baptized.

In that he calls them generatio^s of vipers, yt is evident they obeyed not
his forewarning, neither were baptized. 2. their coming to his baptism
proves not that they were baptized, 3 that same Ego baptizo vos is not
referred to them: so that every way you have falsely made cohaerence in the
text; whervppon he willed me to read yt.


GREEN: I then took the book, and breeifly collected from the whole
discourse thus; Jerusalem and all Judea came to Ihons ministry and all that
confessed their sins were baptized; But when he-saw the Phariseis and
Saduces come unto his baptism, he called them Generations of vipers, and
therefore baptized them not. For this disjunctive sentence but when he savv the
Pharisees etc. shows an exception, that he baptized not all that came to him
in the wilderness, neither would he have called them generations of vipers, if
he had baptized them. About these matters we had much ado, which because his
next coming was only to cavil about the same, I will refer yt to our second
conference.

It must be remembered that Mr. Hutchinson made promise to me to prove the
Church of Rome the true Church when he came again. Further remember, that
these matters about the Phariseis and Saduces, baptism were not written, and
these positions and awnsweres which were written, Mr. Hutch: would needs carry
them away, and would neither have the vvitnesses to keep them, or me ever to
see them or consider of them. And through I though much a do had gotten him to
give them into the vvitnesses hands, yet so soon as I was gone and locked up,
Mr. wardens man was sent to the gentleman for them, who denijng to deliver
them without our consents, Mr. Hutch: sent the Archb: his pursyuant for them,
which Mr. Hutch: the last day of our conference denied in the presence of many
gentlemen. So that either the Pursuyuant Watson made a lie, or else Mr. Hutch;
cannot be excused. But for that which I have written, I refer yt to the
vvitnesses for the truth thereof, yea the positions and answers to the vvriting
vvwhich Mr. Hutchinson has kept from me.


The sum of the second conference had Between M. Hutchinson, and me Ihon
Greenwood, the 17 day of the 3 month.
THe 17 day of the 3 month I was sent for out of my chamber, and brought into
the porters lodge in the Fleet, where I found Mr. Hutchinson, and one whose name
I after understood to be D. Bright; These 2 were closely locked in that no man
might hear our conference, only one of Mr. wardens men, besides my keeper
came in; so soon as I was come and willed to sit down with them, M.
Hutchinson began to make rehearsal of one point of our former conference, to
this effect.

HVTCH. Mr. Greenwood, you know the last time that I was with you, I proved
unto you that Ihon Baptist received to his baptism the Phariseis and the
Saduces, mentioned in the 3 of Math. which you did not agree unto. The proofs
that I brought were many. First the text says they came to his baptism. 2.
he says I baptize you etc. How stand you yet minded in this point, proceeding
further to repeat mine answers, but I brake yt of, and made reply.


GREEN: It is very true that we dissented in this doctrine, and I disprooued
all your alligations then brought to prove that they were baptized; I will not
stand now to call into question our conference then had; only for that this was
not then set down in writing, I beseech you if you remain still of mind that
they were baptized, set yt down under your hand, and I will either assent unto
yt, or deny yt for just cause.


HVTCH. I will do so, but if you will deny yt, set down your denial.


GREEN: So I will when I see what you will affirm. Then Mr. Hutchinson willed
the wardens man to write thus.

Mr. Hutchinson says that Ihon Baptist did baptize the Pharisees and Saduces
mentioned in the 3 of Matthew, whom he calls generations of vipers.

Mr. Greenwood he says that Ihon Baptist did not admit the Phariseis and
Saduces whom he there calls generations of vipers to his baptism.


HVTCH. It is expressed in the text that they came to be baptized, because the
text says they came to his baptism.


GREEN: I deny the sequel of your argument, and your collection from the text
I affirm to be untruly gathered, for ad baptismum is not ad baptizandos, that
is, to be baptized.


HVTCH. They came to his baptism and he repulsed them not, what is this but
that they were baptized.


GREENVV: Baptism is there understood for Ihons whole ministration, not only
of the seal of baptism, but of his doctrine also.


HVTCH. Then they came to Ihons whole ministry, therefore to his baptism,
seeing his baptism was a part thereof.


GREEN: Alter not the question, I know they came to see all, as unworthy
nearers and seers: but you must prove that they were baptized.


HVTCH. They came to be baptized, did they not?


GREEN: This is not the question, neither can you prove that they came
therefore, I told you the last day Many came to see a reed shaken with the
wind, some to cavil, and not to be either instructed or baptized; But you
must prove that they were baptized, else you say nothing.


HVTCH. I will take him in his own words and wrap them up together; and thus
he began to write with his own hand.

Mr. Hutchinson replieth that the words Ad baptismum suum cannot be otherwise
understood since that the exhortations follownig does plainly declare they did
offer themselves to be baptized, and he does not bring yt to prove that they
were baptized, but to force Mr. Greenw: to show whither they were expulsed by
Ihon, considering they made offer of themselves. If (...) may not be understood
of baptism, but of the other part of Ihons ministry, which was teaching and
exhortation, as Mr. Greenwood supposes, then (...).


GREEN: You falsify the scriptures, wrest my words, deny your former
affirmation, and seek by all means to entangle by setting on foot new
questions; I have often proved unto you that their coming unto Ihons
ministry as unworthy beholders, did not prove they were baptized, neither
did I say that ad babtismum suum was understood only of his doctrine but of
his whole in ministry, whereof his baptism was a part, yet they were not
baptized for coming to see him; and where you say you brought yt not to prove
they were baptized, yt is mamanifestlie untrue, both by this and our former
conference; Again till you have proved that they were baptized, you say
nothing.


HVTCH. Mr. Hutchinson proves that they were baptized, because Ihon says
afterward Ego baptizo vos


GREENVV: These words Ego baptizo vos are not spoken to those Pharifeis and
Saduces, but generally to such as Ihon baptized, for yt follows he that
comes after me etc. shall baptize you with fire and the holy ghost Luke. 3.
Verses 15.16. which cannot be solely referred to the Phariseis, though they had
been baptized, but this is a sum of a several doctrine.


HVTCH. Ihon Baptist in his exhortation says unto them who has forwarned you
to fly from the wrath to come etc. this shows they came to baptized.


GREEN: Still you would alter the question, neither does this prove that they
were baptized, or yet that they did repent; But rather on the contrary Ihon
publishes their obstinacy to all the people and threatens them with the
judgments of god.


D. BRI. They might repent upon his exhortation, and so be babtised.


GREEN: There is no mention that they did repent.


D. BRI. Yes these words which Mr. Hutchinson repeated Ego baptizo vos proves
yt.


GREEN: I have often showed that those words are not spoken to them but to all
such as were baptized by Ihon etc.


HVTCH. Ihon Baptist knew none of their conuersations before or after therefore
he stirred them up to bring forth fruit worthy repentance, not that he see
their fruits; and so me thnikes this and that receiving of the Eunuch to
baptism so suddenly, does teach us, not to debar any from the sacraments
whatsoever their life has been, yea though we knew yt not, they offering
themselves and making declaration of faith.


GREEN: In the true Church none can be debarred from the sacraments that make
with knowledge true confession of their sins, and promise obedience to the word
of God, and to be ordered by Christ's ordinances; but I see no such confession
made by these Pharisees neither yet by your communicantes. As for the Eunuche we
shall show an other manner of confession then the verbal repetition of
certain words used in your Church.


D. BRI. Why, do you think our people have not made a true confession of
their sins, and promised amendment publikelie? etc.


GREEN: No your parish assemblies were never received into the true faith to
submit themselves unto Christ's ordinances by true confession with knowledge and
understanding, for that confession they made or make, is but a verbal
repetition of words as one might teach a parrat.


D. BRI. Some do understand what they say though all do not; will you forsake
the Church because some are ignorant?


GREEN: Neither do those that understand what they say bring forth fruits,
neither are they separated from the vnbeleebers, neither is that confession of
words which any of you have made a sufficient confession to make you a Church,
but the most part are Atheists and know not what they say.


D. BRI. What have none of us made a true confession of faith, I never heard
the whole profession we make denied before, neither that the most part do not
know what they profess, though I grant there be some such.


GREEN. No, not with amendment of life; For you remain one body with the
infidels, and deny in deed the true profession and practice of the gospel,
and subject your selves to the popish Courts and Cannons. Here we brake of in
some displeasing words, I desiring D. Bright to write, if he would reason
orderly; He said he came but to bear Mr. Hutchinson company. Then I demanded
of Mr. Hutchinson if he had brought all his proofs he had to prove that the
Phariseis mentioned in the 3 of Matthew were baptized, he said yea, I said then
I would oppose what reason I had to prove the contrary; he said yt was
preposterous, yet he was content etc. so I set down two reasons thus.


GREEN. In the 7 Chap. of Luke the 30. verse the holy ghost sets down that
those Scribes and Phariseis mentioned in the 3. of Matthew were not baptized, 2.
that Ihon Baptist ought not to call them generations of vipers whom he
received to his baptism.


HVTCH. The place of Luke is not to be understood of those Phariseis mentioned
Math. 3.


GREEN: Yes, the very doctrine yt self of our Savior Christ going before in
the 7 of Luke is evident to be drawn from their contempt of Ihons ministry
Math. 3.


HVTCH. Nichodemus believed and many other of the Phariseis.


GREEN: That's not the question. The question is whether the Phariseis mentioned
in the 3. of Matthew were baptized by Ihon or no; Luke says they were not
baptized of him.


HVTCH. I will answer that of Luke, and take him in his own words; so he
wrote with his own hand thus.

Mr. Hutchinson says the 7. of Luke does not prove that these Phariseis
mentioned Math. 3. or that none of the Phariseis were baptized. The argument
drawn from that place is of many particulars, and the place of Luke is not
generally but indefinitely conceived.

Again whereas Greenwood proves by the 7. of Luke, that the Scribes and
Phariseis mentioned in the 3. of Math. came not to be baptized or (which is
the other part or Ihons ministry) to hear his doctrine, but to gaze on him,
and to see him as a spectacle, yt is contrary to the words of Math. 3. ad
baptismum suum; And therefore the Phariseis mentioned in the 7 of Luke cannot be
understood of the Phariseis Math. 3.

To the other, that Ihon Baptist ought not to call them generation of vipers,
though yt need no answer, yet yt is false because Christ calls Peter Satan,
and his Disciples men of little faith, and an unfaithful nation, Paul the
Galatians Insensaios. etc.


GREEN. Whiles I was about to write mine answer to these things, Mr.
Hutchinson would needs be gone, promising again at his next coming to prove
the Church of Rome the true Church: so I was constrained to set down mine
answer after-wards, which is this. Our savior Christ in the of Luke sets
down two sorts of people which came to John's ministry, the one of such as
heard and obeid his doctrine, and were baptized, the other of such as heard and
saw, but obeid not his doctrine, neither were baptized: Of which sort chiefly
the Scribes and Phariseis are note vnrepe^tant despisers; Therefore I meruell
Mr. Hutchinson could so falsifye my words to excuse himself of open error, and
affirm that I should say the Phariseis did not hear but only gaze upon him,
seeing I said they did hear but did not obey neither were baptized. Further in
the 7 of Luke, our Savior speaking indefinitelie and generally of Ihons
ministry, and of the Phariseis contempt, and that they were not baptized of
him, yt were open contradiction to say they were baptized, and injury to the
holy ghost except you can show by express words that some of them were
baptized by Ihon. As for Nichodemus, he was not called to the faith by Ihon,
much less baptized by him. To the last point, Mr. Hutch. his examples of
Christ's reproof of Peter, or of his other Disciples etc. as also Paul's
reprehensio^ of the Galathians, does rather confirm my former assertions them
infringe yt, seeing they were reproved for the present committing and standing
in sin, and not upon their repentance. So that still I affirm yt were
contrary to all the scriptures to call them generations of vipers, who had
publikelie made confession of their sin, till they again transgressed, whereof
there is no mention either of their conversion or transgressing after the
confession of these Phariseis Math. 3. But at the first this controversy might
have been ended with this, that Ihon received none to be baptized, but such as
were won by doctrine, and made public confession; So that either the
Phariseis were not baptized, or else they repented: and the^ here is no shelter
for Mr. Hutchinsons euasio^, to prove by then example that all the la^d might
in one day be received to their sacraments at the beginning of her Mats.
reign, without knowledge and true conversion, and so remain a Church of
Atheists and idolaters ever since. God call forth his elect from this
fellowship.


A sum of the conference had in the Fleet the 18. of the 3. month betwixt
Mr. Hutchinson and D. Androes of the one party, and Henry Barrow close
prisoner there on the other, so near as his frail memory could carry away.
THey being set down in the parlor with one gentleman who^ they brought with
them and three of their own servants, I being entered and come unto them,
they desired me to sit down with the^, and that we might all be covered etc. I
demanded to what end.

HVTCH. Your Chamberfellow Mr. Greenwood has told you the cause of owr coming.


BAR. He told me that some had been with him yesternight, But told me not the
cause of your coming unto me this day.


HVTCH. We come to the same end* to confer brotherly with you concerning
certain positions that you are said to hold. Having Some his book and
certain articles of the Bishops before him.


BAR. I desire nothing more then Christian conference, but having been 2 years
and well nigh an half kept by the Bishops in close pryso^, could never as yet
obtain any such co^fere^ce, where the Book of God might peaceably decide
all owr controversies.


ANDR. Why the Book of God cannot speak, which way should that decide owr
controversies?


BAR. But the spirit of God can speak, and which way is that spirit tried or
discerned but by the word of God?


ANDR. But the spirits of men must be subject unto men, will you not subject
your spirit to the judgment of men?


BAR. The spirit of the prophets must be subject to the prophets, yet must the
prophets judge by the word of God. And for me I willingly submit my whole faith
to be tried and judged by the word of God, of all men.


ANDR. All men cannot judge, who then shall judge of the word?


BAR. The word, and let every one that judges take heed that he judge aright
thereby. vvisdome is justified of her Children.


ANDR. This sauoreth of a pryuat spyrit.


BAR. This is the spirit of Christ and his Apstles, and most public they
submitted their doctrines to the trial of all men by the word, So do I.


ANDR. What are you an Apostle?


BAR. No, but I have the spirit of the Apostles.


ANDR. What, the spirit of the Apostles?


BAR. Yea the spirit of the Apostles.


ANDR. What, in that measure?


BAR. In that measure that God has imparted unto me, though not in that
measure that the Apostles had by any comparison, yet the same spirit. There is
but one spirit.


HVTCH. Well, you will confer then, and we come to confer with you if you will.


BAR. I am most willing of any conference that may be to the glory of God and
owr edefying.


HVTCH. Well let us go to it then. What say you to these propositions? Having
the Bishops articles, and Somes book in his hand.


BAR. For Somes book I disclaimed it, and said the man had greatly injured me:
For any propositions that I hold I was desirous to set down mine own
propositio^s, and never required either the BBs. or Do. Some to set them down
for me.


HVTCH. I was at the great Commission a year ago, where you did set down
with your own hand your own answers.


BAR. Then did you see the Bishops offer me the greatest wrong that I suppose
was ever offered to any Christian in any age. I was brought out of my close
prison and compelled there to answer of the sudden unto such articles as the
Bishops in their secret Council had contrived against us. I could not be
admitted any further respire or consideration, neither any present conference
with any of my brethren, neither yet so much as a Copy of mine own answers,
though I most earnestly and humbly besought the same, but have ever since been
kept in most straight emprisonment without company, air, or comfort, never
hearing of any kind of conference until now; But have in the mean while
been greuouflie sclandered, blasphemed and accused, by sparsed articles,
printed privileged books, in their pulpets, in open Session, and unto owre
honorable maiestrats.


HVTCH. We will not hear your complaints because we cannot redress your
complaints.


ANDR. For close emprisonment you are most happy: The solitary and
contemplative life I hold the most blessed life; It is the life I would choose.


BAR. You speak philosophically but not Christianly. So sweet is the harmony
of Gods graces unto me in the congregation, and the conversation of the Saints
at all times, as I think my self as a sparrow on the house top when I am
exiled from them. But could you be content also Mr. Androes to be kept from
exercise and air so long together? These are also necessary to a natural
body.


ANDR. I say not that I would want air. But who be those Saints you speak
of, where are they?


BAR. They are even those poor Christians whom you so blaspheme and
persequote, and now most unjustly hold in your prysons.


ANDR. But where is their Congregation?


BAR. Though I knew I purposed not to tell you.


HVTCH. They are a company of Sectories as you also are.


BAR. Know you what a Sectorie is?


HVTCH. I know you to be Sectories and Schismatics.


BAR. What both? It should seem you know not what a Sectory is. But it is
evident that your Church is deeply set, both in Schism and apostacye.


HVTCH. A Sectory and Schismatic are both one.


BAR. That is not so. A Schismatic is ever cut from the Church, a Sectory is
not so.


HVTCH. They are both one, and come indifferently of the word (...) scindo
findo.


ANDR. There is difference betwixt (...) and (...) a schism and an heresy;
the one signifying election the other a rent. But I never heard of any
difference betwixt a Schism and a sect, both coming of one word.


BAR. Though they both come of one root, yet is not a Schism and a Sect all
one. Here they would needs have a greek Dictionary and greatly wished it. So I
sent for scapula, which being fetched, did not satisfy us concerning this
point.


ANDR. Secta in latin is the same that (...) in greek.


BAR. I deny that; There is difference between a Sect and a Schism.


ANDR. Secta coms of seco to cut, and (...) of (...) to cut, what difference.


BAR. I take the use of the word Secta, rather to be of sequor to follow,
because Secta a Sect signifies via, a way, and great difference appears in
the Scriptures betwixt a Schismaticke and a Sectory. A Sectory is allways in
the Church, a Schismaticke always out of the Church.


ANDR. Where find you this in the Scriptures?


BAR. I find it 1. Cor. 3. and Hebr. 10. In the one place Sectories, in the
other Schismatics described.


ANDR. The Sectories 1. Cor. 3. are Schismatics.


BAR. That cannot be; they were chief teachers of, and in the Church of
Corinth, where the Apostle reproves them because some held of, and followed
one teacher, some of an other, as if one had held of Paul another of Apollos.


ANDR. There contentions are called (...).


BAR. What of that; yet you see these were Sectories, and Schismatics are they
which have cut themselves from the Church Hebr. 10. by leaving the fellowship.


HVTCH. 1 Cor. 11. The Apostle says that Schisms are amongst them, Therefore
in the Church.


BAR. What is that to the purpose; I hope you will not say that he ca^ be a
Schismatic until he have rent himself from the Church. There shall be heresies
and Schisms in the Church, yet no heretic or Schismaticke until they be
either co^uinced and remain obstinate, or else have cut themselves from the
Church, by forsaking the fellowship.


ANDR. Augustine says that an heretic breaks the faith, a Schismatic
charity.


BAR. A Schismatic also breaks the faith, by departing from the communion of
the Church.


ANDR. A Schismatic may depart from the Church, and yet hold the faith.


BAR. They cannot hold the faith which forsake the fellowship of the faith.


ANDR. You speak ignorantly; sundry Schismatics have not erred.


BAR. I speak truly and as the holy ghost speaks in the last verse of the
10. to the Hebr. But we are not of the vvithdravving unto destruction, but of
faith to the conservation of our soul. Here you see the keeping of the faith,
set opposite against the departing from the fellowship.


ANDR. Loking upon my Testament (...) vvithdrawing. What is this to Schism,
The place you would allege is higher up in the Chapter.


BAR. This is the place which I would now allege, what say you unto it, is not
that withdrawing from the fellowship Schism? Can any withdraw from the
fellowship and yet keep the faith? is there any salvation out of the Church,
of salvation without faith?


ANDR. What is there none but a true faith, never read you of any other?


BAR. Yet acknowledge I but one faith* as there is but one God etc. which faith
no Schismatic can have; and as for this false faith, Devils and heretics may
also have such faith: But you will not say that an heretic does hold the
faith, neither yet does a Schismatic hold the faith.


ANDR. Do not hipocrits make a show of faith and yet they have no faith? what
faith is theirs?


BAR. There is no comparison betwixt hipocrits and Schismatics, the one
whilst he stadeth making show of the true faith both by life and profession,
so far as we can judge; the other making open breach of faith. But after the
hipocrite is once discovered, I say then he also appears to have no faith.


HVTCH. These are but (...), strife about words; shall we begin to reason to
some purpose.


BAR. If we may have indifferent notaries that may justly set down what
passes on each side, These speches were at the beginning of our conference
which my memory serves not place aright.
so that we may either of us have a copy thereof, the better to expend and
consider of each others reasons, I am very willing at any time or place so to
reason.


HVTCH Here is one that can write: and called one of his men.


BAR. He is no such writer as I would have. Further I would have some witnesses,
because you are two, and I am but one.


ANDR. Rather then that shall be a hinderance I will go up and reason with Mr.
Greenwood, and leave you two together.


BAR. That is not my meaning, I had rather you tarried still. Only because you
are two and I but one, therefore your testimony may the rather be taken against
me.

Ynke and paper being brought, and many entered into the Parlor, we were first
to set down and agree of a Prop. which after much discourse to and fro, M.
Hutch. set down after this manner


HVTCH. The parish Church of St. Bride is a true Church, to which any
Christian may join in their public prayers and Sacraments as they are by
law now established.


BAR. The Parish of your St. Bride, as it consists of a confuse multitude of
all sorts of people, mingled together in one body, standing under a false
ministerye in Idolatry and disorder, is not a true established Church of
Christ, and therefore not such as any true Christian ought to join unto in
their prayers and Sacraments, as they stand in this estate.

Here Mr. Andros moved that seeing the question was agreed upon, and the time
now far spent, we might depart until an other time: But I seeing much company
gotten in, and nothing more heard against me then this proposition, desired
them to say somewhat unto it in that time that remained.

First therefore Mr. Androes found much fault with my proposition, as disordered
and unlearnedly set down, and therefore deserved no answer. I said that if it
were true it suffised me, and unless they could disprove it it must still
stand in force against them. Here we had also much ado about owr order of
reasoning, whither it should be after their schole manner, by Logic or no. I
desired to reason after a Christian manner, according unto truth, though not in
logical forms, where after some discourse of the necessity and vanity of
the art of logic, I said I would not bind the majesty of the Script. to
logical forms, whereabout we should have more vain cauilles, and spend more
time, the^ about the discussing of the question; and that my conscience could
neither be convinced or instructed with any syllogismes so much as with the
weight of reason and force of truth.

Wherefore at length they condiscending unto me, denied with one consent my
whole proposition as false and untrue.

I also denied their proposition as altogether false, and willed them to make
proof of it. But still vrdging me to prove mine, I condiscended so to do.


BAR. In my general proposition are contained four principal heads. Namely,
1. The co^fuse commixture of al sorts of people. 2. Their antichristian and
unlawful ministerye, 3 Their false and idolatrous manner of worshipping of
God, and of their whole ministration both of the word and Sacraments etc. 4.
And their popish and antichristian order and ecclesiastical government. From
all which several heads infinite reasons may be drawn. But because all these
cannot be handled at once, I will begin with some one of them. And as order
requires (if it please you) I will begin to show that this people, as they
stand in these parishes in this confusion etc. are not in this estate capable
of the Sacraments and ministry of Christ.


ANDR. Order requires that you should rather begin to disprove owr ministry
first.


BAR. There must be sheep before there be a flock, A flock before there be a
shepherd.


ANDR. A flock and a Shepherd are relatiues.


BAR. There must be a flock before there can be a shepherd, because the
people must choose the Pastor.


ANDR. That is a devise of yours.


BAR. Will you call the Commandment of Christ my devise?


HVTCH. Your whole proposition is denied, prove that.


BAR. My proposition being so large I must begin with some one part thereof; I
will first therefore begin with the people of this parish.


BAR. Arg. 1. The people of this parish are a confuse company of Infidells,
Idolatort, ignorant, profane and open wicked; Therefore no such communion to
which a Christian my join in their prayers and sacraments in this estate.


ANDR. Infidells, what Infidels? Know you what Infidells are?


BAR. I take them to be vnbeleiuers, such as have no true faith.


ANDR. What because they have no true faith, therefore Infidells?


BAR. Yea because they have no true faith, therefore unbelievers or Infidells.


HVTCH. We receive no infidells into owr Church, if you mean by Infidells
(...) without faith.


BAR. I mean by Infidells, men without faith, (...).


HVTCH. What, know you what (...) is here, it is (...) privative.


BAR. And so I understand it; men distitute of faith.


ANDR. Can you put no difference betwixt Infidells and Idolaters, what think
you the Papists to be Infidells?


BAR. I know the word infidel to be more large, yet hold I all Idolaters
infidells, and the Papists infidells, because such gross Idolaters.


ANDR. We think more reverently of the Papists the^ so, though they be
Idolaters.


BAR. But Moses and Paul think so of all Idolaters, though Israelites, though
Jews, though Apostataes; Saying that what they offer they offer unto Devils.
Leuit. 17. Deuteronomy. 12. 1 Cor. 10.


HVTCH. Will you call hipocrits, Infidells? Because we receive some hypocrites,
therefore Infidells?


BAR. Hipocrits whilst they make and hold the same profession and faith with
us cannot by us be discerned, or judged by the Church, until the Lord further
discover them, by breaking out into some error or transgression. But infidells
are such as either are never come, or are fallen from the faith; Of which sort
I affirm all the people as they thus stand in your parishes to be.


HVTCH. and ANDR. We deny that, prove it.


BAR. They stand one with the world, uncalled forth unto the faith. Therefore
they are such.


ANDR. Wat new phrase is this, stand one? what mean you by stand one?


BAR. The phrase is not new but usual through all the Scriptures. I mean by
standing one with the world, that they remain one body with the world and the
world with them, uncalled forth unto the faith etc.


HVTCH. ANDR. We deny it: they stand not one with the world.


BAR. I thus prove it. They stand one with this whole land, and with all
the wicked and abominable persons thereof, Therefore they stand one with the
world.


HVTCH. ANDR. We deny both the Antecedent and consequent.


BAR. In proving the land to be of the world, the Conseque^t will of necessity
follow.


ANDR. We deny this land to be of the world.


BAR. That land and people that are not truly called out and gathered unto
Christ are still of the world. For owr savior says unto his Disciples I have
chosen you out of the world etc. Ioh. 15. But this land has not as yet been
truly called out and gathered unto Christ, Therefore it is of the world and the
world of it. For I am sure it is neither holyer not better then Israel and
Judea were at the coming of owr Savior.


HVTCH. ANDR. Our land is truly called and gathered unto Christ, and so are the
people of this parish.


BAR. Christ's Church always consists of a holy free people, seperat from
the world, rightly called and gathered unto Christ, vvalking forth in faith
and obedience; But the people of this Parish and generally of the land have not
as yet been thus separate from the wicked of the land, neither as yet been
thus gathered unto Christ, but stand mingled together with all the wicked
etc. as their present estate shows, Therefore they are no people capable of
the holy ministry and Sacraments of Christ etc.


HVTCH. ANDR. The people of this parish, as also of the other parishes in the
land have been and are truly called unto Christ, neither is there any open
wicked received into, or suffered in the Church.


BAR. All the land at this day is of your Church without the exception of any
one person* But I am sure you will not say but there are many wicked in the
land, Therefore you are not separate from the wicked.


HVTCH. I know no such wicked as you speak of, If you know any you shall do
well to complain that they may be cast out.


BAR. Alas I know none other. But why were they thus received? Or how should
they be cast out?


ANDR. There were two cast out the last Sunday here in London, Therefore we
separate the wicked and keep them not amongst us as you say.


BAR. And had you no more apparently wicked but two worthy to be cast out?


HVTCH. ANDR. We know no more.


BAR. That is well; I report me to all your Gaoles etc. And were not these two
cast out by the power of Antichrist, by some Chancellor or Commissarie, or some
of that crewe?


ANDR. What if they were?


Bar. Then you cast out Satan by the power of Satan.


ANDR. Prove that?


BAR. That were to digress from the present question, which is not whom and
how you now cast out, but whom and how you received and keep in your Church,
which I affirm to be all the profane multitude of the land, without any true
separation at the first, and so you continue.


ANDR. That is not so, I tell you we excommunicated, two the last day, Therefore
we have separation.


HVTCH. We deny your Assertion, we received not all, or any profane into owr
Church at any time.


BAR. In Q. Mary's reign all the land was fallen into open Apostacy and
Idolatry; In this estate were they all found at the beginning of owr Q.
Elizabeth's reign, and so all at one instant upon her first setting up this
religion received into the body of your Church, had this ministry set over
them, these Sacraments administered unto them etc. in your Parishes as they now
stand. Therefore all the profane were received into your Church without
choice or separation.


HVTCH. There were none then received but such as made true profession, and we
can neither require nor discern more.


BAR. They could make no true profession that had no knowledge of the truth.
But the people that time had no knowledge of the truth, Therefore they could
make no true profession so suddenly.


HVTCH. They all had knowledge of the truth, They repented and sorrowed for
their sins as appears in the Confession.


BAR. Thus I prove that they had neither true faith nor repentance. None can
have true faith and repentance but such as are called thereunto by the preaching
of the gospel; But all this people were received into your Church without
the preaching of the gospel going before; Therefore they were received into
your Church without true faith and repentance; For all were received into your
Church at one instant, this ministry at the first dash set over them all etc.

Here Mr. Androes began a large discourse, that the Jews had two manner of
excommunications, The one of the heathens, the other of the Publicanes The one
they banished from coming into their Temple, The other they suffered to come
thither, yet abhorred they their company and conversation in civil things.
And here would needs know of me which of these were the greater.


BAR. Your question is to no purpose neither is your assertion true; The Jews
had not two kinds of excommunication, They did not excommunicate the heathen.
And in that they abhorred the company of the Publicanes in civil conversation
whilst they admitted them to the Temple, they sinned.


ANDR. Let him be unto thee as a beathen and a Publicane. Is there not two kind
of exco^munications mentioned amongst the Jews, one to the heathen, another
unto the Publicane?


BAR. No; there is no excommunication of the Jews mentioned: The heathen they
could not excommunicate, because they were never in communion with them: The
Publicanes they did not excommunicate, because they still admitted them unto
the Temple.


ANDR. I will show you in Scripture that the Gentiles were not suffered to enter
into the Temple; Therefore they were excommunicate: And the other was a civil
discommuning.


BAR. It should seem you know not what excommunication is. They were never
admitted to enter into the Temple, Therefore they were not excommunicat; For
none can be excommunicat but he that has been in communion. But the heathen
was never in Communion. As for this civil discommuning of such as are still
held members of the Church, it is a most ungodly devise; For to cast out or
abhor in owr common meats such as the Lord receives unto his Table, were very
unchristian.


ANDR. You understand not the place; Did not owr Savior Christ there speak of
excommunication, willing them to have such as refused to hear the Church in
detestation, as the Jews held their heathens and publicanes, whom they
excommunicat.


BAR. Our Savior there speaks not of excommunication of the Jews, but of
the excommunicat Christians, willing all his Disciples to shun and eschew
such as hear not the Church, as the Jews did the heathens and the Publicanes,
to have neither spiritual nor civil communion with the^m. But what is all
this to the purpose, what answer do you make to my former reason?


HVTCH. Which reason? You have as yet made none, but proved the same whith the
same.


BAR. This reason. All the people of the Land were received into the Church at
one instant; had this ministry and these Sacraments etc. without being called
unto faith and repentance by the preaching of the gospel. Therefore they were
received into your Church without true faith and repentance, because it is
impossible to have true faith and true repentance without the preaching of the
gospel going before.


ANDR. Was not the Eunuche as suddenly received into the Church, had the
Sacraments administered unto him, with as little knowledge as they?


BAR. No, he was called by the preaching of Phillip, and had more knowledge then
any of these people, or well nigh any of their teachers the^ had, being all
generally plunged in apostasy and Idolatry immediately before.


ANDR. Could he bewray greater ignorance, then to doubt of so Mr. Andros read
the place out of Esai. plain a place, as none in the Scriptures coud be more
manifest. He was vvounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquities, The chastisment of our peace upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed, of whom else could this be understood but of Christ?


BAR. I not loking upon the place as Luke records it Act. 8. Espied not then
how craftily Mr. Androes falsefied and misaledged the text; Yet I added this;
He was led as a Sheep unto the slaughter, and like a lamb domb before his
sherer, So opened he not his mouth. My answer therefore herevppon was, that it
was no ignorant question. But that the greatest Rabbine of those times might
well have asked the question, seeing it is so common a thing in the Prophetts,
to have figured many things that came unto Christ in their own persons, as
appears every where in the book of psalms, and also in this prophecy, and
almost in all other. Is it not said in this prophet, Behold, I and the children
that thou have given me, are as signs and wonders in Israel. might not this
question then be well asked whither the Prophet spoke it in his own person or
of an other?


ANDR. It was a most ignorant question. Could any bear or be broken for owr
transgressions but Christ only?


BAR. But the Prophet might be led as a sheope unto the slaughter etc. And
therefore the question was according unto knowledge, and such as without
knowledge could not be moved; Or unless it were known, that text not be
understood. This Eunuche was a godly and zealous Proselite before Phillip met
with him.


ANDR. What, will you say godly before he had the knowledge of Christ?


BAR. Yea I say godly, and that before he knew that Christ was exhibited, and
come in the flesh.


ANDR. Then belike in that estate the Eunuche might have been saved, if so be
he had dyed before he had heard that Christ was come in the flesh and ascended.


BAR. Yea I doubt not thereof.


ANDR. HVTCH. That is heresy, will you set that down under your hand?


BAR. Yea that I will, and abide by it also to be truth, and prove both you
heretics if you obstinatly affirm and teach the contrary.


ANDR. Why then there were two faithes, two ways of salvation, one for Jews,
an other for Christians.


BAR. It follows not; There was but one faith, one salvation, common to all
beleiuers from the beginning; Christ to day, and yesterday, and for ever the
same. The Jews believed in Christ to come, The Gentiles then in Christ come;
Both in Christ; Both saved by faith in Christ. The Jews that had not as yet
seen the person, nor heard of the ministry of Christ, dying in that estate
were undoubtedly saved. The Lord bare much and a long time with the Jews, and
gave a time of removing these things.


HVTCH. The Eunuche made a true profession when he confessed JESUS to be the
Son of GOD, and was then baptized; Therefore owr people making as good
confession, why should they not also as suddenly be received to the Sacraments
and ministry?


BAR. It has often been said that your people do not neither could make so good
a confession as the Eunuche because they had not the preaching of the gospel
going before their confession, neither showed they such fruits of faith as the
Eunuche did, who was a true worshipper of GOD before.


ANDR. The Jailer in the Acts was as suddenly called, baptized, and showed no
more fruits of faith then these did.


BAR. That is not so; he washed the Apostles stripes, administered comfort unto
them, and food unto them after that he and his howse-hold had heard and
believed the word preached. But I never heard of any Church erected in this
manner, without the word preached going before as yours is.


ANDR. They had the word preached in king Edwards time.


BAR. What boted that, when they all fell to Idolatry in Q. Mary's time, and
all without being called to repentance by the gospel, were received into your
Church etc.


HVTCH. The confession they made was sufficient.


BAR. That is denied and proved insufficient, because it was not wrought by the
preaching of the gospel going before. Answer that reason.

Herevppon Mr. Hutchinson took the pen and ynke and wrote to this effect.


HVTCH. The confession of sin that is publicly made in the Church of
England, is sufficient to enable all such as say it sincerely, to the
ministry and Sacraments of the Church.


BAR. The verbal confession that is prescribed and used in the Church of
England, is not sufficient to enable the people that say it, or say Amen unto
it, unto the ministry and Sacraments of Christ; Neither could they make any
true or sincere confession, without the preaching of the word going before, to
call them thereunto.

Upon this issue we for that time ceased; They affirming this verbal
confession in this manner said, to be sufficient to enable all the people so
saying it over, And I for the reasons above said, denying the same.

Mr. Hutchinson put up the paper wherein these Arguments and propositions were
written into his bozome, but promised me a Copy; whereunto I condiscended, so
that upon the next conference I might keep the paper.

There arose controversy betwixt Mr. ANDR. and me concerning these words (...)
and (...) He affirming them to be all one; I, to be very diverse; the one
signifying, vicinity; the other, disjunction of habitations; he alleging the
ancyent use; And I both the ancient and present; affirming all to be corrupt.

Mr. Androes also in reasoning with me often swore by his honesty, for which I
reproved him for swearing unlawfully and making his faith an Idol. But he said
I knew not what an oath or an Idol meant.

Mr. Androes also used this word Luck. I said there was no fortune or luck;
but all things came to pass by the providence of God. To prove Luck he turned
in my Testament to the 10. of Luke ver. 31. (...) etc. And turned in a leaf
upon the place, and as he was going out willed me to consider of it. which is
no more then to come to pass, although suddenly or unlooked for to us, yet by
the direction and providence of God unto us; without which a sparrow falls
not upon the ground. So that though the heathens abused this word, to chance
and fortune, yet is it both contrary to Christian faith, and not the first and
proper signification of the word.


A sum of such chief points as were handled in the second conference,
betwixt Mr. Hutchinson, Do. Androes on the one party, and John Greenwood and
Henry Barrow prisoners in the Fleet, on the other party, upon the 13. of the
4. Month. The discourse whereof orderly to set down we cannot, all things
were so disorderly handled therein by them who sought nothing so much as to
obscure and turn away the truth by their schole learning, manifold cauills
and shifts, shameless denial of manifest truths, and most unchristian
contumelies, scoffs, and reproaches against owre persons.
1. FIrst they hold, by especially Do. Androes, that the scriptures now ought
not to decide controversies, because the scriptures cannot speak.

2. That the scriptures ought to be judged and interpreted by the ancyent
fathers wrytings, and not by other scriptures, or the circumstances of the text.

3. That because the spirits of the Prophets must be subject to the Prophets,
therefore the wrytings of these dead men ought to judge and interpret the
scriptures.

4. That the scriptures ought to be interpreted and expounded by Logic.

5. That no man may preach the word, or interpret scriptures, but he that has
an office in the Church.

6. Being pressed with Acts. 13. ver. 15. And their own note upon the same
in their Geneua Bible, he utterly rejected both that translation and the notes
therevppon, saying yt was inhibited to be used in their Church.

7. They further said, that Paul was a minister of that Synagogue, because he
was a Pharisey.

8. There is no Church where there is no administraco^n of sacraments. Being
pressed that the Pastor alone cannot make a Church, neither that upon the
death or deposing of the Pastor, at which time the Church for a season is
without sacraments, as also that the host of the Israelites were a long time
in the wilderness without sacraments; they only answered unto the last, and
said, that the Israelites were not without sacraments at any time, because
they always had the pillar of fire.

9. Being showed that this pillar was no sacrament of the covenant prescribed
by God to be used of the Church, they still affirmed that the Church could not
be said to be without the sacraments, whiles they had these Sacramental signs.

10. They held that Christ after his death descended into hell.

11. Do. Androes endeavored to prove it by Colos. 2. ver. 15. because Christ is
there said to have triumphed over the principalities and powers; his consequent
and collection being denied and showed to be a popish dream, and to have no
groundworke or warrant from this place, he sought to escape by denying the
english translation, which says and has tryumphed over them in the same
cross, because it is in some copies tryumphing them in himself.

12. Being pressed that Christ's spirit was in the hands of his father, Luke.
23.46. his body in the grave, therefore he could not after his death descend
into hell. To this Do. Androes answered, that his soul being in the hand of
God might be in hell, because the hand and power of God was every where; Yt was
then said that Christ's soul was in paradise, and that all the souls of the
blessed were then by that reason in hell as well as his, yea Christ his soul
now might so be said to be in hell likewise, because the power of God is every
where: But Christ having finished all his sufferings, and performed them upon
his cross. John. 19. had now nothing to do in hell.

There remained an Argument at our last conference without answer, which was
this.

None can be called to a true profession of faith, without the preaching of
the gospel going before; But all the people in these parishes were received
into your Church without the preaching of the gospel going before; Therefore
they were received without a true profession. 13. Do. Androes here denied the
minor. and said the people were not received into their Church and had the
sacraments delivered unto them before they had been taught half a year. Being
demanded what the people in the mean while were to be esteemed, whether
faithful or idolatrous, whether members or not members of their Church; he
said, they were neither to be esteemed faithful nor unbelievers, neither
members nor not members, but they where all this while in membring.

14. Being demanded what those preachers were to be esteemed, whither
ministers or not ministers unto this people, they answered that they were
ministers.

Argument. 1. There can be no minister but unto a flock; But here by your
own saying was no flock at this time Therefore these could be no ministers
unto them.

15. They here denied the Mayor, and affirmed that there may be a minister
without a flock.

Argument. 2. A shepherd can be no shepherd over goats or svvyne, but only
over sheep; The ministry of Christ cannot be set over infidells, or over
any people to take chardge or cure over them, until those people be called
unto, and have made profession of the faith.

But here the people were not as then called unto, neither had made profession
of the faith: Therefore the ministry of Christ could not at that time be set
over them, in that estate. 16. They still denied the Mayor, and gave this
reason thereof, because the unbelievers might hear the ministry of the Church.

We granted that the unbelievers might hear the ministry of the Church,
but from hence it follows not that they had interest in the ministry before
they were members of the Church; It is one thing to hear the ministry of the
Church, and an other thing to be a member of the Church.

17. Then they brought Paul's example to prove that a ministry might be set
over infidells, because he was said to be the teacher of the Gentiles, and all
the Apostles willed to go and teach all nations.

To this it was answered, that Paul stood no minister neither took government
or chardge over any heathen which were not called to the faith, and joined to
the Church, still putting difference betwixt teaching the heathen the truth,
and exercising a ministry over them.

18. They alleged 1 Pet. 1. that the Apostle there took chardge and care over
strangers.

Yt was answered that those strangers were Jews, called to the faith,
dispersed through many regions, as the next verse. 1 Pet. 1.2. and James 1.
shows.

19. Paul wrote himself a father of the Corinths. though ye have many
teachers, yet have ye but one father.

Yt was still answered that those Corinthians were believers.

Argument. 3. There can be no communion betwixt the believers and unbelievers;
therefore the infidells can have no communion with the Church in the
ministry thereof, or in any spiritual action.

Being demanded by them what we meant by communion, we answered, such
communion as is spoken of Act. 2.42. in doctrine, in prayer, in the sacraments,
in mutual communication in all Christian duties, and how none were received to
this communion, before they were joined as members unto the Church.

Argument. 4. There can now be no Pastor over any people by the rules of
Christi testament, but where a mutual covenant is made betvveene the Pastor
and the people, he bound to teach, guide, and govern them, they again to
obey him in the Lord: But the infidells have made no such covenant with the
Pastor; Therefore etc.

20. Do. Androes said, the Pastor ought not to govern; that he himself was a
Pastor, yet no guide or governor of the flock; and that in the Church there
were governors over the Pastors, as Bishops.

We answered that the word Bishop or Ouerseer was a general name, common to
the Pastor, teacher, and Elders, which name imports government and care.
Phil. 1.1. Act. 20.28.

21. Do. Androes here said, that the word bishop was not common unto either
the Pastor, teacher, or Elders, but unto other higher governors.

We answered, that unto their ministry the name of a bishop did not indeed
accord, but only unto their Lord bishops, and desired some proof of this their
assertion out of the word of God.

22. Unto which they answered, that all their ministry was by positive
laws.

We then said that it must needs follow, that all their religion and worship
was pollitick also, and that ministry which Christ has not prescribed in
his Testament is antichristian.

At lentgh, after many bitter and reproachful speeches against us, we
returned again to our former discourse, and framed this Argument unto the rest.

Argument. 5. The people now are to make choice and proof of their Paestor:
But they without the faith cannot make choice of their Pastor: Therefore etc.

Here they said that this and allowre other positions were fond, vain, and
foolish; and this was all the answer we could get of them.

Mr. Hutchinson at the breaking up required me Henry Barrow to set down some
reasons why I refused to join unto their Church, that the people present
might be satisfied; whervppon I set him down under mine hand as follows.

The reasons why I Henry Barrow cannot join with the Church of England,
yielded by me the 13. of the 4. Month.

1. The people as they stand are not called orderly to the faith, but stand
mingled together in confusion.

2. The ministry set over them is not the true ministry of the gospel
which Christ has appointed to his Church in his testament.

3. The administration and worship of this Church is not according to the word
of God.

4. The ecclesiastical government, Courts, officers and Cannons are not
according to the testament of Christ, but new and antichristian.

Until all these points be either approved by the word of God, or reformed, I
cannot consent to join unto this Church in this estate.

These things I witness and subscribe. H. Barrovv.

I John Greenwood, being demanded by Mr. Hutchinson whether I would set down
mine hand unto this, or else yield some other cause of my dislike, refused to
do either of both, until he had proved the Church of Rome to be the true
Church of Christ as he had twice promised, and at neither of his commings would
perform.

A brief answer to certain sclaunderous Articles and ungodly calumniations
sparsed abroad by the BBs and their adhere^ts against diverse faithful and
true Christians her Majesty's loyal and louinge Subjects to color their
own ungodly and tyrannical dealing with them, and to bring them into hatred
both with Prince and people.
Article 1. They hold that the Lords prayer or any sell prayer is blasphemy,
and they never use any prayer for the Queen as supreme head under Christ of
the Church of England.
Answer WE hold that the Lords prayer (so commonly called) is sacred and
Canonical scripture, co^teyning a most absolute and perfect rule and grownd
work whereby all faith full prayers ought to be framed, given by owr Savior
Christ for the instruction and confirmation of his Disciples that their
prayers might be according to the will and glory of God: But that the very
form of words as they are in these petitions were given and instituted as a
set and stinted prayer, or that owre Savior Christ and his Apostles have ever
used yt in that manner, we find not in the scriptures, where we see their
prayers according to their present occasions etc. set down in other words,
and no mention made of such prescript and lymited saying of this as they
require and enjoin: Moreover, if they were as ignorant what belongs to true
prayer, or of the true use of this form for prayer as they seem, yet even
their own practice in their pulpyts and Liturgies does excuse us thus far
forth and condemn them. For her Majesty we pray both publicly and
pryuatly, day and night at all times and places according to owre duties as
becomes us, and godwilling will not cease so to do whilst owre lives shall
last.

Article 2. That all set prayers or stinted prayers, or read service are but
mere bablinge in Gods sight and plain Idolatry.
TO this we answer that we are taught in the Scriptures John. 4.
That God is a Spirit and will be worshipped in Spirit and truth: we find
further in the Script. and in owr selves Romans 8.26.
That God gyveth to all his Children* and has given to us his holy Spirit to
help owr infirmities and to teach us to pray according to his will in his
word: we are also there taught. 1. Io. 2.27.
That we need no man to teach us but as the same anoyntinge teaches us of all
things. moreover we find not any such devised prayers or stinted service
perscribed to the Church by those excellent and perfect workmen Thappostles;
1. Cor. 3.11.12. and ^*
neither yet any Commaundment or authority given by the^ unto the church to
make, bring in, ympose, or receive, Matt. 15.9. Coll. 2.20. Gall. 5.1.
any such stinted, devised, and Apochripha service where only the word of God
and the graces of Gods spirit ought to be heard: For these causes we esteem
and refuse all such devised Liturgies as superfluous, will not worshipp
inuentio^s and traditions of men, besides and contrary to Gods revealed word,
to the graces of Gods Spirit, and to owr Christian liberty; Wherefore we
wonder at the ignorance of these blind Pharesies, which knowing neither the
right end, Reave. 10.4. 1. These. 5.19
use, nor means of prayer themselves, yet dare in this manner teach, correct,
and quench the Spirit of God in others by ymposing the chafe and leaven of
their own lypps upon the whole Church, yea as a sacryfice upon God himself
will he nyl he.

Article 3. They teach their is no head or Supreme governor of the Church of
Christ: And that the Queen has none authority in the Church to make laws
Ecclesiastical.
WE hold Christ to be the only Ephesians. 1.22.23.
head of his Church, and the greatest Princes in the world to be but members
of his Church: We hold her Majesty to be 1. Pet. 2.13
supreme governor of al persons estats and causes whatsoever with in her
Dominions: We renounce the Pope and all popish jurisdictions over either
Conscience, Queen, or Contrye, and we acknowledge no other Prince, potentate,
or power foreign, or Domestical, Ecclesiastical or Civil, to have any
superior or equal authority within her Majesty's Dominions: We hold Christ
to be the only Deu. 18.15 Matt. 17.5. Acts. 3.22.
Lawgyuer in his Church, and that he has already (being the Heb. 3.6.
Son, and as faithful in his house as his servant MOSES in his Tabernacle)
established sufficient Laws for the government of his Church unto the worlds
end in his last 1. Cor. 2.16
will and Testament; which no Prince, nor all the Princes in the world nor the
whole Church may Gal. 3.15.
alter Deu. 4.2. Reu. 22.18.19.
add unto or take from, upon the pains contained in the Scriptures. But both
Prince and people ought with all their endeavor, as far as the Lord has
given them knowledge and means, to put the same in execution.

Article 4. They teach that a lay man may beget faith, And that we have no
need of public administration.
WE know not what you mean by your old popish terms of lay men, we hold al
true beleyuers Ecclesiastical and 1. Pet. 2.5. Reu. 1.6.
spiritual, yea and that any such beleyuer may beget faith, and for evident
proof thereof referr you to these places of scripture Luke. 10.1. etc. Luke.
8.39. Acts. 8.4. Acts 11.19. etc. Acts. 18.26. 1 Corin. 14. entier 1 Corinthians.
7.16. Phil. 2.15.16. 1 Pet. 3.2. 1 Pet. 4.10. 2 Timothy 2.2. 1 Thessa. 5.11. etc.
Iam. 5.19.20. which shall either instruct of convince your herein. Yet hold we
the public administraco^n of the word by PASTORS, TEACHERS and the PROPHETS
in the church by far, and without all comparyson more excellent, more blessed,
and more to be desired, and judge your sin and iniquity by so much the more
heynouse and even come to the full, in that you so bitterly with all your gall
and spyte resist the holy ghost, by hindering us his servants from proceeding to
so heavenly and gracious a means of owr salvation, 1. These. 2.15.16. Mat.
23.13.
and earnestly with all your forces oppose your selves against God, in that you
will neither enter your selves into his kingdom nor suffer such as would.

Article 5. They condemn all coming to Church, all preaching, all
Institution of Sacraments, and say that all the Ministers are sent by God in
his anger to deceive the people.
THe Lord condemns, and we according to his Commandment shun all false
Churches, false and deceitful preaching, and false Institutions of Sacraments,
and we believe as the Lord has said 2. These. 2.10.11.12. Reu. 13.13.14. Ren.
19.20.
that all false Ministers are sent of God in his wrath to deceive the people,
of which sort we protest, your public parrish assemblies as they stand in
this Confusion, disorder, and Idolatry, your public preaching, Sacraments,
and ministry to be, and are ready by the manifest evidence of Gods undoubted
word to approve the same to your faces, it any Christian audience or
indifferent trial might be granted.

Article 6. They affirm that the people must reform the Church and not tarry
for the Magistrate, And that the Primative Church sued not to Courts or
Parliaments, nor vvayted upon Princes pleasures; But we make Christ to attend
upon Princes, and to be Subject to their laws and government.
WE go not about to reform your Ios. 6.26. Iere. 51.9.26.
Romish Bisshopricks, Deanes, officers; Advocates, Courts, Cannons, neither
your popish Priests, halfe-Priests, Ministers, all which come out of the
bottomless pytt: But we leave those merchantmen and their wares with the Ier.
50.15 16. Reu. 18.6.
curse of God upon them until they repent: We are also taught in the word,
that the kingdom of God comes not by Luke. 17.20.
observation, neither is brought in by the zach. 4.6. Isay. 40.10. Iere 17.5.
arm of flesh, but by the spirit of God, and by the power of his word Mat.
3.3.8.
working in the hearts of all Christ's faithful servants true repentance from
dead works and all things that displease the Lord even as soon as they are
reproved unto them by his word, as also a true conversion of their hearts and
souls unto the Lord, with an earnest love, continual zeal, and ready desire
to put in practice what soever the Lord shows them to be his will in his
word without all Luke. 9.59. etc.
delay or Luke. 14.18. etc.
excuse whosoever forbid or Command the contrary: We are to obey God rather
then men, and if any man be ignorant let him be 1. Cor. 14.38. Reu. 22.11.
ignorant still; We are not to stay from doing the Lords Commandment Mat.
15.12 etc. Gal. 1.10.
upon the pleasure or offense of any.

Article 7. That the Book of common prayer is a pregnant I dole and full of
abominations, a piece of Svvynes flesh, and abomination to the Lord.
WE have showed in owr answer to your second Article what we think of all
Apocrypha and devised Liturgies, when they are brought into and emposed upon
the Church: But saying you are so zealous for the silver shryne of your DIANA,
and wayle for your Portuise, we affirm it to be as you report a (PREGNANT
IDOL) which has in it an infinite sort of Idols, and is full of
abominations and bitter fruit. As may appear by the double Idols of your
solemn and double feasts of your hollomass, Christmas, Candlemass, Easter,
Whitsontyde, Trynitie sunday etc. Your Lady days, Saints days with the Eaues,
feasts fasts, and devised worshipp unto them, which fill a great part of your
book, Also your lents, Rogaco^ns, ash-wensdayes with the bitter cursings and
comminations, Your mawnday and holy Thursdayes, your goodfrydayes with their
peculiar worshipps, Your division of the year into your Aduent, Septuagesima,
Easter and trinety Sunday with their Collects and worshipps servinge to every
week in the year, yea to every day in the week, except such feasts and Days
as are above named, To all which you add your blasphemous abuse of the
Scriptures shredding and rendinge them from their natural sense and true use,
to bend and apply them to Your Idol feasts and days; Your abominable
Collects over, for, and to the dead, Your celebrating days to Angels, as
your Michaells day, your making Archangells there and making Michaell a
Creature. As also your high prophanaco^n of the Sacraments perverting changing
and corrupting the holy institution of Christ with your popish devises, sige^s,
Godfathers, Godmothers, with their ridiculous dialogue between Priest, Cleark,
Godfathers, Godmothers, and the infant, and the rash, indiscreet, and
impossible vow of the said gossipps, Your purifications, and Churching of the
Woman, with her offering then for her self, and at the Christnings (as they call
it) for the Child, your hasty baptism by the midwifes, your bishopping or
second baptising of Children; Neither is the other Sacrament free from your
pollutio^s, It is sold for 2 pence a head, th'instituco^n of Christ broken and
changed in the delyuery, a stagelike Dyalogue between Priest, Cleark, people
added, new Apochrypha laws and injunctions added, to the Priest to stand at
the North end of the table etc. to the people to kneel, verse and Collect in
their appointed times and tornes. Moreover your popish and Idolatrous housling
the sick with this Sacrament, Thus prostituting and selling both Sacraments to
the open unworthy and their seed; As also your popish manner of visiting and
pardoning the syck, wherewith this your book swarmeth, as with sundry peculiar
errors, which were even a wearynes to report much more to confute: Yea we
doubt not but that these which we have named do appear to all men which have
any spark of light in them, to be most gross Idolatries and heinouse
blasphemies, as whereby the honor which is due to God is given to Creatures,
God is worshipped after the devices and fantasies of men, and not after his
revealed will in his word, Gods name highly taken in vain, the holy
Scriptures profaned, the Sacraments sacriligiouslie abused, yea even the
office of God taken from him and given to an impiouse Priest. If you doubt of
any of these things let your Portuise this service book be but brought and
tried by the word of God (whereas now it is set up as the Idol of
Indignation and Dagons stump above the word of God) and you shall find these
things to stand thus and worse then we report. And now you should not think it
strange that it is termed a piece of swynes-flesh; Let it be brought to the old
usual mass-booke, and see if you find it not a Collop of that foul mezeled
hogg howsoever it has lighted into some conning Cooks handling that has
finely mingled and interlarded it to the pollecies of these times that it might
please both sorts, as well the new forward protestants of these days, as those
that lyked the old relygion (as they term it) best; Innovation (espeacially to
Christ's Testament) was then (as well as now by owr polletique Deuines) held
dangerous to the Common wealth. Well as we said you shall find it a peyce, nay
a pyg of that Swyne, now grown to a greater age, even to th'encrease that you
see; And we doubt not, if you bring it to that beast the parent, yt will
acknowledge as much, yea we have credibly heard by some of no small account,
that the Popes holiness himself has offered to ratify this Book, ministry
etc. if so be we would receive him as our Arch-B: And this you know that
Swynesflesh was forbidden by Gods law both to sacrifice and diet, It was an
abhominaco^n both to God and man as then, and surely if it were so in the Tipe,
it is much more now in the substance.

Article 8. They say it is a greater sin to go to the Church to public
prayers, then for a man to lie with his Fathers wife.
THe first is gross Idolatry and high sin against the whole first Table;
The second is an horrible abhominacion against the Law of God and of Nature,
not so much as to be spoken or thought of by any chaste or Christian heart,
much less in this manner compared: But it is even shame to hear or repeat
those things you are not ashamed to publish, much more which many of you
commyt in secret.

Article 9. Those that will not refrain from our Churches, preaching, or
service they give unto the Devil and excommunicate.
AS we meddle not neither have any thing to do to judge them that are 1. Cor.
5.12.
without, so receive we none as Act. 2.41 42. 2. Cor. 6.17
members of our Congregation, but such as having left all false assemblies
where God is not rightly worshipped, join themselves unto us to serve God
together according to his word, and to lead our lives in his holy faith and
fear: If any of these fall into Romans 16.17. 1. Tim. 6.3.5. Titus. 3.5. 2.
Tim. 3.5. 2. These. 3.14
error, apostasy, Idolatry or any other known sin, and will not be reduced
by Christian admonitions exhortations etc. thereunto belonging, such obstinat
offenders then, we together (according as we are Commanded of God) by the
power of our Lord Jesus Christ (which he has Mat. 18.17, 2 Cor. 2.7.10.
left unto his Church) 1 Cor. 5.4
deliver unto Satan in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, for the humbling of
the flesh, that their souls might be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus; this
being the last remedy God has appointed, the last duty we can perform to
them for their salvation: The neglecting whereof as it should be to their hurt,
so should it be to the chardge of the Iosu. 7.12. and 22.16.17.18. 1 Cor. 5.6.
Heb. 12.29. 2 Pet. 2.4.5.
whole Church before the Lord, who is a jealous God, even a consuming fire.

Article 10. They hold it not lawsull to baptize Children among us: They never
have any Sacraments among them.
WE neither condemn nor neglect the Sacraments, being ministered by a lawful
Minister to the faithful and their seed according to Christ's institution: In
that we refuse your Sacraments it is for your wilful profaning and
prostetuting them to all comers, for the defaults of your assemblies, worship
ministry, and the heinouse breach of Christ's Instituco^n etc. In that we have
no Sacraments amongst us it is not by our default (whose souls gasp and bray
after them) so much as by your barbarous cruelty and Tyrannical dealing with
us, who will not suffer us to assemble not so much as to see one annothers
faces by your goodwills, hunting, pursuing the^ abroad, persecuting,
confiscating, shutting up close prisoners them you get into your hands:
Wherefore we with the Prophet David, even cry out unto our God against such
wild Boares as thus destroy the tender vines, against such cruel tyrants as
persecute us into the wilderness, and keep us from the comfort of the word and
Sacraments in th'assemblie of the Saints by their open force and pryuie
sclaunders.

Article 11. They refuse to take an oath to be examined.
WE refuse not reverently to swear by the holy Deu. 6.15 Ier. 4.2. Heb. 6.16.
name of God before a lawful Magestrat upon just occasion according to the
word of God: But we have just cause to refuse that ungodly rash and unlawful
oath, Amos. 5.14. Zeph. 1.5. Matt. 5.34.35.36.37. Mat. 23.16 etc.
by or with their book etc. offered and enforced by these BBs. at their
pleasure upon every occasion to every one that comes before them after the
manner of the Spanish Inquisition, expreslye contrary to the word of God, the
Laws of this land, and derrogatorie to her Mats. prerogative royal, her
Crown and dignity.

Article 12. They will not marry amongst us in our Churches, but resort to
the Fleet and to other places to be married by one Greenwood and Barrow.
WE find not in the scriptures the gyuing and joining in matrimony to be an
action of the Church, neither to be restrained or to belong to the ministers or
Pastors office: Wherefore seeing the actio^ is merely Civil we see not why we
may not after the Ruth. 4.9.10.11.12. John. 2.1.2.
examples of the godly in the scriptures marrye in all Heb. 13.4 1. Cor. 7.9.
1. Tim. 4.3.
places, at all times in the Lord by the direction or consent of Parents,
(unless it be by their own manifest defaults) before faithful witnesses etc.
Neither have the men (whom you here untruly sclander) taken upon them to
marry any, or executed that office otherwise then together with other
faithful to witness the same and to praise God for yt.

3 Thou do love Evil more then good, Lies more then to speak the truth.
Selah

4 Thou love all words that may destroy, o deciptfull tongue

Psalm. 52.
5 So shall God destroy thee forever, he shall* take thee and pluck thee out cut
of thie Tabernacle, and root thee out of the land of the living: Selah Let the
lying lips be made dumb which cruelly, pryuely, and spitefully speak against
the Righteous. Psalm. 31.18.

YEt as great pains as these men have taken by their close imprisoning, open
railing, and pryuie sclaundering to convince owr errors and instruct owr
Consciences, they have left out and not acquainted you all this while with the
greatest heresy we hold, and that is, that her Majesty has as good right to
the personages, gleabe lands, Bishoprics, Prebendaries, and all other
cathedral collegiat Church lyuings, as her Mats. Father of most famous
memory king Henry the Eight had to the Abbeys, and that it shall be as greatly
to the glory of God, the good of Christ's Church, the benefit of her Majesty
and the whole land to dissolve these now, as the dissolucon of the Abbeys was
in the time of her Majesty's Father. The Abbeys and these had both one
original, they sprang all from one fountain; Now the scripture Iam. 3.11.12.
Mat. 7.16.
says one fountain sends not out bitter and sweet water, men gather not
grapes of thistles; As for Nom. 8.18.24. Heb. 7.12.
Tithes they belonged to the Leuiticall priesthode, and to the service of that
Temple, and therefore ought now to be abolished. Set stipends have no stay to
lean upon in the scriptures except Judge. 17. entier. Judge. 18.19.20. Jude. 11.
MICHA his Priest help to prop them up. Owr savior Christ Mat. 10.8 9.10. 1.
Tim. 6.8.
and his Apostles persuaded to sufficiency but appointe not neither will them
to 2 Cor. 2.17 1 Thessalonians. 2.5
condico^n for any certentye: this is the matter that boyleth in their
stomachs, and will by no means be digested, this is hit that touches to the
quick, and makes all the silver saints in this land as well tything priests as
hired lecturers thus to bestur them, least their portions should be reproved;
They would gladly have their portions improued, the one sort in seeking to
have personages impropriat restored, the other sort in suing to have the
Bishoppricks reformed by co^uerting their lyuings from them to their servants
the preachers; Both labor in vain, DAGON of the Philistims cannot stad before
nor with the Ark of God, the head and the hands are cut of, the stump must
follow after; The stone that was cut without hands has smytten and broken
their Image, even that stone which these evil buylders refused whereat they
stumble and are offended, 1. Pet. 2.8. zach. 4.7. Mat. 21.16.
is appointed the chief of the corner; his poor saints whom they so despise
and persecute shall bring yt forth with shouting and joy, and crying GRACE
GRACE unto yt, maugre all their turning of Devices; yea even the Children in
the street shall welcome Christ into his Church saying HOSANNA to the Son of
David, Luke 19.27.
when he shall take vengeance of his enemies, and of all such as would not that
he should reign over them. That nation and kingdom which will not serve him
shall perish, Isay. 60.12
and those nations shall be utterly destroyed, for all the kingdoms of the world
are owr Lords and his CHRIST'S and he shall reign for evermore; Revel. 12.15
There is no connsell, nor strength, nor pollycy against the Lord.

Bevvise therefore now ye kings, be learned al ye Judges of the earth.
Serve the Lord in fear and rejoice in trembling.
Kiss the Son least he be angry and ye perish in the way*
when his wrath shall suddenly burn
blessed are all that trust in him.
EXPECT their other Conferences with all possible speed:

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing.
for thruth read truth. and for wne read own. page 3. for aimisse read
amiss. pa. 4. for them read then. pa. 11. for babtised read baptized. pa.
12. for note read noted. pa. 13.

