A Brief Description of Jerusalem and of the Suburbs thereof, as it flourished
in the time of Christ.

Whereto is annexed a short Commentary concerning those places which were made
famous by the Passion of Christ, and by the Acts of holy men, confirmed by
certain principal Histories of Antiquity.

Very profitable for all Christians to read, for the understanding of the
sacred Scriptures and Josephus his History.

Hereunto also is appertaining a lively and beawtifull map of Jerusalem,
with Arithmeticall directions, correspondent to the numbers of this Book.

Translated out of Latin into English by Thomas Tymme Minister.

LONDON, Printed by Peter Short for Thomas Wight. 1595.

To the right honorable Sir John Puckering, Knight Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England, Thomas Tymme, wishes increase of honor here, to Gods
glory; and perpetual felicity in the world to come.
For So Much as (right honorable) Jerusalem, the city of our God, even upon his
holy mountain the joy of the whole earth, and the City of the great King,
that fair and most ancient City, by a special prerogative is by God him
self bewtified above all other Cities: and was therefore the chief, most
noble and famous City of the world: Many travelers and Pilgrims, have at
sundry times both in Mappes and histories, described the same. By the advantage
of whose labors therein, now of late one Christien Adrichom, has performed a
most lively description, and in the Latin tongue enriched with diverse
antiquyties. The profit that might come hereby to my countrymen of the vulgar
sort, both for the better understanding of the story of the Bible, where
Jerusalem and the parts thereof are often times mentioned, and also for the
ready conceauing of Josephus his history, moved me to translate it into the
english tongue: And the book thus translated, with the charts expressed in
natural colors, I have presumed to dedicate unto your honor. And because
the master workman in this new plat of old decayed Jerusalem, has left
behind him sum rubbish and relics of the Romish superstition, I have in some
measure purged and swept the streets and corners of the same, with the broom
of truth, and carrying them out by the Scouregate have laid them on the
Leystall of oblivion. My pains herein taken, though not so great, as the
laying of Ierusalems foundation, or the raising of a chief corner stone or the
squaring and finishing any part of this exquisite plat: yet such it is, as even
in the meanest degree of a poor labourer, that does but sweep the streets, I
most humbly beseech your honor to accept as a small mite of my good will: The
which I gladly offer, to the end, that amidst the great burdens of your most
weighty affairs, your honor behoulding this most brave city, adorned with
so glorious a temple, and contemplating the passion of our savior Christ
therein, may be delighted and recreated: And further, that viewing this
terrestrial city, whose glory is now vanished, may think still as the
Apostle did say, Non habemus hic manentem ciuitatem, and so aspire to that
heavenly Jerusalem, garnished and full stored with all manner of delights which
abides for ever: wherein I do most humbly and heartily wish your good
Lordship a most happy residence, after you have performed your most honorable
course in this life, in the service of your country, the pleasure of your
prince, the general benefit and comfort of your own soul.

Your Honors most dutiful to command, Tho: Tymme.

The Preface.
For So Much, the truth of history, is the foundation of faith, and of
spiritual understanding, (Christian Reader,) and the history of things done,
blind and imperfect, without the knowledge of places, the which knowledge
gives much light, both to the truth of history, and also to the spiritual
interpretation thereof: therefore I have thought good to observe two things
with great diligence in this work. First that I might portray and set forth
the true and lively Image of Jerusalem, of all other cities the most glorius
and famous throughout the whole world, whereof mention is made in sacred and in
profane histories, as it flourished in Christ his time; and also the form of
the temple, (the fame whereof has been extolled above the heavens, and was
worthy of eternal memory) by the sacred Scriptures, by approved writers, and
by ancient tradition of faithful and trusty men, in a lively plot, or map,
most equisitly drawn, together with the names, originalls, situations, and
forms of every place, and the most worthy histories concerning the same, with
all breuity. Secondly, that I might rightly dispose the places of Christ his
passion, and represent every thing which he suffered in every place, even as if
they were now done before our eyes: and so represented that I might, explain
it with plainness and breuity. For hereby, all those things which he
suffered for our sakes, will be both more plainly understood, and also more
profitably remembered. But per adventure there will be some which will mislike
this our endeavor, and the rather because we have many things by tradition of
elders: to whom I answer out of Saint Hierom where he says, That
ecclesiastical traditions, which are no hinderance to faith, are so to be
kept, as they were delivered by the ancients. In the mean time I will not
say, that they are too rash and too too wicked, which will deny that thing,
Hier. to. 1.
which has been godly received at al times and of all men. Epist. 28. ad
Lucinium.
So many of us therefore as washed with the blood of Christ, do bear his name
and are called Christians, if our faith be aunswering to our name, and our life
not disagreeing from the truth, hoping to be saved by the merits and grace of
Christ our savior, let us believe that, which incorrupt and reverend antiquity
has left, let us in no wise depart from those things which our ancestors
have celebrated without superstition, and which by the consent of the whole
world, are come even from them to our hands, and with thankful godliness, and
godly thankfulness, let us call to mind those places oftentimes, which may
put us in rememberance of the passion of Christ: to which places this map
will lead us, as it were by the hand: and with the eyes of faith and of our
mind let us look upon the same son of God, and inwardly behoulde him, who
being urged with the great love of our salvation, having finished his last
supper in the parlour of Sion and being come into the Garden of Oliuet, prayed
and swet blood, through the anguish and grievous consideration of the Imminent
afflictions. Immediately he was betrayed by the most wicked Judas; he was
taken, bound, and thrust forward by the Jews, even as a lamb by the woolues,
most cruelly amidst the noise of clamors and weapons, and then was led to the
house of Anna the high priest: There he was stricken: From thence he was
drawn to the palace of Caiphas: in the same, he was falsely accused,
condemned, spyt upon, blindfolded, buffeted with fistes, and sundry ways all
the night scorned and afflicted. In the morning he was violently carried through
the midst of the city to the house of Pilate. From thence he was led to the
palace of Herod and accufed again, despised of him, mocked, and apparrelled
like a fool in a white garment, and brought back again by another way of the
city to Pilate. There again he was accused of many faults, stripped, and
grievously whipped, clothed with purple, crowned with thorns, dyuersly
derided, spitted upon, buffetted with fistes and stricken with a reed* and
being thus misused, was made a gazeing stock to the people and adjudged to
death. Then he was laden with a heavy cross, and in the sight of all the
people, with grievous and bloody steps he was drawn, punched: and urged by
the furiouse violence of the soldiers, through a great part of the city, and
by the gate of Judgment out of the city, by a hard and stoany way, even
unto mount, Caluarie. And being come thither he was stripped again, and being
both faint and weary, was refreshed with gaul instead of drink: and about
high noone he was fastened to the cross, and so lifted upon high. And hanging
on the cross by the space of three hours, was derided with taunts and
reproachful words: being thirsty, they gave him vinegar to drink. Finally
he which could save the world with one drop of his blood would needs bestow
upon us by the five Rivers of his wounds, his life, with all his blood. A
figure hereof was that brazen serpent, Cant. 3.
which moses caused to be exalted in the wilderness. To this spectacle also our
heavenly father calls every faithful soul, Come forth (says he) ye
daughters of Sion, and see king Solomon, Nay one far greater then Solomon.
Lament. of Jeremy 3.
In like manner Christ hanging on the cross cries out O all ye which pass by
the way, behold and see, if there be any sorrow and grief like mine.

And not only to the consideration and meditation of these things, but also to
the Imitation, God in the holy Scripture exhorts us in these words
(spiritually interpreted) saying, Look, and make all things according to the
example or fashion which was showed thee in the mount. Exodus 25.
For all the precepts of life, which our savior taught all the time of his
preaching, Heb. 8.
as well by word as by example, the same he expressed in himself in one day of
his passion: Wherefore if we would follow Christ, not only in word but also
in work, we may, by his lively crucified Image on mount Caluarie, as it were
out of a goulden book entitled with the noble title of three most principal
languages, written with the quils of the spear, of the nails of the thorns,
and of the whippes, in the most pure parchment of the Immaculat lamb, and with
the purple blood of the same, both learned and unlearned, learn easily and
briefly, perfect theology, the most wholesome remedies of Physic, the full
knowledge of Law and of Justice, the science of liberal arts, of true
humility, of obedience, of piety, of charity, of patience, finally of all
manner of virtues, and of things most perfect: and may also be inflamed and
drawn to love and to follow Christ. Thus the blessed virgin, standing nere to
the cross of Christ, did not only with bodily eyes, but also in heart, through
faith (which wauered not in her) behold the wounds of her son and seriously
thinking thereon, was so comforted, that now, as Ambrose says she was prepared
also to die for the good of mankind. Ambrose in Luc. ca. 23.
So saint Ihon both seeing the side of Christ opened with a spear, John. 19.
blood with water coming forth of the same, and also giving testimony
thereunto, did by the meditation thereof so greatly profit, that at the last
he became a most perfect divine, and a soaring Eagle to behoulde the most holy
Trinity. Luke 23, Hier. to. 1.
So the Thief, when he saw and heard Christ Jesus crucified, Epist. 13. ad
Paulinum.
in continently turned unto Christ, and confessing him, he made the punishment
of murder martiredome, and changed the cross for Paradise. So also the
Centurion by this spectacle, Mar. 15.
received so great strength of faith, that under the cross he was made a
famous confessor of Christ, and further (as Chrysostom says) was afterward
crowned with Martyredome. Chrisost. in Mat. ca. 27.
Moreover Thomas behoulding and touching the wounds of Christ crucified, was so
illumined with faith, that he plainly and openly professed Christ, to be both
his Lord and his God.

This being so, and love procuring love, even as the loadstone draws Ironne:
who is he, I pray you, whom so vehement love of Christ, nay rather a heat
and flame will not affecte, kindell, and set on fire? Who is he when at the
death of Christ all creatures do suffer with him, the Sun darkened, the veil
of the Temple rent in sonder, the earth quaking, Rocks breaking, graves
opening, and the dead arising, who and what is he (I say) that will not
wonder, and that will not be abashed? Only Adams children, for whose cause
he died are not moved with this so great a benefit.

The Adamente, that most hard stoane, is mollified with the blood of a goat:
Iron with the heat of fire is made soft: Heb. 6. 10.
but the hearts of Christians more hard then Adamant or Iron, are not
mollified with the blood and fire of Christ* but do crucify a fresh unto
themselves the son of God, and do tread under their feet the blood of the
testament.

What I pray you can be more beseeming, more meet, more Just, and more
profitable for us, then to love again him that so loves us, and Imitate him
whom we love? For if any thing herein seem hard, if any thing grievous, that
thing, love, the sweet yoke of the Lord, makes light and easy, for all labor
is light, to him that loves, according to that notable sentence of that
auntiente father saint Gregory, Nihil adeo grave est quod non aequanimiter
toleretur, si Chrsti passio, ad memoriam reduca tur. There is nothing so heavy
and burdensome but the same is willingly borne, if so be the passion of Christ
be remembered.

For we will endure all things with patience as light and easy, if we call to
mind what hard words, harder stripes, and most hard pains and afflictions,
he suffered for us, whose head was crowned with thorns, his eyes blind
foulded, his ears filled with reproaches, his mouth with gaul and vinegar,
his face polluted with spitting, his cheeks bruised with buffetting, his kneese
shaking, his shoulders laden with the cross, his heart replenished with sorrow
his body torn with whippes, his members racked, his hands and feet bored,
Exodus 15.
to be brief from the crown of the head to the soales of the foot, he
sustained an Innumerable sort of wounds and sorrows. Wherefore as the waters
Mara, being sometimes bitter, were made sweet by Moses, at what time he cast
wood into them: even so all our tribulation, if we patiently endure the cross
of Christ, will wax sweet, and the gaul thereof will: turn into honny. For
by the meditations of these afflictions of our savior, faith is illumined,
hope strengthened, charity inflamed, and all virtue increased. Wherefore saint
Augustine a light of the Church, no less truly then godly, provoking us by
very forceable words thereunto: says thus, Behold the wounds of him that
hangs, the blood of him that dies, August. in lib de virgi nitate.
the price of the redemer, the scarres of him that ryseth: His head boweth to
kiss thee, his heart is opened to love thee, his arms stretched abroad to
embrace thee, his whole body set forth to redeem thee. Consider what and how
great ^hese things be, weigh them in the balance of your hearts, that he
may be wholly fastened in your hearts, who for us was wholly fastened on the
cross. Thus far Augustine. So that it is not enough to meditate of these
things once: but it is profitable to think upon them often: yea the oftener,
the more they avail and profit. In the wholesome contemplation of whose
passion, although we profit much, yet we shall never attain to the perfect
knowledge thereof, but there will remain still somewhat that we may seek for,
the full knowledge whereof is reserved to our heavenly country. In the mean
time, let us contemplate in these things day and night, in these things let us
recreate and busy our selves. In these let us watch, in these let us sleep,
yea to die in the meditation of these things, is most Christian, and available
to everlasting salvation.

Places of holy Scripture to the praise of JERUSALEM.
Lamenta. II. Is this the city of perfect bewty, the joy of the whole earth.
Ezech. V. This is JERUSALEM, I have set it in the midst of the nations and
countries, yt are round about her. II. Cron. VII. I have chosen this place for
my self, to be a house of sacrifice. Isaias. II. Micheas. IIII. The Law shall
go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from JERUSALEM. Apocalips XXI. I
saw the holy Citiie, new JERUSALEM, come down from God out of Heaven,
prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband. Tobit. XIII. O JERUSALEM the holy
City, many nations, shall come from far to the name of the Lord God, with
gifts in their hands, even gifts to ye King of heaven: all generations shall
praise thee, and give signs of joy. Cursed are all they which hate thee, but
blessed are they for ever which love thee. Rejoice and be glad for the children
of the just: for they shall be gathered and shall bless the lord for the just.
Blessed are they which love thee, for they shall rejoice in thy peace. Blessed
are they which have been sorrowful for all thy scourges. For they shall
rejoice for thee, when they shall see all thy glory and shall rejoice for ever.
Let my soul bless God ye great King. For JERUSALEM shall be built up with
Saphires and Emeraudes, and thy walls with precious stoanes, and thy towers and
thy bulwarks with pure gould. And the streets of IERVSALFM shall be paued with
Berall, and Carbuncle, and stoanes of Ophir. And all her streets shall say,
Halleluiah, and they shall praise him saying, blessed be God which has
extolled it for ever,
Thomas Newton to the loving Reader.
THat stately place, that princely bower
that seat of mighty King,
That flower of Benjamin his tribe,
whose fame through world did ring,
Ennobled with such royal styles,
and titles of renown,
And over worldly cities all
most meet to wear the crown;
Lo, here presented is to View
in such good currrant sort;
As no pen heretofore performed
or made thereof report.
So that we need not now to run
or gad from place to place,
In dangers great, through countries staunge
to try or know this case.
That brave estate which erst it had,
is now (alas) defac'de.
King david's house, and temple now
is quight and clean disgrac'de.
Yet sitting still with book in hand
we here may plain behold
The state of each thing as it was,
in times that were of old.
Where Christ did preach, where Christ did suppe,
where Christ did fast and pray,
Where Christ was caught, where christ was whipped,
where thieves did him betraye:
Where he a precious ransom paid
for man who had offended;
Where he was buried; where he rose,
and eke where he ascended.
Where Annas kept his pompous court,
where Caiphas palace stood;
Where wicked Pilate dwelt, that did
condemn most guiltles blood.
This and much more is here discourst
by him that both had read
And seen with eye, full thirty years,
where he his life had lead.
Whose work and pains as they deserve
much thanks and hearty praise.
So Timme his guerdon well deserves
of all men in these days.
As Well for here acquainting us
with this rare work of skill,
As also for his other pains
that passed have his quill.
Who like a candle wastes himself
in giving light to others?
More such God grant to take like care,
to help their Christian brothers.
Thomas Newton.

A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF JERUSALEM AND THE SVBVRBES THEREOF AS IT FLOURISHED IN
THE TIME OF CHRIST.
1 Jerusalem
the elect City of God, The original places from whence this commentary is
taken and where more is to be red.
holy and most glorious, built upon the holy mountains, excelling all the
cities of the world, as well by the loftiness of the seat, as by the
moderation and temperature of the heavens, Psalm 47. and 86.
and fruitfulness of soil, was situated in the midest of the whole world,
and of Iudaea, as it were in the very center and heart of the earth. Math. 4. 5.
And being as a Queen amongst all other neighbor cities, Psalm. 73.
had the pre-eminence as the head over the body, Ezech. 5.
and shined as the sun above others in sumptuousnes and glorious buildings:
having such surpassing excellency, Joseph. lib. 3 de bello Iudaico. cap 2.
she was by a certain singular privilege in time past, the only place which
God had chosen to himself: and was a figure not only of every faithful man's
soul, but also of the elect Church of Christ militant upon earth, Deu. 16. 17
and of that blessed triumphant Church in heaven. Psalm. 47.
A city of perfect beauty: Tren. 2.
the virgin of the world, the paragon of all the East, and the joy and
rejoicing of the whole earth.

This city was builded about the year from the creation of the world, Genesis
14.
two thousand twenty and three, in the time of Abraham, Ios. l. 7, an. Iud.
cap. 7. and l. 7. Bell.
by Melchisedech the King. In hebrew it was called SALEM; and in Greek
SOLYMA: and it seems that he possessed the same fifty years. Iud. ca. 18.
The which afterward the Iebusites enjoyed, Genesis 10.
who sprang from Iebusi, Joshua. 10. 15. and 18.
the son of Chanaan: of whom it was called for a time Iebus, and Iebusaeum
at what time Joshua slew the King thereof. Judge. 1, 19.
And the Iebusites held the same, 2. kings 5.
eighte hundred and twenty four years, 1. Cron. 11.
who trusted so much to the strength of their city, Ios. l. 7. an. cap. 3.
that when king David assailed the same; in contempt of him and of his army
they placed upon their walls, the blind, the halt, and the maimed, saying that
these were sufficient to beat back the enemy.

But when David through Gods help enjoyed the city, Hier. to. 3. de loc.
Heb. lit, 1.
the Iebusites being expulsed, he reedified the same round, fortified it with
a castle, dwelt therein, and made it the Metropolitan city of the whole
province of Iudaea, Eus. Eua^g. praep. li. 9.
and the head of all the kingdom, and from thence forth called it Jerusalem,
3. Reg, 3. 5. 6. 9, 10. 7.
as it were Iebussalem the letter b. (to make the better sound) turned into
r. Notwithstanding there are some which write, that it is called Jerusalem, of
the magnificent temple which Solomon builte therein, as it were Hieron
Salomonis. Iosep. lib. 8.
For the Greeks call a temple (...). Ant. cap, 2, and 5.
In continuance of time Solomon and other kings of Iudaea greatly enlarged the
same, and so fortified it with most strong gates, towers, walls, and trenches,
and so adorned it with a temple, with palaces, and with most exquisite
buildings, that among other cities it was a miracle of the whole world, and is
therefore more honored with silence, then with all that can be said concerning
the same.

In this glory and excellency, Ios. con. Api on lib, 1.
Jerusalem flourished four hundred seventy and seven years, as if it had been
an earthly paradise, Strabo. geograph. li. 16.
being in compass round about, six miles and two hundred and fifty paces. And
by the wall and circuit of the city, there was a stony trench or vaulte
threescore foot deep, and in breadth two hundred and fifty, wherein was
abiding, about one hundredth and fifty thousand men. 4 Reg, 16. 21. 24. 25.
But when the wickedness of the Princes and people not only had profaned the
temple with the abominations of Idols, 2. Cron 28. 33. 36.
but also had filled the city even to the full with innocent blood most
cruelly shed, the city together with the temple, Princes, and people by the
just vengeance of God, Mich. 3.
was by Nabuchodonoser king of Babylon (but Gods whip) so utterly overthrown,
Ierem, 25. 26. 29.
and desolated threescore and ten years, that Sion was plowed up like a field,
and Jerusalem was become as a heap of stones, Hier. tom, 3 trad. Heb. in 2,
par. 15
and the mountain of the temple, as it were the height and top of woods, so as
in the mean time (as Hierom witnesses) that neither so much as a bird, 1.
Edr. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
nor a beast, could fly, or pass through the same. Neem. 1. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.


Afterward the temple only being with much a do and very hardly builded,
wanting gates, towers, and walls, was inhabited again by the Jews
(retourning out of the captivity of Babylon) threescore years.

Moreover within the space of two and fitie days, Nehemia enclosed it in
compass three miles and seven hundred and fity paces, 1 Match. 12. 13 and 14.
with gates, towers and a strong wall: Ios. 6. be. 6.
and afterward, the same being bewtified by the Machabees, Ios. be. 13. and ce.
by Herod, and by others very stately, with public and private buildings,
Psalm. 37.
recovered the former dignity, Isai. 2.
being very famous and populous by the space of five hundred and four and
twenty years: Mich. 4.
having in it many narrow streets, Acts. 1.
by reason of the exceeding number of houses therein. Mar. 16.
At what time there, Psalm. 18.
as in a Theater, Ios. 6. bell. 13, and 7. be. 14. 17. and 18.
Jesus Christ wrought our salvation: and from thence as from a center, the
apostles spread forth the Evangelical doctrine throughout the world.

But Titus Emperor of Rome, being brought by the just judgment of God to take
vengeance for the Death of Christ, the thirty and eight year after his
passion, besieged it round, casting a bank about it, and shut up the Jews
in the City as in a prison, which came out of every Tribe to cellebrate the
feast of pasouer there. Whereupon that City, the wonder of the world, was
made a den of thieves, and a sepulcher of dead men. For by reason of civil
murders, famine, pestilence, and sword, there perished in the same, eleven
hundred thousand Jews. And as for the City it self, Titus did so utterly
subvert it, that men which came unto it, would scarce believe that ever it had
been inhabited. Nevertheless, he left three principal Herodian Towers, that
is to say Hippic, Mariam, and Phasel, which were more notable than the rest,
as well for greatness as for beawtie, and that part of the Cities wall, Luke 19
which compassed them from the West, unshaken; to the end, that both it might
be a Castle for the Roman soldiers which should be left there for a
Garrison, and also to show unto posterity what manner of City, Eu. in
Cronic. et hist.
and how well fortified, the force of the Romans had subdued. Eccle. lib. 4.
cap. 6.
But after threescore and five years, the Jews rebelling again, A Elius
Adrianus the Emperor slew many thousands of them, and utterly subverted those
Towers with the remainder of the wall, Hier. in lo. Act. Apo. lib. H.
and commanded the City to be strewed with salt: whereby it came to pass
according to the prophecy of Christ, that there was not left one stone of the
City upon a stone. And building the City again in less compass, Neceph.
3. Histo. Eccl. 24.
he excluded mount Sion, with the palace of Solomon, and that of the Queen,
and the house of the forest of Libanus, also the gate of the North corner,
Broca. in descrip. loco rum terrae sanctae itinere. 6.
and the tents of the Assyrians, and all the north part, even to the dounge
gate and to the gate of Ephraim: but the mount of Caluary, and the sepulcher of
the Lord, which were aforetime without the walls, he enclosed with the North
walls of the city; and set the picture of a sow cut in Marble upon the
forefrunt of that gate, by which men go to Bethleem, thereby giving to
understand, that the Jews subject to that law of swines flesh, were under the
power of the Romans: whom by an Edict he forbad never more to enter into that
city, Will. Tyr. histo. bell. sac. lib. 14. cap. 12.
or look into the same from the top of any higher place, and from thenceforth
commanded it to be called AEliam Capitoliam, after his own name. Jacob. vit.
cap. 55.
But after this, being inhabited of the Christians, and dignified with a
Patriarchall seat, receiving again in continuance of time the name of
Jerusalem, flourished five hundred years in Christian religion,

And in the year after the birth of Christ six hundred thirty and six,
Onuphr. in chron. Ecclesiast.
it was taken by the Saracens which reigned in Egypt, and so possessed four
hundred three score and three years.

After this in the year of Christ, Wilhelm.Tyriarch. hist. bell. sa. lib. 8.
cap. 5. 18. 19. 20. 21. and l. 9. c. 1. 2. 9.
1099 the city Jerusalem was recovered by the Christians having for their
Captain, Godfrey of Bullion, who was the first that entered upon the wall of
the city with great courage and most fierce assalt, the Ides of July, the
very same day and hour, wherein Christ died: And so great slaughter was made,
throughout all the streets, lanes, Jacob. de vitria. cap 20.
and corners of the city, that no man could pass but over the dead bodies
of the slain: and so exceeding was the effusion of blood, that men went over
their shoes in the blood of the dead: B. Salig. in epist. ad Ioa^. a Lotharing
card.
insomuch that the conquerers themselves were from the sole of the foot to the
crown of the head imbrued with blood. Who when they enjoyed the city,
putting off their armor, and clensing themselves from their blood, visited the
places of Christ's passion, resurrection, and ascension (which the faithful that
dwelt in Jerusalem showed unto them) and beheld them with reverence. The eight
day after with one conssent they elected Duke Godfrey, and created him the king
of Jerusalem. But the man being full of Godliness and humility, would not be
crowned with a crown of gold after the manner of Kings, in the holy cittye,
but contented himself and reverenced the like crown of thorns, with the
which the emperor of mankind was crowned in the same place, when he went to be
crucified for our salvation.

Jerusalem therefore being recovered by the Christians was so held and enjoyed
by them fourscore and eight years. Bas. Hero. bell, sacri. contin, lib, 1
cap. 7. and l, 6, cap, 10.
Afterward namely in the year, 1187. the second day of october, the Christian
princes (woe and alas) disagreing among themselves, Jerusalem was delivered up
to Saladine the Soldane of Egypt, Matt, Palmerius in Cronic.
upon this condition that it should be lawful for the Christians to depart
with bag and baggage: the which Saladine held it three hundred and thirty
years. Mossaeus in Cronic.
But in the year of our Lord, 1517. it was invaded by Selimo the emperor of
turques, and is at this day in the same compass of walls possessed by the
Turks: Onaphr, in cronic.
who name it Cusumobarech or Codsbarich, that is to say, a holy city. So that
from the first foundation thereof unto this present year one thousand, five
hundred, ninety four are passed three thousand, five hundred, thirty and one
years.

THE FIRST PART OF THE CITY. THE PLACES WITHIN THE CITY.
2 MOUNT SION,
which is called ye mount of the Lord, and the Holy Mountain, is much more
higher then other mountains and larger: Psalm. 2. 25.
after the fashion of a Theater in the form of a half circle compassing the
city on the south part. Joel 2. 3.
And being set as a looking glass on a high place, Iosep. 6. bell. 6. et. 15. ant
14.
founded by God upon a firm rock, Nicep. S. hist. eccl. 30
on every side broken off, had a plainenes thereon like to a town, and being
very pleasant and recreatiue, it represented the excellency and delights of
heaven. Brocard. itiner. 6.
Whose top the Iebusites first of all fortified with a strong castle, and the
compass thereof with firm and lofty walls, with gates, Salig. tom. 6, cap.
6.
and with towers. Whom when David the king had expulsed, he made the castle
and the walls round about, Isa. 14. 20.
the gates and the towers, much more defensible, Bas. Hero. bell sa. ri. cout
in. lib. 1 cap. 8.
and made the top and plainness of the hill into streets and lanes, and
builded there for himself, for his nobles and worthies, houses, and called it
the city of David: which now also Josephus calls the higher city, and the
holy part. The Machabees reedifying the same mountain in compass, 2. King. 5.
made it most strong with many walls, 1 Para, 11. and, 15.
and lofty towers, in such wise as notwithstanding any force, it was
invincible, only by famine it might be surprised: where were many straight and
narrow passages, and many houses of citizens placed.

From this mountain, Psalm, 47. 86
according to the foretelling of the prophets, Ios. 6. bell. 6 and 1. bell. 1.
a law, and an evangelical light came forth, 1 Macab. 4.
and as it were from the head it self, it was spread forth into the whole body
of the world, for the saving health of all nations. Iose. bell. 15. and 16.
The which when the Romans by the judgment and will of God, against all hope
of man, and without bloodshed had taken (the seditious within the City being
stricken with a sudden fear, and roaming here and there from the wall, and
hiding themselves in their sinkes) being dispersed in all corners and streets
with their naked swords, slew all that they met withal, Isai. 2.
having no regard of persons or sex, Mich. 4.
and set fire on the houses burning them and all those that were fled into
them, Isai. 49
and destroying many houses whereinto they entered for pillage sake, Luke. 2.
where finding whole families dead (whom the famine had consumed) they so
abhorred the sight thereof that they returned back again empty, Actor. 13.
running through with their swords all that they met, Joseph. 7. bell. 16.
and so filling the streets with dead bodies, that the whole City flowed with
blood in such abundance, that (as Josephus witnesses) many things burning,
were quenched with the plentiful blood of the slain. But night coming on the
slaughter began to cease, but the burning increased. The next day following,
Titus being entered into the City woondered at the fortifications of the
City, and at the rocks of the towers, which the Tyrants through folly had
willingly forsaken. To be brief, when he had seen their substantial
altitude and invincible force, we have fought (says he) by the manifest help
of God, and it was God which drove out the Jews from these holds. For what
hands of men, or what engines of war might have prevailed against these? Many
such words spoke he to his friends. This mountain though it were excluded out
of the city, yet afterward it was builded again and inhabited. But now being
in the Suburbs most ruinous, it lies wast.

THE PLACES OF MOUNT SION.
3. THe Castle of Sion
being ancient and strong, was set on the very top of mount Sion, round like
a crown, and was a sure defense and beauty both of the City and Temple, 4
king, 13
and was as the capital or chief place of so great a city. 2 king, 5 7, 11.
Herein the Iebusites dwelte at the first: whom David casting out by force,
3 king. 1
enjoyed the castle, and receiving from Hiram king of Tyrus, stones, wood, and
artificers, builded out of the same a strong palace for himself, 1 Chronicles. 11,
17
and a house of Cedar with a kingly throne. In the which castle afterward,
David himself and other kings of Judah inhabited, and used the same for the
kings seat. And for this cause it was continually kept with a straight guard
of soldiers. Iose. 6. bell. 6
And in process of time it was called the kings castle, Jeremy 17
and the house of David, the seat and throne of David, Luke 1
also the Court and kings house. In this castle the most cruel of all tyrants
Antiochus king of Syria, Aristaeas li. de 72. int
which in Greek was called (...), 1 Match, 1
that is to say Renoumed, 1 Match, 13 14.
(but more truly (...), that is Mad, he deserved to be called) placed a
garrison of Gentiles: whereby in the time of the Machabes he afflicted the
Jews very much a long time. The which when Simon Machabaeus had enforced to
yield through famine, and had cleansed the castle from the pollusion of Idols,
they entered therinto with palms in their hands with Cimbals, with
psalterions, with hymns and songs: and he placed therein men of the Jews to
defend the City and country, yet now there is nothing to be seen but the
ruins thereof.

4. THE KINGS PRISON
with a lofty Tower, Neem, 3
which ouerlooked the kings house. Jeremy 23 39, 40
Into this prison Jeremy was cast, because he prophesied that the City
should be taken: and at the last was delivered out of the same by
Nabuchadonezer, when the City was taken.

5. CAESAR'S and AGRIPPAS hall,
Ios. 15, ant. 11. and 1. bell 16. and 6. bell. 6.
was the kings house, which Herod the Ascalonite builded for himself in the
uppermost city: for he builded in his palace two great and fair houses of
polished marble and fine gold, whereunto the Temple it self was not
comparable, and calling them after the names of Caesar Augustus, and of Agrippa
his son in law, his friends, he named the one CAESAR'S, and the other AGRIPPAS.

6. THE PARLOVR OF SION
was situate about the midst of mount Sion, Mat. 26.
being large, paued, Mark, 14
and very fair: Luke 22.
wherein Christ in his last supper did eat the paschall Lamb with his
disciples, John. 13*
washed their feet, and instituted the sacrament of his most blessed body and
blood. Luke 24.
In the fame, on the day of his resurrection (when he was entered, John* 20*
the doors being shut) standing in the midst of his disciples, he showed unto
them the wounds of his side, of his hands and feet, and did eat before them:
after that, breathing upon them, John: 20
he gave them the holy ghost, and therewithal power to remit, and retain the
sins of all manner persons. The eight day after this, here he offered unto
Thomas the Apostle the prints and scarres of the spear and nails to see and
feel. Acts 1, 2
Here, after the Lords ascension, Hier. to. 1 epist. 27 ad Eustoc. vir. and to.
3 epist. 1. ad Paulin: Niceph. lib. 2. hist. eccle cap. 3.
Matthias was by lot chosen into the Apostleship of Judas the traitor. Here on
the day of Pentecost, the holy Ghost came down in a great sound, and in the
form of fiery toonges, lighted upon one hundred and twenty believers: and at
the first sermon of Peter, three thousand Jews were converted and baptized. In
this place James the Lords brother surnamed Just, Act. 6, 15
was by the Apostles created the first Bishop of Jerusalem: and Stephen with
six more, were ordained Deacons. Here the Apostles entered into the first
consultation, or council, and set down the twelve Articles of Christian faith.

7. THE CYPRES trees of Mount Sion,
Eccles. 24
which were very excellent, whereof the book called Ecclesiasticus makes
mention.

8. THE HOUSE OF Annas,
John. 18
the chief priest, the father in law of Caiaphas, Thren. 3.
wherein Christ was examined of Annas concerning his Disciples and his
doctrine, at what time he answered that he had taught openly before all men,
for the which he received a blow on the cheek by a servant.

9. THE HOUSE OF THE WOORTHIES,
wherein the strong men, and valiant peers of king David dwelt: Neem, 3
where also as in a wrestling place, the chief wrestlers and champions, for
exercise sake, used to try maisteries.

10. THE HOUSE OF THE VIRGIN MARY,
Niceph. 2 hist. eccle. 3 and 21.
wherein after the death of her son she dwelt with John the Apostle.

11. THE HOUSE OF VRIA,
2 king. 11, 23.
one of the most valiant soldiers of David, whose wife Bethsabe, bathing her
self in a fountain of her Garden (which also is to be seen in the map) by
her beauty allured David to adultery, beholding her from a gallerie of ye
kings house.

12. THE UPPER MARKET,
Ios. 6, bell. 6,
by reason whereof, the upper city also, was called sometimes the upper
market.

13. THE STAIRS OF THE CASTLE,
Acts, 21 and 22
or prison, whereon the Apostle Paul stood, when he made answer for himself.

14. THE STAIRS OF SION
, Neem. 3, 12.
by which men went up to the city of David. Ios. 15, ant. 14.


15 THE KINGS GARDEN,
4 king. 21
the which also was called the garden of Oza, Neem, 3
wherein Manasses and Amon kings of Judah were buried.

16 MELLO,
a valley or dale, very deep and wide, which lay between mount Sion and the
lower city, Bas. Hero. 1. bell. sa. 8.
and extended it self from the water gate to the fish gate. Bro. itin. 6.
David builded and compassed mount Sion round about from this valley: 2. King.
5.
the concauity and bottom whereof Solomon did make level and plain, 1. Chro,
11
that it might be a convenient street: 3. Kin. 9. 11*
and from thence forth it was called the street of the water gate. Neem. 8.
He also bewtified the same with buildings, 2 Chro, 32.
which being decayed, was repaired by Ezechias. In this place it was that Ioas
king of Judah was slain by his servants in the way down to Sela. 4, king, 12.
But in Josephus time, this valley was called Tyropoeon, Joseph. 6. bell. 6.
and was very large and full of dwelling houses. Brocord. itinere. 6.
At this day this valley is so filled up with earth and stones, that there
remains only a small show of the former concauity and depenes.

17 THE PALACE OF CAIPHAS;
belonging to every high priest, large and square: wherein sometime dwelled
Eliasib the cheef priest. Neem. 3.
In this palace the princes of the people being gathered together, Matt. 26.
and 27.
consulted among themselves what policy they might use to catch Jesus, Mar,
14, 15
and to kill him: Luk, 22. 23
to whom he was there soulde by Judas for thirty pieces of silver. Joan. 18.
Afterward also he was thrice denied by Peter: and was by false witnesses of
the Jews, accused before Caiphas in the counsel of the priests and elders,
to whom when he answered nothing being straightly charged by the high priest,
to tell whether he were Christ the son of God, the which when he confessed,
he was convinced as it were of blasphemy, the chief priest calling for the
sentence of the counsel, threescore and six elders condemned him to be worthy
of death, and aunswering said, He is worthy to die. Whereupon the servants and
soldiers, did presently spit in his face, they blinde-folded him, buffeted him
with their fistes, commanding him to prophecy, scorned him all the night with
sundry mockes, and vexed him with many blasphemies, and that I may speak much
in few words, no mortal man in this life is able to express, what and how
much he endured this night. And in the morning following, the rulers of the
Jews assembled together in this place again, to deliver him up to death: and
leading him bound, they delivered him to Pilate the deputy.

18. THE FOVNTAINE OF SION,
the which was made with great labor and cost.

19. THE BRIDGE OF SION,
Ios. 15, ant. 14, and 7 bell. 13, 15
by which men went through the valley out of the upper city unto the Temple.

20. THE GATES OF SION,
Psalm, 86.
which the Lord loves more than all the Tabernacles of Jacob.

21. THE UPPER GATE,
2 Cron. 23,
by which Ioas when he was crowned king of Judah in the Temple, and guarded with
the princes of the Jews, was led into the palace of the kings of Judah.

22. THE SEPVLCHER OF DAVID,
3 kin. 2, 11
together with the field wherein the kings were buried, 2 Chronicles. 24, and 26
the which very stately was placed aloft in the city of David: Neem, 3
wherein David himself, Iosep, 7. ant. 16, and 13
Solomon, and other kings of Judah, also Ioyada the chief priest were buried.
Into this monument of David's sepulture, Ant. 15, and 16, ant. 7
Solomon brought great treasure at his burial. The which Hircanus ye high
priest and captain opening, brought from thence 3000. talents of silver. Acts. 2
Not long after this, Herod the Ascalonit king of Jews, Niceph. hist eccle. 3
went about also to bring much treasure out from thence, Breid. 12 Iul.
but a flame of fire breaking forth and consuming two of his soldiers, he left
off his enterprise, Sal. to. 7. cap. 2
and to make satisfaction for himself, he adorned the same monument with
fair shining Marble, Pasch. d. 184
which continued there a long time after. Where ye Saracens afterward builded
a church for themselves which stands as yet; which place they greatly
reverence, and suffer not any christian to enter into ye same.

23. THE SEPVLCHER OF STEPHEN,
Acts, 8, 5* 22
the first Martyr; of Nichodemus, and of Gamaliel, Paul's schoolemaister.

24. THE TABERNACLE OF SION,
1 Chro, 6, 7
covered with skins which king David made, 2 king. 9
and placed the same in the little hill of Mount Sion which is called Gabaon, 2 Chronicles, 5
and with great reverence he put the Ark of God therein, Ios. 7 ant. 4
and appointed priests and Levites continually to Minister from day to day by
turn, which remained there twenty and four years, Breid. 12. Iul. pasch. d.
184.
until it was carried by Solomon into the temple. In the same, David sorrowing
for his adultery with Bethsabe, and murder of Vrias, made certain psalms of
repentance.

25. THE KINGS PRESSES,
zach. 14.
wherein the kings wine was pressed.

THE SECOND PART OF THE CITY.
26. THE DAVGHTER OF SION,
Psalm. 9, 72
so called, zach. 9
because it seemed to grow from mount Sion, the which was also called the
lower city, being another part of the city, whereof there is often mention
made in the holy scriptures and in Josephus.

THE PLACES OF THE DAVGHTER OF SION.
27. THE MOVNTAINE OF ACRA,
Iose. 13. ant 9. and 6. bell. 6. 7, and bell. 13, 16.
was sometime in the lower city very lofty and steep, the height whereof
afterward Simon Machabaeus abated and made plain by the continual labor of
the people, which he employed herein by the space of three years day and
night, that the Temple alone might be higher then all other places of the
city.

28. THE AMPHITHEATER,
Iose. 15, ant. 10.
that is a place environed with scaffoldes and stages, capable of fourscore
thousand men, where the people were wont to behold their games, which Herod
the elder first of all other builded in the field at Jerusalem with great
labor and cost. Wherein, to recreate the beholders, wrastlers and sword
players, showed many feats of actiuitie: and sometimes, Lions, Leopardes,
Bulls, Bears, Bores, Wolves, and other exceeding wild and fierce beasts,
fought one with another, and sometime condemned men were cast unto these to be
devoured, and captives taken in war. At which time of their games, the place
beneath was strowed with sand, to the end that neither the sword players should
fail in their footing, nor the fighters might be defiled with the blood of
the slain, nor yet that the sprinkling of the blood should bring horror to the
lookers on.

29. THE CASTLE ANTONIA,
Ios. 15. ant. 14. and 18.
strong and well fortified, Ant. 8.
lying near to the North side of the Temple, which was builded in time past on
a high rock fifty cubits high, Item. 1. bell. 3, and 4. 16, and 6. bell, 6 and
alias sape.
and very steep round about, and the tower was called Baris. In this the
chief priests which came of the Machabees even till Herod's time inhabited:
where in a Cell made for that purpose, the sacred stole of the chief priest
was kept, the governor of the Tower lighting a candle there every day. Herod
the greater having gotten the kingdom, and seeing that this castle was
conveniently scituat to command the Cittisens; that they might not seek
innovation through sedition, repaired the same to his great cost, and
fortified it within with a royal palace, even like a city, and with four
lofty towers at each corner, whereof three were fiftye cubits hie, and the
fourth threescore and ten, from whence the whole temple might be seen: and for
the favor which he bare to Marcus Antonius his friend, he called it ANTONIA In
this castle the Roman soldiors, kept always watch with their soldiors,
having an eye and principal care least the people should work any innovation
in the Temple on the feast days. And so the Temple belonged to the city, and
the castle Antonia to the temple.

30. THE COVRTE OF RECORDS,
which we commonly call the court of Chauncery, or of the Roules: that is to
say, a house wherein the act of the city, and of the citizens, and also
their public records, and the accoumpt of creditors were kept: Iose, 2, bell.
17. and. 7. bell 13.
the which the seditious burned, the keepers thereof flying from thence to the
end they might destroy all the evidence of the creditors, and join unto them
all the detters.

31. THE CASTLE OF ANTIOCHVS EPIPHANIS,
Iose.:12. ant. 6.
both high and strong, the which, after the slaughter of many citizens, 1.
Mac. 1.
the spoil of the cittye and temple, Dan. 8. 11. 12.
and the burning of most fair houses, he builded upon the mountain Acra, and
fortified it with strong walls and towers, and placed a Garrison of
Macidonian soldiers there mingling with them certain of the most raschall
fugitive Jews, by whom the continual sacrifice was taken away by the space of
three years and the city it self vexed more then six and twenty years. But
after this Simon Machabaeus wan and destroyed this castle.

32. THE COMMON PRISON OF THE CITY,
Act. 4, 5.
wherein the Apostles being shut up, Iose. 6. bell. 6.
by the rulers of the Jews, were in the night time brought forth by the
angel. Josephus seems to call this prison Betiso.

33 THE CORNER PARLOVR,
Neem. 3.
belonging to the corner house, where the public suppers were kept.

34. THE VAVLTED CAVE,
leading from the castle Antonia into the Temple, Iose. 15, ant 14.
which Herod the elder made, setting a tower thereon, Breid. 14.
that by the same he might pass privily into the temple, Iul.
if so be the people intended to make any insurrection against the K. the
which remains as yet very wonderful and large, insomuch that six hundred
horses may very conveniently be placed therein.

35 THE COURT,
Iosep. 6, bell. 6, et, 7 be. 13.
In Hebrew called Gasith. Which in the inner city was joined to an old wall
thereof. Exodus 18.
Wherein were three score and ten Senators and ordinary Judges, Hier. to, 3.
epist. 25, ad. Fabiol.
which were called of the Jews Sanhedrim, in Greek Synedrium, that is to say
in English, mars. 11.
The counsel of the Elders, and Seniors of the people. Number. 11.
These dealt in the affairs of the common wealth, gave Laws, and determined
the doubtful and weighty causes, yea even of other Cities also, they ended
strifes and controversies, and gave the sentence of death, Deu. 17
generally they dealt in all capital causes, except only in the difficulties
and mysteries of Gods Law and of the Jews Religion, the which the priests
only determined. In this consistory the Apostles were examined, Acts 4, 5
whipped, and forbidden to preach, and yet went rejoicing from the Council,
because they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Jesus. Acts
6, 7
Here it was that Saint Stephen standing before the Council, and his
countenance shining like an Angel, lifting up his eyes, saw the Heavens
open, and the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of GOD, from
thence he being cast with violence out of the City, was stoned.

36 THE HOUSE OF ANANIAS THE HIGH PRIEST,
Iosep. 2. bell. 17.
which the seditious at ye length fiered.

37. THE HOUSE OF SAINT ANNE,
Breid. 26,
the Grandame of Christ, Iul. Sal. to. 8. cap. 6
wherein she with Ioacim her husband abode when the feast was at Jerusalem,
where they both died. Iac, vitri. cap. 58
Here the blessed virgin Mary was conceived (as some conjecture) and abode
there during the passion of Christ.

38 THE HOUSE OF THE RICH GLVTTON,
Luke. 6
which burns in hell according to the Evangelical story. Breid. 14.
In the which house that he dwelt, Iul.
it is reported by some antiquities, Sal. tom. 8 cap. 6
a high wall whereof is showed at this day to Christian travelers.

39. THE HOUSE OF MISSA,
4 king. 11
whereof mention is made in the fourth book of Kings.

40 THE HOUSE OF THE NATHINAEANS,
Neem. 3
which carried wood and water into the Temple.

41. THE HOUSE OF THE PRINCE OF THE PHARISEIES,
Luke. 14
in the which Christ touched the man sick of the dropsy and healed him.

42. THE HOUSE OF THE FOREST OF LYBANVS,
3, kin, 7, 10
in length one hundred cubits, 2. Par. 9
in breadth fifty, Isai. 22
and in height thirty cubits: the which Solomon builded most brave and
glorious of polished marble, Iosep. 18 ant. 5. 6, 7.
of Cedar trees, garnished with silver and gold, having a flat roof with
walks and galleries: (according to the fashion of Palestine) and within lively
counterfeits of sundry trees and plants most artificially made, Hier. to. 3
epist. 33 ad Suniam.
that the leaves thereof seemed in some sort to shake. And near unto the same
he planted a grove and a green arbor, Eccles. 2
made of all manner of trees, and watered with fountains: also he made parkes
and fish pooles, wherein it is like were all manner of wild beasts, birds,
and fishes. This house was a storehouse of meat, an armorie for weapons of
war, a house wherein ointments, paintings, and sweet perfumes were laid
up and preserved. Beside these, two hundred shields of gold for horssemen,
and three hundred large targets of gold for footmen which Solomon made, were
in this house by him laid up. Al other vessels also of this house, were of
gold. To this house the king and his peers came when the weighty affairs of
the Common wealth were ended, and recreated their minds, with banquets, with
plays, and with pleasant walks.

43 THE HOUSE OF SIMON THE PHARISIE
which is at this day to be seen: Luke 7.
wherein Christ sitting at the Table, forgave unto Mary Magdalen the sinful
woman (bewailing her sins, and washing his feet with her tears, wiping them
with her hair, kissing them, anointing him, and much loving him) many sins.

44 THE HOUSE OF THE COMMON PEOPTE
wherein they exercised themselves with dartinges and other exercises of the
arm, Jeremy 39
and with feasts, with plays and walks refreshed their minds.

45 THE GREAT MARKET,
Iose, 13. ant 20. and. 1. bell. 3.
which was in the midst of the city, and near adjoining to the Castle
Antonia, Iose. 14, ant 22. item. 1. bell. 7. and 11:
wherein Alexander the king of the Jews, and the chief priest, crucified
eight hundred Jews, killing also the Wives in the presence of their husbands,
and the children in the sight of their mothers: the which spectacle himself
with his Concubines beheld, at what time they were banqueting in the castle
Antonia. For the which cruelty he was surnamed Crucida. In the same market
place, Herod the greater, fought a great battle with the Parthians, which went
about to bring again Antigonus into the kingdom. Iose. 6. bell. 14. and 7. bell,
7. and 8.
Furthermore when the famine through the Roman siege was exceeding great in
Jerusalem, in such wife that it consumed whole families, and replenished the
tops of houses with fainting women and children, and the ways with the dead
carcases of old men (in which extremity they did eat leather, their girdles,
their shoes, hay, and mothers, their own children) then a man might have
seen lusty young men which before time were most flourishing, pass through
this market place, like shadows of dead men. And when those which remained
alive, were not able to bury the dead, by reason of their exceeding multitude,
and could not endure the stink of the bodies unburied, they cast them over the
wall into the valleys of the city. The which when Titus saw as he went
about the walls, full of dead bodies much putrified, he fetched a great sigh, and
houlding up his hands to GOD, protested that it was not his deed, for the
obstinate Jews refused peace, to them often times offered.

46. THE MARKET OF WARES,
the which was in the upper part of the lower city, Acts 12.
in the which, Eusebius, 2. hist. eccle. 9
fish and sundry other things were fold. In this market S. James the greater,
Neceph, 2. hist. eccl 12.
the brother of John, suffered his martyrdom by the tyranny of Herod Agrippa.

47. THE VPHOLSTERS MARKET,
Neem. 3.
wherein all manner of old garments that had been worn aforetime of others,
were to be sold.

48. THE SCHOLE OF GENTILLITIE,
1 Match. 1. and 2.
which Jesus, the false high priest of the Jews (who after the manner of the
Gentiles would be called Jason) and other Jews apostatas, Mac. 4.
by the permission of Antiochus Epiphan, set up even under his castle
oueragainst the temple: wherein the people were taught the laws and fashions
of the Gentiles, and the youth instructed in the studies and disputations of the
Greek philosophers. Where they being naked and anointed with oil, exercised
themselves in feats of actiuity, in martial actions, and in enterludes.
Furthermore in the same place, the said Apostatas set up EBHEBIAM, that is to
say a Stews of fair young boys, wherein they committed most filthy things
against nature, By reason thereof many fell from the law of God, to the
manners and abominations of the Gentiles, being as it were sold to commit
monstrous wickedness: insomuch that some of the priests forsaking the temple and
worship of God, gave themselves to the exercise of feats of actiuity: here
hence also there sprang up among the Jews diverse sects, namely the Pharisees,
the Saduceis, the Esseies etc.

49 THE HOUSES OF THE PRIESTS,
Lyra in Neem. 3.
and of the Levites whose houses were shut up by the outward part of the wall:
but from the former part they had a prospect toward the temple.

50 THE HABITATION OF THE TARGET BEARERS,
4. King. 11.
was builded before the west gate of the temple: Joseph. 20.
where first the Jews, Ant. 15.
then the Roman soldiors, upon the solemn feast days had the stations for
the guarde of the temple.

51 THE LYSTES,
Ios. 15, ant 10. and 17. ant 9. 10.
OR TYLT, which was placed oueragainst the South part of the Temple, wherein
horses, by running, agillitie, and swiftness were exercised. And the
wrastlers and champions did contend before the people, who should rnnne
swiftest on foot, with chariots diversely drawn, who should break most
spears, and in other masteries, and fears of valiencie. Where Herod the king
for the honor of Augustus Caesar ordained the game and prise, of five years
continuance; appointing unto the victors great rewards. the same Herod when he
should die, called all the more noble sort of the Jews of al places within
his dominion, by an Edict threatening death to such as should not obey, and
caused them to be shut up in the Lystes, to the end that after his death they
all being there slain, every house might have cause to wail even in despite
of all Iudaea.

52. THE MOVNTAINE MORIA,
the which in another place is called the land of vision, Genesis 22.
and the mountain of the temple, Mich. 3.
and the mountain of the daughter of Sion, 1 Match. 13 and 16.
lying near unto the east wall of the city, Isa. 10. 16.
being very high, stoany, and very steep round about. Iosep. 15. ant 14. and
6. bell. 6.
In this mountain Abraham being ready to offer up his son Isaac, in steed
of him offered up a Ram which was taken, by the horns in a thicket. This was
the very same mountain which David bought of Streuna or Ornan the Iebusite for
six hundred sicles of goulde: and erecting an alter in his threshing flower, he
offered a burnt offering unto the Lord, 1, Cron. 21.
which the fire from heaven consumed. Afterward in the same mountain Solomon
builded unto the Lord a most excellent Temple both for largeness and beauty;
whereof mention shall be made hereafter.

53. THE FIRST WALL,
Iose. 6, bell, 6 7, etc.
the which was called the old wall, both in regard of the valleis, and a hill
which was alofte above them, and also in regard of threescore towers whereinto
it was divided, the which made it very defensible and strong.

54. OPHEL,
2. Cron. 27. 23.
which Josephus calls Ophlam, was a tower of an exceeding height, whose top
seemed to rech unto the clouds; it was fortified with a castle, and compassed
about with a firm wall, near unto the Temple, notwithstanding it was without
the wall, which shut off the habitation of the priests. Herein dwelte the
Nathenims. Into this Manahemus the tyrant flying, was taken and slain. This
same was at the last burned by the soldiors of Titus.

55. THE PALACE OF THE MACHABEES,
builded by them on a very lofty place on the weste side of the Temple, 1.
Mac. 13.
from whence they which would behoulde the cittye and those things which were
don therein, Iose. 17, ant 14.
had a most pleasant and delectable prospect. The which king Agrippa afterward
excedingly enlarged and made it a Court for himself: from whence out of his
parlour he might behold whatsoever was done in the temple. For the which
cause the rulers of the Jews builded a very high gate between that and the
weste part of the inner Temple, to hinder the kings prospect. This thing both
king Agrippa, and Festus also the Lieutenant of the country took in very
evil part, who also commanded them to pull down the said gate. But the
rulers entreated, that they might have leave to send ambassadors to Nero the
emperor concerning this matter, saying that they could not live if any thing
were casted down of the buildings of the temple. The which liberty when they
had obtained; they sent Ismaell the chief priest, and Helchia the treasurer,
and with them ten of their chief rulers. And Nero at the earnest suit of
Poppea his wife, a godly woman, which she made for the Jews, pardoned the
building of the said gate, and permitted the same so to stand.

56. THE PALACE OF PILATE,
Psalm. 37, et. 72.
and of the Lieutenants of Rome, adjoining to the Gallerie, which lies on the
North side of the castle Antonia: Isa. 1, 50* 53, 63.
which palace, Math. 27.
was much more large, lofty, and fayrer, Mar. 15.
then all the buildinges of the cittye, and had an ascend or mounting, Luke 23.
of twenty and eight steps of Marble. Joan. 18.


Here when Christ was falsely accused, and required to be crucified, by the
princes and people of the Jews, for (that as they said) he perverted the
people, forbad tribute to be given to Caesar, said that he was Christ a King,
and therefore approved him self a seditious person, Pilate condemned him to be
whipped under the form of this sentence* which was found in a most ancient
chronicle, Breid 21. Iul. Sal. tom 8. cap. 7.
as follows, Iesum Nazarenum virum sediciosum, et Mosaicae legis
contemptorem, per pontifices et principes suae gentis accusatum, expoliate,
ligate, et virgis caedite. That is to say, Take ye Jesus of Nazareth accused
by the chief priests and rulers of his own Nation to be a man sedicious,
and a contemner of Moses Law, strip him, bind him, and whyp him. Whereupon
the soldiors of Pilate led him into the Judgment haule, stripped him before the
whole band of soldiors and other people, tied him to a pillar, beat him most
cruelly with rods, and rent and tare his most tender body. After this, they
put on him a purple robe, platted and in forcible manner, broided on his head a
crown of sharp thorns, delivered into his right hand a reed, and in scorn
saluted him as a king bending the knee before him, many ways mocked him, they
did spit on him, they did buffet him, and strike him upon the wounded head
with a reed.

57 THE QVEENES PALACE,
3 Reg, 7. 9.
which Solomon most royally builded of precious and polished stones, Cro. 2. 8.
9.
for the habitation of his wife which was Pharaos daughter.

58 SALOMONS PALACE,
3 kin. 7, 10
exceeding great and fair, the which he builded in thirtene years
magnificently and most sumptuously on the south part of the mount Moria, of
bright marble, and cedar trees, supported with many pillars, for his own
habitation: this he wonderfully garnished with gold and silver round about, and
made all the vessels thereof of gold. In the same place afterward, the
Christian kings of Jerusalem had their palace, where first began the order of
the Templers.

59 THE CASTLE PISAN,
Sal. to. 7. cap. 1.
compassed about with deep trenches, and towers; the which was builded on the
west part of the city, by the Christian inhabitants of a town in Italy
belonging to the Pisans, at what time they had the dominion of the holy land.
Where first the Pisans, after them the Saracens, and now the Turks, do exact
of the pilgrims of the holy land sacrilegious tribute.

60 THE INNER FOVNTAINE,
2. Reg, 20.
which king Ezechias made in the midst of the city at the North side of the
temple. 2 Cron. 32.
For he brought into the city the waters of this fountain, Eccles. 48*
from the higher fountain of Gition, by conduct pipes which were under the
earth, and made them to issue forth in this fountain. This fountain he
compassed about with a well to water the whole city, that the people in time
of siege might not be distressed with the want of water.

61 THE POOLE PROBATICA,
John. 5.
that is to say ye sheep poole, wherein the sheep and other beasts were
washed that were appointed for sacrifice. In Hebrew it is called Bethesda, (and
corruptly Bethsaida) that is to say, the house of effusion because the rain
waters ran into the same. It was situate between the gate of the valley and the
temple. Sol. to. 8. cap. 5, 6.
It was the largest and most principal poole or water of the whole city,
having five porches, which king Solomon made for the service of the Temple. And
this Josephus calls Salomons lake or Poole. For in this poole the Nathenims
washed the oblations which they delivered unto the priests to be offered in the
Temple. The Water hereof was moved at certain times by the Angel of the
Lord, and who so after the stirring thereof went first into the water, he was
healed, whatsoever disease he had. And therefore there lay a great multitude of
languishing people in the porches thereof, as blind, lame, withered, waiting
for the moving of the water. Among which number Christ healed a man which had
languished thirty and eight years.

62 THE OLD FOVNTAINE,
Isai. 22.
together with a River, Iese. 7, bell. 24.
which issuing out of the same runs through the whole City into the brook
Cedron.

63 THE BRIDGE,
Iose. 14.
and portch with gates, by which men went from the gallerie, Ant. 8, et 15.
and from the Castle Antonia, over the valley of Cedron into the Temple, the
which at the first the favorites of Aristobolus against Pompei, Ant. 14, et 1.
Bell. 5.
and afterward the seditious against Florus, Item. 2, bell 15, 16, etc.
cut off, least by the means of the Castle Antonia, the Temple should be
gotten.

64 THE WARDERS GATE,
Neem: 12
so called, because certain of the kings guard warded there, at such time as
the king entered into the Temple.

65 THE HORSE GATE,
Lyran, in Neem. 3
so named, because men might ride so far as that place: but then leaving
their horses, they went on foot into the temple. At the which place began the
habitations of the priests.

66. THE GATE OF THE ESSENS,
Ios. 6, bell, 6
was situate in the old wall of the City.

67. THE FIRST GATE,
Zach. 14
whereof the Prophet Zachary makes mention.

68. THE PORCH OF PILLARS,
3 king. 7
situate before Salomons palace, the which was fifty cubits long, and
thirty cubits broad, and supported with strong pillars.

69. THE BEAST MARKET,
Ioh, 5.
called Probatica, where sheep, oxen, and other beasts for sacrifice were
sold in the open market.

70 THE PALACE OF QVEENE BERNICE,
Act. 25. 26.
sister of king Agrippa, Ios. 2, bell 15 16, et, 17.
who with her brother at Caesaria heard Paul's supplication before Festus. And
afterward paying her vows to God at Jerusalem, she came bare foot before
Florus sitting in his judgment seat tyranizing against the cittisens, whom she
beseeched in vain as concerning them.

71. THE PALACE OF GRAPTA,
Ios. 5. Bell. 9
the niece of Izata king of the Adiabens, which she built for her self.
Wherein afterward, Ihon the Captain of the seditious abiding, left there his
money and spoils of tyranny.

72. THE PALACE OF HELEN,
Ios. 20, ant. 2. and 6. bell. 7 and bell, 13. Eusebius. 2 hist eccle. 12.
which exalted it self in the midst of the mountain Acra. She being the
Queen of the Adiabens which dwelt beyond Euphrates, was converted from
Gentilisme, to the religion of the Jews, Acts 11.
and came to Jerusalem, to dwell. Where she being become a Christian, at what
time that great famine, (whereof Agabus prophesied) in the days of the
emperor Claudius, pinched the whole world, but specially the land of Iudaea,
this good Queen (I say) at her proper costs and charge sent for great store of
corn out of Egypt which she distributed among the poor and needy at
Jerusalem.

73. THE PALACE OF MONOBAZ,
Ios. 6, bell. 7.
king of Adiabens, the son of Helen, which was situat in the east part of
the city.

74. THE TEMPLE OF THE LORD,
King. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9, 2 Chro. 2. 3 4. 5. 6. 7
otherwise called, the Lords house and the sanctuary. The which Solomon the
peaceable king builded of the matter prepared by David his father, and of
elect, hewn, and pollished stones, and of timber cut from mount Libanus, by
the labor of more then a hundred fitie three thousand men in the mont Moria,
without any sound of axe or hammer, in seven years, so sumptuous and
magnificent both within and without with shining gould, that it was counted the
miracle of the world. Concerning the wonderful excellency whereof nothing can
be sufficiently spoken. When Solomon dedicated this Temple, the cloud and
glory of the Lord filled it, and the fire which came from heaven consumed the
sacrifices which were offered therein. As concerning the entrance of this
temple, the same was contrary to the fashion now used, being Eastward, and the
back part tended west; whereupon the priests, and people prayed turning to
the west, and worshipped God herein with great reverence, until through the
Impiety of the kings and people of the Jews, 4. King. 25.
it was profaned with the pollusions of Idols often times. 2 Chro. 36.
Therefore four hundred forty and one years after the first foundation
thereof, by the just judgment of God, Nabuchodonozer king of Babylon burnt
the same, and so destroyed it, 1 Es. 3, 5, 6.
that it lay desolate threescore and ten years. But after that, 2 Mac, 3
Zorobabell repaired the temple again in excellent sort with squared stones,
Iosep. 2, bell. 17, and, 7, bell 10.
and the best timber in the same mountain, within the space of forty and six
years. 1. Match. 1. 4, 6. 13.
And this also was of so great estimation that it was honored throughout the
whole world, and was from all parts enriched and bewtified with the greatest
gifts and honors of kings and princes. The which after three hundred, fifty,
and four years, was spoiled by Antiochus Epiphan king of Syria, and polluted
with Idols. In the third year of the contamination thereof, the most valiant
Captain of the Jews Judas Machaboeus, purged it, and restored to the same
again, the goulden vessels, and the worship of God. And that it might never
more be defiled, he did waule it about in manner of a castle with deep
trenches, Iose. 14. ant 8. et 7. bell. 4 9.
with strong and high walls, and with gates and towers both forceable and
fair.

Wherein he being beseeged a long time with one hundred and twenty thousand
Gentiles, could not be commanded.

But about one hundred year after this when that famous Captain of the
Romans Pompei the great fought against it, Strabo. Geo gra, lib. 16.
he wanne it with maine force, 1 Mac. 6,
and in the entering thereof he slew therein twelve thousand Jews; and
Pompei himself with his peers entering into the most holy place, and
behoulding the Table, the Candlestick, and other things there, of shining
goulde, and finding also two thousand talents of the holy treasure, this
heathen Prince moved as it were with a certain godliness, would not so
much as touch any of them but the next day after the siege commuanded the
keepers of the temple to cleanse the same, and to celebreate their lawful and
solemn sacrifices. This self and same temple being afterward decayed, Herod
the Ascalonit king of the Jews, by the space of nine years and a half,
repaired and bewtified it, with sumptuous buildings.

And according to the prophecy of the prophet Aggei (even as the Church is
preferred before a Sinagogue, Agge, 2,
and the blood of the gospel is more precious then the gold of the law)
greater was the glory of this second temple, Luke, 2.
then was that of the first: because Christ, Math. 4.
with his presence, doctrine and miracles, Joan, 7. 8. 10, et, ce.
glorified this. For in this, when he was a child he was offered. In this
he sat in the midst of the doctors; In the pinnacle of this Temple he was
tempted of the Devil, when he fasted forty days and forty nights. In this
likewise he preached often times, and was vexed by the Jews. All which
things, as they make much for the glory of the temple, so they did nothing
avail, but that the very same Temple, in the year from the foundation thereof
under Zorobabell five hundred eighty and six, by the army of Titus Caesar,
after a doubtful and bloody battle, Iose. 7. bell. 9. 10. 18.
was won with great force and violence, and so great a slaughter of Jews
made about the alter for burnt offerings, that the blood of the slain ran
like a river by the stayres of the Temple: and the Temple it self in the
first brunte and fury of the battle was set on fiere, by a certain
soldior, moved by divine motion, not attending to the command of any, even
without the Emperors consent: And by this burning, a work of all that ever was
seen or heard of, the most wonderful, and the ornament of the whole world,
the tenth day of the month of August, En, in chr, et 4, hi. eccl, 6.
was consumed into ashes: to wit, even the very same day and month, whereon
aforetime the temple was burnt by the Babilonians. Niceph, 3. hist, eccle. 24.


Yet for all this after threescore and five years, the Jews rebelling again,
and going about to restore the Temple in the same place where it was before,
AElius Adrian the Emperor, slew of them in one day five hundred and four
score thousand, and utterly rased the rest of the buildinges of Jerusalem,
and leueled the mountain Moria whereon the Temple was builded, and made it
even, casting the rubbish and earth thereof into the vale Iosaphat, and into
the brook Cedron, left the city trusting to the defense of the mountain and
Temple, should rise up and rebel any more against the Romans. He wasted
also with fire and sword nine hundred and four score villages. But the
emperor Julian the Apostata, after two hundred and twenty seven years, to
make the oracle of Christ false, Ruffin. in Eusebius, hist.
which he had prophesied concerning the temple that there should not be left
one stone upon another, Eccl, lib, 10 cap, 37, 38. 39.
gave unto the Jews money out of the common treasury, and commanded them to
build a new the temple and to sacrifice there according to the law of Moses.
Theodoret. 3, hist, eccle. 17.


The Jews glad of this, came from all parts of the world to Jerusalem, Zozo.
5. hist eccle, 21.
and threatening grievous things against the Christians, Niceph. 10. hist, eccle.
32, 33.
they prepared and got unto them skillful workmen, stones, timber, mortar, and
all other things necessary for the building: also they caused to be made silver
mattockes, spades, and baskets: and thoroughly purged the place where the Temple
stood, with such speed and willingness, that their women also bestowed all
their ouches, taches, bruches, and other Jewels, for the building, and carried
out from that place all the rubbish in their laps. And when the foundations
were opened and cleansed, the day following they should have begun their
foundation, but the same night there came such an exceeding and vehement
tempest, that it carried away and scattered abroad their stone, timber, and
mortar, with other their necessaries. Over and besides this, a great
earthquake, shook all the stones of the old foundations of the temple and
dispersed them, disordered the houses next adjoining to the temple by a
downfall, and killed many Jews.

And when they which remained, in the morning enterprised again to build; a
fire falling from heaven, a flame also breaking forth from the foundations of
the temple, destroyed more Jews then before, which either were busy about the
work, or which came thither to see and look on: and all that day burnt and
consumed into ashes, their maules, hammers, axes, spades, and all other working
tools, that nothing was left. The Jews being yet obstinately bent, the next
night following, a bright sign of the cross appeared in heaven, and the
garments of all the Jews were marked as it were from heaven with figures of
the cross, and replenished therewith as the firmament with stars; which when
the day appeared they seeking to put out, could not by any manner of means do
it. And thus being astonished and confounded, they left off both their vain
enterprise and also the place. So that by their wicked endeavor, the divine
oracle, was not only not made frustrate, but also more fulfilled and confirmed.

The Jews being in this sort beaten from their enterprise, the Christians
nevertheless were not afeard to build in the same place. For they erected a
temple there in a round form, made of great hewn, and pollished stones,
covered with a leaden roof, very large high and bewtifull to behold. The which
in process of time, was honored with the Patriarchall seat, and became famous
by reason of the true and pure worship of God which was therein maintained.
Wilh. ty, lib. 8, hist, bell. sacri, c, 20. et. lib. 9, cap 9.
At the length being invaded by the Saracens, it was contaminated four hundred
threescore and three years, with the filthy worship of Mahomet. Finally in the
year of Christ, Broc. iti, 6.
1099. the very same temple, Breid. 14. Iul.
though it was fortified with a wall, with towers, and with strong gates by the
Christians, yet was it violently won by Godfrey of Bullion, a valiant man;
who killed within the circuit of the temple, ten thousand Saracens, in such
wise that the upper face of the earth was covered with the blood of the slain.
In the which place the said Godfrey erected a College of divine service,
giving continual maintenaunc to the same, furnishing it with necessary
habitations, which so continued by the space of four score and eighte years.
The which expired, the same was possessed again by the Saracens, through the
pernicious discord of Christian princes: who in the top thereof, (according
to their manner) set up the figure of the half moon: and in the courts
thereof they planted figs, and olive trees. The same being now possessed of
the Turks, is defiled with the detestable worship of Mahomet. And all
Christians are commanded by an Edict, not to enter thereinto, upon pain of
death. For if any Christian be known to have entered therein, he is by and
by either compelled solemnly to deny the faith of Christ, or else publicly
to lose his head.

THE FIRST PART OF THE TEMPLE.
75. THE HOLY OF HOLIEST,
Exodus 26.
the which is so called because of the singular holiness of the place. Leu,
16. 23
It is also named the Oracle, Numb. 29. 19.
and the Inner house. 3. King. 6.
For it was the secretest part of the temple, 2 Cro. 3. 4, 5.
whereinto few did come: being twenty cubits long, and as many in breadth;
the heighte whereof was one hundred and twenty cubits. Whose floor was paued
with marble, Heb, 9, 13.
and laid over with fur boardes, Joseph, 6. bell 6.
covered with plate of gold. The gates were made of polished stones inwardely
framed with boordes of cedar, and covered with golden plates: the which being
fastened with nails of gold shined most gloriously, as if it had been a
divine work. Whereon were graven Cherubims, precious stones, palms, flowers,
Imbosements, and pictures of diverse sorts, representing the celestial bewty.
The roof also was covered with golden plate, the very top whereof was set
full of goulden prickets, or sharp spittes to fraie away birds, lest by
sitting thereon, it might be polluted. Into this sacred holy of holiest, the
chief Priest, for the divine majesty thereof, entered but once every year
alone, Heb, 9. 13.
in the feast of purgation: on which day the Jews did fast and afflict
themselves. And then that great and chief priest of God, prefiguring the
person of Christ, offered the blood of a calfe burnte without the host, for
his own sins, and for the sins of the people. Who if he wear but so much
as in sleep polluted, entered not in in his own person, but by his substituted
vicar.

THE PARTS OF THE MOST HOLY PLACEs.
76. THE ARC OF THE COVENANT,
Exo, 25. 27 et 40
the which by the commandment of God was made of Sethim wood, Number. 17.
which corrupts not, Deuteronomy. 31.
by Moses in the deserte, covered within and without with plate of pure goulde,
being set in the midst of the holy of holiest, Heb. 9.
shining like the sun with the glittering brightness of gold. Ios. 3, ant, 8
Whose surpassing beauty is rather to be wondered at, then with words to be
expressed. In this Arc the two tables of stone, containing the ten
commandments written with the finger of God, were kept with a singular care
and holiness: also the Pot wherein was Manna: and Aarons flourishing rod, and
the book of Deuteronomy. The Arc abode in this place about four hundred and
thirty years. 2. Mac. 5, 2.
It is written in the book of the Machabees, yt in the time of the captivity of
Babylon, the Prophet Jeremy by the commandment of God, hid the same privily
together with the Alter of Incense, and the perpetual fire, in a cave of the
mount Nebo. 2 Chro, 36.


But the Hebrews conjecture, Dan. 1.
that it was carried by Nabuchodonozer into Babylon: 1. Esd. 1.
and that it was never returned again, 3. Esd. 1.
but another made by the Jews in stead thereof after the return from the
captivity. Hier. in Joel cap. 3.
Other some think that Nabuchodonozer carried away the same with five thousand
and four hundred vessels of silver and gold, Iose. 10, ant 13.
which belonged to the temple of Jerusalem, Sucton. in vit. vespasi.
and put them into the temple of Bell his god, Rodolph. lan gius de vrbis
Hirosol templique origin et excidio. lib. ^. cap. 15.
but preserved by Gods providence (as it was sometime in Philistaea) after
threescore and ten years of the captivity, they think (I say) that it was
restored again to the Jews, at their return by Cyrus, together with the said
vessels. But after the beseeging of Jerusalem Titus and Vespasian, cariyng out
of the temple to Rome, the Arc of the covenant, the two tables of the Law,
with both the rods of Moses and Aaron: also the goulden table, and some of the
show bread: the goulden Candlestick also, and the four pillars; made these to
be carried among other spoils, by the Jews themselves round about the city
in an open triumph, wherein with great pomp they triumphed over that nation:
Simon Giora Captain of the seditious, and seven hundred Jews captives (which
were selected from among the rest for youth and comlynesse) going before the
triumpher half naked, with their hands bound. This triumph being ended
Vespasian, laid up all the vessels of Jerusalem, in the Temple of Peace at
Rome, which he in most sumptuous manner had builded: But the law of the
Jews, and the purple vailes of the most secret places, he commanded to be
safely laid up in his palace.

77. THE TWO CHERVBIMS,
Ex. 25, 37.
of glory, the which, as it appears by the Hebrew text of Paralippomenon, 2.
King. 6.
are like unto young boys, Heb. 9.
made of the wood of the olive tree, Ios. 8, ant, 3.
ten cubits high, and covered with plates of gold, and shining with angelical
brightness, stood at each end of the Arc with wings spread, one couple
covering the propitiatory, and with the other couple touching the gate on both
sides: Whose faces were directed toward the uttermost house: and looking one
toward the other, they beheld both themselves, and also the propitiatory.

78. THE PROPITIATORY,
otherwise also called the oracle, the which being above the Arc, between the
wings of the two Cherubims, and shining with most pure gold in brightness
above the sun, representing the divine majesty, was as it were the seat of
God speaking: from whence he gave oracles and answers.

THE SECOND PART OF THE TEMPLE.
79. THE HOLY PLACE,
Exo. 26, 29
so called for the dignity of the place. Leuit. 10.
It was also called the Sanctuary, 3. King. 6
the outward house of the Lord, 1 Cro. 23, 24.
and the priests Court. 2. Paralip. 3.
This is the other part of the Temple, fortye cubits long, Ezech. 44.
and twenty broad, in highte one hundred and twenty cubits. Luke 1,
The doors hereof were of gold. Heb. 9.
The floor made of fur boards was covered with plate of goulde. Ios. 8, ant,
3. et 15 an. 14.
The gates were made of polished stones, and being within lined with boardes
of Caedar, were covered outwardely with plates of goulde. Whereon was graven
Cherubims precious stones, palms, flowers, and sundry carved works and
pictures, which wonderfully delighted men to behold. Above it was covered with
a fair roof, shining as if it had been fire.

From the entrance hereinto, such as were not clean, were forbidden by the
Law. Only the priests, which King David reckened to the number of thirty
eight thousand, and distinguished them by Lot into four and twenty orders,
entered daily thereinto.

All which being without vice, according to David's ordinance, wekely by turn,
from Saboth to Saboth abstayning from their wives, from wine and from all other
strong drink, their priuities covered with linen breeches, outwardely
clothed and girded with a linen garment, wearing a silk myter on their
head, in a wonderful order, and with the greatest reverence that could be,
they worshipped God, they offered sacrifices and made their prayers.

80. THE ALTER OF INCENSE,
Exo. 30. 37
of gould, Leuit. 2.
which by Gods commandment was placed over against the veil hanging before
the most holy place, 1. Mac. 4.
called the holy of holiest: Whereon the Priests, Luke 1.
every day morning and evening offered unto God for a sweet savor,
Frankenscence and sweet perfumes. The angel Gabriell standing sometime at the
right hand of this alter, toulde unto Zachary, as he was offering Incense,
the conception of John Baptist.

81. THE GOVLDEN CANDELSTICKE,
the which having seven branches, Ex. 25, 26. 27. 37
and so many Candles, was placed on the South side of the Temple: the which
being lamps of most pure oil, Leuit. 24.
burned continually, and gave light as well by day as by night, Ios. 3 an, 10.
to all the holy place.

82. THE FOVNTAYN,
Ezec. 47.
of water which issued forth on ye right side of the temple the water whereof
Salomo^ derived into the sea of bras, Joel 3.
and into the copper Lauer: Aristeas li. de 72 anter pret.
the which being carried from thence by Conduit pipes under the earth breking
forth half a mile from the east side of the citrie ran into the brook
Cedron.

83. THE GOVLDEN TABLE,
Exo. 25, 26 37.
the which stood on the North side of the temple, Leuit. 24.
whereon were set twelve loaves made of the most pure and fine flower of
wheat. 1 King. 21.
The which being stale, Mar. 2.
remained to the use of the priests, Ios. 3, ant, 9.
and then new were supplied again every Saboth day, upon the which were laid
two golden cups full of Frankensence.

84. THE CHIEF PRIEST
his Image, Exo. 28, 39
and holy apparel, Leui. 8, 16.
every part whereof show forth unto us, a divine and heavenly magnificence.
For when he went to offer sacrifice, or to enter into the most holy place he
put on not only the under garments spoken of before under the number seventy
nine, but also above upon them a Tunicle of Iacinct with sleues down to the
ankells, at the lower hem whereof there did hang threescore and two golden
bells, and in another border as many pomegranats. The Tunicle was girt with a
girdle four fingers broad, wouen with silk, gould, precious stones, and
flowers of sundry colors. Aloft above this, he did wear an Ephod or
Superhumeral, that is to say, a most fair cloak, made of gold, of Iacinct,
of purple, scarlet and of fine silk most curiously wouen together, dazzling of
the eyes by reason of ye variety and glittering brightness of the colors and
flowers. Upon each shoulder whereof there were several Onix stones included in
gold, which Josephus calls Sardonichs: in either of which stones six names
of the children of Israel were graven.

Beside these, he had the Reasonable of Judgment, which he carried upon his
breast, wherein was doctrine and truth. The Reasonable was a square thing about
the breadth of a man's hand, wouen and made of gold, lacinct, purple, scarlet,
and fine silk, whereto were fastened twelve precious stones of diverse sorts,
having engraven in them the names of the twelve sons of Israel, according to
the order of their nativity. Moreover on his head he ware a long round cap,
in form of a Miter, made of Iacinct and fine silk; upon the front whereof was
set a brooch of gold in form of a half gloabe, which figured the ineffectable
name of God, Tetragrammaton, with these four Hebrew letters (...) thereon
ingraue^, setting forth by the wonderful brightness thereof the excellency
of the divine majesty: Also the golden Censer in his hand: by which he offered
unto God the most fragrant odor of Frankensence, is a part of his ornaments.

Al which things as they are full of mysteries, so some of them excelled the
rest in divine power. For that stone which the high priest did bear on his
right shoulder, so often as he had pleased God with sacrifices, did so
wonderfully shine, that they which stood a great way off might perceive it.
And (which is no less wonderful) the twelve stones which were on the
Reasonable, did foreshewe unto them which went to the war, victory.

For before the army should move it self, there came so great a brightness
from them, that it gave all the people to understand that God was present, and
that he would help all those that call upon him. But now God being angry with
the wickedness of his kings, both the Reasonable and the Onix also have ceased
one hundred and five years before the nativity of Christ to give their wonted
shine and brightness.

85 THE VEIL,
Exodus 26. 36.
was wouen of Iacinct, purple, scarlet and fine silcke in most bewtifull
variety; and was adorned with Cherubims and al manner of flowers imbroydered
thereon, 2 Cron. 3.
which hong at the gate before the most holy place, Math. 27,
and at the death of Christ was rent from the top to the bottom even in the
midst,

THE THIRD PART OF THE TEMPLE.
86 THE JEWS I WILL
. The which also is called the Entery, 3. King. 6.
the Haule, 2 Cron. 4. 6
the Holy Secular, and Salomons Porch, being the third part of the temple.
Ezech. 40.
Into the which men went up by four steps. Heb. 9.
Whose pauement checkered with marble of sundry sorts, Joseph. ant 3. 14. et
6. bell et 7. bell 4. 16. et l. 2. cont: Apionene.
was open to the aier, and uncovered, and was compassed about with a wall made
with three degrees of stones of sundry colors. To the which were annexed
great porches, broad, and above threescore and ten cubits high, born up
with marble pillars of single stones which were twenty five cubits high, the
roof covered with Cedar. The inset gates covered with gold, shined most
gloriously. And it had three high gates: whereof the first tended toward the
east, the second toward the South, and the third toward the North: every of
the which gates were shut with two silver doors thirty cubits high, and
fiftene broad: but the weste part had no gate but was enclosed with a whole
wall. And this was called the Jews I Will or Haule because only the Jews being
clean and chaste made their prayers there, Luke 1.
and heard the words of the law. John. 10.
In the which place, Act. 3. 4. 5.
Christ taught the people often times: Iose. 15. ant 14. et. 2. be 16. et. 6. 7.
and where the Jews would have stoned him: and Peter when he had healed the
lame man spoke unto the people: and converted five thousand men. Before this
Haule enclosed with alattice, there was a Table set, containing this law
engraven with letters of Greek and Latin, Every stranger that shall enter
into the holy place shall dye. And the Romans had given authority to the
Jews to put to death as well Romans as Jews, which transgressed this law.

THE PARTS OF THE JEWS I WILL.
87 THE ALTER OF BVRNT OFFERINGE OF BRASS,
Ex. 27. 38.
the which stood in the midst of the I Will open to the aier and uncovered. 1
Corn. 4
Wherein that perpetual fire was daily maintained by the putting to of wood
which fire in old time, Leuit. 9, 6 et. 1.
the Lord sent down from heaven, when Aaron at the first time offered
sacrifice in the desert. On the which altar, the priests every day morning and
evening, burnte sundry sorts of Male beasts which were clean and without
blemish, as Sheep, Oxen, and Goats, turtels, Pigeons, and such like, which
were consumed with this holy and perpetual fire, for a burnte offering and
Odor of sweet favor unto the Lord. But in the time of the Captivity of
BABYLON, this perpetual fire was hidden by the Priests in a dry pit or
well and being sought for by Neemia the priest, 2. Mac: 1.
threescore and ten years after the same, there could be no fire found in that
place, but a certain thick water which by divine power, at the prayer of
Neemia was set on fire.

88 BOOZ and IACHIN,
3. King. 7. 2 Cron. 3.
two pillars of brass of wonderful beawty, thirty two cubits high, whose
circumference or circuit comprehended twelve cubits, which Solomon caused to be
made artificially, and placed them in the porch of the temple, one at the right
hand, which he named Iachin, and the other at the left hand which he called
Booz.

89. THE LAVER OF BRASS,
2. Kin. 7. 2 Cron. 4.
a vessel of great capascitie, full of water, placed by Solomon on the North
side of the temple, whereon were carved the pictures of cherubims, Lions, and
Oxen. In this the priests washed the beasts which should serve for burnt
offerings, which nevertheless were first washed in the sheep poole called
Probatica.

90 THE HOUSE OF COUNSEL,
1 Cron. 26
at the South side of the temple, where was the assembly of the elders of the
people.

91 THE CLOSETS,
1 Cro. 9, 2. Ierem. 35. Ezech. 42.
or vesteries, were side houses, long, broad, and high, like towers. In the
which, the Priests when they should enter into the holy place, did put off
their woollen garments, laying them up till the service was ended. 1. Mac. 4.
Wherein also they did eat the parts of the peace offerings.

92. THE SEA OF BRASS,
Exo. 30, 38
containing very great store of water, 3. King. 7.
which Solomon made, and placed on the South side of the temple, 3. Cron. 4.
upon twelve oxen of brass; wherein the priests entering into the temple to
serve at the alter, washed their hands and their feet.

93. THE NEW GATE,
Iere. 26, 36
the which was in the I Will of the temple toward the south where Jeremy
foreshewing that the citrie and temple should be destroyed, was taken. And
where Baruch red before the people the prophecy of Jeremy.

94. THE HOLY GATE,
3. Esd. 9.
otherwise called the brazen gate, which being in the Inset part of the
temple, opened toward the East: before the which Esdras red the law of God
before the people: and where the rulers of the Jews, a long time after that,
exhorted the seditious unto peace.

95. THE PORCH OF THE TEMPLE,
3, King. 6.
builded by Salomo^ before the Sanctuary, 2 Cron. 3.
the which was twenty cubits long, and ten broad.

96. THE RINGES SEAT,
Hier. in 2 Cron. 3.
the which was very lofty, the which Solomon prepared for the kings.

97. THE LOFTES OF THE SINGERS,
where divine praises were song with voice, Ezec: 40.
and with diverse instruments.

98. THE PLACE OF ZACHARIAS,
2 Para. 24.
where he was stoned between the temple and the altar. Mat. 23.


99. THE PLACE,
where the Jews would have stoned Christ. John. 10.


THE FOVRTH PART OF THE TEMPLE.
100 THE I WILL,
Ezech. 40.
which belonged to the Gentiles, Ios. 15, ant. 14, et, 6, bell. 6, et, 7, bell.
10, et, lib, 2. contra Apionem.
being also called the out set Court, which is the fourth part of the temple,
into the which men ascended by many stares. Whose inset space open to the aier
paued with all manner of bewtiful stones, had four excellent gates opening
toward the four parts of the world, which were shut with doors of brass.
This being a square porch much like a cloister, vphoulden with pillars of
Marble, and seeled over with cedar, was thirty cubits broad. The whole
circuit and compass of which porch, was five hundred paces. Into this Court
or porch all sorts of Jews and Gentiles might enter, both clean and
unclean: where upon it was called the Court of the Gentiles. Here hence it
was that Christ did cast out twice the buiers and sellers: and suffered not
any man to carry somuche as a vessel through the same. Here he discharged the
woman taken in adultery. Here he taught often times. Here also the Jews
would have stoned him. Finally here it was that he was glorified before the
Gentiles with a voice from heaven.

THE PARTS OF THE COURT OF THE GENTILES.
101 THE GOVLDEN EAGLE,
Iose. 17, ant 8, et, 12.
was of great waigth, set up by Herod the greater over the greatest gate of
the Temple, Item. 1, bell. 21, et, 2, bell, 1.
and was at the last pulled down by the Jews and cut in pieces, where upon
arose a great tumult, and many were slain.

102. THE TREASVRIE
; Mar: 7.
in Hebrew called Corban, a chest wherein was offered and kept such money,
Mar. 27.
as served for the necessaries of the sacrifices, 4. King. 12.
for the sustentation of the poor, and for the repairing of the Temple. When
Helidore, who was sent by the king of the Syrians, sought to take the spoil
of this treasury, 2 Cron. 24.
he was scourged by angels from heaven. And when Pilate by the like temiretie
would have bestowed this holy treasure for the bringing in of waters he was let
and hindered by a general uproar of the people: 2 Mac. 3.
the which nevertheless the Romans when they had won the city took and
carried way. Iose. 18. ant. 5
Also we read that Lysimachus was slain near unto this place: Iose. 17. bell.
11.
Here it was that Christ taught himself to be the light of the world, 2 Mac. 4.
and said that he should be lifted up upon the cross by the Jews. Joan. 8.
Christ sitting here, Mar. 12.
pronounced that the poor widow offering two mites, Luke 21.
had given more then all the rich. Iose. 18. aut 13, et, 19.
Over this treasury, for a monument of his adverse fortune turned into
prosperity, king Agrippa hanged up that golden chain, which the Emperor
Caius gave unto him: being equal in weight to that Iron chain with the which
his hands were bound by the commandment of the emperor Tiberius.

103. ACHAS DIAL,
4. King. 26.
the king, which he made, wherein the king Ezechias being sick, Isai. 38.
for a sign of recovering his health, the shadow of the sun by divine
miracle, went backwards ten degrees.

104. THE NORTH GATE,
1. Cron. 26.
whereof mention is often times made in the Scripture and in Josephus.

105 THE SOVTH GATE,
1. Cron. 26,
mentioned often times in Scripture, and in Josephus.

106 THE WEST GATE,
1. Cron. 26
the which also in the book of Cronicles, 1 Cro. 23.
is called the gate of foundation.

107. THE EAST GATE,
the which also is called the gate Sur, 1. Cr. 9, 26.
otherwise Seir: also the kings gate, and the Bewtifull gate: Neem. 3.
because of all the rest it was the greatest, 4. K. 11, 15.
highest, 2. Cron. 27
and fairest: by which also there was the principal entrance into the temple.
Acts. 3.
This being decayed was repaired by king Ioatham. And near unto this gate the
Apostle Peter, with his word, healed the man which was lame from his mothers
womb and sat there begging of alms.

108. THE TOWERS OF TROMPETORS,
Number. 10.
which were erected alofte in the west corners of the temple. Ios. 5. hell. l 9
In the tops whereof, the priests, wanting the use of belles, with two silver
trompets, called the people unto the temple. From thence also they told the
people of Festival days, of Sabboths, of fastes, and of solemn feasts.

109
HERE Christ writing with his fingar on the ground made the accusers of the
women taken in adultry ashamed and set her free. John. 8.


110 HERE
Christ making a whip of cords, cast out the buiers and sellers, John. 2.
together with their marchandis. Matthew. 21.


Thus far we have spoken of the Temple, and of the parts thereof: and now me
will prosecute the other parts of the daughter of Sion.

111. THE THEATER,
Iose. 15.
the which was builded in form of a half circle by Herod the Ascalonite king
of the Jews, Ant. 19, et. 20.
near unto the palace of the Machabees. In the circuit whereof in Imagerie
was set forth the tittles, Ant. 15.
the victories, and spoils, of Augustus Caesar; shining with silver and
goulde: where the better and more worthy sort sitting upon stayres and seats
made round in compass, and the rest standing therein, beheld the players, and
actors, and musicians, playing their comedies and tragedies, and other plays.

THE PLACES OF THE DAGHTER OF SION.
112 THE THROANE OF SOLOMON
. 3. King. 10.
It was a very great thron of Iuorie, 2 Cron. 9.
covered over with shining goulde, Iose. 8,
close and round in the top like a Judgment seat, having six steps or
stayres, at each end whereof were twelve Lions set. In this throne king
Solomon sat, when he heard the controversies of the people, and pronounced
Judgment, and capital sentences, appointing laws and statutes. Herein also
he sat, when in royal manner he would show forth his pomp, Lyra. in, 3.
glory and Riches, and when he intended to bestow upon his faithful servants
rewards. King. 7.


113 THE PASSAGE
which King Solomon made of strong timber, 2 Cron. 9,
to go from his palace into the temple.

114. THE TRIBVNALL,
was a public place, set before the house of Pilate, John. 19*
and appointed for Judgment, Mat. 27.
where the Lieutenants of Rome were wont to give sentence, Mar. 15.
which in Greek, Luke 24,
was called LITHOSTROTOS, that is, a place of pauement, and in Hebrew, GABATHA:
because it was high and lofty. Pilate sitting in this judgment seat, and
having good will to free Jesus standing before him, took water and washed his
hands before the people, saying, I am innocent from the blood of this just
man. But all the people crying out Crucify him, Crucify him, his blood be
on us and on our children: and further laying treason to his charge in that he
made himself a king, he condemned Christ to the death of the cross, in this
form of words, even as we found them in certain antiquities, from whence
we faithfully report them.

Iesum Nazarenum subuersorem Gentis, contemptorem Caesaris, et falsum Messiam,
vt maiorum suorum testimonio probatum est, ducite ad communis supplicij locum:
et cum ludibrio Regiae maiestatis, in medio duorum latronum cruci affigite. I
lictor, expedi cruces. That is to lay, carry ye to the place of common
execution Jesus of Nazareth, a subuerter of his nation, a contemner of Caeser,
and a false Messiah, as is proved by the testimony of the elders of his own
people, and crucify him between two thieves in reproach and scorn of his kingly
majesty. Go hang-ma^, and make ready with speed the crosses. The which sentence
pronounced he delivered him to the soldiors to be crucified. Who brought forth
Jesus, Isa. 53.
deprived of all beauty and comeliness, and more like to a leaper, then to
himself, by reason of the pains which they had laid on him, but that he
might be known unto the people, they put on him again his own garments,
and carieng his cross, with two thieves through the gate of Judgment, to be
crucified in mount Caluary.

Pilate sitting in this Tribunal seat in time of an Insurrection for
bestowing the holy treasures of the temple, Iose. 18, ant, 5, et, 2, bell.
which were called Corban, 8. Eusebius. 2.
gave a secret sign to the soldiors which were privily armed under their
clothes, Hist. celc. 6
that they should not use swords but clubs, Niceph. 2.
to beat down the tumultuous Jews. Hist. ec. 10.
By which means many of them were slain, many sore wounded, and very many
trodden under foot, even to death by their own company in the tumult.

After this Florus the Lieutenant, sitting in the same judgment seat, Io. 2,
bell, 15.
caused many of the Noble men and gentlemen of the Jews, to be beaten and
torn with rods and whips, and to be fastened on crosses: who also caused many
other massakers about the city, nothing sparing neither women, children, nor
sucking babes. The which were certain beginnings of vengeance taken by almighty
God upon the obstinat Jews for the shedding of the Innocent blood of Christ.

115. THE TOWER OF STRATO,
Ios. 13, ant. 18, et, bell, 3
in Greek called Pyrgus Sratonis, situate between the castle Antonia and the
temple: it was a hollow and an obscure passage where Antigonus was slain by
the soldiors of his brother.

116 THE VALLEY OF CEDRON,
Sopho. 1: Ios. 14, ant. 8, et, 15, an. 14.
broad, deep and dark, which in manner of a ditch or trench compassed the
temple round about. And because it was disposed after the fashion of a mortar,
it was called in He brue Macthes, Item. 1, bell. 5, et, 6. bell. 6* 7. et. 6,
Ios, 20. ant, 16.
and in Latin Pila. This was so exceeding deep, that men could not look down
from the roof of the temple into the bottom thereof but their eyes, would
dazzle and their heads seem to turn with gidinesse. Eusebius. 2.
Herein Merchantes, and all sorts of chapmen dwelled. Hist. eccle. 1 et, 23.
Into this valley James the brother of the Lord, first Bishop of Jerusalem,
for professing Jesus the son of God on the feast of passover was cast down
headlong from the battlementes of the temple at the commandment of Anani a
Saducei chief priest, and was immediately knocked on the head with a fullers
club, and was there buried nere unto the temple, his monument remaining there
alonge time after.

117 THE WAY OF THE CROSS,
by which Christ having received his judgment to be crucified, went forward
with painful and bloody steps to mount Caluary.

For beginning at the Palace of Pilate he made six and twenty steps (which
make threescore and five foot) unto the place where the cross was laid upon
him. D. Petrus Potens and M. Mattheus Stenberch did measure the city of
Jerusalem long since, by whose report this Description is made.


From whence (all the cittye gazeing on him) carrying his cross on his sore
shoulders, he came toward the Weste, or rather North-weste, fourscore
steps, which make two hundred foot, to the place, where men say, that he
fell down under his cross.

From thence going forward, by threescore steps and three foot (which make a
hundred fifty and three foot) he came to the place where the blessed virgin
Marye with John the Apostle met with him. Also petrus call entinus in his
book entitled the way of the cross.
And proceeding from hence by threescore and eleven steps, and one foot and
a half (which make a hundred seventy and nine foot) he came unto a certain
cross way, where Simon of Ciren was compelled to bear the hinder part of the
cross with Christ.

Taking his way hence by one hundred ninety and one steps, and half a
foot, (which comes to four hundred and seventy foot) he came to the place
where a certain woman met with him. And from thence going three hundred
thirty six steps and two foot, (which amounte to eighte hundred forty and
two foot) he came to the Iudiciarie gate where once again he fell with his
cross.

From thence he ascending faintely a very heard and stony way toward the
North, he gained three hundred forty and eighte steps and two foot (the
sum eight hundred seuentye and two foot) which brought him unto a two
foulde way, where certain women weeping spoke unto him: And from hence
laboring forward threescore steps and one and half a foot, (which make
four hundred and four foot) he fell down the last time, at the foot of
the mount CALVARIE. From thence he wearilie and faintingly went forward
eighteen steps, or forty five foot to the place where the hange-men drew
off his clothes, where they gave him to drink wine mixed with mirrh and gaul.

Then he went on twelve steps, or thirty foot even to the place where he
was nailed on the cross on mount CALVARIE. So that from the Palace of
Pilate, unto the place where Jesus was crucified, the distance is a thousand
three hundred and seven steps: or by another accoumpt, three thousand two
hundred sixty and eight foot,

We have made such exact descripion and demonstration of the way of the cross
(as also the way of the Captivity hereafter expressed under the number of two
hundred and seven) to the end that every Christian man, in all places, even
in the doors of his house, or walking often times in his garden, or being in a
journey, or in the Temple, either lying in his bed, may by the Imaginination
of his mind conceive the like way, and with godly affection of the heart may
meditate upon the passion of Christ: the which no doubt is both acceptable unto
God, and for our own souls health most profitable as the holy Scriptures,
and the writings of good men by their often exhortations do testify.

118. THE WAY OF ENTRANCE EOR THE HORSES,
4. King. 11.
which was between the palaces of Solomon, 2. Cron. 23.
and of the Queen. Ios. 9, ant, 7.
By which Athalia the Queen being brought out of the horse gate, was slain
in the valley of the Brook Cedron.

119 THE GALLERY,
made in form of a stone bridge, with many arches, extending it self with
ample largeness over the common street, adorned with open walks upon the
same. From the which there was a passage from the palace of Pilate, into the
castle of Antonia, and so from thence into the Temple. From this place, being
very safe, ye Lieutenants of Rome were wont to speak unto the people. Joan. 19.
Whereon Pilate standing, exhibited Jesus to the Princes and people of the
Jews to be looked on, being very soar scourged, spit on, clothed with a
purple cloak, and wearing a sharp crown of thorns upon his head, Breid. 14.
saying unto them Behold the man; Iul.
that he being thus afflicted, Sal. tom, 8. cap. 7.
they might have compassion on him. But they with confused voices cried, Ios.
2, bell, 1. 6, Item, 5. bell. 9.
crucify him, crucify him. Whereas yet an arch of stone is to be seen, and
is showed unto strangers, with this Inscription: Toll, Toll, crucifig -- the
rest cannot be red, by reason antiquity has worn it out. From this Gallery
king Agippa pronounced an eloquent oration to pacify the sedicious people,
exhorting them to obey the Romans, Josephus makes mention many times of this
Gallery.

120 THE CROSS OF CHRIST,
which was laid on his shoulder, Pasch. d. 207.
was fiftene foot long, and eight foot over, as we have received by tradition
of the elders.

121 HERE
it is said that Christ fell the first time under his cross. Pasch. d. 207.


122 HERE
also by tradition of some fathers, Breid. 14.
it is said, that the blessed virgin Marye with John and certain godly women
stood, Iul.
as Christ passed by with his cross.

123. CHRIST, being com to these two ways,
Math. 27,
and being wearied with the heavy burden of his cross, Mar. 15.
is said to have fallen. Luke. 23.
For the which cause, Breid. 14.
the soldiors and Jews, Iul.
fearing that he would faint, before he could be crucefied, Sa. 1, 8, c, 7.
took a certain man coming out of the country, Pas. d, 20 8.
named Simon of Cyren, and compelled him to carry the cross after Jesus.

THE THIRD PART OF THE CITY.
124 THE SECOND CITY.
4 King. 22.
This is the third part of the cittye, 2. Cron. 34
the which also had many narrow ways whereof mention is made sometime in the
Scripture wherein among others many prophets and noblemen dwelt. Sopho, 1.
This when the Romans had gotten, Hiero. in 2.
they were by the seditious again driven out of the city. Cron. 34.
Io. 6, bell, 10


THE PLACES OF THE SECOND CITY.
125. THE LAKE AMYGDALON,
Ios. 6, be, 12.
near unto the which Titus erected a Bulwark.

126. THE HOUSE OF MARIE,
the mother of John, and of Mark, Acts. 12.
one of the seventy and two disciples of Christ, wherein the faithful of the
primitive church, were wont to assemble themselves, and to pray. Where also
after the martyrdom of James the Apostle, Peter being cast into prison by
Herod Agrippa, Sal. tom. 8. cap, 4.
they prayed without ceassing for his deliverance. Who at the last being
brought out of prison by the angel, and knocking at the door of this house,
was by a damsel brought into the same. In the which place afterward a church
was builded which was the first of the Christian Greeks. And is an episcopal
seat, which the Sirians hold unto this day.

127. THE HOUSE OF OLDA THE PROPHETS,
the wife of Sellum; 4. King. 22.
a famous nobleman the great uncle of the prophet Jeremy: 2 Cron. 34.
whose counsel being asked by the king Josias, she foretold him of the
destruction of Jerusalem.

128. A CONDVIT,
and fountain, which by pipes sent forth water alofte: Ios. 2, be, 18 and 6,
bell. 6.
and by the like pipes derived water into Herod's palace, and about the same,
filling the cesterns thereof.

129 THE WOOD MARKET
which Cestius set on fire. Ios. 2, be 24.


130. THE HABITATION OF THE RECHABITES
: Iere, 35.
who living religiously according to the commandment of their Father,
possessed neither fields nor vineyards, and like pilgrims of this world, dwelt
not in houses but in tents, and wholely abstained from wine. Wherefore when
through the necessity of war they were compelled to come into the city,
Jeremy drinking unto them by the commandment of God, they would drink no wine.
By which example of their obedience, the same prophet reprehended the
disobedience of the obstinat Jews, neglecting the commandment of God; and
therefore he did set before the one a punishment, and before the other a
reward.

131 A LAKE,
which was situate between two walls of the city, Isai. 22.
whereof mention is made in Isai the prophet.

132 THE MIDDLE TOWER,
Ios, 6, bell, 9.
which was in the middle wall.

133 A MONVMENT
of Allexander Iannaeus the high Priest and king, Ios 13, ant 21, et, 6, bell, 8.
wherein he was buried by the authority of the Pharasies very sumptuously.

134 A MONVMENT
of Johannes Hircanus, Ios. 6, bell, 7.
high priest and Captain: of whom mention is often made in Josephus.

135. THE SECOND WALL,
2 Cro. 32,
the which is also called the middle wall, Neem. 3, 12
bewtified with many gates, Ios. 6, bell, 6.
and divided with fourteen towers* the which wall Ezechias the king repaired,
and made more strong and higher.

136 THE PALACE OF HEROD,
Ios. 6, be 6.
the which was builded by HEROD the Ascalonite king of the Jews, (who killed
the Innocents) with sundry sorts of pollished marble stones nere unto the west
wall of the city, from the old wall, even to the middle wall: being most
singularly bewtified with silver and gould most strongelie fortefied with an
iron gate, Acts 12.
and three most excellent towers, Ios, 2. be, 17
to wit, Hippic, Mariam, and Phasel, which in greatness, strength and beauty,
excelled all the towers of the whole world. Within was the kings haule, which
being builded on high and very lofty with unspeakable magnificence, was
wholly compassed about with most beautiful towers, Luke. 23.
parlours, chambers, galleries, porches, and with pillars, with the which there
was an enclosed court open to the air.

In this haule, Christ was presented to Herod Antipas Tetrarch of Galilie, who
killed John the Baptist; which Herod, asked Christ many questions, who was
there constantly accused by the Jews. Whom, when he answered nothing, Breid.
14.
the same Herod and his whole rout despised and scorned: Iul.
and so sent him to Pilat clad in white, as if he had been a fool, or a
iester. But now this palace is a scoole for children of the Infidelles.

137. THE MIDDEL GATE,
Ierem. 39. and 52.
of the second wall, wherein the uttermost walls being broken, the princes of
the king of Babylon did sit.

138. THE UTTERMOST COURT,
compassing the Haule of Herod round about, Io. 2, be, 17.
where the kings soldiers did watch and ward. Wherein was the kings prison
whereinto malefactors were put. In this prison Saint Peter was shut up by king
Herod Agrippa, Act. 12.
who had slane James the greater. Which Peter being bound with two chains, and
most safely kept by four quaternions of soldiors all the days of sweet
bread: But in the night before the day whereon he should have been put to
death, he was by the Angel of the Lord loosed from his chains, and by him
brought forth through an iron gate, by the first and second watch, into the
city.

139 THE LAKE, CALLED STRVTIVM,
which was the middle Lake. Iose. 6, bell, 12.
Here also Titus caused a bulwark to be made.

140. THE TOWER HIPPIC:
The which being four square, Iose. 6. bell. 5. 6. 7
was builded in the second wall, upon a high hill. It was four score and five
cubits high, and having two tops was to be seen a far off. It was
marueilouse strong, builded by Herod the elder: who having in the war lost
his friends the Hippics, called this tower after their name Hippic.

141. THE TOWER MARIAMME,
Iose, ant, 9. and bell. 16. and 6. bell. 6,
The which being fifty cubits high stood aloft in most bewtiful manner, upon
a high hill of the old wall, the which Herod builded for a memorial of
Mariamme his best beloved wife, whom he had slain, and called it after her
name Mariamme. And because it carried the name of a Queen, therefore it was
more beautiful in show then the other.

142. THE TOWER PHASELVS,
Ios, 14. ant. 22. et 16.
which being fower-score and ten cubits high, set upon a high place of ye old
wall, and made alofte in form of a ball was of woonderful height and exceeding
strong. ant 5. et 17 ant 14. et 1 bell, 11. et 6. bell. 6. et 7. bell, 18.
Which Herod builded after the fashion of the tower Pharus in Alexandria. And
in the honor of his brother Phaselus called it Phaselus, who being taken
prisoner by the Parthians, and having no liberty to use neither weapon nor
hands: ran his head against a stone and so killed himself. How this and the
other two towers were left standing after the destruction of Jerusalem, read
under the number of (1.) going before.

143. HEROD'S PARK,
which had in it an orchard and a garden, Ios. 6, bell. 6.
watered with ponds, rivers, and fountains: replenished with sundry wild
beasts, fishes and fouls: having many large walks, and round about the same,
many towers of tame doves.

144 THE HOSPITAL,
Ios. 13, ant. 15.
which Hircanus the high priest founded, with the money which he got out of the
sepulcher of David. Egesi. 1, hi.
wherein pilgrims, poor men, and such as were Impotent were sustained and kept.
Iudaic, 1.


145. THE WRESTLING PLACE,
Io. 6, bell, 6
the which was placed in Herod's Pallas. It was large, serving in the winter
time for wrestlers, and for other exercises, and pastimes, wherewith men
recreated themselves.

THE FOVRTH PART OF THE CITY.
146. THE NEW CITY,
called in Greek Caenopolis, the fourth part of the city; Ios. 19, an. 7
and 2. be. 15. and 6. bell. 6.
the which was severed as the other parts of the city were with walls, and
many narrow ways, which went cross, extending to the walls of the city.
Wherein dwelt woolle sellers, Carpenters, Smithes, and other workmen and
artificers.

THE PLACES OF THE NEW CITY.
147 BEZETHA,
a mountain, Ios. 6, bell, 6..
the which having many houses built thereon was inhabited by the common sort of
people.

148 THE CASTLE OF THE ASSIRIANS,
Ios. 6, bell, 8 and 13,
nere unto the which Titus pitched his tents, at such time as he had gotten
the wall of the city. This castle stood more then an arrow shoot from the
second wall.

149. THE THIRD WALL,
the which also is called the outset wall, which king Agrippa made upon the
common charge of the citizens, Ios 19, ant 7 Item, 2. bell. 10. and 6. bell. 6.
extending it more broad and high then it was before. This wall was very firm
and strong, five and twenty cubits high. It had four score and ten square
and lofty towers which were of great force, distant one from the other two
hundred cubits; whose building and bewty in stone work, was nothing inferior
to that of the temple.

150 THE BROAD STREET:
Neem. 3. 8.
the which also was caled the street of the gate of Ephraim.

151 THE KINGS CAVES,
Ios. 6, bell. 6.
upon the which the third wall of the city was builded in length.

THE GATES AND TOWERS ABOUT THE CITY.
152 CAPHETETA,
1 Match. 12.
the East wall of the Cittye upon the brook Cedron, which Ionathas Machabeus
repaired.

153 THE CORNER STONE,
Isa. 28.
which was most hard, being the firm foundation of mount Sion. Psalm. 117:
This was a figure of Christ, Neem. 3.
Acts. 4.
who is the strong and stable foundation of his church. Romans 9
1 Pet, 2.


154 THE GATE OF THE CORNER,
so called because it was situate in the north-easte corner of the city, 4
King. 14.
next unto the brook Cedron. 2 Cron. 25.
The which also was called the gate of Benjamin, Iere, 31. 37* 38.
because the way led through the same unto the tribe of Benjamin. By this gate,
zach. 14.
wood was brought into the city out of the desert. Broc, itin, 6.
In this gate also Jeremy the prophet was apprehended, Sal. tom. 8. cap, 5.
whose ruins are now to be seen a great way out of the city.

155 THE GOVLDEN GATE,
situate between the gate of the valley and the gate of the fountain, so
called because it was gilden with goulde: Eze. 43. 5
It was also called the East gate, Broc, itin 6.
because it was builded on the east side of the Temple. Sal. to. 9. cap. 4
And because it led by a very short way, from the temple of mount Oliuet, it
was rather a gate of the temple then of the city: Breid. 14 pasch die. 184.
and therefore Neemias makes no mention thereof. By this gate Christ came
riding upon an ass into the city of Jerusalem at what time men cut down
palms and strowed them in his way, crying Hosanna before him.

156 THE GATE OF EPHRAIM,
4. King. 41.
which now of some is called Saint Stephens gate, 2. Cron. 25
situate on the north part tending toward the way which leads unto the tribe
of Ephraim, Nee. 8, 12,
where upon it was called the gate of Ephraim. From this gate unto the gate of
the corner Ioas king of Israel, Ios. 9, ant, 10.
beat down the wall of Jerusalem by the space of four hundred cubits, Broc,
itin 6 sal. tom. 8. cap, 5,
and in triumphant manner he being carried into the city in his chariot
through that breach, became Lord of the cittye. The which wall together with
the towers thereof, Ozia king of Judah afterward restored again.

157. THE WATER GATE,
Nee, 2. 3. 8
the which was situate between mount Sion, 2 Cro. 23,
and the mount Moria, Iere 19, 31.
in the valley called Mello, Broc, itin, 6. sa, tom. 8, c, 5.
toward the east. It was called the water gate, because it opened a passage,
unto the fountain of the water of Siloe: and because horses were carried
through the same to be watered in the brook Cedron. And for this cause it was
called the east horse gate and it tended toward the valley Gehennom.

158 THE GATE GENATH,
or the gate of king Herod's Garden, Ios. 6, bell. 6. 7. 8.
which was not far from the second wall of the cittye. By which, water was
brought up into the Tower Hippic. By this gate the seditious privily salyed
out many times upon the Romans.

159 THE GATE OF THE KINGS GARDEN,
4. King. 25.
which in mount Sion was placed between two walls of the castle: by which
king Zedechias fled in the night.

160 THe gate of the high priests palace,
Neem. 3.
at the south side of the city.

161 THE FISH GATE,
2 Cro. 33.
the which was situate next to the tower of David in the valley Mello, Sopho.
1.
between mount Sion, Neem, 3, 2.
and the lower city, toward the weste: and by the vault adjoining to the
same, Broc. itin, 6, Sal, to. 8. cap. 1, 5.
it gave a convenient passage too and from the city to every man. And it was
called the fish gate, because through the same, fishes were brought into the
cittye from Ioppe, and from other towns of the sea cost. This also had other
names, as the gate of David: and the merchants gate. David's gate, because it
was next to David's tower: and the merchants gate, because by the same much
merchandise were carried into the city from Bethelem, Hebron, Gaza, from
AEgipt, and from AEthiopia. By this gate strangers that came from the weste,
were wont to enter into the city.

162. THE DOVNG GATE,
Neem. 2. 3. 12.
on the east side of the city, toward the corner gate, on the north-east,
carried all the doung and filth of the city which the rain gathered together,
into the brook Cedron. Where upon it was rightly called the doung gate.

163. THE GATES OF WOMEN'S TOWERS
. Broc. iti. 6.
On the north end of the city, Sa. t, 8c. 5.
by which the seditious brake forth upon the Romans, Ios. 6, bell. 2. and 5.
when they beseeged the city.

164. THE VALLEY GATE,
2 Cron. 26.
so named, Neem. 2. 3. 12.
because it made way into the valley of Iosephat, situate in the midst between
the doung gate, Broc. itin, 6,
and the goulden gate, and not far distant from the sheep market, Breid. 14.
and the poole called Probatica. Iul.
The which also for this cause deserved to be called the drove gate, Sal. to,
8. cap 5.
because the flocks of cattle which were soulde in the sheep market and were
to be offered for sacrifice in the temple, were brought in by this gate. But
now it is called Saint Stephens gate of the first martyr Stephen, which was
stoned to death not far from the same.

165. THE OLD GATE,
which being on the west part of the city, Nee, 3, 12*
was called in time past by the Iebusites the gate Iebus. Deuteronomy. 22.
It was also called the judgment gate, because in old time, Ruth. 4,
the Judges did sit there in Judgment. John 19.
For then the Seniors did exercise justice and Judgment in the gates of their
cities. Heb. 13.
And such as were condemned to die, went out at this gate. Broc. iti. 6.
Where upon Christ was led out of the same to be crucified. Sal, tom 8. cap, 7.
Of this gate, there are at this day some oulde remainders and ruins to be
seen.

166 THE ROCK
: which was very high, going alonge from the tower Psephina unto mount Sion,
Broc, itin, 6
upon the which the whole west wall of the city stood.

167 THE TOWER ANANEEL,
Iere, 31.
the which being not far distant from the corner gate, Zach. 14.
toward the east and by north, Nee. 3, 12.
was very strong and notable: whereof the holy scripture makes mention often
times.

168 THE CORNER TOWER,
2 Cron. 26.
standing alofte upon the corner gate, which king Ozias did strongly repaier,
and made it one hundred and fifty cubits high.

169 THE TOWER OF DAVID
: Vuil. Tyr, 9 be, sac, 3.
strong and lofty, the which was builded by king David in a corner of two
deep valleys, Broc. itin, 6.
on the top of a broken rock, with four square stones most firmly joined
together with Iron and lead: whose singular fortitude, and notable bewty, for
the commendation of Christ's spouse (which is the Church) is spoken of by
Solomon when he says. Thy neck is like the tower of David, builded with
bulwarks, where upon there hang a thousand shields; Cant. 4:
yea all the weapons of the Giants.

170 THE HIGH TOWER,
2 Cron. 26.
which was builded upon the gate of the valley. Ios. 9, an, 11
The which also king Ozias repaired, and that it might be seen beyond mount
Oliuet, he made it one hundred and fiftye cubits high.

171 THE LANTERN TOWER,
situate on the North end of the city, which men think was so called,
because fire was continually kept there, Nee. 3, 12.
to serve as a mark both for land and seafaring men, to direct them the right
way.

172. THE GREAT TOWER,
Neem, 3.
which standing near the wall of the temple was higher then the rest.

173. THE TOWER MEAH,
Nee. 3, 12.
otherwise Emat, that is to say of one hundred cubits, which was not far from
the temple.

174. THE TOWER PSEPHINA,
Ise. 6, bell, 2. 5, 6.
which was eighte square, of seventy cubits high, founded at the North-weste
corner of the city, Broc. Itin, 6
upon a very high rock: being like a strong tower, which by reason of the
exceeding hight thereof was fearful, from whence on a clear day, men might
behold Arabia, the sea, and the vttermoste borders of the Hebrews. The ruins
whereof are as yet to be seen.

175 THE TOWER OF SILOE,
Luke 13.
which falling in Christ's time slew eighteen men.

176 THE DEEP VALLEY,
Broc. itin, 6
which compassing mount Sion on the North and south part, went all along the
weste side of the city, even to the gate of Ephraim, making a fit and
convenient ditch for the City.

THE PLACES WITHOUT THE CITY. THE PLACES AT THE EAST PART OF THE CITY.
177. THE WATER,
Aristaeas. lib. de 72. interpretibus.
which was brought out of the temple by conduit pipes under the earth, issued
forth here with great noise, Mat, 21. 26
and so ran into the brook Cedron. Mar. 11. 14


178. BETHANIA,
the noble castle of Marry and of Martha the sisters of Lazarus, having many
houses, the which was situat beyond mount Oliuet, Luke 10. 29
distant from Jerusalem fifteen furlongs, Ioh. 11* 12.
that is, two Italian miles. From which place, though it were but a little way
off, yet by reason that mount Oliuet lay between, the city Jerusalem could
not be seen: except from a little hill from whence part of mount Sion might
be seen. Christ often times lodged in this house of Martha: where he preached
the word of God to Mary sitting at his feet. Here he raifed up Lazarus to
life, after he had been buried four days, and began to stincke. Here, he
sitting in the house of Simon the leaper, at the table together with Lazarus,
Martha serving the^ Mary anointed him with a most precious ointment.

179. BETHPHAGE,
Math, 21.
a little village, belonging to ye priests situate at the east foot at the
mount Oliuet, Mark 11.
from whence Christ sent two of his disciples unto the Castle Opposite, Luk 19.
or over against them, John. 12.
to fetch the Ass and the Coulte. The which brought, and the disciples
clothes laid on the Coulte, he road on the same into Jerusalem. But coming
down from mount Oliuet, and seeing the city, he wept on her, and prophesied
her utter ruin because she knew not the day of her visitation.

180 THE CASTLE OPPOSITE,
Mat, 21.
or which lies over against you (to use the words of Christ) when he sent his
disciples to fetch him the Ass. Mar, 11.
It was a village right over against Bethphage. Luke 19.


181 THE WELL,
John 11.
nere unto Bethanie, where when the Lord came to raise up Lazarus, Martha
first met with him, and afterward called forth her sister Mary.

182 THE LITTLE HILL,
at the foot of mount Oliuet, Ios. 6, be. 13
near unto the Doue-house a little above the valley of Siloe.

183. THE WITHERED FIG TREE,
planted beside the way of Bethanie, Mat, 21.
the which bearing no fruit, but garnished only with leaves, was curssed of
Christ and so presently withered.

184 THE DRAGON FOVNTAINE,
which does spring even at this day, Neem. 2.
which was between the valley and the dung gate.

185. GEHENNOM,
the which also was called Benhennom, Iosu. 15, 18
that is to say, the valley of the sons of Ennom. It was a place which was
situate in the Suburbs of the city of Jerusalem toward the South-easte. 3.
King, 11.
In which place of Benhinnom was the tabernacle and the Idol Moloch: Acts. 7,
the which Idol as it was chief and principal among all the other Idols, so
the same being the greatest abomination and most hated unto God, he often
times forbad the same in the scriptures. It was an Idol the matter whereof was
brass; made in the likeness and similitude of a king, it was hollow within,
and had a head like to the head of a Calfe, the other parts or members of the
body having the shape and fashion of a man, the arms whereof were stretched
out: whereto the children that should be offered were made fast, with the
vehement and extreme heat of the Idol were burned and utterly consumed being
so houlden as it were of the same between his arms. For when the Idol was
made red whot with the fire which they had put into the hollownesse of the
same, then the most wicked parents of these children in most cruel and
barbarous manner, delivered up their sons and their daughters to these
detestable and devilish Imbracings of the Idol, that so they might be
burnte. And this they did of a certain deuelish devotion, offeringe them up
to the Devil Moloch for a burnt offering of most filthy savor. Amiddest
these horrible torments where with they were thus tormented, the miserable
Clamor of the children could in no wise be heard, whereby the parents might
in any sort be moved to pity or compassion, for that the priests of this
Idol Moloch, during the whole time of the sacrifice, 4. King. 16. and. 21
did usually make an exceeding great noise both with the trumpettes and drums.

Whereupon that place was called also Tophet. In this abominable manner, 2
Cro. 28 33.
Achaz, and Manasses also, 4. King. 23.
kings of Judah, being even as mad as the Common people, offered up their
sons to the Devil Moloch. The which detestable madness, the godly king
Josias seeking at the length to redress, brake in pieces the image of Moloch,
cut down his Groves, and defiled the place thereof with the filthiness of
dead Carcasses, of bones, and of other unclean things, and appointed it to
be a perpetual dunghill for ever.

In this Valleye Ieremye at the commandment of GOD, Iere 7, 19, 32.
breaking an earthen pot in pieces against the ground, Isai. 30.
before the Elders of Judah: prophesied that GOD would after the selfsame
manner, break and destroy both the Cittye and the people. According to which
prophecy, there was so great and mighty a multitude of people slain there,
because they had filled this place with the blood of Innocent children, that
this place was called no more the valley of Tophet, but Poliandron, that is to
say a heap of many dead bodies, whose Carcases lyeng there unburied, became
meat for the birds of the air and for the beasts of the field.

186. GETHSEMANI,
a ferme place, at the foot of mount Oliuet. Math. 26.
This had many fruitful olive trees. When Christ intended to go unto the
garden that was in mount Oliuet, Mar. 14.
he came from his last supper into this place, heavy and sorrowful unto the
death.

187 THE GARDEN OF OLIVET,
in the mount of Oliuet, Mat. 26.
where Christ prayed unto his father three times, Mar. 14.
that the cup of his passion might pass from him. Luke 23,
And being in an agony, as he continued in prayer, John. 18.
he swet blood which fell drop by dropp unto the earth: Hier. in loc,
at what time he was comforted by an angel from heaueu. Heb, lib, G.
In Hieroms time there was a Church builded on this place, Broc, itin 6.
which is as yet to be seen. Bre. 14. Iul.


188 THE KINGS GARDEN,
the which also was called the enclosed garden. 2. King. 25.
It was in the Suburbs of Jerusalem, 3. King. 1.
walled round about. And like to a parradise it was planted with trees, Cant. 4.
of all sorts of fruits, 4 Kings 25.
with herbs, Iere. 39. 52
with flowers of most sweet savor, and what soever else that might delight the
senses. Iose. 7, ant. 15. et. 9. ant 11.
It had also most pleasant and convenient walks. In this was that famous
fountain Rogel, and the stone Zoeleth, of both which there is often mention
made in the Scripture; where Adonias when he purposed to reign, offered
oblations, and with his followers made a feast.

189. THE GROAVE OF MOLOCH,
4. King. 23.
consecrated to the Idol Moloch: Hieron. in Ier, 19, et, in Mat, 10.
where the worshippers thereof, after they had ended their sacrifice, committed
fornication under the shadow of the trees.

190 THE MOUNT OF OFFENSE
; 3. King. 11.
it was a very high mountain, 4. King, 23.
situate on the south side of the kings garden. Where the most wise Solomon
being now old, was seduced and made folish by his strange wives, building a
temple to Melchom the Idol of the Ammonites, which also he worshipped.

191 THE MOUNT OLIVET
; or mount of Olives, so called by reason of the great plenty of olives which
grew there: called also in Greek Elaeon, which otherwise also is named the
famous, and holy mountain. It was situate on the east side of Jerusalem. It
was separated from the high city, the valley of Cedron lying between, distant
from the city a Saboth days journey, according to the Scripture: but
according to Josephus, Dan. 11.
it was distant five furlonges: who also adds that the top of the hill was
six furlongs from the city. Zach. 14.
For it was of so great hight, Acts. 1.
that from the same, not only almost all the streets of Jerusalem but also the
dead sea, Broch. itin. 5.
might easily be seen. And besides the olives it abounded with palms, Breid.
14. Iul.
pines, mirtells, and other fruitful trees.

In the top of this hill, the holy king David fleeing from the face of his
son Absalom, weping, and barefooted worshipped God. 2. King. 15.
In this mountain also his son Solomon forgetting all godliness, 3 King. 11.
erected a temple to Astaroth the Idol of the Sidonians, 4. King. 23.
right over against the temple of Jerusalem (from whence every one that
committed Idolatry might beeseene.) The which also with all other places
dedicated to Idols, Josias utterly destroyed.

Christ often times came up into this mountain, both for quietness sake and
also to pray, Luke 21, 22 24.
tarieng there all the night. John. 18. 8.
Also from the top of this mount, he ascended into heaven, Act. 1.
in the presence of his disciples standing there and behoulding him, after he
had blessed them.

192. THE MOUNT OF OFFENSE,
a high mountain, on the other side of the brook Cedron, and on the North side
of the mount Oliuet, 3. King. 11.
distant from Jerusalem four furlonges. 4 King. 23.
Whereon Solomon by the motion of his heathenish wives, Broc, itin, 6.
builded a Temple to Chamosh the Idol of the Moabites. Sa. 6, cap, 5
This also Josias brake down. In the time of the Machabees a Castle was
builded on this mount, some tokens whereof are to be seen at this day.

193 THE FVLLERS MONVMENTE
: the which was not far from the Corner gate, Iose. 6, bell, 6
in the North-easte.

194. THE PALM TREESE,
Neem. 8.
whereof mention is made in Neemias, John. 12.
and in Saint John's Gospel.

195 THE DOVE-HOVSE,
on the South end of the mount Oliuet; Ios. 6, bell. 13.
It was made of stone, round, lofty, and fashioned like a tower, wherein were
store of doves to the number of four or five thousand.

196. THE BRIDGE OF CEDRON,
Bre. 14. Iul.
made of stone, with one arche erected over the brook Cedron, which Helena the
Emperes caused to be made in that place.

197. THE SEPVLCHER OF THE VIRGIN MARY,
Joan. Damasce de dormitione Deipar.
which was in the valley of Iosaphat near unto the ferme place of Gethseman,
at the foot of mount Oliuet wherein the body of the most holy and blessed
virgin, was decently buried by the Apostles.

198. THE COMMON PLACE OF BVRIALL,
4. King. 23.
which was in the velley of Iosaphat, Ierem. 26.
where the common sort of people were buried.

199. THE FOVNTAINE OF SILOE,
Isai. 8. 22.
whereto was joined the poole of Siloe, Nee, 3.
the which also is called the lower poole, lyeng on the weste side of the
valley of Iosophat, and springing from the root of mount Sion. The water
thereof being clear, sweet, and plentiful, ran with a still and calm
stream into the brook Cedron.

This fountain king Hezechias repaired. In the poole of this fountain the man
which was borne blind washing his eyes which Christ had anointed with clay
and his spittle, Iobn 9.
received his sight. Broc, itin 6.
Josephus testefieth that Siloe, Breid. 14 Iul.
and all other waters which were without the city, did so fail and vanish
away before the coming of Titus Caesar, pasch die. 197.
that water was soulde hard by them. Io. 6, bell, 11
And after his coming, they did so abound to him and his host, that they had
water enough for them and for their cattle. Concerning the virtue of this
water, the most dilligent Surueyour of this place Saligniacus, writes in this
sort. The water of this fountain is of great price at this day, even among
the Saracens themselves. For whereas naturally they be rammage and stink like
Goats, Sa. t. 10. c. 1
they washing themselves and their children therein, do mittigate the evil
savor thereof. The Turks also make great accoumpte thereof, for that they
find by experience, that the use thereof is good for the sight of their eyes.

200 STEPHEN,
Acts. 7.
the Deacon, in the very flower of his youth, was stoned to death, praying to
God for them that stoned him, whose garments the young man Paul kept. This
man, was the first that triumphed with the palm of martyrdom.

201 THE BROOK CEDRON
; is a river on the east side of Jerusalem between the same and mount
Oliuet, 1. King. 3.
which being increased with diverse springs issuing from all parts out of the
mountain, Iere, 31.
and pooles, Ios. 8, ant. 1. et 6. bell, 13.
ran through the valley of Iosaphat, Ezech. 47.
and Gehennom with a silver stream, and so passed through the plains of the
wilderness into the dead sea.

On the banks of both side this river, there grew many fruitful trees: the
pleasant show whereof, together with the gardens near adjoining which were
watered with the cristall streams of Cedron, Broc, itin, 6.
greatly delighted the eyes and minds, Sal. tom. 9. cap, 1.
of such as walked by the same. King David passed over this river bare footed,
2. King. 15.
bare headed, and with watery eyes, accompanied with his most trusty friends,
fleeing from the face of his son Absalom. Christ also went over the same,
with his disciples when he went to the garden of mount Oliuet.

202 THE VALLEY OF IOSOPHAT,
Ios. 6, bell. 3.
the which also is called the valley of Cedron, Hieron. in loc. Heb. litt. C.
and the valley of Mountains. It is a wide and deep valley between Jerusalem
and mount Oliuet, zach. 14.
compassing the city on the east part, Broc, itin. 6 sal. tom. 8. cap, 8.
the which is made very fruitful by the passage of the brook Cedron. The
great deepenes of this valley was much filled by Titus and Adrian the Roman
Emperors, 3 King. 15.
casting into the same great store of earth with the ruins of the temple and
city, 4 King. 23.
yet it was not therewith any thing near leueled. 2 Cron. 15. 2. 9. 30.
In this valley, the godly and religious kings of Judah, Asa Ezechias and
Josias, burned the Idols of the temple, and cast their ashes into the brook
Cedron.

This valley was the common place of burial for the whole city, Joel. 3.
where all the common sort of people were buried. Sal, tom. 9. c, 2.
For it was the manner of the Jews to bury their dead courses out of the
city. And in the same place, the Turks are now buried.

203. THE VALLEY OF SILOE,
Iose. 6, bell, 13.
so named of the fountane of Siloe: Salig. to. 8. cap. 2.
wherein the Jews which at this day dwell at Jerusalem, are buried.

204 THE WAY OF THE FVLLERS FIELD,
4 Kings 25.
lying between the water of Siloe and the South-easte corner of the city.
Isai. 7. 36.
Here the Prophet Isaias foretoulde king Achaz, that Christ should be borne of
a virgin.

205 THE WAY OF THE CAPTIVITY
. Joan. Pasc. in pereg. s. die. 190. 193. 194. 197. 200. et 207.
These small pricks traced forth in length (as you see) do demonstrate the
way, by which Christ was led captive for the redemption of mankind. For
being come into the garden of mount Oliuet to pray after his last supper in
the parlour of mount Sion, and having offered to GOD his Father the holy
sacrifice of prayers, Isai. 53.
returning from thence he met with his enemies which came to take him, Iere.
11.
to whom he yielded himself. Who had scarce gone forty steps from the
place where he prayed, but the soldiors which were sent from the high
priests and rulers of the people, laid hands on him, took him, and bound
him.

From whence he was presently carried as a meke Lamb by those ravening woolues,
armed with weapons, Psalm. 109.
over the brook Cedron, to the house of ANNA, which was distante from the
place where he was taken, two thousand three hundred and sixty pases. And
from hence he was carried to the Palace of CAIPHAS three hundred and thirty
paces. And so afterward he was conducted by the soldiers and by the people
to the palace of Pilate, which was distante from that of CAIPHAS a thousand
pases. And from thence to the palace of HEROD which was distante three hundred
and fifty paces. Lastly from thence again to the palace of Pilate he was
carried by another way then that which he came, the distance of six hundred
else which make about the length of half a mile and more. The pases whereof
we speak here, contain two foot and a half.

206 THE WAY, TO ANATHOT,
Broc, itin 6.
to Bethel, and to the wilderness.

207 THE WAY TO IERICO, and to ENGADDI,
Luke 10.
of the which there is mention made in some of the Evangelists. Mar, 11.


208. HERE THE THREE APOSTLES,
Mar. 14.
Peter, James, and John, Luke 22.
sat while Christ prayed in the Garden, being about a stones cast from the
self same place.

209 HERE
the other eight Apostles tarried being distante about a quarter of a mile from
the other three places. Mat, 26.


210. HERE CHRIST,
Mat, 26.
to make us free, was betrayed with a kiss by the Traitor Judas, Mar. 14.
and was bound with hard and straight bands (as if he had been an evil doer) by
the Jews, whom he beat down backward to the ground by the word of his mouth.
Luke 22.
There Simon Peter moved suddenly with great feruencie, John. 18.
stroke the servant of the high Priest whose name was Malchus, and cut off his
right ear: which christ immediately restored again. But the rest of the
Apostles being afeard left the Lord and fled.

211. IN this place of mount Oliuet
right over against the temple near to a certain water, Mat. 23, et. 25.
Christ sat with his disciples, Mar. 13.
making a long sermon concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, Luke 21.
the afflictions of the godly to come, the coming of false prophets, the
signs of the end of the world, and concerning the manner of the last
judgment. In the which place, there was afterward builded a temple which is
now desolate.

212. THIS WAY Christ came to Jerusalem,
Mat. 21.
sitting upon the Asses coult, Mar. 11.
waited on with a great company of men, Luke 19.
some going before, John. 12.
and othersome following after him: where unto also a great number which came
out of the city joined themselves. So that he seemed to be received of all
men with so great favor, that many spraed their clothes in the way, some
cutting down the bows of palms, olives, and other trees, to honor him there
withal, strowed them in the way. And the voices of such as rejoiced was heard
in every place as he went resounding with these cries, Osanna in the highest,
blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. With this pomp and triumph
the true king and humble triumpher, entered in at the goulden gate, and rode
about the temple, and the greatest part of the city. With this new
spectacle, the whole city was moved saying, Who is this? The multitude which
followed him answered, This is Jesus the Prophet of Nazareth a City af Galile.
Then the cry of those that reioysed and were glad increased more and more,
and men and women, young and old, yea which is wonderful) the very infants,
which came from al parts, cried out together, Osanna to the son of David,
Blessed be the king of Israel, which comes a king in the name of the Lord.
Blessed be the kingdom that comes in the name of him, that is Lord of our
father David: peace in Heaven, and glory in the highest, Osanna in the highest.
With these joyful voices and cries, they proclaiming their Messiah, followed
him even into the Temple. Where this new king happily beginning his kingdom,
presently healed the blind and the lame. In the mean time the wicked and
envious Pharisees, the chief priests and Scribes, do fret and fume, who
seeing the great maruels which he did, and the children crying in the temple,
Osanna to the son of David, said among themselves, Do ye not see how we
profit nothing? Behold the whole world goes forth after him. Psalm. 8.
Whereupon they begin with Jesus himself saying, Master, do thou hear
what these say? Rebuke thy Disciples. To whom he showing that this was long
before prophesied of by the Prophet, answers, Why should they not? Have ye
not read, Out of the mouth of very babes and sucklings thou have ordained
praise? I say unto you if these hold their peace, the stones shall presently
cry.

THE PLACES ON THE SOVTH PART OF THE CITY.
213. ABACVC.
Dan. 14.
Here the Angel of the Lord takes up the prophet Abacuc by the hair of the
head, Breid. 14. Iul,
as he was carrying to the reapers in the field their dinner, and carried him
with the same meat into Babylon to feed Daniel, Salig. t. 10. cap. 2.
being shut up in the Lions den. Who being fed, he brought Abacuc hither
again.

214 ACELDEMA, or Haceldemach,
Zach. 11.
that is to say the field of blood. Mat. 27.
It was a potters field situate at the South part of mount Sion having
behind it a hill of the same name. Act. 1.
This field, Niceph. 8.
by the counsel of the Jews, Hist ec. 13.
was bought with the thirty pieces of silver for the which Judas soulde
Christ, Broc. itin. 6
that it might serve to bury strangers in, Breid. 14 Iul.
the middle part whereof the Emperesse Helen caused to be enclosed with a
four square wall in length seventy and two foot, and in breadth fifty. Salig.
tom, 6 cap, 5, et, t. 10, cap, 1.
And the same to be covered over with a roof having seven loope holes by
which the dead bodies of Christians might be let down. Pas. d. 197.


The virtue of this earth is reported to be wonderful, and almost incredible,
to wit, that it brings and consumes into dust, the bodies of the dead men
within the space of twenty four hours, leaving nothing but the bones.

215 THE FVLLERS FIELD,
4 King: 18.
which lay all along at the South end of the city, Isai. 7. 36.
even from the valley of Siloe east ward unto mount Gihon, toward the west and
between the wall of the city and the water. In this field the Fullers did
scour their clothes in the brook next adjoining, and did set them on
tainters, and so dry them.

216. THE DEN, OR CAVE, of James the less,
wherein he is said to have hid himself by the space of three days, Hie. to.
1. in catal, scrpt. Eccle.
having vowed not to eat bread until Christ was risen again. For the which
cause the Lord appeared to him a part, 1 Cor, 15.
after his resurrection.

217 THE CAVE OF PETER THE APOSTLE,
Breid, 18, Iul.
wherein after he had denied the Lord thrice, he repented him and mourned
with many tears.

218 THE TENTS OF THE ASSYRIANS,
of whom for a revenge of their blasphemy, the most strong to the number of
185000 in the very first night of the beseeging Jerusalem, 4. King. 18. 19.
were slain by the Angel of the Lord, 2 Cron, 32.
and (as Augustine reports) their bodies were brought into dust, August, t.
10 ad fratres in ere sermon. 25.
that they might not infect the aier: their garments, armor and weapons
notwithstanding remaining whole and sound, that the people of Jerusalem might
have the spoil.

219 THE HOUSE OF ELIAS,
Breid. 14. Iul.
wherein it is said that the prophet Elias sometime dwelt. Where afterward also
a Church was builded.

220. THE MOVNTAINE EROGE,
otherwise called the South Mountain, Iosu. 15, 18
being very high and lofty, 4 King. 15.
bowing a little toward the west. 2 Cron. 26
Concerning this mountain this is worthy to be noted; Amos 1.
That, when Ozias king of Judah presumed to put on him the priests attire, zach.
14.
entered into the sanctuary of the Temple, Ios. 9, an. 11
and offered upon the golden altar, the incense of sweet savor unto God: by
and by there came a great earthquake, Ada^ Reisne rus et Joan. Herdenus in
descrip. vrbis Hiero sol, lib. 7. c, 2.
(whereof also Amos and zacharias the Prophets make mention) whereby the upper
part of the Temple was shaken, and this mountain cleft in the mids, with so
great and terrible violence, that one part thereof falling and tumbling down
was rolled and carried by the space of four furlongs even right over against
the East mountain (which is called the mount of offense) where at the length
it stayed. King Ozias himself in the mean time, blasted and terrified with
lightning, was stricken in the forehead with a Leprosy. For the which cause he
being presently cast out of the Temple and City, languished all his life long,
and was shut up in his house and separated even till the day of his death.

221. A FOVNTAINE
. Mat, 2.
At this Fountain, the Star, which vanished away when the three wise men,
Breid. 14. Iul.
which came from the East, were entered Jerusalem, Sal, tom. 10 c, 2.
appeared unto them again: and led them unto Bethlehem.

222. THE CAVE OF the Prophet Jeremy:
Lamen. 1. 2 3. 4. 5.
wherein he sitting with a grieved and sorrowful mind, wept, moorned, Necep.
8. Hist, ec. 30.
and bewailed the destruction of Jerusalem, with sobs and sighs. Where Helena,
the Empress (as Nicephorus testifies) builded a notable monument.

223 ISAIAS
. Argum. in Isaiam.
Here that notable Prophet Isai, when he prophesied in Jerusalem about
threescore and ten years, Hierom tradit. Heb. iu. c. 2. Pa, 33. Broc. itin, 6.
Breid. 14. Iul.
by the commandment of king Manasses, was split through the body with a saw,
and was buried under an Oak, whose sepulture is to be seen at this day.

224 THE CAVES OF THE APOSTLES
. There are many Caves, wherein eight of the Apostles (as it is reported) hid
themselves, during the time of the Lords passion.

225 THE MONVMENT ABSALOM,
2. King. 18.
is a marble pillar, Ios, 7. an, 10
with an Inscriptio^ on the same, distant from Jerusalem two furlonges: which
Absalom being alive set up to himself for a monument in the kings valley:
where there is as yet to be seen a great heap of stones, which daily is
increased more and more. For the Pagans and strangers passing by that way, use
this for a custom, that every man cast a stone at the pillar, and challenging
as it were, according to the law, Breid, 14. Iul.
his rebellion against his father David, they curse him with this
malediction, Cursed be the Parricide Absalom, and accursed be all they for
ever, which unjustly do persecute their parents. Pas. d. 191.


226 THE RIVER OF THE UPPER FOVNTAINE,
situate on the South part of mount Sion (which Hieron calls the Fullers
fountain) the which the noble king Ezechias repaired with the conduct thereof
also. 4. King, 18.
This he choked with earrh, 2 Cron. 32*
at what time the Assyrians beseeged Jerusalem. Isai. 7. 36.
Hier. in loc.
Heb. lit. T.


227 THE SEPVLCHER OF ZACHARIAS,
the son of Barachias, whom the Jews slew between the temple and the altar.

THE PLACES ON THE WEST SIDE OF THE CITY.
228. BAALPARASIM,
is a field in the valley of Raphaim, wherein David the king, 2 King. 5.
at the first time, overthrew the Philistians, 1 Cron. 14.
and buried their Gods which he found in their tents.

229. HEROD'S TENTS,
Iose. 14. ant 24. et 1., bell 12.
which as Josephus witnesses, he pitched on the weste part of the city.

230. THE FOVNTAINE GIHON THE LOWER,
2 Cro. 33
which sprange up in the end of the fullers field, Broc. itin. 6.
the waters whereof Ezechias brought unto the upper ountaine.

231. THE FOVNTAINE GIHON the higher,
4. King 20.
springing from the mount Gihon, 2 Cron. 32.
which afterward Ezechias stopped up, Eccle. 48.
and cutting deeper into the rock, he brought the waters thereof unto the west
part of the city of David, Broc. itin, 6,
by conduct pipes under the earth, by which he brought it through the midst
of the city, into the innermoste fountain, least when the cittye should be
beseeged the people might want water.

232. IVDAS,
Mat. 27.
who of an Apostle being become a traitor, hoong himself upon a wild fig
tree: Acts. 1.
And being hanged brust asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.

233. THE MOUNT OF CALVARIE,
Iere. 31.
a rockie mountain of mean hight, Mat, 27.
called in the Hebrew tongue Golgatha; Mar. 15.
which was next to the Northwest part of the city. Luke 23.
In the which place offenders condemned in open judgment, John. 19.
were put to death. Where at all times, 2 Cor. 5.
a man might see the boanes and bowels of men hanged, or otherwise put to
death. Here, Christ Jesus our savior, which knew no sin, becam (as the
Apostle says) sin for us, that is to say, was made a sacrifice for our
sins, and as if he had been an evil dooer was hanged between two thieves,
and for our salvation crucified. So that now mount Caluary, which aforetime
was a place most infamous, by the passion and blood of Christ, is now made
famous and honorable.

234. MOUNT GIHON,
Broc, itin. 6 sal. tom. 6. cap. 5.
a mountain full of stones, high and long, which running along by the West part
of the Cytty, growing less and less toward the gate of judgment, is severed
from the City by a deep valley. In this mountain, at the commandment of
David, 3. King. 1.
Solomon was anointed king, by Sadoc the chief priest, and by Nathan the
prophet with the holy oil. To whom immediately all the people cried, God save
king Solomon.

235 THE MONVMENT of Anani
the chief priest, of which Josephus makes mention, in his sixth book, and
thirteenth chapter of the Jews war.

236 THE PEAR TREES
of the valley Raphaim, 2. King. 5.
the which Josephus calls the wood of weeping, 1 Cron. 14.
near unto the which David assisted by God from Heaven, gave a second
overthrow to the Philistines, pursuing them a great way.

237 THE SEPVLCHER OF CHRIST,
Isai. 11.
was a new Monument, Mar. 25.
eight foot long, distant from Mount Caluarie, Mat. 1. 6
one hundred and eight foot, and from mount Sion about a mile: which Joseph of
Arimathea, a noble Senator, Luke 23.
had hewn out in the rock for himself, John. 19.
in the Garden near unto mount Caluarie. In the which Sepulcher he together
with Nichodemus, Nicep. 8.
and the virgin Mary, Hist ec. 30.
with other godly women, buried the body of Jesus, Beda in Mar. ca 16.
being with the consent of Pilate taken from the cross, Broc. itin, 6.
and then trimmed with mirre and Aloes, Breid. 12 Iul.
and wrapped in a fine linen cloth, was put honorablely into the same, the head
laid toward the west: And rolling a stone of exceeding weight to the mouth of
the monument, Sal, tom. 7 cap, 3. et 6.
he went his way. But in the mean time, the chief priests and Pharisees,
going about to hinder the resurrection of Christ taking unto them a strong
guard of soldiors, watched the sepulcher, and sealed the stone which shut up
the mouth of the sepulcher, least the keepers and watchmen being corrupted with
money should deal deceiptfully. But this diligence of the Jews, by which
they went about to houlde Christ in the grave from rising again, increased the
miracle, and confirmed the faith of the Resurrection. Mar, 16.
And there he first of all appeared to Mary Magdalen, John 20.
at the monument as she was weeping, in the likeness of a Gardener.

238. A WOOD,
near unto the city, as is to be gathered by Josephus in his sixth book and
fourtene chapter of the Jews war.

239 THE BROOK, OR RIVER GIHON,
2 Cron. 32.
at the south-west corner of the city: which king Achas had begun to bring
from the lower fountain Gihon into the upper fountain: the which king
Ezechias at the last finished.

240 THE VALLE OF DEAD CARCASSES,
Iere. 31.
which lay between mount Caluarie, Lira, ibid.
and the walls of Jerusalem: so called, because the dead carcasses, bones, and
ashes, of such as were put to death or burnt on mount Caluarie were cast
thereinto.

241 THE VALLEY OF THE FOVNTAINE GIHON:
2 Cro. 33.
whereof mention is made in the book of the Cronicles, Ios. 6. be, 13* et 15,
et 18,
and in Josephus.

242. THE VALLEY Raphaim,
2. Kin. 5. 23
that is to say, of Giants. It a is valley on the west side of the city very
large and great,, 1 Cro, 11. 14.
which begins at the north part, and extends unto the South; Isai. 17.
bringing forth most plentifully in time past excellent wheat, wine, oil,
and al other fruits. In this valley David by the help of God, twice overcame
the Phillistines which sought to invade him with a great army.

243. THE WAYS TO BETHLEHEM, Emaus, to Gaza, and to Ioppa,
Actor. 8. Broc. itin. 6
which Solomon made with flint and stoane, even as he did other ways, which
led to Jerusalem, both to make the passage more easy, and also to show forth
the magnificence of his kingdom in this point.

244. THE WAY TO SILOE, and to Gabaon,
whereof Brocardus in his sixth book of his traueile makes mention.

245. HERE CHRIST
fell again; Pas. d. 10.
as according to the tradition of the fathers of old.

246. HERE JESUS
tourning himself about to the women that mourned and wept, Luke 23.
said, Breid. 14 Iul.
ye daughters of Jerusalem, Salig. tom, 8 cap, 7.
weep not for me; but weep for your selves and for your children, because the
day shall come, etc.

247. HERE CHRIST FELL DOWN
the third time under his cross: Breid. 13. Iul,
as the fathers of old time have affirmed. Pas. d. 181, et 212.


248 HERE CHRIST WAS STRIPPED OVT OF HIS GARMENTS;
Psalm, 38, et 68.
whose body being all to torn with whips, Isai. 63.
could not but be very soar, whereunto his bloody garments cleaving gave new
occasion of pain, Mat. 27.
when they were violently pulled off. Mar. 15.
And standing there naked all the while that the cross was a preparing, Breid, 12.
in the could and wind, he sat down at the length upon a stone, where he
drank wine mixed with gaul and mirh.

249 HERE CHRIST BEING LAID ON HIS BACK ON THE CROSS,
Psalm. 21.
and stretched out upon the same, zach. 13.
his hands and feet was nailed thereunto with Iron nails: John. 20.
and his tender members were with such force strayned and racked upon the
cross, Salig. to. 7. cap. 4.
that the very arteries and sinews were loosened, Pas, d. 214.
and all his bones might be toulde.

250 THIS IS the most notable and memorable place of the whole world,
Mat. 27.
even the clifte of the Rock of mount Caluarie, Mar. 15.
wherein the Cross bearing the body of Christ, Luke 23.
was fastened about high noone of the feast day of Passover. John. 19.
Upon the top of which cross, a white table was fastened, expressing the cause
of his death, written with Pilats own hand in these words of Hebrew, Greek
and Latin. JESUS OF NAZARETH, KING OF THE JEWS

Further it is to be remembered, Math. 27.
that the Jews did in such manner erect and set Christ upon his cross, Mar.
15.
that his back parts might be toward Jerusalem, and his face toward the
west. For they demed him unworthy to have his face toward the holy city.
Luke 23.
But we must think, that this was not done altogether by fortune, or without
a mystery: but rather by the singular dispensation of God, his miseries seem
to be no false prophets of our felicity, John. 19.
by this means, and by this deed forewarning them of that which the Prophet
Jeremy had prophesied should come to pass, saying I will scatter them with an
East wind before the enemy, Beda in Luc, cap, 23
I will show them the back and not the face, Breid. 12.
in the day of their destruction. Iul.
For as saint Hierom says, seeing they are dispersed throughout the whole
world, and do call upon God night and day in the synagogues of Satan, Salig.
to, 7. cap, 5.
God shows unto them his back, and not his face that they may know that he
is always going from them, Iere, 18.
and not coming toward them: Hieron. in Iere, cap, 18
And that even in the day of their destruction, that is to say, during all the
time after the passion of our savior, Psalm. 58.
unto the very end of the world: Isai. 10.
that when the fulness of the Gentiles is come in,, the remnant of the people
of Israel may be converted at the last, Romans 9. and. 11.
and be saved. And I verily conjecture that by this their cruelty, they were
foretellers of our felicity. For in that they did set the most sweet and
amiable face of our savior toward the weste, it seems unto me to note no
other thing, but the very same which the kingly Prophet long before had
toulde should come to pass saying, His eyes behoulde the gentiles. For he
having the eyes of his mercy opened and fixed upon us, Psalm. 65.
from the time of his passion, will not cease to look upon us with a favorable
countenance even unto the end of the world.

Therefore, Christ being on this manner hanged on the cross, three hours
naked, bloody, wounded, crowned with thorns, did hang between two thieves in
most grievous torments, partaker with them of the pain and punishment, as if
he had been a companion with them in their wickedness: The which thing the
prophet Isaias foreshewed should come to pass, saying, He was reputed among
the wicked. Whom in the mean time, the Jews, the high priests, together with
the Scribes and elders of the people passing by, yea the common soldiors also,
and the thief that was crucified with him, in steed of consolation, which
belongs to all that are afflicted, in most reprochful manner scorned him,
shaking their heads, and saying, Thou which destroiest the temple of God, and
buildest the same again in three days, save thy self: if thou be the
son of God, come down from the cross, He saved others, him self he cannot
save If he be Christ the king of Israel, let him come down now from the
cross; and we will believe him. He trusted in God, Let him deliver him now,
if he will have him. For he said I am the son of God.

Jesus most patiently suffering all these things more bitter then the cross,
was so far from revenging them that he prayed for them that mocked him saying,
Father forgive them for they know not what they do. And to the other of the
thieves requiring mercy he promised Paradise, saying, Verily I say unto thee,
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. And then behoulding his well
beloved mother, and the disciples also whom he loved, and commending a virgin
to a virgin, Behold thy son. And then he said to his disciple, Behold thy
mother: who from that hour forward took her for his own. While these things
thus proceeded, the sun abashed at those passions which the creator of all
the world suffered on the cross, as it were mourning hid his face: and was
darkened from the sixte hour, (at what time it shyneth in greatest glory)
until the ninth hour.

Then Jesus complaining that he is forsaken of his father, cried out with a
strong voice saying, My God, My God, why haste thou forsaken me? This done, to
the end all things that were spoken of by the prophets, I thirste. Straight
way one running, Psalm, 68.
as though he would do him some good, when he had taken a spounge, and filled
it with vinegre, he put it upon a reed and gave him to drink. Jesus
wonderfully thyrsted for the salvation of men: but the Jews offered him
nothing but gaul and vinegre. And so soon as Jesus had tasted the It is
finished, giving thereby to understand, Heb, 5.
that the sacrifice was truly ended according to the will of his father. And
once again crying out with a loud voice and with sheading of tears, Father
into thy hands I commend my spirit: And so bowing down his head (a man of
flourishing age) he yealded up his breath, the nynth hour of the five and
twentieth day of March, and in the three and thirtith year of his age and three
months. But in the year from his Incarnation, the thyrty and four.

By this sacrifice, the most high and everlasting priest inflamed with most
singular and unspeakable love, offered him self a sacrifice and a peace
offering to God his father, and by his death destroyed death, overcame Satan,
brake a sunder hell gates, restored life, and opened unto all believers, the
everlasting kingdom of heaven. For this cause, the fathers of old time,
ingraued in silver these words of the psalm in Greek, and set it in the
circumference of the hole which was made on the top of mount Caluary, and
wherein the cross of Christ was fastened, but now they are engraven in copper
thus.

(...), that is to say, Here God our King before worlds wrought salvation in
the midst of the earth.

The which one and only bloody sacrifice most truly and lawfully made, Pas.
d, 223. et, 224.
he would not by and by so soon as he was dead be taken from the cross, but
even as when he was alive, so when he was dead, by the space of three hours
he hong as a spectacle to all men: and as he spared no one member from torment
so his will was to shed all his blood, even to the very last drop of his
most precious heart, and to open the fountain for the washing away of our
sins, Zach. 13.
the which we may use to our endless comfort. Isai. 12.
Therefore one of the soldiors perceauing and opening his side and heart, Zach.
12.
presently there issued forth blood and water as from a most lively spring,
to the sanctifying and salvation of his Church. In the mean season all things
gave testimony to their Lord and makers death. The veil of the Temple rent
asunder in two parts: the earth was shaken and quaked, the graves opened, the
dead bodies of men arose again, and the stoanie rocks, (to the shame and
reproach of the Jews for the hardness of their hearts) claue a sunder and burst
in pieces.

251 HERE the blessed virgin Marie,
John. 19.
accompanied with John, Luke 2*
with Marie Magdalen, and with other women, stood with a firm mind and
constant faith, Breid. 12.
where according to the prophecy of Simeon, Iul.
Salig. to, 7. cap. 5.
the sword of sorrow pearsed her soul. Pas. d. 225.


252 HERE the soldiors
which crucified Christ, parted his garments among them and cast lotts for his
seameles coat who should have it, John. 19.
that the saying of the prophet might be fulfilled, Psalm. 21.
They parted my garments among them, and for my Vesture they did cast lottes.

253. HERE the dead Corpse
of Christ, being taken down from the Cross, Breid. 12.
was delivered to the blessed virgin Marie to be buried.

254 HERE
Christ meteth with the women, Math. 28.
which returned from his Sepulcher toward Jerusalem, and saluteth them, who
embracing and kissing his feet woorshiped him.

255 HERE
Christ in the form of a stranger, Luke 24.
went with the two disciples toward Emaus: Mar. 16.
and in the way as they went together, he interpreted Moses, and the
Scriptures of all the prophets, which he proved to be fulfilled in him.

THE PLACES ON THE NORTH SIDE OF THE CITY.
256. THE tents of the Chaldaeans.
On this North part of the city, 4 King. 25.
Nabuchodonozer king of Babylon, and the Chaldaeans, Iere 1, 39, and 52.
scaled the walls of Jerusalem, and wan it.

257 THE TENTS of the Romans,
the which were pitched between the Woman's towers, Ios. bell, 2. 3, 5, 6. 7, 8
9, 10 et 7. bell 1, 2. 4. 9 10, 15, 16.
and the tower PSEPHINA. On this part, although enclosed and fortified with a
triple wall, Titus and the Romans assailed Jerusalem. For on this part only,
the city was sauteable. And albeit the other parts were compassed round about
with one single wall only, yet the same being very strong, and set upon
stony and cragged rocks, and having also deep valleies or trenches Impassable,
were inexpugnable. Therefore they began to scale the first wall, which was the
outermost and third wall of the city. After that they took in hand the
second wall: And then the third wall of the city, which wall also called the
old wall. Next they took the castle Antonia: And so the temple, which was
fortified like a castle and last of all they entered mount Sion, of all the
rest, Wtl, Tyr, bell sac. lib, 8, cap 5 et 18,
the most strong. At what time also the Christians took this city in hand to
win it, they began their enterprise on this part, anong whom Godfrey of
Bullion was the first that entered the wall, nere unto the gate of Ephraim,
whose soldiors following the assalt like men, opened immediately the said
gate, and so wan the city. The which also the Saracens beseeging on the same
part, wan from the Christians.

258 THE HILL GAREE,
Iere, 31.
the which was near to Jerusalem one the north.

259 EREBINTH
was a little village on the north. Ios.6. be, 13


260. GARDENS AND FEARMES,
Ios. 6, be. 2. 4. 7.
enclosed with walls and hedges: where Titus taking a view of the city was in
danger.

261 THE SEPVLCHER of Helene
Queen of the Adiabens (who vittailed Jerusalem in the time of the famine with
wheat) the which she most sumptuously builded with three pinacles, Iose. 20.
ant 2. 3. et 6. bell 2. 5. 6.
about three furlongs distant from the city. Eusebius. 2. hist eccl, 12
Wherein she was buried with her son Isates: Hie. to. 1. epist. 23. ad Eustoch.
the which also was standing in the time of Eusebius and Hierom.

262 THE NORTH MOVNTAINE,
Ios, 6. be. 13
where Pompei pitched his tents.

263 THE MONVMENT of Herod Agrippa:
Act. 12.
who for his intolerable pride being stricken by the angel of the Lord, Ios.
19, ant. 8. et 6, bell, 4. 13.
and consumed of worms, dyed.

264. SAPHA,
in Greek called Scopos, that is to say, A place of espiall, situate toward
the north, distante from the city about seven furlongs. Ios, 11. ant, 8. et
2. bell. 24. et 6. bell 3. 4.
It was so named, because from thence both the city and temple might be seen.
Here Iaddus the chief Priest, and the rest of the priests, in their priestly
attire, and all the people clad in white garments, went forth to meet
Alexander the great, king of the Macedonians, when he came with his army to
destroy Jerusalem. Whom when Alexander saw by and by suppressing his fury, in
humble sort worshipped the name of God, which shined in goulden letters in the
Reasonable of the high priest, and gave reverence to the high priest. Then
entering into the City and Temple, he offered sacrifice to God, and granted
great privileges unto the Jews.

265. THE FRVITEFVLL WOOD,
Ios. 6, bell, 4. et 7,
which Titus caused to be cut down.

266 THE LAKE OF SERPENTS,
Ios. 6. bell, 4.
which in old time was called Bethara.

267. THE WAY,
Broc. itin, 6,
by which men went into Samaria and Galile.

268. THE VILLAGE
near to Jerusalem, Neem. 3.
whereof Neemia makes mention.

THese ( Christian Reader) are the most notable and famous places of the City
and Temple of Jerusalem. By the placing whereof, the situation of the rest may
easily be known. Therefore if we have made a true description, let the praise
be given to God, the giver of all good gifts. But if otherwise there be any
defect, impute that to my want of skill, and not to my ill will: who for that I
was not able to give toward the furnishing of the Temple, gold, silver, or
precious stones, have notwithstanding offered a little oil to lighten the
Church; trusting that the same will be acceptable, both to Christ,who allowed
the twoe mites which the poor Widow offered: and also to those that be good
Christians, whom it becomes well to be like unto their head CHRIST.

FINIS.
The names of the Authors out of whose works and travels this Description of
Jerusalem is taken and made.
THE HOLY BIBLE, of the old and new Testament. FLau Josephus, a priest of the
Jews: who flourishing in the 70. year of Christ, exactly described the
situation, the form, and the besieging of the City of Jerusalem. EXemplars
of the famous Doctor of the church S. Hierom, as well printed as written. Who
lived in the year of Christ. 380. James of Vitriac, who traveled into the
Holy land, and and returning was made Bishop of Acon, who wrote a Book,
concerning the Holy land, and the wonders which he saw there. He flourished in
the year of our Lord. 1231. James pantaleon a Frenchman, Patriarch of
Jerusalem, his book concerning the Holy land. Who was famous in the year of
Christ, 1247. THe exact Description of Jerusalem, and of the places of the holy
land, made by Brocardus a Moonke, published at Basil by Heruage, and at Antwerp
by Stelsius. Who in the year of Christ, 1283. after great search and dilligent
survey of that City and land, and the view of the ancient ruins thereof,
described the same most carefully. THe Description of Jerusalem and of the holy
places, by John Mandeuille Englishman, who finished his peregrination in the
year of our Lord, 1322, and diligently described the same: printed at Antwerp
by Nicol. Wou^er, in Anno. 1564. A Table of the City Jerusalem, and a very
ancient description of all the Holy land, portrayed one hundred year since
and more in parchment, which John Huls procured from the Library of the
College of saint Hierom at Delph in Holand. THe original of the City of
Jerusalem and of the Temple in the same, described by Rodulph Langius, Anno
1476. and printed at Colen, Anno. 1517. THe Pilgrimage to Jerusalem and to
mount Sinai, of Bernhard Breidenbach, Deane of the Church of Mentz, which he,
accompanied with others more, finished, Anno 1483. and most dilligently
described the same. Adding thereunto a portraiture of the most principal
places of the holy land and of his travel, which he caused a cunning painter
to make upon the view of every place, whom he had in his company for that
purpose: Printed at Mentz, An. 1486. A Description of the voyage to Jerusalem,
published in the year 1520. by M. Gerard Kuynretorff and others. A Delineation
of the City of Hierusaiem, which master John Schorrel with the help of a
skillful painter drue forth by the view of the eye, sitting on mount Oliuet.
1521. THe Description of Jerusalem and of the holy places, by Joan. Heuterus
Praetor of Delph, which he set forth in An. 1521. THe like Description was
made by Bartholmew of Saligniac Knight, and professor of both laws. 1525. A
Peregrination, with an exact description of Jerusalem and of the holy places,
made by John Pasch Doctor of Divinity, printed at Louane in the year, 1563.
THe Histories of the Holy war, whereof there were three and twenty books,
showing how in the year 1099 Jerusalem and the whole land of promise, was
recovered again by the Christians, and so possessed of them 84. years by
William, archbishop of Tyren, Chancellor of Jerusalem: printed at Basil in
the year. 1564. SIx books of History concerning the holy war, set forth
by John Herold, printed at Basil in the year, 1560 A Delineation, or Map of
the City Jerusalem, and of the holy places of all the land of Palestine, by
Herman Broculoo, printed at vtrict in the year, 1538 BOnauentur of Mirica his
Description of Jerusalem, and of the holy places thereof, who made three
voiages thither, and dwelt there a long time, in the years 1538. and 39. The
universal Cosmography of Sebastan Munster. THe Description of the City of
Jerusalem, and of Palestine, by Wolfgang Weyssenburch: Printed in the year,
1542. A Dilligent Description of the places of the old and new Testament
gathered out of many authors: as, out of Ptolomie, Pliny, Pomponius Mela,
Strabo, Herodotus, Hiero^, Joseph Egesippus, Stephanus, Raphael volateran,
Lyra, Bocas. And out of the morelater, as James ziegler, Wolfang Weyssenburg,
and Andrue Althamer, men that herein have taken great pains: and printed at
Paris. A Delineation and description of the City Jerusalem, and of the land of
promise, most exquisitlie done by Bonauenture Broccard, in the year, 1544. A
Description of Jerusalem and of the places thereof, by M. Gerard Joan of
Leiden, in the year, 1556. A Map of the City of Jerusalem, and of the whole
land of promise, made by Tilmannus Stella in the year, 1557, and printed at
Anwerp. A Topographical description of the City of Jerusalem by Fabian
Licinius a Venetian, printed at Venes in the year, 1560. A Map of Jerusalem
set forth by Adam Reiszner, exhibited to the Emperor Ferdinando in the year,
1559. THe way of Caluarie, written in Latin, by Laurence Surius. THe way of the
Cross, from Pilates house to Mount Caluarie, published by Peter Calentine, and
printed at Louane in the year, 1561. THe Itinerarie of John Godscalci of Delph
which he finished in the year, 1561. A Description of Jerusalem and of the
places therabout by Isbrand Godfrey, which he finished in the year, 1563. THe
voyage of the noble knight, Baptist van der Muelen of Mechlin, who by word of
mouth described unto me oftentimes Jerusalem, and all the places thereof, which
he surueyed in the year, 1567. THe Description of the old and new Jerusalem,
made by Peter Lackstein, and painted in a map by Christian Sgrothen in the
year, 1570. A Topographical delineation of the City of Jerusalem made by
Antonie de Angelis a minorite, who dwelt a long time at Jerusalem, set forth
in the year, 1578. A Very large map the City of Jerusalem, and of all the
holy land, drawn in parchment with the hand of Biron a Frenchman with lively
colors, and bewtified with Gold, and described in the French tongue, which
Map, MICHAEL EYZINGER of Austria, a most dilligent historiographer, delivered
unto me.
THese are for the most part the chief Authors among them, which of set
purpose have handeled this Argument, and of whom I make special mention, I
have used many, of whom I have nothing spoken: And to make mention of all such
writers, which having anoher purpose, and have yet given me matter to write of,
year to make a tedious Catalogue.

A Table Alphabeticall, whereby the Reader may find the principal matters
contained in this book.
A
ABacuc, 213 Aceldema, 214 Anani his moniment, 235 Annas his house, 8
Amphitheater, 28 Antonia his Castle, 29 Arc of the Covenant, 76 Altar of
Incence, 80 Altar of burnt offering, 87
B
BAalpharazim, 228 Bethania, 178 Bethphage, 179 Broad street, 150 Bridge of
Cedron, 196 Bridge of Sion, 19 Bridge from the castle antonia, 63 Brook of
Cedron, 201 Brook Gihon, 239 Booz and Iakin, 88 Bigness of Christ his cross,
120
C
CAesar and Agrippas hall, 5 Caiphas palace, 17 Castle Antonia, 29 Castle of
Antiochus, 31 Castle Pisan, 59 Castle of the Assyrians, 148 Caves, called the
kings caves, 151 Castle opposite, 180 Cave of James, 116 Cave of the Apostles,
224 Cave of Peter, 117 Caluarie, 233 Cave of Jeremy, 222 Capheteta, 152
Cherubims, 77 Candlestick of gold, 81 Christ his cross, 120 Christ rides to
Jerusalem, 211 Christ falls down under his cross 245, 247, 121. Christ
speaks to the moorners, 246 Christ stripped out of his clothes, 248 Christ
racked and nailed on the cross, 249 Christ delivered to the virgin mary, 253
Christ's garment parted by lot, 252 Christ speaks to the women after his
resurrection, 254 Christ talks with his two Disciples going to Emaus 255 The
court, 35 Court of Records, 30 Corner parlour, 33 Corner stone, 153 Court of
Herod's palace, 138 Conduct, or fountain, 128 Closets, 91 Common place of
burial, 198 Cypres trees, 7
D
Dial of Achas, 103 Douehouse, 195
E
ESsens gate, 66 Eagle of gold, 101 Erebynth a village, 259
F The
Fountain of Sion, 18 Fountain the innermost, 60 Fountain old, 62 Fountain
in the temple, 82 Fountain, 128, 221 Fountain dragon, 184 Fountain of Silo,
199 Fountain Gihon the lower, 230 Fountain Gihon the higher, 231 Fruitful
wood, 265 Fullers field, 115 Fig tree withered, 183
G The
Garden belonging to the king, 15 and 188 Gardens enclosed, 260 Garden on mount
Oliuet, 187 Garments of Christ parted by lot, 252 Gates of Sion, 20 Gate,
called the upper gate, 21 Gate of Warders, 64 Gate called the horse gate, 65
Gate belonging to the Essenes, 66 Gate the first, 67 Gate, called the new gate,
93 Gate called the middle gate. 137 Gate called holy gate, 94 North Gate, 104
Gate South, 105 Gate in the West. 106 Gate of the corner, 154 Goulden Gate, 155
Gate of Ephraim, 156 Gate called the water gate, 157 Gate Genath, 158 Gate of
the kings garden, 159 Gate of the high priests palace, 160 Gate called the
fish gate, 161 Gate called the dung gate, 162 Gate of women's towers, 163 Gate
called the Valley gate, 164 Gate called the old gate, 165 Grove of Moloch, 189
H The
House of Annas, 8 House of the Worthies, 9 House of the Virgin Mary, 10 House
of Vria, 11 House of Ananias, 36 House of S. Anne, 37 House of the rich
glutton, 38 House of Mesa, 39 Houses of the Nathinaeans, 40 House of the prince
of Phariseis 41 House of the forest of Lybanus, 42 House of Simon the
pharisei, 43 House of the common people, 44 Houses of the priests, 49 Houses of
the target bearers, 50 House of counsel, 90 House of Mary the mother of John,
126 House of Olda the prophetess, 127 House of Elias, 219 Hill Garee, 258 Hole
where the cross stood, 250 Hill which is little, 182 Herod's park, 143
Hospital, 144 Holy place, 79 Holy of holiest, 75
I The
I Will of the Jews, 86 I Will of the Gentiles, 100 Isaias martyred, 223 Judas
hanged on a tree, 232
L The
Lystes or tyltyard, 51 Lauer of brass, 89 Lofts of the singers, 97 Lake, 131
Lake Amigdalon, 125 Lake of Serpents, 266
M The
MArketplace, 12, 45, 46, 47, 69, 129 Mary and John behold Christ as he
passes by with his cross, 122 Mello, 16 Moloch his Grove, 189 Mount Sion, 3
Mount Moria, 52 Mountain Bezetha, 147 Mount of offense, 190, 192 Mount oliuet,
191 Mountain Eroge, 220 Mount of Caluary, 233 Mount Gihon, 234 Mountain in
the north part, 262 Monument of Alexander, 133 Monument of John, 134 Monument
of the Fuller, 193 Monument of Absalom, 225 Monument of Anani, 235 Monument of
Herod, 263
N The
NOrth mountain, 262 North gate, 104 New City, 146
O The
Ophel, 54 Oliuet, 191
P
PArlour of Sion, 6 Parlour in the corner, 33 Palace of Caiphas, 17 Palace of
the Machabees, 55 Palace of Pilate, 56 Palace of the Queen, 57 Palace of
Solomon, 58 Palace of Queen Bernice, 70 Palace of Grapte, 71 Palace of
Helen. 72 Palace of Herod, 136 Palace of Monobaz, 73 Passage of the temple
from Salomo^s palace, 113 Palm trees, 194 Pear trees, 236 Place of zacharias
death being slain, 98 Place where the Jews would have stoned Christ, 99 Place
where the woman taken in adultery, was absolved, 109 Places of Christ's fall,
121 Place where the three Apostles sat, while Christ prayed, 208 Place where
the 8. Apost. tarried, 209 Place where Judas betrayed Christ with a kiss, 210
Place where Christ preached of the destruction of Jerusalem, 211 Place where
Mary with others stood at Christ his death, 251 Porch of pillars, 68 Porch of
the temple, 95 Prison, called the kings prison, 4 Prison common, belonging to
the city, 32 Poole, called Probatica, 61 Priest, called the high priest, 84
Propitiatory, or mercy seat, 78
R The
REchabites habitation, 130 Rock of the West Wall, 166 River of the upper
fountain, 226
S The
SApha, 264 Sion. 3.26, 27 Sepulcher of David, 22 Sepulcher of Stephen, 23
Sepulcher of Christ, 237 Sepulcher of Helen, 261 Sepulcher of the virgin Mary,
197 Of zacharias, 227 Stayres of the castle, 13 Stayres of Sion. 14 School of
Gentility, 48 Sea of brass, 92 Seat appertayning to the king, 96 Singers
seats aloft, 97 Solomon's throne, 112 Simo^ of Cyren, bears the cross, 132
Second city, 124 Stephen stoned, 200
T The
TAbernacle of Sion, 24 Temple of the Lord, 74 Table of Gold, 83 Tents of the
Assyrians, 218 Tents of Herod, 229 Tents of the Chaldeans, 256 Tents of the
Romans, 257 Theater, 111 Throne of Solomon, 112 Tribunal seat, 114 Towers of
the trumpetters, 108 Tower Strato, 115 Tovver in the middle, 132 Tovver Hippic,
140 Tovver Mariamme, 141 Tovver Phaselus 142 Tovver Ananael, 167 Tovver in the
corner 168 Tovver of David, 169 Tovver called the high tower, 170 Tovver called
the Lantern, 171 Tovver called the great tower, 172 Tovver Meah, 173 Tower
Psephina, 174 Tovver of Siloe, 175 Treasory, 102
V The
VAlley called the deep valley, 176 Valley of Iosaphat, 202 Valley of Siloe,
203 Valley of dead carcases, 240 Valley of the river Gihon, 241 Valley of
Cedron, 116 Valley of Raphaim, 242 Vaulted cave, 34 Veil of the temple rent,
85 Village nere to Jerusalem, 268 Vria his house, 11
W The
Wine press belonging to the K, 25 Walls, first 53, second 135, the third, 149
Way of the cross, 117 Way of entrance for the horses, 118 water issuing forth
of the temple, 177 Way of the Fullers field, 104 Way of the captivity, 205 Way
to Anathot, 206 Way to Jericho, 207 Way to Siloe, 244 and to Bethlehem, 243 Way
to Samaria, and Galile, 267 Well, 181 Whipping of the buyers and sellers, 110 A
Wood, 138
Z
Zacharias place where he was slain between the temple and the Altar, 98.

