THE SECOND PART OF THE FRENCH ACADEMIE.

Wherein, as it were by a natural history of the body and soul of man, the
creation, matter, composition, form, nature, profit and use of all the parts
of the frame of man are handled, with the natural causes of all affections,
virtues and vices, and chiefly the nature, powers, works and immortality of
the Soul.

By PETER DE LA PRIMAVDAYE Esquier, Lord of the same place and of Bar.

And translated out of the second Edition, which was reuiewed and augmented by
the Author.

AT LONDON Printed by G.B. R.N. R.B. 1594.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir JOHN PVCKERING knight, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England, T. B. wishes increase of honor here, to the glory of the
Highest, and endless happiness with the Saints in the world to come.
Having finished (Right honorable) the translation of the second part of the
French Academie, and pondering with my self, unto whose Patronage I might
commendand committ the same, as it were into a safe Haven to be preserved from
the tempestuous and surging waves of this Sea-like world, it came to my mind
upon sundry good considerations, that your Honor might challenge the same as a
thing that by all right appertains unto your self. For first, calling to my
remembrance, that the principal scope aimed at by this Author in the penning
of his book, was to uphold the glorious essence of God against all
contradiction of Atheists, and that by the view of his divine works in the
creation of the body and soul of man, I presently concluded with my self,
that the defense of this point against that viperous brood, was a work best
beseeming the sacred seat of Magistracy, and such as for their places
representing the person of the supreme Judge, wore by the infallible word of
truth adorned with his own titles, Psalm. 82. 1. Exodus 21. 6. Now forasmuch
as by the special providence of God it has pleased her royal Majesty to
advance you to that seat of magistracy, next under her Highness, in which
you are placed, it seemed unto me, that I should after a sort offer wrong
unto your Honor, if I did not recommend unto it the defense of the highest
ruler, whose person you do in a higher degree then others represent. Secondly,
when I considered with my self that this generation of Earth-wormes, which
place nature being but a creature in the room of the Creator, and deny the
immortality of souls after this life, do therein as much as lies in them
labor to put out the light of their own conscience, which yet could never be
wholly darkened in the minds of any, no not of the most desperate Atheist
that ever was, I thought it most convenient to crave, that your Honors lawful
protection in the behalf of this Book, and of my small pains taken therein
for the benefit of my country, might be as it were a Sub paena served upon
the whole rabble of these devils incarnate, to cause them to appear at that
high court of Conscience, in which you enjoy the chiefest place next under her
sacred Majesty, there to make answer to the humble complaint of Conscience,
unto which they offer such notorious violence. A third reason that moves me
to become an humble petitioner, that this book may be gathered under the wings
of your Honors safe defense, is the constant report of your great care, that
none be entertained into your retinue and family, whose hearts are possessed
with a liking of that Antichrist of Rome, within the compass of whose
jurisdiction, this dangerous infection of Atheism began first in this latter
age of the world to break forth, and has now set footing even in those
countries, from whence by a general consent of all Estates it has been
banished long ago. Let Florence testify this to all posterity succeeding,
where that monster Machiauel first began to budde, who has now spredde
abroad his deadly branches of Atheism over the most countries in
Christendom, insomuch as few places but are so well acquainted with his
doctrine, that the whole course of men's lives almost every where, is nothing
else but a continual practice of his precepts. And yet Machiauel being
Secretary to that Florentine estate, and employed altogether in civil
affairs, may seem in some sort inexcusable, if he be compared with many of
those unholy Fathers of Rome, who making open profession to be the
Ringleaders (forsooth) of the whole world to bring them unto GOD, were
plunged irrecouerably in this bottomless gulf of Atheism. Pope Leo the tenth
a Florentine borne, was so far from confessing Christ Jesus to be the Son
of God with Peter, whose Vicar he would seem to have been, that he blushed
not openly to deride the doctrine of the Gospel, and to scoff at Christ Jesus
himself the Author thereof. For upon a time as Cardinal Bembo by occasion
cited unto him a place of Scripture concerning the glad tidings of salvation,
this son of perdition most blasphemously replied upon him in this manner,
How profitable this fable of Christ has been to us and to our crewe is well
known to all ages. A most horrible saying, and such as could not proceed but
from a flat Atheist: of whom also it is reported, that he maintained there
was neither Heaven nor Hell after this life. Birds of the same feather were
Siluester the second, Benedict the ninth, Gregory the seventh, John the three
and twentieth, Alexander the sixth, Clement the eight, Paulus the third, with
diverse others of that rabble, of whom some utterly renounced God and betook
themselves to the Devil, some denied the immortality of the soul, some
taught most damnable heresies, and all of them turned the grace of our God into
wantonness, denying God the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ, Jude
verse 4. It would require a long time to anatomize their several lives, and
your Honors weighty affairs in behalf of this Church and Commonwealth will
suffer no long discourse: in regard whereof I am constrained in few words, and
yet in most humble wise to recommend my self and these my poor labors to be
shrouded under your Lordships safe protection, most heartily craving at the
hands of the highest, so to guide your Honor in the managing of that great
charge he has called you unto, as may make most both for his own glory here,
and for your blessed and endless reward elsewhere. [*]

Your Honors most addicted T. B.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER
Grace and Peace.
SENECA the Philosopher reports (gentle Reader) that the looking glass was
first invented to this end, that man might use it as a mean to know himself
the better by. Now besides that in a glass we may attain to some kind of
knowledge of our selves when we take a view of our own countenance, and of
the lineaments and proportion of our bodies outwardly, Socrates applied the
same to a further use for the instruction of manners. For as Apuleius writes
of him, he earnestly persuaded his Auditors to look often into a glass, and
to behold themselves therein, to this intent, that he which thought himself
beautiful and fair, might take occasion thereby to avoid all kind of
deformity in manners and conversation, whereby that beauty of his would be
greatly blemished: and that whosoever perceived by the glass any defect of
comeliness in his countenance, might labor so much the more seriously by the
help of virtue and inward graces of the mind to recompense the outward wants
and imperfections of his body. In which respect this Book may most fitly be
resembled to a glass, as that which affoordeth unto us both these uses in
far more excellent manner then can be performed by any looking glass how rare
and surpassing soever it be. For even the best of that kind does represent unto
our eyes only so much of the surface of our own bodies as is directly before
it, but as for the hinder parts we take no view of them by a glass, much less
is it able to give us a sight of the internal members of our bodies, whereby we
may attain to any profitable knowledge of them. But if we take a diligent
view of this book, and with the eyes both of body and mind look intentiuely
upon the same, it will in most evident manner represent unto us not only the
outward members of ma^s body both before and behind and on every side, but even
the most hidden and inward parts thereof, which otherwise before life have left
the body cannot possibly be seen of any man. Here may you behold all the bones
as it were the frame and timberworke of man's body, yea the very foundation upon
which all the residue of the building is laid. Here may you see the exquisite
frame and composition of the head, as it were the upper lodging of this house,
the several ventricles of the brain, as so many sundry chambers for the
intertainement of the Animal spirits: the singular workmanshippe of the eyes,
as of the lights and windows appertaining to this palace of man's body: the
matter and form of the humors in the eyes, as it were the crystal glass
set in the windows, together with the eye-liddes as caseme^ts to open and
shut, to receive in or keep out the light as need requires: besides the
eyebrowes as penthouses to defend those windows from the violence of stormy
weather. What should I speak of the ears, as of high watchtowres whereby
warning is given to the internal senses so often as any adversary noise gives
notice of enemies approaching to annoy this goodly castle? The mouth is it not
as the door that receives in all kind of provision meet for the reparation
and maintenance of this great building, as occasion serves? It is a world to
think what excellent workmanshippe appears in the voice and tongue of man,
and what singular uses it has very requisite for the perfection of this piece
of work. Now if we shall descend and enter into the contemplation of the
breast, as of the middle story of this building, and consider with what goodly
household stuff those rooms are adorned, who is able either with tongue to
utter, or with heart to conceive, the rare devises the precious Jewels, the
singular art there to be found? What an exceeding fair room is the dining
chamber of the heart, the receptacle of the will and affections, the shop
wherein the vital spirits are wrought, and the forge from whence is derived
that fire and heat which warmeth the whole house? And least this fire should
break forth into such a flame as might bring peril of burning to this goodly
building the chamber of the heart is daily and continually refreshed with cool
blastes proceeding from the lungs, as from an outward room that is built round
about a great part thereof. Here also is to be seenethe Artery, which as a
lively conduite carries forth continually most crystal streams of vital
spirits into every room and office of the house. Betwixt this second story and
the third is laid the Midriffe as a flore that makes a separation between the
instruments of the vital parts being the implements of that middle room, and
the natural instruments of the nether story which serve both for the
upholding and maintenance of the whole building, and also contains in it
matter for the erecting of a new frame, which is to stand after the former is
come to his full period. In this third story or partition is to be seen the
stomach, which being as it were the kitchen of the body receives in at the
door of the mouth al such meats and drinks as are requisite for the keeping of
it in sufficient reparations, and for the defense of it against two mighty
enemies Hunger and Thirst, who by continual undermining can of the same, la^
or to lay it even with the ground. And because nothing can be prepared in the
kitchen without heat, and the maintenance thereof, besides the natural heat of
the stomach it is compassed on the right side with the liver, on the left with
the spleen, behind with the muscles of the chinebone, before with the kal,
above it has the heart and midriffe, and within it are sundry vital spirits,
from al which as from so many several fires, it receives heat for the better
dressing and concocting of that which is conveyed into it. Neither are the
gutters and sinks necessarily belonging to every house, wanting to the
perfection of this beautiful building of man's body: as may appear by the
guts and other parts of baser service, without which it is not possible that
this frame should long continue. Now besides the singular delight and pleasure,
which this natural knowledge of our own bodies yields unto our minds, the
profit and commodity that issues here from is great and manifold. For first
in regard of our selves if we were thoroughly acquainted with the Anatomy of our
bodies, with the substance and situation, with the form and qualities, with
the uses and offices of every part and member of the same, it is out of all
question, that by the knowledge thereof, we might both prevent many diseases and
infirmities, which through want thereof would sease upon us, and being
overtaken with any, might recover our selves more s^eedly by a wise and
skillful carriage of our selves according to the same. Neither is it laid upon
every one to have so much skill as is requisite for him that makes profession
of that art toward all men, but only so far forth as may serve for the
p^eseruation of his own health, either in employing the talent of his private
knowledge, or in yielding himself more readily, unto the wise direction of the
skillful Physicion. Secondly, Prou. 6. 6.
as Solomon sends us to the industrious nature of the Pismire to learn
diligence and forecast in our calling, so the Apostle takes occasion by the
variety of members in one body, 1. Cor. 12.
to reprehend two sorts of people in the Church of Corinth, both such as were
carried away with envy toward their superiors, themselves being endued with
meaner gifts, and those also who being furnished with more excellent ornaments
of Gods spirit, were puffed up with pride in themselves, and with disdyne
toward others of fewer graces. And this being the second use that arises from
this natural knowledge of our bodies, offreth it self in most plentiful
manner to be observed by us, in every part and member of the same. What a
notable lesson of good neighborhood are we taught by the view and
contemplation of man's face? For, as many several members of different uses are
so artificially knit and linked together in one face, that not one of them is
any impediment or hinderance, unto another in the execution of his office: so
we are instructed thereby how to carry our selves toward our neighbors, every
one to contain himself within the limits of his several calling, and not to
incroch one upon another as the manner of a great many is, that are not
contented with their own estate. Again, in the second story of this frame
when we consider the lungs, which are the bellows of the voice, are placed so
near the heart that they compass it round about, are not all men thereby
admonished, that their speech is but the interpreter of the heart, and the
messenger thereof? that the mouth must like a good servant attend upon the
heart, and utter nothing but that which it receives first from the same? that
no man ought to imitate the example of Hippolytus in Euripides, who being
admonished of his Nurse to remember his Oath, made her this misshapen answer,
(...): The tongue has sworn, but the mind is unsworn? As many hollow-hearted
subjects of late days behaved themselves towads her Majesty, having rec^iued
a dispensation so to do from Pope Gregory the thirteenth, whose goodly posie
was thus set down in certain tokens sent to all such as were to be reconciled
unto him, Fili mi da mihi cor and sufficit, My son, give me thy heart, and i^
suffices. Which is all one as if he had said swear and forswear thy self if
thou will, say thou art a good subject go to the church, do whatsoever is
commanded thee, so thou let me have thy heart, it skilleth not who have thy
t^^g, thy hand, and all the rest of thy body. Elihu being of another spirit,
was better instructed in the knowledge of this near conjunction, which
naturally ought to be between the heart and the tongue: and therefore speaking
to his friend Job he tells him, Job 33. 3.
that his words should be in the uprightness of his heart. Whereas they that
follow not this course of nature, but violently draw their tongue to utter that
which is far disagreeing from the meaning of the heart, are branded for the
same by the kingly Prophet David with this mark of infamy, Psalm 12. 2.
that they are men of two hearts, or of a double heart, which is monstrous in
nature. The like instruction to this we are taught in that the tongue is placed
so near under the brain, which is the seat of the mind and understanding
part of man, as it were at the feet of her schoolmaster, to the intent it
should not speak unadvisedly and handouer head, as we use to say, but with
great deliberation, both in regard of the matter it self to be delivered by
speech, and also of the circumstances of time, place and persons, which are not
to be neglected. For look how preposterous it is to set the (...) before the
horse, so is it for the tongue to run before the wit, and to utter it knows
not well what, having received no direction from the same. And therefore Solomon
putting the name of heart for the mind and understanding part of man says,
Prouer. 15. 28. and 16. 23.
that a righteous man's heart meditateth or pondereth what it shall answer: and
that the heart of the wise guides his mouth prudently. Neither is it slightly
to be passedouer, that every one having two eyes that serve for seeing, two
ears for hearing, two nostrils for smelling, two feet for going, has yet but
one soft and fleshy tongue for sundry uses, and that tied fast with strings,
and compassed about with gums, teeth, and lips, as with a double wall, to teach
men thereby, that the tongue being a very unruly member, had need to be
brideled and hemmed in on every side, least it break forth into a world of
wickedness, and breed destruction to the whole body. Now if we look into the
middle story of this building, there we shall see that although the heart be
the fountain of life, and the root of all the vital spirits that are dispersed
into every part and member of the body, yet it cannot want either the cool
refreshing it has from the lungs, or the veine-pip^s proceeding from the
liver, or the moving strings it has from the sinews, or the necessary defense
of the ribs and bones, which as strong bulwarks and rampires fence it in on
every side. Even so fares it with the great and mighty men of this world; who
although in regard of their power and authority over others, they seem to
have their lives and liuelihoodes at their beck and commandment, yet they
are so far from being able of themselves to maintain their honors and high
places without the necessary aid of the inferior sort, as that without them
they should want wherewith to uphold their own lives. But this appears yet
more evident in the lower story of this frame, where the guts and entrails
of the body as it were the sinks of an house have their abiding. For although
in regard of their use they may seem to be the basest and most abject parts
of the body, yet if we consider the necessity of them, we shall see that a man
may better spare a principal member of his body then the least gut that is in
his belly. Even so fares it with the politic body of a common wealth, in
which the base Artisan will sooner be missed oftentimes then he that carries a
greaterport, and is advanced to a higher room and office in the same. A third
use that may be made of this book as it were of a crystal glass worthy the
looking into, is that singular delight and pleasure which may be reaped, by the
view and consideration of the harmony between this terrestrial frame, and the
celestial habitation of the heavens, when they are compared together. And as
that famous sentence (...), Know thy self, is reported of many to have
descended from the heavens, so surely it will be no small furtherance to a man
whereby he may attain to a better knowledge of himself, if he seriously
observe what a great agreement there is between him and the heavens, whereunto
the very situation of his countenance lift up toward heaven, does as it
were lead him by the hand. First therefore if we consider the original of
them both, Genesis 1. 1, 26.
we find in holy Writ, that as God is said to have made the heavens in the
beginning, so also it is there related, that not long after he made man after
his own image and committed unto him the sovereignty over the earth and over
all living and moving creatures under the cope of heaven. Neither can it be
truly said, that howsoever the Lord himself formed the first man, and
breathed in his face the breath of life, yet since that first creation he has
not intermedled at all with the continual propagation of mankind, but has
surrendered all his working power into the hands of nature, by whose powerful
operation the matter of men's bodies is brought to this glorious perfection,
which we see it has when it first appears in the world. For this is to
speak after the manner of mere natural men, that have not as yet learned the
language of Canaan, as is plain if we call to mind what the kingly Prophet
says unto the Lord, that it was he that possessed his reins, Psalm. 139. 13.
and that covered him in his mothers womb. Which also is more manifestly
taught by that holy man Job, who confidently affirms, Job 10. 10, 11.
that it was the Lord who had powered him out as milk, and turned him to
cruddes like cheese: that he had clothed him with skin and flesh, and joined
him together with bones and sinews. Wherefore as it was the eternal God, who
first turned the body of the heavens into that roundnes, gathered the light
into the bodies of the celestial lamps, fixed the stars in the firmament,
endued each planet with his several motion, and clothed the inferior world with
this glorious circumference: so the same God at the first planted Adam as the
root of mankind, and ever since has caused his whole race and every several
person as so many branches to issue and grow out of his loins. He turned the
eyes into that roundnesse: he planted the ears as watch-towers in the upper
part of the head: he placed the tongue, fastened the teeth, stretched out the
sinews? he watered the veins with blood, gave maessines to the bones, and
clothed the flesh with a fine skin as with a garment: he severed the fingers
and toes, caused the feet to walk, and the hands to gripe. He, and none but
he gives sight to the eyes, hearing to the ears, taste to the tongue,
smelling to the nostrilles, and feeling to the fingers. Who but he has endued
the lungs with breathing, the heart with the spirits of life, the stomach with
concoction, the liver with the making of blood, and women's breasts with the
making of milk? Who has fashioned the instruments of hearing in the head like
to a hammer and an anuile, the heart in the body like a pyramide, and made the
spleen in substance like a sponge? Who has covered the head with hair for
comelines, and boared the skin through with infinite pores for euacuation? In a
word, who has given beauty to the whole body, and to each member his several
operation? What father, what mother, what workman has wrought these things,
but the only wise and immortal God? But to proceed, as the sun, moon, and
celestial stars and planets have a double motion, the one common with the
whole body of the heavens, the other proper and peculiar according to the
nature of every several star: so have the parts of man's body two motions,
whereof the one depends of the motion of the whole body, and is therefore
universal, and the other is particular according to the inset nature and
disposition of each several member. And to descend to a more special
comparison of one particular thing with an other, how does the diverse
operations of the animal spirit (whose seat is in the brain) concur with
the different workings of the sun in the firmament upon the inf^riour bodies
here below upon the face of the earth? We see that through the selfsame
reflection of the sunbeams, the clay is hardened, and the wax made soft: that
the light of the sun is comfortable to some eyes, whereas other become worse
through the brightness of the same, that it works otherwise upon a thick body
then upon a thin, upon a hard then upon a soft, upon a plant then upon a stone,
upon the earth then upon the water. So the Animal spirit being distributed into
sundry partr and members of the body works diversely in each of them according
to the diverse nature, composition, and temperament of every one. For being
imparted to the eyes by the opticke sinews it gives sight: to the ears by
certain passages, it woorketh hearing: to the tongue by small Nerves, it
breeds tasting: in a word, being dispersed into the muscles and skin by
means of certain sinowie threedes concurring in manner of a net, it infuseth
feeling throughout the whole body. And as it often falls out that we are
deprived of the heat and light of the sun, when either some thick cloud,
or the body of the Moon, or some such thing is interposed and put between us
and the same: so we quickly see and feel the want of the Animal spirit,
when any thick clammie humor, or wind, or melancholicke fumes, or any such
impediment stop the passages and hinder the woorking thereof, as is to be
seen in them that are taken with the palsy, apoplexy, madness, numnesse,
and such like. It is no less delectable then strange to consider in how many
things the Sun as it were the heart of the heavens, agrees with the heart
of man, which may not vnfittely be called the sun of the body. For as the
Sun being the chiefest of the Planets occupies the middle place among those
wandering stars, having the rest as his guarde both above and beneath him, to
employ as need requires both for their own safety and the good of the
inferior world: so the heart being the chiefest member of the body, is seated
in the middle story of the same, having the other parts both above and
beneath it and on every side, employing them according to their several
offices for the upholding and preservation of the whole frame. And as the Sun
is the storehouse of that celestial heat, which together with a divine and
quickening spirit working in the bowelles of the earth makes it a fruitful
Mother, and tender Nurse for the bringing forth and preservation of all
things: so the heart is the harth from whence proceeds all that inset and
native heat, which being conveyed with the vital spirit into every member of
the body makes them lively and powerful to perform those duties that are
enjoined them. Concerning the motion of the heart, as it agrees with the Sun
in this that they both have a double motion, so in that the hea^ being the
first that receives life and motion, is the Original of all motion in the
body, it resembles the whole heavens, of which depends all natural motions
of inferior bodies whatsoever. Again, the two eyes in the head represent the
two chief lights in the firmament. And as there are both simple stars in the
heavens, namely the Sun, Moon, Saturn, Iupit^r, Mercury with the rest, and
also compound, as the Charles-waine, the Lion, both the bears and others: so
in the body there are simple or similar parts, as the sinews, bones,
arteries, veins, etc. and compound parts, as the heart, liver, brain,
stomach, lungs and such like. Moreover, it is certain, that the Planets,
howsoever in regard of their moving to and fro they are said to be wandering
stars, have yet their certain li^^^tes in the heavens, especially in the
Zodiac, in which as in their dwelling houses they exercise those natural
powers wherewithal they are endued, as the proper mansion of the sun is in
Leo, of the Moon in Cancer, of Saturn in Capricorn, of Jupiter in
Sagittarius, and so of the rest. In like manner, although the body of man be
so framed, as that there is no one part but it is serviceable unto all, yet
there are certain several places appointed as peculiar shoppes for each
faculty to work in especially, as the brain for the Animal spirit, the
heart for the Vital, and the liver for the Natural: the gall is the
receptacle for choler, the spleen for Melancholy, the sucking veins serve to
purge the blood from the serous substance of it, and so of the other powers
and parts of the body. To conclude this third use (for a day would not
suffice to utter all that might be spoken in this matter) as the Sun by
reason of the Annual progress through the twelve signs, makes a sensible
division of the year into four parts, which have their different seasons and
qualities if they fallout according to the course of nature, and so likewise
the Moon by her (...) quartereth the month accordingly: even so farethit with
the body of man in regard of his whole age, which being considered from the
beginning unto the ending, agrees very fitly to those several seasons both
for number and praedominant qualities, if the threede of life be not cut off
in the midway by the rasour of death. For the body of man in his first age,
which is his childehoode, is moist and hot, and so is the former part of the
year called the Spring, as also the first part of the month from the new
moon to the ending of the first quarter. In the second part of man's age, which
is his flourishing and youthful time, the body of man is hot and dry, such as
are the qualities of the second part of the year or Summer season, and of that
second part of the month, which is from the first quarter to the full Moon.
Thirdly, the body of man in the third part of his age, commonly called
Mans-age, is cold and moist according to the disposition of the third part of
the year called Autumn, and of that season of the Moon, which is from the
full to the last quarter. To conclude, in the fourth and last quarter of man's
age called Olde-age, his body is cold^ and dry like to the Winter season, and
to the fourth part of the Month, which is from the last quarter to the next
new Moon. Now as these three former uses of the Anatomy of man's body serve
for the commodity and delight of man, so the fourth is the same that ought to
be made, not only of the body of man, but as Solomon teaches us, of all the
creatures both in heaven and earth, and that is the glory of God, For the Lord
having set in his visible creatures evident marks of himself and of his
eternity, power goodness, Romans 1. 20.
wisdom and providence, as the Apostle teaches, what remains but that man
for whose sake and service the Lord created al things, should thereby
acknowledge his sovereign Lord, and return unto him all glory, praise, and
duetifull obedience for the same. That we ought to make this use of the
Anatomicall consideration of our bodies, the kingly Prophet David teaches us
most divinely by his own example, when after a view taken of the admirable
work of God in fashioning him in his mothers womb, he break^th forth into
this saying, Psalm. 139. 14.
I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: marvelous are
thy works, and my soul knows it well. And surely unless we tread in the steps
of this worthy king, and propo^^d this as the scope of all our travails in
searching out the several parts of our bodies, that God our Creator and
gracious preser^er may be praised, worshipped, and feared thereby, we shall
never know our selves aright, and as we ought to do, but rather join with the
most part of men who not using their skill in this behalf as a ladder to
climb up by unto God. stick fast in the very matter and form of their
bodies, so that many of them become mere Naturalists and very Atheists. One
especial cause whereof, as (...) it is because they lay not the ground and
foundation of their skill in the holy Scriptures, the fountain of all sound
knowledge, which teach us, that ^t is the Lord that made us and that formed us
from the womb, Isay 44. 2.
but follow after some small streams of this knowledge, even such as are
polluted with the in^entions of man's brain placing the course of nature in the
procreation of mankind (which is but an effect of Gods almighty working power)
in the room of God himself the supreme cause of al. In which respect they may
not unfitly be resembled to Moles that are always plodding in the earth, or to
swine that finding acorns upon the ground, never look up to the tree from
which they fall. They forget that man's eyes are therefore set in the head,
which is the upper part of the body, rather then in his breast, belly, or feet,
because he should be admonished thereby to lift up his mind unto heaven and
heavenly things: and therefore Plato says, that men's eyes were set in a body
erected and looking upward, that they might be as guides to lead them to the
knowledge of God, upon the sight of the celestial light, and notice taken of
the heavenly motions. Otherwise, although a man's skill be never so great,
although he knowet^ the way of the stars, the walls of the world, the
foundatio^s of the earth, the top of the heavens, yet if he be ignorant of the
creator and moderatour of them all, it shall profit him nothing. But as no man
is to look for grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles, so we must not think
that Epicures and Atheists will once either labor to know God or open their lips
to praise him, when as yet they have not learned to believe that he is, much
less that he is a rewarder of them that seek him. Hebr. 11. 6.
And surely of all Satan's delusions wrought by him in the hearts of
vnbelee^ers, this monstrous error of (...), as that which is destitute of all
show of (...) self into the heart of man. For (...) r^ption, hunger and thirst
is not more incident unto him then (...) religion and aberration in (...), yet
for any man not to see and acknowledge by the dim candle of nature, that God
is, that his (...) ^^^cheth over all, that the soul of man is immortal, and
that after this l^se there is a place of happiness for the good and of
torments for the wicked, is as I may term it, a supernatural error, or rather
cleun^ againsst (...) religion, nature and all. The truth whereof appears
both by the common consent of all nations, who have generally approo^ed those
points as inviolable principles and maxims in nature, and also by the
judgment of the sounder sort of Philosophers and Lawmakers amongst the
Heath^^, who knowing that all men's consciences did naturally acknowledge not
only a being of a divine power, but a subjection also thereunto, pret^nded
that their laws and superstitions came from some one or other of their
supposed gods and goddesses: as Minos King of the Cretensians made the people
believe that he had received his laws of Jupiter, Lycurgus the D^^^demonian
lawmaker of Apollos oracle, Numa Pompilius a Roman^ king of Aegeria the Nymph,
and so the rest of others. And in tru^th they that deny the divine essence,
what do they but deny themselves, and the being of all things in the world
besides? For as Aratus the heathen Poet (...) is also confirmed unto us by the
Apostle Paul, Act. 17.
In God we live, (...) have our being: so that without him it is impossible we
should have any being one moment of an hour. And it is strange to consider
(...) these reaonable beasts (for men I dare not call them) standing so (...)
upon reason and sense as they would seem to do, cannot in reason (...) that
this great variety and exquisite order, which they behold and see in nature and
natural things, must of necessity have some superior cause from which they
received both their first being, and their conti^^al (...) in the same. When
they look upon any excellent picture, they presently judge, as the truth is,
that it was wrought by some cunning painter: and every (...) building leads
all men to the consideration of some exquisite master builder that framed it.
And shall not the view of the world, and the knowledge of so many admirable
things therein as are subject to all our senses, constra^^^ ^s to acknowledge a
superior cause and creator of them all? Does any ship sail his right
course without a Pilot? or is there any City well governed without a
Magistrate? And shall any surmize, that the celestial lights could observe
their right motions without the direction of him that made them? or that the
terrestrial globe of the earth could (...) so well ordered by the course of
nature, were it not that all things are (...) by him that (...) them all? But
such is the blockishnesse of these (...) that they will believe nothing but
that which they may see with their eyes, and (...) knowledge of by the light of
their bodies. As though, if their eyes were plucked out of their heads there
could be no sun in the (...) nor light in the world because themselves were
in darkness and could see nothing. How many things are there in nature which
(...), and yet no man makes any question of their being, no not they (...),
who notwithstanding deny that there is any divine nature, any (...) soul,
Angel or spirit, because they are not visible and subject to ^ight. Can any
of them see the wind, look upon the voice of a man, behold the sweet
harmony of music? Nay, can they take a view of the hearts in their bodies,
or of the brains in their heads? Are they therefore without heart and
brainelesse? Surely it seems they are clean void of brain, ^it and common
sense, that nail all their belief so fast to the sight of their b^dily eyes.
And yet were it so that they would not most wilfully (...) the evidence of
their own hearts, they should there behold with the eyes of their mind as it
were in a crystal glass that which may be known of God. Romans 1. 19.
Nay the holy Ghost proceeds further, and tells us, that even our bodily
eyes may and do after a sort look upon the eternal power and Godhead, Psalm.
20.
which are seen by the creation of the world, being viewed in the works
thereof. And because it may so fall out by the (...) judgment of God, that
these beetle-eyed Atheists may as well be deprived of their bodily eyes, as they
want the sight of their minds, the creator and Lord of the whole world has
set such marks of his diety in his works that such as have only the
direction of nature may even with their eyes closed up touch and handle him if
they will but grope after him, Act. 17. 27.
in whom we all live move and have our being. What should I press them with
the certain testimony of their own hearts and consciences, which will they
will they, draw them to a fearful acknowledgement of the mighty power of
God, whenever either by his terrible voice of thunder he shakes their
hearts, or by some irrecouerable disease, as a messenger of death, he (...)
them to appear before his tribunal seat and throne of iusti^. But there
needs no other proof to co^^nce them then the words of their own mouths.
For do not their horrible oaths whereby they blasph^^ the Majesty of God, and
as much as lies in them tear him in pieces, ^e a^e ^^^nesse against themselves
that the Lord whom they despite in that (...) has a being, howsoever
otherwise they deny the same? And if no reason will sink into their brains,
yet me thinks the weight of Gods judgment which have from time to time seized
extraordinarily upon these Atheists that have sprung up in the world should
cause them more seriously to consider of their miserable estate.

It is reported of Protagoras, Protagoras.
who was one of the first of that stamp, that being banished from Athens, and
his Books publicly burnt, he was drowned in the sea as he sailed into Sicilia.
Diagoras Diagoras.
was violently slain by certain men whom the Athenians had hired with money for
that purpose. Epicurus Epicurus.
also, who placed his felicity in corporal pleasures, died miserably in a
vessel of hot water, after that he hadbin fourteen days together extremely
tormented with the stone in the bladder. Lucianus, Lucianus.
surnamed by his own countrymen the Blasphemer, as he behaved himself most
currishly in barking both against the gods of the Heathen, and against Christ
Jesus the Savior of the world, so his end was thereafter by being torn in
pieces and devoured of dogs. Pliny Pliny Sen.
the elder denying the immortality of the soul of man, and placing Nature a
creature in the stead of God the Creator, whilst he was ouer-curious in
searching out the cause of the burning of Aetna, was choked with the smoke
that issued from it. A just punishment for him to end his life by smoke, who
esteemed his soul to be no better then a little vapor. Cassius. Brutus.
Cassius being a professed Scholar of Epicurus, and Brutus most brutishly
railing upon the providence of God because his enterprises against Caesar
succeeded not to his desire, were both overtaken with the revenging hand of
God, the one of them causing his servant to be his Butcher, and the other
embruing his hands in his own blood. The like befell Lucretius Lucretius.
a most notorious Atheist, who being deprived of the right use of his senses,
abused by him to the denying of God and of all religion, slew himself in the
midst of his madness. Pope John the 13. Pope John 13.
may woorthily be enrolled in this band, as he that was not ashamed to put up ^
supplication to the devil to send him goodlucke at dice: and one day in the
midst of his iollitie he took a cup of wine and drank to the devil. But
by the just judgment of God he was stabbed in with a dagger by one who took
him committing adultery with his wife, so that he died thereof within eight
days after. Leo the tenth Pope Pope Leo. 10.
of that name, who thought there was neither heaven nor hell after this life,
and blasphemously said that the Gospel of Christ was but a fable, was
suddenly stricken dead with an extreme laughter, which he fell into by reason
of news brought him of the slaughter and overthrow of certain French men in
Italy by his means. The French histories make mention of one Frances
Rabelais, Frances Rabelais.
who having sucked in this poison of Atheism made a mock at al religion, as
Lucretius his forerunner had done before him: but the selfsame author and
defender of true religion, that took from Lucretius al use of reason, did so
deprive this beast of all sense, that as he led a brutish life; so he died like
a swine in the midst of his drunkenness, deriding those that spoke unto him of
God and of his mercy. Iodellus Iodellus.
likewise a French Poet, and a professed Atheist, as he gave himself in his
life time to write tragedies, so he made a right tragical end. For having
through gluttony and riot wasted his patrimony and wealth, he fell into such
extreme need, that he was miserably famished for want of sustenance. It
would ask a long time to set down the judgments of God that have justly
overtaken sundry others of this abominable crew: only I will rehearse one
history worthy our knowledge concerning this matter, mentioned by Enguerran in
the second volume of his Histories. In the reign of Jews the eleventh, and
upon the fifth day of June 1464. there happened (says he) a wonderful
accident in the Palace at Paris, whilst there was a controversy in pleading
between the Bishop of Angiers and a rich citizen of that town, A citizen of
Angiers.
whom the Bishop accused of notorious Atheism, namely, that he had said in
the hearing of many, that he believed not there was any god or devil, either
any heaven or hell, Now as the Bishops Advocate rehearsed these words, the
place where they were pleading trembled very sore, insomuch that with the
shaking a stone fell down from the top to the bottom, but hurt no body,
albeit they were all taken with a great fear. Whereupon they went all
presently out of the place until the next day when the matter was to be heard
again. And then also the said room began to shake again, so that one of
the summers of the chamber sprang out of the mortesse, and bowed downward two
feet, but fell not. All that were present supposed they should have died no
other death, which caused them so violently to rush out, that for haste some
left their hattes, some their cappes, some their slippers behind them, neither
durst any plead any more there before it was thoroughly mended. Now albert
Enguerran speaks nothing of the determination of that suite, yet for as much
as nothing comes to pass by happe-hazard (as they use to speak) but all
things are guided by the good providence of God, it is out of question, that
the Lord would teach us hereby, how we should detest and abhor such
execrable thoughts and speeches, seeing the very dumb creatures, as the
stones, the timber, and the earth it self (which of it own nature is
immovable) were so affected with the horror thereof, that they could not
abide so much as to hear it spoken of without shaking. But here some will say
unto me, that this labor might well have bin spared, considering that the
sunshine of the Gospel (which breaks forth so clearly in all quarters of
the land) will quickly descry if any such ougly bird should once begin to
peep out of the shell within the nest of this Island. And if the Athenians
being mere heathen men banished Protagoras out of their territories, and burnt
his Books in a public place, because in the beginning of one of them he
called the deity into question, we may not think but that in this land
ouer-spread with the knowledge of God, this monstrous brood shall be nipped in
the head so soon as ever it shall dare to show it self. Indeed a man would
think that Atheism should not once be dreamed of, or named amongst us,
considering that we live in those times of which the Prophets foretold, Isaiah.
11. 9. and 54. 13.
Ier. 31. 34.
That the earth should be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that
cover the sea: that all the children of the Church should be taught of the
Lord: so that one neighbor shall not teach another, saying, Know the Lord: for
they shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest, says the Lord.
So a man would think that France, having bin for these thirty years and
upwards almost continually scourged with ciuillwarres, and that for the cause
of religion, should be so far from being stained with the least spotte of
Atheism, as that it might now at the length truly say with the Prophet David,
Psalm. 119. 71.
It is good for me that I was afflicted, for thereby have I learned to keep
thy law. And yet both this our Author and some other of that nation, knowing
that this infection has seized upon many of their countrie-men, have labored
by their writings to suppress the same. And surely it is greatly to be feared,
that as their disguised attire covers the bodies of many of our people, and
makes them deformed, so this poison of Atheism has passed the narrow seas,
and is landed in the hearts of no small number, to their utter destruction both
of body and soul. Neither is this the fear of some few without any ground,
but of a great many wise and godly Christians, who seeing the general
prophannesse of men's lives almost every where, both publicly cry out against
the present infection, and privately bewail the future evils that necessarily
follow the same. And albeit per adventure there be none amongst us, that are
so far gone in Atheism as Ligneroles a French Courtier of late days was,
who is said to have made open profession thereof, yet if the tree may be judged
of by the fruits, and the outward effects of men's lives do show the inward
affections of their hearts, he that has but half an eye may see, that there
are a great many amongst us of those foolishmen of whom David speaks, Psalm.
16. 1.
Who say in their hearts that there is no God. In the forefront of which
company, the students of Machiauels principles and practicers of his precepts
may worthily be raunged. This bad fellow whose works are no less accounted of
among his followers, then were Apollos Oracles among the Heathen, nay then the
sacred Scriptures are among sound Christians, blusheth not to belch out these
horrible blasphemies against pure religion, and so against God the Author
thereof, namely, That the religion of the heathen made them stout and
courageous, whereas Christian religion makes the professors thereof
base-minded, timorous, and fit to become a pray to every one: that since men
fell from the religion of the Heathen, they became so corrupt that they would
believe neither God nor the Devil: that Moses so possessed the land of Iudaea,
as the Goths did by strong hand usurp part of the Roman Empire. These and
such like positions are spued out by this hel-hound sometime against true
religion, otherwhiles against the religion and Church of Rome, sometimes also
taxing the religion of the heathen, of falsehoode, and coosinage: so that in
truth he would have all religion to be of like account with his disciples,
except it be so far forth as the pretense and show of religion may serve to
set forward and effect their wicked policies. And for this cause he sets
down this rule for every Prince and Magistrate to frame his religion by,
namely, that he should pretend to be very religious and devout, although it be
but in hypocrisy. And to this he adds a second precept no less impious,
that a Prince should with tooth and nail maintain false miracles and
untruths in religion, so long as his people may thereby be kept in greater
obedience. Now what fruits we are to expect from the students of this
profession, let all men judge that have any sparks of pure religion glowing in
their hearts. Unto these may be added, such as tread in the steps of
Lamech, who derided the judgment of God upon Caine: such as walk in the ways
of Ismael, who mocked Isaac in regard of the promise: and such as those
irreligious persons were of whom Peter speaks, who in iesting-wise asked
what was become of the promise of Christ his coming to judgment. That there
are such amongst us, even in these times wherein we live, let the testimony
which one of that crew gave lately of himself when the heavy hand of God by
sickness sommoned him to give an account of his dissolute life. He being one
day admonished of his friends to leave his badde course of life, which
otherwise would bring him to utter destruction, scoffingly returned them this
answer: Tush (quoth he) what is he better that dies in his bed then he
that ends his life at Tiburne? And being further urged to doubt the loss of
his soul in Hell fire for ever although he feared not death in this world,
he replied, Hell? What talk you of Hell to me? I know if I once come there,
I shall have the company of better then my self: I shall also meet with some
knaves in that place, and so long as I shall not sit there alone, my care is
the less. But you are mad folks (quoth he) for if I feared the Judges of
the Bench no more then I dread the judgments of God, I would before I slept
diue into one karles bags or other, and make merry with the shelles I found
in them so long as they would last. The voice of a mere Atheist, and so
afterward he pronounced of himself when he was checked in conscience by
the mighty hand of GOD. And yet this fellow in his life time and in the
midst of his greatest ruff, had the Press at commandment to publish his
lasciuous Pamphlets, whereby he infected the hearts of many young Gentlemen
and others with his poysonfull platforms of love, and devilish discourses of
fancies fittes: so that their minds were no less possessed with the toys of
his irreligious brain, then their chambers and studies were pestered with his
lewd and want on books. And if the rest of his crew may be permitted so
easily as he did without controlment to instill their venomous inventions into
the minds of our English youth by means of printing, what other thing can we
look for, but that the whole land should speedily be overflowed with the
deadly waters of all impieties, when as the floodgates of Atheism are thus set
wide open? Are they not already grown to this boldness, that they dare to gird
at the greatest personages of all estates and callings under the fables of
savage beasts, not sparing the very dead that lie in their graves? that the
holy Apostles, the blessed virgin Mary, the glorious kingdom of heaven it
self must be brought in as it were upon astage to play their several parts,
according as the humor of every irreligious head shall dispose of them? And
whereas godly learned men, and some that have spoken of their own experience,
have in their books that are allowed by authority, termed Stage Plays and
Theaters, The school of abuse, the school of bawdery, the nest of the devil
and sink of all sin, the chair of pestilence, the pomp of the devil, the
sovereign place of Satan, yet this commendation of them has lately passed the
Press, that they are rare exercise of virtue. It were too long to set down
the Catalogue of those lewd and lascivious books, which have mustered
themselves of late years in Paul's Churchyard, as chosen soldiers ready to
fight under the devils banner: of which it may be truly said, that they
prevail no less (if not more) to the upholding of Atheism in this light of
the Gospel, then the Legend of lies, Huon of Bordeaux, King Arthur, with the
rest of that rabble, were of force to maintain Popery in the days of
ignorance. Wherefore my humble suit is to all such as may by virtue of their
authority stay the violent course of Atheism daily spredde abroad by these
pernicious Pamphlets, that they would lay to their helping hand for the speedy
redress thereof. And as for those that reap the gain of iniquity by the
sale of such infectious stuff, oh what a sweet smelling sacrifice should they
offer unto the Lord, if they would gather all such hurtful Books together, and
cause them to pass through the fire in the midst of that yeard, where now they
are so commonly sold. Hereby it would come to pass, that the land being purged
of so great contagion as droppeth out of the pens of such godless brains,
the Lord would withdraw his heavy hand, which now many ways presses us sore,
the preaching of the Gospel would prevail mightily, Act. 19. 19, 20.
as it did in Ephesus after the like sacrifice, and young Gentlemen and others
would employ good hours upon better studies: which the Lord grant for his
mercies sake. AMEN.

THE SPECIAL AND principal matters handled in this second tome of the French
Academy, as it is divided into several days works, and distinguished by
Chapters.
The first days work.
Page 15 OF the creation of the first man, and of the matter whereof the body
of man is made. Chap. 1. 22 Of the creation of woman. Chap. 2. 28 Of the simple
or similarie parts of the body, namely the bones, ligaments, gristles, sinowes,
pannicles, cords or filaments, veins, arteries and flesh. Chap. 3. 34 Of the
compound parts of the body, and first of the feet and legs, and of the arms
and hands. Chap. 4. 41 Of the backbone of the marrow thereof: of the ribs, and
of other bones of man's body. Chap. 5. 47 Of the share bone and marrow of the
bones: of the bones in the head, and of the flesh: of the muscles and of their
office. Chap. 6. 52 Of the kernels in the body, and of their sundry uses,
especially of the breasts of women, of their beauty and profit in the
nourishing of children, and of the generation of milk. Chap. 7. 57 Of the
fat and skins of man's body, and of their use: of the hairs thereof. Chap. 8.
The second days work.
62 Of the bodily and external senses, especially of touching: of their
members, instruments and offices. Chap. 9. 67 Of the eyes, and of their
excellency, profit and use: of the matter and humors whereof they are made.
Chap. 10. 73 Of the tunicles and skins of the eyes: of their form and
motions: of their sundry coulors: of the sinews whereby they receive sight,
and of other parts about the eyes. Chap. 11. 79 Of the ears, and of their
composition, office, and use. Chap. 12. 85 Of the diverse uses of the tongue: of
the instruments necessary both for voice and speech, how there is a double
speech, of the form thereof, how the spirit of man is represented thereby.
Chap. 13. 91 Of the agreement which the instruments of the voice and speech
have with a pair of Organs, what things are to be considered in placing of the
lungs next the heart, of the pipes and instruments of the voice. Chap. 14. 96
Of the tongue, and of the nature and office thereof: of the excellency and
profit of speech which is the art of the tongue: what is to be considered
touching the situation thereof in the head, and near the brain. Chap. 15. 103
Of the office of the tongue in tasting, and in preparing meat for the
nourishment of the body: of the teeth, and of their nature and office: of the
conduite or pipe that receives and swalloweth down meats. Chap. 16.
The third days work.
108 OF the sense of taste given to the palal: what tastes are good to nourish
the body: of the diversity of them: of hunger and thirst, and of their causes.
Chap. 17. 113 Of helps and creatures meet for the preservation and nourishment
of the body: how God prepares them to serve for that purpose: of their use.
Chap. 18. 119 Of the nose and of the sense of smelling, and of their profit and
use: of the composition matter and form of the nose. Chap. 19. 124 Of the use
briefly of all the outward senses of man's body, namely in purging the
superfluities and ordures of his nose: of the diversity that is in men's faces,
and of the image of the mind and heart in them. Chap. 20. 130 Of the nature,
faculties and powers of man's soul: of the knowledge which we may have in this
life, and how excellent and necessary it is: into what kinds the life and soul
are divided. Chap. 21. 136 Of the two natures of which man is compounded how
the body is the lodge and instrument of the soul: how the soul may be let
from doing her proper actions by the body, and be separated from it, and yet
remain in her perfection. Chap. 22. 142 Of the brain and of the nature
thereof: of the sundry kinds of knowledge that are in man: of the similitude
that is between the actions and works of the natural virtues of the soul,
and of the internal senses. Chap. 23. 147 Of the composition of the brain,
with the members and parts thereof: of their offices, and that knowledge which
ought to content us touching the principal cause of the virtues and wonderful
powers of the soul. Chap. 24.
The fourth days work.
148 OF the seat of voluntary motion and sense: of the office and nature of
the common sense: of imagination, and of fantasy: and how light and dangerous
fantasy is: of the power which both good and bad spirits have to move it.
Chap. 25. 158 Of reason and memory, and of their seat, nature and office: of
the agreement which all the senses both external and internal have one with
another, and of their virtues. Chap. 26. 164 That the internal senses are so
distinguished, that some of them may be troubled and hindered, and the rest
be safe and whole, according as their places and instruments assigned unto
them in the body are sound or perished: and of those that are possessed with
devils. Chap. 27. 170 Of the reasonable soul and life, and of virtue: of the
understanding and will that are in the soul, and of their dignity and
excellency. Chap. 28. 176 Of the variety and contrariety that is found in the
opinions, deliberations, counsayles, discourses, and iugdements of men, with
the cause thereof: and of the good order and end of all discourses. Chap. 29.
182 Of judgment, and of his office after the discourse of reason: and how
belief, opinion, or doubting follow it: of the difference that is between
them. Chap. 30. 187 Of the means whereby a man may have certain knowledge of
those things which he ought to believe and to take for true: of the natural
and supernatural light that is in man, and how they bear witness of the image
of God in him. Chap. 31. 192 How the virtues and powers of the soul show
themselves by little and little, and by degrees: of contemplation, and of the
good that is in it: of that true and divine contemplation which we look for
after this life. Chap. 32.
The fifth days work.
198 OF the appetites that are in all living creatures, and namely in man, and
of their kinds: and particularly of the natural and sensitive appetite. Chap.
33. 203 Of will and of the diverse significations and uses of these words
(Reason and Will.) of the actions, freedom, and nature thereof: of the power
which reason may have over her. Chap. 34. 208 Of those good things which both
men only guided by the light of nature, are able to propound to themselves, and
to follow, and they also that are guided by the spirit of God: of the power and
liberty of the will in her actions, both external and internal. Chap. 35. 214
Of the distinction that ought to be between the understanding and knowledge,
and the will and affections in the soul, and between the scates and
instruments which they have in the body: of the agreement that is between the
heart and the brain. Chap. 36. 219 Of the nature and composition of the heart,
and of the midriffe: of the tunicles or skinnie couerings of the breast, and of
the Pericardion, or Cawle about the heart: of the motion, office and use of the
lungs: of the heart, and of the arteryes. Chap. 37. 224 Of the substance,
situation and counterpoize of the heart: of the nature and use of the vital
spirit, and of the forge, vessels and instruments thereof: of the sundry
doors and pipes of the heart, and of their uses. Chap. 38. 229 Of the second
motion of the heart, which belongs to the affections of the soul, and of
those that go before or follow after judgment: of the agreement that is
between the temperature of the body, and the affections of the soul. Chap.
39. 233 Of the health and diseases of the soul: of the agreement between
corporal and spiritual physic: how necessary the knowledge of the nature of
the body and of the soul is for every one. Chap. 40.
The sixth days work.
237 OF four things to be considered in the will, and in the power of
desiring in the soul: and first of natural inclinations: of self love, and
the unruliness thereof. Chap. 41. 241 Of the habit of the soul in the matter
of the affections, and of what force it is: of the causes why the affections
are given to the soul, with the use of them: of the fountain of virtues and
vices. Chap. 42 246 That according to the disposition of the judgment, the
affections are more or less moderate or immoderate* of the cause of all the
motions of the soul and heart: of the variety of affections: of the
generation, nature, and kinds of them. Chap. 43. 250 That joy or grief are
always joined to the affections: and what joy and grief are properly. Chap.
44. 255 Of the causes why God has placed these affections of joy and sorrow in
the heart: of true and false joy, and of good and bad hope. Chap. 45. 260 Of
fear, and of the nature and effects thereof toward the body the mind and the
soul, and how it troubles them: of the true harness and armor against
fear. Chap. 46. 265 Of the delight and pleasure that follows every joy, and
of the moderation that is required therein: of diverse degrees of pleasures, and
how men abuse them, especially those pleasures, which are received by the
corporal senses. Chap. 47. 270 Of the comparison of pleasures received by the
internal senses: and how men descend by degrees from the best to the basest
pleasures: of the difference between the use of spiritual delights and
corporal: and how the one chase the other. Chap. 48.
The seventh days work.
276 OF the affections of love, of the nature, kinds, and object of it: of the
beginning of friendship: of the virtue and force of alluring that is in
likeness and in beauty: of the agreement that is between beauty and
goodness. Chap. 49. 281 Of other causes why beauty procures love, and of
diverse degrees and kinds of beauty: how it is the nature of love always to
unite, an what other effects it has: how love descends, and ascends not:
what power it has to allure and breed love. Chap. 50. 286 Of desire and
coveting, and of the kinds of it: of the infiniteness of men's desires, and
what Good is able to satisfy and content it: of the difference between desire
and love, and of the utmost limit and end of love. Chap. 51. 291 Of the good
things that are in true love, of the diverse valuations of love, and of the
benefits which it procures: what knowledge is requisite to allure love, and
how one love grows by another of the friendship that may be both between
the good and the badde. Chap. 52. 297 Of favor, reverence, and of honor: of
their nature and effects: of those outward signs whereby they show
themselves: of pity and compassion, and how agreeable it is to the nature of
man. Chap. 53. 302 Of offense in the heart and soul: of the degrees of
offense, and of the good and evil that may be in this affection: of contempt
that is bredde of it, and of mockery, which follows contempt. Chap. 54. 307
Of anger and of the vehemence and violency thereof: of the difference that is
between anger and rancor: of the affection of revenge that accompanies them:
of the motions of the heart in anger, with the effects thereof, wherefore this
affection is given to man, and to what use it may serve him. Chap. 55. 313 Of
hatred and of the nature and effects thereof of a good kind of hatred, and of
the remedy to cure the evil hatred: of envy, and of the kinds and effects
thereof: of the difference between good and evil envy. Chap. 56.
The eight days work.
319 OF jealousy and of the kinds thereof: how it may be either a vice or a
virtue: how true zeal, true jealousy and indignation proceed of love: of
their natures, and why these affections are given to man. Chap. 57. 324 Of
revenge, cruelty and rage, and what agreement there is among them: what shame
and blushing is, and why God has placed these affections in man: and of the
good and evil that is in them. Chap. 58. 330 Of pride, with the consideration
thereof as well in nature entire as corrupted: of the orginall thereof, and of
such as are most inclined thereunto: what vices accompany it: how great a
poison it is, and what remedy there is for it. Chap. 59. 335 Of the natural
powers of the soul, and what sundry virtues they have in the nourishment of
the body: of their order and offices: of their agreement and necessary use:
where the vegetative soul is placed in the body, and what virtue it has to
augment the same. Chap. 60. 341 What instruments the soul uses in the body,
about the natural works of nourishing and augmenting: of the ventricle of
stomach, and of the figure, orifices and filamentes it has: of the stomach,
and of what substance and nature it is: of the causes of hunger and of
appetite: of the inferior orifice. Chap. 61. 347 Of the intalles and bowels,
and of their names and offices: of the nature of the three smaller guts, and
of the other three that are greater: of the instructions which we may learn
by these things. Chap. 62. 353 Of the Mesentery and Mesareon: of the
Meseraicall veins, of the Pancreas or sweet bread, and of their nature and
office: of the liver, and of his nature and office: of the roots, bodies and
branches of the veins: of their names and uses, and of the similitude between
them and the arteries. Chap. 63. 358 Of the blood, and of other humors in the
body: of their diversity and nature, and of the agreement they have with the
elements: of the similitude that is betwixt the great garden of this great
world, and that of the little world, touching the nourishment of things
contained and preserved in them. Chap. 64.
The ninth days work.
363 OF the vapors that ascend up to the brain, and of the waters and clouds
contained therein: and in what perils men are (...): why the soul and blood
are put one for another: of the temperature of the humors necessary for the
health and life of the body: of the causes of health and of diseases, and of
life and death. Chap. 65. 368 Of the uses and commodities of the humors joined
with the blood, and what vessels are assigned unto them in the body, and of
their nature and offices, and first of the choleric humor, and of the
spleen: then of the flegmaticke humor, and of the kidneys and other vessels,
which it has to purge by. Chap. 66. 373 Of the names whereby the humors of the
body are commonly called, with the causes wherefore: of the comparison between
the corruption and temperature of the humors of the body, and between the
manners and the affections of the soul: of the means whereby the humors
corrupt, and of the feauers and diseases engendered thereby: of the sundry
natural temperatures in every one. Chap. 67. 379 Of the diverse temperatures
and complexions of men, according to the nature of humors that bear most sway
in them: of the disposition whereunto they are naturally moved by them either
to virtues or vices: of the means to correct the vices and defects that may be
in our natural inclinations. Chap. 68. 383 Of the restoration and reparation
of all natures created by the generatiue power and virtue that is in them, and
namely in man: what generation is, and what the generatiue power of the soul
is: what the seed is, and how generation proceeds of strength and of
infirmity. Chap. 69. 388 Of the powers of the generatiue virtue and of their
offices: of the principal cause why God gave to man the power of generation:
in what sense the reins are taken for the seat of generation: how we ought
rightly to consider of the generation of man. Chap. 70. 393 Of the fashion of a
child in the womb, and how the members are framed one after another in the
mothers belly: of the time and days within which a child is perfectly
fashioned. Chap. 71. 398 Of childbirth and the natural causes thereof: of the
great providence of God appearing therein: of the image of our eternal
natiuitic, represented unto us in our mortal birth. Chap. 72.
The tenth days work.
404 WHy God created man naked, and with less natural defense then he did all
other living creatures: how many ways he recompenceth this nakedness: of the
general beauty of the whole body of man, joined with profit and commodity.
Chap. 73. 409 Whether the life of the body can proceed eyter of the matter or
of the composition, form and figure, or of the qualities thereof, or else of
the harmony, conjunction and agreement of all these: whether any of these, or
al of them together can be the soul: of the length and shortness, of the diverse
degrees and ages, and of the end of man's life: of death, and of the causes
both of life and death: of the difference that is between natural and
supernatural Philosophy in the consideration of things. Chap. 74. 414 Of the
causes generally of the length and shortness of bodily life: of natural and
of violent death: in what manner the life of man consists in his breath: of
the principal things required to life, and without which it cannot be: of the
difference betwixt the life of men and the life of beasts: of the image of the
spiritual death in the corporal: of the true comfort which we ought to have
therein. Chap. 75. 420 Of the chief consolations, which the wisest among the
Pagans and Infidels could draw from their humane reason, and natural
Philosophy against death: of the blaspemies used by Atheists and Epicures
against God and nature: what nature is, and who they be that attribute unto it
that which they ought to attribute to God. Chap. 76. 426 That there is but one
soul in every several body: that one and the some soul has in it all those
virtues and powers, whose effects are daily seen: of the seat of the soul in
the body, and of the principal instrument thereof of the union of the body and
soul: of the diverse degrees of nature, and of the excellency that is in it: of
the fountains and bounds of all the powers and virtues of the soul. Chap. 77.
432 Of the nature and variety of the animal spirits, and how they are only
instruments of the soul, and not the soul it self: of the nature of those
bodies wherein the soul may dwell and work: of the difference that is, not
only between the soul and the instrumente by which it works, but also
between the instruments themselves, and their natures and offices, and which
of them are nearest or farthest off: of the degrees that are in the union and
conjunction of the soul with the body. Chap. 78. 438 Of the divisions of man
made in the holy scriptures, as well in respect of the soul as of the body in
what significations the names of soul, spirit and heart are used therein, and
the causes why: of the intier sanctification of man: how the soul is taken for
the life, and for the members and instruments of nourishment and for
nourishment it self. Chap. 79. 444 What is meant by a living soul, what by a
sensual and natural body, and what by a spiritual body: how the name of
soul is taken for all the desires of the flesh, and for all things belonging
to this life: and not only for the whole person alive, but also for the person
being dead, and for a dead (...) for the spirit sep^rate from the body. Chap.
80.
The Eleventh days work
490 WHether the soul of man is engendered with the body, and of the same
substance that the body is of: or whether it be created by it self and of
another substance: whether it be needful for us to know what the soul is,
and what is the e^^ence thereof, or only to know of what quality it is, with
the works and effects thereof. Chap. 81. 495 Whether there be any thing
mortal in the soul of man: of the distinction between the soul and the
powers of it: of the opinion of Philosophers, and what agreement is between
them touching the soul of brute beasts, and the nature and substance of it: of
their opinion that derive the soul of man and the soul of beasts from one
sou^taine: of them that ascend higher, and of their reaso^^ Chap. 82. 499 Of
the opinion of Galen, of Plato, and of Aristotle touching the substance and
nature of man's soul: of the opinion of Occ^m touching the vegetative and
sensitue power thereof, and of the distinction of souls he makes in man: of
the sentence of the Platonists, and of Origin touching the creation, birth, and
nature of the soul: of the conjunction of the soul with the body, and the
estate thereof in the same. Chap. 83. 503 Of the opinion of the Platonists and
some others touching the substance of men's souls: in what sense not only the
Poets and heathen Philosophers, but also Saint Paul have said that men were the
generation and lineage of God: of their error that say, that souls are of the
very substance of God: of the transmigration of souls according to the opinion
of the same Philosophers. Chap. 84. 509 The chief causes, as learned men
think, (...) Pythagoras and (...) transmigration of souls, and transformation
of bodies: the ancient opinion of the Jews touching the same thing. Chap. 85.
515 Of the Pythagoreans of these days amongst the Christians, and of their
foolish opinions: of the opinions of many Doctors and and Divines touching the
creation and ordinary generation of men's souls: of the moderation that ought
to be kept in that matter: of the cause of the filthiness and corruption of
man's soul. Chap. 86. 5^^ Of those powers and properties, which the soul of
man has common with the soul of beast^^ of those powers and virtues which are
proper and peculiar to it self, according to the Philosophers: of the
difference and agreement that is between humane philosophy and christian
doctrine touching th^se things. Chap. 87. 5^6 How men can have no certain
resolution of the immortality of the soul, but by the word of God: of the
perverseness of Epicures and Atheistes in this (...): of the chief causes that
hinder (...) from believing the immortality of the soul, and of their
blockishnesse and evil judgment therein: how we must seek for the image of
God after which man was created in his soul. Chap. 88.
The twelfth days work.
5^^ OF those who desire the return of souls departed to testify their
immortality: what witness has binne sent us of God out of another world to
resolve us therein. Chap. 89. 53^ Of natural reasons whereby the immortality of
souls may be proved against Epicures and Atheists: and first of the argument
taken from the faculty of knowledge which the soul has, and from that
knowledge of eternity which (...): how it appears, that it is not begotten
of this corruptible nature, because it ascends up unto God: and how by a
special benefit of God, it is daily created, and not by the virtue of nature.
Chap. 90. 541 Of the argument for the immortality of the soul, that may be
taken from that natural desire thereof and of perpetuity which is in it: of
another argument to the same purpose, of the desire which men have to continue
their name and memory for ever: an argument to the same end taken from the
apprehension and terror which men may have both of the death of the body: and
also of the soul and spirit. Chap. 91. 546 Of the agreement that may be taken
from the delights and pleasures of the soul to prove the immortality thereof:
an argument to the same end taken from the insatiable desires and pleasures of
men, even from such as are most carnal: of the testimony which they may find
even in their vices to prove the immortality of their soul. Chap. 92. 551 Of
the testimony that men have of the immortal nature of the soul in their very
body, by the composition and frame thereof: of that which is in the motion and
rest of their soul: how the creation of the whole world should be vain, and
how there should be no providence of God, no religion, no divine justice, if
the soul were mortal: of the multitude and qualities of the witnesses that
stand for the immortality thereof. Chap. 93. 556 Of another argument for the
immortality of the soul taken from that natural desire which men have of
knowledge: of Aristotle's opinion touching the nature and immortality of the
soul: of other reasons of Philosophers to prove that the spirit cannot be a
corruptible and mortal nature: and how just men should be more miserable, and
should have more occasion to fear and to eschew death, then the unjust and
wicked, if the soul were mortal. Chap. 94. 563 Of that praise and reward
which wisdom and virtue may receive of man in this world: how miserable it is
^f there be no better prepared for them elsewhere: how death would be more
grievous and lamentable to the best learned and wisest men, then to the
ignorant and foolish, if the soul were mortal how the best and most certain
judgment of men is for the immortality of the soul: of them who not believing
the same, say that it is good for men to be in such an error. Chap. 95. 569 Of
those internal testimonies, which all men carry within themselves, to convince
them that doubt of the immortality of the soul, and of the judgment to come,
which shall be in eternal happiness for the good, and perpetual torment for
the evil: how the very heathen acknowledged as much by reasons taken from the
testimonies of nature. Chap. 96.
The thirteenth days work.
575 OF the testimonies which every one may take from his conscience: of that
fear unto which all men are naturally subject to prove the immortality of the
soul and a judgment of God upon the just and unjust: how that which the
Atheistes say, that fear causes gods amongst men serves to overthrow their
damnable opinion. Chap. 97. 581 Whether Epicures and Atheists be reasonable
beasts, yea or no, and what reasons they bring to overthrow the immortality of
the soul: of the false opinion of Pliny touching the same, and of his
frivolous and brutish reasons to this purpose: of the brutish conclusion
unbeseeming the whole race of mankind, which he makes of this matter, and of
the judgment of God upon him. Chap. 98. 588 Of them who say, that we cannot
know by the light of nature but that the soul is mortal: of them that allege
a place of Solomon against the immortality of the soul: how we ought to
consider of the judgments of God upon Epicures and Atheistes: how the
absurdities which follow their doctrine declare plainly the grossness of it:
of the force of those arguments that were produced before for the immortality
of the soul. Chap. 99. 594 Of the image of God in the soul of man, and of the
image of the world in man's body: of the conjunction that is between God, the
Angels, and men of the sundry degrees of Good that are therein: of those
lessons and instructions which we ought to receive from the wonderful
composition and conjunction of the soul and body. Chap. 100.
FINIS.
THE FORESPEACH OF THE INTERSPEAKERS IN this Academy, wherein is handled the
cause of their future discourses touching the natural history of Man.
The names of the discoursers. ASER, which signifies Felicity. AMANA, Truth.
ARAM, Excellency. ACHITOB, Brother of goodness. ASER. My companions, I greatly
bewail the misery of our age, wherein so many Epicures and Atheists live, as
are daily discovered amongst us in all estates and callings. True it is, that
the disagreement in matters of religion amongst them that bear the name of
Christians is very great, and causes much trouble in the Church:
nevertheless, I doubt not but that agreement might soon be made, if the word
of God only might be the judge of true and false religion. For all that fear
God, and are careful to do nothing contrary to their duty, that account the
holy scriptures to be the true doctrine of the spirit of God, and are
assuredly persuaded, that there is another life after this and a judge before
whom they must appear, they, I say, are not so hardly induced to peace and
concord, but that a man may hope well of them. But they that fear nothing,
that call all things into question, that esteem all religion to be opinions
only tormenting men's brains: they likewise that stiffly resist even the truth
it self, whereof their own consciences convince them, laboring as much as
lies in them to extinguish not only the light of God within them, but that
also which they learn in his word, such monsters, I say, will trouble all
Christendom more then the contentions about religion, unless the goodness of God
provide some convenient remedy for the same. For they must be taught to believe
one God, one Jesus Christ, the immortality of the soul, the resurrection of
the body, a second everlasting life full of joy and happiness for good and
just men, but full of grief and pain for the wicked and unjust: generally,
they must be taught to believe whatsoever we learn in the holy scriptures
concerning the creation and end of every nature. These things being spiritual
and heavenly cannot be seen nor comprehended without a celestial and
supernatural light, nor without spiritual eyes, joined with the virtue and
power of the spirit of God, who only is able to clarify our eyes and to give
them sight. For albeit God gave spiritual eyes to man, when he endued him
with a reasonable and understanding soul, yet they are even blind through
sin, if they always have not God that great and everlasting Sun to
illuminate them with his divine light: as the eyes of the body remain in
darkness, when bodily light is taken from them. Matthew. 15. 14. john 9. 39.
Hereupon they are called blind in holy scripture, that have not the true
knowledge of God by the light of his word. For although they that are most
ignorant have some little knowledge and sense of the divinity by that small
remnant of natural light, which man received at his first creation,
nevertheless because this sparkle is so small in regard of that darkness,
which fills the mind of man, it is not sufficient to lead them to God, and
to the right way of salvation. Therefore they soon go astray and wander
hither and thither, and for the most part follow superstition in place of
religion, and lies in stead of truth: because it is an easy matter for the
devil to disguise his inventions under a false show of piety, that they may
not discern between truth and falsehood, between that which God likes, and
which he disliketh. For seeing the spark of natural light in man's
understanding is so small, there needs no great troubling of the spirit,
neither any great impediments to be cast in his way to confound and amaze him,
and to take away, or utterly to ouerturne his judgment, whereby to mak^ him as
unable to judge of the truth, as a blind man is to judge of colors. But they
are in far worse case that voluntarily separate themselves from all truth,
both natural and supernatural. For they easily believe that, which the
Epicures long since taught against the immortality of souls, and against the
providence of God toward men: insomuch that they hold this for most certain,
that the soul perishes as the body does, and that there is no God that
intermedleth in the government of humane affairs, but that they are guided
either by fortune, or by prudence, or by the folly of men, according as matters
fall out.

I quake to think that such monsters are to be found amongst them that berare
the name of Christians, and have in former times received the marks and seals
of Christianity in the Church of Jesus Christ. But my quaking is doubled when
I consider, that many of them that profess learning and humane philosophy,
and that are thought to have most skillful sharp and subtle wits, are not
only infected with this execrable Atheism, but profess it, open a school
thereof, and know how to poison many with it. For as there was never yet
opinion, error or heresy so strange or monstrous in the world that has not
always found men ynowe to receive it, so long as there were Authors and
masters to set it abroach, so these professors of Atheism are never without
great store of disciples: because after this manner God punishes the curiosity,
ingratitude, and perverseness of men, the contempt of his word and hatred of
the truth, which is commonly in them, as also the pleasure they take in
vanity and lies. Therefore God by his just judgment gives them over into a
reprobate sense, so that they cannot but always reject the truth, and embrace
error and lying, as he often threatens them by the mouth of his Prophets and
Apostles. Esaias 29. 14. 2. tim. 3. 13. 2. these. 2. 10, 11, 12.
Examples hereof we see daily in such as think themselves the wisest men, who
have this in their cogitation (if they dare not speak it openly) that it
belongs not to men of wit to believe in God and his word, but to such as are
simple and foolish: not to these great and noble spirits that fly above the
clouds, who in truth know more then they should, to bring them to that place
of weeping and gnashing of teeth.

We are to live (my companions) amongst such kind of men, and I suppose that
ye, as well as my self, have heard some of them speak: especially since of
late times the service of Princes has longer retained us near unto them, then
we were wont in our young years when the study of good letters did wholly
possess us. Therefore we ought to be very desirous to fortify our selves
daily with strong and powerful reasons against whatsoever we may hear
uttered by these scorners of all piety: not for fear that we shall at any
time be deceived by them (for I am most assured of the graces and gifts, which
we have received from God) but that we may have abundantly wherewith to resist
the vain and weak arguments of these deceivers, when we light among them,
especially in the company of ignorant folks, whom they may easily draw to their
side if we should be silent. Besides, although we should not be able to
confound them by reason of their obstinacy, yet we shall at the least give them
occasion to think more seriously of their error. I know well what small
account they make of the testimonies of holy scriptures, and how they esteem
of them but as of fables and dreams made by some doters and idle persons: for
so they call the Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles. As for the writings of
Philosophers, they will believe Epieurus, Pliny, Lucretius, Lucian, and others
of their sect, who deny all divinity, and the immortality of souls. But they
will give no credit to any thing that we fetch from the saying of Pythagoras,
and Socrates, and from the writings of Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Plutarch, and
an infinite number of other excellent Philosophers of all nations, who have all
taught that there is a divine providence and justice, and that the soul is
immortal. What shall we say then? where shall we seek for arguments which they
will vouchsafe to hear? I have heard them say sometimes, that they would give
credit to natural Philosophy in those things wherein the causes are proved
by their effects. Now if we take this course to prove unto them a godhead, his
providence, his future judgment, and the immortality of the soul, which way
soever we turn our selves, either upward or downward, on the right hand or on
the left, we shall find testimonies every where, which they may not in any wise
reject. For we have nature, the necessity of causes, proportion and
similitude, the life, decency, and dignity of man, the goodness of God, the
vtility that comes by mankind proceeding from the bounty of God, all which
with one common consent, and as it were with one voice do teach and cry, that
there is one God creator and governor of the whole world, and that the soul of
man cannot be mortal. Hereof it is, that the holy Ghost does often propound
unto us in holy scriptures this whole visible world, as a great book of
nature, and of true natural divinity, all the creatures as preachers and
general witnesses of God their creator, of his works and of his glory.
Nevertheless there are but few that have such eyes as are requisite for the
reading of this book, or fit ears to hear the voice, and to understand the
sermons of these natural preachers, no not amongst them that are most skillful
and best studied in the searching out of nature, and have greatest knowledge of
natural things, of liberal arts, and of all humane philosophy. For there are
as many, yea more, to whom in this respect the self same thing is befallen,
which long since befell to the first and greatest philosophers, unto whom Saint
Paul obiecteth this by way of reproach, Romans 1. 18, 19. etc.
that when they knew God by the works of the creation of the world (wherein he
makes his power, his eternal and invisible Godhead, as it were visible unto
us) they did not glorify him as God, but withheld the truth in
unrighteousness. And yet it will not be a hard matter for us (God being our
helper) to make it manifest by the consideration, not only of the whole frame,
but of the least creature therein, especially of the body and soul of man (who
is a little world) and of the creation, nature, dignity and excellency of both
his parts, how not only the simplest and most ignorant may and ought to learn
to know God and his providence over every nature, and so to honor and to
glorify him, as he has bound them thereunto, but also how the wisest ought
to direct all their skill and knowledge which they have in natural philosophy,
to this self same end. As for those that make open profession of Atheism, and
refuse the testimonies, which God in his word sets down unto us, of
himself, of his providence, and of all things belonging to the salvation and
sovereign good of men, they shall have yet, will they nill they, enough probable
reasons to prove all these things, so that we may easily convince and prove
unto them by these testimonies, which every one of them carries about in
himself, both the immortality of the soul, as also the religion of God and of
his providence. For these three things are so linked together, that in no wise
they cannot, neither ought to be separated: so that he which admits the one,
must of necessity approve the others, and if he doubt of the one, he
rejects all.

As therefore (my companions) some years past after our return from war, we
took occasion upon the corruption that then was in all the estates of France,
and the forlorn manners which reigned in every one, to meet together and to
discourse in our Academy of the institution in good manners, and of the means
to live well and happily, to the end that in renewing the memory of our former
studies we might begin to direct our life to that principal end, which the
Philosophers appoint thereof, namely virtuous actions: So I think that even
now we have an other good occasion to read in this great book of nature, and
to bring one to another whatsoever we have learned concerning the nature of
man. For first we have leave in regard of our Princes service, to recreate our
selves for a while in our own houses. Again, the self same place where we
met so fitly, and wherein we began our former discourses of Philosophy, does
inuit us to proceed in them. Moreover, we doubt not of the combat, which is
prepared for us when we shall visit our neighbors and friends, amongst whom
many profess themselves better Philosophers then good Christians. We know also
into what straights we have been brought in our masters courts: and let us not
hope that the peril will be less when their service shall recall us near
unto them. Wherefore we shall do well to arm our selves now with all the
reasons and testimonies which we have in nature against that Epicurean
doctrine, whose only drift is, by denying the immortality of the soul to
turn men from all religion and fear of God. For thus doing, we shall not
only greatly profit our selves, but them also, who being in danger to be
seduced by such deceivers shall hear us now and then reason with them: who
feeling themselves convinced by natural reasons wherein they supposed to have
greatest strength, will not be so bold to vomit their poison before others, but
shall be constrained to d^gest it by themselves ^o heir own confusion and
overthrow. I desire therefore (my companions) to know how you stand affected
toward this my intent and purpose.


AMANA. If ever there were age, wherein those signs of the end of the world,
Matthew. 24.
which the spirit of God has foretold us, have been seen, it is this, wherein
they are so apparent, that there is no one body, if he be not deprived of all
discourse of reason, who does not acknowledge them very evidently. For we are
fallen into those times wherein store of false prophets are arisen, and have
seduced many, wherein all iniquity is increased, and charity altogether
frozen. Which thing has discovered not only many false religions, but also
Atheism, which is far worse. For without doubt they that are altogether void
of religion, are farther off from true religion then they that follow one that
is false. And yet there are as many, yea more at this day that do openly show
themselves to be Atheists and Epicures, then there are of those that are taken
for good Christians. If in outward show they profess religion, it is but to
cover themselves under the vale thereof, to the end that men should not take
the^ for such as they are indeed, as also that they might keep company with
the best. But in their hearts, and amongst their companions they mock and
laugh at al religion, at al fear of God, and whatsoever else is taught us by
his word touching any other life the^ this, wherein joy is prepared for the
good, and torments for the wicked. Now if there were nothing else to do, but
to convince such men of error and lying, the matter were easy: for they carry
all their witnesses and their condemnation with them: but they are not so
easily confounded. For a man is convinced, when he is constrained to
acknowledge in his conscience that he has no reason whereby he is able to
withstand and gainsay that truth, which is showed unto him, and which
condemns him. But if he be obstinate, headstrong, wickedly given and
f^oward, he will never leave kicking against the prick, but persevere in his
headin^sse and obstinacy, and in his maliciousnes and peruersenes. For when
reason fails him, he armeth himself with impudency; like to a bold
murderer, or to a shameless harlot that will blush at nothing. Therefore
Chrysostom said not without reason, that heretics may well be convinced, but
not confounded. For they do but wipe their mouth, as Solomon speaks of an
harlot, which presently after boasts that she is an honest woman. But
howsoever wicked men strive to blindfold their understanding, and to harden
their heart against the judgment of God, yet it is never propounded unto them,
but will they nill they, they feel themselves pricked and pressed with some
sense thereof. True it is, that it is not so with them as the children of God
are touched, as they of whom it is written, that after they had heard the
preaching of Saint Peter, Acts 2. 37.
they were pricked in their hearts, whereby they were led to true repentance,
because they had bin touched to the quick by the word. But it is said of the
reprobate and of them that are hardened, of which sort are all Atheists, that
God has given them a pricking spirit, by reason of their bitter h^^^t, which
causes them always to increase in bitterness, to fret and chafe against God,
when they feel themselves pressed by his word and by his judgment.

Therefore I am of opinion (my companions) that for this cause, and for those
reason which ASER recited unto us, we are now to call to memory all the
testimonies that we can bring of God and of his providence, of his judgment,
and of the immortality of men's souls, by the consideration of the nature of
man, and of his parts, the body and soul: expecting when sometime hereafter
God shall give us grace to contemplate the self same things in every nature,
and in all this great visible world. For no doubt but such kind of
contemplation will furnish us sufficiently with arguments to convince all
Epicures and Atheists, and to constrain them to acknowledge in their
conscience a divine justice, Psalm. 19. 1.
and an eternal life. The heavens (says the Prophet) declare the glory of
God, and the firmament shows the work of his hands. This hie ornament, this
firmament so clear, and face of heaven so sumptuous to behold, is a thing full
of greatness. Therein we may behold the Master builder thereof, clothed with
the whole frame as with a garment, which is a sure testimony of his power and
virtue. He who cannot fall within the compass of man's gross senses, makes
himself as it were visible in his terrible works. What we learn by the view
of the world.
This world is unto us a learned school, wherein the praise of God does
preach it self. It is a goodly large and rich shop, wherein this sovereign
and most excellent workman lays open all his works, to this end, that he
might be known by them. It is a temple, wherein there is no creature so
little, but it is as it were a similitude and resemblance of the creator
thereof, to show and manifest him unto us. In a word, it is a Theater, where
the divine essence, his justice, his providence, his love, his wisdom have
their working by a wonderful virtue in every creature, even from the hiest
heaven unto the center of the earth. Ask the beasts (says Job) and they shall
teach thee, and the fowls of the heaven and they shall tell thee: or speak to
the earth and it shall show thee, or the fishes of the sea, and they shall
declare unto thee. Who is ignorant of all these, but that the hand of the Lord
has made these? But truly there shines in man more then in all other
creatures, a beam of the divinity, and a proportionable image and similitude
of his nature, in that God has framed him of an immortal soul, capable of
understanding, and of reason, to make him partaker of his eternal glory and
felicity. Psalm. 8. 1. 4, 5, 6.
O Lord (says the Psalmist) who marvelous is thy name in all the would! What
is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou visitest
him? Thou have made him a little lower then God, and crowned him with glory and
worship. Thou have made him to have dominion in the works of thine hands: th^^
have put all things under his feet. But withal, as God has more expressly
created man after his own image, then any other visible nature, and therefore
more excellent then the heavens or the earth, or any thing contained in them,
so he has singulerly bound him to know and to honor him, in which thing he
has placed his sovereign Good. But man being exalted by God to that honor,
that he might attain to so great felicity, could not conceive or acknowledge
it: which is the cause that we see so many, who following the corruption of
man's nature, are not only become like to brute beasts, Psalm. 32. 9. Isai. 1.
3.
but much more unthankful, yea far more forgetful and miserable then they
are. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but man will not
know God his creator, of whom he holds body, soul, and goods. What a
horrible shame is it, that the Ox and the Ass, which are such dull beasts,
should give greater honor and obedience to man, of whom they receive their
food, then man does to God, of whom he has and daily does receive so many
benefits? Let us make have therefore (my companions) to go to the school of
nature. For if we profit well therein, I doubt not but we shall easily come to
the knowledge of the creator thereof, and of the chief end of our being.


ARAM. All things created have their proper motion, Every creature has his
proper motion and disposition.
which they follow according to that love that every one of them bears to his
natural disposition. For the heavens continue always constant in their
natural motions. And as the fire and air naturally love to be above, and
therefore draw thitherward without ceasing: so the water and earth love to
keep below, so that they always bend that ways. So that none of the elements
can find any stay or resting place until they be come to those places which
God has appointed for them. Plants cast their roots downward, and their
branches upward, every one following therein his nature. For a plant being to
receive his nourishment from the earth by means of his roots, which are unto
it in stead of mouths and veins to suck and draw necessary sustenance for
the preservation of it self, sends them always into the ground, and
disperseth them all about according as they can find nourishment: but the
stalk, stock, branches and boughs, which are to be nourished in the air,
always disperse themselves, draw and ascend upward. Beasts having sense, do
much more show that liking which they have to follow their natural
inclination. For we see that by their proper apprehension and appetite, they
are driven hither and thither to seek and follow after that which they desire
and love, being agreeable to their nature: and to fly from that which they
hate, as being contrary thereunto. Likewise men, who only of all other mortal
creatures were by creation made partakers of reason, have their proper motion
convenient to their nature. For being created to attain to that sovereign and
eternal Good, which is set before them in the divine essence, they have
received from that infinite goodness power and virtue to wish for that Good,
with a desire to apply and join themselves thereunto. Wherefore all men are
naturally pricked and driven forward with a love and desire tending to that
Good: as well because of that natural agreement which they have with the same
Idea of Good, which is God (their souls being of a celestial and immortal
essence) as also because this Good is of that nature that it ought to be loved
of every nature, yea so much the more loved as there is greater measure of
reason in the creature to know it. The difference between the natural and
supernatural desire of man to good.
But this desire naturally ingrafted in every man's heart, which provoke and
keeps men in a love and liking of every thing which they think meet to
content and satisfy them, and which they seek after in diverse things as their
affections lead them, differs much from that desire, which by heavenly grace
is planted a new in those, whom God according to his good pleasure and always
just will, has chosen and elected to everlasting happiness, and pricked
forward, guides and leads them to that principal end for which they were
created. For although the other sort of men, being heirs of that corruption
that has ouerspread the whole nature of man by the means of the sin of the
first father of all, be driven forward in soul and spirit, yea many times not
thinking thereof, to their natural desire of obtaining that Good: yet they
seek it as blind men that go by groping, but cannot find it, because the
darkness of error and ignorance, wherewith their understanding is overwhelmed,
hinders them from looking directly toward that Good, and causes them to
wander out of that only way that could lead them unto it. So that in stead of
looking unto God, and to celestial and heavenly things, they stay themselves
about earthly and corruptible things, unto which the nearer they labor to
approach, the farther off they are from the end of their wishes and desires. For
this cause the blessed Apostle says, 1. Cor. 2. 14.
that the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God: for they
are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. But they that are illuminated, and guided by heavenly
and supernatural light, and whose understanding is framed by the spirit of
God, to receive It, know then how they are carried by their proper motion to
the contemplation of the true Good, in the enjoying whereof they shall once for
ever be made partakers of a felicity, Isay. 64. 4.
which eye never saw, nor ear heard, neither came into man's heart: I mean,
when by dissoluing the mortal tabernacle of this body, they shall be clothed
with glorious immortality, and shall see him face to face who is all in all:
in whom they shall be satisfied, according to the doctrine of the Prophet,
Psalm. 16. 11.
In thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. This is that (my companions) which ought to whet us on
to direct our sight straight to that place whereat we ought to level, namely
to heaven, and not look to any other thing then to God, who is the scope,
which we desire and shall one day attain unto. Now if we can not see this
white so far off, and much less come unto it without direction, GOD is come
near unto us in the person of his Son Jesus Christ, who being the
brightness of his glory, has left us his word for a sure guide, besides so
many testimonies of his providence and goodness over all creatures, How we may
see God.
that we daily behold him as it were visible in them. For the ruled motions
of the heavens, the wonderful workmanship of so many starry tents, the
connection, agreement, force, virtue and beauty of the Elements: the situation,
firmness, and spreading of the earth amidst the waters, and so many sundry
natures and creatures in this whole frame of the world: al these things I say,
are so many interpreters to teach us that God is the efficient cause of them,
and that he is manifested in them and by them, as their final cause. But the
glass wherein we may yet better behold him is man: in whom shines and is
imprinted an image of the divine essence, which is not found again in any
visible creature; and that is reason and understanding, whereof by creation he
was made partaker as well as the Angels. This is the chief and principal work
of the creation, whereby God meant to give such a being to his creatures and
spiritual natures, to the end he might communicate his wisdom and goodness with
them, and thereby lead them to eternal felicity. Wherefore if it be good for
men to consider the works of God in his creatures, and in their nature created
by him, and that for the reasons and ends declared by us, it is better and more
necessary that they should do the same thing in their own person and nature,
wherein there are almost as many maruailous works of the almighty power of God,
as there are in ye whole frame besides, and in all other creatures. Therefore
that sentence which says, Know thy self, was not without good reason so much
praised and renowned amongst all the ancient Greek and Latin Philosophers, as
that which is worthy to be taken for a heavenly oracle, and a sentence
pronounced by the mouth of God. For whosoever shall know himself well, cannot
fail to know God his creator, and to honor him as he ought, if he follow the
chief end for which man was created, as well as the residue of the creatures.
Plato in his Phaedrus, and in the tenth book of Laws, How Plato came to the
knowledge of God.
searching and inquiring by the means of motion, what was the substance,
nature and immortality of the soul, attained to the understanding of the
divine essence. Aristotle also taking the same way in his 8. book of natural
Philosophy, shows that he knew God under the name of the first moouer, who
was perpetual and immovable. But we may attain to the knowledge of God and of
our selves, a great deal better then all the Philosophers could, who were
ignorant of the true beginning and end of things, if we be guided by the word,
which is the light of the truth, and whereof all the humane philosophy of the
wisest that were, is but a li^^e shadow. Now then, if under this heavenly guide
we feed our spirits with a doctrine that teaches man to know himself well,
we begin at that science which of all other is most necessary, profitable,
and pleasant: I say necessary, as that which guides and leads us as it were
by the hand to find out God; profitable, because it brings a maruailous
commodity to this present life, both in regard of bodily health, as also of
ruling all our actions according to virtue; and pleasant, because a man may see
therein as it were in a sacred temple all the images of the wonderful works
of the world.


ACHITOB. I cannot but greatly commend those Philosophers that reprehended and
condemned them, who spent all their time only in the contemplation of heaven
and earth, and of the nature of other creatures, and in the mean while
descended not into themselves, to know themselves and their nature, but
especially their soul. For what will it profit a man to take so great pains
as to measure the whole world, and to compass on every side all the
elementarie region, to know the things that are contained in them, and their
nature, and yet in the mean time he can not measure or know himself being
but alittle handful of earth? For although the knowledge of the rest of the
creatures that are in this great visible world, will greatly help to lead
him to the knowledge of God the Creator, neuertheless^ he shall never be able
to know him well, if withal he know not himself. The knowledge of God and of
our selves joined together.
Yea these two knowledges are so joined together, that it is very hard matter
to sever them. For as a man can not know himself if he know not God, so he
cannot know God well, if in like sort he know not himself. So that I take this
for most certain, that neither Astronomy, Geometry, Geography, or Cosmography,
nor any other Mathematical science is so necessary for man, as that whereby he
may learn to know himself well, and to measure himself well by the measure of
his own nature, that he may thereby know how to contain himself within the
limits thereof. As for Mathematicians, natural Philosophers and Phisicions, who
bestow their travail in the knowledge of nature and natural things, and in the
mean time forget God and themselves, whereas they ought to learn both the one
and the other, by that knowledge that God has given them of his works, I say
they are not worthy to be taken for natural Philosophers, Phisicions or
Mathematicians, but rather for blockheaded beasts. In my opinion they behave
themselves, as if a man should be always occupied in looking upon his house,
and handling of his mooueables and household stuff, and in the mean time did
not put them to those principal and special uses, for which they ought to
serve, but were altogether forget full of himself, of his wife, and of his
children. Moreover concerning Phisicions, if their care to know their own
soul, with the nature and parts thereof, be not more to minister that food and
physic which is necessary for it to live well and happily, and that for ever,
then to know the nature of men's bodies that they may cure others, it may
worthly be said unto them, Physician heal thy self. For if he be worthily
derided that takes in hand the cure of other men and cannot heal himself, or
at the least has no care to do it, surely that man is well worthy to be had
in greater derision that is more careful, not only of his own, but also of
other men's bodies, then he is of his own soul, whereby he differs from
brute beasts, and is made partaker of an immortal nature. Wherefore it is very
requisite, that all students in natural philosophy should profit so well in
the study thereof, as to be able to turn it into true natural divinity,
whereby they may learn to know God their creator, in that nature which he has
created to this end to make himself seen and known therein to all men.

We have therefore good cause (my companions) to bestow al possible pains and
travail, that we may proceed on in so necessary and profitable a knowledge.
Two books that reach us to know God.
Wherefore we must lay before our eyes two books which God has given unto us
to instruct us by, and to lead us to the knowledge of himself, namely the
book of nature, and the book of his word, which we must join both together,
as also that doctrine, which is set forth unto us in them concerning the
knowledge of our selves, especially of the soul, which is the true man. For
the first book would stand us in small stead without the second, as we see it
daily by experience, yea every one of us has trial thereof in himself.
Therefore God of his great mercy has added the second book unto the first, to
supply the want that is in our nature through sin. For if man had not sinned,
this book of nature would have sufficed to have kept him always in the
knowledge, contemplation; and obedience of God his creator. For then he should
himself have carried the book whole and perfect imprinted in his heart and
mind: neither should his soul have needed any teacher to know to self, but in
it self it should have clearly beheld and contemplated it self, so long as
she preserved ^er first light and abode in that harmony wherein God had created
her. But now that she is in the body, as it were some excellent picture of
Apelles fallen into a sink of mire, covered and compassed about with thick
mists, The necessity of the word
and obscure darkness, it is very needful that we should have another new
light, brought unto us from heaven, which is not natural as the first but
supernatural. For this cause God has farther given us this second book, of
which I spoke even now, by means whereof and by the virtue of his holy spirit,
he communicates unto us as much celestial and heavenly light as is needful
for the knowledge of our selves and of his high Majesty. Being therefore
guided by the spirit of God, whereby our spirit does see and contemplate, let
us read in these two books, and diligently note in them the parts, and powers,
force and virtue as well of the body as of the soul of man, especially the
immortality thereof: whereby we shall make the way easy, for us to walk and
sport our minds hereafter in the large and goodly fields of the whole world, by
discoursing of all natures contained therein, if it shall please God to give us
grace, as he has given us wills to perform it. True it is, that we have now
taken in hand a very long piece of work, and not greatly necessary in respect
of the principal cause of our meeting together, if we meant here to make an
entire and perfect Anatomy of man's body. This duty belongs to Physicions;
which we will not take upon us: but it shall suffice us to open a gappe to the
consideration, first of the matter whereof the body is made, and of the
diversity thereof: then of the form which God has given unto it: and lastly
of the profit and use of them both. For through a little understanding and
knowledge, which we may have of these things, if we consider them as we ought,
we shall have great occasion to maruayle at the work of God in the frame of the
body: yea we shall see therein store of testimonies of his almighty power,
knowledge, wisdom, goodness and providence. But as for the soul, we will
labor to make her to behold herself in the glass of her wonderful actions,
so far forth as she is able to contemplate herself, and to measure her
greatness by her own compass. Wherefore we will here make as it were an
Anatomy of the soul, and of all her parts, powers, virtues, and faculties,
instructing our selves at large in the consideration of her nature, creation
and immortality: and eschewing in all our discourses as much as we may,
obscure words and phrases, subtle, curious and unprofitable disputations,
which the ancient Philosophers have used in the searching out of such matters,
we will apply our selves to the greatest number of such as have not haunted the
schools of philosophy, that we may profit many, and instruct our selves in the
truth by familiar speeches, so far forth as our weak judgment is able to
comprehend, being directed by the gift and grace of God, and made comfortable
to his word, which is the true touchstone whereby all doctrine is to be
examined. Moreover we will observe in our discourses the same order which we
kept in our Academical treatises: but only that I think it meetest for our
present purpose, that every one of us after he has discoursed of some point,
should offer matter subject to his companion to prosecute and speak of, as if
he gave him instructions concerning that thing which he propounds unto him.
And thus we will deal all four of us, every one in his course, making one
discourse round in the morning, and another the afternoon: continuing until
we have finished as it were a natural history of man, and of his parts, the
body and soul. First therefore thou shall instruct us ASER, in the creation of
first man, and in the matter whereof man's body is made.


Par la prieres Dieu m'ayde.
THE FIRST DAYS work of the second part of the French Acadamy.
Of the creation of the first man, and of the matter whereof the body of manis
made. Chap. 1.
ASER. God only has his being of himself, therefore he is eternal, without
beginning and without end. But because he would not be alone, he created the
creatures, and by their creation gave being to that which was nothing before.
Therefore all natures took their being and essence, and do hold it of that
first everlasting essence. Thus also he answered to Moses, who asked of him
what his name was: The name of God. Exodus 3. 14.
I will be that I will be: or, I am that I am, Moreover he said, Thus shall
thou say to the children of Israel: I am has sent me unto you. We see here
what name he gives himself, whereby he shows that he only is, and has
an immutable essence and existence, which only, to speak properly, a man may
call a Being. Wherefore seeing God is the first essence, and that only that
has being of it self, and from which all others proceed, as rivers from
their spring and fountain, we shall easily come unto the Eternity of God, if
we know how to ascend thither by the degrees of the essences of all those
creatures, which descended from his eternal and unchangeable essence, by
reason whereof he is called Jehovah by the Hebrews.

If then we consider our selves, every one of us shall know that he had a
beginning, that he made not himself, neither came into the world but by ye
help of another. This consideration will lead every one to his father and
mother that begat him: and being come so far, he will pass on and ascend step
by step to his ancestors, Steps to ascend up by to the knowledge of God.
making the like judgment of al his predecessors as of himself. For he will by
and by think, that they came into the world after the same manner that he did,
and not otherwise, and that they were not the first men. Thus if a man ascend
up still from father to father, he must needs in the end come to some one
father, that was the first father of all, of whom all others took their
beginning, as he that was the stock of all mankind. This first father must
either have his being of one, or be eternal, or come of some eternal matter
like to God, or be God himself. Which because he^ could not be, ^hee must
needs have some beginning, and be borne after another fashion then they were
that descended of him. Now what (...) can we say he had but the Creator of the
whole world? Being come to his first beginning we can mount no higher, but
must stay there, and conclude, that this first builder of nature was without
beginning, that he is infinite and eternal, otherwise we shall never find
place to stay at. Thus we see how the creature leads us from essence to
essence, proceeding from one to another, until it come to the first essence
which is infinite and eternal, the spring and fountain of all others, which
we call God. But let us speak of this creation of the first man.

After the almighty power of (...) Eternal had within nothing and of nothing
made the only matter of the world, and had seucred out of this Chaos, the
air, the fire, the earth and the water, and enriched the whole with celestial
lights; herbs, plants, earthy, ayery, and watery living creatures, Genesis 1. 26.
Let us (said he) make man in our own image according to our likeness, and
let them rule over the (...) of the sea, and over the foul of the heaven, and
over the beasts, and over all the earth, and over every thing that creeps and
moouethon the earth. Now we will note here in the first place three things
well worthy of consideration. Three things to be considered in the creation of
man.
First, that God did not barely command that man should be made and created, as
he commanded for the other creatures: but he speaks, as though some great
king or prince should ideliberate with his Council about the making of some
great work: declaring afterward himself why he took this way in the cruation
of man only, and not in the creation of the other creatures like wise, when he
says, According to our own image and likeness, which is the second thing we
have to note. For by these words he plainly declares, that he minds to
make a work, the like whereof was not before, and to draw our an image more
agreeable to his nature and more worthy his Majesty then he had done before
amongst all the works^ of his hands. For although he had already idomed and
replenished the whole heavens (...) goo^y lights, yea al thee (...) and residue
of the world with all sorts of creatures, yet there was not one creature under
heaven which he had made capable of understanding and reason, to know and
glorify God the creator of the whole world. And (...) the Angels being (...)
spirits had this understanding and knowledge, yet he would have man besides
upon earth, for whose sake chiefly he had created the world, to the end he
might know and glorify him together with his Angels. Therefore Moses adds
the third thing which we have to consider in this deliberation of man's
creation, thereby the better to let us know the excellency of this creature
above the rest, when he declares, that God would create him, that he might
rule over the rest of the living creatures, and over the whole earth, as if man
should be his Lieutenant, and as it were a little terrene god, under the great
and sovereign God that created him. But some man may ask with whom God makes
this deliberation? For he speaks as though he would have some helpers and
companions in the making of this so excellent a work. The Prophet Isaiah
answers to this, Isa. 40. 13, 14. romans 11. 34.
saying, Who was his counselor? or who has given to him first, and he shall be
recompensed? For he had no other counsel or help but of himself, and of his
heavenly and eternal wisdom, as it is testified by Solomon. Prou. 8. 22. etc.
Therefore we must not think that he had the Angels for counselors and
helpers, either in the creation of man, or of any other creature whatsoever, as
some have presumed to imagine and to affirm. For that were to derogate too
much from the nature and majesty of God, and to take from him the title of
Almighty, which agrees to him only. For the creature cannot be a creator.
And as there is but one only God, so there is but one creator of all things.
For the work of the creation can agree to none but to God only. But Moses by
this manner of speaking in the plural number, meant to give out some obscure
knowledge of the trinity of persons that is in the unity of God, The trinity
of persons in the unity of the godhead.
and that union which they have together in the work of the creation, which is
common to the Father, with the Son and the holy Ghost, as are all the other
works of God. For although there be distinction of persons in one and the
same divine essence, yet there is no division between them nor separation. And
as they are united together in one and the same essence, so likewise are they
in all their works. For the Father does nothing but by the Son, and that in
the virtue of the holy spirit. Genesis 1. 27.
Therefore the Prophet adds immediately God created the man in his image: in
the image of God created he him: he created them male and female. We see here
that Moses does not propound unto us three Gods or three creators, but one
only. And in that he does twice repeat this, that God created man in his
image, it is to let us understand, that this point ought to be well considered
of, and weighed, as that wherein consists all the excellency of man, and the
true difference that is between him and the other living creatures, which are
but brute beasts. We shall know where we ought to seek this image of God in
man, after we have heard the rest of the history of his creation. For after
that Moses has briefly and summarily spoken as we have said, he takes the
same matter again into his hand and entreats thereof more specially. Genesis
(...) 7.
He says then, That the Lo (...) of the dust of the ground, and breathed in
his face breath of life, and that the man was a living soul. Whereby he shows
evidently, yt God did not create ye body and soul of man both at one time, as
he had created the beasts, but the body first and then the soul, which he
joined therewith, not only to give life vntoit, as it is given to brute beasts
by ye soul which they have, but also to make it capable of understanding, as
we shall understand more at large hereafter. For we speak not now by what means,
or at what time ye soul is joined with the body in the common and ordinary
generation of men, but only of the mean and order which God observed in the
creation of ye first man, according to ye rehearsal which Moses makes. Now
touching ye matter whereof he made him, because the chiefest and most apparent
was taken from the earth, Genesis 3. 19.
it is said expressly, that he was made thereof, and that he should return
thither, as we see it true, in the death of every one. But this is most certain
and granted of al ye great philosophers yea evident to be seen, that man's body
is compounded of the 4. elements, and of all their qualities, Man's body
compounded of the 4. elements.
as also all the other bodies of creatures under heaven. And because the
greatest part which remains of yt which we see of man, is of ye earth,
therefore it is said, that he returns to earth, although whatsoever is taken
of the other elements in ye compositio^ of his body, does likewise turn again
into the^. For the flesh of man agrees aptly with the earth, his vital spirits
with the air and the fire, his humors with the water. Of what element every
sense holds most.
The sense of seeing agrees with the fire: that of hearing with the air: yt of
tasting we the element of water: the sense of touching with the earth: and that
of smeling with the air and fire, as we shall understand more at large
hereafter when we handle them. Yea there is no piece so small in the whole
frame of man, wherein every one of the elements does not intemeddle his power
and qualities, although one of the^ does always command above the rest. This
is to be seen in the blood, which is the first and chiefest of those 4. humors
in the body, and is properly of the nature of the air. For the muddy dregs,
which commonly thicke^ and settle in the botto^ of it, are of the nature of the
earth, and are called Melancholy: the pure blood that swimmeth in the midst
does represent unto us the air: that humor that swimmeth in a round circle
is watrie sleame: and the skumme that appears above, is the choler, which is
of the nature of the fire. If we consider the ordinary generation of men, the
matter is humor: natural heat is as it were the master buylder: dryness
hardneth the body: and cold refreshings do not only moderate the heat that
the moist matter should not be consumed, but have also their proper action to
congele and gather it together.

Now we must understand that of this first matter which contained all the
elements, The first matter the mother of all things.
and which God made the mother of all things, and capable of all forms, every
body is compounded, and every one returns into the same again, and of that
takes a new form: so yt the true matter of all corporal things does not
turn into nothing, neither increases or decreaseth in any sort. So that ever
since the Eternal that can do all things, made this whole great frame of
nothing, no one thing is made of nothing, neither does any thing vanish into
nothing: but the change of every thing yt is bred or that dies, is only in
form. Now by this knowledge of the matter of the first man's body, we may
easily understand of what matter al men's bodies are made. For certain it is, yt
of one only man al others have had their beginning, being all his seed and
offspring and multiplying daily according to his first virtue. The reason
hereof is this, because this power is naturally ingraffed in every thing to
bring forth his like, and to continue it self in the same kind, being inhabled
thereunto through a quickening virtue infused into it by that divine reason,
which is the efficient and preserving cause of all creatures. Now I doubt not
but ye Epicures and Atheists, and such like deriders of God and his word, with
whom this age is pestred more then any age past, will account all this to be a
very fable, that has been hitherto spoken of the creation of the first man.
For they give no more credit to the writings of Moses, and of all the Prophets
and Apostles, then to an old wives tale, or to the fables of doting dreams.
Neither will they believe any more of God, of his providence and of his works,
then they are able to understand, know, and comprehend by their natural
reason. They will say then, that they have not seen the like works in nature,
An argument of all Atheists against man's creation.
(which they put in stead of God:) and so by the same reason they will account
for lies whatsoever the word of God teaches us concerning the creation of this
great visible world, and of all things contained therein, as also that which we
shall hear anon touching the creation of woman. And thus because they saw not
when God created the world, and because he did set another order in nature
after the creation thereof, then there was before he had created nature,
therefore according to their goodly phylosophie, there shall be neither God nor
Creator, nor difference betwixt the works of the creation, in which nature it
self was created, and those that sollowed after God and disposed the order of
nature created by him. What then shall we say of man and of all the world? Shall
he be without a creator, and eternal, or made of some matter that was eternal
with God, or shall he be God himself? For either he was created, or he was not
created. If he were not created, then is he eternal, as even Aristotle says,
following the discourse of humane reason, Aristotle's error was yt the world
had no beg^nning
which notwithstanding blinded him in this marter of creation: Wherein he is
not only contrary to the word, but also to his master Plato, and to the best
and most excellent amongst the Philosophers. But if the world was created, it
must needs be that it had some beginning, and that the first man, (as
likewise every other creature) was begotten after another manner then the use is
at this present. But what would these sharp wits, or rather dull beasts say,
if they had not seen by experience the work of God (which they call the
work of nature only) in the generation of men? For of what are they daily
begotten and conceived, but of a supersluitie, and as it were of an excrement
of man's body, as hereafter we shall understand more at large? Is this far
more easy to digest in humane reason then the first creation of man? If these
skorners had never seen such a thing, and if they were not convicted hereof by
daily experience, they would give as little credit to those that should tell
them of it, as they do to the spirit of God speaking of his works by the
mouth of his Prophets. As for those that set nature in the place of God, what
greater brutishnes can proceed from them? For does not the very same of
nature declare sufficiently, Nature comes of the Latin word Nascor. which
signifies to be borne.
that nature is a thing made and created, and so consequently, has her
creation and her birth of God, as all other creatures have? But God punishes
these poor ignorant fellows with the like judgment that he does many other
skillful and great Philosophers, whom he oftentimes gives over into a
reprobate sense, because through their pride and ingratitude they abuse the
knowledge of natural things which God gives them: and so that science which
should lead them to a greater knowledge of God, makes them more beast-like
then any other, through their own fault. For it cannot be otherwise but that
every one, considering the nature and composition even of one only member of
man's body, most of necessity acknowledge and confess, that some Woorke-master
made it, and that this Woorke-master is of no bodily or humane nature, but of a
spiritual and divine being: that he has not only understanding and
knowledge of all things, but also that he is understanding it self: that he
knows, loves, and is the author of all order, and that his wisdom and
virtue is so infinite, that it surmounteth all men's understandings. Hereupon
it follows, that he is worthy to be esteemed for God, and to be
woorshipped of all men. There are others that ask, why man was not created an
infinite space of time before he began to be by the testimony of the holy
Scripture, which teaches us, that it is not yet fully 6000. years since his
creation, as though he had been created very late. But if the shortness of
time offendethe them, because they think that there are so few years, since
we read in holy Scripture, that man was created, let them consider that
nothing lasts long if it have any end, and that the whole space of ages
past, if it be compared with eternity that is endless, is not only not to be
thought little, but none at all. Therefore that question which now they ask
after 5000. years, they might with the same curiosity demand after six
hundred thousand years, if the world had endured so long. They also that were
before us when man was but newely created, might have moved this question: yea
the first man might have enquired also as soon as he was made, why he was not
made before. And so this controversy about the beginning of man's being, had
never at any time heretofore any other reasons then it has now, neither shall
have hereafter. Let us know then that God being eternal and without
beginning began time, and in time made man whom he had never made before,
being led thereunto not by any new and sudden motion, but by an immutable
and eternal counsel. For no new thing can befall him, neither is there any
thing in him that is mutable: but according to the height and depth of his
riches he has multiplied the children of men. And let them think, imagine
and dispute what they list, yet all things have had their beginning according
to the good providence of God, which no man in the world can sufficiently
comprehend. O great mystery, that God has always been, and that it pleased
him some time past to make man first, who was never made before, and yet not to
change his purpose and will! How we must ascend up to the knowledge of God by
his creatures.
Thus you see how we must step by step ascend by the works of God unto
himself, as we have already touched in the beginning of our speech, and as
we can do it well enough in men's works. For when I behold a work, it by and
by puts me in mind of the instruments wherewith it was made, and the
instruments, of him that made them, and of him that set them aworke. Then the
Workemaster puts me in mind of him that made him such a one, namely, both
of his master that taught him, and also of his parents that begat him. Thus
climing up still from one to one, and from degree to degree, I must needs in
the end conclude, that there is one chief Workmaster, of whom all others are
descended by their order and degree. And there I must stay: as in like manner
proceeding from one essence to another, I may come to the contemplation of that
infinite and eternal essence, which is the spring and first cause of every
nature, namely unto God, who has given to that matter whereof he made all
things, a form meet and convenient for that work which he would make of it.
This is that which I think we ought to conceive touching the creation of the
matter of man's body. Now before we consider the disposition thereof, I think we
ought to entreat of the creation of woman, who is one self same flesh,
differing only in sex, and appointed of God to be a necessary help for the
original and preservation of mankind: which I desire to hear you discourse
of, AMANA.

Of the creation of Woman. Chap. 2.
AMANA. No marvel, if the eye of man's soul be often dimmed, yea loses all
light in the diligent consideration of the wonderful works of Gods providence.
For as the eye of the body although clear of it self, cannot behold colors,
figures, and other visible things, except it be illuminated with light from
heaven, or from some other lightsome body: so albeit our understanding of it
own nature be very clear sighted, as being a beam of the divine brightness,
yet by reason of the bond that conioyneth it to the body, wherein it is
overwhelmed with the darkness of the matter, it can in no wise attain to the
glittering conceptions of eternal wisdom, unless it always have God that
great and everlasting Sun, and his heavenly light to illuminat it, and to
guide it to the faithful contemplation of the works of his almighty hand.
This has bin the cause why so many great wits discoursing philosophically of
the original and beginning of things, and looking on every side, yea doubting
and fearing many things, which they found contrary to humane reason, have bin
carried hither and thither with diverse opinions, like to a vessel tossed in a
deep sea, but could never come near to the knowledge of the truth. But if we
follow the bright star of truth fixed in the heavenly book of life, as we
have learned therein the creation of man, so we may as easily be instructed in
the creation of the woman, to the confusion of the wise men of the world, and
of all Epicures and Atheists. The holy scriptures teach us, that after God had
created man and placed him in the garden of Eden, to dress it, and keep it,
and had forbidden him to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
which was a sign and toke^ of the homage, obedience, and subjection he did owe
to God his creator and Lord, and of that blessed life appointed for him as a
recompense and crown of this obedience, It is not good (then said he) that
man should be himself alone, Genesis 2. 15, 18.
I will make him an help meet for him. And to show the better how this help
was, not only meet, but also necessary for man, Moses says, that God had
already brought all the beasts before Adam, that he might name them according
to their natures and kinds, which he performed. What great knowledge of
natural things was in Adam.
Whereby we may judge, what great knowledge of natural things was in Adam
before he sinned. For otherwise he could not have given to all living
creatures names agreeable to their nature: and if he had not named them as he
should, he had brought in great confusion in nature, Afterward Moses adds,
that amongst all those living creatures he found no help meet for Adam: yea
the Lord had spoken of him before, as if he had been alone in the world. For
although all the beasts, and all the residue of the creatures were given to
man to assist him, so that being in that estate of innocence wherein he was
then, he might receive all service and ready obedience from all the
creatures, nevertheless he had not as yet any help of his kind. For he
could not have that familiarity and conuesation with the beasts, nor receive
such help from them, as he could from creatures of his own kind. Therefore
when the Lord said, that it was not good for man to be alone, he declared
plainly, that he did not create him to live and solitary in the world, but
with company, and that his will was, that there should be men upon earth, who
should live in society and fellowship together. Man was created for society.
Now seeing that man was created for this end, he could not live in company
with others of his kind without generation and multiplication thereof, which
could not be except he were joined to a wise, seeing it pleased GOD to
appoint it so. Wherefore as he created the other living and sensible creatures
of two sexes in one kind, namely, some males and others females, that they
might increase and multiply by generation, so likewise dealt he with
mankind. But as he took an other course in the creation of man, then he did
in that of beasts, so also dealt he in the creation of the woman, whom he
purposed to give unto man for a companion. For he created not man and woman
both together, but man first, and then woman afterward, as we will declare by
and by. Now because there is no conjunction or communion in any humane
society, wherein that holy bond, which ought to knitte all men together, and
join them one to another, is better declared, then in that whereby man and
wife are conjoined and united, as it were in one self same body, and in one
soul, therefore it pleased God not without cause to begin this holy
society by that conjunction, which is the bond and foundation of all the
rest, and as it were the springhead and fountain of all mankind. Therefore
it is written, that GOD minding to create woman and to give her to man for an
helper, caused an heavy sleep to fall upon Adam, (which name is as much to
say as, Of earth) and when he slept he took one of his ribs, and closed
up the flesh in stead thereof. And the Lord God made a woman of the ribbe,
The creation of woman, and use thereof. In Hebrew Ish signifies man, and Ishah
woman.
which he had taken from man: then the man said, This now is bone of my bones,
and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called Man's, or Mannish, because she was
taken out of man. First we see in this history, that God would not that the
male and female should have two beginnings, but only one, and that they should
be as it were one stock of mankind, to the end that the conjunction thereof
should be more straight, firm and inviolable. For if it had been otherwise,
the diversity of beginnings might have given occasion either of conte^ning one
another, or of envy, dissension, and brawlings. Therefore God created in the
person of Adam the fountain of mankind, and after framed Euah, (which is as
much to say, as alive, or living) to the end we might know, that the woman
was not created as a new creature of an other race or kind, but was only a
portion and part of the nature of man. By this means Adam had in the woman as
it were a glass to behold and contemplate himself, as Euah also had the like
in him, and as yet to this day every husband has the like in his wife, and
every wife in her husband. For the woman was flesh of the flesh of man, blood
of his blood, and bone of his bones, even as it were his own body, and a
second-selfe. How then can the husband despise and hate his wife, and not hate
himself? For as Saint Paul witnesses, Ephesians. 5. 29.
No man ever yet hated his own flesh. And what cause has a woman to be loath
to be obedient to her husband, if she consider that she is taken out of him,
and that in setting her self against him, she strives aginst her self, and
does her self great wrong and injury? Therefore as the Lord has declared
what place he would have the husband and wife to keep, every one in their
degree, by that order which he has observed in creating the man first, and
then the woman: so he has done the like in that he created the woman neither
of the man's head nor of his feet, but of his ribbe. Whereby as on the one
side, he admonishes the wife not to lift up her self above her husband by
taking authority over him, and so making her self his head: so on the other
side he admonishes the husband not to abuse his authority, by putting his
wife under his feet, as if she were a slave, but to account of her as of his
sister and ^ompanion. We are therefore to consider the great wisdom and
providence of God in this creation of the woman. But Atheists, and other
contemners of the word of God, besides that goodly ground and foundation of
their impieti^^ whereof we heard before, take farther occasion to deride this
history of the creation of woman, because it is said, that she was builded
of a ribbe which God took from Adam. Truly the works of God in the creation
of things are not usual, because they are the first: but they which will not
believe them, may as well give no credit neither to the miracles that have
been in times past, nor to those that are daily seen. For they were not to be
called by this name of miracles, if they were wrought by an ordinary course of
nature. They conclude then out of Moses speech, either that Adam had then one
rib more then he should have had, How Atheists scofle at the woman's creation.
or else that he had one less then he should after the woman's creation: so
that what side soever you take they will find a great absurdity. They that
seek for occasions in this sort to scofte at the works of God, that study and
take delight to cavil at them, will always find absurdities enough in them
according to their corrupt will and judgment. For they will daily coin as
many as they list to hinder themselves from the knowledge of God and of his
works, least they should be constrained by them to glorify him. But indeed
what can they do else but bark against God and his providence, and laugh at
all that is taught us by the holy spirit concerning the creation of all things
contained in the world, seeing they are not capable of the knowledge and
understanding of heavenly mysteries? But I demand of them, what strange matter
they find in this, if it were so that Adam was created with one rib more then
men commonly have, which God prepared in his creation for the woman's creations
or otherwise, if he had one less after her creation, Genes. 2. 21.
which is more likely? For it is said expressly, that God filled up with flesh
that place out of which he took the ribbe whereof he framed Euah. So that
Adam lost nothing, neither was he less perfect in respect of that. For God did
very well recompense it two ways. First, because that which he put in stead
thereof, did serve Adams turn as well as if his rib had remained still.
Secondly, it turned to his great good, in that he had a whole woman for one of
his ribs, yea such an help was given unto him, that she was as it were
another half of his body to make him a perfect man. Besides all this, we have
further to note the significations of those things which God meant to represent
unto us, and to teach us by that manner of proceeding, which he observed
increating the woman; of which I have already spoken. But we have also to mark
herein a notable prophecy of Jesus Christ and of his Church and a lively image
of her union, Of the mvsterie of Christ and his Church in the creation of the
woman.
conjunction, and communication with him being her husband. For as the rib was
taken from the man's side whilst he was asleep, that the woman might be made:
so in the death of Jesus Christ, signified by this sleep, and whilst he hung
upon the cross, his side was pierced, out of which issued blood and water
which resemble the Sacraments that tend to the edification of the Church. And
as Euah was taken from Adam according to the flesh, who was the first stock of
mankind, and then joined unto him in marriage, that of twain they might be
one in one flesh: so the Church was taken from Jesus Christ according to the
spirit, who is the true stock of mankind regenerated and reformed after the
image of God, that she might be one mystical body with Jesus Christ, who was
given unto her by God for her husband and head. For this cause we may say the
same things of him and of his Church, which we spoke before of the authority
and sovereignty of the husband over his wife, and of the subjection of the wife
toward her husband. For the Church was not first, but Jesus Christ who is
eternal, very God and very man: neither was Jesus Christ taken from her, but
she from him. Therefore that which Adam said of Euah, when God brought her
unto him, and when he had seen her after he awoke from sleep, namely, Ephesians.
5. 30.
This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, Saint Paul applies to
Jesus Christ and to his Church, because she is made bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh, and partaker of the very nature of Jesus Christ by faith in
him, and by that union, conjunction, and fellowship which she has with him,
whereby she is conjoined unto him as his spouse. Wherefore the faithful have
good cause to rejoice, knowing that there is the like spiritual union,
conjunction and communication between Jesus Christ and them, as there is
between the husband and the wife according to the flesh.

Now as we have answered to the frivolous speeches which Atheists commonly
make about the creation of the woman, so we will not pass over with silence
the opinion of natural Philosophers, The opinion of natural Philosophers
touching the nature of women.
who say, that the male is as it were a perfect man in comparison of the woman,
and that she is an imperfect man. For they do teach, that nature tends
always to the greatest perfection that she can attain unto: and because the
male is more perfect then the female, therefore that she always endeavors
to bring forth males. But when she wants power and strength to do that
she would, she ingendereth females insteade of males. Whereupon it should
follow, that the generation of the woman, as also that of the other females of
all living creatures, is an infirmity, a defect, and an imperfection of
nature. But I would gladly demand of them, whether GOD made an imperfect
work or no, when he created the first woman: and whether he did not create
her as perfect in her kind, and in that degree for which he created her, as
he did the man in his. Moreover, seeing God is the creator of nature, it is
certain that he created it perfect in all things belonging unto it, and that
he has made it subject to certain Laws, under which it is always guyded by
his providence as well in the generation of females as of males, of the woman
as of the man. And if some creatures excel others, yet that hinders not why
every one should not be perfect in his order and nature, having regard to
their Creator, and to the end for the which he created them. We must not
therefore allege any imperfection in the creation of the woman, more then in
that of the man: seeing that if she had been created otherwise then she was,
she should not have been so perfect in her nature as she is, because she
would not so fitly serve that turn for the which she was created, namely, to
help man, both in the generation and continuance of his kind, and also in
being a succor unto him in such things as belong to his nourishement, and in
the guiding and government of them. Besides, is it not said as well of the
woman as of the man, that she was created in the image of GOD, as we have
already heard? For Moses, after he had said that God created man in his
image, adds immediately, Genes. 1. 27. 1. Cor. 11. 7.
In the image (I say) of God created he him, he created them male and female.
And, as man is the image and glory of God, so the woman is the glory of the
man: neither can the one be be without the other. For as the woman is of the
man, so the man is by the woman, but all things are of GOD. Therefore the
word of Building, What the word (...) imports in the ^^eation of the woman.
Genes. 2. 22.
which the Prophet uses in setting down the creation of the woman, is duly
to be considered in this matter. For when he says that God built the woman
of Adams ribbe, this word imports more then if he had simply said, that he
made and formed the woman. For thereby he would have us know the perfection
of man, and of mankind in the creation of the woman, because without her his
building could not be finished. So that man is as it were the first
foundation, upon whom the woman was builded: as likewise by generation of
children proceeding from them both, this building is not only preserved and
continued still, but also furthered and augmented. Upon the like reason the
word that signifies a child in the Hebrew tongue, is taken from a word that
signifies to build in the same language: as in deed children also are the
true building of a house. But before we enter into any larger discourse of this
matter to know the generation and multiplication of mankind, I am of opinion
that we shall do well to entreat first of the disposition of that matter, whereof
we heard before his body was made, as also of the parts thereof. For
generation respects chiefly the third kind of the natural powers and
faculties of man, whose virtue and properties we are not to consider of, before
we have been instructed in all things that concern the particular composition
of man's body and of every part thereof: to this end, that we might have the
true knowledge of that lodging which God has given to man to dwell in upon
earth, and that step by step we might come to consider of the host or tenant
of this tabernacle, namely of the spirit and soul, which is truly man. Let
us then begin to take a view of the division of the chief parts of the
body, and so handle first the simple or similary parts, of which all the rest
are compounded. This matter subject I offer to thee ARAM, for thy discourse.

Of the simple or similary parts of the body, namely the bones, ligaments,
gristles, sinowes, pannicles, cords or filaments, veins, arteries, and flesh.
Chap. 3.
ARAM. If we take pleasure in beholding material frames builded with men's
hands, especially if they be made by rare workmen, and such as excel in their
Art, and in viewing attentively the goodly works that are in them, we ought
to be a great deal more delighted without al comparison, in looking upon the
stately edifices builded with the very hand of God, and upon the exquisite and
wonderful works wherewith he has adorned and set them forth. Curiosity
causes many men to wander all their life time in lands and seas unknown, to
feed their minds with a vain knowledge of the manners and customs of
strangers: but very few will be found, who have a care to know themselves. In
so much that being able to discourse of the situation of diverse regions, and of
the beauty of those places and fortresses that are therein, yet they know not
their own house wherein they always dwell, and much less themselves, namely
their souls, which are the inhabitants. But if we think it a shame for a man
to be ignorant of those things that belong, or bring commodity or pleasure to
the life of man, the ignorance of our selves, which hurts this life and the
other we look for, is a great deal more shameful and dishonest. Now a man
may easily perceive how commendable, excellent and profitable the knowledge of
the nature of our bodies, and of every part thereof was judged to be by men in
ancient time, in that they had public schools amongst them, in which every
one might daily behold Anatomies: yea Anatomies were showed to every one that
would see them in the private houses of Philosophers and Physicions. And for
this cause Galen says, that the Ancients would not write of this science. But
after when this diligence of the first lovers thereof began to be despised
and rejected of the most part of men, it was necessary that some should write
thereof for their good, as also for the benefit of posterity. Otherwise they
would have fallen within short space into a dangerous ignorance of their
nature, and of the causes and remedies of such diseases as daily trouble them.
But we must refer that knowledge, which in our discourses we seek for out
of this science, to another end. Neither do we undertake to speak of that Art
and Science that belongs to Phisicions, as though we made profession thereof,
The true end and use of knowing the book.
but only to show the true use of it, and how it may be referred to the
honor of God, and to the knowledge of his wisdom and providence: as also to
the end, that in beholding the wonderful composition and disposition of the
members of our body, we should remember the creator thereof, who sees
whatsoever heth most secret and hidden therein, and who is able to make as it
pleases him an Anatomy both of body and soul, and to send them both to
everlasting hell fire, when they will not acknowledge him to be the efficient
and final causes of their being. Having regard therefore to this end, we will
consider of the parts of man's body according to the subject propounded unto us.

The parts then of the body are divided into two sorts or kinds: the
firstis, the simple or similary parts, the other the compound parts. The simple
parts are of that nature, What the simple or similary parts of man's body are.
that every portion of them, how great or little soever it be, retains
always the name that is given to the whole, whereof it is a part: and of these
simple parts the other kind is named, whereof we will entreat hereafter,
because they are compounded parts, and obtain the place of members, whose
parts are not called by the name of the whole member, but every part has his
special name. For all the parts of the head are not called by the name of the
head, and so it is in the other members of the body. But if a bone be broken
into many pieces, every piece is still called a bone: and the like may be said
of the other simple parts, which are nine in number, namely, the bone, the
ligament, the gristle the sin^w, the pannicle, the cord or filament, the vein,
the artery and the flesh. Our speech therefore must be of these. No man is
ignorant, that the foundation of every building is as much a part thereof
rather more (although it appear not) then any other part how sumptuous soever
it be. For the rest are laid and planted upon the foundation, neither can they
long continue in their beauty, unless that be good and firm. We may say the
like of the bones of a man's body: Of the bones of man's body.
(which are made of the seed in generation, when the thickest part of it is
hardened by heat, as stones are baked in the earth by great heat.) For they are
not only like to foundations and pillars, which sustain the body and all the
members thereof, but they are as it were pales and fences unto it to contain
all things that are within the building of the body, and to inuiron all the
parts of it, as it were with walls and rampires. For this cause they are more
earthy, drier, and colder then any other part of the body. And therefore the
providence of God appears most wonderful in this composition of the bones,
seeing that of one self same piece of earth or clay he makes the bones so
strong and hard in comparison of the ligaments, Gods providence great in the
creation of the bones.
gri^tles, and oter simple parts: so that in respect of these the other are
for strength and hardness like to stones and metals in comparison of the other
part of the earth. Neither is the wisdom of God worthy of great admiration in
this respect only, but also because he made not the bones all of one piece,
nor yet of one fashion and form. For minding to give motion, not only to man
but also to al other living and sensible creatures, the bones were to be
divided and distinguished into diverse pieces, to the end they should not hinder
this motion, which is so necessary for those creatures: the manner whereof we
may see in men armed at all points. A fit similitude.
For the harness must be made of diverse pieces according to the joints of the
members, that their moving may have no impediment. But because the bones being
divided and separated one from another, cannot be so conjoined or united
together, that every one should sustain that charge which it has to bear,
therefore that they might serve more fitly for motion to the creatures, God has
framed the^ in such wise, that they have their joints in so good proportion and
so aptly interserted one within another, as that the whole combination and
uniting of the^ al together is maruailous exquisit and goodly to behold, like
to a work made of many pieces, which all meet together in one body. For some
of them are hollow like to a round box, that they may be conjoined with the
other that are round in the ends, to the end they might be knit together more
conveniently. To be short, they have all their fashions proportionable one with
an other according to that manner of uniting, which is most meet and convenient
for the^. Now because this conjunction of joints cannot keep itself at that
stay if it have no other band, Of the ligaments.
therefore has God placed there certain ligaments, or st^ings of the bones
which are white parts, without blood, void of sense, not holow, proceeding
from the bones, and differing from them in nature, Of the gristles.
although not so much as the gristles do. For the gristles (which serve also
for a stay that is softer then the bones, to the end they should not rub
together over hardly one within another) are more earthy, drier, and harder
then the ligaments, and yet not so much as the bones: so that they are as it
were of a middle substance and nature between the bones and the ligaments,
which are also very earthy, dry, and hard, but less then the gristles and the
bones, and more then the sinews, Of the sinews.
which also in some sort draw near to the nature of the ligaments. But they
differ both in that they have diverse originalles, as also because the ligaments
are altogether insensible, as the bones and gristles are, neither can they give
any motion or sense as the sinews can, but serve only for ba^ds to tie the
bones one to another, and to knit the other members unto them. But the sinews,
which proceed either from the brain, or from the marrow of the back bone
whose original is from the brain, are of a tender, soft, and white substance,
and of that nature that they have al sense, which they impart to all the sinewy
parts of the body. And of the^ also some give both sense and motion together.
Therefore their substance is not so dry, nor so hard as that of the ligaments:
neither yet is it so soft and tender as is the substance of the flesh, or of
the kernels, or of the skins, and of such other like parts, whereof we will
speak hereafter. As for the pannicles, Of pannicles and ^ilaments.
and cords or filaments, which are little long threeds, slender and white,
solid and strong, we may comprehend them under the name of sinews and
ligaments, because they take part of both natures. For some of them have sense
with the sinews, others have none with the ligaments. The office of the
pannicles (which are little skins made of sinews and ligaments) is to defend and
to knit together the members, and to impart to many of them sense, as to the
liver, the heart, the lungs, the spleen, and the kidneis. And as for the
filaments, they serve the body, some to draw nourishment, others to retain and
keep that which is meet to nourish the body, and some to drive forward and to
cast forth those excrements and superfluities, which help not to nourish it, Of
the veine^.
but are only a burden and grief unto it. The veins are thin and slender
pipes carrying the thicker blood wherewith the body is nourished, and they have
their beginning from the liver. For in that the hollow vein is greater and
larger then the rest, and out of that all the other veins extend themselves
into all the body, as it were branches proceeding from the body of a tree.
Herein (as we will do in all our discourse) we follow the common opinion
approved of the late learned Philosophers, Physicions, and Anatomists. For
Aristotle wrote that the heart was the original of the veins. But Hippocrates
taught otherwise, Of the arteri^.
whom Galen followed, confuting Aristotle's opinion. As for the Arteries or
pulses they are pipes that proceed from the heart. For in that is ye great
artery planted, which is ye stock of all the rest, which serve to carry the vital
spirits throghout the body: they are covered with little skins, that are strong
and thick to keep the spirits from breathing out, and for the same cause they
have their passages more straight. So that they have two skins or couerings,
whereof that which is underneath is five times thi^ker then the skin of a
vein. To conclude, the Arteries and veins are joined together, to the end
that the vital spirits might draw and receive from the veins convenient
matter for their nourishment, as also that by their heat they might warm the
blood that is within them. For there are certain mouths in them both for this
mutual communication, both that the spirit might draw his nourishment from the
veins, as flame fetches the preservation of his light from the lamp, and
also that the veins might receive spirit and heat from the arteries. Of the
flesh.
As for the flesh it is a substance of blood, which is then made when the
thickest part of it is as it were congeled: and with that all the members of
the body are clothed outwardly. We must speak more largely of the uses and
properties of all these simple parts, which we have here laid open in few
words. In the mean time in this little that has bin discoursed, we see a
maruailous providence of God, who has disposed and tempered the matter of the
body in such wise, that he made it so apt to effect that work which he
purposed, and that by proportions and mixtures so well contrived from one
degree to another, as he has done in the elements, to the end that all the
parts of the body might the better be preserved one by an other. And although
men's bodies are compounded of earth and of the other elements, as we have
already touched, yet God shows himself very won^e. full in this whole work
and matter of man. For as he turns the earth into diverse natures, so that of
one piece he makes gold, of another silver, of this brass, iron and other
met^alles, of that mineralles, of another precious stones of sund^y sorts,
which are as it were ^he bones of the earth, besides a great many other things
of diverse kinds which were infinite to rehearse: so of one self same matter
appointed for the composition of the body, he makes va^iety of works that
(...) may be framed and furnished in all respects. For we see what difference
there is between the bones, which parts are most earthy, The bones most
earthy of all the parts.
and so consequently driest, hardest, and coldest, because of al other parts
they d^aw nearest to the nature of the earth. Then the gristles obtain the
second degree next after the bones for agreement of nature, as that which is in
then iddest between the bones and the ligaments, as the ligaments are of a
middle nature between the gristles and the filaments, and the filaments
between the ligaments and the sinews, and so of the rest. Therefore as God
the great workmaster of nature has framed all the parts of man's body of
matter taken from all the elements, so also he has tempered his matter
according to the work he meant to make, and to that office, which it pleased
him to appoint unto every part and member of the body. So that the matter of
some parts holds more of the earth, of other parts it has more water, or
air, or fire, or else is more or less mingled of all together. Whereby it
appears how aptly this workemaster can apply himself unto his work. We
have also another notable testimony of his providence, in that he has made
the ligaments so strong and firm according to the necessity of their office,
having ordained them to knit the bones in their joints, and to be as it were
bands and cords to tie and conioyne them together, even as the thongs of
harness keep the parts thereof bound and tied one to another. We may say as
much of the filaments, but chiefly of the sinews, which in their places serve
for bands to the body. And here we have also to note, that because God has
created them to give both motion and sense to the body, therefore he has
planted their root partly in the brain, partly in the marrow of the
backebone, which is also derived from the brain: as the original of the
ligaments is either in the bones, or in the gristles, or in the skin, and the
beginning of the filaments both in the ligaments and in the sinews, according
to that use for which they were made. And that the motion of living creatures
might not be hindered, he has not made the ligaments, nor the filaments nor
the sinews of any such boisterous or stiff matter, but that the creatures may
easily bend every way whithersoeuer they list to move and turn their members.
Neither has he made them of so tender and soft matter, but that they are
strong and powerful enough to hold fast all the members within their joints,
to the end they might not easily become bare and thrust out of their places,
as also to furnish the creatures with strength and power, which consists
principally in the force and might of these parts. It is requisite also that
they should be such, because they are as it were in continual labor, and
sustain great stresses. Wherefore they must needs be of such matter as will
not easily yield or wear away, or break in pieces. And because all the
members and all the joints are not to sustain labors and brunts alike,
therefore the Lord has very well provided for that, as he has done the like
also in the composition and distribution of the bones. For those members that
must sustain the heauiest burdens and greatest brunts, that are to dispatch
most laboursome business, and therefore require the greater strength, have
biggest, strongest, and mightiest bones, ligaments and sinews, so that their
bulk, bigness, breadth and thickenesse are answerable to their necessary
uses. The lesser members and such as are to undergo less pain, which are
ordained to effect more fine and witty works wherein Art is more required
then force, have also their bones, ligaments and sinews lesser and smaller, so
that in certain places there are some bones passing small, and sinews, which
are only as it were little threedes. Thus much I thought meet for us to
understand concerning the simple parts of the body, now we must consider the
compound parts: and first entreat of the outermost parts, and so follow
that which we spoke of the foundation of man's building, to the end, that by
little and little we may set him upright, and consider him thoroughly in all
his parts. Therefore thy speech ACHITOB, shall be of the feet and legs, and
of the arms and hands.

Of the compound parts of the body, and first of the feet and legs, and of
the arms and hands. Chap. 4.
ACHITOB. Among the manifold and great commodities, which we may reap by the
diligent consideration of the Anatomy of the body, there are two of greatest
weight. The first is, to put us in mind of our mortality in regard of our
bodies, A double use of Anatomy.
to the end that we should not please ourselves too much in the beauty of
them, and so wax proud and abuse our selves, as also that we should remember
all those testimonies, which we have in the holy Scriptures of the frailty
of man, and of his whole nature. For when we see that those parts of the body
that are hardest, strongest, most firm, and such as after the death of a man
continue longest before they return into powder, and into that first matter
out of which they were taken, as namely those parts that were propounded unto
us in the former discourse, especially the bones: I say, when we see that these
notwithstanding their hardness, must in the end return to dust as well as
the rest, what shall we think of the other parts that are softer and more
tender, and less able to resist corruption? Therefore the spirit of God does
so often by his word call and send us back to that instruction, which he
gives us by the matter whereof he made and framed our bodies, and by the
consideration of our own original and birth: to the end we should learn
to contain our selves evermore within the compass of all humility and
modesty, as well toward him, as one toward an other. Hereof it was that
Isaiah had commandment given him from the Lord to cry, Esaias 40. 6. Job 14.
1, 2.
that all flesh i^ grass, and all the grace thereof as the flower of the
field. Man that is borne of a woman (says Job) is of short continuance, and
full of trouble. He shoots forth as a flower, and is cut down: he
vanishes also as a shadow, and continues not. Again for the second point,
we are taught to consider and to know by that providence of God, which
shows it self in the composition of the vilest and most earthy parts, and
in that frame which he makes for the building of the whole body, how great
and wonderful it ought to be in the residue, namely in the noblest parts
thereof, especially in the soul, if we could see it with our eyes, as we
behold the body. Wherefore, that we may the better know the excellent work
of God in this building, we must raise it upright before our eyes, to the end
we may behold it on the outside (as it were a frame ready made) from the
foot to the top, and from the foundation to the covering and highest part
thereof.

The whole body of man is commonly divided into four principal outward parts,
Four principal parts of the body.
which are called compound, in respect of the simple parts spoken of before,
which serve for matter to make them of: whereupon afterward they take the name
of member, according to that form that is given to each of them. These four
principal parts are, the head, the breast, the belly, the outward parts,
namely, the arms and hands, the legs and feet. The head ends where the
neck begins. The breast comprehends that part which we commonly call the
breast, also the back, the ribs, and whatsoever else is contained in them from
the neck unto the midriffe, Of the midriffe.
which is a skin that separateth the heart and the lungs on the one side, and
the inferior intralles on the other. The belly reaches from thence where the
breast ends unto the bone above the privy members and near to the groine.
The extreme or outward parts are already named by us; and of them our present
discourse shall be, beginning, as it were at the foundation, upon which all the
body is laid. First therefore we see how God has so aptly fashioned the
feet, that they do not only bear up all the rest of the body, but also
carry and recarry it wheresoever a man will. Next, the legs are set upon them,
as it were the pillars of this whole building, being closed in such sort unto
them as need requires, to help the feet to sustain and bear up all the
rest of the frame laid upon them. Eccles. 12. 3.
For this cause Solomon calls them the strong men that stoop in old age,
when their virtue and strength fails them. For they bow through weakness, and
tremble as the hands do, which the same Prophet calls the keepers of the
house. Now because the chief strength of the body lies in the bones, when the
scriptures mean to set forth any violent grief, as when a man is extremly
pressed* and as it were altogether oppressed, Psalm. 6. 2. and 22. 14. isay 38.
13.
they say that his bones are vexed, or broken, or out of joint, that is to say,
all his strength and power, so that he is as a body whose bones are wholly
broken and shiuered. And when the Scripture would signify the contrary, Job
21. 24. Esaias 66. 14.
it says that, their bones run full of marrow, and that they flourish like
an herb. Now if we take the whole leg, namely from the huckle bone unto the
ends of the toes, it has three great parts answerable to the three parts of
the whole arm, which part of the body reaches from the shoulders unto the
ends of the fingers. In the first place is the foot, which is the nethermost
part of the whole leg, and it consists of three parts, Three parts of the
leg.
which also are answerable to the three parts of the hand. The first is the
heel, which by a joint and convenient knitting together, unites the foot to
that part of the leg which reaches from thence up to the knee or gartering
place. The second is the sole, and as it were the back^ of the foot, being
long, large and hollow in the midst, to the end it might be more fit to
stand fast and to walk upon. The toes are the third part of the foot, being
set and placed in such wise as is most convenient for that duty of the foot.
For they differ much from the fingers, not only in length, but also in
situation, because the office of the hand and the foot is not all one.
Therefore as the fingers are longer then the toes, so the thumbs are otherwise
placed then the great toes. For if the great toe were placed as the thumb is,
it would hinder the foot in stead of helping it: and the like may be said
of the other toes. The two other parts of the leg are, first, that which is
from the knee to the foot, which is commonly called the leg for want of an
other proper name in our tongue, next the thigh, which is from the huckle bone
unto the knee. And as this has his joint and band to fasten him to the knee,
so the other by the like means is joined to the foot. Therefore both the
foot and the whole leg have their necessary motions through the help of the
sinews and muscles, as well to stretch it self out, as to bow and bend
forward and backward, upward and downward, as also to turn it self on the
right hand, and on the left, and round about: both to set forward and to
retire, to ascend and to descend, and for all the motions that are meet and
convenient both for this member and for all the parts of it. Thus much for the
lowest foundation of the frame of man's body, and for the pillars that hold it
up. Now we must consider of the other outward parts, the arms and the hands.

As God has given to man two legs and two feet to hold him up, Of the
arms and hands.
and to carry him whithersoeuer he would go, so he has given him two arms
and two hands, to dispatch all business which he thinks good. Therefore
the hand is rightly called by Aristotle, ^he instrument of the instruments. For
there is no member in all the body nor instrument whatsoever, that makes more
or more sundry works. This instrument makes all other instruments, and
sets them a work, as we see by experience. And because man only of all
other living creatures is capable of Arts, and knows how to use them,
therefore has God given to him only this instrument to exercise them. We see
also that there is no work which he cannot do with his hands. And what work
of God is there which he does not counterfaite, as if he were some little god
upon earth, that had undertaken to make an other visible world within this
world created by God? For if we consider the Sciences and A^tes of men, and
those excellent works which they make by the means of their hands, who will
not be ravished with admiration? That sentence of Anaxagoras may well be
approved wherein he says, that the hand is the cause of knowledge and
wisdom: (although Plutarch does learnedly understand experience, by the
hand.) For if it did not frame letters and figures, nor made instruments
requisite and necessary for all Sciences and Arts, they could not in any wise
be either taught or learned. Therefore considering well that which we say, man
may be called a second Creator, who taking pattern by the work of God in
the creation of the world has endeavored to make works answerable unto
those which God has given him in the world for a pattetne to imitate. The
agreement and difference between the works of God and the works of man.
Psalm. 33. 9. romans 4 17.
But there is great difference betwixt the works of man and the works of God,
especially in three points: namely, in the matter, in the form, and in the
life of them, together with all those things which it brings with it. For
first man can not work without matter, which he cannot find in himself, as
God who made all things of nothing, and made that to be which was not. But man
deals contrarily. For he can make nothing of nothing, but must of necessity
have matter meet for the work he takes in hand, unto which he is able to
add the form only. And yet he cannot give it any fashion except he first
had the pattern thereof in the wo^kes of God. For although he can make very
strange figures, and such as the very like has not been seen in all nature,
nor amongst all the creatures, yet he cannot pourtraite any so new, or so
strange, whereof he had not before some resemblance in the works of God in
sundry creatures. For he takes diverse pieces of many sundry figures, with
which afterward heaped together, he counterfaiteth one altogether new and
strange. As for example: never man saw a mountain all of gold, yet a man may
imagine one in his mind, and frame an image thereof in his imagination. For
albeit he never saw such a mountain, yet because he has seen both
mountains and also gold, by joining these two together which he knows, he
can frame the image of such a mountain in his mind, and then having in this
sort formed and conceived it, he can counterfaite it with his hand. But as
God takes not the matter of his works without himself, and without the
treasures of his infinite power, so he needs not to seek else where for
forms and patterns then in the treasures of his eternal wisdom and infinite
knowledge. Again, there is this besides, which is chiefest of all, that he is
able to give, not only being, but also life, sense, and motion to his works,
yea such nature and properties as pleases him: which man can not do. For he
can not change the nature of that matter upon which he works, but it must
st^ll continue the same in nature and disposition. And although he can draw
sundry effects from those matters about which he is occupied according as he
may mingle and compound them together, nevertheless he alters not their
nature, but they retain it still according to their portion, every one in his
place. Neither can he give to the best of his works so much life as is in a
reddish, or in any other lesser herb or plant: nor so much motion, sense, and
industry as a Fly or an Aut has, or the least worm in the earth. Now to
proceed in beholding the use of the hand, we must understand that God gave
unto men arms and hands chiefly to help one another, more then with any
other member of their body, in so much that they ought to refer al their
works, arts, All handy works ought to tend to common profit.
and exercises to common benefit and profit. But it is far otherwise. For
there is no member whatsoever with which they hurt one another more: so that
their hands are more dangerous without al comparison, then the paws of all
savage beasts. For those beasts that are most cruel spare the blood of their
kind, but men delight to imbrew their hands in man's blood, yea in the blood
of their nearest kindred. There are some also who shamefully abuse their hands
in causing them to serve for diuinations: from whence the Art of Palmestrie
proceeded, Of the Art of Palmestrie.
which is full of superstition, and of fooleries well worthy to be laughed
at: and such are all the other kinds of diuinations invented by the vanity of
man's brain. They that would seem to allege some show and likelihoode of
foundation for it, say, that nature has imprinted in the lines of the hands
wonderful significations of the temperature and disposition of the whole
body. Therefore they call the long line in the midst of the hand, the line
of life, and say, that they who have it whole throughout, are long lived. But
suppose this were so, yet what probability is there for any to seek in the
lines of the hand for the knowledge and signification of all things that shall
befall men, and to foretell them, as they say, their good and ill fortune? For
although it were so, that by looking upon the hands, a man might in some
sort, judge of the temperature and disposition of the body, yet what reason is
there to extend this consideration to the foretelling of all things, as if God
or nature, as they speak, had set marks in the hands, so that a man might
know, I say not by the Science, but by the vanity of Chiromancie, whatsoever
good or evil shall come unto men? For they that deal with this kind of
divination do not only foretell whereunto the body may be disposed according to
the temperature thereof, as a Physicion may judge of the sickness or soundnes of
the body by those tokens which he sees therein following his Art, but they go
a great deal further. For they take upon them to foretell al good and ill
adventures, namely, whether a man shall be rich or poor, married, or no, and
whether he shall have many wives, and what they shall be, whether maidens or
widows, whether rich or poor, with such other toys and old wives tales,
whereof their Books of Palmestrie are full. They therefore are very fools that
give credit to such praedictions. Of the Palmestry of Christians.
But Christians have a true and sure kind of Chiromancie which they may use.
For if men consider only their hands, with what workmanship they are made,
for how many uses they may serve, and how profitable and necessary they are
for them, they shall find in them an infinite number of marks to make them
good diuiners; yea it will teach them to divine that of necessity there was a
God and a Creator, who was the workemaster that made that work and those so
excellent instruments, whose use and commodity can not sufficiently be
conceived. For although we had never heard of God or of his providence, this
only consideration ought to be sufficient to teach us to seek him, and to
hold up toward him those hands which he has given us. If therefore by the
contemplation of our hands, and by those marks of the power, wisdom,
goodness and providence of God, which are imprinted in them, we can learn
such a Science and Art of Divination, as will the better induce us to glorify
God in the workmanship of our bodies, then do we profit greatly therein. And
this we ought to do, not only by the contemplation of our hands, but also
of all the residue of the members and parts of our body, even unto our very
hairs and nails. For we have not so many Preachers only of his glory and
magnificence in our bodies, as we have members, but also as there are hairs
in the head. For there is nothing, no not so much as a little hair, (as we
shall see hereafter) whereby God does not testify his divine providence.
Wherefore if we should by peece-meale lay open only those principal things
which are to be considered in all the parts of the arm and hand, and those
testimonies of the great providence of God that may be found and noted in them,
a whole day would not suffice: although we did only behold the great
workmanship that is, I say not in the whole hand, but in one finger thereof.
For it is an instrument which God has given only to man, to touch and to take
with, to gripe and to use in his own behalf in stead of all kind of
defensive weapons. The use of the hand.
In this respect he made it of such a fashion that he can lay hold of, and
apprehend all things either great or small, of what form or figure soever they
be, whether round, square, or otherwise. And therefore it was requisite that the
fingers of the hand should be unequal, that they should be placed and disposed
as they are, thereby the better to gripe and to lay hold of all things. For
albeit some of them be longer then others, yet when we close our hand, and
gripe anything, they are all equal. And as God has given to man a mind
capable of understanding and knowledge, so also he has adorned him with this
excellent instrument, which is so necessary for all Arts, that without this,
those other would remain idle. In a word, it is an instrument which man could
not want neither in peace nor war. Neither is there any thing to be found
therein, which does not serve very fitly for all duties of the hand, as also
nothing is wanting that is necessary. The very nails have two excellent
properties: The properties of the nails.
the one is, that they serve for a covering and an ornament to the ends of the
fingers: the other, that they help to take hold of, and to gather little and
hard things. For this cause also they are so convenient both for matter and
form, and so fitly fastened and set in their places, as better could not be
devised. But let us consider of the whole arm or hand, to see the composition
and division thereof. As we said before of the leg, so there is in the whole
arm three great and principal parts, Of the three parts of the whole arm.
taking all that member which is from the shoulders unto the ends of the
fingers. The first is the hand, which likewise has three chief parts,
namely, that which is joined with the lower part of the arm from the elbowe
unto it self, and it is called the wrest: the second is the hollow palm
which is apt to gripe with, Three parts of the hand.
together with the back of it on the other side: then the fingers make the
third part, being so made and placed as they are fittest to take easily, to
gripe, to close, and to crush. In so much that whatsoever has been spoken by
me worthy consideration in the legs and feet touching their office, and all
those motions that are apt, and necessary for them, the same also may be
plainly seen in the whole hand and arm. The second principal part of the
whole arm is that which is taken from the elbow unto the hand: the third is
from the shoulder unto the elbow, and both the one and the other are so coupled
together with their joints and bands, as is most requisite for all their
motions. Thus ye see what in my opinion ought chiefly to be known in this our
present matter. Now seeing we have begun to take a view of the foundation of
the frame of man by the consideration of the fourth compounded part of the
body, I think that before we handle the other three, we shall do well to
behold the wonderful composition of many bones, which serve also to sustain
the whole stock of the body, and upon which the backbone is chiefly grounded.
Therefore thou ASER entreating thereof, and of the ribs and other bones of
man's body shall prepare the way for us to proceed in the description of our
building, even unto the top and highest place of the whole frame.

Of the Backebone and of the marow thereof: of the ribs and of other bones of
man's body. Chap. 5.
ASER. Those Philosophers that were endued with greatest knowledge of those
excellent things that are hid in man's nature, stood much upon the
contemplation of this, that his face was lift up toward heaven: whereupon they
concluded, that he ought to abandon all carking care of base and earthly thing
to contemplate those things that are above and heavenly, and in the knowledge
of them to satisfy the desires of his soul. And truly this is worthy to be
considered, that amongst terrestrial creatures which walk upon the earth,
God has created none with two legs only, or that is made straight and bolt
upright, but man. Therefore he only and no other has the ridgebone made
according to the straightness of the legs: which is neither in foure-footed
beasts, nor in birds, albeit they go upon two feet, and have their head
lifted upward. For as well their legs, as those of foure-footed beasts are
so placed in regard of the backebone when they walk, as men's legs are when
they sit down, namely cornerwise, not downeright. But when men go, their
legs are stretched straight with the backebone, (which is like the keele of a
ship) unto which all the bones belonging to the stock of the body are
conjoined, every one being answerable each to other according to their
proportion: as the other pieces of wood whereof a ship is made, are joined
with the keele by that knitting together which they have therewith. For this
cause the whole body of man is straight, and can stand upright, and sit down.
But no beast can do either of them, because there is no such uprightness
void of corners between their backebone and their legs, as there is in man.
Therefore they can neither hold nor do any thing either standing or sitting.
For although they can stay themselves upon their haunches, yet they cannot
sit altogether like to man. And contrariwise, man can do nothing well lying
along or with his belly downewarde as beasts use: but standing or sitting he
can do all his affairs very easily. To this end has GOD given him legs
and feet, arms and hands, of which we spoke before. Now as hitherto we
have seen the lowest foundation of man's building, namely the feet and legs,
so here we must know that there is yet another wonderful frame of bones, as
it were a new foundation for the whole stock of the body, and residue
thereof. Amongst others some are very strong, being placed crossewise to
uphold the rest: they serve also for the defense of many inward parts that
are against them. Upon this second foundation the backebone is laid, Of the
backebone.
which reaches up to the head, and is very artificially made. For first,
because a man cannot always stand upright, but must sometime bend himself,
or lie down, or turn from one side to another, it is not made all one bone,
but it consists of many bones, namely of four and twenty, which are called
the knuckles or turning joints of the backebone. Eccles. 12. 6.
For this cause Solomon very fitly calls it the silver chain or coarde,
which lengtheneth, or shrinketh being consumed with extreme old age. For it
is framed after the fashion of a chain, and holds the lower parts of the
body, as it were tied and chayned unto the highest part, which is the head.
Again, it is not without good cause called (...) chain of silver. For it is a
very precious part of the body, and ought to be greatly accounted of, both
because the body stands in need of it, and also for many great benefits
which it receives thereby. True it is that some understand by this chain of
silver, the uniting and agreement of matters whereof the body of man is made,
being taken from all the Elements, and joined together by a goodly harmony
and proportion. But the former exposition seems to me most fit, because of
that similitude which the backbone and joints of it with their use, have with
a chain and the vse-thereof. For if the chine-bone were all of one piece, a
man should be always stiff like to a pale, or like to a logge or body of a
tree: and so the stock of the body could not enjoy those motions that are
necessary for it, as we see all the members have agreeable to their nature.
For they are nt planted into the stock of the body, as boughs and branches
are into the stock of a tree, which are without motion as well as their stock.
Likewise man (whom the Philosophers called a Tree turned upward, because he
has his roots in his head) is a far other kind of plant then those are,
which being in the earth, stir not out of one place. For it is a tree to be
carried about, whose branches have their natural motion. And as touching those
bones whereof the chine-bone is made, they are so ordered, that the first which
sustayneth all the rest, as the principal foundation (being called Os sacrum,
Of the holy bone.
that is, The holy bone) is the largest, biggest and strongest: and being
joined to the hippes is very artificially framed of three bones, and sometimes
of five or six. Wherefore some think that it is so called by reason of the
artificial composition thereof: others, because of the greatness: and some,
because it helps women in their travail, as that whose knitting together
opens with the hippebones in them that bring forth children. Others say,
that there is no opening, but only that it stretches forth and inlargeth it
self. There are some also that think it is so called, because it is so
necessary unto life, that after it is once hurt, death follows. After this
bone, the rest that follow are less and less until you come to the highest:
insomuch that the lowest are biggest, and the highest least, to the end that
as they are the foundation one of another, so they might be able to bear that
charge which they are to sustain, and be the less burdened. And as for the
conjunction and uniting of them together, it is so well contrived, that it has
so much strength as is necessary for it, and is neither too soft, nor too
hard, too dry nor too wette and slipperie, but that which is meet for their
motions. This order of bones and turning joints thus raunged, is properly
called the Backebone or Chine, and in Latin Spina dorsi, because of the sharp
ends or points which each of them has oneuerie side for his defense, as it
were thorns. Of the marow of the chine.
This whole chine has a marow proceeding from the hinder part of the brain,
and reaching down to the nether end of the backebone: which being round in
shape, is as a river whose spring is in the brain, from whence it proceeds
as the great Artery does out of the heart, and the hollow vein out of the
liver, as we have already declared, and may entreat thereof more at large in
speaking of the inner parts of the body. Therefore as the great artery is as
it were the stock of all the rest, being planted in the heart from whence it
springs, and the hollow vein whose fountain is in the liver, is as it were
the stock of the other veins: so the marrowe of the chine is as it were the
stock and spring from whence all the sinews issue, which afterward like to
little rivers impart their sense and motion. And because the fountain of this
river is in the brain, therefore also the original of sinews is attributed
thereunto, notwithstanding that all those sinews which give motion and sense
to the parts that are under the head, except it be to the intrals and guts,
proceed from the marrowe of the chine. Hereby we may note once again, that
that place alleged by me out of Solomon where he calls the backbone a
silver chain, Eccles. 12.
agreeeth also very fitly with that which is here spoken. For seeing the
sinews distribute sense and motion to all the members of the body, as it has
been already told us, and have their beginning from the brain and marrow of
the chine, we may well say that it is a chain and coa^d of a great length,
which extends it self very far by reason of other chains and strings
proceeding from it. For as the backbone may be resembled to a chain, so the
marrowe within it is like to a coarde, whereof all the sinews, which are as it
were the little strings of all the members of the body, have their beginning
and increase. And therefore some in stead of a silver chain translate, a coard
or threede of silver, as we read in the common Latin translation: but the
sense is all one. And that which Solomon adds after of the golden ewer which
is broken in olde-age, with the exposition of the best learned given thereof,
agrees also very well to this effect. Of the skin of the brain called the
golden Ewer.
For by this golden Ewer they understand the skin that covers the brain,
which is of a yellowish color, resembling the color of gold. It is very
fitly called a Ewer, because it is a vessel contianing the matter and
nourishment of the sinews, and as it were the fountain of all the motions and
senses of the body: it is as it were the lodging of all the animal parts, and
the original of all the senses both internal and external. Wherefore the
matter of the brain contained within it is of a more celestial nature then
any other part of the body, and comes nearest to the spiritual and divine
natures. So that this vessel is not without good and just cause called by
Solomon the Ewer of gold. For there is in it a fountain out of which man
receives great treasures. Now because the sinews, arteries and veins were
to have their passage and issue from their fountain without let or
hinderaunce, it was requisite that the backebone should have such holes as it
has, and that the bones thereof should be of that fashion they are, to the end
that neither themselves, nor the marrow within might be easily broken, and that
the next parts and members might not be hurt. For it is very dangerous to have
any rupture or hurt in the chine as well by reason of the marrow as of the
sinews. And because it pleased God to lodge there those internal members of
the body, that are most necessary for life and for the preservation thereof,
Of the ribs.
he fastened the ribs to both sides of the backebone, namely twelve on every
side: and has left a sufficient space betwixt them, that the place might be
able to receive those members, for whose cause they were so built and disposed.
So that there are before and behind, especially about the noblest members,
very long and large bones, to defend them on al sides (as it were good harness
and strong bulwarks) but chiefly behind, because the arms and hands cannot
so well defend them, as they may the other before. Therefore God has better
armed them with bones, making those of the shoulders so large behind as they
are, and knitting them also unto the backebone by their band, but yet so that
they touch it not. Likewise they are fastened to the highest bone in the breast
which reaches up to the throat, above the first ribbe, by two little bones
which pass over the ribs that are betwixt them. For this cause these bones
are called the keys of the throat. The keys of the throat.
For they close and shut up these parts as it were keys, so that without
them shoulder blades would fall backward, being no more able to keep close
together, then the poldron of an harness not being fastened to the gorget.
The arms likewise are fastened to the shoulders, as also the thighs and
legs to the hippes: then the hands are joined to the arms with their
joints and bands, as has been touched before. Now we are to note further,
according to that I spoke even now, that the backebone is in a man's body, as
the keele in a ship: so that as the rest of the matter and form of the ship
must be well proportioned and framed according to the keele, so is it in the
composition of man's body, and in that correspondencie, which all the members
ought to have with the ridgebone of which they all depend, otherwise there
would be no good agreement but great deformity. And as for the ribs and
breast bones, they have such workmanship as is requisite for the members
contained within the ribs. Of the workmanship of the ribs and of other
bones.
For seeing the members of man's breathing are closed within, needful it is
that they should not only be defended and armed with bones for their guard
and preservation, but also that these bones should be so placed, that they
might enlarge and restrain themselves, open and close again, in such wise
that the breathing and members thereof be not hindered in their motions.
Therefore they are all by nature less hard then the other: besides, they are
many, to the end there might be spaces betwixt them, not only for the enlarging
and restraining of the breast, but also that the muscles might be placed
between the ribs. And this is one cause, why it was needful that the
backebone should be framed as it is, namely, that it might be more commodious
for respiration. And because the stomach also stands in need of enlargement
and restraint according to the quantity of the meat which it receaueth, and
according as it is lift up and pressed down thereby, therefore it was
requisite that it should have the like help. But forasmuch as it might soon
be hurt by reason of the hardness of the ribs, if they were driven and
forced against it, God has so disposed those ribs wherewith he has defended
the stomach, that they are neither so long nor so hard as the rest. For they
are of a softer kind of bone, drawing nearer to the nature of gristles then the
other, and the more they descend downward, the shorter they are. Therefore the
lower part of the ribs are commonly called the false ribs, How many false
ribs there are.
or bastard ribs, which on each side are five in number; the other seven
ending at the breastbone, to the end they may defend and guard the heart and
lungs, which are vital parts. Hereupon when any has been wounded to death, it
is often said in the holy scriptures, 2. Sam. 2. 23. and 3. 27.
that he was stricken under the fifth ribbe, because no blow pierces those
parts, but it hurts some one of the vital members, which cannot be wounded,
but that death follows thereupon. We see then how the providence of God did
well forcsee whatsoever was requisite in this work of man's body, and has
provided thereafter as need required: as we may easily judge by that which we
have heard of the bones only, which parts are most earthie and massy, and are
void of all sense. Wherefore we may well conceive how excellently this
wisdom has wrought in the other parts and members that are more noble. But
we may judge a great deal better of all this, if we consider that our treatise
of the bones only, is but very little in comparison of that which might be
spoken, if a man would utter it as Phisicions do, and distinguish properly of
all the kinds of bones, and of their uses. Now to end the outward
composition of the body touching the bones, we must consider of the share bone,
and of the bones of the head, and of the marow that is within the bones, and of
the use of the neck. Last of all, we will clothe with flesh this dry Anatomy,
that afterward we may come to those parts of our building that are most noble
and excellent. Therefore it belongs to thee AMANA to entreat of this subject.

Of the share bone and marrow of the bones: of the bones in the head, and of
the flesh: of the muscles and of their office. Chap. 6.
AMANA. Nothing makes the work of God in the composition of man's body more
wonderful, then the beauty of his shape, and the exquisite art used in the
work, wherein a man cannot change so much as a nail or an eyelidde, which is
but hair, but that some imperfection must be acknowledged therein, and some
discommoditie following thereupon will cause it to be perceived. For this cause
the kingly Prophet considering his creation, speaks as one ravished with
admiration. I will (says he) praise thee, Psalm. 139. 14.
for I am fearfully and wonderfully mad: marvelous are thy works, and my
soul knows it well. He could not in all that Psalm marvel sufficiently
at so excellent a work of God. Therefore he used a word which signifies as
much in the Hebrewe tongue, as if in stead of our speech, thou have framed or
fashioned me, he should have said, I have benewouen or wrought in tissue and
interlaced, and fashioned artificially as it were in broadery work. And
truly no image or picture, how well soever it be painted and purtrayted, is
to be compared with the form and figure of man's body: neither is there any
work of tapistrie, so well wrought and imbrodered, or that has such variety
of exquisite art, and such diversity of figures, as that has. And from what
paterns do Painters and Ingrauers take the fashion and form of those Images
and pictures which they would draw forth, but from this? What is a piece of
tapistry or imbrodered work in comparison of a man's body, which is as it
were an image of the whole world, and wherein a man may find almost the
variety and draughts of all things contained in the whole frame of the world?
This will evidently appear unto us in the sequel of our speeches, touching
the compounded parts of the body.

Therefore to finish the external composition of this humane building
concerning the bones, we will first note, that God in creating the belly has
not compassed it about with bones, Why the belly is not environed with bones.
as he has done the other parts of the body, and that chiefly for two causes.
First, it is most meet it should be so, by reason of the meat it receives.
Secondly, for the benefit of women that bear children. But to the end it
might be vpholden together with that burden it bears, God has given unto it
the Share bone for a foundation, Of the Share bone, or tayl^bone.
which also stands instead of a bulwark for the bowels. And because a man
cannot always stand upright, but must oftentimes sit down, not only to
rest himself, but also to dispatch many works which he has to do, therefore
he has the buttocke bones and the flesh wherewith they are covered, Of the
buttocke bones.
which are unto him in stead of a stool and a cushion to sit at his ease.
And forasmuch as the bones are to be nourished, they have for their familiar
food, the marrow, which by nature is moist, soft, fat, and sweet. Therefore
it has neither sinew nor sense, Of the marow.
but is within the bones, as the sap of trees is in the midst of their
stocks and branches. For this cause Job speaking of the prosperity of the
wicked, Job 21. 24.
says, His breasts are full of milk, and his bones run full of marrowe.
But this is strange, that seeing it is made of the thickest of the blood, as it
were a superfluity of the meat, how it can be engendered within the bones, and
draw nourishment from the veins, as other parts of the body do. But God knew
well how to provide for that, and to make way for nourishment through the
hardness of the bones, which are not all alike full of marrowe. For as some of
them are more dry or moyster, more hard or softer then others, so they have
more or less marrowe: and some have none at all, because they need it not.
Now this marrow whereof we speak now, differs from that in the chine-bone,
which the Arabians call Nucha, Nucha.
and is of the nature of the substance of the brain, from whence it proceeds
as a river from his fountain, for the generation of sinews, to which end the
other marrow is not appointed of God, but only for the nourishment and
preservation of the bones. Seeing then we are come to the brain, we must
consider with what bones God has enclosed it on every side for the defense
thereof, how many in all there are in the head both before and behind, on the
right side and on the left, above and beneath: of what form, breadth, length,
and hardness, and how they are joined one with another by seames and bands, and
that not without great reason and consideration of the Workmaster, which made
such an excellent piece of work. Of the bones of the head.
For first, there are commonly six bones, which compass the brain on each
side, besides that which is called the Wedge-like bone, which is under the
pallat of the mouth, and unto which all the rest are fastened. And because
there are many vessels and members in the brain and head, God has made the
head of a round figure, reaching somewhat in length, and bulking out somewhat
more both before and behind. Now forasmuch as vapors, fumes, and smokie
excrements mount upward, therefore he has created the head, and those bones of
the head that are highest, not so solid and thick as the rest, to the end the
vapors and fumes should not continue enclosed within the brain, but might
euaporate, and so disburthen the brain: otherwise it would be very ill at
ease, and subject to many diseases. Therefore all of them together are so made
one bone, that yet they are not all of one and the same piece, but joined
together, not by ligaments, as many sundry and several bones are, but by such
a proper and apt conjunction, that there appears between them as it were a
seame made after the manner of a Saw or Comb, as if they were very finely
sewed together. And because the bones behind could not have that help of the
hands, for their defense which the bones before may have, God has created
them more hard and stronger. Besides, they all are to the brain and to every
part thereof, in stead of an helmet and murrion to defend it on every side.
Thus you see the composition of the head touching the bones thereof, which is
so joined to the body by the backebone, that nothing but the neck, which is the
upper end of the chine, Of the neck and use thereof.
is between them. For it was necessarily to have motion both above and
beneath, before and behind, and on both sides: which could not have been if
it had been fastened to the shoulders without any space between, which is
necessary also both for breathing, for voice, and for many other purposes
that may be noted hereafter. And albeit the neck served for nothing else but
for voice, yet is it so necessary, that without it a man could have no voice,
nor any other creature to which it is given, as appears in those that have no
neck. For all beasts that want the neck, want also the voice, as we may see
both in fishes, and in those beasts which the Latins call Insecta animalia:
the reason is because they have no neck whereby to join their head with the
rest of their body, but only as it were a little threede, which holds both
the one and the other close together. Now that we are come to the top of
the building of man's body, and have set him upright, as it were a dried
Anatomy, we must come next to the covering of the bones, sinews and other
parts mentioned by us, to the end that after we have finished the
description of the outward parts, we may speak also of those that are
within. Of the flesh.
The flesh then is the first garment wherewith the bones are covered: and it is
properly called by that name which is given to that part whereof the Muscles
are compounded. For some under the name of Flesh comprehend the Kernels and the
fat, because of the agreement which these parts have one with another, and
by reason of their use. For as for the flesh, it has this in common with the
Kernels and fat, that it is soft and tender: but herein it differs from
that matter whereof Kernels are made, in that the matter of Kernels is more
Spongelike. We learned before that Flesh is a substance of blood, and how it
is made thereof. Concerning the Muscles, we use to call by that name the
proper instrument that moves voluntarily all the members of the body. Of the
muscles.
Therefore it is compounded and made of threedes proceeding from the sinews,
and of ligaments compassed about with a great deal of flesh, insomuch that
when the Muscles are taken away from the body, there remains almost nothing
but bare bones. Their proper place is in all places of the body where there
are joints and where motion is required. For without them the body cannot
have that voluntary motion whereof I spoke even now, What voluntary motion is.
and which is so called, because thereby a man may move and remove his
members from one place to another as he thinks good, and as he shall judge
it needful for himself. Wherefore we must know that the brain which is the
seat of the animal parts, and the original of the all the sinews, and of
all motions and senses given to the body by them, is in respect of the whole
body like to a Waggonner that guydeth his Wagon, and the Muscles are like to
the bittes and brydles of horses, to cause them to retire or set forward as
the Waggonner pleases, either to draw them backewarde, or to drive them
forward, to pull in or to let loose the bridle. The sinews are as it were the
reins and leathers fastened to the bridles, to hold them in, or to let them
loose, and to turn them both on the right hand and on the left: then those
members of the body which move it from one place to another, A comparison
betwixt the body and a chariot.
are as it were the horses that are led and guided by this means, and the
rest of the body is like to the Charet and the burden which it caryeth. And
for this cause the Muscles are compounded of ligaments, sinews and flesh. For
as the ligaments serve to knit them together, and the sinews minister sense
and motion, so the flesh serves to the benefit of those little strings that
proceed from the ligaments and sinews: first to nourish them, then to hold
them up fostly, as if they leaned upon little cushions and pillowes, and
lastly, to keep them as well against the vehemency of internal heat, as
against the heat, cold, and hardness that comes from without. Likewise the
flesh perfourmeth all these things unto the rest of the thredes that are
throughout the whole body, both in the heart and in the stomach, and in other
parts that have flesh. But we have further to note the great differences of
flesh that are in all the parts of the body, that we may still increase in
the knowledge of the marucilous works of God, and of his divine providence.
For there is great difference between that flesh where with the bones,
ligaments and sinews are covered and clothed, and that of the internal parts
of the body, which also differs in quality, albeit all is compounded of one
and the same matter. For what difference is there betwixt that flesh which is
between the skin and the bones, The differences of flesh.
and that of the brain: as also that of thelungs, heart, liver, spleen and
kidneyes? Not one of all these members has his flesh like to any of the rest,
but they all differ very much according to the nature and office of the
compounded members. For the flesh of the brain is by nature apt for the
generation of the animal spirits, as that of the heart for the vital
spirits, and that of the lungs for air and breathing, that of the liver to
turn the matter which it receives from the stomach into blood and into
nourishment for all the members: that of the spleen to draw the gross blood
which is as it were the Lees of the blood, and to nourish it self thereby:
that of the kidneyes also to draw so much blood as is requisite for their
nourishment, and likewise to draw the urine, which after they send into the
bladder. Thus you see how every of these internal parts of the body is
compounded of flesh meet for his nature and office. Whereby we see many and
sundry shoppes within man's body, whereof every one has his proper work about
which it is busied, and such a nature as is agreeable to that work which GOD
has assigned unto it, who is the Creator and the Workmaster, and effects all
these works by his heavenly providence.

Moreover, Diverse uses of the flesh.
we have to note that the flesh generally serves the whole body for matter of
filling, to keep close all the members thereof, and namely all the bowels, and
to fill all the spaces between them, as also to strengthen all those parts
that are environed therewith, to the end they might not easily be shaken in
pieces. It defends also all the members both against heat and cold.
Likewise if any man fall, or lie down, it serves him for a boulster or soft
pillow, and for a shelter against bruses, and a defense against wounds, for a
shadow against heat, and a gown against cold. And thus much I think
sufficient to be known concerning this present Subject. Now before we take
any other matter in hand, we are to consider of the Kernels that are in the
body, because of their excellent use and property: especially we are to
consider of the Dugges, wherein appears a singular work of GOD, namely in
women, as we may presently hear of ARAM.

Of the kernels in the body, and of their sundry uses, especially of the
breasts of women, of their beauty and profit in nourishing of children, and
of the generation of milk. Chap. 7.
ARAM. He that should only stay in considering the lump and confused matter
whereof man is daily made, he should see therein but a little slime, yea such
vile corruption and rottenness, that a man would be even ashamed to name it.
But as a painter with his colors and draughts of his pensil gives a form to
that matter whereof he makes his piece of work, and painteth limme after
limme, and piece after piece: so the Lord gives by little and little and by
piecemeale to that confused mass and lump, such form and fashion as it
pleases him to bestow upon it in that time which he has appointed for that
purpose: and, as he uses to do, beginning always at the least and weakest
part, and at that which is as it were nothing, he still continues and
increases his work until it be perfect and absolute. Likewise, after we
have considered of the least and most earthy parts that are in the corruptible
matter of the body, we will look into them that are more excellent, and then
come to the contemplation of that immortal essence, which dwells in him.
Therefore I will now go on with our matter Subject.

Those parts of the body that are called Kernels (by reason of the similitude
they have with nuttes) are of two sorts, Two kinds of Kernels in the body.
and have their use and commodity very great, especially in two respects. For
some are by nature more thick and dry, and serve to fasten the upper partition
of the members and vessels of the body, to the end they should neither break
nor cleave. Therefore we have such Kernels in the neck, in the arme-pits, in
the groynes, and in those parts where the elbow and the hamme bend, and in
certain other parts. There are others not so thick by nature, and more
spongy and moist, and full either of milk, or of seed, or else of a flegmatike
and glewish humor. Now albeit all kinds of Kernels are given to the body to
drink up the humors, and to moisten the other parts, nevertheless those that
are of this latter kind, ferue chiefly for the first use. We have such also to
moisten all the parts of the mouth, and of the throat by the means of
spittle, that so they may be kept from drought, and that thirst may be
repelled and moderated. Likewise they are very serviceable to the life of man,
in that they soake and drink up, as it were spoonges, the fleame that
descends from the brain, that it should not fall upon the lungs, or into the
stomach, or upon other parts of the body, to the great damage and danger
thereof, as it happens to such as are short breathed and in consumptions, and
to them that are troubled with rheumes. And as these serve in the mouth and
throat for spittle, so there are many, and those very great ones in women's
pappes, especially when they have milk to the making whereof they serve, as
also those that are in more secret parts which serve for seed, namely to
keep it, to dress it, and to prepare it for generation. Therefore it is that
those kernels which are in the breasts of men and of young maidens are less
and harder. The least part in man full of admiration, and very profitable.
We ought not here to pass over without great admiration, the good
temperature and disposition, which GOD has made of the whole matter and form,
and of all the parts and members of man's body, insomuch that there is nothing
how little or vile socuer, which is superfluous, which is not very commodious
and profitable, and which is not wonderfully well applied and appropriated to
such places as are most fit for it, and to those uses whereunto it ought to
serve. For who would have thought that these kernels thus dispersed throughout
the body, were so many ways serviceable unto it as we see they are? Yea we
might here rehearse many more uses if we would speak more particularly of
this matter, whereof we mean to speak but generally, as also of all the rest
that concern the anatomy of the body, according to that end which we
propounded to our selves in the entry of our speeches, namely, to open a gappe
only to the consideration, first of the matter whereof man's body is
compounded, and of the diversity thereof: then of that form which God has
given unto it: and lastly of the profit and use of both: to the end we might
daily learn the better to know the great power, skill, wisdom, goodness
and providence of him that has created and disposed all things in so good
order. But as touching that which we spoke of the pappes, and of their
substance, we have yet to consider of two points well worthy the noting,
concerning the place where God has seated them. Of the pappes, and of their
situation, and use.
First, they are there placed where they serve to shroude and to defend the
noblest and most necessary parts for life that are in the breast, namely the
heart and the lungs. For they are set before them to countergard and keep
them, both from over great heat, and from excessive cold, and from many other
inconveniences. And as they serve for the heat of the heart, so their own
heat is increased by reason they are so near the heart, whereby the milk
that is engendered in them is the better baked. So that we see, that although
GOD has not given men pappes for the generation of milk and nourishing of
children, as women have, nevertheless they are not without profit, and use in
them, as we have heard. Whereunto also we may add the beautifying of that
part of the body where they are placed, especially in women. Again, could
they possibly be set in any place, that were more fit and more easy, both for
Mothers and Nurses, and for the children to whom they give suck and
nourishment? For if the mother be disposed to give her child suck, she has
this commodity to sit down if she will, to hold it in her bosom, and upon
her knees, and likewise to embrace it in her arms, whether she sit, lie down,
or stand: also she may carry it up and down whither she please, even
whilst she gives it suck, and feeds it. This commodity is not granted
to the females of beasts when they give suck and nourish their little ones
with their teates. Wherein we have to mark one notable difference which GOD
has put between men and beasts. The difference between ye care of men and
beasts over their little ones.
For beasts have no other care of their young ones, but only to nourish their
bodies with food until they be able to feed and govern themselves:
afterward, both sire and damme and little ones forget one another, taking no
more knowledge each of other, nor loving one another more then other beasts of
their kind. But amongst men, both the father and the mother are carried with an
affection toward their little children, which is the cause why they forget
them not as beasts do. And as they love their children, so are they loved of
them, insomuch that there is a mutual love proceeding from that natural
affection which they bear one toward another. On the other side, this love
causes parents to let their children have instruction, that they may be wise
and virtuous. And therefore it is not without good cause that women's pappes are
placed in the breast, namely, to the end they should be unto them as signs
and testimonies of the affection of the heart, and of that love which they
ought to bear toward their children, whereof they ought to make them
partakers as well as of the milk of their breasts, and as if they gave unto
them their heart, as they give them their blood turned into milk. Likewise,
children are by the selfsame means to be admonished of that mutual
affection and love, A good lesson for children.
which they ought to carry toward their mothers, as if they had sucked it out
of their breasts, and from their heart together with their milk, that they may
return the like unto them again. Wherefore, mothers and children have a wise
mistres in nature, and in the providence of God that appears therein, if they
knew how to follow it well. Again, for this cause mothers ought to take
greater delight in nourishing their own children, then in committing them to
the hands of strangers and hired Nurses. For out of doubt, the mutual
affection and love of each to other would greatly increase thereby. Now
having spoken of the place which God has assigned to the pappes, Of the form
of the pappes.
let us consider his providence in their form, which is such, that fayrer and
more fit for that office of theirs could not be devised. For we see how
they hang there in the breast of the mother and Nurse, as it were two bottles,
having nipples and holes made fit for the infants mouth, that he might take
hold of them, and draw and suck the milk that is within the dugges, which
are filled presently after the child is borne, so that he is no sooner come
into the world, but he has such food and nourishment ready dressed as is
meet for him. For albeit the infant brings his teeth with him from his
mothers womb, yet because they are hid within the gummes, and are not yet
come forth, he must have such meat as needs no chewing, but may be
sucked, which GOD has provided for him. Wherein we have a wonderful
testimony of the care he has over us, and what kind of Father and cherisher
he is. For this cause David had good reason to say, Psalm. 8. 2.
Out of the mouth of babes and suckelings have thou ordained strength, because
of thine enemies. For if one consider the providence of God, which daily
shows it self over children only, there is no Atheist, Epicure, or other
enemy of God so great, which shall not be confounded, convinced, and
constrained, will he nill he, to give glory to GOD. For before children can
speak, even from their mothers breasts, they show forth and preach the
providence of God in providing milk for them. How children ^resed in their
mothers belly.
But we shall find it a matter of greater admiration, if we consider not
only in what manner they are nourished presently after their birth, but also
how they are nourished in their mothers womb. For there they are not
sustained by the mouth, nor with milk, as they are after their birth, but with
their mothers own blood received by the Nauill, which is in the midst of the
body. But God has made such an agreement between the womb in which the
little child is nourished in his mothers belly, and betwixt her breasts, that
that blood wherewith the Infant was feed before it was borne, presently after
the birth ascends into her pappes, How and whereof milk is made.
in which, by reason of the aboade it makes there, it becomes white, and is
so well heated and prepared, that it has as convenient and pleasant a taste,
as can be put into the infants mouth. And as for the substance of the milk,
there cannot be any that is more fit to nourish it or more natural, feeing
it is the accustomed and usual sustenaunce: neither is there any difference,
but only in that it is otherwise colored, being somewhat changed in taste and
savor, as also in this, that the infant receives it by another passage then
it did before. Wherefore it is needful that it should have a convenient and
pleasant taste for the mouth that receives it: as also it is very requisite
that it should be of that color which it receives in the pappes. For it
would be strange to see the infant draw blood from his mothers breast, to
have his throat full of it, and his mouth bloody. All these things show well
that the Prophets had good cause to say, that the mouths of little infants
preach the praises of Gods providence, and confound his enemies. For when that
food which God gives to nourish them in their mothers womb can feed them no
more there, it has pipes whereby to retire to that place in which it may
perform the ^ame duty, and that so fitly, that if that blood which is turned
into milk did descend, as it ascends by veins which pass from the womb to
the breasts, the providence of GOD would not so manifestly appear as it
does. And therefore we see by experience, that so long as the child is
nourished in his mothers womb, there is no milk in the breasts, but after it
is borne, the blood that ran even unto the womb, ascends upward by veins,
making a good long journey before it come to the breasts. How the milk is
wrought and whited.
For these veins reach up hard to the throat on every side, insomuch that the
blood which they carry to the pappes ascends above the breasts, and then
descends into them: to this end, that through the length of time wherein it
abides in the veins, it might have more leisure to be the better wrought,
and to be turned into milk, and into that white color which it receives.
And the milk is made the whiter, not only through the abode which it makes
in the breasts, but also by the means of that kernelly flesh whereof they are
compounded. For it is of a whitish color, that it might give the same color
to the milk, whereof the pappes are the vessels. So that here we may the
better know (as we touched before) why GOD by his providence made the
breasts of that matter and color whereof they consist. Now we have further
to note another point wherein God has very well provided for the comfort of
women, as it were a recompense for the pains and travail which they have both
in the bearing and bringing up of their children, namely, that whilst a woman
is withchilde, and gives suck to her infant, she has not her monthly and
usual purgations, because her supersluous blood, and that which at other times
is an excrement and must be voyded, is not then any longer a superfluous
excrement, (if she be not otherwise evil affected in body by sickness) but is
turned into the food of the child, Whereof woman's milk is made.
whether she bears it in her belly, or gives it suck with her breasts.
Wherein we see a maruailous work of God. For it is all one as if he turned
poison or venim into good meat and nourishment, yea into most deintie food,
for the use of such a delicate mouth and tender nature as an infant has that
is newly borne. Further also we will note here, that so long as the infant is
in his mothers belly, it is nourished more like to a plant, then to those
living creatures which receive their food by their throat. And yet after he is
borne, he knows well wherefore his mouth s^rueth before ever he used it,
without any other Master or Mistress to teach him this skill them the
providence of God, which shows it self also in other creatures in the like
case, but not in such evident and excellent manner. How and where an infant
receives breath and food in the womb.
We may say the like of the breath which the infant receives not in (...)
mothers womb by his mouth, no more then the meat wherewith he is fed, nor
yet by the nosethrilles, which are more specially given to the body for that
purpose, but by the nauill which is appointed to be the pipe to convey both
unto him before he be borne. But the discourse of this matter will fall out
more fitly hereafter to be handled at large, when we shall speak of the
natural and internal powers of the soul. Wherefore it is time to finish the
covering of our building, and so make an end of the speeches of this days
work. Therefore it belongs to thee ACHITOR, to cover it with skin and
hair, unless you think good first to tell us something of the fat that is
found within the skin.

Of the fat and skins of man's body and of their use: of the hairs thereof.
Chap. 8.
ACHITOB. Hitherto our intent has been, after speech had of man's creation,
first to erect up his tabernacle, as it were a d^ie Anatomy, which is a body
consisting only of bones. After we clothed it with sinews, muscles,
ligaments, flesh, and kernelles, which serve it for a garment, A similitude.
or stands in stead of mortar or plaster for the walls of a building. For
in this edifice of man's body, the bones occupy the place of stone, which must
afterward be committed to the Mason to cause them to keep close together,
every one in his place. But yet we have to white it over, which is the last
covering, to make it fairer, better polished, and more perfect. For if we
consider it only as hitherto it has been set out unto us, we shall see it
but as it were a frame not polished, nor made perfect without: or as it were a
body without a skin, which is not very pleasant to sight. Therefore we will
now put on the last garment, which covers all the rest, namely the skin:
but first a word of the fat, which being within, is of great force to
preserve and keep it.

I will not stay here to declare how and by what means the fat, as also the
kernels and paps are made of the blood, because our principal scope is to show
the providence of God in the use of all the parts of the body, leaving to the
Physicions that which appertains to their office, touching the entire and
perfect knowledge of the Anatomy of the body. Seeing then we are to speak of
the fat that is found in the body, The uses of fat in the body.
it serves for the defense and preservation of those parts that are covered
therewith, not only against heat and cold, and other things that come from
without, which might indammage those parts, but also to keep in natural
heat the longer, by whose virtue concoction of meat (commonl^ (...) led
digestion) is made in the body. Likewise it is very profitable for those parts
that are in greatest and most usual motion, to supple and anoint them, as
well to make them more nimble and ready to move, as to preserve them from
drying, and so consequently from bruzing and wasting. There is also in many
places a certain humor which serves to anoint the joints and their
ligaments, and the small ends of the gristles. For moisture helps motion
very much, and preserves those parts that are moved, as we see by
experience in chariot wheels. For when the axeltrees are greazed, about which
they move, they do not only turn about more easily, but also last and
continue longer: whereas although they were all of iron, yet they would wear
away and be set on fire of themselves, if they were not anointed and moistened
with some humor. Now let us come to consider of the covering of man's body. As
therefore a man uses not one only garment, but diverse, so is it with the
body. For first he is clothed with three skins, Three skins of the body.
that are great, long and large, with which he is covered clean over from the
sole of the foot to the top of the head. The first skin has no feeling
no^ blood.
The first is a little skin very thin, which of it self has no feeling,
being made of the second skin which it covers: and this second skin is
made of sinews, flesh, and little veins, and in some places of little
arteries, being as it were of a middle nature between the sinews and the
flesh. Therefore this skin has feeling throughout, and is not without blood
as the first is. There is also a third skin under the second, which is more
fleshy, and therefore it is thicker and more strong, unto which the muscles
cleave, and through which very thin arteries and productions of sinews
pass, which tie it with the other skin. The fat of the body is between
these two skins, which serve the whole body not only for a covering, but
also for an ornament, especially those that are most without, which in men's
bodies stand in stead of that skin wherewith the bodies of beasts are
covered. Besides these three skins that cover all the body, there are within,
many other particular skins of diverse sorts, to cover the members that are
there, which the Physicions call Membranes and Tunicles, Of membran^^ and
tunicles.
with such other names agreeable to their Art, to distinguish them one from an
other according to each of their offices. For there are many in the head to
cover, fold up, and to contain the inward parts thereof and of the brain:
as also in the breast, and consequently in other parts and members within.
Among the rest some are like to nets and coiffes: others resemble little
sackes or bands, according as those members are which they are to cover,
serving also for defense unto them, and to distinguish and separate the parts
one from an other. We will leave to the Physicion to number and to distinguish
them, and to name every one by their proper name: and now come to consider the
last covering which is upon the body in certain places, especially upon the
head, Of the hairs.
and that is the hair, which principally abounds in the head, both in men
and women, because it proceeds out of a moist and soft place. And to the end
it might take the better root there, the skin that is underneath it, is very
thick and fleshy. The profit of the hair is great, and serves for many
things. First, it is the ornament and beauty of the head. For as the face
would be evil favored and unsightly, if it were hairy, so contrariwise, the
head would be very deformed if it were skinnelesse, where it is covered with
hair: as we may judge by them that have balde heads. Therefore because it is
the top of the building of man's body, God would have it adorned with such a
covering: which also stands him in some stead to defend his brain, and to
consume the grossest and most fumy excrements, of which the hairs of the head
are engendered, so that they are a kind of purgation for it. Besides, it
serves for a covering to the head, which it may use at pleasure, as need
requires, against both heat and cold. For it does not always need to be
alike covered at one time and in one age, as at an other. Therefore a man may
let them grow, or cut them, or shave them clean off, as is most commodious
for every one. And when they wax gray and white through age, they put men in
mind of two things. First, that they draw toward the grave and death, to the
end they might in good time frame themselves thitherward, Good lessons for the
gray headed.
and if they have gone astray in youth and forgotten God, that then at length
they should bethink themselves, and consider that they are no more young, and
that they must shortly die: for although it be late, yet better late then
never. But it is best to follow Salomons counsel, who admonishes young men to
remember God before the Almond tree flourish: Eccles 12. 5.
comparing an old man that is gray and white with age, to a blossomed tree, by
reason of the whitenes of the flowers. For when a man flourishes in this sort,
his flowers put him in mind that the tree of his body dries up, and that it
loses his natural strength: whereas the flowers of trees are testimonies of
the vigor that is yet in them to bear fruit. Therefore we are very miserable,
if we do not glorify God in our youth, neither think upon any other life then
this. For we come far short of the life of trees, and are not of so long
continuance, neither are we yearly renewed as they are, which seeming to be
dead in winter flourish and wax green in spring time, as if they became young
again. Which thing we are not to look for in this world, wherein we flourish
contrary to trees, namely in winter, which is our old age. Secondly, gray and
white hairs warns men to have such manners as becomes that age and color,
that they may make olde-age reverent, according to that saying of the wise man,
Prou. 20. 29.
The glory of the aged is the gray head. For such are those ancient men, whom
God in his Law commands to be honored, Leuit. 19 32.
when he says, Thou shall rise up before the horehead, and honor the person
of the old man, and dread thy God. I am the Lord. Of the beard.
The same consideration also ought to be in the beard, which is a great
ornament to the face, and serves to distinguish the sexes, and likewise the
ages of men: unto whom they bring authority and majesty. For this cause the
ancients did shave or powle their beardes and hair in the time of mourning
and affliction: so that when the Prophets denounced some great adversity and
desolation, they foretold that every head should he ^ald, and cut, and shaven,
and the beards in like manner: Esaias 15. 2. 2. Sam. 10. 4.
as it appears in the Prophecy of Esaias against Moab and such like. We (...)
also that Hanun king of the Ammonites, shaued off the half of the beards of
David's messengers to bring them in derision, whereupon they would not show
themselves openly to the people until their beards were grown. Concerning
women's hair, Of women's hair.
Saint Paul testifies expressly, that God has given it unto them to admonish
them of the subjection they owe to their husbands, and of that power which they
have over them, in token whereof they ought to have the head covered,
especially in the assemblies of the Church. 1. Cor. 11. 5, 6.
Therefore he says, Every woman that prays or prophecieth bareheaded,
dishonor thither head: for it is even one very thing, as though she were
sh^^en. Therefore if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorne^ and if
(...) be shame for a woman to be powled or shaven, let her be covered. Verse.
1^, 14, 15*
And a little after: Judge in your selves, is it comely that a woman pray unto
God uncovered? does not nature it self teach you, that if a man have long
hair, it is a shame unto him? But if a woman have long hair, it is a praise
unto her: for her hair is given her for a covering. Wherein the Apostle
labors chiefly to admonish women, that nature has given to them longer
hair then to men, and that it becomes them best to have it so, to the end
they should keep their heads covered with some veil and honest covering, for
the reasons declared by him: sending them to the school of nature to learn of
her what modesty and honesty they ought to follow and to show in their
hair. The school of Nature is the school of God.
For indeed this school of nature is the school of God the creator of
nature, in which he teaches us by our own body, and by the nature thereof,
what is convenient and honest for us. Therefore God has not covered some
parts of the body with hair for an ornament only, as the beard in men, and
hair of the head both in men and women, and for other causes whereof I have
spoken, but also to admonish them to cover that, which they can not discover
without shame and villainy, whether it be by deed or word. Hereupon it is*
that not only those parts of the body that are more honorable and noble, as
the head and face, are adorned with hair to give them greater majesty, but
also places more secret are covered therewith, to teach us, that the honor we
owe to them is to keep them covered and hid: and that they dishonor them
greatly, and themselves also, who discover them, not only byvile and shameless
handling, but also by infamous and dishonest words, as many do, that always
have filthy speeches of whoredom in their mouths. For that which is dishonest
to be seen and to be discovered to the eyes, is also dishonest to be heard,
and to be disclosed to the ears, which we must keep chaste, as likewise the
eyes, the tongue, the mouth, and the heart. Therefore they that behave
themselves otherwise, do as if they meant to despite God and Nature, whom they
will not follow as mistress. Wherefore, when Saint Paul sends women to the
school of Nature to learn that lesson which is there taught them, he opens
unto us a great gappe, whereby we may know what Mistress God bath given us
in nature, and what instructions we may receive from her, if we can
understand her, and have the wit to know, and to comprehend all that she
shows us, even in our own bodies and go no further into her school,
considering that there is not so little as one hair therein, from which we
cannot take instruction. How great then would the profit be, if we could
consider as we ought, other things that are more excellent, and of greater
importance? Now that we have raised up the frame of man's body from the
foundation unto the very top, we must to morrow by the help of God, in
continuing our speech of the compound parts of the body, enter into the
consideration of those goodly outward members wherewith the head is adorned,
and of the senses of the body, unto which those serve as instruments. Therefore
it belongs to thee ASER, to begin the handling of such an excellent matter.

The end of the first days work.
THE SECOND days work.
Of the bodily and external senses, especially of touching: of their members,
instruments and offices. Chap. 9.
ASER. They that have the greatest knowledge in humane Arts, although it be in
natural Philosophy, are not therefore more happy then others, unless they have
learned to join therewith the knowledge of divinity. For albeit they have
greater understanding of the nature of things created by God, then other men
that have not been conversant in such studies, yet all their skill, being
blind in respect of true and eternal wisdom, will profit them nothing, but
only to make them more guilty before God, and worthy of greater condemnation,
then if he had given them no more understanding then beasts have. And who
knows not that the felicity and sovereign Good of man, Wherein true (...)
consists.
consists not in the knowledge of the creatures and of their nature, but in
the knowledge of the Creator that made them? Therefore we should labor in
vain to know our selves, if it did not lead us to the knowledge of God: yea
it would help us nothing at all, but to manifest more evidently our
ingratitude toward his Majesty, and to aggrauate so much the more his just
and fearful judgment upon our heads. Likewise we should reap little
benefit by our careful inquiry into the matter and form of the frame of man,
whereof we discoursed yesterday, if it served not unto us for an entrance into
a deeper contemplation of the goodly works, that appear outwardly therein,
and of those corporal senses that have their seats and instruments in them.
And all this knowledge would do us little or no good at all, if we were not
led thereby to the understanding of the internal senses of the soul, unto
which the former serve as messengers and ministers, as these latter do unto
the mind and understanding. Therefore in following this order let us ascend
step by step to those things that are most excellent: and although the eye of
our mind should dasell when we draw near unto the^, yet we shall gain
greatly, because those things are very great which draw nearest to perfection.

Having before compared the composition of man's body to a building, and having
raised up all the outward parts of it unto the very top, it remains now
that we set on the gates and windows. When a man would signify that a house
is very lightsome and has air enough, we commonly say that it is well boared
or pierced. Which may truly be spoken of man's body in respect of those
outward members, Of the beauty that is in the face.
which God has fashioned in the head, especially in the face, which he has
appointed for servants to the chief bodily senses, whose service also is
afterward required for the spiritual and internal senses. It is in this part
of our building and tabernacle, wherein God causes the greatest beauty
thereof to shine, I mean in the face, which is as it were an image of goodly,
orient, and lively colors, enriched with many excellent works, not only in
regard of the skin and painting, but also of the form, and of so many
goodly and pleasant members as are ornaments unto it; yea, which are so
necessary, that without them all the rest are as it were unprofitable, neither
could they preserve and keep themselves. I speak not yet of those parts
that are hidden, and contained within the head, but only of those members
which appear outwardly, which are in such wise disposed every one in his
place, that albeit they be not far distant one from another, yet the near
joining of them together does not cause them one to hinder the office of an
other, notwithstanding their diversity, as we see evidently, and shall know
more at large by the sequel of our speeches. Hereby does God admonish us how
we ought to behave our selves one toward an other, A good instruction for
every one.
and dwell eueryman within his boundo^ and limits, not setting one upon an
other, and not incroching upon any thing that is our neighbors. For as these
is spare and room enough in the head for all the senses and members that are
there, and the like in the rest of the body for all the members whereof it is
compounded, by reason of the good order, concord and consent that is amongst
them: so the earth and the world is big enough, and has goods enough for
all, if we had skill and could bear one with another, and be content every
one with his estate and office, and with those gifts which we have received
from God, as members of one and the same body. If this good accord and consent
were amongst us, a little place would please us: but if we do otherwise, all
the world will not be great enough to suffice us. No rivers, seas, or
mountains will be sufficient, to keep us within our bounds and borders.
Therefore let us learn of the senses and members of our body, what rule we
ought to keep one with an other. The bodily senses, which God has given to
man to be ministers and messengers to the spiritual senses of the mind, are
five in number: Five corporal senses.
namely, the sight, hearing, smelling, taste, and touching. To all the members
and instruments of these senses, which shall be hereafter declared unto us, the
faculty of sense is generally given by the sinews, which have their original
from the brain, as we have already touched. So that hereby we see what is the
dignity and excellency of the head, seeing God has placed therein the
fountain and spring not only of all the sense, but also of all the motions of
the boby, which are wrought by means of the sinews. For we must know, that
four things are required in the office and use of the bodily senses. Four
things required in bodily senses.
The first is the power and virtue of the soul, which gives sense by the
animal spirit guided by the finewes. The second is the instrument being well
applied and made fit for his use and office, by which the soul effects her
work. The third is that thing that is to be perceived by sense, about which
the soul exercises her office. The fourth is the mean or way, which
receives the object of the sensible qualilitie, and and carries it to the
instrument. As for example: If the question were of sight, first there must be
this power and virtue of seeing in the soul. Next, the eye is necessarily
required thereunto: for it is the proper instrument appointed to receive light.
Then there must be light, without which all things are covered with
darkness and made invisible. For although the eyes by nature are partakers of
light, yet that which they have naturally, and which they carry within them
selves, will affoorde them as small light as if they had none at all, except
they receive a greater light that comes from the heavens, or from some light
(...) body, as from fire, or from a candle lighted, as we see by experience the
night time. Lastly, the mean or middle way is of necessity required, by which
the light is to be brought and communicated with the eye, and that is the air,
through which it passes, as through a glass or crystal or such like bodies,
which are not so (...) that they keep back the light from (...) through them.
For if there be nothing between them, I mean between the eye and the light,
and those colors which it must behold, a can not apprehend and perceive them.
The like is to be said of the senses of hearing, smelling, and tasting, as we
shall understand berter, when we speak of them hereafter particularly. But
as for the sense of touching it is most earthy of all the rest. Of the sense of
touching.
Therefore it agrees with the (...) is common to all the parts and members of
the body that have s^ns^, although it be more (...) less in some places the^
in others. This sense is given to the body to discern the first qualities by,
namely, hot, cold, moist, and dry, from others that accompany them, as
heavy, and light, hard, and soft, sower, and sweet, thick, and thin: which
are compounded qualities, taken from the four (...) all corporal things are
made of the four elements. Concerning g^^^atnesse, figures, members, motion,
and rest, they are common to many of the senses. Thus much for the sense of
touching, from which the rest do differ, in that every one has his proper
sense, which is not communicated with any other. For only the eyes see, the
ears hear, the nose breaths, the tongue and palate taste. And here we
have to consider of the great providence of God in many points. No body can
live without some sense of touching.
First, forasmuch as the body cannot live without the sense of touching, which
has for object the elementary qualities, it is given to all living creatures
in every part of the body, to the end, that thereby they might know according
to the proportion of the qualities, what is profitable or hurtful to their
bodies in the participation of these qualities, and so eschew more easily that
which might hurt them. But men have this sense chiefly in the ends of their
fingers, that touching slightly with them, they might make the first trial of
all qualities. For if they feel that the thing which they touch, is too hot,
or too cold, or that there is some other excess in the quality which might
hurt them, they are admonished thereby, to the end that by a very little hurt,
they might avoid a greater. For a man may better cheap feel a little grief
and that very lightly in the end of one finger, or of many, then in a whole
member, or in all the rest of his body. Besides, God has further provided for
this sense, in that it is not so sharp to ^^ele suddenly and to the quick,
as the sight or hearing, to the end the body should receive less damage by
that which it touches if it be hurtful for it. Now the eyes, because they do
not touch that which they see, nor the ears that which they hear, therefore
they can not be so damnified, as the residue of the members may, which feel
not except they touch.

Moreover, Some members of the body absolutely nec^^^tie to life.
we have yet to note the providence of God herein, that amongst them members
give by him to the body, he has created some of that nature, that a man can in
no wise live without them: and others so, that albeit they be not necessary for
life, yet he can not live at his ease, and not receive great hurt if he want
them. The members of the first sort are, the brain, the heart, the lungs, the
liver, the spleen, the stomach, and such like, that are the seats of the
animal, vital, and natural virtues, without which there could be no stay of
life. For after these members are hurt or perished, farewell life. The other
sort are the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, the feet, the hands, and
such like. For although a man loose some one or many of these members, yet he
does not therefore loose his life, but he shall surely feel the detriment,
which such a loss brings upon him. And as we commonly say, A proverb.
that the Ox knows not the valow of his ^orne until the have lost it, so
we may with greater reason say, that no man knows of what value the parts
of his body are until he want them, or until they be so hindered that they
cannot fulfill their office. Wherefore we ought to pray to God to preserve them
for us whilst we have them, and give him thanks because he has not created
us lame or maimed of any member. And when we see any that were borne without
them, or that have lost them since, we ought to be so much the more stirred up
to glorify him, acknowledging it to come from his grace in that he has dealt
better with rathe^r with them, although we have deserved no more then they. Now
because we do not so, neither have this consideration as we ought, to give him
thanks, and to use them to his honor and glory, therefore he depriueth us of
them many times, to punish this ingratitude, and to cause us to know better the
value of these gifts, after they are taken from us, and that we have lost
them, seeing we could not know it whilst we had them, nor yet him that gave
them unto us. And by the same means also he would admonish and put us in mind
of the damage we receive by the defects of our soul, by those which we feel
by experience in our bodies. Whereupon we have an other goodly point of the
providence of God to note, An other point of Gods (...)
in that he has given us almost all double members, without which we could
not live but with great pain and trouble: to the end that if we lost one, we
might yet use the other, and in some sort supply the loss of that which is
wanting. For this cause he did not create only one eye, or one nosethrill,
one ear, one arm, one hand, one leg, or one foot, but twain. This ought
to be well considered, that we might have the better knowledge of the care
that God has over us, seeing he has so well provided for all things, that
he will not only have us live, but also furnish us with all necessary things,
whereby we might live more commodiously, more easily, and with less pain and
trouble. And when it falls out, that some one of these members or both are
wanting, God supplieth this defect by maruailous means. For sometimes we see
that maimed folks have done many things with their feet, or with their neck
and head, that others could hardly do with their hands: at least wise they
have done things without hands, that would seem altogether incredible to such
as have not seen them. The hands sometimes stand in st^ade of the tongue and
cares.
And many times we see dumb men, whose hands stand them in stead both of
tongue and ears. For by the signs and gestures of their hands they signify
their meaning to others, as if they themselves did speak: and understand the
mind of others that make the like signs. Yea, there are some that conceive
what others say unto them, only by seeing them open and move their lips, so
that we must needs acknowledge it as a miracle of God. Now having spoken
generally of the senses of the body, and specially of touching, as also of
their members and instruments, we must come to their particulars. Therefore
AMANA, thou shall discourse unto us first of the eyes, which are as it were the
principal windows of this building which we have undertaken to pourtraite and
set forth.

Of the eyes, and of their excellency, profit, and use: of the matter and
h^nors whereof they are made. Chap. 10.
AMANA. It has always bin the opinion of the Stoics and Academics, The
opinion of the Stoics and Academics.
that the bodily senses did rather hinder then help to obtain wisdom: that
no man could know or understand anything: that the senses were feeble and
slow: that sensible things were so small, that they could not be perceived: or
else so subject to motion, that no certainetie could be found in them: that our
life is short, and full of opinions and customs: that all was compassed about
with darkness, and hid: and therefore that nothing could be perceived or
understood, so that men were to profess that they would affirm or approve,
In Phad. and in (...).
of nothing. Plato writes in many places, that we must believe nothing but
the understanding, which beholds that that is simple and uniform, and as it
is indeed: and that there is no science, but only in those reasons and
discourses, which the soul makes when it is not troubled with bodily lets, as
with sight, and hearing, or with grief and pleasure. 14. de ^rap^^. Euang. c. ^.
Eusebius disputing against this, shows that the senses help much toward the
obtaining of wisdom: and that when they are rightly affected, and in their
natural habit, they never deceive the mind that it ^tentiue. But we shall
know more at large what their profit is by continuing our discourses of the
instruments of the senses.

Let us know therefore, Of the eyes and of their use.
that the eyes were given of God to men to cause them to see, and to be as it
were their watch towers and fentinels, the guides and leaders of the whole
body: as also they are as it were the chief windows of the body, or rather of
the soul, which is lodged within it. For it is a most excellent work of God,
whether we consider the matter whereof they are made, and how diverse or
agreeable it is to the office that is assigned them? or the beauty that is in
their form, and in the diversity of their colors: or the commodity and use of
their motions, and how they are set in their places, as it were goodly
precious stones laid in some curious piece of work: and how they are
environed and armed both above and beneath, on the right hand and on the left,
with the eyelids, and the eyebrows, not only for their protection and
defense, but also to adorn, and to make them show more beautifully. And surely
it is not without cause that God has put such great excellency in them, and
has created and framed them so artificially. For first, they are the chiefest
members of all the bodily senses, whose nature approaches nearer to the nature
of the soul and spirit, The eyes draw nearest to the nature of the soul.
then any other, by reason of the similitude and agreement that is between
them. Therefore by good right they bear rule among all the senses, and all the
other members of the body, as being their guides. For they are given to man
chiefly to guide and lead him to the knowledge of God, by the contemplation of
his goodly works, which appear p^ncipally in the heavens and in all the order
thereof, and whereof w^ can have no true knowledge and instruction by any other
sense but by the eyes. For without the who could ever have noted the diverse
course and motions of the celestial bodies? yea we see by experience, that
the Mathematical sciences, among which Astronomy is one of the chiefest,
cannot be well and rightly showed and taught, as many others may, without the
help of the eyes: because a man must make their demonstrations by figures,
which are their letters and images. I pass over many other Sciences, as that
of the Anatomy of man's body and such like, which are very hard, yea impossible
to be learned and known certainly unless they may be seen with the eye.
Wherefore seeing the bodily senses are the chiefest masters of man, in whose
house the spirit and understanding is lodged and enclosed, the greatest and
first honor is by good right to be given to the eyes and sight. Likewise it is
the first mistress that provoked men forward to the study and searching out
of science and wisdom. Sight is our first mistress.
For of sight is engendered admiration and wondering at things that are seen:
and this admiration causes men afterward to consider more seriously of things,
and to mark them better: and from thence it is that men fall to enquire of
matters more carefully, and to sound them deeper. In the end they come to the
study of science and wisdom, which is the knowledge of supernatural light,
namely of the light of the mind, unto which, science and doctrine is as light
is to the eye, so that it contemplateth and museth by that, as the eye sees by
right. Therefore we have to note, that it has pleased God the creator of al
things to scatter his light throughout the whole world, and over all creatures
as well spiritual and invisible, as corporal and visible. His spiritual
light he has infused into spiritual creatures, and bodily light into bodily
creatures, to the end that by this benefit the spirits might have
understanding, and the eyes sight. So that Angels and the spirits of men,
which are spiritual and invisible creatures, are illuminated by the means of
understanding, O^ spiritual eyes and spiritual light.
with that spiritual and heavenly light whereof God has made them partakers:
as the bodies of living creatures, and chiefly of man are illuminated with the
corporal light of the Sun by means of the eyes. For as bodies have their
bodily eyes, so spirits have their spiritual eyes. For that understanding
wherewith God has endued them, is unto them as the eyes are to the body.
Wherefore by that they see God, who is their heavenly Sun, and the fountain
of all divine and spiritual light, as bodily eyes behold the material sun,
wherein as in a fountain God has placed corporal light, which he would have
us see and know by means of the eyes: which we ought to acknowledge as a
great benefit. (...) the light (...).
For the light is a work of God worthy of great admiration, which discovers
and shows to us a great part of nature, and is unto us in stead of an image
of the best and most excellent natures, which without doubt are lights and
shining natures. Neither could any man possibly express in words or teach in
any sort what the light is, which shows al other things, and what is the
beauty and excellency thereof, unless the eyes did behold and know it, and
distinguish it from darkness. For by means of the eyes we may judge what our
life would be, if it were buried in perpetual darkness, or if man had no
instrument to apprehend and to receive the light when it sh^neth. Therefore as
God has created the light to discover and show all things by it, so he has
given eyes to man, whereby he may apprehend and receive it. To this end he
has made them of a matter that is partaker of light, and meet to receive it,
that by the agreement of nature that is between them and the light, they might
enjoy it, and by ^he self same means they might be messengers to the mind to
induce and lead it to the consideration of the divine light, whereof corporal
light is a very small resemblance: and hereby also the mind might know that
God, 1. Tim. 6. 16.
who dwells in a light that none can attain unto, is a maruailous light, as
holy men know by experience when he shows himself unto them. For as the
eye is like to a glass that receives the images of things offered unto it, so
God imprinteth images of him self in our mind as in a glass. Wherefore as a
glass cannot receive any image, but of such things as are set before it: so
the image of God cannot shine not be imprinted in the mind of man, unless he
always set God before his eyes, that he may receive his image. And as the eye
is illuminated by the beams that proceed from the sun, so the mind is
illuminated by the brightness of the divine light, in which we consider the
Father in the unity of the godhead, as the spring and fountain of al light,
and the Son, as the beams and brightness engendered thereof, and the holy
Ghost, as a flame proceeding from it, which causes the eye of the mind to
receive it, and to be made partaker thereof. We see then how our eyes together
with the light admonish us of great things, of most excellent works of God,
and of great secrets of spiritual and heavenly things, whose images he has
imprinted in the light and in our cies, to the end, that by these corporal
and visible images, we may have some knowledge of those things whereof they are
images, which cannot be seen and perceived with corporal senses, but only
with the spiritual senses of the soul. Wherefore we ought greatly to praise
God for this goodly gift, both of the light and of the eyes, which cannot
sufficiently be valewed. For although it did us no more service then it does to
brute beasts, namely to guide and lead us in this corporal life, yet we ought
seriously to acknowledge the excellency of so great a gift of God, and how
profitable and necessary it is for us. But there is a great deal more in it,
The difference betwixt the sight of men and of beasts.
by reason of the mind and understanding which God has given to the spirit and
soul of man, as it were spiritual eyes, to the end there might be an
agreement and proportion between the^0 and the eyes of the body. For as the
eyes declare to the mind what they see, that it might take knowledge thereof: so
when the mind has seen with spiritual eyes those images that are offered
unto it by the bodily eyes, it causes them to see a great deal more clearly,
then the eyes of brute beasts do. For because they want minds and
understanding, their eiesight pierces no further then unto those corporal
things which they behold. Wherefore when they see the light of the sun, they
only prepare themselves to be guided by it, and never consider or look any
further. But man, if he be not altogether brutish as beasts are, stays not
there, but passing further he co^sidereth the beauty of the sun, and those
great benefits which it brings with it. And being ascended so hie by the
means of corporal light, he ascends even to the spiritual and divine light,
and to God, who is the eternal and infinite Sun. Man also has so much the
more knowledge of the nature of corporal light, and of the effects thereof, and
has also so much the more celestial and heavenly light whereof bodily light
is an image, as his mind is illuminated by the word and spirit of God. For
otherwise men see little clearer, and not much farther by the light of the body,
then brute beasts do. Moreover we made mention in our former speech of 4.
things requisite to see by: which also are to be used in the other senses. I
will only add a little of the fourth thing, which is of the mean that
receives the object of the sensible quality, and bears it to the instrument.
If those bodies that are set before our eyes, are so thick by nature that the
light can not pierce through the^, the^ does the light appear upon them, but
not in so great measure, nor so clear as in the air and in other bodies, as
in glass, crystal or such like that are not so thick, that they will hinder
the light from piercing through them. Of colors, and of their nature,
variety, and use.
This part of light that is upon thick bodies, is called color, which is of
diverse sorts, according to ye mixture of light and darkness that is in them. For
first there are 2. kinds of simple colors, by mingling of which together al
other colors are co^pounded. The one is white, which has most light in it of
all others, and therefore will take any other color. The^ there is black color,
which has least light in it: and therefore it will take no other color. All
compound colors made of black and white mingled.
Now according as these 2. kinds of colors are mingled together, al other
colors, being infinite in number, are co^pounded, taking their diversity and
difference as they have more white or black mingled in the^. For this cause
some are red, others yellow, these green, those skie-color, others gray, or
blew, or tawny. In a word, it would be a difficult matter, yea impossible to
rehearse al their differences and varieties. But God shows himself yet more
wonderful in the diversity that is seen even in one kind of color. For let
us consider in a meadow or garden all the herbs, trees, and plants that are there
with leaves and flowers, and we shall see no green in any one of the^, which
differs not in some thing from the green of another kind, although they be
all green. The like may be said of their flowers. For whether they be white,
or black, or red, or yellow, or azure, or of any other color, we shall not
find one that differs not in something from others of ye same color, but of a
diverse kind. So is it with diverse feathers and colors of birds, amongst which
there are such sundry colors, that a man cannot tell what certain name to give
the^: as for example, we see about the neck of a Ring-doue. And although
Painters endeavor as much as lies in the^, counterfaite all these diversities
in their printings mingled with many colors, and howsoever, as followers of
nature, they come very near her, yet they can never approach so near as to be
able to represent any color so lively as she brings it forth. Now if the eyes
were not capable of light, they could not see any color, nor discern one from
another: and if they could not see colors, Nothing seen but by color.
they should see nothing. For nothing can be seen but by means of colors, no
more then it may be seen without light, of which those are made. And as the
eyes cannot well see if they have not as much light as is needful for them:
so if they have too much, and more then they want, they will see a great deal
less: or if it be very great, they will be dazeled, and as it were blind.
Therefore it must be dispensed unto them by just measure and proportion
according to their capacity: and then through the reflection of those things
which it discovers unto them, it imprinteth their images in them, as the
image of a ring is imprinted in sealed wax. Now having spoken of the
principal use of our eyes, if I should enter into a more particular
consideration of their nature, I know not almost at which end to begin. For
there is nothing, either in the matter of which they are made, or in their
form, composition and use, how small soever it be, which is not able to cast
all men into great admiration. For first, Of the matter and humors of the eyes.
if you ask after their matter, they are compounded of three sorts of
humors, of which the one is like to water, the other to glass molten, or to
the white of an egg, and the third to ye or crystal: and therefore they
take their names of those things which they resemble. Concerning the
Christalline humor, it is not so thin, but more firm then the other twain,
much like to wax melted. Nevertheless it is a great deal more clear and
more glistering then both the other: so that there is the same difference
between these three humors, and that which may be seen through them, which
is between crystal, glass, and water, and that which a man may see through
them. Of the Christalline humor.
The Christalline humor is given to the eye to impart light unto it: therefore
it is in the eye, as it were a little round Crystal glass, very glistering.
And although the other twain are very bright, so that the light may pass
through them, as it were through water and glass, yet they have no light of
themselves, as the christalline humor has, which could not receive that
light which it does from without, if of it self also it were not partaker of
light, and if by that participation which it has, there were not in it a
natural agreement with the other. The other twain are joined unto it not
only to nourish and moysten it, that it dry not too fast, but also to help
to preserve it, and to moderate the vehemency both of those spirits and
colors that might hurt it. Now because these humors are liquide and soft,
they had need of fit vessels to keep every one in his place appointed,
for the executing of their office. How the humor^ are placed.
The christalline humoris in the midst of the other twain, because it is the
glass of the eye, which receives the light, and the images of those things
that by the light are disclosed unto it. Therefore it has behind it that which
resembles molten glass, or the white of an egg, which is not altogether so
soft and liquide, as the other before that resembles water. Thus has God
disposed them according to that natural co^ueniency which is betweeue them,
that they might be so knit one to another, as is meetest both for them and
their uses. And being all joined together, they serve to fill up that hollow
place within which the eyes are enclosed: so also the other parts, and namely
the fat, whereof they are well provided, serves not only to fill up void
room, but also is appointed to this end, that the eyes might rest them more at
ease, and be moystened the better. How Gods providence appears in the eyes.
In all which things great wonders of Gods providence appear most clearly:
namely, in this, that the humors are so distinguished, every on keeping his
place without mixture or confusion, as also in this, that the christalline
humor, which is partaker of light, and which ought to receive it, is so well
compassed about and fortified on all sides. For this cause it is more firm
then the other, that it might both keep and distribute better the light which
it receives, and also preserve it self, and help the other humors that are
joined unto it, which being as it were Nurses unto it, do in like manner help
it again. Moreover, we are greatly to marvel at the providence of God, in
considering the coats and skins of the eyes, their form and motions, their
diverse colors, and the sinews whereby they receive sight: the discourse of
which matters, I lay upon thee, ARAM.

Of the tunicles and skins of the eyes: of their form and motions: of their
sundry colors: of the sinews whereby they receive sight, and of other parts
about the eyes. Chap. 11.
ARAM. If we would stand to consider of all those things that are worthy of
admiration, but in one eye only, as well in respect of the matter, as of the
form, and means whereby they receive the virtue of seeing, and perform their
duty, as the Phisicions she we these things in an Anatomi^, a man might make
a very great book thereof, as likewise of all the other members. For there is
no member so little, wherein there is not most exquisite art, and wherein a
man may not see marvelous works of Gods providence, so that I should be
wonderfully abashed to see any Physician prove an Atheist, if he have never so
little knowledge of the nature of man's body, and of the composition and
Anatomy of the parts of it, were it not that God punished them with the like
judgment that he has done other great Philosophers, whom he casts into a
reprobate sense, because through pride and ingratitude, they abuse that
knowledge of natural things, which he has given them. Let us learn therefore
to know the Creator by the knowledge of the creatures, and let us look upon the
workmaster in the excellency of his works. And now to this end, according to
out intent, let us with the eyes of the mind, behold the eyes of the body,
seeing they looking upon all things, yet cannot see themselves.

Now as we have perceived, Of the tunicles and skins of the eyes.
that God has disposed the matter and humors of the eyes according to that
office whereunto he has assigned them, so he has appointed tunicles or coats
which are little skins, in which they are contained as it were in their
vessels, and compassed about with them as it were with little bands, to keep
them united and close together, and to preserve them, that they move not
forth, and run out, and withal to be unto them a sure defense. These
skins according to their offices and uses are disposed one after another, and
interlaced between the humors of the eyes, according to that agreement of
nature which they have, both amongst themselves, as also with those humors
which they serve, and which in like sort serves them, to the end that neither
the one nor the other should easily receive hurt. Five tunicles.
And amongst those five several tunicles, which there are of them, according
as the Phisicions and Anatomists distinguish them, one is very slender, like to
a small spiders web, or to a very little fine white skin, that is between the
parts of an onion. Then there is another that is like to a little threede: and
the third resembles in color the stone of a red grape, I mean the outward
side of it. They are named by the Grecians and Latins according to the
similitudes and likeness of those things which they resemble. But the
chiefest, strongest, and hardest of them is like to a flender and clear horn,
I mean that horn whereof Lanterns are made, but that it is not so hard and
thick by a great deal: and by reason of the similitude which it has with
horn, it is called by the same name. This has God created in this sort, both
that it might be a stronger defense to all the humors of the eyes, and also
that it might serve for the light which they are to receive, through which it
shines, as the light that is in a Lantern besides the horn of which it is
made. There is yet another white skin, which serves to keep in the whole
eye unto the head, in the place assigned for it: and this is the first, as that
like the spiders web is the last, and then the other are placed between
these in the same order that I have named. A testimony of Gods providence.
Herein appears the work of God, namely his providence is to be well
marked in this, that he has not placed the eyes so far out in the face and
head, as he has done the nose, ears, and lips, but more inward as it were
in holes and little dens, by reason of the humors whereof they are compounded,
to keep them so much the more fast and close together, because they are
liquide. Therefore they are shut up in their holes, as the water of a Well is
in that place where it is gathered together. For this cause the Hebrews often
use the solfesame word to signify both the eyes and fountains. Of the form of
the eye.
Next, God has created the^ of a round form, both because it is the fairest,
most seemly and most perfect, as also because it is most moveable, and easiest
to turn and return on every side, as the office of the eye requires. For
seeing they are given to man and to al creatures for the direction of the whole
body, and of all the members thereof, they ought not to be so fastened in the
place where they are, that they can never look but one way, nor stir
themselves on any side. Therefore God has appointed to every eye seven
muscles, both to keep them firm and steady, Of the muscles of the eyes.
as also to cause them to remove and turn upward and down ward, on the right
hand and on the left, crossewise and round. And as the round form is most
perfect, so it is most fit for the office of the eyes, to the end they may see
all things better, and comprehend all sorts of shapes better then if they were
flat, or hollow, or square, or of some other fashion besides round: as a man
may judge by the diversity of looking-glasses, and of their figures and
makings, according to the variety of which, they represent diversely those
things whose images they receive. Now because man, as also all other creatures
go forward, and not backward or sidewise, therefore God has not placed the
eyes either in the hinder part of the head, or on any side thereof, but before.
And although the eyes be moveable and made to turn on every side, yet they
never turn clean backward, but only sidewise, so far as they can see and
behold well. For they have nothing to look upon within the head, but only
without. Therefore they have this advantage besides, that being set in that
place which is assigned unto them in the head, they may turn from one part to
another, and see, not only on the right hand and on the left, but also
behind, by that motion which the head has from his sinews by means of the
neck: which motion the head should not have, if it were seated upon the
shoulders without a neck: and this is another commodity of the neck, whereof
we spoke not before.

Now before we go any further in the discourse of those parts that are
about the eyes for their defense and preservation, it shall be good for us to
consider here of the goodly painting, and variety of colors that are in them.
For first we have a white color, which covers the greatest part of the eye:
next that goodly small circle, which is round about the eye: then the apple of
the eye, which the Hebrews call the daughter of the eye, being in the midst of
it, as it were a little glass, where in a man may always see some image, as
it were in a glass when one looks into it. This little circle is called by
some a Crown, and by others a Rainebow, because of the diversity of colors
that are seen in it: which are not all alike in all men. For some have this
circle more black, others more gray, others more yealow, or more read.
Moreover, besides the sinews of those muscles that are given to the eyes to
move them every way, each of them has one proper unto it self, whereby the
life and virtue of seeing is communicated unto it from the brain, by means of
the soul that gives life to all the body. Of the visuall sinews.
Therefore these sinews differ from all the rest, in that they are not solid,
but hollow within, like to little water pipes, to carry unto the eyes the
spirits of sight, which are as it were a little flame of light, whereby they
receive from the brain, life and virtue of seeing. Next we are to consider how
God has placed them near the nose, to the end they may purge also by that on
each side, as well as the other humors of the brain. The use of the kernels
near the eyes.
Therefore there are kernels hard by them in the head, which serve both to
moysten and to water them according as they have need, by reason of their
burning nature and perpetual motion, and also to retain and soke in humors,
least they should descend and fall down upon them too fast, and so hurt them.
Besides this commodity, the nose in his place is unto both the eyes in stead
of bulwarks, and so also are the bones which close them in on every side, and
the balls of the cheeks, which are higher then the holes of the eyne, that
they also might serve to defend them. Moreover, God has further armed them
with eyeliddes, which serve them both for ornament, and are also in stead of
gates unto them, having muscles to open and to shut them, either wholly or in
part as need shall require, both for sight, Of the cyclids and of their hairs.
for sleeping and waking, and for defense. And besides the eyebrowes wherewith
God has covered them above the liddes, there are little hairs growing at
their brimmes, which God has not given in vain. For first, they serve to
direct the beams of the sight, that they may see more directly: next they
serve for defense against little flies, against (...), mo^tes, and other small
things that might enter in, and trouble them. Moreover, they serve for
ornament, as it were some pretty border round about them. And because the
hairs of the eyeliddes have an other office then those of the eyebrowes,
therefore they are otherwise disposed: for they are not so thick, nor mingled
one within and about another, as the hayres of the eyebrowes are, but they are
raunged and set all in rank, even orderly one by another. And as for the
eyebrowes, The use of the eyebrowes.
they do not only serve to set forth the eyes, that their beauty may the
better appear, but also to defend them against the rain, against the sweat
of the head and forehead, and other things that might descend and fall upon
them if they had not this to stay the^. And to this purpose we see the
agreement which they have with the nose on each side, and how the providence of
God has made them like to a half circle, or a half moon, or a little arche,
or else after the fashion of a little penthouse, to the end that the sweat and
rain might have an easy course and descent on both sides, and not run into
the eyes. And because they should not hinder in stead of helping, God has
created them of that nature, that they grow not like the hair, beard, or
nails, but continue always at one stay. What then will those women say for
themselves, who take so great pains in twitching and plucking off the hair of
their eyebrowes, to the end they should not be so thick or great as nature has
made them. For they think it greater beauty when they are shorter and
thinner. Against the pri^^ of women.
But in this, as in all their paintings and prankings they do not only lift up
themselves against nature, as though they would work her a spite, but also be
have themselves as if of set purpose they meant to reproach God for creating
the^ as he did. Now in speaking of the eyes, let us beware that we be not so
blind, as that we cannot see that thing by them, which they teach us, or take
no heed of that which they show unto us. For the consideration of one of them
alone, or of one eyelid or browlidde only, ought to teach us to open and to
lift them on high, that they may search out and contemplate him that created
them, and has given them unto us: Psalm. 94. 9.
even to him who says, I that formed the eye, shall I not see? Therefore we
ought to be afraid, least our eyes be given unto us as Judges; to convince us
of our ingratitude toward God their and our Creator, and to condemn us. For
there are but too many miracles to be seen of his almighty power in their
creation, and too many witnesses of his providence toward us, to make us more
then ashamed and confounded. We have yet another point to be noted touching
their situation, which causes a certain proportion and agreement to be
between the heavens and the head, Of the proportion between the heavens and
the bead.
and between the eyes of the great and little world, and those of the body
and soul. For it is most certain, that they could not be placed more
conveniently, then in the highest part of all the body, as it were in the
highest tower, seeing they are to serve all the other members in place of
Warders and Watchmen, and of guides and leaders. Therefore Solomon had reason
to call them the Lookers aut by the windows. Eccles. 12. 3.
For the holes of the head in which they are placed as it were Looking-glasses,
are their windows through which they see and behold. We may also say as much of
the apple of the eye, which looks within his little circle, as it were by a
window. For this cause, as God has placed the sun, moon, and all the rest
of the lights above in the heavens: so he would that there should be some
proportion between the heavens and the head of man, and between those goodly
lights above named, and the eyes that are created to receive light from them,
and to be that in man who is the little world, which the sun, moon, and other
lights of heaven are in this great universal world. Therefore forasmuch as the
eyes are as it were the images of these goodly bodies and celestial glasses,
they occupy the highest place in this body of the little world, as the lights
do in the great body of the world, whereof they are as it were the eyes, to
give it light on every side. The eyes draw nearest to the nature of fire.
For this cause also the eyes are more fiery, and have more agreement with the
nature of fire, then any other member that belongs to the corporal senses.
And as they are in a high place, so they are admonished thereby of the place
unto which they ought to look, according to that which David says, I lift up
mine eyes to thee that dwell in the heavens. Psalm. 123. 1.
In all these things we see a goodly harmony and agreement between the great
and the little world, the like whereof we shall also find between the world
and the spiritual heaven, whose sun and light is God, and between the eyes
of the soul and of the mind. Therefore Jesus Christ said very well, Matthew. 6.
22. 23.
The light of the body is the eye: if then thine eye be single, thy whole body
shall be light: but if thine eye be wicked, then all thy body shall be dark.
Wherefore, if the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?
So that the eyes being as it were the lantern, lamp and flame of the whole
body, they could not have a more apt place, or more convenient for their
nature, then that where God has placed them. The like also may be said of the
spiritual eyes of the soul and of the mind. For God has lodged the
understanding and reason in the brain of man, The agreement between the eyes
of the soul and those of the body.
as it were in a high tower, in which it ought to reign as a Queen and
Princess, and guide under her laws all the affections and actions of men, as
the eyes guide all the members of the body And when God, who is the sun and
light of the world* and of the spiritual heaven, reaches out his beams to
these eyes of the soul by his eternal Son, and gives them life, vigor and
virtue by his spirit, then is the mind well lightened, and then does she
happily and to her proper end direct all the parts of the soul. Now for the
conclusion of our speech, seeing we have spoken largely enough of the eyes of
the body, and of their nature, beauty, and excellency, and what goodly
images of the spiritual eyes they represent unto us, let us yet a little better
acknowledge the greatness of their Woorkmaster, by considering apart the
matter whereof they are made, I mean by it self and without the woorkmanship:
as if we should now behold their substance without that disposition and form
which he has given them. What is an eye plucked out of the head but a little
clay and mire? as indeed it is the matter whereof it is made. Now what a
wonderful thing is it, that God has so appropriated it, as to make such a
goodly piece of work thereof, and such fair instruments for the service of
men? And therefore our Savior Jesus Christ meant to represent this divine
work, John 9. 6.
when he made the blind to see by putting clay upon his eyes. Let us
therefore use their sight, which is such an excellent gift of God, to behold
his works, and those goodly images of the divine nature, which on every side,
and continually are before our eyes: and let us beware that we feed them not
with the sight of profane and dishonest things, least they serve to poison the
mind and soul, whereas they ought to become messengers, to declare unto it
honest and healthful things. For he that does otherwise is worthy to have, not
only his bodily eyes put out, and plucked out of his head, but also the eyes of
his mind, that so he may be blind both in body and soul, as it commonly
falls out to many. But let us follow our matter propounded touching the
senses, and their members: and speak unto us, ACHITOB, of the ears, and of
their composition, offices, and use.

Of the Ears, and of their composition, offices, and use. Chap. 5.
ACHITOB. The wisdom of God is so great, and he provides so well for all
things by his providence, that he never does any thing in vain: insomuch that
there is nothing whatsoever in all nature, which has not his proper use, and
which is not compounded of matter and form agreeable thereto, for the
instruction of men. But forasmuch as men are rude of understanding, and by
reason of their natural corruption easily turned aside from the chief end of
their being, namely, the contemplation of celestial and heavenly things, in
place whereof they betake themselves to ye care of those things yt are earthly
and corruptible, it comes to pass, that having eyes and ears, they neither
see nor hear any spiritual thing, so that their very light is become (...).
And then how great may we think the darkness to be in those parts that ought
to be guided by the^ that are capable of light? Therefore as we have learned,
that the eyes are the first guides and household masters that God has given to
every one, and the first authors and inuentors almost of all arts, sciences,
and disciplines, because by their sight we know the light, color, greatness,
figure, number, situation, and motion of bodily things, both near and far
off: so now we are to know, that the heating and the cares are very convenient
for one man to communicate his knowledge with another, as if one should power
wine or water out of one vessel into another. But they are especially given by
God to men, that they might serve to receive the doctrine and instruction of
wisdom, as we may perceive if we consider diligently their nature and use.

The ears then, The situation of the cares.
in mine opinion, are also as it were watchmen over the whole body, as well as
the eyes. For it is not only required, that a watchman should see, but also
that he should both hear and speak. Therefore are the ears placed hard by
the eyes on each side, as well for an ornament to the head, as for the
commodity and use of the whole body. For that place is fit for them that they
may so much the more conveniently receive those sounds that come unto them, and
cause them to hear, even as the eyes receive the light, which causes them to
see. Therefore as God has disposed the matter whereof it pleased him to make
the eyes, and has given them such a form as agrees best to that office,
which be would have them perform, so has he done in regard of the cares, as
also of all the other members of the body. Of their making.
For this cause he has made them of gristles, which are a great deal harder
and more firm then either flesh, kernels, sinews, or ligaments: but yet
nothing so hard as the bones are, as we have already learned by that which was
spoken before. Besides, near about the place where the ears are, he has set
the hardest and firmest bones that are about the head. Therefore they are
called stony bones by reason of their hardness, and of their natural
agreement with stones: whereby the cares are strongly fortified, and that very
agreeable to their nature and office. Of their form.
As for their form, it is half round, and very well compassed. They are also
doubled in about the ends, as if nature had wrought them about with little
ledges turned in of the same matter, in most excellent and decent manner. And
amongst all living creatures God has given immovable ears to none, The cares
of men and apes only are without moving.
but only to man, and to an ape: for the rest can move them up and down. And
as for this external and eminent part of the ear that appears without, if
it served only to beautify the head, the use of it were not to be despised.
For it is evident by such as have their ears cut off, Of their use.
how deformed and unseemly the head would be to look upon, if it were not
decked with that part of the ^ares planted there by God for their greater
ornament, as it were two goodly bruches. Hereof it is, that those men have
this part cut off, who are to be made deformed and infamous for some notorious
offense. But besides the honor and ornament, which this part of the ^ares
brings to the head, it serves also to cover the brain which is next to the
cares, least it should be hurt. And to the end that they might not be easily
bruzed, or broken, nor yet hang downewarde, they are, as I have said, of a
gristly substance, as are all those parts that are bare and appear outward,
and which are in danger to receive injuries and discommodities from without.
Likewise this outward growing of the ears brings a double commodity with it
to the rest of that member. The first is, that it keeps back the rain and
sweat of the head, and much filth that might enter into the ears, if those
places were flat, and had nothing but the holes of the ears without these
bulwarks, Therefore their form is made so, that they ascend and bend upward
without, but are hollow within. The other is, that it helps much for the
better receiving in of the soundes that are brought to the ears by the air,
because thereby the soundes are better conveyed unto that place, which is
properly appointed for the hearing. For this cause the cares are not pierced
straight outright, but their holes are made winding in, like the shell of a
snayle, whose form they represent, so that one cannot thrust straight forth
so much as a little threede, or the bristle of a hog. For if they were boared
outright, many inconveniences would befall them. The first is, that the soundes
would not be conveyed in so well, as they are in places that bend and give
backewarde, where they have rebounds, which causes them to stay and sound
better. The second is, that the ears should receive ouer-great sound and too
thick, and so being more confused, they could not be discerned and understood
so well. Again, as too great light does not only dazell the eyes, but hurts
them withal: so ouergreat soundes would mar the instrument of hearing, if
they were not distributed and compassed according to the capacity thereof. For
there must always be an answerable and apt proportion between the sense, the
thing subject to sense, and the mean by which the sense is made. Hereupon it
falls out often, that many become deaf by hearing ouergreat soundes, whereof
we have experience in Smithes, amongst whom many are thick of hearing,
because their ears are continually dulled with the noise and sound of their
hammers and anuiles. The like oftentimes happens to those that deal with
artillery, by reason of the continual use and greatness of the sound. Of the
place of hearing.
Moreover we must note, that there is a very little hole in each of these stony
bones, Three small bones in the ears.
in which the hearing is properly made, and within which also there are three
very small bones, whereof the one is called an anuile, the other the hammer,
because they are made almost of the same fashion, so that a man would say, that
nature had framed a little anuile and a little hammer to make soundes, and to
cause them to be heard. The third small bone was found out by certain
Phisicions and Anatomists, and being boared in the midst is fashioned like to
a little stirrope, and is always less then any of the other twain. Phisicions
that write of Anatomy make no mention of this last, or if any speak of it,
they are but few, and of late time. And in deed it is a hard matter, even
for them that are most skillful and expert, to look unto all how diligent and
able so ever they be in Anatomy, especially in the view of many instruments,
and of their sundry parts, which are so small, that hardly can we discern them
with our eyes if we look not very narrowly unto them, and that after we are
told thereof before. As for these small bones whereof I speak now, and
namely the third, a man may perceive them better in a dry Anatomy, and in some
skull that has nothing but the bare bones, then he shall in a whole body.
Therefore the skilfullest Phisicions and Anatomists confess, that the body of
man has such wonderful art in it, that every day they find some new thing
in it, which was not observed by any in former times. But let us return to our
speech concerning that which remains of the composition of the ears. Besides
these little bones, Of two skins within the ears.
there are two small skins full of nerves, which hold and bind these bones
in such wise, that they are as it were a little tabour stretched out in that
place. These small skins have their original from those sinews, by which
the virtue of hearing proceeds from the brain to the ears. For after the
sounds are made in the air, they are carried to these skins, and then heard
and discerned by them. Hereupon they are made hollow, to receive the soundes
that come from without, having a nature that agrees very much with the air,
as the eyes do with the fire, I mean in respect of their virtue which is
burning and glistering, albeit their substance be moist. Therefore as the eyes
judge of light and colors, and by that means bring great pleasure and profit
to men: so the ears judge of sounds and of the voice, What profit and
pleasure is received by the ears.
of notes, harmony, and of melodies, whereby man receives commodity and
delight. And if there were but the sundry notes of birds, what solace does
he receive by it? But besides, how many instruments are there of most
excellent and melodious music, what voices and pleasant songs, framed very
cunningly, and with great grace and harmony by the art of music? For we see
by experience, that this science is given of God to men, that it might be
chiefly dedicated to their ears, to the end that by the sounds and songs which
they hear, they might be stirred up to praise God the giver of them. Therefore
Solomon not without good reason called them the daughters of singing or of
music, Eccles. 12. 4.
because of the delight which they take therein, and also because this whole
art, and all songs and melody would be vain and unprofitable to the life of
man without hearing. But above all, the chiefest profit that the ears bring
to men, is by the means of speech, whereby they communicate one with another
all their conceiptes, imaginations, thoughts and counsels, so that without
them the whole life of man would be not only deaf, but dumb also and very
imperfect, as if man had neither tongue, mouth nor speech. And on the other
side, seeing man has always need of doctrine and instruction, albeit all the
other bodily senses help him therein, nevertheless, none is so fit or more
serviceable to this purpose, next to the eyes, then the ears. Wherefore if
Solomon for the cause above rehearsed, called them the daughters of singing, a
man may also call them the daughters of discipline and of knowledge. For as man
has nothing more proper then speech, whereby he lets others know what he
has in his mind and heart, so he has nothing more fit then that, to teach
all things by, whose doctrine is already begun by means of the other
senses, How doctrine is learned.
but principally of the eyes. For the other senses together with the sense of
seeing, are as masons, that lay the first foundation of the frame of doctrine,
and afterward speech builds upon this grounde-woorke: which it cannot do,
if it be not helped by the ears and by hearing, which agree with the voice
pronounced by the mouth, whereby speech is sent and conveyed to the ears, that
it may be heard and understood of them.

Thus after the knowledge of things is found out, and arts begun by means
of the sight, after the same manner that was declared before by us when we
entreated of the eyes, then the sense of hearing teaches a great deal more,
both greater matters and sooner. For we receive and understand in a short
space, that which our master who teaches us, has obtained and prepared in a
very long time. For how many things must we see, and what books must we
read before we shall attain to the knowledge of that, The benefit of
Lectures.
which we may learn by hearing one lecture, at which we shall be auditors only
one hour or less? Let us consider then how conveniently and bountifully God
deals with men in this behalf, when that thing which is very profitable and
most necessary is made so easy for them. For nothing is more profitable or
more necessary then to learn much, nor any thing more easy then to hear
much. Therefore Solomon says, Prou. 1. 5, 6.
That a wise man shall hear and increase in learning, and a man of
understanding shall attain unto wise Counsels, to understand a parable and the
interpretation, the words of the wise and their dark sayings. This also is
the means whereby GOD has appointed, that men shall learn and understand his
will. And therefore, as we heard that eyes were given unto us, to this end
especially, that they should contemplate the works of God, their and our
Creator: so we ought to know that ears were given us, that before all things
we should hear and understand his voice and word, and consecrate them wholly
to that purpose: to the end that after the ears of the body have heard it,
they should be the messengers to declare it to the ears of the soul and
mind, How hearing is framed in the ears.
to cause them also to hear and understand the same. For this cause, as the
air that enters into the ears, and brings unto them the sound made in it
self, when it is stricken and moved, moves the little hammer of the ears, and
causes seth it to strike upon the anuile, and so makes a sound by means of
the little taber, through whose sound the spirits of hearing are awakened: so
God by inspiration works in his Prophets and Ministers, who receive his voice
after a divine manner: and then are they as it were the hammers that strike
upon the anuiles of men's minds and hearts, by which sound the spirits of
the hearers are awakened and stirred up. But my desire is, that we should
thoroughly consider here this great secret of GOD that lies hid in nature,
namely, the means whereby the hearing is made and framed in the ears, which
we cannot see or comprehend as it is in it self. Nevertheless, God gives
us great light thereunto by the matter and form of the instruments, which he
has made for the hearing. Wherefore seeing the ears are framed so
artificially as we have heard, as appears to the eye by their Anatomy, we
cannot doubt but that God would have their use and artificial composition
known to them that may behold with their eyes the instruments of hearing,
when they are laid open unto them, as they are to Anatomists, to the end that
by the view and contemplation of the^, they might judge of that secret work of
nature which God has wrought in hearing, which cannot be seen with eyes when
it is in doing. For we know by experience whereto serves a hammer, an anuile,
and a taber, and what sound they make when the one strikes, and the other is
stricken, and how that hollow things are more fit to receive sounds, and to
cause them to be heard better, then things that are solid and more thick. So
that when we see instruments like to these in the composition of the ears, we
may easily judge, that God has not placed them there, but to do that service
which may be performed by such instruments, to the end we should know the
great skill and wisdom of the Woorkmaster that made them. Now for the
conclusion of our speech, let us learn, that although our ears did us no more
service then the ears of brute beasts do to them, and reached only to the
use of this life, yet could we not sufficiently acknowledge that good, which
God does to us by them. But we must make a greater account of this, that by
the means of his word, which he will have declared to our cares, he causes
them to serve to his honor and glory, and to our own salvation. Therefore let
us apply these so beautiful and artificial members, with all the rest of our
senses to their principal end, yea to the end of all nature, namely, to the
glory of their Maker: and let them be deaf, and stopped up against all
dishonest things that might poison them, and so consequently our minds by
them. 1. Cor. 15. 33.
For that which Saint Paul says, That evil words corrupt good manners, ought
to be extended to every vile, dishonest, and wicked thing which the ears may
hear. Wherefore they that abuse them so vilely, deserve that God should pluck
them off, and stop them, and make them altogether deaf, not only their
bodily ears, but also those that are spiritual, as he makes them blind
according to that threatening which he gives out by Esaias. Esaias. 6. 9, 10.
Now to follow our purpose touching corporal senses and their instruments, I
think we ought to entreat of the tongue, because it serves chiefly for
speech, whereof we have already made some mention, and for the sense of taste,
in which we must be instructed. Therefore ASER, declare unto us the diverse uses
of the tongue, and what instruments are necessary both for voice and speech.

Of the diverse uses of the tongue: of the instruments necessary both for voice
and speech: how there is a double speech: of the form thereof: how the spirit
of man is represented thereby. Chap. 13.
ASER. If we were only of a spiritual nature as the Angels are, it is
certain we should by and by understand one another, by that mind and
understanding, whereof we are partakers, as they understand each other: neither
should we need speech, tongue, ears, or eyes, to hear and see by, no more
then those natures that consist only of spirit, having all those things
spiritual whereby they communicated both with God, and amongst themselves. But
we can have no such communicatio^ among our selves by the understanding of the
mind and spirit only, because of that corporal nature which comes between
the souls and spirits one of another. Wherefore the help of speech, as well as
of the other external senses, is very requisite for us in every part of life.
Also because our soul, being kept under our flesh as under a veil, uses
cogitations and discourses, it stands in need of speech, of words and of
names, by means of which it may utter and publish that, yt lies bid as it were
in a deep and dark place, where nothing is seen. Forasmuch therefore as the
tongue is the principal instrument whereby God gives speech to me^, and without
which they would be dombe, and seeing also it serves the sense of taste as well
as the roof of the mouth, it shall not be without good consideration, if
entreating now of this member, and of ye use thereof, we place it in the order
of our discourses, between the instruments of hearing, whereof we spoke
before, and those of taste, of which we will speak hereafter, for the
agreement it has with them both.

God has given ye tongue to man not for one use alone, but for many: and
namely for three at the least, Three uses of the tongue.
which are all very necessary for ye life of man. The first is to frame the
speech: the second, for the taste: the third, to help to prepare the meat
that is chewed in the mouth for the nourishing of the body. And because the
first is the noblest of all, and given to man only, whereas the other twain
are common to him with beasts, I will begin with that: whereunto this may be
added, that because of the conueniencie it has with the hearing, and with the
ears, these two matters will agree the better, being joined in order one
after another. Next we will handle the other uses that appertain properly to
the sense of taste and to the nourishing of man. Now we have first to note,
that God has placed many instruments in the body without which speech could
not be well pronounced and expressed. For first, speech could not be without
voice, for the which God has created many instruments ye are all necessary for
that purpose, The instruments of the voice.
as namely, the wesell of the throat, the windepipe, the throat, the lungs,
the breast, and certain back-running sinews appointed thereunto by reciprocal
motions. All these parts help only to make the voice of man, without any
framing of speech, except it be the wesell of the throat, which is a little
fleshy and spongie body, in figure like to a pineapple, hanging at the end of
the palate, whose use is manifold. For it serves first to stay the air from
rushing in over fast and violently into the lungs, The use of the wesel of ye
throat.
and from entering in too cold and over suddenly unto them. Then it serves also
to divide and distribute the air when it ascends from the lungs, ye it may
be the better scattered and dispersed into al parts of the mouth. And by this
means this instrument fashioneth the voice, and causes it to yield a sound,
and so prepares it for the tongue, that it may be articulated and framed into
speech by ye same. Therefore besides the wesel of the throat which serves for
these two uses, there are five other instruments which in regard of this
present matter serve only to frame ye voice into speech, Five instruments
requisite to lea^^e the voice into speech.
that otherwise would be but a confused voice. The first is the tongue, which
has the chief place among the rest: then the palate, the teeth, the lips, and
the nose. For although a man may speak when he has not all these parts
perfect, yet his speech will not be well framed if he want any one of them, as
we see by experience in them that have lost their teeth, or their lips, or the
roof of the mouth, or that have their nose cut, stuffed, or otherwise troubled.
For this cause the Hebrews name their letters, some gutturall, because they
are pronounced more in the throat: others, dentall, because a man cannot well
pronounce the^ without the teeth: and so they call others, labiall, that is,
letters of the lips: and others, letters of the palate, because they cannot be
well expressed without those parts of the mouth. The like is in all other
languages, albeit they do not distinguish their letters by such names. Now in
such variety of instruments made for the service and use of one only thing, we
ought to acknowledge the great nobility and dignity of speech, Of the dignity
of speech.
with which God has endued and honored man above al other creatures. For he
has not given it to any of them, but to him only, and by that he has put a
difference between him and the beasts, as also by reason and understanding,
whereof he has made him partaker, and in respect whereof he has given him
speech, which is as natural unto him as reason, which is the spring head
thereof, and from whence it proceeds, as a riuerfrom his fountain. For how
could men make known their counsels and thoughts without speech? And what
good should they receive by that sense and understanding which God has given
them more the^ to beasts, if they had no more speech then they have, whereby to
make it known? And to what purpose would speech serve them, if they knew not
what to say? And what should they have to speak, if they had no more
understanding and reason then other living creatures have? Were it not
sufficient then to have a co^fused voice only as they have? Therefore also we
see how God has joined these twothings together granting speech unto man,
because he has created him pa^taker of reason and understanding. And having
deprived beasts of the one, he has also deprived them of the other, so that
they are partakers neither of reason nor speech. Ecclus. 17. 5, 6.
For this cause Ecclesiasticus has joined these things together, saying, That
God has given to men counsel, and tongue, and eyes, ears, and an heart to
understand, and sixthly, he gave them a spirit, and seventhly, he gave them
speech to declare his works. He filled them with knowledge of understanding,
and showed them good and evil. Whereby he teaches us plainly, what is the
right and true use of speech, to what end it is given to man, and from whence
it springs. For he places counsel in the first place, and next the tongue.
Again, after the heart and spirit, he places speech, that we might know who
is their messenger. Whereupon we may conclude, that the one is given for the
other, and both to glorify God, by showing forth his works and marvelous
acts. (...) sermon.
To which effect Basil the great says very well, that God has created us and
granted us the use of speech, to the end we might have the ability and means
to lay open one to another the counsels and thoughts of our hearts, and to
distribute amongst us that which is in every one, by reason of that
communicable nature in which we are created. For the heart ought to be in man
as a secret treasury, or as a larder or pantry in a house, out of which all
things necessary for the use thereof, and for the maintenance of the whole
family are daily taken. The heart also is like to a seller or garner, wherein
counsels and thoughts are locked and closed up, and the tongue is like to the
steward who draws out and dispenses whatsoever is to be distributed. For as
we said in the beginning of our speech, our soul uses thoughts and
discourses, which cannot be declared so long as it is enclosed in this
tabernacle of flesh, without speech, words, and names, by means of which, she
brings forth and publishes that which was enclosed and hidden in the
secret closet of her understanding. Two sorts of speech in man.
And so we say, that there are two kinds of speech in man, one internal and
of the mind, the other external, which is pronounced, and is the messenger of
the internal, that speaks in the heart. Therefore that which is framed in
voice* pronounced in speech, and brought into use, is as a river sent from the
thought with the voice, as from his fountain. For before the thought can utter
any outward speech by means of the voice, first the mind must receive the
images of things presented unto it by the corporal senses. The degrees by
which we come to ^^eech.
And then having received them by the imaginatiue virtue that is in it, reason
must discourse to know and to consider of them well, and to separate or join
things according to that agreement or difference, that concord or discord,
which they may have amongst them. Next, it is necessary that judgment should
follow this discourse, to make choice of, and to follow that which it shall
judge to be meet and convenient, and to reject and shun the contrary.
Lastly, all must be uttered by significations apt and convenient for every
thing: so that when the mind has given over to the office of the vocal
instruments, that which it has comprised and resolved upon in manner
aforesaid, the same is manifestly declared outwardly by the air framed into
voice, I mean by the moving of the articulate and distinct voice, whereas
before it was hid and covered. Now when this voice and speech is pronounced
with the mouth, as it is invisible to the eyes, so it has no body whereby the
hands may take hold of it, but is insensible to all the senses, except the
hearing, which nevertheless cannot lay hold of it or keep it fast, as it were
with griping hands, but entering in of it self, it is so long detained there
whilst the sound reboundeth in the ears, and then vanishes away suddenly.
But albeit the sound and the voice passes so suddenly, as if presently it
flew away having respect to the outward speech, nevertheless the internal
speech remains, not only in the spirit, heart, and thought that engendered
it, not being in any sort divided, cut off, or separated, but also it fills
all the hearers, by reason of the agreement that is between the spirits and
minds of men, and the speech that is bred there, and because it differs not
much from the mind, and from the thought where it first began and was bred.
And thus the thoughts and counsels of the mind and spirit are discovered
and manifested by speech. What voice is.
So that al voice is not speech. For the name of voice generally taken
comprehends all sounds and things which bring any noise to the ears.
Nevertheless it is more properly and specially attributed to those sounds,
which all sorts of living creatures are able to make with their throat to
signify any thing thereby. But man only has articulate and well distinguished
soundes: unto which, birds of all other beasts approach nearest, so that even
many of them are taught in some sort to frame man's voice: but it is without
understanding. And because that instruments of music do after a sort imitate
the distinct voice of men, we attribute voice to them: although the sounds
which they make be more without judgment and understanding then that of
beasts. Speech represents all the parts of the soul.
But in men, voices framed into words are signs and significations of the
whole soul and mind, both generally and specially, namely of the fantasy and
imagination, of reason and judgment, of understanding and memory, of will and
affections. Wherefore it is an easy matter to judge by his speech how all
these parts are affected, namely, whether they be sound, or have any defect
in them. For if a man be dull witted, or have his fantasy and imagination
troubled, and his memory slow and heavy, he shall have much ado to speak
that which he thinks and conceiueth in mind, and have as we use to say, but a
bad utterance. Which thing also may happen to good wits, either for want of
exercise and use, or through some defect that may be in the body, or in the
instruments of the voice, or because the matter whereof they speak may be
profound, obscure, and difficult, so that a man cannot easily find words fitly
to express the nature of it, as the worthiness thereof requires. Which
reason often entimes makes wise and skillful men slow to speak, because they
know what a hard matter it is to utter in good sort that which is to be spoken,
in so much that they had rather keep silence, then speak ill or improperly.
But a lighthead, and a cocke-braine that is void of this consideration, will
think he has a more ready wit. For he will speak before he ponder or
discourse in his mind. So that whosoever has not a ripe and stayed reason,
nor temperate and settled senses, he can not have his words set in good order,
nor his speeches well knit and agreeing one with another, as we have example
hereof in children and fools. And if a man have reason and judgment ready at
hand, but not stayed and pithy, he may well prove some great babbling
pleader, but not eloquent. For he only is to be accounted eloquent, Who is
to be accounted eloquent.
who can conceive well in his spirit and mind that which he ought to speak,
and then is able to express it well, both by apt words, and by sentences that
are well tied and knit together. We see then how the voice and speech of man
lay open his whole heart, mind, and spirit. But the voices of beasts have no
significations but only affections, I mean such as are in men, and which the
Grammarians call Interiections, because they are not framed into speech, nor
well distinguished as others are. Now if we understand all these things well,
they may help very much to instruct and confirm us in the doctrine of the
Trinity of persons, of the Unity of the Godhead, and of the eternal
generation of the Son of God, who is his divine and everlasting word.
Likewise they will cause us to conceive more easily, how this heavenly and
eternal word, namely, Jesus Christ, is the Image and Character of God, the
express and ingraued form of his person, as it is in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Hebr. 1. 3.
and not in shadow or painting. For the glory, majesty, and virtue of the
Father is always hid from us, but only so far forth as it shows it self
ingraued in his son and in his word, Of the image of the heavenly word in the
speech of man.
as the image of the mind appears imprinted and engraven in the speech that
is uttered. And as the internal word bred in the mind departs not from it,
neither is separated, and yet it imprinteth an image thereof in the minds of
the hearers, to whom it is declared: so the divine and eternal word begotten
of the Father, is alwaye^ resident in God, and yet imprinteth his image in the
hearts and minds of men, to whom it is manifested by those means which he
has appointed for that purpose. Thus you see a gappe laid open into these
high and great secrets of God, which we ought to mark well, following such
phrases of speech as are taken from humane things, and used by the spirit of
God in the holy scriptures, to the end we might more easily understand them.
Wherefore if there were no other reason, this were sufficient to induce us to
consider more diligently the excellent work, and great providence of God,
which appears in the framing of the voice and speech of man, and in the
nature and use thereof, and in those members and instruments of the body,
which serve to that purpose. Therefore AMANA, let this matter be the subject of
thy discourse.

Of the agreement which the instruments of the voice and speech have with a
pair of Organes: what things are to be considered in the placing of the
lungs next the heart: of the pipes and instruments of the voice. Chap. 14.
AMANA. When we consider diligently all the instruments created by God in the
body, as well for the ministry of the voice, as of speech, we shall find
amongst them all things requisite in the best and most perfect instrument of
music that can be, to make a good harmony: and we shall know, that no Organs
are so well made, or disposed in such good order for the compassing of their
sound and melody, as the instruments of the voice and speech of man are. And by
the consideration of this concordance, we are admonished always to have the
same thing in the mouth which we have in the thought, to the end that from
such an agreement, as it were in every part of an Organ and of an instrument
of music, There must be an harmony betwixt the heart and the tongue.
there should proceed a good harmony and pleasant melody. For if there should
be discord between the heart, the tongue, and the speech, the harmony could
not be good, especially before God the Judge of most secret thoughts, no more
then the harmony of a musical instrument quite out of tune would be pleasant
in the ears of men, and namely of good Musicions, who can judge best of
concords and discords.

First then we must note, that the breast, neck, and head are as it were the
instrument and the body of the Organs, within which they are put and enclosed,
and by which they are sustained: next, that the lungs are as it were their
bellows to blow them. Therefore it is made of two pieces joined together, like
to a pair of bellows, to draw in and to thrust forth the air, and to help
each other in respiration and breathing. Wherein we must call to mind how
needeful it was, that the backebone and breast, and the building of the ribs
should be framed in that sort that we heard before, that they might serve to
this use, and make room for these bellows to enlarge themselves, and to do
their duty. Of the nature of the lungs.
We see also what their nature is, what motion they have, and from whence they
receive it. For God has created them of that nature, that they move and remove
of themselves, by the virtue of the soul and life in the body, without which
they would be void of motion, and could not do their office, as we see in
dead bodies. And because the lungs are the bellows that blow wind into the
instruments of the voice, without which it could not be made, therefore they
are lodged next to the heart, so that they cover it, to this end that men
should be admonished, that their voice and their speech is the messenger of
their heart: Why the heart and speech must agree together.
and that for this cause the heart and the mouth, and the voice and speech
which proceed from them, always ought to consent and agree together. For it
would be great dissoluteness, if the heart, which ought to be the original
and fountain of the speech, should think one thing, and the speech, which is
the messenger of the heart should utter and declare another. For before the
tongue and mouth speak, or speech be framed in them, it must first be
conceived and bred in the heart and mind, and then brought forth and
pronounced by the tongue and mouth. Therefore Elihu says to Job, Job 33. 1,
2, 3.
I pray thee hear my talk, and hearken unto all my words. Behold now, I
have opened my mouth, my tongue has spoken in my mouth. My words are in the
uprightness of my heart, and my lips shall speak pure knowledge. We see
here, how Elthu joins the heart with the mouth, the tongue, the palate and
the lips, all which are instruments of the speech, as we heard before.
Therefore there must always be a good and general agreement between al these
things. This good concord beginning in our selves, according to every man's
particular place, ought to stretch it self generally to al, that we may al
agree together, as the spirit of God so often exhorts us thereunto in his
holy word. Iam. 4. 11. psalm. 12. 2.
And therefore it calls them, men of double hearts, and double tongues, that
are not upright in heart, nor true and certain in word. Matt. 12. 34, 35. luke
6. 45.
Our Lord says, that of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and
that a good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good
things, and an evil man out of an evil treasure brings forth evil
things. For as the tree is known by his fruit, so speech makes manifest both
the heart and mind of a man. Therefore he shall be a great deal better known
by his speech, then by the sight of his face. For his face does not so well lay
open to the eyes his heart, mind, and manners, as his speech discloseth the^ to
the ears: as we may judge by that which we learned to this effect in the
former discourse. Therefore before the bellows of the lungs blow to frame
afterward voice and speech in the tongue and mouth, the draught must be first
drawn and framed in the heart, that the tongue and mouth may represent and
express it afterward: otherwise they will speak to no purpose, but only give
testimony, that there is little wisdom and upright affection in the heart.
Hereof it is, that Solomon shows oftentimes, that a wise man's tongue is not
lightly set on work without the direction and counsel of the heart and mind,
whose servant and messenger it ought to be: but a fool powers forth al his
mind at once. For he utters all that comes in his mouth, and speaks before
he has considered what he ought to say, so that his words are sooner spoken
then thought upon. The heart of the wise guides his mouth wisely, Prouer. 6.
21, 23, 24.
and adds doctrine to his lips. Fair words are as an honey comb,
sweetness to the soul and health to the bones. The wise in heart shall be
called prudent: and the sweetness of the lips shall increase doctrine.
Prouer. 12. 13.
A wise man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fools publishes
foolishness. Prouer. 29. 11.
A fool powers out all his mind: but a wise man keeps it in till afterward.
There are many such like places in the Proverbs, which I could allege to
this purpose. And we know what is commonly spoken when a man speaks of a
good affection and in truth, that he speaks from his heart: but if he be
known to be a liar, crafty, and deceitful, we say that he speaks not from
his heart. Which is as much as if one should say, that the same thing is not in
his heart, which he has in his mouth. Although in truth when those speeches
are thought upon before, such contrarieties are found as well in the heart as in
the tongue and mouth. For if they were not first in that, they would not be in
the tongue, which is the messenger of the heart. This is the cause of that
double heart which we said was in wicked, close, and disguised persons. You see
then what we have to note, both in regard of the bellows that blow the Organs
of man's body, and also of the player that ought to blow and direct them. Now
let us speak of the instruments and pipes into which the wind and breath of
these bellows does enter, Of the pipes and instruments of the voice.
and gives motion and convenient sound to every one of them. They have been
named all unto us before. Wherefore we have to consider of that pipe which is
called the rough Artery or windpipe, Of the wind pipe
which is made like to a flute, and in regard of the matter, is of the nature
of a gristle and of skin. It was necessary that it should be of such matter,
because it is to move when it receives in, or gives out the air, and to be
enlarged or restrained as need requires. Needful therefore it was that it
should be compounded of such skins as are easy to move, and to open* and shut,
and which might serve for soft and tender ligaments. And because the voice
cannot be framed, if the air whereof it is made, be not beaten back with some
thing, it was in like manner requisite, that some gristles should be mingled
therewith, and linked together: as it was needful for the ears to be made
winding in, that the air might rebound the better, and receive the sounds, as
we heard before. For this cause it is called a rough artery, as well in respect
of the matter whereof it is compounded, as of the figure. For it is made after
the manner of small circles and rings, placed in a rank one by another
throughout the whole length thereof, like to the tail of a Creuis: and that
with such moderation, that it is thick, slender, and dri^, according as need
requires to make the voice of a reasonable bigness. If it be too dry, it
malieth the voice shrill and hard to be pronounced: From whence proceeds the
change of voice in sickness.
as experience shows in burning feauers, and in great droughts. Again, the
pipe thereof is larger beneath then above, and so lesseneth upward where need
is, like to the pipe of a Bag-pipe, to the end that the blast should neither be
too slow and weak in ascending, nor yet over hasty and ^odaine. For if it be
^lowe and languishing, it will turn to wind without any noise and sound: and
if it be hasty and sudden, it will breed sighs in stead of voice: as it
falls out to them that are diseased and weak whose breath is short, and to
old men, who have small virtue of respiration, and much less of singing.
Therefore some expound that place of Ecclesiastes where it is said, that all the
daughters of singing shall be abased, Eccles 12. 4.
of the voice of old men, and of the instruments which breed and pronounce
it, and of their virtue and strength: although others will have it to be
understood of the ears. But it may be referred to them both. Now the
principal instrument of the voice is in ye head of the rough artery, namely in
that place which is commonly called the knot or joint of the neck, The
Anatomists call it La^inx.
or Adams morsel, being fashioned likest to an Almaine flute. I abstain from
speaking more specially of the rest of these pipes and instruments, which are
only quils to receive the blowing of the lungs, as also of the 3. gristles,
which make the distinction of the voice, and namely that in the midst, which
inform, is like to that end of the bag-pipe that is put into the mouth, or
like to the lips of certain pots made to power out wine, or of offe pots and
such like things, as we may see in Apothecaries earthen pots.

Besides, in the midst of that gristle, there is a deep slit or cleft called
glottis, that is, a little tongue, because it is the proper instrument of the
voice, and has both the sides enlarged or closed up by muscles proper to that
use and purpose. As touching the gristle before, it is fashioned like to a
little shield, so that a man may both see and touch it in the neck. That which
is behind, is of the fashion of a ring which is put upon the thumb. And as
these gristles are dilated and opened, or pressed and shut by their muscles,
especially both the sides of that cleft whereof I spoke even now, How the voice
is made great or small.
so do they make the diversities of voices. For as when they are opened, they
make the voice big and obscure, as it were the base in singing: so contrariwise
when they are pressed, they make it small, clear, and shrill, like to the
countertenor: and as they are more or less restrained or opened, so they make
diverse notes of the voice, as the tenor, the mean, and such like. And because
the pipes cannot make this variety of voices in this cleft, therefore there are
chinkes which serve for the same purpose. In this sort then, this instrument of
ye voice, which is placed in the top of the Artery and called Larinx by the
Physicions, being aided by gristles and their muscles, and by that little tongue
whereof I spoke not long before, together with these chinkes, frames of it
self as many sundry voices and notes, as all the pipes and flutes of a pair of
Organs being set together, and furnished with all sorts of pipes, A testimony
of the providence of God.
both great, small, and mean. Wherein we see a wonderful providence of God,
whether we consider the instruments named by us, or the place that contains
them. For the artery, which comes up from the lights to the throat,
occupies but one part of the neck: and yet it does as much alone, taking it
whole with the other instruments of which I have spoken, as a whole pair of
Organs. For in a pair of Organs there must be many pipes, some great, some
small, and others of a middle sort that are greater or lesser as it falls
out, according to the diversity of notes for which they are made, because they
can not be either enlarged or restrained, open or shut, but as they are first
framed. Therefore there needs as many of each sort as the parts of Music are
diverse, and as there wants variety of notes to fill every place and to
furnish both the base and the mean, the tenor and the counter^enor. But, as
might be gathered by our speech, the pipe and instrument of the voice is made
of such a fashion, that when a man is disposed, he may enlarge it for the base,
and then restrain it for a countertenor, or else open and shut it in middle
sort either more or less to make the tenor or the mean, and to cause the
voice to ascend and descend according to those notes and tunes which he would
have it make, and that by the means before touched. The like may be done in
speech. For as every one is disposed to lift up or to depresse his voice, to
enlarge or restrain the pipes and instruments thereof, he may speak either
higher or lower, bigger or smaller, or clearer, and set what sound, tune, and
accent he please upon the speech, which he will pronounce. Wherefore we may
very well say, that every one carries about with him and within him self very
fair and strange Organes, Fair Organs within every man.
upon which he may play at all hours at his pleasure, either in singing or
speaking: yea they are so whole and perfect, that they want neither the
bellows, nor the crosse-beame, nor the cords, nor the hollownesse for sound,
nor the seat, nor the posts, nor the porters, nor the bearer of the keys,
nor the table whereon they are set, nor the Organ pipes. For all this is in a
few small instruments which discharge their duties, yea they are more perfect
in man then in any artificial Organs. And if any Organ-maker could, I will not
say make such, but only counterfaite them, and make as many sundry sounds and
tunes with one pipe, as others do with many, all men would greatly admire such
a workman and his work, especially Organists and Musicions that understood
the Art of Music. How much more then ought we to admire that great and
divine Organist, that has made those goodly Organs of man's body, and given
them such a good sound? And how greatly ought we to desire, that we may be the
true temples of God, and good Organ players therein, to cause these fair
Organs to sound again, and to sing and preach his praises by them? For I doubt
not but that these are the true Organs, whereby he will be praised and
glorified by us. But there is yet a great deal more to be considered of this
matter, of which both this and the former discourse has bi^ made. For these
Organs being prepared as I have set them in sight, have nothing more then the
sound of the voice, as it were an instrument without speech. Wherefore we must
now make a speaking instrument, which has not his like neither in all the
works of nature, neither in all humane and artificial works. This Art and
office belongs properly to the tongue, of whose nature and use, and of the
excellency, and utility of the Art it has, which is speech, thou ARAM shall
give us some profitable instruction.

Of the tongue, and of the nature and office thereof: of the excellency, and
profit of speech which is the Art of the tongue: what is to be considered
touching the situation thereof in the head, and near the brain. Chap. 15.
ARAM. The Ancients being desirous to extol eloquence very much, propounded
the image of an Orator, as it were of one that spoke of gold, The praise of
eloquence.
who in speaking drew out a golden chain, which coming from his tongue was
fastened to the ears of a great many men that heard him, whereby he drew and
led them after him whither he would. Thus they compared the speech and
eloquence of an Orator to a chain of gold, because of the virtue and power
which it has with men, being able to keep and stay them, to moderate their
affections, and to guide and govern them easily without force and violence, as
if one should lead them tied with a chain, whom they would voluntarily
follow not being constrained, but only of their own good will, which
nevertheless should be so drawn that it could not resist. As indeed that
persuasion which proceeds from speech draws the wills and affections of
men, with a sweet and pleasant kind of violence, which they follow with great
desire, and cannot gain say it. Now this art and office belongs properly to
the tongue, of which we are now to speak.

The tongue then is a fleshy and muscly member, The description of the tongue.
but soft and like to the substance of a tad-stoole, being full of sinews,
arteries, and veins. For it had need have good store of sinews, both because
of those sundry motions which it has necessarily, as also for the sense of
taste and of touching, which agree to the nature thereof. Likewise it had need
of many arteries, that so it might have great abundance of spirit and heat,
by reason of the diversity of motions which it has. And to the end it should
not want nourishment, it has in like manner great plenty of veins: and that
it should not dry up through continual moving, it has humidity to wet and
moysten it. Of spittle, and the profit thereof.
Whereupon we ought to note well the providence of God in this, that although
spittle be but an excrement and superfluity, which partly distilleth from the
brain into the throat, and partly is sent up thither from the boiling
stomach, yet it is not unprofitable, because it wetteth and moysteneth the
tongue. For being very dry it is more slow in moving, as we see by
experience in them that are subject to great drought. Therefore God has
provided a remedy for that inconvenience, by means of two fleshie kernels
like to sponges, on each side one at the root of the tongue, which are
commonly called Almonds, because they are fashioned like unto them: these
through passages ordayened for that purpose, moysten all parts of the mouth.
Moreover, the tongue is tied to a forked bone with many muscles by two
branches, which hold it up as it were two near pillars, and that with such a
counterpoyse, that it can move and remove it self equally on each side. For if
it were tied by one branch only, it could not keep it self upright, but
should go crossewise only from one side. But God has provided very well for
that: and if we did know and consider it well, we are admonished thereby, Our
speech ought to be upright.
that speech pronounced by our tongue ought first to be well weighed as it were
in a balance, to the end it decline not, or turn on any side more then it
ought, out hold it self upright, and directly follow reason. Moreover, it can
not easily be declared, by what Art the tongue stretches forth it self so
diversely by the means of muscles, and how it has so many sorts of motions
from all sides, so ready, and so sudden, and for so many things as it has
both to speak and to do. The profit of speech.
But it is far more difficult, yea impossible to tell the causes, how a man
can by the tongue frame so many sorts of words and so diverse, which are as it
were the marks and paintings, not only of all visible things, but also of
all things invisible, and of all the thoughts of man. For if we would
entreat of any matter one with another, we know already by that which has
been spoken, how it can hardly be done without speech, as also that we cannot
speak without certain words and names to name and signify those things by,
whereof we mind to speak. For if we have no words and names to make them
known by, we must always have the things themselves present, that we may
point at them with the finger, which is impossible. And although it were so
that we had them always before our eyes, yet that were not sufficient. For
we should be forced to speak to the eyes by signs, and yet we could never
without comparison invent so many signs, nor counterfeit and imagine so many
things with all the senses and members of our body, as the tongue alone would
affoorde us by means of speech. For it gives a name to every thing. Therefore
it is able to make the natures of things known, and to set before us as well
things absent as present, invisible as visible, spiritual as corporal. In a
word, God has given this benefit to man, by means of the tongue and the
ears, that they can represent one to another, and cause each other to know
and understand as well divine things as humane. And although God made this
diversity and confusion of languages amongst men, Gene. 11. 7.
to punish them for their arrogancy and ingratitude, nevertheless he has so
provided for this evil, that he has manifested the more his great goodness
toward them, and the riches of his eternal providence, by that knowledge of
so many sundry tongues which he has given them, Acts 2. 3, 4.
and chiefly that by them his Gospel might be published. And if this benefit
of God be worthy of great admiration, ought we not also to marvel much at
this, that such a variety of sounds proceeding out of the mouth of man, A
miracle of letters.
can be comprehended in so small a number of letters, whereby so many sorts of
words, and such diverse languages are expressed? By this means also, we see
that speech, which can not be perceived by any of the senses but by the ears,
is made as it were visible, so that by the help of Letters a man may speak to
the eyes, and not see them, as he may also to the ears by means of the
voice. And although voice and speech fly into the air as if they had wings,
insomuch that a man can neither behold them with his eyes, nor smell them with
his nose, nor hold them with his hands, nevertheless speech is kept still
before the eyes, and may be called back when a man will by means of writing,
The benefit of letters.
and by the benefit of letters. Yea, it may be sent to them that are absent,
and as far as one will, that they may understand it, even to them also that
are not yet borne. For we see how our predecessors teach us after their death
by their books and writings, and how by this means their words are not
only visible unto us, but also as it were immortal. Wherefore the less we
can conceive how this may be done by the tongue and by letters, the more
ought we to wonder at this great work of God in man, praise him for it, and
give him thanks. Now albeit the eye of our understanding dazell, and can not
wholly comprehend this work of God, neuerthlesse we see this well enough, that
the tongue does so help to frame the voice into speech, and to make the
diversity of words whereof speech is compounded, as the hand and fingers of
the Organ-player who touches the Organs, and of the Musicion that plays upon
an instrument of music whatsoever it be, serves to cause the sound thereof
to be heard. For although, when one blows the Organs, the pipes thereof will
yield diverse sounds and tunes, if they be open, according as they are either
great or small, long or short, wide or narrow, as we have said: yet these
soundes will be but confused, without harmony and melody, if the Organist does
not play with his hands, thereby to dispense as need requires that wind and
breath which is to be distributed into the pipes, and if he touch not the
keys of the Organs according to those tunes and notes, which he would have
the pipes to make, following the Art of Music. And this we may see yet more
plainly in a baggepipe. For although it sounds by reason of the wind,
within the leather bag, which receives and keeps it as it were a little
sack, yet it always yields forth but one sound, without distinction and
harmony, until the Minstrill play with his fingers upon the holes of the pipe
that belongs unto it. Therefore as there is great difference between a simple
confused voice, and that which is distinct and artificial, The difference
between voice and speech.
so is there between voice and speech. So that when the tongue has received
the wind and breath, which ascends up from the lunges by the rough artery,
and is fashioned into voice by the means before mentioned: then it forms the
same afterward into distinct speech by such an art and science, as none can
understand, much less express it, but GOD only, who has given it to the
tongue, in which consists the chief dignity thereof. For it is that
science, which is the mother of eloquence, which men have in such great
admiration: and because of this, the arts of Grammar, Logike, and Rhetorike
have been published by the best learned men. For all these three Arts are
specially appointed for speech: the one to make it proper, pure and nete,
namely, Grammar: the other, The uses of Gra^mer, Logic, and Rhetorike.
namely Logike, to knit well together all discourses made by speech, and all
sentences in them, according as they agree among themselves, depend and follow
one another, and are grounded upon good reason: Thirdly, Rhetorike is joined
unto them, to adorn and polish speech, to make it more significant and very
eloquent: so that whereas Logike makes speech as it were a simple picture,
that has nothing but bare draughts, which serve to make it whole, and
furnished in regard of every part and lineament thereof, Rhetorike makes it
not only as it were a picture well set forthwith fair and lively colors of
all sorts, but also adorned and enriched with goodly hills and dales, and
such like payntings, that it may show better, and be made fairer and
pleasaunter to behold. Wherefore as there is great difference to look upon
between these two pictures, so is there of speech in respects of the ears,
as it is propounded either more plainly and simply, or more deeked and
garnished. For this cause, seeing God has vouchsafed us so much honor as to
give us speech, especially to praise and glorify him with our tongue, and to
benefit the common society of men, we must not be content only to speak,
but we must study to speak well, in fit terms, and wisely, to the glory of
God, and to the good and profit as well of our selves as of them that hear
us. This cannot be done but by the knowledge of God and of his word, without
which all the Logike and Rhetorik of men is but vain babbling. We cannot
speak wisely without the knowledge of God and his word.
But when the one is joined with the other, and the arts that teach men to
speak elegantly are appliedto this purpose, then is ye use thereof very good and
worthy of great commendation. Therefore we must all acknowledge our selves to be
as it were Organ-pipes, having of our selves neither sound, nor voice, nor
tongue, nor mouth to speak of God, and of his works as we ought, and to praise
and glorify him, but only so far forth as he being the Organ-player
blows within, and inspireth us by his holy spirit, giving unto us wisdom
and tongue and mouth, and virtue in speaking. Now here we must not only call
to mind what we have already spoken of the causes, why the lungs, which is one
chief instrument of the voice, and without which it cannot be made, is placed
so near the heart, but also we must consider how near the tongue, and the
other instruments of voice and speech next unto it, are unto the brain,
wherein is the principal seat of the spirit, and which is chiefly assigned to
the mind of man, and to that part of his soul that is most divine. Why the
tongue is placed near the brain.
For seeing God would have the tongue to be the messenger, and as it were the
Interpreter of the spirit and mind, and of all the thoughts thereof, that men
might teach one another both the knowledge of God his worship, and of all other
good things, and seeing he would have speech to be the bond of humane society
and of that communication, which men ought to have one with an other, therefore
it was very requisite, that being the instrument of speaking it should be
near the brain, which is the lodging of all the internal senses, of which,
if God will, we will entreat hereafter in their place. For as all the
external senses do carry to the internal, and the bodily to the spiritual,
whatsoever they perceive by sense according to their nature and office, thereby
to admonish and instruct them, that they may think and judge thereof and lay
it up in memory: so the internal and spiritual senses carry the same things
afterward to the tongue, that it might declare and make them known to those,
unto whom they would communicate their mind and cogitation. Hereof it is,
that the tongue is oftentimes taken for doctrine, and for all speech both good
and evil: in which sense Solomon takes it when he says, The tongue of the
wicked shall perish. And Saint Paul calls speaking with the tongue, 1. Cor.
14 2, 14, 15.
when one uses spech that is not understood of the hearers: and speaking with
the spirit and with understanding also, when such a language is used as is
understood of every one, and which serves to the edification of them that
hear it. Therefore the tongue must not stir, nor the mouth open it self to
speak, before it have received a commandment and charge from reason, The
mistress of the tongue.
which is the Lady and Mistress thereof, to guide and govern it, whose
messenger and servant it is to give notice of that which the reason and mind
would have known. Wherefore it is very convenient that the lady and mistress
of the tongue should have her lodging over and near about her, and not to be
far from her, to the end she forget not her self, nor attempt any thing
without a commandment from reason. So that as before we gave the heart to be
the governor, guide, and counsailour of the tongue: so now we appoint the
brain as lord and master thereof, to the end it should have a good guide both
above and beneath it. For no member in all the body has greater need. James 3.
6.
Therefore S. James calls the tongue a fire, yea, a world of iniquity, which
defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature, and is set
on fire of hell. Such are the fruits of an unbridled tongue that is misled and
ill governed: as contrariwise it is an excellent treasure in man, when it is
moderated and used wisely and soberly, and in time and place convenient as need
requires. For all these things God gives us good instructions in the matter
and composition of this member. For first, he does not content himself in
giving to man but one only tongue for so many offices as are assigned unto it,
whereas many other members are double, and yet serve chiefly but for one thing:
but also has made it tender, soft and pleasant, and tied it fast with many
bands, as it were so many small cords and threeds, to restrain and bridle it,
to the end it should not run over or be too forward, and that it should not
bring forth bitterness in stead of sweetenes, nor prick and hurt any body.
Therefore it is made blunt on every side, not sharp or forked, like to the
stings of scorpions and other venomous beasts. Moreoure it has the gummes and
teeth, with which it is environed and closed in on every side as it were with a
quick-set, and with a strong rampire to keep it fast shut within the bounds and
limits thereof, Why the tongue is so fashioned and fenced on every side.
as it were within a cave. Besides, it has lips as it were gates to open unto
it, or to shut it up and muzzel it, lest it should take too much license.
Therefore seeing God does guard the tongue so on every side, he gives men to
understand that they ought not to abuse it, and teaches them what care they
ought to have of this little member, seeing that of all the outward members, none
is so hid, covered, compassed about, and locked up with such a natural
covering and enclosure, as that is. And to end our speech, we know, that when
ye heart and mind, which ought to be ye guides and governors of the tongue,
shall be reformed in purity and true knowledge of God by his grace, there will be
nothing but good speech and all truth in the tongue, to the setting forth of
the glory of his divine Majesty, and to the profit of every one according to
the duty of true charity. But if the mind and heart be evil, and blinded
with error and ignorance, they will bring forth like fruits and speeches. Now
having discorused at large of the first office of the tongue, which consists
in framing of the speech, we must consider of the other two uses thereof, which
are in tasting, and in preparing meat that is chewed in the mouth for the
nurishment of the body. Therefore, thou shall begin, Achitob, to discourse of
these two offices, and of those instruments, which serve the tongue to this
purpose.

Of the office of the tongue intasting, and in preparing meat for the
nourishment of the body: of teeth, and of their nature and office: of the
conduite or pipe that receives and swalloweth down m^^tes. Chap. 16.
ACHITOB. The more we consider the work and providence of God in the
composition of man's body, the more we shall marvel at it, and daily find
therein new matter and occasion to glorify his name. Before we considered
thereof, as of the frame of a house: now we shall see it as it were a town or
city that has Milles and Ouens, and Artificers of all arts and occupations.
And, which is more wonderful, we shall perceive such industry in many of the
members, that oftentimes one alone will serve for many offices, One member may
se^ue for many offices.
for the due performance whereof man's reason would require many members: and
yet God has so well provided therefore, that one alone does better discharge
them, and with less trouble then many together could do. Which may evidently
be known by those uses and offices of the tongue, whereof we are yet to
entreat.

One, and that the chiefest reason why the tongue is fitly placed in the head
near the brain, was declared unto us in the former speech: now we must note
others, especially why it is necessary that it should be in the mouth, as
likewise in the head. For the tongue could not have satisfied any one office
committed unto it, if it had been placed barely and openly in the face, as the
eyes, nose, or ears are. And seeing it was requisite to have it covered, it
could have no better covering then the mouth, Why the mouth is the fittest
place for the tongue.
as may be proved by many reasons. The first is, that seeing it is the
instrument of speech, which must be helped by many other parts to have it well
framed, as we heard before, it was to be lodged in a place where it might have
near at hand all instruments needful for that service. Now this use of
speech is proper to the tongue of man only, and not to that of brute beasts:
but to the other twain following, are common to man with beasts, namely the
sense of taste, for which God has appointed both that and the palate: for which
cause it was requisite also that it should be near the brain, and in the
head, as the other instruments and members of the senses are, as also in the
place appointed for this preparation of bodily food. For it must first judge
of tastes and discern between good and bad meat, The officer of the tongue.
and between good and bad drinks, to the end, that whatsoever is good for the
nourishment of the body, may be kept, and that which is bad, rejected: and that
afterward, which is the last office, it may help the teeth and mouth to chew
the meat, and so to swallow it down. For the jaws and teeth are as it were the
stones of the mill, which serve to prepare the meat for all the body.
Wherefore as there are two stones in every mill, namely, one beneath, which
abides always steadfast, and turns no way, and another above, which always
turns about to bruze and grind the grains of wheat that are between them: Of
the mill of man's body.
so in the mil of man's body there are two jaws like to two milstones, of which
the one is always firm, and the other moves. But there is this difference
between these and milstones, that the nether iawe only moves, which is
true, not only in man, but also in all other living creatures, except in the
Crocodile, who in this point quite differs from all other living creatures
that have jaws and teeth. Now God has so appointed this motion of the
milstones of man's body not without good reason. For seeing the brain is so
near, and that there are so many goodly members in the head above the upper
most iawe-bone, it were to be feared, that the continual and great moving
thereof would shake them, and bring them into some inconvenience. And that the
jaws might bruze and break whatsoever is put between them, as the stones of
the mill grind the grains of corn, the teeth are planted in them to serve
them in this work. And in stead of wind or water, which drive artificial
milles about, this natural mill of which we speak, has his muscles and
sinews to move it, and to set it aworking when need requires. For this
cause Solomon, meaning to show the defect of teeth in old age, and what small
strength old men have to chew their meat, Eccles. 12. 3, 4.
says, that the grinders shall cease because they are few, and the doors
shall be shut without by the base sound of the grinding. These doors are the
lips, because they serve the mouth, and the mill which is within them. For we
understand by the mouth, all that is from the lips unto the throat and
winde-pipe, wherein not only the mill of man's body is contained, but also as
it were a part of the bake-house, in which the meal that is grinded is to be
kneaded, and so made ready for the oven, that afterward it may be baked in the
stomach, which is as it were the oven and kitchen of the whole body to dress
meat for it, Of the kitchen of the body.
wherewith all the members thereof are to be fed and nourished. For food
can not nourish the body if it still continue such as it is put into the mouth,
unless it be better prepared and dressed in such sort, that it may easily
be turned into the substance of the body that receives it. As then jaws and
teeth are the mill and milstones, which bruze and turn to meal the wheat
that is put between them, that is to say, all kinds of meats, both hard and
tender, for the nourishing of the body: so we may say, that the tongue in this
respect plays the miller, and serves in stead of a hopper, into which those
grains that otherwise would skatter from between the milstones are put that
they may be ground. For when the meat falls on any side from between the
teeth, the tongue serves to send it back again, that it may be well chewed,
and not avoid the grinding of the jaws and teeth. Thus we daily come to
greater knowledge of strange instruments in the body of man. For we heard
before what Organs and what kind of musical instrument God has made in him
for the voice and for speech: now we may see how there are within him, a mill
and a miller, a bakehouse and a kitchen. Hereupon we ought to think, that the
Master and Maker of these, has not created them that they should be idle, as
though he had given them nothing to grind, or to bake. For he is no such
workmaster as to make any work, and not to set it a woorking, or to leave it
unfurnished of things necessary: neither any such master or Lord, but that he
can casily do it. God ministers food to all creatures.
Wherefore although there are as many of these milles and ouens, as there are
not only reasonable creatures, but also beasts, and although he has
undertaken to maintain them always, even from the creation of the world until
the consummation thereof, yet he never wanted matter to set them on work when
it pleased him. Hereby we may know whether we have a rich father or no, and
what cause we have to fear that he will leave our milles and ouens empty,
although we had many houses full of them, as in deed we have in our selves, our
wives and children, so long as we acknowledge him to be such a one, and that we
yield obedience unto him, as becomes his children. But we have further to
note, that as our mill is not without a Miller, and such tools as are
necessary for him, so the Oven and Kitchen have their Baker and Cook. For
first, the teeth do not only serve for a mill, but they discharge some part
of a Cooks office, because the more they chop the meat, and chew it well, it
is the better prepared for the stomach to bake it so much the sooner. Therefore
we say commonly, that the first preparation and digestion of meat is made in
the teeth. For this cause God has given a great number of them to man, and
has made them of bone, and distinguished them into sundry sorts, according to
that office whereunto he has assigned every one of them. Of teeth, and of
theirs diverse kinds.
For right before there are four above, and as many beneath, that are broad,
sharp, and cutting, which are called Incisorie teeth, because they are apt to
divide and to cut the meat as a knife does: and these have but one root.
Then there are other twain on each side, commonly called Dogge-teeth, because
they resemble the teeth of dogs, which are broad toward their root, but
sharp and poynted above: and these also have but one root of a reasonable
length. Their office is to break the meats and other things, which by reason
of their over great hardness could not be cut by the first. Next, the other
teeth are appointed to bruze very small those meats, which have already passed
through the former, even as milstones bruze wheat. Therefore they are sharp,
broad, hard, and great, and have more roots then the other. And because of
the similitude which they have with milstones, they are called by the same name
both of the Grecians and Latins, as also iaw-teeth and grinders. All teeth are
planted in the iawe-bones by means of the gummes, being fastened within them
as it were nails, so that they cannot easily be moved, shaken, or plucked
out. And although bones naturally have no feeling, yet teeth are very sensible,
by reason of certain branches of small soft sinews which enter into their
substance. For this feeling is necessary for them, both because they are bare
and not covered with flesh as other boones are, as also for the meats sake and
for i^ste^ as they that in some part are serviceable to the taste, as well as
all the other parts of the mouth. Thus you see how the teeth serve at one time
both for a mill and a cook, together with the tongue and the rest of the
mouth. The tongue like to a baker.
Again, the tongue serves for a baker, having this office laid upon it, to
gather the meat together after it is well ground and chewed, and to fashion
it round like to pills or small loaves that are yet but dough, to this end
that it may with more ^ase be swallowed down. Wherein it deals like a baker,
who first fashioneth his bread into loaves. Next it plays the part of a baker
and of a peele both together, as that which sets in the meat, and causes
it to descend into the stomach, which is the oven wherein it must be baked,
that afterward it may nourish the whole body For this cause it was necessary
that the tongue both in breadth and length, should be answerable to the whole
mouth in such sort, that it might touch all parts of it to discharge so many
offices. We see then that man's body is not only like to such a frame of a
house as we considered of before, but also like to a great City, wherein
there are milles and Ouens, and Artificers of all occupations.

Now upon this that has been discoursed touching this last use of the tongue
in preparing and swallowing down meat, we must further note, that as there
is a pipe that reaches from the lungs unto the mouth for respiration; and for
the breath of the voice, as has been declared unto us: so there is another
from the stomach unto the same place, Of the Gullet or We^^^^d.
properly call the Gullet, which the Physicions commonly call by the Greek
name (...): whose office is to carry the meats and drinks into the stomach.
And as the other pipe is in the former part of the neck, that it may go right
to the mouth to draw in the air, so this second is behind in the neck, that
it may keep more heat, in it, and it is longer then the first: Nevertheless,
many think that there is but one pipe for bruath and for meat and drink: as
there are some also, who albeit they know well there are twain, yet they
suppose that the one is for meat, and the other for drinks, that the lights
also might be moystened thereby. Yea, there have bneene skillful and great
Philosophers, who seem to have been in this error, or at leastwise have
disputed thereof. But because GOD has so distinguished these passages, and
that the first is the breathing pipe, for the reason uttered before, this
excellent Woorkemaster has made another little instrument, Of the Epiglt or
little tongue.
called Epiglot by the Physicions, made of a grictly matter, reasonable hard
and fashioned like to a little tongue that is of a triangle form, or like an
(...) leaf. This instrument serves to cover the pipe for breath, at the very
top of Larinx, as it were a cover of a pot. It serves the pipe to this
use, not to keep every thing out of it, but to suffer no meat or drink, or
any other thing to enter in in any such quantity as might hinder breathing and
respitation. For a little thing will stop a man's breath and strangle him, as
appears in those whom Histories affirm to have been strangled, some by a
little hair, others by a stone of a grape, some in supping up milk, and others
by such like tirfles. Yea, many times we have experience of this pevill when
we eat and drink, if never so little ineate or drink enter into this
passage. Good lessions for every one.
Therefore God teaches us two things thereby: the first is, upon what
assenderthreed our life depends, seeing so little a matter is sufficient to
deprive us of it. The other is, to admonish us how quier and sober we ought to
be in eating and drinking, not glutton like; and alsoin speaking, when we take
our refection. For then is the danger greatest, if we speak whilst we eat:
because we cannot speak without voice, not have voice without breathing nor
breath without opening this little cover. And because the breathing pipe is
foremost, the meat and drink must needs pass over this little tongue, as it
were over a little draw bridge. So that if this small cover were lift up and
opened, in stead of going beyong the pipe of breathing, it would enter into it.
But it most not be so fast shut up, but that breath may always issue out, and
that some thin humor and liquor may enter in, to moysten and supple both the
artery and the lungs: otherwise potions appointed for that purpose by the
Physicions, were vain and unprofitable. Having now spoken sufficiently of
those instruments which are serviceable to voice and speech, and of all the
proper offices of the tongue, it will be thy part, ASER, to morrow, to take in
hand again, and to pursue our matter of the senses, and of their instruments,
and first to instruct us what the sense of taste is, and what the palate is that
serves it.

The end of the second days work.
THE THIRD DAYS work.
Of the sense of taste given to the palate: what tastes are good to nourish the
body: of the diversity of them: of hunger and thirst, and of their causes.
Chap. 17.
ASER. It is wonderful that God causes all things whatsoever they be to serve
his work in such sort, that nothin is in vain, idel or unprofitable: whereof we
have already seen many testimonies in our former discourses of the least
parts of the body. But which is yet more wonderful in his providence, he
has created, made and disposed nothing throughout all nature without great
order, excellent measure, and modration in all things: which gave occasion to
the first Philosophers to call the whole frame of the world, Mundus, which is
as much to say, as an Ornament, or a well disposed order of all things. Whereby
God would have us especially learn to know, how greatly order pleases him,
and how he abhors all disorder and confusion, and how greatly he desires,
that men after his example, should observe measure and moderation in all their
works. Hereof we may have a goodly instruction in this place, if we consider
how all the senses, and namely, the taste with those sauoury relishes that
agree with it, receive their strength, virtue and nature from all the elements,
according to that agreement, which their nature and offices have with them: as
also what pleasure we take in the relish of all things, when it agrees with
our taste: and contrariwise how it troubles us, when it is unpleasant and not
agreeable to our taste.

Yesterday we discoursed of the corporal senses, and of their members and
instruments: whereupon we spoke of the tongue, both because of the agreement it
has with the ears by reason of speech, as also because it is the instrument
of taste together with the palate, What the palate is.
which is the upper part of the mouth, made like to a pretty vaute, and to a
little heaven. Job 12. 11. and 34. 3.
Therefore Job said, Does not the ears discern the words, and the palate
tastemeate for it self? And again, The ear tries the words, as the mouth
tastes meat. The sense of taste then is that sense, whereby the mouth judges
of all kinds of tastes, which are many in number. And this is a notable gift
of God, Of the providence of God in the variety of tastes.
in that he has given such relishes to meats and drinks, whereby not only
men, but also all living creatures can presently know by their taste what
things are good to eat and drink, and what are otherwise. For if God had not
given the sense of taste to all living creatures, that they might judge thereby
of all meats and drinks, what would their life be? But we are to know this
thing further, that men judge by their taste, not only of such things as may
serve to nourish them, The sense of taste necessary for Physicions.
but also of medicines. For Physicions know the qualities of herbs and
simples more by their taste, then by any other sense: afterward by this
knowledge they judge easily of their natures and proprieties, and for what
remedies and uses of physic they will serve. Therefore this judgment of the
taste is very necessary for the life of man, especially for the nourishment of
all litting creatures: because all things which the earth brings forth are
not good to feed them. For some things are diverse from nourishment, as earth,
clay, wood and stones: other things are altogether unsavory, and have no taste,
and some have but a very little. But God has provided a remedy for this, by the
means of salt, and of sundry fortes of sawces and spices, whereby they may be
made to have a pleasant taste. There are some things also, which are clean
contrary, either by reason of their evil taste, as gall and wormwood, or else
because of the hurt which they may bring with them, as those things that are
venomous, and very poison. But God has very well met with this inconvenience
both by this gift of the sense of tasting, and also by putting into such things
as might hurt either man or any other living creature, a certain quality,
which we call relish or taste, that is contrary and very unpleasant to the
sense of tasting: as likewise he has given to those things that are healthful
and good to nourish, a relish that is agreeable and pleasant unto our taste.
This is to be understood if our taste be not corrupted, either by sickness,
or by some unbridled appetite: the like is to be said of the spittle, Another
use of the spittle.
which beside the use before named, has this also, that it helps the taste.
Wherefore if it be already infected with some evil taste, it will not well
receive others, but will cause euerything to be of the same taste wherewith it
is infected and corrupted. Now those things are most sauoury, and have the best
relish, that have in them the best mixture of heat and moisture, which two
qualities make the relish of things, and without which we see that all extreme
cold and dry things have no smacke or taste, as flax or towe, and dry wood,
or water that is very pure. In other things, those that have more moisture
then heat, have their taste less sharp, so that according as heat and
humidity are tempered together, the diversity of tastes is framed. For if
humidity does not exceed and surmount earthy dryness, or both of them be
consumed by heat, there is no taste. So that as all bodily things are
compounded of all the elements, and differ one from another, according as they
have more or less of the elements, so is it in tastes. For this cause this
sense of taste answers to the element of water, How the senses agree with the
elements.
and holds most of the nature thereof: as the sense of touching has more
affinity with the earth, to the end it might agree better with those things
that are to be felt thereby. For the vigor and sense thereof ought to be close
together and throughout, and such as takes faster hold then any of the rest.
So likewise the sense of sight agrees with the fire, and that of hearing with
the air, as we have already touched it. And as for the sense of smelling, it
agrees both with the fire and with the thick air, because smelles are
stirred up by heat, as smoke is by fire, which afterward are by the means
of the air carried to the sense of smelling, whereof we will speak hereafter.

But let us go on with our discourse of tasting, and of such things as are apt
to nourish the body. For we cannot live without the help of many things:
amongst which, meats and drinks are chiefest: because that as hunger requires
meat, so thirst desires drink. We must therefore understand, that this
soul and life which is called Vegetative or nourishing, and which is common to
man with all other living creatures, has two principal instruments in the
body, Of heat and humiditie the preseruers of life.
namely heat and humiditie: of which, heat is first and chief, belonging
properly to the virtue of nourishing: next, humiditie is joined to heat, that
it may feed and preserve it. For life is preserved in the body by heat, which
is the chief instrument thereof: so that as soon as heat is gone, it
becomes stark dead. And because this heat would easily and quickly consume
it self, if it were not nourished and maintained, moisture is joined unto it
in living bodies, as it were a bridle to keep it back, to the end that life
might be prolonged, which otherwise would fail presently after it were
forsaken of heat, as heat also would decay, if it were not nourished and
preserved by humiditie, which it necessarily requires. For heat draws
humor unto it self, and sucketh and drinks it up: likewise humor
refreshes heat, and slaketh the vehemency thereof: all which we may
plainly see in a lamp. For let us compare the light of a lamp with life, and
then let us consider, whether this light can be preserved without fire, and
whether this fire can continue any long time and not be extinguished, unless
it have two things. The first is matter, as namely the wieke of the lamp:
which matter cannot be firm, if it have no dryness in it whereof fire may
take hold. For fire being hot and dry, cannot have any fellowship with
coldenesse and humiditie, without some middle quality agreeable to his nature.
On the other side it will soon consume the dry matter, on which it lights,
if the vehement heat thereof be not abated and tempered by some humiditie,
which both resists the dryness, and also by the coldenesse it has,
moderateth the heat of the fire. Therefore we see, that the matter of the
wicke of a lamp cannot continue long being once lighted, if it be not greased
with some tallowe, or some humide matter to preserve both that and the fire of
which it receives light. For when it is burnt out, the fire also dies with it
through want of nourishment that might maintain it. But it is not enough
although the fire have meet matter to nourish it. For they must be so well
wrought and mingled one with another, that there be neither too much nor too
little of either, but as much as need requires. For if there be a great deal
of wieke and but a little oil and tallowe, it will endure so much the less
while: and if there be too much oil or tallowe in respect of the wieke, it
will slake the fire overmuch, yea it may be in such great quantity, that it
will put it quite out. But if due proportion be kept between the cotton and
the oil or tallowe, the fire will preserve it self very well, and give a
goodly clear light. A comparison between a lamp and man's body.
The like is done in our bodies. For if they were without natural heat, there
would be no life in them: and if this heat had not meet matter to preserve
it self within them, it would quickly be extinguished. Now seeing it must
be nourished and maintained, this cannot be done unless it have some solid
and firm matter, which cannot be consumed so quickly, but that it may preserve
it self sometime. Again, forasmuch as there is no matter so solid and firm,
which is able any long time to resist the fire that consumes all, if the
violence thereof be not moderated, this matter must of necessity be moistened.
Here then the meat, which is most solid, stands in stead of match or week
to this natural fire, from whence proceeds life to the body: and drinks are
as it were oil in a lamp, to moysten the meat, to the end that this fire
should not consume it so quickly. And because it must always be kept burning,
(otherwise the light thereof, which is the life, will die together with it) it
must have new matter continually ministered unto it, as it were to a fire that
cannot always continue kindled in the chimney and not go out, if it be not
preserved by wood or coal, or in a candle or lamp, if it have not always
cotton, or week and oil, or some other tallowy and moist matter. Therefore
we see that when either of them begins to fail, another is put in to
supply the place of it. And thus as fire and the light thereof are maintained
in a lamp or candle by means of that nourishment they have both in the week
and in the tallow thereof: so life and that natural fire which gives life to
the body, are mainteyned by that food, which they receive ordinarily in eating
and drinking. The meat then in man's body, is to nourish and preserve the
natural heat thereof, as the week is in a candle or lamp: and the moisture
which it receives by drink, is unto it as the ^oyle and tallowe. The causes
of chirst and hunger.
For this cause if heat be stronger in a man, he shall feel thirst, which is
an appetite and desire of that which is moist and cold, that is, of such
qualities as are contrary to the fire, which is hot and dry. For the moisture
must be confirmed and strengthened to moderate the burning heat, as it is when
oil is powered into a lamp. And if both heat and moisture consuming each
other, begin to wax faint and to fail, they must both be helped, that they
may gather more strength: as when we put not only oil, but week also into a
lamp. And this is the cause of hunger, which is a desire of that which is hot
and moist. But there is difference between the humiditie required in hunger,
and that which is required in thirst, because the moisture desired in thirst is
more thin and less earthie, then that which is required in hunger. And if
the moisture be increased over much, so that the heat decreaseth and
languisheth, and consequently the appetite to meat and drink and to receive
nourishment, decays, it must be restored again by physic. For although all
nourishment be as it were physic to the body, Of physic, and the causes
thereof.
nevertheless, there is this difference, in that food repaireth the whole
person and all the body, whereas physic repaireth only the instruments of
the body, which are to serve for nourishment. For this cause food is always
necessary for all, at all times, and in all places: but besides that all stand
not in need of physic, they that want it, use it but at certain times as
necessity requires. For if those members that serve to nourish the body be
well disposed, and discharge their office so well, that all the parts of the
body receive due nourishment, and the whole body be healthie and sound, there
needs nothing but ordinary food to preserve the body, and to keep it in
good health. But if any member be weakened, and does not his duty well,
especially any of those that ought to serve to nourish the whole body, it must
be restored again to strength by the means of physic. Now albeit the sense
of taste whereof we have presently discoursed, be not so apt to teach,
especially, the knowledge of spiritual and divine things, as the senses of
sceing and hearing, of which we have spoken heretofore: yet we may receive much
good doctrine thereby. For as the body cannot live except it have such
corporal food as agrees to the nature thereof, Instructions from the sense
of taste.
so the soul cannot live if it have not that knowledge, which God has
appointed for it. And as life is kept in the body by heat, which is the chief
instrument thereof, to the life of our souls consists and is preserved and
increased by heat, namely, by the love and charity of God, without which it
cannot live that life that is agreeable to it own nature. For the soul that
is separated from the love of God, is dead in respect of the true and blessed
life, seeing God lives not in it, nor it in God. For this cause this love must
be always nourished and mainteyned therein by the celestial and divine
moisture, agreeable to the nature thereof. Wherefore as it is of a heavenly and
celestial nature, so the food thereof must be answerable thereunto. This
food therefore cannot be had but of God, who is the life of the soul, as the
soul is the life of the body: and the means which he has appointed to
minister this food unto it, is his heavenly and eternal word, and those
spiritual graces which he communicates unto us thereby. But let us follow our
matter subject of corporal senses. And seeing we have entreated of the means
whereby the body is nourished, we ought to consider more particularly of those
things that are meet and convenient to maintain and preserve the body of man,
and see how God prepares them to this end: in which thou shall instruct us,
AMANA.

Of helps and creatures meet for the preservation and nourishment of the
body: how God prepares them to serve for that purpose: of their use. Chap. 18.
AMANA. God being careful over the welfare of his creatures that have life,
has put in them a desire to preserve themselves, to the end they should
follow after such things as are profitable for their health, and shun that
which is hurtful and contrary unto it. The equality of heat and moisture
preserves life.
Now this preservation consists either in the equality of heat and
moisture, nourishers of life, or else in an inequality that may easily be
reduced and brought to an equality by that which we eat and drink. For if
there be so great excess of heat or moisture that the one consumes the
other, death follows necessarily: if there be no excess of either, but a
good equality, the body is very well affected. But it is very hard to find a
body so tempered. And although such a one might be found, yet it could not
long continue in yt estate, but that it would quickly change, as we may judge
by that which we have learned in the former discourse. But when this change
does not bring with it so great excess and inequality, but that it may be
kept upright by nourishment, the body is nevertheless well disposed, vntiil
such time as the excess is greater then can be repaired by food. For then if
food will not serve the turn, we must have recourse to physic: and if the
inequality be so great, that by the help of physic no remedy can be found,
there is no other natural aid to be had.

Now this inequality that approaches so near to equality, Of the inequality
that is in the nature of the body.
is very pleasant, as that which is the prick and procurer of natural
pleasures, necessary for the life of man to incite him to desire them, and as
it were the sawse to make them toothsome. For if there were always equality,
we should never be affected with hunger or thirst, nor with any appetite to
eat or drink. And if this appetite were not, we should not have those
pleasures, which we receive by meats and drinks, and by their diverse tastes
and relishes. So that we should not have such a notable testimony of the
goodness and bountifulness of God toward us, and of his care, as we have
by the sense of taste which he has given unto us. Wherein also he admonishes
us in such sort of our mortal nature through the necessity we have of food
for the preservation of our life, A testimony of the great providence of God.
as that withal he supplieth this want and necessity, that we may the
better know and taste the sweetness of his love toward us. For, whereto would
those creatures serve that are good for our nourishment, if we had no use of
them? And how could we use them, if we stood not in need of them? Therefore
seeing the matter stands thus, it appears evidently, that we are nourished
by such things as are familiar and like to our nature, and are healed by things
contrary to that which hurts us. For the nearer any thing approaches to our
nature, the sooner it is converted into it. So that amongst those meats that
are familiar unto us, they nourish best that draw nearest to our nature. For
this cause babes new borne that are little and tender, have milk for their
food, which is very meet for them by reason of the agreement that is between
it and the matter whereof their bodies are made. What meat is fittest for
infants.
For, as we have already heard, the milk is made of the self same blood
wherewith they were nourished in their mothers womb, and whereof they were
before engendered and conceived: forasmuch as the parents seed, of which they
were framed, is derived from their own blood. Whereupon it follows, that the
matter of their bodies is of the same substance: and so that food which draws
nearest unto it, is most natural and meet for them. For this cause we said
before, that all things are not serviceable for meat, drink and nourishment,
but those only that have a nature agreeable thereto, and that for the reasons
specified by us. Here then we must call to mind that which we have already
touched elsewhere, namely that seeing the body of man is compounded of all the
elements, it is therefore needful that the nourishment wherewith it is to be
preserved and vpholden, should participate of all the elements, to the end that
all and every part of a man's body should be maintained and preserved by yt
which is like to it self. Therefore God has well provided to this purpose, as
we see in the matter whereof our bodies are made. For we have heard what
difference there is according to the sundry parts and diversity of members in
the body: and yet the whole matter of the^ all is taken from the substance of
the same elements, and the difference between them comes of this only, that
some parts participate more of some elements, From whence comes the different
substance of our members.
and others of other elements. Hereof it is, that the hardest parts of the
body, as the bones, are most earthy: and so consequently of all the other
parts, as they have either more or less of all the elements and of their
qualities. For this cause all the parts and members of the body must have food
agreeable to the nature of the elements whereof they participate, according to
the portion of matter which is in every one of them. Wherein we see a goodly
testimony of the bond and agreement that is among all creatures, yea in all
nature it self, together with the correspondencie that every creature has
with it like. Therefore if we want air for breathing, we draw it in even as
it is of it own nature, together with those qualities which it brings with
it self. If we desire drink, only to refresh and to moysten the body and
the meat it takes, pure water serves that turn, which is common drink for
all creatures, and sufficient for the whole life of man, although there were no
other. Men have more variety of drinks then beasts.
But God has given this advantage to men above beasts, that besides this drink
common to them both, they have others, not only more pleasant to their taste,
but also more forceable to nourish them. For if the question be of taking
sustenance either by meat or drink, we must have such meats and drinks as
are more firm then the air and the water, and which are able to sustain the
body according to it own substance and nature. For as the water and the air,
whereof the body is made, could not consist in the composition thereof, but
would slide and fall away, if they were not intermingled with some other
matter that is more earthie and solid, thereby to keep and knitte them
together: even so, if food consisted only in liquide and moist things, that
had no other substance of more earthie and solid quality, in which the virtue
of heat might remain, and which might be converted into the greatness and
massinesse of the body, the living creature would always have an appetite,
and never leave eating. Therefore God has so framed those creatures, which he
has given to man for meat, that whatsoever is earthy therein does not still
retain the nature of the earth, as if it were nothing but simple earth: and so
likewise that which is of the nature of fire, or of the water, or of the air:
but all is so well mingled and tempered one with another, that the taste and
savor thereof is pleasant and fit for all the parts of the body, that are
to be nourished. And according as the qualities of the elements are mingled
one with another, so the meats and drinks compounded of them, have their
sundry tastes together with their other qualities. For if God had not so
provided for it, man could have no taste therein: and if he tasted not, he
would have no appetite, and so could neither eat nor drink. And if he could
neither eat nor drink, he could not live, as we may judge by that which we
have already heard. We must eat neither too much not too little.
Now as he cannot live without eating and drinking, so it is requisite that
he eat and drink with that moderation, that he take in no more meat and
drink then he ought to do. For if he take too little, he cannot be
sufficiently nourished: and if he take too much, instead of being satisfied,
he shall be burdened, and in stead of preserving his life, he will kill
himself. Therefore it is very necessary that every one should always
observe great sobriety, otherwise God will correct our riot, our gluttony and
drunkenness. But the danger that comes by not keeping a mediocrity, is a
great deal more to be feared on the one side then on the other. For there are
but few that break not square oftener in eating and drinking too much then to
little. Now to end this speech, we have farther to gather such good
instructions as all men have in those things which God has given them for
nourishment, The chief end of food.
yea in their mouth also, to the end to render unto him honor, glory and
praise. Whenever beasts do eat, their tongue serves to feed them, no
otherwise then that of men does help them: but they praise not God with that
tongue which serves to nourish them, because he has not given them that gift
of speech, wherewith he has endued man, and that for the cause which we have
already heard. For as a fountain cannot be without a river, so a river cannot
be without a fountain. For this cause seeing reason, of which God has made
man partaker, is as it were a fountain in him, and speech as the river that
issues from it, the Grecians express both reason and speech with one and the
same word, which Saint John also used, when speaking of the Deity of Jesus
Christ, John 1.
he said, In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and that
word was God. For as all the works of God are perfect in their kind, so he
makes nothing without cause, and which has not his use. So likewise he gives
nothing to any creature, but withal he gives the instruments and means which
it ought to use, thereby to be made serviceable as the thing it self
requires. Hereof it is that he gave not speech to beasts, because he made
them not partakers of reason, without which speech would stand them in no
stead: so that it would have been a superfluous work of GOD. Therefore
seeing it is so, God requires not of beasts that they should by speech praise
him with their tongue, as he requires it of men, unto whom he has given the
means to perform it. For beasts have neither reason to understand what is
spoken, nor speech to utter any thing thereby, whereas man has both the one
and the other. He has both the fountain, and also the river that runs from
it. Wherefore when he sits down to meat, and whilst he is taking his
refection (to which use his tongue serves him, according as we heard before)
and when he rises from table, truly he is much more brutish then any brute
beast, if with the self same tongue he does not praise and glorify God,
acknowledging as he ought the goodness of that celestial Father, Unthankful
men are like to hogs.
that gives him that food, and that nourishes him. If he do otherwise, he
looks no more from whence the meat comes unto him then does the hog,
who with his snowte always toward the earth, feeds upon the akornes that
are underneath the Oaks, and never looks or considers from whence they
fall. Yea, the hog does a great deal better discharge his duty in
praising GOD then such men do, that eat and drink as brute beasts without
giving thanks to God for the benefits he distributeth amongst them. For he
prayseth God in his kind, as all other creatures do in theirs, according as
the kingly Psalmist testifies in many places of his Psalms. Neither does God
require more of them then he has given unto them. But seeing he has given
more to man then to all other visible and bodily creatures, he requires so
much the more of him, and that very justly. For as it is written, Luke 12. 48.
To whom much is committed, more shall be demanded of him. Wherefore man is not
only too too inexcusable, but more vile and savage then any brute beast, if
his tongue serve him no farther at the table for the praising of God thereby,
then if (beastlike) his snowte and nose were in a cratch or manger. For how
shall the food in the use thereof be sanctified by the word of God and
prayer, if he take it after that sort? And if it be not sanctified unto him
by that mean, as Paul teaches, he uses it not as the child of GOD, but as
a thief and a very profane man. For as Every creature of God is good when it
is received with thanksgiving, 1. Tim. 4. 4.
so it is defiled to the filthy, not through any fault of the creature, but of
such as abuse it like to Infidels. But all they abuse it that give not thanks
for it to the Creator. Food must be received with thanke^ giving.
Wherefore as every thing is clean to the clean, that have their hearts
purified by the word of God which they have received by faith, so nothing is
clean to the defiled and to infidels. But if these men of whom we speak, be
unworthy to be taken for men, yea, to be compared with hogs, then whom they
are much more vile and detestable, we may easily judge what is to be said of
those that do not only not praise God or give him any thanks, but which is
worse, blaspheme, and as it were despite him in liew of recompensing him for
the benefits they have received of him, which is usually done by gluttons,
drunkards, and swearers. What shall we say of such men, but that they deserve
rather to be called mad dogs then men? Some more like to mad dogs then
men.
except we had rather call them children of the Devil, whose instrument,
tongue and mouth they are. And as for those that cease not to prattle and
babble about vain and unprofitable matters, and that take delight in
backbiting and slandering every one, we may with good reason compare their
tongue to the clacket of a mill. For seeing every one of us carries a mill in
his mouth, as we showed before, these men may truly boast that their mill is
better furnished with all kind of instruments then others are. But they are
not the more to be esteemed for that, but rather the less, for the reasons
which we have already heard. And when they add to their clacking evil
speech and backebiting, infecting all tables where they come with their tongue,
they may well be compared to dogs that do not only bark but also bite.
But it is time to draw the last draught of the pensill upon the face of man's
body, by considering the sense of smelling with the member that belongs unto
it: wherein we look to be instructed by thee, ARAM.

Of the Nose, and of the sense of smelling, and of their profit and use: of
the composition, matter, and form of the Nose. Chap. 19.
ARAM. Forasmuch as beauty is a grace that proceeds of the proportion,
agreement and harmony of things, it is then very seemly in man's body, What
beauty is, and wherein it consists.
when it follows nature only, and is without any blemish or defect. Now
this beauty consists in sour things, namely, in figure, in number, in
greatness and in situation. For the members of the body are well or ill
colored according to the disposition of the matter. And the correspondencie of
the members one toward another, as well in the number, as in the length and
greatness of each of them well compassed and proportioned together, is one
cause also of beauty: as likewise the placing of every one of them in his
proper place, most conuement and agreeable to his nature and use. For if any
thing be wanting of all these things in any member of the body, there is
deformity in stead of beauty.

But if we consider only the beauty of the head and of the face thereof,
whereof we discoursed yesterday, we shall not find any one member that has
not singular beauty in it, and that agrees not very fitly with the rest,
being of so good proportion and measure, and having such a great and excellent
grace, that a man may truly say that the whole work has in each part
thereof so great perfection, that nothing can be added or taken away, nothing
can be wished to make it more fair, profitable, excellent or perfect then it
is in it own nature. To the setting forth of this beauty, the nose, whereof
we are to speak, serves very much, yea so much, that hardly any member in
all the face or head so disfigureth a man, or makes him more deformed then the
nose, if it be evil favored, disfigured, or taken clean away. But besides
this beauty, which it brings to a man's head, we are to know, that it is
very serviceable to the whole body, The nose is very serviceable to the brain.
and chiefly to the brain lodged in the top thereof, as it were the Lord and
Master: that as it gives motion and sense to all the members, so it might be
compassed about with all the senses, as it were with seruitours and men of
guard. Therefore as it has near about it, the eyes, ears, tongue, and palate,
which are the instruments of seeing, hearing and tasting: so the nose is
needful to serve the sense of smelling. Neither is it placed so near the
sense of tasting without the great providence of God. Why the sense of smelling
is placed so near to that of tasting.
For there are many things in nature, which if they be tasted only are deadly,
or at leastwise very dangerous and hurtful, as appears chiefly in things
that are venomous and poysonfull. For this cause, albeit the sense of smelling
be not altogether so necessary for living creatures, namely, for such as are
most perfect, as the other senses, so that they may more easily want it,
nevertheless GOD has given it them, to the end it might be as it were a
messenger to the taste to show what is good for it and what not, and this
chiefly for two reasons. The first is, to keep men from hazarding themselves
through an immoderate desire to eat and drink, before they have discerned by
the smell of such things as are to be taken, whether they be profitable or
hurtful for them. The second reason is, to take all suspicion and fear from
them, which otherwise might cause them to abstain from those things that are
good and profitable for them. Of the agreement of these two senses.
And therefore this sense of smelling is nearly conjoined, and has great
agreement with the sense of tasting. For this is a general rule, that, albeit
every thing that smells well has not always a good taste, yet whatsoever a
man finds good to his taste, the same has also a good smell: and
contrariwise, that which is found to have an ill relish, the same has also
the like smell. For the taste and smell are given not only for profit, but
for pleasure also and delight. Neither do those things which serve for
delectation, always bring profit, but sometime the contrary, principally
through their fault that know not how to use them moderately. For they are so
subject to their pleasures, How men abuse these senses.
that they can never keep measure in anything, as we see by experience,
especially in these two senses of taste and smell. For as the ordinary meats
satisfy not the delicate appetites of men, but they must have new dainties
daily invented to provoke their appetite further, and to cause them to eat and
drink more then is needful, to their great hurt: so men are not contented
with natural odours which nature brings forth of it self, but now they
must have muskes and perfumes, with infinite variety of distilled waters and
artificial smelles, in regard of which, natural favors are nothing set by.
And yet if they were used with sobriety, there were no cause of reprehension,
seeing all the creatures of God are good, if they be used moderately, and a
they ought with thanksgiving. Hereof it is that they are oftes mentioned in
Scripture in the good part. And not to seek far off for examples, John 12. 3.
we have the testimonies of the holy Eua^gelists, as our Lord Jesus Christ
himself, who was neither nice nor voluptuous, but the perfect pattern of al
sobriety and temperance, did not reject nor condemn precious ointments and
sweet odours, but sometime permitted the use of them upon his own person. How
the spirits are res^est^ed with sweet odours.
Moreover, it is certain, that the animal spirits in the brain are greatly
relieved and recreated by those good and natural smells that are conveyed unto
them by means of the nose, and of the sense of smelling placed therein: as
contrariwise they are greatly offended by evil odours, yea oftentimes by
artificial savors, which commonly cause rhumes, catharres, and great
headaches. For the spirits of the head are subtle, pure, and very neat, so
that sweet smelles are good for them, and stinking savors contrary unto them.
To this end therefore that the brain might receive this benefit of good
odours, Of the diverse uses of the nose.
God has placed both the sense and instrument of smelling so near unto it:
the instrument to keep and convey odours unto it, the sense to discern and
judge of them. Therefore this sense of smelling has some agreement both with
the fire and with thick air, because smells are stirred up by heat, as smoke
is by fire, which are after carried by means of the air unto the sense, and
received and kept by the nose. Forasmuch also as the brain needs air to
nourish and preserve the animal spirits, the nose in this respect also
stands it in great stead. Therefore God has created it not only to serve
the sense of smelling, but also for respiration, that it should be the
principal pipe and passage, by which both the brain and lungs may draw in or
let out breath as need requires. For this cause the brain does stretch out
and restrain it self: and as by stretching forth it self it draws in the
air by the nosethrilles, so by keeping it self close together it retains
the air. And so the external air being drawn in by the nosethrilles, is
distributed by the cranies that are open in the palate, in such sort, that the
greatest part is drawn into the lungs, and the residue goes to the brain by
the passages and holes that lead unto it. And although the mouth serves also
for respiration, yet the nose is appointed more especially for that purpose,
and is much more fit and apt for the same. Therefore God has given it both
matter and form agreeable for that office. Of the matter of the nose.
For first concerning the matter, it is not made all of bone, nor all of
gristles: because if it were all of bone, a double inconvenience would ensue
thereof. The first is, that the bones would be in danger of breaking, chiefly
about the end of the nose when it should hit against any hard thing because
they would not bend and give place easily, as sinews will do. The second
inconvenience would be this, that the ends of the nosethrilles could neither
open nor shut, neither enlarge nor restrain themselves, but would continue
always at one stay: whereupon two other mischiefs would follow. First, the
nose could not open and enlarge it self so much as were requisite many times
to draw in great store of air to cool and refresh both the lungs and the
brain, especially when they are heated and set on fire. For at such a time
there is peril of strangling. Secondly, forasmuch as the nose is given to man
that it might serve the brain in stead of a pipe and spowt to purge it of
slegmatike humors, How the nose is in stead of a spowt to the brain.
a man could not by blowing, close it together and strain it to get the filth
out of it, as need requires many times. For the humors that distill from the
brain are not always very liquide and running, but sometimes so gross and
thick, that a man cannot easily purge the brain or nose, except it be closed
and strained hard. Thus you see two evident causes why it was needeful that the
nose should be compounded of gristles, and not of bones only, at lest wise
from the middle downward. On the otherside, if this lower part had been made
of flesh only, or of kernelles, or of skins, the nosethrilles could not so
well have bin enlarged or re^strained, nor continued so open, as is requisite
for the service of all those duties and offices already mentioned: besides
that those parts could not so well withstand the inconveniences whereunto they
might be subject, if they were of a more tender matter. Lastly, as it was
needful that one part of the nose should consist of that matter for those
causes spoken of, so also it was necessary that the upper part should be made
of bones, not only to keep the sense of smelling the better, which is in that
part, and to be as it were a buckler unto it, but also to serve in stead of
rampires both for the eyes and for the brain. As for the inward parts, there
are two nosethrilles distinguished one from another by a gristle which is
between them both, Of the nosethrils, and of their parting asunder.
as it were alittle wall to divide them, to the end that if the one be
stopped, the other may always discharge the offices assigned to them both. And
to the end they may more easily draw in the air for the service as well of the
lungs as of the brain, and also receive in the odours, they are larger at the
first entrance, and after as they ascend up they wax more narrow, and that not
without good reason of the providence of God. For he has in a manner taken
the self same course that he did in the composition of the ears, which he
made large and wide at the entry, having that form, and that hole within, which
we heard spoken of before, together with the causes why. The self same reason
in a manner may be re^dred here. For as it is to be feared, that over great
soundes would hurt the ears if they entered in all at once, so the lungs and
much more the brain might be over cooled by the air that should enter in at
the nosethrilles, if it should ascend up too fast at once, too suddenly, or too
vehemently. By reason whereof it is requisite, that it should be retained in
some sort, to the end that by the tariance which it makes, it should be
heated and better tempered. The like consideration is to be had of the vapors
and smelles in regard of the brain, not only of evil savors, but also of
those that are good. For some are so violent by reason of the abundance of heat
in them, which falls out chiefly in such as are most excellent, that if they
be not dispensed moderately, they hurt the brain. This comes to pass in
some persons, through the weakness of their brain. There are others, and namely
such as care not for sweet things, who take no peasure, no not in good smells,
so that often times the sweetest and most delicate odours are hurtful to their
head. Now God has well provided for all these things, having placed a little
bone in the top of the nose, which is pierced through like to a little sieve.
Hereupon it is called by the Phisicions the siue-bone, Of the spungie or
siue-bone.
or otherwise, and that more properly, the spu^gy bone, because the holes
thereof are not strait, as are those of a sieve, but somewhat slopewise like to
the holes of a sponge. And this serves for the better and more commodious
discharging of all those uses declared by us, and for the avoiding of those
discommodities which we have heard of. Whereunto may be added, that the humors
which descend from the brain may not fall down so fast together, but distill
better by little and little, and the good humors be kept more easily from
falling down all at once together with the evil. Of the muscles of the
nosethrils and of the sinews of smelling.
I pass over here briefly the muscles given to the nosethrilles to move
them, as also the nerves, which are sent from the brain to the sense of
smelling to bring unto it the virtue of smelling, as the eyes, ears, palate,
and tongue receive from thence their nerves also, which bring unto them that
faculty and virtue that is meet for their nature. Wherein we may further
note one goodly point of the providence of God, in that giving motion and sense
to every member of the body by the sinews, he gives a special and proper
sense to those nerves that are to minister virtue and power to every one of the
corporal senses, which the other sinews have not. For there is none that
gives the sense meet for sight, but those that are allotted to the eyes for
that purpose. The same may be said of those that are given to the ears for
hearing, and to the tongue and palate for the taste, and to the nose for
smelling. Now to end this speech, we are to draw out some instruction meet
for the mind, according as we have done in our discourses of the other senses
of the body. As then we judge by the nose and sense of smelling which God has
given unto us, what difference there is between a good and a stinking smell,
and how the one is pleasant and delightsome, and the other unpleasant and
abominable: so likewise we ought to consider what small pleasure God takes in
the infection and stinch of our sins, Notable instructions for the soul.
and how he is delighted with the sweet smell of the justice and virtues of
Christ Jesus, when we are prefumed therewith, and when he smells the savor
thereof in us. Therefore whenever, and as often as we feel some stinch and
abhor the same, that evil smell ought to admonish us of the filthiness of our
sins, and teach us to have them in greater abomination then any catrion smell
whatsoever, and to abhor our selves when we present our selves before God,
prefumed with such an infernal savor. For if we turn our faces aside, and
stop our nose, and even spit upon the ground when we meet with some great
infection, shall we not think that God turns his face from us when he
finds us so stinking and infected? Contrariwise, when we smell some good
savor, it ought to bring into our remembrance the odor of Jesus Christ his
sacrifice, and of those virtues that are well pleasing and agreeable in the
sight of God, and stir us up with all endeavor to present him with such smells,
to the end we may be of good odor before God and men. Which the holy word
will teach us, after he has given us a spiritual nose whereby we may
attain to the right sense and smell of that good odor of Jesus Christ and of
the Gospel, working in us the spirit of discretion to discern truth from
lying, that our souls may be refreshed, as the brain is by those good smells
that are brought unto it by the bodily nose, and by the sense of smelling that
is therein. Now therefore being come to the end of this goodly matter of the
five corporal and external sense, me thinks we should profit much by a brief
collection of their use, and of the commodity which they bring to men:
considering also the diversity that is in their faces and visages, in which
these goodly organicall instruments of the senses are planted: and how their
faces are images and pictures of their heart and mind. The discourse of this
matter appertainth to thee ACHITOB.

Of the use briefly of all the outward senses for the service of man, namely in
purging the superfluities and ordures of his body: of the diversity that is in
men's faces, and of the image of the mind and heart in them. Chap. 20.
ACHITOB. When we taste some pleasure by considering the works of God, namely
those which we bear about us in our nature, (as indeed such contemplation
affoordeth great delight to their souls that are not buried in ignorance) we
ought to think that we have great occasions and certain means to consider,
what pleasure and joy it would be to see and behold the Creator and Workmaster,
who has made and given to man such excellent senses, such wonderful virtues
and faculties: what delight arises of hearing and smelling only some small
odor, and of tasting a little of his providence, wisdom, goodness, benignity,
grace, and mercy much more, when they are throghly tasted and relished of us.
Which may be performed by them that employ all care and diligence in meditating
in his eternal word, and in considering the works of his Almighty power,
until such time as by the dissolution of this mortal tabernacle of the body,
they shall have put on immortality to enjoy true contemplation, that is, to
behold him face to face, who only is able to satisfy soul with goodness and
felicity, Psalm. 16. 11.
as the Prophet teaches us where he says, In thy presence is the fullness of
joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Now then we may
know by that which we have hitherto heard in these our discourses, what
testimonies God has planted of his great providence in all the parts of our
bodies, what care he has had and still has of man, Of the use of the
external senses.
and how he has given him as many corporal senses as he needs for the use
and fruition of all those visible and bodily creatures which he has created.
For he has eyes, whereby he uses and enjoys the light, and the pleasure of
such diversity of colors as may be seen in the world, as well natural as
artificial and compounded, with the sundry mixtures of natural things. Then
by the ears he has the use of al kinds of sounds, and principally of speech,
together with the pleasure of harmonies and melodies consisting in the variety
of tunes and songs, as well of m^ns voice as of birds and other creatures, and
also of instruments of music, which are so many and of such diversity
amongst men And by means of the nose and nosethrils he has the fruition and
pleasure of odours and smells so diverse in nature, both natural and
artificial: and by means of the mouth, tongue, and palate he enjoys and
judges of all sorts of tastes, which also are very diverse, and chiefly of
meats and drinks wherewithal he is nourished. For this good God has
appointed a mean for the preservation of man's life, whereunto he has joined
pleasure with profit, if men know how to use the same with moderation and
measure, rather to make supply no necessity then to satisfy pleasures. The
like may be said of all the rest of the feelings and touchings of all the
bodily members, of which there is great variety.

But having spoken sufficiently of the composition of the external parts of
man's body, and of the outward members, of the natural senses of man and of
their uses, we ought to consider also what instructions God gives by them unto
men concerning their infirmity. Of the fupersluities that proceed out of the
body.
For although the body of man be so beautiful and excellent outwardly as we
have declared, yet it has infection within, which of necessity must appear
and break forth outwardly, that it may be purged and vnburdned. For the body
cannot reap that profit of the nourishment it receives by all the elements,
and chiefly of that which it eats and drinks, as that it can convert and
turn al of it into nourishment and substance, and avoid all those accidents
and inconveniences whereunto it is subject by reason of the infirmity of it
own nature. Therefore it comes to pass necessarily, that the body is full of
excrements, of much superfluity and ordure, which would kill it if it were not
discharged and delivered thereof. For these excrements would be poison unto it
in stead of nourishment. Therefore the providence of God has so provided a
remedy for the same, that admonishing man of his infirmity, to the end he
should always remember that he is created of clay and earth, and that he shall
return unto it again, it has withal ordained the means whereby man should
be comforted and discharged of those excreme^ts and superfluities which might
hurt him. And for this cause there is no member but has his proper passages
appropriated for purgation and serving in his place, yea even the noblest
members. For I speak not only of those members, Of the passages meet to purge
the body by.
which we account most vile, abject, and shameful, and which nature teaches
us to cover and hide, being appointed for the voiding of the grosest, vilest,
and most filthy excrements, but also of those that are the excellentest and
chiefest in ye head and face, so that there is no part of our body out of which
there proceeds not some infection and filthiness. Insomuch that a man may well
say, that our whole body is within as it were a stinking draught or puddle that
emptieth it self on every side as it were by sinks and gutters. For if we
consider it generally, there is no part that is not subject to sweat, (which
oftentimes sauoureth very strongly) and that purges not it selfby sweating
from that superfluity, which it casts forth by that means. Therefore the
providence of God has so well provided for this, that the skin has in it little
holes called by the Physicions, Of the pores in the skin.
Pores: which are so subtle and so small, that they cannot be perceived by the
eye. Through these pores, the superfluities that are euaporated by sweat have
their issue, so that it comes to pass oftentimes, that sick persons are
cured by this only remedy, or at least wise they are greatly comforted
thereby. But let us come to the noblest members in the head, and in the
goodliest part of man, which is the face. The eyes, ears, nose, and mouth
serve for pipes and spowts to the brain and head, Of the spowts of the brain
and head.
to purge it of those superfluities that otherwise might oppress it. Wherein
we are again to consider of the providence of God, and of that care which he
has of us. For seeing the head is the principal member of the whole body, and
seeing the brain within the head is so noble a part, God has given unto it
more passages for the purging of it, then he has done to all the other members.
Therefore we see what store of phlegm does daily issue out by the nose and
mouth, so that a man is many times much troubled both in blowing his nose and
in spitting. In this respect it seems the nose makes the face to look like
a Limbeck, The face compared to a Limbeck.
albeit the water that distilleth through it has no very good smell, neither
is pleasant to look upon, no more is the spittle that comes out of the
mouth. As for the ears, they are not without their filth, so that they must be
oftentimes looked unto and cleansed, and the wax that is in them taken forth:
which differs much from the wax that is made by Bees. For as Physicions
testify, this eare-waxe is nothing else but the superfluity of the
chollericke humor, which is purged there by those pipes: as they say also,
that the melancholy humor is purged by the eyes, which are many times watrish
and very foul by reason of the rhumes and sundry humors that fall down upon
them. Whereby we see, how God does admonish us on all sides through the
infirmities of al our members, what account we are to make of our selves. Good
instructions for all men.
For if the goodliest and most noble members, if the pleasantest, most
delicate, and neatest parts are so foul and filthy, what shall we say of the
rest that are the basest and most abject, which are appointed for no other uses
then to be as it were the draughts and sinks of the whole body? But on the
other side let us consider how God by humbling us on the one side, does yet on
the other side provide for our necessities by those means of purging which he
has appointed for the body of man. Where we have further to observe, The
profit of care-waxe.
that there are some superfluities and excrements purged from the brain, which
are profitable for those members that are assigned to be the instruments of
their euacuation: as we see it plainly in that yellow humor that is purged by
the ears. For it defends them against fleas, little flies and other small
worms and beasts, that might otherwise enter within them.

We have further to consider for our better humiliation, that God has so
created all the members and instruments belonging to our corporal senses, as
that he admonishes us thereby of their nature, and what they can do of
themselves. For there is not one of the^, but it is in some sort made hollow,
to give us to understand thereby, that they exercise their principal and
chief office by receiving from without, that which belongs to their nature,
and not by sending forth any thing of their own. For when the eyes see, they
receive into them the images of those things that are before them. And if they
send forth any thing, it is so far from helping them to see better, that it
hinders and dimmeth the sight, as we see when men weep, or when any humor
runs out of their eyes. Likewise our nose has no sense of the odours, by
means of that wind and breath which proceeds out of it, but when it draws
in the air with which the odours are conveyed into it. And so it is of the
other senses. Whereby we are taught to know the nature of our soul, which
can bring forth no good thing, if it have not received it before of God, to
whom she can give nothing but only receives from him. You see then many
good lessons, which we are taught by the instruments of our senses and by our
own nature: but we commonly pass them over and never think of them at all,
or if we muse upon them sometimes, we say as much indeed, and confess it in
word, but in the mean time we are nothing humbled thereby. Now then we have
bestowed doors and windows upon the frame of man's body, and may with ease
behold the outward excellency and show thereof, in regard of so many goodly
works as are cut out and engraven in every external part of it. We are by and
by to look upon the inward furniture, being enriched with all sorts of rare,
great, and sumptuous works. But for the end of our present matter, seeing we
are taught that so many profitable and pleasant senses and members are planted
chiefly in the face and visage of man, it cannot be without fruit and great
admiration at the providence of God, The diversity of faces is wonderful.
if we consider that amongst so many faces as there are of men, women, and
children, a man shall hardly find two in all the world, that resemble each
other so near, but still some difference will appear to him that looks
narrowly upon them. And if therebe any so apparent resemblance that a man
cannot find any difference, yet that falls out very seldom. Neither is this
seen only in the whole countenance, but also in the several parts thereof,
and namely in the nose, whereof there is so great variety, The great variety of
noses.
as that you shall find very few that are like in all points: so that it is
to be wondered at, that in such great similitude of faces there is so great
dissimilitude. For there is great likeness in that they are all humane faces,
made of the same matter, and having the same parts: but yet they are very
unlike in respect of the particular differences, which are in each of them and
of their parts. Now if we have occasion to admire this diversity that is
among many, what shall we say to the dissimilitude and difference of countenance
that is to be seen in one and the same man, Variety of countenance in one man.
as if he had many faces to use and change at his pleasure, as we see men may
change maskes before their faces? It is certain that there appears great
difference in the countenance of one and the same man, as he is either young or
old, sound or sick. For as a man's years alter, so there will be still some
change in his face, bearing his countenance according to the health or sickness
that is in him. But I speak not now of this diversity, but of another which
happens to men in all ages, and at all times. For there is great difference
to be seen in a man's face according as he is either merry or sad, angry or
pacified, humble and modest, or lofty and proud. For if he be quiet and
modest, he will have a sweet, mild, and gracious countenance: The
description of an angry visage.
if he be angry, he will have a furious face, as though he were
transfigured into a savage beast, having fiery eyes as if he cast from them
flames of fire: he will cast forth smoke at his nosethrilles, as if he had
a furnace kindled within him: his whole countenance will be as red as if fire
came out of it. Therefore it was not without reason said of a Philosopher,
that angry and furious men should behold themselves in a glass, to the end
they might know thereby how such passions change their countenance, and how
they are transformed thereby and look hideous and fearful. And if a man be
lofty and arrogant, Of an arrogant countenance.
his visage will testify the same sufficiently, especially his eyes and
eie-lids, which will be lifted up, as if pride and arrogancy had there placed
their seat. For if we deny or grant any thing that pleases or displeases
us, we declare it by them, speaking by signs, as the tongue does by words.
And although pride be conceived and bredde in the heart, Pride is seated upon
the eye lids.
yet it is seated on the eye-liddes, where it shows and manifests it self.
For seeing it desires always to be advanced and to be lift up above all, yea
to be alone without any companion, that place is very fit and convenient for
it, being high, emiuent, and apparent. But a proud person ought to consider,
that that place is very much declining, to the end he may think of the
danger of falling down, as they that are in some high and sleep place where
they can take no hold. For it can not be but that pride will have a fall,
howsoever it may seem long first. For that sentence of Jesus Christ is always
true, who says, Matthew. 23 12. Luke 14. 11.
that Whosoever will exalt himself shall be brought low, and whosoever will
humble himself shall be exalted. The eyes also do speak and testify of the
heart within. For if the heart be humble, modest, chaste, and well stayed, the
eyes will be so answerable thereunto, that their very looks will declare
sufficiently how it stands affected. Contrariwise, if the heart be proud,
unchaste, loose, impudent, and lascivious, the look and countenance of the
eyes will openly bewray the same. Also we say commonly of such as have lost
all shame, that they have brazen and shameless foreheads. And it seems that
the French word Affronteur, is derived from thence, because they that are of
that occupation must have good foreheads, they must be bold and shameless,
like to harlots and murderers. And as shame is seated and appears
principally in the forehead and cheeks, The seat of shame.
so is it a note of impudency when shame is banished from thence: as that
which then possesses the place assigned to shame and modesty.

Therefore the Scripture attributes a brow of brass and of iron, Esaias 48. 4.
Ezech. 3. 8.
a hard forehead, and a strong face to them that are impudent and past grace,
to such as are intractable and rebellious. By these things then we know how the
face is the image, messenger, and witness of all the affections of the heart,
insomuch that it is very hard for him, do what he can, to cover and conceal
them. Also it is the image and witness of a good and evil conscience. For as a
good conscience causes it to appear joyful and open, so contrariwise an
evil conscience makes it sad and hidden, as it were the visage of a
condemned person. We commonly call Physiognomy the Science whereby men judge of
the nature, complexion, and manners of every one, by the contemplation of all
the members of the body, and chiefly of the face and countenance. Of the true
Physiognomy.
But there is no Physiognomy so certain as that which-wee have now touched,
whereby men may be easily convinced of that which they think to hide in their
hearts, which notwithstanding is quickly descried in their countenances, as
if we read it in a Book. Now it is time to enter into our edifice and
building, there to contemplate the internal and spiritual senses, which the
foul uses in her works and operations. But first we will make the way more
easy to attain to so high a matter, by learning briefly what is the nature,
faculties, and powers of man's soul, and what are the sundry kinds of souls,
the burden whereof I lay upon thee, ASER.

Of the nature, faculties, and powers of man's soul: of the knowledge which we
may have in this life, and how excellent and necessary it is: into what kinds
the life and soul are divided. Chap. 21.
ASER. If God has showed himself wonderful in the creation, composition,
nature, and use of the external senses and members of man's body (of which we
have hitherto discoursed) both in the matter whereof they are made and in the
form given unto them, and in all other things that belong unto them: no doubt
but we shall have much more cause to marvel at the excellent workemanshippe
of his providence in the composition, nature, and use of the internal senses
and members, which lie hidden within the body, whereof the sequel of our
speech requires that we should entreat. For these are the principal, by
means of which the other receive life, and are kept and preserved in life. But
forasmuch as the soul gives life to the whole body and to all the members
thereof, we are withal to consider of the nature thereof, what faculties and
virtues it has, and how it works in all the parts of the body, according
to that knowledge which GOD has given to men, both by the testimony of his
word, and by the effects of the soul. For neither the body nor any member
thereof should have any more motion or feeling then is in a block or stone,
if it had no soul to give it life. For this cause after Job has spoken of the
creation and composition of his body, Job 10. 12.
he adds, Thou have given me life and grace, and thy visitation (that is to
say thy providence) has preserved my spirit, This agrees with that, which we
have heard before of Moses, Genes. 2. 7.
where he says, That the Lord made man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed in his face breath of life, and the man was a living soul.

First therefore we must understand that there are in man three kinds of
faculties and virtues that work continually within him and never cease: Three
sorts of faculties in man.
the first is commonly called Animal, the second Vital, the third Natural. Of
these two latter we will speak hereafter. Concerning the Animal faculty, it
is divided into three kinds: the first is called Principal, Of the animal
power.
the second Sensitive, the third Motive. The Principal is divided by some into
three kinds, by others into five. They which make five sorts, distinguish
between the common sense, the imagination, and the fantasy, making them
three: and for the fourth they add Reason, or the judging faculty: and for
the fifth, Memory. They that make but three kinds differ not from the other,
but only in that they comprehend all the former three under the common sense,
or under one of the other twain, whether it be the imagination or the
fantasy. Of the sensitive.
As for the Sensitive faculty, it comprehends the virtues of the five
corporal senses, of which we have spoken before. Of the motive.
As for the Motive virtue, it comprehends the moving of all the outward
parts of the body from one place to an other, especially of the feet and
legs which is to walk, and of the hands which is to apprehend and to gripe.
This moving is done by the sinews, muscles, and filaments, as we have already
declared: but not without knowledge and will, as the other that are more
properly called natural motions, of which we may speak in their order. And
this motion is led by the imagination in regard of beasts, but in regard of
men, by reason. But because we have already handled at large these two last
powers of the soul, namely, the Sensitive and Motive, when we spoke of the
external members of the body, we will now speak especially of the first, which
comprehends the internal senses spoken of by me even now, which answer to
the external senses, according to the bond, agreement, and communication which
the body and soul have together. And because we cannot know the faculties and
virtues of the soul, How we come to the knowledge of the soul.
but only by means of those instruments whereby it works, as we have showed
in our former discourses the nature and use of the external members, and how
the soul is served by them: so now we will do the like by the internal parts,
to the end that we may the better know the nature of the soul by her
operations and instruments, as the labourer that works by his instruments,
and frames those works that are before our eyes. For the soul being of a
spiritual nature and not bodily, we cannot see it in it own substance and
nature, nor have any knowledge thereof but by the effects, by which we may
judge and conclude of their cause, as also by those testimonies of the soul,
which the Lord affords us in his word. And although the understanding of
man can not attain to an entire and perfect knowledge of the soul, yet that
small knowledge which we may have, does exceedingly profit end delight us.
For seeing it is the most excellent creature that is created under the cope of
heaven, yea more excellent then the heavens themselves, or any of the
celestial bodies, because the soul only is endued with reason and
understanding, The knowledge of the soul how necessary and excellent it is.
there is no doubt but the knowledge thereof is more excellent, profitable,
pleasant, and necessary, yea more worthy admiration then of any other thing
whatsoever, as that which always yields profit to the greatest things that
can be. Therefore we ought not to set light by that knowledge of it which we
may attain unto. For there is in it so great variety, beauty, and harmony,
yea it is so well adorned and set forth, that no heaven nor earth is so well
painted or bedecked with such beautiful, lively, and excellent images and
pictures, as that is. On the other side, she is the Mistress and Author from
whence proceeds the invention of all Arts and Sciences, and of all those
wonderful works that are made throughout the whole course of man's life.
Therefore no man can behold her or think upon her without great pleasure and
admiration. And seeing the fountain and wellspring of all the good and evil
that befalls us is in the soul, there is nothing more profitable for men
then to know it well, to the end they may labor more carefully to keep this
fountain pure and well purged, that all the rivers of their actions and works
may issue and flow pure and clean from thence. For that man can never govern
his soul well, The knowledge of our selves very, necessary.
nor be master of himself, that does not know himself. If we desire to
know what works we are to look for of a workman, what he can do, or what
may befall him, what he is good for, and for what he is unmeet, he must
first of all be known what he is. Therefore that sentence of which we have
already spoken, that says, Know thy self, ought here especially to take
place and to be practiced. For it is a harder matter to know the nature and
quality of our soul and of our mind, the virtues and affections thereof, to
enquire and consider of it well, and to know what may be known thereof, as
also the diverse and holow lurking holes, the turnings and windings therein,
then to know the bones, flesh, sinews, and blood of our bodies, with all the
matter whereof it is made, and all the parts and members thereof. Seeing then
we are to make inquiry of the nature and powers of the soul by the effects
thereof, according as I have already spoken, and seeing the principal effect
is the life which it gives to all living creatures, let us first consider of
the difference that is between the creatures void of life, and those that have
life in them. Afterward let us look into the sundry sorts of lives that are
in living creatures, as that which will help us well to the understanding of
that we seek for. First then we must note that all creatures are either
spiritual or bodily. The division of creatures.
All they are spiritual creatures that are without bodies, and which cannot be
perceived by any bodily sense, and such are the Angels both good and bad, and
the souls and spirits of men. The bodily creatures are all those that are
visible, and that may be felt and perceived by corporal senses: amongst which
some have no life, and some have life. Of creatures without life.
Again, those creatures that have no life, differ in two respects; for some of
them have no natural motion, as stones, metalles, mineralles and such like
creatures. Others have their natural motion: among which some are mutable,
corruptible and subject to change, others are immutable and incorruptible,
continuing always firm in their estate during the course of this world. The
water, the air, the winds and the fire are creatures having motion, albeit
they have no life: but they are subject to corruption, and so are all the
creatures that are compounded of the elements, whether they have life or no.
For being made of contrary matters and qualities they corrupt and change, not
in respect of their first matter and substance, which can never perish,
according to the testimony of Philosophers, notwithstanding it alter in form,
but always returns to the first nature. Stones and metalles, albeit they be
very hard, yet are they not freed from corruption and consuming through use.
The celestial bodies are immutable.
But the celestial bodies are of that matter and nature, that they move
continually, and yet abide always entire and in their first form, not being
subject to any change in respect of their bodies, neither do they wear or
consume away as other creatures do that are underneath them. Insomuch that none
of the celestial spheres are either wearied, worn or spent more with all the
labor they have undergone by the space of so many years, then they were the
first day of their creation. For we must not take it for a change of their
natures and qualities, that according to their diverse course, the sun,
moon, and other planets and stars are sometimes further off, sometimes
nearer each to other, that they have their oppositions, conjunctions, diverse
and different aspects, according to the diversity and difference of their
course and motion. We may say as much of the Eclipses both of the sun and
moon. For the change that is amongst them is not in their own bodies,
substance, and qualities, Of creatures having life.
but only in regard of us and of our sight. Concerning the creatures that
have life, they are for the most part divided into three kinds: but they that
distinguish more subtly make four kinds. And because life is given by the
soul, the Philosophers make as many sorts of souls as they do of lives, and
call them by the same names. They call the first, the nourishing or vegetative
soul or life: the second, the sensitine: the third, the cogitatiue: and the
fourth, the reasonable soul, or the soul partaker of reason. Of the
vegetative life.
Touching the first, there is a kind of life, that has no other virtue in the
creature to which it is given of God, then to nourish and cause it to increase,
and to keep it in being, until this life fail it. The soul that gives life
with these effects is called nourishing or vegetative: and this is proper to al
herbs, trees, and plants that are maintained and kept in their kinds by the
seeds, or by planting, setting, Of the sensitive.
and such like propagations. The second kind of life named sensitive, is so
called, because it gives not only nourishment and growth, as the first, but
sense also and feeling. They that will have but three kinds, make but one of
this and of that which is called cogitatiue by them that make four, who
attribute the sensitive soul to the sea spunges, to oysters, cockles, and to
those creatures which the Graecians and Latins call by a name, which in our
language signifies as much as plant-liuing creatures, because they are of a
middle nature between plants and living creatures having life and sense, as if
they were compounded of both these natures together: so that they are more then
simple plants, and yet are not perfect living creatures, as those are to whom
is attributed the cogitatiue or knowing soul. Of the cogitatiue.
And this is a soul and life, which not only gives whatsoCuer the two former
imparteth to the creatures in whom they are, but also a certain virtue and
vigor, as of cogitation, of knowledge, and of memory, that they may have skill
to preserve their life, and know how to guide and govern themselves according
to their natural inclination. This soul is proper to brute beasts, whom
some think to be partakers after a sort of reason, so far forth as it
concerns things belonging to their nature. But we will proceed no further
at this time in this disputation: only let us note that they which make but
three kinds of soul or life, do give to brute beasts that which we called
Sensitive, comprehending them under that kind of life, unto which they
attribute the same virtue and vigor whereof we now spoke, and which is
distinguished by others, from that kind of soul that gives only simple
sense unto the creature. Of the reasonable soul.
The fourth kind of soul and life is that of men, which has all whatsoever
is in the former kinds, and over and besides that (which is most excellent) it
is partaker of reason and understanding: wherein it agrees with the life of
Angels, as we will declare more at large in place convenient, and show also
the difference that is between them. For this cause the soul of man given
unto him, is commonly called a reasonable soul, as all the former are called
by man's agreeing to their nature, as we have declared. Therefore seeing this
kind of soul and life comprehends all the virtues and properties of the
rest, it may be called Uegetatiue, Sensitive, Cogitatiue and reasonable
altogether. But we must note here, that there is great difference between the
souls of men, and those other of which we spoke before. For beside that the
soul of man is partaker of reason and understanding, with all properties that
are in the rest, it has that common with the Angels, who are spirits
created of GOD to live a spiritual life without bodies, that it is immortal
also as well as they. But of this immortality we hope (GOD willing) to
entreat at large hereafter, as also of the creation and proper nature of the
soul. In these two points then of understanding and of immortality, The
soul of man differs from that of beasts, in understanding and immortality.
the soul of man does much differ from that of beasts. For although they
have a soul that gives unto them life, motion, and sense, with all other
things touched by me, yet it is not partaker of understanding, nor of an
immortal nature as the Angels and souls of men are, but it is of a mortal
nature, which ends and dies with the body. Therefore albeit the soul of man
has in it whatsoever is in the rest, beside that which is proper unto it above
the rest, and that which it has common with the Angels, nevertheless it is
called only by the name of that thing which is the principal, chiefest and
most excellent in it: as also the like is done with all the other kinds of
soul and life. But me thinks we ought to consider more fully of that which
man has either common or diverse in his nature from the soul of beasts, and
what are the proper actions of the soul joined with the body, and how it is
hindered by the body without any change of nature. For the consideration hereof
will greatly further our knowledge of the internal and spiritual senses, of
which we are to discourse, that we may step by step ascend up to the highest
understanding and knowledge which the mind of man can attain unto concerning
the soul. Let us therefore hear AMANA of this matter.

Of the two natures of which man is compounded: how the body is the lodge and
instrument of the soul: how the soul may be let from doing her proper
actions by the body, and be separated from it, and yet remain in her
perfection. Chap. 22.
AMANA. Albeit the greatest excellency of man, which far passes that of all
other living creatures, ought to be valued according to the soul that God has
given him, differing from the soul of all other living creatures, his body
being mortal and corruptible as that of beasts is, yet there are other points
of excellency in the matter, form, and use of all the parts and members of
which the body of man is made, that are not found in any of the other, as we
have sufficiently showed in our former discourses upon this matter. Whereby God
would teach us, that he has prepared and built this lodging for an other
manner of inhabitant then he built the bodies of beasts, The soul is the
proper inhabitant of man's body.
even for a soul that differs far from theirs. For seeing he makes
nothing without good reason, or that is without his profit, he shows by the
instruments prepared for the workman whom he will set on work, what manner of
one he ought to be, and what works he has to make. And because he has
appointed works and offices for the soul of man, which he would not have in
the soul of brute beasts, he has given to man such members and instruments
as he has not given to other living creatures. As for those instruments which
he has common with beasts, God has otherwise disposed and placed in his body
according to the office every one has, as we may learn by their discourses.

It is very evident, Two natures in man.
that man is not only this mass and lump of skin, flesh, sinews, bones,
and of such other matter gathered altogether in one body, whereof we have
spoken already, but that there is yet in him another nature whose substance is
invisible, over and above this bodily nature which we see. For experience
shows us what difference there is betwixt one and the same body when it is
alive, and when it is dead. When there is no life in it, none of all those
faculties and virtues whereof the former discourse entreated, appear within
it, as we see they do so long as life dwells therein. And yet then the body
is not deprived of those members which it had before death, but keeps them
still, until such time as they corrupt and waste away of themselves, and
finally fail altogether for want of the soul and life that should preserve
and keep them sound. In the mean time we see, that they are without force,
and as unfit for use, as if they were not at all, because they want soul and
life, which gives them vigor and sets the^ a working. It is very clear
then by death, that the body has no life of it self, nor any of those
faculties and virtues which life brings with it, but that it receives them
from another nature then from it own. And this nature is called Soul, having
sundry offices in man, as we have already understood, and will hereafter
handle them more particularly and in order. But in the mean time we must note,
that although the soul be not bodily, nevertheless it uses a bodily nature
and instruments which it receives from that, for the performance of those
works that are assigned unto it: which the soul could not do without such
instruments as are necessary thereunto. For as we heard in the former speech,
that among the creatures of God some are spiritual, others corporal, so we
are to know also, Two sorts of spirits.
that among the spiritual creatures, there are two sorts of spirits, of which
some, namely the Angels, were created to live a spiritual life agreeable to
their nature, The description of Angels.
approaching nearer to the nature and life that is in God then any other: not
being united or conjoined to any bodies that belong unto them, unto which they
should give life, as if they were creatures compounded of body and spirit.
Therefore we call them not by the name of souls, as we do the spirits of
men, which God has created to dwell in bodies, to give them life, and to be
joined with them in one person made of two natures, to wit, of a spirit and of
a body. Men's souls have always life in the.
These spirits, which are also called humane souls, can live well enough, and
preserve themselves in their substance, having life always in them, even after
they are separated from their bodies. But the like cannot be said of the
bodies, which cannot live, nor be preserved in their substance without their
souls and spirits. Therefore Jesus Christ said, Matthew. 10. 28. Luke 12. 4, 5.
Fear not them that kill the body and cannot kill the soul: but rather fear
him that can destroy both body and soul in hell. Wherefore albeit we cannot
see the soul, neither when it enters into the body, and is joined unto it,
nor when it dwells there, nor yet when it departs; yet it follows not
therevppon that it is not at all, or that it comes to nothing. For the
effects thereof show us the contrary, so long as that life which it gives
to the body continues therein. And albeit we see no more effects of it,
when it is severed by death, yet it follows not thereupon that the same thing
should befall it that does to the body, and so corrupt therewith. For it is
so far from corrupting with the body, that it keeps the same from
corruption so long as it is therein. And being separated, no marvel if it
effect no more that which it did in the body by those instruments which it
had, because it has them no longer.

Wherefore in this respect it is like to an excellent Woorkeman, The soul
compared to a cunning workman.
who cannot labor in his occupation without such instruments as necessarily
belong thereunto. Yet in the mean season the Woorkeman continues always in
the same estate, and has no less knowledge and art in him without his
instruments, then when he has them, albeit he use them not when they are
away. And although he enjoys both his instruments and his art, yet can he
not well use them, nor perform those works which he has to make, if they
be not found, but corrupted or spoiled, as we see in an instrument of
music. For if the chaunter or Musicion be very expert in his art, To a
musicion.
and handle his instrument as he ought to do, yet can he never deliver those
soundes, tunes and harmony which otherwise he would, if his instrument were
good. And yet that shall not hinder the Musicion from being always as
skillful and expert in his art, as if his instrument were very good and
sound. To an inhabitant.
Likewise if a man dwell in a dark lodging, he cannot see so well and
clearly, as in another that is very lightsome: and yet he shall not have
sundry eyes, but the self same in both places. So that it follows, that his
dimnesse of sight in the one lodging rather then in the other, proceeds not
of any defect in his eyes, but of the house and habitation wherein he is. The
like may be said of the soul lodged in the body, whose actions and works
therein are much hindered if it be badly lodged, if any part of the lodging
be not good, or if it want those instruments and tools that are necessary for
it. For although it has the virtue of sight in it self, yet it cannot without
eyes see those things, which by means of them it beholds. And although it
has in it self the virtue to cause the hands and feet to move, and to set
them on work according to their office, yet it cannot do those works by a
maimed and lame hand, which it will do by him that has both his hands, nor
cause a lame creeple wanting a foot or leg, or having some defect in those
parts, to walk as well as an other that has all these sound and perfect.
And a man may judge of my speech, by that which happens not only to them
that fall into an Apoplexy, but also to such as have some quaume about their
heart, so that they faint and sown, and are for the time as it were dead: and
yet afterward pluck up their spirits, and come again to their former
estate. But before they be revived, they seem as though they had no soul in
their bodies, because it is not perceived by the works thereof, as it is when
the body is well affected. And this is chiefly to be seen in a strong
Apoplexy, or falling sickness, in which the patient loses all motion and
sense. Whereupon it has come to pass oftentimes, that many have been buried
for dead in that case, who were notwithstanding alive, and some have recovered
and done well afterward, as we have many examples both in common experience,
and in histories old and new. Now whilst the soul is thus let from
performing her actions by such inconveniences, who would not judge, that she
were clean extinguished with the body? Nevertheless afterward when she can
use her instruments, she shows plainly that the fault comes not of her,
but of the instruments that fail her. The soul is the workman, the body, the
tool.
Therefore when we speak of the soul and of the body, we must put the same
difference between them that is betwixt a Workman and his tools, considering
the nature of both, and what they can do both jointly and severally. For an
instrument has neither knowledge nor force, nor virtue of it self, being able
to do nothing alone, but only so far forth as it is set on work by some
Woorkeman. But there is another reason in the Woorkeman. For although he
cannot use his art without those instruments that are necessary thereunto, yet
he has always abiding within him that art, power, force, and dexterity,
whereby he woorketh. So that when we speak of the soul, we are to consider
what she can do of her self and of her own nature without the body, and
what she cannot do without it. For we learn in the holy Scriptures, that
when Angels appeared to men, because they are spirits, and have no speech like
to that of men, as being bodilesse and wanting instruments necessary for the
framing thereof, therefore they took men's bodies to appear and speak to men
in and by them. No marvel then if the soul, which is created to use the
members of the body as instruments, speaks not without a tongue, as it does
with one, and with the other Organs of voice and speech. Now forasmuch as we
know, that the soul gives life, motion and sense to all the body, and that it
has sundry instruments in the body, in which and by which it perfourmeth those
works for which they were created of God, we are now to consider what
faculty, power and virtue it has in every part of the body. For albeit that
we cannot assign to the soul, especially to the spirit and understanding
which is the most excellent part therein, any certain place of lodging, as if
it were enclosed within any one part, or within all the parts of the body,
nevertheless we may judge of the nature thereof by those instruments whereby
it works, and by their nature, and by the works it produces. And in this
consideration we have a goodly glass, A glass to see God in.
wherein we may contemplate God that is invisible, making him visible and
known unto us by his works: even as the soul is become as it were visible,
and shows it self to us by the body, in which it dwells, and by the
works which it does therein. Therefore let us propound unto our selves this
whole visible world as it were one great body, then all the parts as members
thereof: next let us consider how the soul of all this great body, namely the
virtue and power of God works therein, and effects all the works that are
done therein, according to that order he has set therein, as the soul works
in the body of man and in every member thereof. Thus doing, as we know that
there is a soul in the body, and another nature beside that, which is bodily,
and which works therein, and this we perceive by the effects thereof: so let
us mark withal by the works done in this visible world, that there is another
nature that effects them, which being invisible differs from all this world
we see, as that which is far more excellent, which fills the whole, and by
virtue and power is in all the parts thereof, as a soul in a body. But in
propounding this glass before our eyes, we must take heed, that we fall not
into their dotage, who have thought and affirmed that the world is the body of
God, The world is not the body of God.
and that himself is the soul thereof. For thereupon it would follow, that
God is mortal and corruptible in regard of his body, and that some part or
other thereof would always corrupt, as we daily see corporal things do.
Again, if it were so, God should not be infinite and incomprehensible as he
is: for the world does not comprehend and contain him, but he all the world,
whereof he is the Creator, and by whom the world is and consists. Seeing then
the soul is the image of God in man, as the body of man is the image of this
great world, in which God works as the soul does in the body of man, let us
consider how God has distributed the powers, virtues, and offices of the soul
in the body, and in every part thereof, as he manifests his glory, and virtue
in all this visible world, and in all the parts of it. How the soul in the
body resembles God in the world.
For first they agree herein, that as there is but one soul in one body, which
is sufficient for all the parts and members thereof, so there is but one God
in the world, sufficient for all the creatures. Next, if we cannot conceive
how the soul is lodged in the body, or how it gives life unto it, neither
yet how it works and displayeth therein the virtues which it has, but only
so far forth as it testifies the same by those diverse effects, which we see
and perceive in every part and member thereof, no marvel then if we cannot
with our eyes discern or comprehend how God is throughout all, filling heaven
and earth, how he displayeth his power and virtue, how he works in all his
creatures, and how he guides, governs, and preserves them by his heavenly
providence. For if we cannot comprehend the creature, nor the nature thereof,
how shall we comprehend the nature of the Creator? And if it be not in our
power to know the works of God wrought in us, neither the works of our own
soul, The absurd collection of Atheists.
how shall we know his works done in the whole world? And if we be not able to
understand or comprehend them, does it follow therefore that he does them
not? yet there are many that conclude after that sort. For they believe nothing
but that which they are able to conceive, know, and comprehend by their natural
reason. And so, because they cannot know how ye soul being of a spiritual
nature is joined with the body, which is clean of another nature, nor
conceive how it is lodged and works therein, therefore they must conclude
that they have no soul, which works that in them that is there done. For
they see not, neither can they show how it works by those instruments,
which it has in the body, but only so far forth, as they behold the
work. But we shall have occasion elsewhere to handle this more at large. For
this time let us go forward with our speech of the powers and faculties of the
soul, considering first of the brain, which is the principal instrument
thereof, and the seat of the internal senses already mentioned by us, of
which we are to be instructed particularly.

Of the Brain, and of the nature thereof: of the sundry kinds of knowledge
that are in man: of the similitude that is between the actions and works of
the natural virtues of the soul, and of the internal senses. Chap. 23.
ARAM. The woorkemanship which God has wrought in the whole course of nature,
as well in the nature of the heavens as of the elements, of living things, of
plants, metals and other creatures, does undoubtedly contain in it great
miracles, and very excellent and evident testimonies: which show plainly unto
us, that the nature of all things, yea of the whole world, comes not by
fortune and at adventure, but that they were created and ordained by a more
excellent nature then any can be found in all the world. But there is not a more
express and clearer image of the divine nature, then in that part of man,
wherein are to be found those great and marvelous virtues and properties, Of
the Animal virtues.
which are commonly called Animales, as namely the thought, understanding, and
knowledge of numbers, and of order, reason, judgment, memory, with the
discerning of honest things from those that are dishonest, of good things from
bad, together with the election or reiection of them. Therefore the
contemplation of these virtues and powers is very necessary for us, that by the
knowledge of them we may daily learn to know GOD the better, by that
resemblaunce and similitude of his wisdom, which he has vouchsafed to
transfer and to imprint in man's nature: and that we might be induced
thereby to glorify him: and that we should labor to the uttermost of our
power, to have this image shine in us more and more, and daily to increase in
likeness unto the pattern from whence it is taken.

Now let us follow that division which we have already made of the sundry
faculties, virtues, properties and offices which the soul has in the body,
namely, the Animal, Vital and Natural: and that division also which we made
of man's body, unto which many attribute three several parts, and call them
bellies, the first and highest of which they place in the head, Three bellies
attributed to man's body.
for the Animal faculties and virtues: the second, which is the middlemost
belly, in the breast and stomach for the Vital virtues: and the last, from
the Midriffe to the share-bone for the Natural faculties. They understand by
the first the whole brain, which they divide also into sundry parts, and
call them likewise Bellies, and little Bellies. We have already heard of the
excellency of the head, of the place and situation thereof, of the goodly
outward members wherewith it is beautified, of the bones whereof it is made,
and of the covering wherewith they are covered, that the brain might have his
convenient lodging, and such a one as is requisite for the nature and office it
has: that it might be well fortified and defended on every side to preserve and
keep it well, against all outward inconveniences that might come unto it: and
to the end also it might have near about it all those servant and senses
which it guides and governs, and all those instruments which it stands
most in need of, both in regard of the works it is charged with, as also for
the purging thereof. Forasmuch then as it is lodged in the head, we are to
know, that as the head has a certain agreement with the heavens, and the eyes
with the celestial lights, Of the brain and of the image of God therein.
as we have already touched, so is it likewise with the brain. For it is of a
more heavenly nature, and approaches nearer to the spiritual and divine nature
then any other part of the whole body, as that wherein a man may find all
those excellent virtues and Animal powers, of which I made mention in the
beginning of my speech, and which are no actions or works of a brutish nature.
Whereof also it follows very well, that the Woorkemaster and author thereof,
cannot be of a brutish nature, without understanding and knowledge of order,
of things honest and dishonest, and of good and bad. Which teaches us
moreover, that he greatly esteems of the preservation of nature and of
humane society, and detesteth whatsoever is contrary thereunto, seeing he
has imprinted in man such an image of his divine nature, as he would not
willingly have defaced and blotted out. Wherefore, although we cannot thoroughly
know, either the nature of the brain, or the actions thereof, or of the soul
which it serves: yet yt which may come to our knowledge will greatly help to
confirm more and more this testimony of God and of his providence, which is
already imprinted in our hearts by the light and law of nature. Therefore it
were very good and profitable for us, to consider diligently of that
resemblance of God, which every one of us bears in a very small image, that
we may give him thanks, and refer to their proper end all those gifts and
excellent parts, which he has placed in our nature. We are to note then for
the first point, that as GOD manifests more excellently his divine nature,
and the glory of his majesty in the heavens, and in the highest parts of
this great visible world, then he does in other parts more base and
terrestrial, The brain most resembles the heavens.
as we may easily know by the contemplation of them: so deals he with the
head and brain of man, which is as it were the lodging of the internal senses
already named, which are far more excellent and noble then the outward
senses. For if living creatures, and chiefly man, should only and barely
apprehend those things that are before them, without any imagination, thought,
or consideration of them, thereby to know how to choose or reject them, as they
may be either profitable or hurtful, it would not be greatly profitable, to
have them presented to the outward senses. For this cause God has joined unto
them another faculty and virtue, which is much more excellent and wonderful
then is the simple apprehending of them. This faculty and power is given for
the knowledge of things, and that to the instruments in the brain, as it
appears by experience in this, that according as the brain and the parts
thereof are well or ill affected, it is perceived in the internal senses, of
which they are the instruments, as we will express more plainly in the
sequel of our speech. But concerning this present matter in hand, Three kinds
of knowledge.
we are to note, that there are three kinds of knowledge. The first knows
those bodies only that are present before it: the second knows those also
that are absent: and the third those things that have no bodies. We see by
experience, that although plants have a certain agreement with other living
creatures, namely in this, that they enjoy the same life with them, which we
called before the Vegetative or Nourishing life, nevertheless, other living
creatures have this more then they, that they know, see, hear, taste, smell
and touch, which things are without them: whereas the whole life of plants has
nothing but that which is within them, having no sense or knowledge outwardly.
Of the first kind of knowledge common to all living creatures.
Concerning that knowledge, which takes notice only of corporal things that
are present before it, it is the same that belongs properly to the external
senses, of which we spoke before, and which are given by God to living
creatures for their preservation. For seeing they are bodily natures, and must
live amongst bodies, he has endued them with a certain knowledge of those
bodies, to the end they may desire and follow after such things as are
agreeable to their nature, and eschew that which is hurtful. Now that which
is hidden within anything, is known by some outward means. And therefore the
bodily senses were given unto the^, to the end that by them they might know
whatsoever is external, being annexed to the things that are perceived. And
although God has not given to all living creatures outward senses alike, yet
they that are perfect have all those five senses spoken of in our former
discourses, by which they are able to perceive and know all outward things, so
that nothing can be found, which is not comprehended under the knowledge of
these senses. Wherein God has so provided, that according to man's judgment we
see, that all perfect living creatures ought to have just so many and not one
more or less. For if they had less, they should not be so perfect as they
are: and if they had more, they would be superfluous and for no use, at
leastwise so far forth as our small capacity could conceive, leaving in the
mean while to the incomprehensible wisdom, and infinite power of God, that
which we are not able to comprehend. For we owe him this reverence, seeing he
alone knows all things that are necessary and expedient for all creatures.
Now besides this outward knowledge of things present, Of the second kind of
knowledge.
we see plainly, that there is another knowledge within of things that are
absent. For our own experience teaches us, that even then when our external
senses are retired and withdrawn from doing their duties, the imagination,
thought, consideration and remembrance of those things we have seen, heard,
tasted, smelt, touched and perceived with corporal senses, remain still in us
both waking and sleeping: as it appears by our dreams, in which the images
and resemblance of those things which the bodily senses perceived waking, are
represented to our internal senses when we are asleep. We see testimonies of
some part of this knowledge even in brute beasts, which causes them to have
respect to such things as they need: but yet they have it not as men have, who
have far greater knowledge, and more internal senses then beasts, Of the third
kind of knowledge.
as being partakers of reason and understanding. The third kind of knowledge,
which is of things that are not bodily, is the principal effect of the
understanding, which lifts up all the senses of man to the cotemplation of
the divinity, and of the spiritual and supernatural things: which kind of
knowledge is proper to man and to no other living creature. Of this knowledge
we will entreat more at large hereafter, when we shall speak of those
principal and most noble senses of the soul, namely understanding and reason.
In the mean time that we may the better know the faculty virtue and office of
every one of those internal senses of which we will entreat, we are to
understand, that the soul works by them in their places, almost after the
same manner it does in the diverse kinds of her natural faculties and
virtues, according to the nature of every one of them. For this power and
virtue which we call natural, Of the natural virtue and of the kinds thereof.
and which before we said was the third faculty that continually works in
man and never cease, is divided into three sorts. The first is the virtue of
nourishing, the second of augmenting, the third of ingendring: and these have
six other virtues and faculties common to them altogether. The first draws
unto it, the second holds fast, the third digesteth, the fourth distributeth,
the fifth assimilateth and incorporateth, that is, conuerteth into it own
substance that which is dispensed unto it, and so turns it into the substance
of the body that receives it: the sixth drives forth whatsoever is
superfluous. For the nourishment which the body receives would do it no
good, unless it had some virtue in it to draw the same unto it self, as also
members and instruments meet for this work, as we will declare more at large
by the help of God, when we shall speak more particularly of this matter.
Besides, it is not enough for the body to draw food to it self, but it must
also retain the same. And because the things that are taken cannot nourish
the body except they be turned into the nature thereof, therefore they must
first be digested and prepared by this means, as we use to prepare such
meats as have need of dressing before we eat them. But because they are not
sufficiently prepared by this first dressing, they must be once again dressed
by the natural heat that is in the body, without which neither the heat of
the material fire, nor the heat of the sun will serve the turn, unless
this natural hear also do his duty. Now after the meat is thus digested
and prepared, it must be distributed and parted to all the members, that every
one may take such nourishment as is meet for it. And because the matter is
diverse in the whole composition of the body, as namely, bones, gristles,
ligaments, sinews, arteries, veins, flesh and other kinds of matter whereof
we have spoken heretofore: therefore must the food also be so converted in
every member, as that it is to be altered into a substance altogether like to
every several part it has to nourish. Now forasmuch as all that the body
takes in for nourishment, is not fit for that purpose, after that nature
has taken that which may do her good, she rejects the residue, which is not
only not profitable, but also very hurtful for her, unless she did cast it
forth, and so discharge and purge the body thereof. Now let us see how the
like is wrought in the brain between the internal senses and the Animal
virtues. Of the Animal virtues and powers in the internal senses.
For first there must be some faculty and virtue that receives the images
imprinted in the senses, the knowledge whereof is as single and plain as may
be, because it is only of things that are bodily and present, as I have
already declared. This virtue is called Imagination, Of Imagination.
or the Imaginatiue virtue, which is in the soul as the eye in the body, by
beholding to receive the images that are offered unto it by the outward senses:
and therefore it knows also the things that are absent, and is amongst the
internal senses as it were the mouth of the vessel of memory, Of Memory.
which is the faculty and virtue that retains and keeps whatsoever is
committed to the custody thereof by the other senses, that it may be found and
brought forth when need requires. Therefore Memory is as it were their
treasurer to keep that which they commit unto it, and to bring it forth in
due time and season. Now after that the Imagination has received the images
of the senses, singly and particularly as they are offered unto it, then does
it as it were prepared and digest them, either by joining them together, or by
separating them according as their natures require. Of Fantasy and Common
sense.
They that distinguish Imagination from Fantasy, attribute this office to
Fantasy: others say it belongs to the Common sense, under which they
comprehend both the former faculties, because the office thereof is to receive
the images that are offered unto it, and to discern the things as they are
presented by all the external senses, and to distinguish them as they do.
Afterward it is requisite, that all these things thus heaped together, should
be distributed and compared one with another, to consider how they may be
conjoined or severed, how one follows another, or how far asunder they are,
that so a man may judge what is to be retained and what to be refused. And this
office belongs to Reason, after which Judgment follows, Of Reason and
Judgment.
whereby men choose or refuse that which reason allows or disalloweth. For it
belongs to reason to discourse, and memory afterward, as I have already
touched, has this office to retain and keep all. Thus you see the similitude
and comparison that may be considered of between the actions and works of the
natural virtues of the soul, and those of the Animal virtues in the internal
senses: which may greatly help us to the better understanding of that which
we have already touched before, concerning the spiritual food of our
souls, which properly belongs to the internal senses. Now because all
these senses, faculties and virtues have their instruments in the brain,
before we speak more at large and particularly of their office and nature, we
must see how these parts are placed in the head, and what vessels and members
they have in the brain: and this ACHITOB shall teach us.

Of the composition of the Brain, with the members and parts thereof: of
their offices, and of that knowledge which ought to content us, touching the
principal cause of the virtues and wonderful powers of the soul. Chap. 24.
ACHITOB. The actions, faculties and virtues of the soul are so high and
obscure, that their excellency far surmounteth ye capacity of our
understandings. For we have no other soul above this yt effects these works,
whereby we might see and know the nature hereof, as by this we come to the
knowledge of corporal things, whose nature being of less excellency and more
base, our soul which is of a more high and noble nature is able to know,
comprehend and judge of them. But because there is no nature in us more high
and excellent then our soul, none can know it as it is, The nature of the
reasonable part in ye soul is hard to be known.
but only the creator that made it, especially that reasonable part of the
soul, wherein the image of God is more lively, and shines more clearly then
in the rest. Therefore we may in some sort know by this part, faculty and
virtue which is the chiefest, what is the nature of the rest, that are
inferior unto it. But because there is no part in us above that, we cannot
perceive and know how it uses the internal senses, with their vessels and
instruments, as by this we may judge of the Vital virtue, which it shows
unto us in the heart, and of the Nutritive virtue which it discovers unto us
in the liver, and in other parts and members serving to these faculties, as
also to the virtue of generation. Therefore we must wait for a more ample
knowledge of our selves, chiefly of our souls, and above all of that part
which is most excellent in it, when we shall by the goodness and grace of God
behold face to face the creator that created it, and shall behold and know our
selves in him, and contemplate him in all perfection and truth. But seeing we
understood by the former speech, that all the Animal faculties and virtues, and
all the internal senses (in the knowledge whereof we desire to be instructed
more at large) have their seats and instruments in the brain, let us now
consider how these parts are placed within the head. And first of all we
must call to mind what we heard before of the outward parts thereof. As
for that which is within, there are hollow places, called Little Bellies, Of
the little Bellies of the brain.
distinguished by distaunce of place, as it were diverse chambers in one
building. Therefore there are certain membranes or skins both to distinguish
them and knitte them together, as also to preserve and keep them from all hurt
and danger.

Now albeit these skins have this office, yet it is much to be marueiled
at, how this whole frame can keep it self and continue so firm, as it were
the roof of a house or Church, considering that the matter there is great,
spongie, and very tender. The first of these skins is a thick covering,
which is one of the chiefest skins that belong to our body. The substance
thereof is thick, and harder then any other skin, Of D^^a matter, or the hard
mother.
and therefore it is called the Hard mother, because it brings forth and
preserves all the rest. The use and profit thereof is to wrap and foulde in
round about the whole brain, and to keep it, that whilst it moves, it
should not be hurt with the bone of the head, which is commonly called the
skul. For nature uses to set a mean between two contraries, Of the skull.
as well to knit them together, as to preserve both the one and the other.
Therefore because the bones of the skull are hard, Three uses of the hard
Mother.
and the brain is soft and tender, God has placed this covering, which is of
a middle substance between them both, and is so tied to the one and the other,
that it hangs as it were between both, and touches neither of them, but
there is space between them, to the end that the motion of the brain might
be free without any let or hinderance. The second use thereof is, to serve for
a passage to the veins and arteries, for the nourishing of the brain and
governing of the vital spirits. Last of all, it serves to distinguish the
whole brain, first into two parts, namely into that before, and that behind:
then into the right side and the left. It is of this skin whereof some men
think Solomon spoke, when he made mention of a golden Ewer broken in the
extremity of old age, Eccles. 12. 6.
and so we expounded it when we entreated of the marrowe in the chine-bone.
Of Iia matter or ye godly mother.
Besides this skin, there is another named the Godly mother, which is fine
and very slender, wouen of many veins and arteries, serving not only for it
own life and nourishment, but also for that of the brain. Neither does it
only compass and wrap in the brain round about, as the Hard mother does,
but enters also into the bowels and windings thereof, to tie and knit it
together on al sides. As for the brain, Of the brain and office thereof.
which is the fountain and beginning of the sinews and of the voluntary
motion, and the instrument of the chiefest faculty of the soul, namely, the
Animal and reasonable faculty, it is greater in man then in any other
creature, as that which fills almost the whole skull. I say almost, because
if it filled it full and wholly, the motion thereof could not be perfect. His
office and use is, to work and make fine the Animal spirit, which is
necessary for the whole body, and to serve as an instrument to the faculty of
reason, which is the chiefest faculty and virtue of the soul. The first part
of the brain retayneth the name of the whole, The division of the brain.
being divided into two parts, namely into the right part and the left. The
hinder part is called the little brain, and that in comparison of the other
parts. So that when a man considers the whole brain, he shall find within
the substance thereof four Ventricles, or hollow places, which are joined
together by certain ways. Now although we cannot see with our eyes, nor
well understand and conceive how the soul woorketh by her instruments,
nevertheless God gives us a certain entrance into some knowledge thereof by
the matter and form which they have. And therefore it seems, that these
little bellies of the brain have such ways from one to another, to this end
that by them, the spirits that are made and imprinted by the sensible and
intelligible kinds and images, might pass and be communicate one with
another. Now because they must not only be well wrought, but also thoroughly
cleansed of all excrements, God has created those vessels and instruments, in
which this work is to be begun, greater then the others which are to
receive the spirits already wrought and almost perfected. Therefore the two
first are the greatest, having their situation before, namely on each side one,
and being in fashion like to two half moons. The third is underneath them
right in the midst of the brain. The fourth and last is upon the bending
down of the nape of the neck. As for the two first ventricles, they are so
conjoined the one with the other, that they end in one common pipe or passage,
like to two pair of smithes bellows, And it seems that God has made them
of that fashion, as if he meant thereby to show us, that the spirit of the
said ventricles having received his form of the kinds and images propounded
unto it, is carried by this passage into the middle ventricle or belly. I omit
to speak at large of many vessels and instruments, which serve the brain for
sundry purposes, amongst the which there is one, which both the Greek and
Latin Physicions call by a name that signifies a Press, Of the press and
Vault in ye head.
because the blood is pressed into it for the nourishing of the brain: and
another called a Vault, both in respect of the fashion and of the use. For it
is like a Vault or arch-roofe fet upon three pillars, and is as it were the
roof and covering of the middle ventricle, that there might be a more free
and easy space for the motion of the Animal spirit that is made therein: and
also that it might more easily sustain and bear the great quantity of
brain, that leans unto each side of it. I omit also other instruments,
which serve in like manner to strengthen and support the parts thereof. There
is also one instrument made as it were of many pieces joined together like
little wheels, Of the Like worm and of his office.
which is called Like-worme, because of the likelihoode it has with those
great white worms that are found in rotten wood. It seems that this piece
was placed there, to be as it were the porter, to shut and open the passage
of the spirits that go into the hindermost ventricle, to the end they
should enter therein measureable, and so avoid the confusion of the memory
that is placed there: which otherwise would happen if they should enter in too
suddenly and too much at once. Of the passage whereby the superfluities of the
brain are voyded.
There is likewise a pipe; to euacuate the gross and thick excrements of the
brain, as well by the roof of the mouth, as by the nose: and therefore because
it resembles a little basin, or rather a funnel, it is called by those names.

Moreover, there is a pipe that passes from the middle ventricle to the last,
which is as it were the chariot of the spirit, to pass from one to another.
In all which things, and in many others particularly observed by Physicions
and Anatomists, in this part of the brain, we may note a wonderful
woorkemanshippe both for the variety of instruments, and for their fit
application to those duties that are assigned them. Wherefore we may well
say, that it is in this part of man chiefly, wherein GOD does most excellent
manifestly his divine nature, and the glory of his majesty. And this we
shall better perceive, by considering particularly and in order unto which of
the internal senses all these parts of the brain are vessels and
instruments, in which the faculties and virtues of the soul are contained and
doc show themselves. But as was said in the beginning of our speech, None can
here attain to a perfect knowledge of the essential power of ye soul.
let us not here look for a sound and perfect knowledge of that substantial
power, whereby the soul effects so many marvelous works by the means of
these senses. For so high a secret being laid up and hid in wisdom and
truth it self, cannot fall within the small capacity of man's sense and
understanding, until the light thereof be purged from that corporal
darkness wherewith it is covered and compassed about during this life.

Nevertheless by a diligent contemplation of that matter, which we have noted
worthy of admiration, we shall find sufficient wherewith to content our
minds, by causing them to look to themselves, in respect of that which it
has pleased GOD here to reveal and manifest two manner of ways. First,
because we may in some sort take a view of nature, by searching out therein
those things, of which she does here set before us very evident
testimonies: even those things which may be demonstrated (although grossly)
according to the capacity of our dull understandings. The second way, which is
the chiefest and most sure, is by that testimony which himself affoordeth us
in his word. For let us not think that the mind can pronounce any thing for
certain, but as it is directed by the testimony of GOD, seeing the senses
which he has given us, come short herein, and are not able to ascend up so
high. For the excellency of this creature, and of the nature thereof is such
and so great, The mind cannot perfectly know it self.
that it cannot perfectly know and comprehend itself, especially where it is
of greatest dignity. So that if we desire to have certain knowledge, whither
should we have recourse in this defect of our senses, but unto him that is able
to certify us truly in this point. And who can testify the truth of the
work, but the Workemaster that made it, and therefore knows it better then
any other, and all the perfection that is in it? Why then do we not yield to
GOD that honor in a thing not to be comprehended by us, which we do to men
of whom we are well persuaded in things which we cannot know but by their
testimony? For how many things do we believe of which we know not the
causes, and for which we have no other reason showed us, but only the
testimony and authority of men, whom we judge worthy of credit, who
notwithstanding may themselves be deceived, and deceive others. But GOD cannot
be deceived, God cannot deceive, nor be deceived.
nor deceive those that give credit to his testimony, which he has not so
hidden from men, but that it is manifested unto them, yea he has chosen some
amongst them to testify the same from him to others. And if it has pleased
him to have such witnesses amongst them, a man may soon see that he has
chosen them in whom he has caused his image to shine most excellently, and
whom he has made more like to himself, as well by the revelation of his holy
spirit, in all those excellent graces and virtues wherewith he has endued
them, as also by those holy and heavenly works which he effects by them,
whereby he has as it were marked them with his seal to give them authority,
and to cause them to be acknowledged of all for his faithful witnesses and
servants. If then we desire to have certain and true witnesses in any such
matter, where can we find them sooner then amongst the Patriarchs, Prophets
and Apostles, with all those Martyrs and other holy personages, The testimony
of the scriptures most firm.
whose doctrine and life testify unto us how far they differ from other
men? But above all, how highly ought we to esteem the testimony of the very
Son of GOD, who is to be preferred before all others? Seeing therefore we
have so many faithful witnesses, let us keep us to their testimony, waiting
for that perfect light, and more clear and ample knowledge which shall be
revealed unto us in that heavenly glory. In the mean time let us consider
how we are able to comprehend the infinite nature of the Creator of our
soul, seeing we cannot conceive the nature of the soul, which he has
created: and let us reject those dogs and hogs, those Atheists and
Epicures, who judge of God and of the soul of man so far forth only as
they are able to know and comprehend by their natural sense, whereby they see
no further into the soul of man then they do into the souls of beasts, whom
themselves resemble. But suppose they had no other testimony of the celestial
and divine nature of the soul, but that which it affoordeth us daily by those
faculties and virtues where with God has endued it, and the effects it
shows us, yet ought they to learn to judge otherwise. Now to morrow it will
be thy part, ASER, to begin the particular handling of these goodly internal
senses, whose vessels and instruments we have considered of in this speech:
as also thou art to teach us who be the chief ministers of the soul for all
her actions.

The end of the third days work.
THE FOVRTH days work.
Of the seat of voluntary motion and sense: of the office and nature of the
common sense: of imagination and of fantasy, and how light and dangerous
fantasy is: of the power which both good and bad spirits have to move it.
Chap. 25.
ASER. The knowledge of many things is so natural to men, that being borne with
them, it is like to a light attending upon the mind, as the sight does upon
the eyes. For the knowledge of numbers and of order, the Principles and
beginning of Arts, the knowledge and distinction of things honest and
dishonest, proceed from such a light. And when Saint Paul says, that the
Gentiles, and all that have not received of God the Law of the two Tables as
the people of Israel did, Romans 2. 15.
have notwithstanding a Law written in their hearts that does accuse or excuse
them, no doubt but by this Law he understands that natural knowledge which
men have both of God, and of good, and evil, which issues from a higher spring
then from the outward senses, and which every one has for a schoolemistress
within himself, even they also that would extinguish wholly this light if they
could. For although God has imprinted many similitudes and testimonies of
himself in all creatures, whereby he manifests himself unto us, yet should
we know nothing more then the brute beasts do, if there were not a light in our
minds that causes us to see and know them, and to conclude that which we
do: which light is not in beasts, albeit they have outward senses as well as
we. But it is commonly said, that there is nothing in the understanding, which
has not first been in the outward senses: that is to say, that it can know
nothing, which is not first discovered and manifested unto it by them. But we
must understand that saying of such things as fall under their powers and
faculties, which being known and noted by the senses, do awaken and stir up
the understanding, which after by that virtue it has in it self, proceeds
forward, namely, from signs and effects unto causes, from accidents to
substances, and from particular things to universalities. But let us consider
how.

We must first remember the division which before we made of the animal
faculty and power, and thereupon we note that the sensitive and motive
powers, Of the seat of voluntary sense and motion.
whereby the soul, using the means of the sinews and muscles, gives
voluntary sense and motion to all the body, have no special place or seat in
the brain, as the other internal senses have, but are dispersed throughout
the whole substance thereof. Concerning the chief power and faculty we were
told before, how some distinguish between Imagination, fantasy, and the
Common sense: and how others comprehend them all in one. But be it that we
join or separate them, let us now consider of the nature and places of each
of them. Of the Common sense and of his office.
The Common sense is so called, because it is the first of all the internal
fenses of which we are to speak, as also the Prince and Lord of all the
external sense, who are his messengers and servants to minister and make
relation unto him of things in common. For it receives all the images and
shapes that are offered and brought unto it by them, yea all the kinds and
resemblances of material things, which they have received only from without,
as a glass does: and all this for no other cause, but that they should discern
and sever every thing according to it own nature and property, and afterward
communicate them to the internal senses. For although all the knowledge that
is in the mind of man proceeds not from the outward senses, as we showed in
the beginning of our speech, nevertheless they are created of God, to the end
they should send to the understanding the similitudes of things without, and be
the messengers of the mind, and witnesses of experience: and also to the end
they should awaken and stir up the mind to behold and mark the things that
are without it, that by considering of them, it may judge of, and correct the
faults. We must then observe, that the external senses have no judgment of
that which they outwardly receive but by means of the common sense, unto which
they make relation, and then that judges: so that they end where that
begins. In this manner therefore as the Common sense of all the internal
senses is next unto the external, so is it the means whereby they communicate
one with an other. For afterward it caryeth to the other internal senses
whatsoever has been communicated unto it by the external. Now after this
sense has done his duty, Of Imagination and of Fantasy.
Imagination and Fantasy execute their offices, both which are taken by many
for one and the same faculty and virtue of the soul, but yet distinguished
from the Common sense: others join them both with the Common sense, because
these three senses, whether they be distinguished or taken all for one, have
their seats, vessels, and instruments in the former part of the brain.
Therefore there will be no danger if we use these two names Fantasy and
Imagination indifferently. For Fantasy is derived from a Greek word that
signifies as much as Imagination: and it is translated by Cicero into a Latin
word, which is as much as Vision. This faculty therefore and virtue of the soul
is called Fantasy, because the visions, kinds, and images of such things as
it receives, are diversely framed therein, according to the forms and shapes
that are brought to the Common sense. Dan. 2. 28, 29.
Therefore Daniel called the dream of Nebuchadnezzar, the visions of his head,
which he had upon his bed, according to the thoughts whereupon he mused and
fell on sleep. For although this was a heavenly dream, yet God used therein
the internal senses, which he had given to Nebuchadnezzar, unto which he
represented the image of those things he would have him to understand and
know, as afterward they were expounded unto him by Daniel. Moreover this
faculty of the fantasy is sudden, and so far from stayednes, The giddiness
of Fantasy.
that even in the time of sleep it hardly takes any rest, but is always
occupied in dreaming and doting, yea even about those things which never have
bin, shall be, or can be. For it staieth not in that which is showed unto it by
the senses that serve it, but takes what pleases it, and adds thereunto or
diminishes, changes and rechangeth, mingleth and vnmingleth, so that it
cutteth asunder and seweth up again as it lists. So that there is nothing
but the fantasy will imagine and counterfaite, if it have any matter and
foundation to work upon, without which it can build nothing, as we may judge
by that which has been already showed, namely that man can neither think,
imagine, or do any thing else, of which he has not some beginning and ground
in nature and in the works of God, from which after he has his inventions.
But although fantasy can do nothing without this gappe and entrance, yet it
is a wonder to see the inventions it has after some occasion is given it, and
what new and monstrous things it forgeth and coyneth, by sundry imaginations
arising of those images and similitudes, from whence it has the first pattern.
So that in truth, Fantasy is dangerous.
fantasy is a very dangerous thing. For if it be not guided and brideled by
reason, it troubles and moves all the sense and understanding, as a tempest
does the sea. For it is easily stirred up not only by the external senses,
but also by the complexion and disposition of the body. It is very subject to
the motions of good or ill spirits.
Hereof it proceeds that even the spirits both good and bad have great
access unto it, to stir it either to good or evil, and that by means
unknown to us. For as we have many means to provoke one another imagination
and fantasy, which are not in beasts, neither can be comprehended by them; so
these spiritual natures (by reason of the agreement of their nature) have one
toward an other, which we neither know nor can comprehend, whereby they
have access to move our fantasy diverse ways. Wherefore as the Angels have
means to represent to our minds the images of good, heavenly, and divine
things, both waking and sleeping: so can evil spirits greatly trouble them by
diverse illusions: the proof whereof we have in many, How sorcerers are
deluded by the Devil.
whom badde spirits find apt and disposed thereunto, and namely in sorcerers,
whose mind they trouble in such sort by sundry strange illusions, that they
verily think they have seen, heard, spoken, and done that which the devil
represents to their fantasy, yea such things as neither men nor deuilles
themselves can possibly perform: and yet all that while they stir not out
of their bed, or out of some one place. But the devil, having once power
over them, does in such sort print in their fantasy the images of those
things he represents unto them, and which he would have them believe to be
true, that they can not think otherwise but that it is so, that they have done
such things, and that they were awake when indeed they slept. For as God
appears to his servants by heavenly visions, both when they sleep and when
they wake, and printeth in their minds the images of those things which it
pleases him to reveal unto them: so the devil, who endeavors to
counterfeit all the works of God to deceive men, has his deuilish illusions
for his visions, The devil counterfaiteth the works of God.
whereby he moves and troubles the fantasy and minds of those, over whom
he reigns through their infidelity and wickedness. Therefore it is very
needful, that men should recommend themselves to God, to the end these evil
spirits may have no such power over them, and that their judgments may be
sound to discern the images of those things, which he represents to their
minds, from all Diabolical illusions. And surely no marvel if wicked
spirits so oftentimes deceive men, when as Iuglers have so many ways to abuse
them, showing them such strange sights, that if they were not wrought by those
kind of men, a great many would take them for miracles. Yea although they be
done after this manner, yet we wonder thereat, being hardly able by the
sharpness of our wits to attain to the knowledge thereof, so that many are
persuaded that such things cannot be done without the power of the devil. But
let us return to our matter. Of the force of imagination.
This imaginatiue power of the soul, has moreover such virtue, that
oftentimes the imagination printeth in the body, the images of those things
which it does vehemently think of and apprehend, the experience whereof is
very evident, especially in the longings and imaginations of women with child.
Many times also we see some that can hardly go over a bridge without falling,
by reason of the apprehension of the danger, which they have conceived in their
fantasy and imagination. But which is yet more strange, The strong fancy of
women with child.
it falls out oftentimes, that the fancies and imaginations of great bellied
women are so vehement and violent, that upon the bodies of the children they
go withal, they print the images and shapes of those things upon which they
have fixed their fancies, and unto which by reason of their fancy, they are
most affectionated. We see examples hereof a great many continually. Neither
is it altogether without reason which we use commonly to say, that fancy
breeds the fact which it imagines. For we see many fall into those mishaps
and inconveniences, which they imprint in their fantasy and imagination. We
may also observe here, how we are provoked to yawne and gape when we see
others do so, and driven into a desire of many things of which we should not
have dreamed, unless we had been incited thereunto by the example of others,
or by some object presented to our senses, and provoking us thereunto. Yea,
Imagination prevails much in beasts.
this imaginatiue virtue can do much in beasts, as among other things we may
see it in this, that they desire rather to make water in a puddle, or in a
river, or in some other water, or upon a dunghill or in a stable, then
elsewhere. For the things that are offered to their senses soon move their
fantasy and imagination, which afterward stirs them up, either in respect
of the agreement that is betwixt those things, namely, water and urine, or
because of their custom to do such a thing in such a place, which puts
them in mind and helps them to do it more readily, by reason of the
imaginatiue virtue that is in them.

Now if imagination has such virtue in beasts, we may judge also what it is
able to do in the mind of man, which is a great deal more quick and ready.
Good counsel for every one.
Therefore we ought to eschew all occasions of evil, that may be presented to
our senses, to stir up our imagination and fantasy to wicked and dishonest
things. For one only wicked look, or one dishonest speech, is sufficient to
trouble our minds with diverse imaginations and fantasies. Which as it is well
known to the devil, so knows he also how to give occasion, and to offer the
means of stirring all the stuff in our fancies. But we keep such bad watch in
this respect, that in stead of eschewing occasions of evil, we seek after
them, and where we should shut the door against evil, we set it wide open,
that it may enter more easily into us. Wherein we follow not the example of
the Prophet, who prayed unto the Lord, saying, Psalm. 119. 37.
Turn away mine eyes that they behold no vanity: but we rather take a
contrary course to whet our selves forward to all beastliness. Seeing
therefore Imagination and Fantasy have so little hold of themselves, we have
need of an other faculty and virtue above that, to be able to judge of things
imagined and perceived by sense (of which we have hitherto spoken) and that is
reason, the discourse where of I reserre to thee, AMANA, as also of memory,
which is the fifth and last internal sense of the soul.

Of Reason and Memory, and of their seat, nature, and office: of the
agreement which all the senses both external and internal have one with
another, and of their virtues. Chap. 26.
AMANA. They that have curiously searched into the nature of beasts, have found
in them, especially in such as were most perfect, as many external and
internal senses as are in man: yea they perceived, that their brain and all
the parts thereof, did not differ much from that of men, whether we respect
the substance or the fashion. But all these excellent gifts of nature reach no
farther in them, Beasts search only after corporal things belonging to this
life.
then to the uses of this present life, and the necessities thereof. For they
have no reason given them to enquire after that which is good, to the end
their will might follow and embrace the same. Moreover their Good, consists
only in corporal things belonging to the body, which they easily know and
discern, as standing in need of no other reason or understanding to make
inquiry after it, then of that bare knowledge and natural inclination that is
given them. But the Good that belongs to man, is hidden in the soul and
spirit. For this cause he must of necessity enquire after it, that he may
come to the knowledge thereof, least he choose evil in stead of good, for want
of knowledge of his proper and true Good, and so be deceived by the appearance
of a false Good, which is not so in truth, but in opinion only and by error:
whereby the greatest part of men are commonly beguiled, preferring the supposed
Goods of the body, before the true goods of the soul, and temporal things
before eternal. Therefore as our eyes stand in need of light to keep us, and
to cause us to see in darkness, so our soul and spirit has need of reason
to guide it in the midst of error and ignorance, that it may discern truth
from lying, the true Good from the false, and that which is profitable from the
contraty.

This faculty and virtue of the soul, so necessary in man, and which is able
to judge of things imagined and perceived by the other senses, (of which we
have spoken before) to know whether they be good or bad, Of the seat of
reason and of his office.
and what is to be embraced or eschewed, is called, the Judging or discoursing
faculty, namely, Reason, which is the principal part and virtue of the soul,
and bears rule among all the other senses. For this cause he has his seat
by good right assigned him in the midst of the brain, as in the highest and
safest fortress of the whole frame of man, to reign amiddest all the other
senses, as Prince and Lord over them all. For it is he that discourses and
judges of truth from falshoode, that knows the agreement and disagreement
of things, that joins together whatsoever is to be joined, and separateth
that which ought to be separated, that distinguiseth things which follow, or
are contrary each to other, by comparing one thing with another, by considering
all circumstances, by referring every thing whither it ought to be referred. It
is requisite therefore, that he should keep his own place, and not be
shuffled up and confounded with imagination and fantasy, Reason is the judge
of Fancy.
of which he is the Judge to approve or condemn that which is good or evil,
as also to correct, to stay, and to keep them in awe. For if reason
intermeddle and mingle it self with them, it will be so troubled, that it will
not be able to judge as it ought of those things, which they present and bring
unto it, but will be so carried away, as if it were deposed and thrust out of
it own place, and as if maids should rule their Mistress, and take place
before her. The like also happens unto it, when it is carried away with the
affections, which it ought to rule, moderate, and govern. But if it be upright
and sound, after it has well considered and debated of the whole matter
brought and laid before it by the former senses, it gives sentence as Judge,
and judges finally without appeal. For there is no other judgment after
that. Hereof it is, that it has a judicial seat in the midst, wherein
being placed it hears suits and causes. Of Memory and of his office.
Besides, it has near unto it Memory, which is in place of a Notary and
Secretary, and as it were a register book, in which is entered whatsoever is
ordained and decreed by reason. For as we have need of such a Judge as reason
is, to conclude and determine finally in the mind, whatsoever may be called
into question and doubted of, so it is requisite, that the conclusion and
definitive sentence should be registered in Memory, as it were in a roll or
book of account, that it may always be ready and found when need requires.
For what good should we get by that, which imagination, fantasy, and reason
conceive and gather together, if it should all vanish away presently through
forgetfulness, and no more memory thereof should remain in man, then if
nothing at all had been done? Dan. 2.
The like would daily happen to us, that befell Nebuchadnezzar, when God
revealed unto him by dream in the vision of an Image, what should become of
his Monarchy and Empire, and of those that followed him. For he remembered
well, as himself testifies, that he had dreamed a dream, whereupon his
spirit was troubled, whilst he labored to understand it: but he was so
far from knowing the signification of his dream, that he remembered not what
he had dreamed and seen therein. Where we see, that his imagination and
fantasy were so moved by the image and vision represented unto them in this
dream, that they imprinted in his memory how they had seen a vision, and that
it was very strange and wonderful. Yea reason it self judged, that the
vision and image was of another nature, then those that are commonly in the
imagination or fantasy, or those which they coin themselves in sleeping and
dreaming, and that it had some divine signification. And this did reason
imprint in the Kings memory, who remembered all these things generally, but
when he began to enquire of the matter more specially and particularly, he
could not call to mind the kind and manner of his dream, but confessed that
the thing was gone from him. Afterward, having heard and understood Daniel he
knew that he spoke a truth, and then remembered what he had dreamed and was
gone from him, because it was not well imprinted in his memory, but had passed
over lightly by it. Here then we see how necessary this secretary and
register, whom we call Memory, is for the understanding and spirit, not
only to mark lightly such things as pass by it, but also to note and ingraue
them, Of the seat of memory.
as it were in tables or pillars of stone or brass. Therefore has God
assigned his seat and lodging in the hindermost part of the brain, to the
end that, after such things as are to be committed unto it, have passed by all
the other senses, they should be committed to it to keep, as to their
secretary. And for this cause that part of the brain is less moist, and most
solid and firm, for two manifest and apparent reasons. First, because it is
the fountain of the marrowe in the back: bone, of which those sinews are
derived that give the strongest motions to all the members of the body.
Therefore also it was requisite, that they should be of a more firm and
solid matter then the rest that are taken from the substance of other parts
of the brain, which are not to sustain so great stresse. Secondly, forasmuch
as the memory is as it were the Register and Chancery Court of all the other
senses, the images of all things brought and committed unto it by them, are to
be imprinted therein, as the image and sign of a ring or seal is imprinted
and set in the wax that is sealed. Therefore it is needful that the matter
of the instrument of Memory should be so well tempered, Causes of good and
bad memories.
that it be neither too soft nor too hard. For if it be too soft, the images
will be soon engraven, but they will not stay there any long time, as they
that will be quickly blotted out. Contrariwise, if it be over hard, it will be
a harder matter to imprint them therein. But when it is well tempered, it
receives the images easily, and keeps them well. For the Memory has two
duties as well as the hand, namely, to receive and to hold fast. Therefore
they that are of a moist brain receive more easily into their memories that
which is offered unto them, and they that have a dry brain, retain and keep
better in memory.

But following that which we have hitherto spoken of all the internal senses,
Of the agreement between all the senses.
we are now to observe and note this, that the knowledge of things which we
have by the outward senses, is as if we beheld the shadows of them: and that
knowledge which we have by the common sense, by Imagination and Fantasy, is
as if we did look upon the images, which represent unto us those things
whereof they are images moreliuely and clearly then their shadows can do. And
the knowledge we have by understanding, of which faculty we will entreat
hereafter, is as if we viewed, not only the shadows or images of things,
but also their very bodies, which is more. And that knowledge which we have by
reason is as if, besides all this, we saw their effects and virtues.
Therefore there is as much difference between the knowledge that a man may
have by every one of these faculties and powers, as there is betwixt the
shadow, and image, and body, and effects or virtues of one and the same thing,
to the end that the nature thereof may be thoroughly known. For all these
senses and virtues of man's mind agree so well together, that as the outward
senses serve the common sense, so the common sense serves Imagination, and
imagination fantasy, and fantasy understanding and consideration, and
consideration recordation, and recordation conference, and conference reason,
and lastly memory serves them al, as they also serve memory. Therefore it is
not without the great wisdom and providence of God, that the seat and shop
thereof is in the hindermost part of the head, because it must look to the
things that are past. The memory is a spiritual eye.
So that we have in that part as it were a spiritual eye, which is much more
excellent and profitable, then if we had bodily eyes there, as we have
before, or else a face before and an other behind, as the Poets fained that
Ianus had. Thus we may learn by our speech what reason is, and the discourse
thereof, and how it causes the nature of man to approach in some sort to that
nature which is divine and heavenly, making man far to excel all other
nature in the world. For it goes from things known, Of the effects of Reason.
to them that are unknown, and descends from generalles to specialles, and
from them to particulars, and mounteth aloft again by the same steps from
one to another, and compares one with another. For after that Imagination has
received the images and impressions of things offered unto it by the outward
senses, the consideration of Reason follows, which enquireth of all that may
be in the mind, of the plenty or want that is there, and causes it to
return to it self, as if it did behold and consider it self, to take
knowledge what it has, or what it has not, how much it has, and of what
quality and nature it is. After this, reason draws out and concludes
invisible things of visible, of corporal things it concludes things without
bodies, and seeret things of plain and evident matters, and generalles of
particulars: then it refers all this to the understanding, which is the
chief virtue and power of the soul, and that which comprehends all the
faculties thereof, as we will discourse in place convenient, yea, that which
finally rests in the contemplation of the spirit, Of understanding and
contemplation.
which is the end of all inquiry of truth, and as it were a settled and
assured view of all those things that have been culled out by reason, and
received and approved by judgment.

Hereof it is that we say, A double discourse of Reason in man.
there is a double discourse of Reason in man, whereof the one consists in
speculation, having Truth for the scope and end thereof, and goes no farther
after it has found the truth. The other consists in practice, and has
Good for his end, which after it has found, it stays not there, but goes
on to Will, which is an other power of the soul of great virtue, as we will
declare hereafter, and is given of God to man, that he should love, desire,
and follow that which is good, and hate, eschew, and turn from evil. But
these things shall be handled more at large in the sequel of our speeches.

Now to resume and finish this present matter, as we learn that man by the
discourse of reason that is in him, lifts up himself above the outward
senses, yea above Imagination and fantasy, and knows well that he is
enclosed within the body as in a prison, which nevertheless can not altogether
hinder him from understanding and contemplating the things he sees not: so
also he uses the help of Memory to keep and retain in his mind
whatsoever he has known by any of the senses, either external or internal.
Therefore is the Memory compared to a Picture. Memory compared to a picture.
For as a Picture by the sight of the eyes gives the knowledge of that which
is painted therein, so is it with Memory, by the sight of the mind endewed
with understanding and knowledge: for it does not only look upon things
simply as beasts do, but considers of them, and diligently enquireth into
them, and having found them, it places them in the Memory, and there keeps
them. And the better to have them in memory, it often thinks and meditateth
of those things, it turns and tosseth them to and fro, that they may be the
better imprinted therein. What remembrance is.
For this cause some Philosophers attribute unto man beside memory both
recordation and remembrance, which is one recordation upon another, whereby we
call to mind that which was slipped out of it. For it comes to pass
oftentimes, that that which before we have seen, heard, and known, and even
kept a while in our memory, is escaped us and so forgotten, that we think of
it no more then if we had never understood or known it, neither should we
ever remember it, unless some body did put us in mind of it, or some evident
token made us to think of it, Some things also there are, which albeit they
are not clean gone from us, but are somewhat better registered in our memory,
yet we cannot readily remember them and bring them forth, without great and
long inquiry. Therefore must the mind turn over all the leaves of his Book
or Register of Memory, or at leastwise a great part thereof to find them out,
as if a Chancellor or Secretary should search all his Papers and Registers,
The mind compared to the keeper of Rolls.
and all his Rolls of Chauncery, until he had found that which he sought
for. And we see among our selves, what notes and observations we use, that
they might be as it were a memorial book unto our memories. You see then why
some have attributed to man both recordation and remembrahce, thereby to put a
difference between them, and bare memory without any other consideration,
which they say is in beasts, who forgetting presently what they perceived by
their senses, when they see those things again, that in some sort puts
them in mind thereof, then they call them to mind as if they had known them
before. But now that we understand the nature, office, order, and seats of
the internal senses of the soul, that all may be more casily perceived, I
think we ought to show by some familiar examples, how a man may know, that
these internal senses are so distinguished, disposed, and ordained, and that
they have their seats and instruments in the brain in such sort as we have
already spoken. Let us then hear ARAM discourse to this purpose.

That the internal senses are so distinguished, that some of them may be
troubled and hindered, and the rest be safe and whole, according as their
places and instruments assigned unto them in the body are sound or perished:
and of those that are possessed with Deuilles. Chap. 27.
ARAM. Howsoever it pleased God to enrich man with heavenly gifts and graces
above all visible creatures, yet foreseeing the future pride of mankind, he
always and in all things gave him great matter of humility and modesty, to
the end that they which know how to profit thereby, should never forget the
graces received from the goodness of their Creator, and so never become
ungrateful toward him. And truly we ought to be very careful to keep our
selves from pride and vain boasting of the senses of our mind and spirit,
which God has given us, how ingenious, excellent, and divine soever they be:
yea, rather humbling our selves before his Majesty, we are to yield him
continual thanks, and pray that it would please him to keep them always
sound and safe, and to augment his gifts and graces in our minds. For he
shows us by experience every day, that he can trouble our minds with a
small matter, yea the minds of those that are most witty, prudent, wise, and
skillful, and the most divine spirits that can be found amongst men. How many
do we see daily, yea many times of those that are admired of all for their
singular wit, A good admonition to humble us.
great prudence, knowledge, wisdom, virtue, credit, and authority, that
loose the use of their senses and understanding, insomuch that they do not
only grow foolish, as if they were become little children again, but also
have less direction and government in them, then the poor beasts have? And
how many do we see, that become frenzy and mad, behauing themselves as it
were brute and savage beasts, and continue in that estate unto the death? The
consideration of these things will cause us to understand better that which we
have heard of the distinction, disposition, order, and seats of the internal
senses of the soul, and of their vessels and instruments. We have then
daily great testimonies and very evident signs here of in frantike and
bedleme persons, in such as are oppressed with melancholy, in furious folks,
and in all those that are beside themselves. For there are sundry sorts of
them, some being troubled but in one part of the mind only, Diverse kinds of
mad folks.
having the other parts sound: some more troubled then the former, and
othersome that have nothing sound and untouched. Hereof it is that we see
some, whose imagination and fantasy only are out of frame, insomuch that they
judge a thing to be that which it is not. Therefore they conceive strange
opinions, which they imprint so deep in their brain, The imagination troubled.
that they are not easily rooted out again. Some imagine and believe that they
have horns: others that they have a serpent, or some other beast in their
bodies: others that they are become water pottes or glasses, and thereupon are
afraid lest some body should iustle against them, and break them in pieces.
There have been some that were so verily persuaded in their fancy, that they
were dead, that they could never after be brought to eat or drink any thing
but dyed in that opinion. And yet all these did understand very well and
conceive what was said unto them, and remembered it as well afterward. Whereby
it appears, that they have reason and memory more sound then imagination and
fancy, as Galen and other Physicions mention many examples of such, and our
selves do often see some like to those of whom I speak now. There are others
also, Reason troubled.
that have their imagination, fancy, yea and their memory also sound, but
their reason is so troubled, that they can not understand nor conceive that
which is told them, nor make any discourse themselves, neither examine or
conclude any thing by reason. Galen alleges an example of one, who after
he had cast down out of a window certain glasses and violles, with other
vessels of brittle matter, threw down a little child, which was slain.
This man knew well enough that he held in his hand glasses and other
vessels of such matter, and that the child he threw down was a child,
and he remembered well what he had seen, heard, and done: but he had not his
wits so advised nor his reason so stayed, as to discourse, consider, and
judge thus with himself, that be could not cast those vessels down but
he must break them, considering the matter whereof they were made, nor the
child, but he must kill it. I omit many other examples I could allege to
this purpose, which many skillful Physicions speak of in their books, because
I mean not to touch this matter but as it were by the way. Concerning them
that loose their memory, The memory lost.
and yet keep the other parts sound, we have many examples of them. For
there have been plagues sometimes, whereby many have lost their memories in
such sort, that they clean forgot whatsoever they knew before, yea their own
names, their parents and their friends. And the disease called the Lethargy
brings with it forgetfulness and want of memory, as the name it self
gives us to understand in the Greek tongue, from whence it is taken.
Therefore we see how the internal senses of the soul may be perished
severally one without an other: whereupon we may well conclude, that as they
may be all sound together, so they may all be perished at one and the same
time. Example hereof is daily seen in many that are frenzy and mad, having
all their senses troubled, which sometimes they had sound and perfect. Yea
there are some that behave themselves like dogs and wolves as Physicions
report, because they think they are transformed into those kind of beasts, by
reason of the violence of Melancholy, and of that malady, which is thereupon
named by the Graecians Cynanthropie and Lycanthropie. It pleased God to punish
Nebuchadnezzar with this kind of chastisement, Dan. 4.
to beat down his glory and pride, when his wits were taken from him, in
so much that he did not think himself to be a man any more but a beast, and
so indeed lived in the fields like a wild beast. Now therefore we may
know by the sequel of our speech, and by the examples which we have
alleged, how the internal senses are distinguished one from an other in
such sort that every one has his office apart, as the members that are in a
man's body. And if any desire to know more particularly in what part and place
of the brain every particular sense has his lodging and seat for to exercise
his office in, How a man may ^^dge of the ^eats of the senses.
we may judge hereof somewhat by experience, which teaches us, that they who
have received some blow, or are vexed by sickness about the former
ventricles of the brain, have then common sense, their imagination and
fantasy perished, when the instruments about those parts either suffer or
have suffered violence. If the same happen to the middle ventricle, the like is
seen in the defect of reason: if to the hindermost ventricle, the memory
fails, as it has befallen many upon the receipt of a blow in that place:
yea, which is more then that, experience does not only show this when
blows and diseases light upon the head and brain, but it appears also in
the composition and making of all that part of the body. For according as the
head shall be either well or ill framed and proportioned either before, in the
midst, or in the hinder part thereof, or in all three together, so shall a
man find greater excellency, moderation, or defect, in the internal senses,
which exercise their offices in the head, as well particularly as generally.
Therefore it is not without reason said in our common speech of him that has
a good spirit, sense, and judgment, that his head is well made: and
contrariwise, that his head is ill made that wants these things. For
whatsoever the inhabitant or workman is that labors, the lodging in which
he dwells, or the tools and instruments which he uses, are of great
moment to further or hinder him in his work.

But now that we are in hand with frenetike persons, and have said before,
that good and ill spirits have great means, and such as we can not
comprehend, whereby they move the imagination and fantasy of men, Of such as
are possessed with Deuilles.
it shall not be altogether fruitless, if we speak somewhat of them that are
possessed with spirits. For there are some who think not, that the Deuilles
in their very substance enter into the bodies or souls, hearts or minds of
men. I speak not here of such as think there is neither God, nor Angels,
nor Deuilles, but even of them that believe all these things: who
nevertheless think, that evil spirits trouble the hearts and minds of men
only by prouocations, temptations, and illusions. Others there are, that
refer all the madness of Lunatike folks to natural causes, as if they
proceeded either from melancholic or cholerike humors or some such like
causes, as frensinesse, madness, and fury, or some such diseases whereby men
are carried beside themselves. True it is, and cannot be denied, that many are
thought to be possessed with Deuilles, when in deed they are nothing so. For
there are some counterfeit crankes, as many have been taken with the manner,
who upon some occasion have by mere knavery fained themselves such. And some
also there are that be but melancholy mad, and carried away by some disease
of the brain: but because their melancholy and fury is very violent and
strange, ignorant people suppose they are possessed with some spirit.
Notwithstanding we may not doubt, but that evil spirits, desirous to hurt men
both in their goods, bodies, and souls, use all the means and occasions they
can possibly invent and find out, to execute their malice, when it pleases
God to give them leave. The power of evil spirits.
For they can drive forward and move the hearts and minds of men, and set
them in such a fury, that even their reason and judgment will be wholly
confounded and as it were clean extinguished. Hereupon it comes, that many
being carried headlong with such madness, tear, and kill themselves, or their
own wives, children, or others, whereof we may daily see many examples.
Nevertheless we say not, that the natural light which God has given them is
wholly put out in them, much less in those that are not so far gone: but the
Devil does stir them forward with such violence, that they are as it were
taken perforce from themselves, when they are forsaken of God. Which examples
ought to admonish us to call upon God incessantly, that he would govern us
by his son Jesus Christ, who is come to destroy the works of the Devil,
that so the light of reason and of judgment may not be darkened or put out in
us, and that our hearts be not so possessed and pusshed on by Satan, that we
rush our selves through a deuilish fury against the will of God. And this did
our Savior teach us to demand of him when he said, Matthew. 26. 4^. and 6. 13.
Pray that ye enter not into tentation: and when he taught us to say, Lead
us not into tentation, but deliver us from evil, For if evil spirits durst
set upon those that were sound both in body and soul, after that manner which
I have spoken of, according to that power that was given them, we may not
think that they spare such as are sick: especially those that are already
troubled in brain and beside themselves. For the Devil, as our mortal
enemy, continually watches for those occasions that are fittest, and most for
his advantage to hurt us withal. Therefore he intrudeth himself amidst our
diseases and miseries, chiefly when there is weakness of brain joined
therewith, using against us those weapons, which he finds in our own
nature, as also those which his own malice and rage ministers unto him,
whereof we have a very profitable example in the history of Job. He
declares plainly by his speech, that if the fear of God had not kept him
back, he had rather have strangled himself, then lived in that miserable
estate wherein he was. And no doubt, if God had not held a strong hand over
his servant Job, Job 7. 15.
and brideled the rage and evil will of Satan that persecuted him, the Devil
had had great power over this good man, to have persuaded him to make away
himself desperately, as Achitophel and Judas did. Now if the Devil prevailed
so far with Job, by that leave which God gave him to afflict and trouble him,
we may well think what he can do with the wicked and reprobate, whom GOD
wholly abandoneth and gives over unto him. We have a very plain example in
Saul, of whom it is written, that the spirit of the Lord went from him, 1.
Sam. 16. 14, 15. and 314.
and that he was given over of the Lord to an evil spirit, which troubled
and vexed him, and that in the end he fell into such desperation, that he
utterly forsook God and slew himself. We may know also by that which the holy
Evangelists have written of such as were possessed, and were healed by Jesus
Christ and by his Apostles, what power evil spirits have over the^, whilst
God suffered them to execute their rage and fury. A man may easily judge, that
such persons are not only out of their wits through sickness, but that evil
spirits possess them. For he so troubles their mind and spirit, that they
know (...) more what they do, then the veriest bedlems that can be. And
although he horribly vexes their bodies, yet they feel not his torments, or
if they do feel them, yet they cannot abstain from vexing themselves. So that
it is easily known, that the devil is in them, and that it proceeds not
only of a simple frenzy, or melancholy humor, seeing some of them have done
such things as could not possibly be performed by the power of man, whereof
some of those are witnesses, whom the holy scripture rehearses unto us.
Wherefore it is out of all question, that evil spirits have wrought both in
them and by them. Therefore we have good occasion offered unto us by all that
has been hitherto spoken, to humble our selves before God, and to pray unto
him continually, as we said in the beginning of our speech. For being as we
are, we ought still to praise God, who distributeth his graces as it pleases
him, and that by a most exquisite kind of justice. Good instructions for all
men.
And when we see those that are infirm and beside themselves, some for a
certain time, and by fittes, others continually and after diverse manners, let
us not mock or despise them, but rather have pity and compassion over them,
pray to God in their behalf, and succor them as much as we can, acknowledging
the grace of God toward us in keeping us from such inconveniences, and
beseeching him to preserve and keep us continually. For whatsoever befalls
others, should as it were hang before our eyes, as often as it pleases him to
beat them with such scourges, which we our selves have no less deserved then
they that are beaten, yea oftentimes a great deal more. The Lord strikes
whom it pleases him, that by them others might take instruction. Therefore if
we cannot profit by such teaching, nor learn at other men's cost to fear and
honor him, to call upon him and to give him thanks, it is to be feared that
he will send us as much, that so we may learn at our own charges. Yea and then
also he is very gracious unto us, if he suffer us to have our understandings,
to know how to profit by his rods and chastisements, and give us not wholly
over into the hands of Satan our Adversary. But enough of this matter. And
now that we have seen the nature and office of the internal senses of the
soul, with their seats and instruments, the sequel of our speech requires
(as I think) that we should entreat of understanding and will, which are two
faculties and virtues in the highest and most principal part and power of the
soul of man, and in regard of which it is properly called by the name of a
reasonable soul and life: as we shall presently learn of ACHITOB.

Of the reasonable soul and life, and of virtue: of the understanding and
will, that are in the soul, and of their dignity and excellency. Chap. 28.
ACHITOB. Although beasts without any judgment and reason follow after yt
which they conceive to be agreeable to their nature, and eschew the contrary,
according as their natural inclination drives the^ thereunto: yet they pass
not those bounds of nature which God has set them, nor violate the laws
thereof. Whereby we see, that through a secret sense of nature, they draw
always toward God their Creator, in that their nature bends still toward
that which God has appointed to be the chief Good, unto which they can
attain. And no doubt but God has given them such inclinations to be as it
were rules to direct them to that which is their proper and natural Good,
which consists only in corporal things belonging to their bodies. Now if
he be thus careful for beasts, we may not think that he has deprived Man
of such a benefit, but that he has also given him his inclination to lead
him to his proper Good, and to the truth which in respect thereof is
necessary for him. For what likelihoode is there, that such a woorkeman as God
is, would create Man, the most excellent creature under heaven, in worse
estate not only then beasts, but also then all other bodily creatures, which
are nothing in comparison of the excellency which is in him, who
notwithstanding following their natural disposition, Psalm. 148. 8.
Praise GOD and fulfill his word, as the Psalmist says.

As therefore God has ordained and prepared a far greater Good formen then
for beasts, and has laid up the same in his soul and spirit, so has he
given them the means to enquire and find it out. But the difficulty that is
in finding it out, proceeds through their own fault. For the darkness of
ignorance and error, which sin has brought into their minds, is that which
hinders them, and which had not taken hold of them, if mankind had continued
in the perfection of his first nature. Nevertheless, what defect soever there
be, yet we see, that in the mind of man there shines always this natural
light that is given unto him above that which beasts have, I mean Reason, which
serves to guide the soul and spirit amidst the darkness of error and
ignorance, to the end they may be able to discern truth from falsehood, and
the true Good from the false, as we see the light serves the eyes to keep us,
and to cause us to see in darkness. Therefore we said before, that there was
a double discourse of reason in man; whereof the one is Theoricall and
Speculatiue, Of contemplation and action.
which has Truth for his end, and having found it goes no farther. The
other is Practical, having Good for his end, which being found it stays not
there, but passes forward to the Will, which God has joined unto it, to the
end it should love, desire and follow after the Good, and contrariwise hate
eschew and turn away from evil. Therefore when the question arises of
contemplation, reason has Truth for her utmost bounds, and when she is to
come into action, she draws toward Good, and having conferred together that
which is true and good, she pronounces judgment. So that reason considers
of things with great deliberation, and being sometimes in doubt which way to
take, she stays and returns as it were to her self, and makes many
discourses before she judge and conclude. But sin has so troubled our
spirit, that these natural rules, which should evermore cause us to incline
to that which is right and good, are greatly depraved and corrupted.
Nevertheless there remains in us a small remnant of that great Good, which
testifies sufficiently unto us what loss and damage we received by our fall.
Therefore both the internal and external senses serve us not only for the
good of the body, and for this life as they do to beasts: but also for the
good of the soul, and help us to lift up the mind higher, to seek for a
better life, and for a greater Good, then can be found among all the creatures,
The senses of ^^^serue for ye good of his soul.
and in which alone the mind finds true felicity, agreeable to such a
nature as it self is. Hereof it comes, that it cannot content it self with
that wherewith beasts are contented, nor stay there where they stay. For after
the spirit is somewhat settled upon that knowledge, which it has by his
imagination and fantasy, he lifts up himself higher by the means of
reason, namely to the understanding of spiritual and divine things. For he
knows well, that because he is as it were shut up in an obscure prison, and
compassed about with darkness, he is hindered from attaining to the
understanding and knowledge of many things whereof he is ignorant, and can
neither see nor know that which he would so nearly, clearly, and perfectly as
if he were at greater liberty, nor use that natural vigor that he has,
being in this prison of the body. In this sort does man consider of himself
and of his nature; and from that knowledge which he has of the highest and
most excellent things in nature, there springs in him a love toward them,
insomuch that the spirit ascends up and attaineth unto God, who is the
author and Creator of all. For this cause there arises contention betwixt
reason and fantasy. Contention betwixt the spirit and fantasy.
For imagination and fantasy, being nearer to the corporal senses, draw the
soul to those things that are bodily: but reason and the spirit prick it
forward, and cause it to lift up it self to more excellent things. For the
spirit (which the Philosophers express by Understanding) mounteth up unto
those things that cannot be known nor comprehended of imagination and
fantasy, nor of any other sense. Moreover it keeps fantasy brideled* and
brings it into the right way, which otherwise wandreth far wide, and
enters into many turnings and windings. Neither does the spirit wholly
yield unto every present profit, or decline the contrary, but calls things
past to remembrance, coniectureth and foreseeth things to come, and searches
out what is true and what false to give judgment thereafter, and then to
follow after or to eschew that which ought to be followed or fled from.
Thus you see what the reasonable soul brings to men, which is not in beasts
nor in their soul. Besides, from this vigor and nature of the spirit, speech
proceeds, which being his messenger, is wanting unto beasts, because they
are void of reason and understanding, in regard whereof speech is given, as
we have already heard. Therefore we understand by the reasonable soul and
life, such a soul and life as has counsel, What is meant by the reasonable
soul.
judgment and reason, and which was created to this end, that knowing God her
Creator, and loving him in respect thereof, she might honor and serve him, and
finally by degrees attain to immortal life and happiness, which is appointed
for her end. For as nothing is more excellent then reason, whereof God has
made man partaker, so there is nothing more beseeming reason then to know,
love, and honor God, seeing there is nothing greater, more excellent, or that
may be compared unto him. Therefore as man differs from brute beasts in
respect of reason, wherewith God has endued him, so he differs from them in
that he is capable of religion, created and borne thereto, which consists in
the things already touched. But beasts are not capable of any kind of
religion, being altogether void thereof: as on the other side, there is no man
but he has some sense of it. Proof that the soul of beasts is mortal, but
of men immortal.
Whereby we may gather a good argument, that beasts are not only void of
reason, but also that their souls are mortal, and the souls of men
immortal. For the fountain and fruit of the religion and service of God,
consists not in this mortal life, and therefore it must needs be in some
other that follows. And for this cause Reason, which is so great and
excellent a gift of God in man, is not bestowed upon us for things of so small
price and so transitory as these are, which we use and enjoy in this life, and
in which it is wholly busied: much less for those whereby the life of beasts
is preserved, but in regard of these things which I have now declared.
Therefore as God has not given such a life to stones as he has given to trees
and plants, What is in plants above stones, and in beasts above plants, and in
men above beasts.
nor yet sense, imagination and fantasy to trees and plants, as he has done
to beasts: so he has not granted reason to beasts, as he has to men, and
that not without just cause. For as it is enough for stones in regard of the
perfection of their nature, to be heavy and such as they are, and sufficient
likewise for trees and plants to have a Vegetative soul, seeing they want not
that which beasts have more then they: so beasts stand not in need of that
which men have above them. For it suffices for the preservation and defense of
their life and being, that they have some kind of cogitation joined with
imagination and fantasy: although they want reason, which is not necessary for
them as it is for men, for the causes already specified: and chiefly because
they were not created by means of the knowledge of God and of true religion to
come to a better life, then their brutish life is. The end of m^n^ being.
Therefore as man is created, to the end that the light of the knowledge of God
might shine in him, and that God might communicate with him his wisdom and
goodness, so he would that the soul of man should be an evident testimony
of himself. For this cause it was said in his creation, that God made man
after his own image and likeness, as we have already heard. Seeing then
there are in the reasonable soul so clear and excellent testimonies of God,
and that by it especially the difference appears between man and beasts, as
also in the diverse governments of their lives, it behooves us to con^ider
thereof very diligently. And albeit this glass of God cannot be so evidently
seen, as those that are made of steel, or of glass and lead by the hand of
man, to represent the image of our bodies, nevertheless the actions and works of
the soul do plainly show, that there is such a power and virtue in us, which
God has given us more to use for our benefit, then to know it, and that for
the causes already touched by us. Only God knows the soul perfectly.
For the true and perfect knowledge thereof belongs to God only, who being
above it, has created and given it, and will cause us to know it better when
we shall be in that eternal light, in which we shall know those things that are
now hidden from us. In the mean time let us in this life consider of and
distinguish the actions and works of the soul, whereby we are severed from
beasts, and which being very evident testimonies of God in us, govern the life
of man, and bring forth all honest sciences and arts. We have spoken already
of the powers and virtues of the soul which by the use of corporal
instruments labor and manifest themselves: but it appears evidently, that
there is in man another higher power, because we have many actions and do many
works, What actions men do, which beasts cannot.
which beasts cannot perform nor imitate. For man has the knowledge of
numbers and can reckon, he understands not only particular things, but also
general and universal things, he discourses, that is, gathers and
concludes one thing of another, and that very far, he inuenteth arts and
disposes them, he judges of his own reasons and discourses, and marking his
own faults, he corrects them, he changes his intents and purposes, he
discerns virtues from vices, and honest things from those that are dishonest:
finally he deliberateth by a long discourse of reason. As for beasts they
have not these things common with us, as they have the use of the senses, as
of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and other such like things, wherein they
oftentimes excel us in many respects. For many of them have these senses more
sharp then we have. And although they have some imagination, fantasy and
apprehension of things offered to their bodily senses, yet that holds but
for the present, and in the place or field where the things are offered unto
them. How beasts discourse.
The like may be said of those discourses of reason, which many think are in
the perfectest of them. For they have some kind of discourse, in that they can
pass from one thing to another. But all their judgments are but of particular
things, neither do they ascend higher. In like manner, they know not things
absent, nor pass from the^ to others, whether it be from things absent to them
that are present, or from present things to those that are absent. For they
take or leave incontinently those present and particular things which they
know, and make a stop there without any further discourse. So that this
intellectual and reasonable power is proper to man only, and is the highest
and most sovereign virtue of the soul of man. And although the internal
senses are serviceable unto it, as they are served of the external senses,
nevertheless it has proper actions, virtues and motions, which it can and
does exercise without the help of bodily instruments, when it is separated
from the body. And even while it is in the body, it is sometime ravished, as
if it were altogether out of it, as it has often fallen out to holy men,
Ezech. 37. 1.
who have been ravished in spirit in the contemplation of celestial and
divine things, and that by the revelation of the spirit of God: Act. 10. 3,
10, 11. 2. cor. 12. 2, 3.
insomuch that Saint Paul testifies of himself, that He was taken up into
the third heaven and into Paradise, not knowing whether he were in the body
or out of the body, but GOD he knew. We will consider therefore in this
chief and most sovereign part of the soul, two faculties and virtues, namely
the Understanding and the Will. Of the Understanding and of Will.
For it being so that man is created to attain to that sovereign and
eternal Good, which God has propounded unto him, therefore has GOD given him
the power and virtue to wish for that Good, to the end he might desire to
apply and join himself unto it. This power and virtue is called Will. But
the soul cannot have this appetite and desire, if first it understand or know
not that Good which it ought to desire and follow after. For this cause has
God given unto it another power and virtue, which we call Understanding. And
forasmuch as our spirit stays not always in one thought, but discourses
and goes from one matter to another, it had need of a receptacle and
storehouse, wherein it may lay up the first thoughts when others come, as if
it placed them in a treasury, that they should not be lost, but might be
found out, and called forth when need should require. The memory compared
to the rolls of Chancerie.
But we learned by our former speech, that this office apperteyneth to
memory, which is as it were the Rolls of a Chauncerie court, in which the
seals of images framed by the thought, are imprinted, and upon which the
understanding does look as often as it pleases. And even as it serves to
the other internal senses, unto which it succeeds in order, so also it
serves the Understanding and Will.

Concerning the Understanding, if we consider it generally, it comprehends
the whole mind: but being taken more specially, we mean a certain
particular office thereof. For it understands the the things that come from
without, as we conceive them: then it lays up that which it has understood
in some little cofer by it self for a time, out of which it may take them
again when need requires. This repetition and taking again, which is as it
were an inquiry, and searching out, is called Consideration: and from thence it
comes to recordation and remembrance, and so conferreth together the things
it has understood, and compares them one with another: which being done, a
discourse thereof is had with others, after which discourse it determines and
judges what is true and what false, what good and what evil. Then does the
Will choose that which is good, and refuses the evil. And as we come from the
understanding to the will by these degrees, so we must ascend up by the same
steps, even from the last to the first, namely from Will to Understanding.
For Will does not follow after or refuse any thing, which the judgment has
not first determined to be good or evil: and the judgment decrees nothing
before it has taken advise of reason, and reason advises not before she have
conferred the things one with another, and thoroughly examined them. Neither can
this conferring be without consideration, nor consideration without requiring
that of Memory, which was committed unto it to keep, and the memory will
keep nothing safe, but that which it has first known and understood. So that
the reasonable soul has all these things, namely Understanding, Will and
Memory. And under this faculty of understanding, there is simple and
particular intelligence, What degrees are between Judgment and Will.
after which Consideration follows, next Recordation, then Conferring, and
discoursing after that, next Judgment, and last of all Contemplation, which is
as it were the rest of the soul and spirit. Now these things being so
excellent and wonderful, and somewhat obscure withal, deserve to be
discoursed of more at large, and to be uttered more clearly. And therefore
before we go to any other matter, we shall do well to consider of the
diversity that is found in the operations and discourses of the Understanding,
according to that gift of light which is in it, and what is the end of all
discourses. Prepare therefore thy self ASER to entreat of this matter.

Of the variety and contrariety that is found in the opinions,
deliberations, counsels, discourses and judgments of men, with the cause
thereof: and of the good order and end of all discourses. Chap. 29.
ASER. All things whatsoever can be rehearsed, are either of this mutable and
temporary nature, or of the other, which is immutable, perpetual and above
that nature. If the question be of the first, either the variety and change is
such, that no certain rule or determination can be given, or else there is a
perpetual tenor and constancy in them according to their inbred inclination,
through a steadfast and continual order of nature, which is alike in all,
according to their natures and kinds. If the variety and change be very
uncertain, there can no certain science and knowledge be had of them, nor any
determination set down so general, but that there will be always some exception.
For touching the first sort, What knowledge we may have of variable things.
we can have no sure knowledge of things that are infinite, and that have
infinite alterations. And because particularities, and particular things are
infinite in regard of our capacity, there can no entire and certain knowledge
be had of them all in special. As for generals, howbeit they also are
variable, yet some rules may well be given of them, of which the art
follows afterward: and yet no such certain rules, but often it falls out
otherwise, as we may see in many arts, and in sundry experiences. For although
it be ordinary for women to love their children, yet there are some that
murder them cruelly. So that howsoever it be very common to love them, yet it
falls not out so always. Therefore we may well say of a woman, if she be
a Mother, it is very like, that she loves her child, because it is natural.
But we cannot conclude certainly, that it is always so, seeing we often see
the contrary. There are also oftentimes many signs, which have such apparent
significations, that they seem to signify things unto us certainly enough,
wherein nevertheless we are deceived, as it falls out often in our
suspicions and opinions, which are not grounded upon certain and firm
arguments, and most evident reasons. Wherefore the knowledge that we may have
of such things cannot properly be called science, In what things conjecture
takes place.
but only conjecture, opinion, probability or likelihood, because there is
great show of truth, but yet not very certain.

Now albeeit the nature of things be mutable, yet if they always keep one
and the same tenor and constancy, which continues alike always to it self,
a man may have a certain knowledge of them, Of what things science or
knowledge may be had.
and that is called science: example whereof we have in celestial bodies and
in natural things, which always keep one and the self same order and
nature, both in the elements, and in living creatures, in plants also and such
like things. For as for the heavens, although they be mutable creatures, yet
they have always certain courses and motions, which follow their accustomed
order without ceassing. In like manner we see that all these things mentioned
even now, are distinguished in their kinds, and have their natural means
whereby they are mainteyned and preserved. For it is natural in man to beget
man, and by this means mankind is preserved. The same may be said of other
living creatures, of plants also and of such other things which never fail in
keeping their order. We have this light in us by nature. Wherefore when I see a
child or a man, I may always say certainly, that no painter has painted and
fashioned him in that sort, and that it is none of his work: but that he was
begotten and bred of a man and a woman that were his parents. For God does not
now create men and women, as he created Adam and Eve in the beginning, and as
we showed in our first discourse, but by the common order which he established
at that time, and in regard of which he instituted the holy estate of Marriage,
In what things wisdom takes place.
as we will entreat hereafter. But if the question be concerning immutable,
perpetual and supernatural things, we have need of another light, that is
greater and more agreeable to their nature, which is given to men by divine
inspiration. This light or knowledge is called Sapience or Wisdom. For this
cause Saint Paul writing to the Ephesians says, Ephesians. 1. 16, 17, 18.
I cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers, that
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the father of glory, might give unto you the
spirit of wisdom and revelation through the knowledge of him: that the eyes
of your understanding may be lightened, that ye may know what the hope is of
his calling, and what the riches of his glorious inheritance is in the Saints.
We see here how the Apostle joins together wisdom, revelation and
illumination of the understanding, The author of wisdom.
the author of which he makes the spirit of God, by whose revelation and
lightning we obtain true wisdom, of which the wisdom of the world is not
capable. And therefore afterward he calls this wisdom, Ephe. 3. 19.
the knowledge that passes all knowledge. For although by our natural light
we have some obscure knowledge of God, as we have already touched it, yet it
cannot so far lighten us, nor cause us to ascend so high, except God give us
this also, of which I spoke even now. Therefore how great soever the natural
light be which we have, yet if we follow it any thing far, we are presently
compassed with darkness, Much darkness mingled with our natural light.
which proceeds not of the things we are to know, but from our own minds,
which being pressed with the heavy burden of our body, are hindered and made
more slow: or else it is because our minds are troubled, as if some cloud
troubled the sight of our eyes. So that the more light is in our mind, the
greater knowledge we have there, and the less doubting. If there be no light
at all, or so little that it be no better then none at al, then ignorance
spreads it self as it were darkness in an obscure and troubled night,
insomuch that there is neither science, nor opinion, nor likelihood, nor
doubting. Here of it is that we commonly say, ignorant persons cast no perils.
Thus then as every one has more light in the mind, he beholds obscure
things more clearly, The cause of the diversity of knowledge and of ignorance
in men.
because his understanding is better, either by the benefit of nature, or by
study and exercise, or by a special gift of God. Others see nothing at all or
very little, no not into those things that are very clear and manifest, so
that they are like to men compassed and covered with darkness at Midday. This
befalls the^ either through the ignorance that is in their understanding, or
by reason of their blockish slouthfulnes that neglects exercise, or by the
just judgment of God, who because of their sins has blinded their minds,
giving the^ over to Satan to blind them, 2. Cor. 4. 4.
who uses to shut up the eyes of worldly, carnal, and unfaithful men, whom he
has in his power. So that if there be any error in the minds of men, if they
approve and follow after lying in stead of truth, and evil in place of
goodness, this comes not from the natural or supernatural light that God
has given them, nor of the knowledge they have thereby, how great or small
soever it be, but of the darkness that is mingled amiddest this light, which
sin has made more dark and wholly overwhelmed, and the Devil daily
increases to the uttermost of his power, because he would gladly have all
light in us, as well natural as supernatural, clean extinguished and put
out. For as brightness breeds not clouds and obscurity, so science and
knowledge does not bring forth ignorance and error. For contraries are not
made one of another. Wherefore that comes to pass in the lightning of our
understandings, which we see to happen in the change of light, in regard of
our eyes. For according to that which is put betwixt, so does the quality and
virtue of the light change in respect of our sight. If it be a very thick
body, which the light cannot pearce through, then is it wholly taken from us,
and as it is more or less thick, or thin and transparent, so do our eyes
receive more or less light. In like manner the lightening of our understanding
is wonderful variable, Causes of the variety of men's opinions.
because of the great diversity of things that are set before it in this
life, to hinder it sundry ways, in some more, in some less, according to
those obiectes that are offered to every one, or as men procure to themselves.
From hence it is that there are so many diverse opinions sentences and
judgments amongst men, in all deliberations and in all matters, especially when
the controversy of discerning truth from falsehood, good from bad, and what is
to be followed, what to be fled. Now concerning those things, which chiefly
cause this great diversity, we have first to consider of the composition,
complexion and disposition of man's body, whether it be sound, or whether it be
sick. Also the Age, strength, or weakness, the perfection or imperfection
thereof, common custom, the present disposition of vading qualities engendered
by nourishment, time and place, with those actions and things that may
outwardly happen to the body. For we see by experience, that the
understanding and spirit with all the parts and offices of the soul receive
great help or hinderance, according as the body, and all the members thereof
are well or ill disposed, The manners of men follow the disposition of their
bodies.
and that the manners follow the complexion and disposition of the body. For
God has so tempered the nature thereof with that of the soul to make them
agree well together, that the one takes much of the other, either to good or
bad purpose, according as they are either well or ill affected. Concerning the
soul, we have to consider therein all the affections, besides the nature of
the understanding, whether it be slow and heavy, or quick and light, and of a
ready conceit and discourse, and whether it be sharp or dull. Again,
consideration must be had of the teaching and instruction which it has had,
what opinions are already rooted in it, and what persuasions have forestalled
it, as also how far the behavior, custom and authority of others can
prevail with it. For all these things greatly trouble the minds of men, and
procure not only diversity, but also contrariety of opinions, sentences and
wills of men, which causes them to change and rechange so often, insomuch
that they do not only differ and are contrary one to another, but every one
also to himself. For we have daily trial in our selves, that wee-change our
opinions from hour to hour, and minute to minute, insomuch that whatsoever
we have now approved, determined and set down for a certain decree, we
condemn and reject it by and by after, and utterly overthrow it: and
contrariwise we approve and ratify that which we had a little before
condemned and refused. Whereupon we have to note, according to that we heard
before of the discourse of reason, which is the proper effect of the
understanding, that there are two kinds of it. Two kinds of discourses.
For there are discourses, wherein reason goes on by degrees in continual
order, one discourse always following another, by considering and examining
whatsoever appertains to the matter in hand, that so a certain and sound
judgment there of may be rendered afterward. Again, there is another kind
of discoursing, wherein reason does not only run amain, but withal skippeth
hither and thither, as though it took here a little and there a little, tasting
only of things very slightly and by the way, as Bees that fly from one flower
to another, and leave others between untouched. Which course whilst reason
takes, it omitteth some step or other which it ought to trace: and that either
through ignorance of the right path it ought to follow, or because it thinks
it needless to stay about that which it passes by, or because it delights
not, or is not disposed so to do.

Moreover, we must know, that there is great diversity of discourses,
according to the variety of men's understandings. For sharp wits sound to
the bottom, that matter which is propounded unto them: wise and subtle
heads, even by small conjectures far fetched, conceive that which they seek
after and attain thereunto. There are some also of such great spirits, that
conceive many things at once, and as it were in the twickling of an eye, and at
one look behold all that is pertinent to the matter. Whereby it appears,
that they have a ready imagination and fantasy, their memory like to an open
treasury, a quick consideration, and a perfect and sound remembrance. For
if the imagination and fantasy be slow, or the memory shut up, or if
consideration cease, or recordation be weak, the discourse will be backewarde,
and fall out but badly, as it is with children, and those that are very aged,
with sick folks, and those that have their minds troubled. Of the end of al
discourses.
Now the end of all discoursing in the mind, tends either to the invention
or conclusion of the thing that a man seeks for. And if he attain not to
his end, it is either because he takes not the way which he ought to take,
as they that know not what way to follow, which comes to pass by diverse
means: or because his understanding is not good, but full of darkness: or
through some perturbation that troubles it for a time, as when the affections
are much moved: or by reason of the variety of cogitations, which trouble and
hinder one another. There are some also which go on without any regard had to
that thing they seek after, as it falls out with them that are too much
moved, and that have a very hasty imagination and fantasy. For these men
go beyond the place, where they might find the thing which they seek for:
and so leaving the chief matter behind, they fall into unnecessary and bye
matters, into foolish trifling and strange things, without all compass of
reason, and such as belong nothing to the purpose. Wherefore, so soon as the
discourse is begun, fantasy is presently to be bridled and kept in, and the
inquisition also of memory, to the end the understanding may commodiously take
hold of that which it is to follow, and that no such hasty and light
commotion carry it away, and so cause it to loose all. Wherein we may say, that
it falls out with the understanding, as it does with a hounde that is in
chase. For if he cannot by sent find out the game he seeks, or if after he
has found it and is in chase, he fall to hunt riot, or if he give in, either
for want of courage, or because he is spent, or because the course is too
long, he shall never take the pray for which he was brought to field, but
lose it without recovery: A comparison.
So in these discourses of the mind, whereof we speak, there are others also
beside them that are: already mentioned, who, because they are of a slow
spirit, and the matters they search for are far off and hard to find, have
not vigor nor force sufficient to attain unto them. The self same thing also
happens to some, not so much for want of strength and quickness of spirit,
as because they are commonly idle and slothful, as it is with them that will
not be attentive, and cannot away to occupy their minds, when they should take
some pains to learn. There are many of these, who being more careful for
their bodies then for their souls, and that they may more freely attend to the
body and the desires thereof, are soon persuaded to give over all care to
seek for and to provide things necessary for the soul. And if the body be
never so little out of square, yea the very fear least they should procure it
any grief, causes them wholly to abstain from laboring the mind in the
searching out of wisdom and truth, so that they voluntary become ignorant.
There are others that have running heads, who will never continue and stay in
one thing: and some also that when they should hearken to that which they are
about, have their wits a wool-gathering, and, as we use commonly to say, are
building of castles in Spain. But above all we must herein acknowledge that
God distributeth his gifts and graces to men, and bestows wit and
understanding as it pleases him. Now that we have entreated sufficiently of
the understanding, and of the discourses of reason therein, let us speak of
Judgment which follows it, and of his office. This then shall be the matter
subject of thy speech, AMANA.

Of Judgment, and of his office, after the discourse of reason: and how
Belief, Opinion, or doubting follow it: of the difference that is between
them. Chap. 30.
AMANA. If I judge aright of the doctrine contained in our former discourses,
which handled the nature, powers, faculties and virtues of the soul, I find
that the spirit is as it were the chief part therein, The several powers of
the soul.
in which is the Mind, the Understanding, and Memory. The Mind is as it were a
white paper, wherein as a man grows in years and judgment, so he writes
his cogitations and thoughts, which he has by learning and by the instruction
of wisdom. Understanding is framed by the knowledge of reason, and last of
all Memory follows. For there is great difference between that which the
senses and the understanding are able to do in the time of infancy, and that
which is done by them in other ages, wherein there is greater use of them. And
although the seeds of all the operations of the soul, are included within it
even from the beginning of the creation thereof, nevertheless God has created
it of that nature, that as he has joined it to the body, which has his
degrees of growth in every part thereof, so ye soul has some agreement
therewith in this respect, touching the manifestation of her powers and
virtues. If then any man be endued with an excellent spirit, that is quick
and ready to conceive, and with a memory apt to retain and hold fast, it is a
great mean for him whereby to attain to the knowledge of the truth. But for
the perfection of these two great gifts of nature, it is necessary he should
have a good and found judgment, proceeding from a sound disputing and
discoursing of reason lightened by the spirit of God, and by it purged of
error, illusion, and of all vain opinions, which the nature of man has of
his own inheritance, and which hinders him from judging aright of the truth.

Now the office of Judgment is to like or dislike the discourses of reason,
Of the office of Judgment.
and the conclusions which are made thereby. For it belongs to Judgment, to
judge whether reason discourse and conclude well as it ought to do. And
therefore it is in the spirit and in the mind, as a rule, or as the skoles in
a pair of balance: and whilst reason is a woorking, it is quiet. But when
she has concluded and done, judgment afterward examineth and considers
whether there be any fault in the discoursing, or in the conclusion, or in
both, or whether all be well referred, before it either approve or mislike any
thing. And if it find any thing that breeds fear least it be deceived, then
it begins again to advise of the matter. Now the greatest cause it has to
fear least it be deceived, arises of probable reasons, which albeeit they
be like to be true, yet indeed are not true. And because there are some,
which have such great show of truth, that it is a very hard matter to be
able to discern them from true reasons, and not take them to be such indeed,
therefore the Judgment may be often deceived by this means. For it will not
easily flippe aside, but abide constant in that wherein it is once settled, if
it be not led and induced to allow or disallowe of a thing, either by
virtue of true and certain reasons that may move it, or of such reasons as
are so very likely, and carry so great a show of truth, A sound judgment
is an excellent gift of God.
that they cannot be known and discerned for others. Therefore we may well
say, that a good, upright and sound judgment is an excellent gift of God:
neither is there any thing more necessary in all arts and disciplines, yea in
the whole course of man's life, and chiefly for the principal end of our being,
which is to know and to serve God. For as Good is a thing agreeable to the
Will, so is Truth agreeable to the Mind: whereupon it follows likewise,
that as Evil is contrary and an enemy to the Will, so is lying in respect of
the mind. Wherefore if judgment judges that the conclusion made by reason is
true and follows well, it joins it self thereunto, receiving and embracing
it as agreeable to it self. This approbation is called Consent. But if it
judge the conclusion to be false, it turns aside and rejects it, and this
refusal may be called dissent, because it is contrary to consent, when there
is no agreement of sentences, Two kinds of consents.
but disagreement and contrariety. As touching Consent, we may divide it into
two kinds. For one kind thereof is firm and steadfast, and another weak and
unstayed. If the consent be firm, certain and thoroughly resolved, it is
called Belief. But there is difference betwixt that belief or faith, which
concerns humane matters, and that which is of divine things. For then do
we give credit to humane things, when we take them to be so certain, that
we doubt nothing thereof, as namely when we are so persuaded either by very
evident reasons which remove all doubting from us, or else by testimonies which
we take to be most certain. Wherefore we may say, Agreement betwixt Belief
and Science.
that there is great agreement betwixt this kind of belief and between
Science, because there is a certain resolution both in the one and in the
other. For Science is a kind of knowledge in which the demonstration made unto
us, compels us to approve that which is spoken, because we see the reasons
so certain, that we cannot gainsay them, nor think otherwise. The like is
done in belief, which is a kind of knowledge, that causes us without
doubting to give credit unto that which is told us, because we are overcome
by witnesses and by authority which we approve. For if we doubted any thing,
our consent would be yet weak, and so it could not properly be called
belief, but rather Conjecture or Opinion. For considering that in this there
is some kind of consent, which inclines to one part rather then to another,
therefore it tends to disliking, which is wholly against consent. What
Opinion is.
For this cause we call Opinion, a knowledge that moves us to incline rather
on the one side, then on the other, in regard of the appearance and show of
reason that it has: so that we are not fully resolved therein. Now albeeit
this consent, which is called opinion or conjecture, be not altogether so
firm, as that which we call belief: nevertheless it differs from
Doubting, What doubting is.
which is as it were a neuter judgment, hanging between consent and his
contrary, and inclining neither to the one side nor to the other. As for that
belief which is of divine things, there is such a firm consent required
therein, as that all doubting must be utterly excluded. For faith is not
perfect, if it do not allow for certain, whatsoever God has revealed unto
men by his word, which is a certain testimony of his will. Of says in
divine things.
And although he has given unto us the same means to instruct us by in these
things, that he has done in humane things, yet he goes further. For he
does not only teach us by experience, by reasons and demonstrations, which
appear manifestly to-our senses both external and internal, and of which our
mind can judge as well as of humane things, but he requires chiefly of us,
that we should believe his testimony, and those witnesses which he sends
unto us, and that we should content our selves with his authority. And
because heavenly things surpass the capacity of our understandings, Of the
light of faith.
God makes them capable by the light of faith, which is a supernatural and
divine light, whereby we see that in God, which we cannot behold in all the
creatures, and which our humane reason cannot naturally comprehend.

Now as much as this light is more certain then all other natural light,
either external of the eyes of the body, or internal in respect of the eyes
of the soul and mind, so much more certain is our sight and knowledge of
that, which we see and know by means of that light. For this cause when our
understandings are lightened with this light, we believe more firmly that
which it manifests unto us, I say not only then that whereunto we may be
persuaded by all the humane reasons which can be alleged: but also then that
which we see with our own eyes, and hear with our ears, and touch with our
hands. For these external senses, and those internal senses also whose
messengers the other are, are not so certain witnesses to our spirit, as the
senses of faith, Of the senses of faith.
which are more then humane. For they are heavenly. Wherefore she has eyes
whereby she sees divinely and not humanely, which can never be deceived as the
eyes of the body may. The like we may say of her ears and of her hands. For
there is no sense so certain as all hers are, because she receives them
divinely by the spirit. Therefore as she has not in her any imagination or
fantasy that can deceive her, so she can never fail, either in her discourses
or in her judgments whereupon she resolves: because she is always guided in
them by the holy spirit, whom she follows for her rule in all things, and
who assures her by his testimony, as if she bare the marks and seals
imprinted in her self, and in their minds and hearts in whom she dwells.
Hereof it is that Saint Paul so often says, Ephesians. 4. 30.
that God has sealed us by his holy Spirit, speaking as it were of a seal
imprinted in our hearts and minds, 2. cor. 1. 22.
and as of an earnest and gage which God has given us, for the best and most
certain assurance that can be. No marvel therefore if the children of God
endewed with this true faith become so resolute, so firm and constant, that no
authority, power, wisdom, force, eloquence, no humane reasons, nor any thing
that men or devils can imagine, think, say, or do, is able to make them to
change their minds, whereof we have most evident examples, especially in the
person of all the Martyrs, who could never by any violence in the world be
overcome, but their faith has evermore gotten the victory and triumphed over
all their enemies. And by this we may assuredly know, that it is better
grounded then upon all the reasons and persuasions of men that may be. Ephesians. 2.
Therefore it is not without cause that S. Paul calls it the gift of God,
neither is it without great reason commended so much in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. Hebr. 11.
For being come to that point, that it has such an illumination, as to account
all that God reuealeth in his word to be more certain then any thing that
we either see with our eyes, or touch with our hands, and hereof to have a
true sense and feeling of the testimony of the holy spirit, then does it
exclude al doubting, which is contrary thereunto, and differs much from that
which we hold only in opinion, The conclusions of faith are most true and
unchangeable.
wherein there is as yet no great assurance. So that we may conclude hereupon,
that according as faith is more or less in us, we shall never conclude ill,
nor at any time give over our conclusions. For faith never concludes any thing
which God has not before spoken, whose word and authority is unto it, as in
deed it ought to be, in stead of all reason. For seeing it is that wisdom
and truth which can never fail or lie, it needs not to doubt in any respect
to conclude always therewith, neither has it cause at any time afterward to
forsake or change the conclusion it has set down. Wherefore when our faith is
shaken and begins to alter, it is a sign and testimony, that it holds
more of the nature of opinion then of belief, and that it has not yet a
judgment thoroughly resolved in the conclusion which it has taken. So that
here we may learn what difference there is betwixt belief, opinion,
doubting, and infidelity or incredulity. Incredulity contrary to belief and
opinion.
For seeing incredulity is contrary to belief, it goes farther then
doubting, which concludes nothing on either side, as both belief and opinion
do, but incredulity concludes contrary to them both. For it gives no
consent, as belief and opinion do, but takes the clean contrary: and
therefore it may well be called dissent or disagreement, as being opposite to
that consent that is in belief.

Now to end this speech, and to take away al doubting that may arise of this
word Belief or Faith, Of the diverse acceptions of this word Belief or Faith.
I will only add this, that we are to know that it is diversely taken in the
holy scripturs. For the name which it has in the Hebrew tongue, is taken from
the word, whereby they express verity or truth, which they also take for
constancy and assurance. The word which the Evangelists and Apostles use
according to the Graecians in whose language they wrote, signifies properly
Persuasion. And the name used by the Latins, from whom we have taken our
Faith, signifies that constancy and truth, which men keep in their words
and promises: whereupon they call it the foundation of justice. Therefore
faithful signifies as much as true, constant, and firm in that which a man
has spoken and promised, namely, when one has kept his faith. Hereof it is
also that God is so often in the holy Scriptures called Faithful, in respect
of us, because he never falfifieth his faith, but is always firm and
constant in all his words and works. But when the Scripture speaks of Faith
in regard of men toward God; it does not only comprehend a belief, whereby
we believe that to be true which we hear, and which is spoken unto us, as
when one tells us some history, but it is also a trust, which assures us,
The description of Faith.
that God will perform that unto us which he has promised us. Therefore true
faith includes in it a certain and undoubted confidence of heavenly things,
and an assured persuasion of the accomplishment of Gods promises toward us.
Now to prosecute our purpose, seeing we have learned, that the knowledge of the
truth, which is the principal object of reason and understanding, is very
hard for men to attain unto, let us consider of the means whereby we may be
certain and sure of those things which we are to believe. This discourse ARAM.
belongs unto thee.

Of the means whereby a man may have certain knowledge of those things,
which he ought to believe and take for true: of the natural and supernatural
light that is in man, and how they bear witness of the image of God in him.
Chap. 31.
ARAM, For a man to know himself to be ignorant, is a goodly science and so
necessary for men, that without it they cannot be truly skillful. For the
ignorant person that knows not himself to be such a one, It is good for a
man to know his own ignorance.
but supposes he knows that which he does not in deed, is as unteachable
a beast as can be: because he will never seek for a master to be instructed
by, but if any offer themselves he will reject them, and rather himself take
upon him to teach them. Therefore Socrates was greatly commended by the
ancients because he said, that he knew but one only thing, namely, that he
was ignorant and knew nothing. True it is, that if we speak of things which
may be known by the corporal and spiritual senses of men, even as nature
has given them unto us, and of things belonging to natural and moral
Philosophy, there are many men to be found whose knowledge therein is so
great, that other men in respect of them may seem to be but poor beasts. But
when we must ascend up to the knowledge of things revealed unto us in Jesus
Christ, and in the Gospel, no sense or understanding of man is able to
comprehend any thing therein, if the spirit of God do not teach him, and
dwell in him, to seal and to confirm in his soul the doctrine of those
heavenly mysteries, wherein the skilfullest men are no better taught of
themselves, then those that are most ignorant. For that abides always true
which Saint Paul wrote to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 2. 14.
that the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God: for
they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.

Now I find four means, Four means to know certainly those things that
are to be believed.
whereby men may be made certain of those things unto which they ought to give
credit, whereof three of them are natural and according to natural
Philosophy, the fourth goes further, and is proper to divinity. The first is
general experience: the second, the knowledge of principles: the third,
natural judgment: of these three we will first speak, and then come to the
fourth. Of general experience.
General experience is that judgment which al men of sound minds do give
all after one sort, of those things whereof they have certain experience by
their corporal senses: as is to be seen in natural things. For who knows
not that the fire is hot? And who would not take him for a senseless man
that should affirm the contrary? Yea, who could affirm it, being convinced
of the truth thereof by his own senses? Likewise who sees not the difference
that is between death and life, and what are the effects both of the one and
the other? For every one knows these things by a general experience common
to all. Wherefore this knowledge is certain: and where it is so, there needs
no other proof or demonstration fetched farther then from such experience. For
God has so created the nature of things, that men must needs confess it to
be so, as general experience does declare it to be. And he that will not
believe it, let him take trial thereof himself, and he shall know whether it
be so or no. So that whosoever would stand against this common and general
experience, he should make open war against God and nature, in denying all
order which he has set down therein. Concerning the knowledge of principles,
Of the knowledge of principles.
we must first know that there is understood by principles, that natural
knowledge that is borne with us, which is the seed of all Arts, and a beam
of the light of God in us, to the end that by this means all Arts necessary
for life, should be invented and put in use. As for example, every one knows
naturally, that the whole of any thing is more then the half, or then a part
of it only: and that three are more then two. To be brief, the knowledge of
numbers, of measures, and of other such like things is natural unto us, and is
not found in the nature of beasts: and therefore they have neither the
invention nor use of any Art, as we have already heard. But let us proceed
farther and consider, whether there be no natural knowledge in men, whereby
they understand, that there is a divine nature, wise, just, true, good, that
loves goodness and hates and punishes evil, with which nature the soul of
man has some agreement, and is as it were an image thereof: for which cause he
ought to be made conformable to God, by following after wisdom, truth,
justice, goodness, and all virtue, and by shunning the contrary vices, Of the
natural knowledge of God in men.
In this respect, he that follows this rule obeys God, doing that which is
pleasant and right in his eyes: and he that leaves this rule, disobeyeth and
displeases him, committing wicked and dishonest things, whereby he becomes
worthy of punishment. In a word, we may refer to these natural
principles, whatsoever God has imprinted in men's hearts and minds of the law
of nature, which serves all men for natural divinity, the Books of which
they carry printed in their souls. And yet out of all question, this divinity
will scarce serve us but to condemnation, if we go no farther, because the
book thereof is so blotted in us, that there is not so much as one small piece
or leaf thereof whole and sound, and which is not very much blurred and torn.
Nevertheless that which remains is a sufficient process against us before
God, and able to convince and condemn us at his judgment. Of this we our
selves may judge, in that we see, that there is no nation or people that live
with no religion at all, but they have one either true or false, whereby they
labor to appease the wrath of God, and to be under his favor and protection,
according to that measure of knowledge, which they have of him. Whereby they
plainly declare, that there is a certain law within them taken from the
Book of this natural divinity, which condemns them in their hearts, and
urges and constrains them to do that which they do, even as we feel our
selves pressed and cnndemned by the written law which God has given unto us.
The use both of the natural and of the written law.
Wherefore if we knew how to profit by them both, they would both serve us in
stead of a Schoolmaster to direct and lead us unto Jesus Christ. For both of
them, if we understand them well, testify sufficiently unto us, that we stand
in need of a Mediator, by whom we may have access to God and be reconciled
unto him, seeing we feel our condemnation within our selves and in our own
consciences. As for the third mean to make a man certain of that which he is
to account for true, which we said was natural Judgment, Of natural
judgment.
it is the understanding of that order that ought to be in things, and of the
consequence of them, whereby to judge in some sort of the agreement or
disagreement they have one with an other: insomuch that every one has within
himself as it were a natural logic, whereby he is able to judge at
leastwise of common things. It remains now that we learn the fourth mean,
which passes all the former, and that is divine revelation, whereof we have
made mention, and those certain and infallible testimonies, which we learn
of the holy Scriptures, I mean the Books of the Prophets and Apostles, Of the
fourth mean of knowledge.
with the confirmation and understanding of them by the holy Spirit. For it
were not enough for us to have the word of God delivered unto us by them,
except the holy Ghost had his working both in them and in us. Wherefore although
naturally we more easily and firmly believe that which our mind is able to
see, know, and comprehend by the natural light thereof, then that which goes
beyond it, yet forasmuch as God has made us capable of understanding and
reason, we ought to give no less credit to all that he has revealed unto us
by his word, yea much more to this, howsoever by that light of nature which
remains in us we neither see nor know how true and firm it is, and that
for the causes before uttered. Hereof it is that in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Hebr. 11.
faith is called the substance and ground of things hoped for, and such an
evident demonstration of things not seen, that it conuinceth men and causes
them to perceive and know the truth of them very clearly. Whereupon we have
to note, that this natural light, and that which we call supernatural, are
not (to speak properly) two diverse and different lights, but one and the same,
as we should well have known, if our nature had continued in perfection, and
in that image of God in which it was created and framed, far differing from
all other creatures. For although there is in them some image of God, Of the
image of God in man.
yet they have not understanding to know it as it is, neither to know God
their creator, who has imprinted it in them. But it is far otherwise in man.
For God will be known of him, and therefore he has so imprinted his image in
his nature, that he will have him to see and know it. For this cause he has
given him a mind and understanding able to to receive this knowledge. For the
greatest likeness and resemblance that man can have with God, consists in
the agreement with him in wisdom and justice, which cannot be but in a nature
that is capable and partaker of reason and understanding. Now because God is
good, yea a common and general Good, he will not withholde this good in
himself without communicating it, but makes all his creatures partakers
thereof, especially man, with whom it has pleased him to communicate this
Good of wisdom and justice, which is the greatest and most excellent good
that is in him. Therefore did God together with his image imprint his knowledge
in the nature of man. For man could not otherwise know this image and
similitude, neither what it is to be like or unlike to God, if he had no more
knowledge of God, who, and what manner a one he is, then other creatures that
want this knowledge, because they are not capable of understanding and reason,
nor of this image of wisdom and justice which is in God, and by which man is
made like unto him. Wherefore the first degree of this image and similitude
that is in man, appears in that power and faculty of understanding which God
has given him, and in that wisdom whereof he has made him partaker, and
which has some agreement with the wisdom of God. So that before man sinned,
the image of God was such in him, that there was a perfect agreement of all the
powers and virtues of the soul between God and him. For the divine light did
so shine in his mind, that he had certain and firm knowledge of GOD,
neither was there any resistance against either in his heart or in his will,
but a sound and perpetual concord and consent. So that there was always
between the mind and the will an uprightness and justice agreeable with God,
neither was the freedom of the will hindered or driven forward to evil,
because man had not yet made himself the subject and salve of sin. As long
therefore as man kept this image of God within him, the Lord dwelt therein as
in his own lodging: and by that means would have given to men such perpetual
life and joy, as should never have bin broken off or extinguished either by
sorrow or by death, if he had suffered himself to be always guided by God, and
never turned aside nor severed himself from him. Therefore S. Paul speaking of
this first image and the renewing thereof in man, says, Put on the new man,
Ephesians. 4. 24.
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. Seeing then
it is thus, there is no doubt but that, if man had continued in his integrity,
the light which is now supernatural in him, would have been natural in all
that knowledge of God, which is necessary for him to that end whereunto he was
created. For he had never been overwhelmed with darkness, which dimmed and
hindered this heavenly light that shined in him, and made him the habitation
and temple of God, but had seen clearly the image of the father, of the
son, and of the holy ghost shining in his soul, in which it was imprinted,
the draughts and beams whereof are yet evident enough in him, I mean to them
that consider of them as it appertains, following the light of the word of
God. But forasmuch as the darkness which sin has brought with it, keeps
man from having any sound and perfect knowledge of God, or of heavenly things,
as he had in his first estate, it is necessary therefore that he should
restore and kindle again in him, this divine and perfect life which he has
lost, by the benefit of regeneration and spiritual renouation, as if he
created him anew, giving him a mind to understand his word, and a will to
follow and to embrace it. This is that, which I thought we were to note and
learn concerning the means that bring us certain knowledge of such things as
we ought to judge and account for true. Let us now consider, how the spirit
of man being enriched in measure with heavenly gifts and graces, does finally
attain to the end of all inquisition and searching out of truth, which is
contemplation, that follows judgment, as judgment follows reason and the
discourse thereof. Therefore do thou, ACHITOB* take upon thee to discourse of
this matter subject, and so end all speeches of this days work concerning
understanding, that afterward we may look particularly into the will, which
is the second part and virtue of the highest and most sovereign power of the
soul.

How the virtues and powers of the soul show themselves by little and little,
and by degrees: of contemplation, and of the good that is in it: of that true
and divine contemplation which we look for after this life. Chap. 32.
ACHITOB. I was much troubled oftentimes about the understanding of these two
words Soul and Spirit, in seeking to find what difference or agreement they
have one with another: seeing that many times I saw one of them taken for the
other, and also opposed as repugnant one to another. The difference betwixt
soul and spirit.
In the end I learned of skilful men, that we might use the word Soul to
signify man as he is borne, having only the gifts of a humane soul,
namely, the humane senses, and those other powers and virtues both animal and
natural, of which we have already spoken. And as for the Spirit, that we
must understand thereby, whatsoever heavenly grace and knowledge of the truth
is given to man by the spirit of God dwelling in him, which guides and
leads him to the contemplation of the divine nature, wherein consists his
good and felicity. Moreover we may see in sundry places of the Scriptures
according to the Hebrew phrase, Matthew. 10. 39. romans 13. 1. Esaias 40. 5, 6. Iuc.
3. 6. Romans 8. 6.
the word Soul taken not only for the life of man, and for all things
belonging thereto, but also for the whole nature of man: and thus also is the
word Flesh taken. Therefore when the flesh is opposed and set against the
spirit in man, we understand thereby, not the body only, but also the soul
of man, I mean such a one as it was at the beginning, when being left unto it
self it followed the corruption of it own nature. And likewise by the
spirit, we mean that which is regenerated in every part of man, whereby he
being withdrawn from the perverse desires and corrupt affections of his
nature, is lift up to the contemplation of celestial and eternal things.

But our God uses in such sort to apply himself to the nature and ability of
his creatures, that by little and little, and by degrees he dispenses unto
them those things, which he will bestow upon them, always keeping that
order, which he has used and followed in the creation of the word. Genes. 1.
For, as Moses testifies, he first created it of nothing. Then having created
the matter of all natures, he brought it into a work, and gave unto it a
form, and so polishing it by degrees and day by day, at length he set it in
that perfection, which he minded to bestow upon it. We see likewise, that in
the continuation of his works, How God proceeds in the creation of his
works.
he begins always at the basest and least thing, and so goes on
increasing, augmenting and ascending up until he has placed them in their
perfection, whereof we have daily experience, principally in plants and living
creatures. For the generation of plants comes of their seeds, from which
they take their beginning. And when the seed, which is the least part of the
whole plant, is put into the ground, it takes root therein and then comes
forth, increasing daily until it come to those bounds, that are allotted unto
it by the Creator, which it can not pass: because it can not attain to
greater perfection being of that kind, but then daily falls to decay, until
it be wholly consumed and returned to the elements from whence it was taken.
The like is done in the generation of all living creatures, and namely in that
of man. For what is his beginning? and what is his conception, nativity,
childehoode, adolescencie, youth, man's estate, and then old age? We see how
small his beginning is, and how he grows step by step, and from age to
age until he comes to the flower of his age, and to his full strength, as
plants do: and from thence the nearer he draws to olde-age, the more he
fades and decays until he come to death, whereby the body returns to the
Elements out of which it is taken. For as God has given him a beginning, so
has he appointed him limits, unto which he may ascend up until he come to
his highest, and then he is to descend, as the ordinance of God shall lead
him. As for the soul, the same can not befall it in regard of bigness, seeing
it is not corporal as the body is, neither yet in respect of death, seeing it
is immortal. For it can not be resolved as the body may, to return into the
elements, out of which it is not taken, but it abides always in that
substance and nature which first it had, because it is of a celestial and
divine nature. But if the question be of the faculties, powers and virtues
thereof, the seeds of which it has in it self, we see by experience how
they show themselves more and more perfect, and how the use of them is
greater in one age then in an other. How the powers of the soul manifest
themselves.
For as long as the infant is in his mothers womb, no man can perceive that as
yet he uses any other virtue and faculty of the soul that is in him, then
that which heretofore we called the vegetative or nourishing faculty, by
which he is nourished as plants are. After, when he is borne, he continues
a long time like to other living creatures, as though he had only a vegetative
and sensitive soul as they have. Then by little and little as he grows from
one age to an other, those virtues of the soul whereby he differs from
beasts, appear every day more and more. And yet he has no other soul in
substance, nor any other senses and mind throughout his whole life, then he
had when it first moved: as also he has no other body. But a man may easily
judge, that this comes not of the nature of the soul, but of the instruments
it has in the body, which in the infancy of man, hinder it from doing that
which it does by them in other ages. How they have their degrees in growth.
Besides, we may truly say, that God has created it of that nature, that as
he has joined it unto the body, which has his degrees of growth, so the
soul has some agreement therewith in this respect, touching the manifestation
of her natural powers and virtues. Neither is it any strange thing if God
deal so with it in this matter. In the mean time we see, that although the
soul of man seems in nothing or very little to differ from that of plants,
as long as it is in the mothers womb, nor from the soul of beasts during the
time of his infancy: nevertheless afterward it shows very well wherein it
differs from them, and that it has certain virtues, which are not in any
other soul. For if this were not so, both in respect of the age and growth of
the body, as also in regard of that property which is in the nature thereof,
it would be always like to that which it is in the beginning, as we see it
is with plants and beasts, in whose soul we can perceive no more change in
the end and when they grow up, then in their beginning and first birth.
According then to that I have now said, we see by experience, that in the
gifts and graces, wherewith GOD daily adorneth and enricheth his children, he
does not communicate all at once unto them, but by little and little and by
degrees, as he judges it expedient, and as they are capable of reason and
understanding. Therefore it is written of John Baptist, Luke 1. 80.
that the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit: which is as much to say,
as that according as he grew in age, God increased the graces of his holy
spirit upon him, wherewith he had endued him even from his mothers womb.

And when we have profited well in his school, so that we are assured of,
and instructed in those things, which we ought to follow according to the
word of GOD, we easily attain to that Good, which is the end of all
inquiry of the truth, namely to contemplation, which follows judgment, as
judgment follows reason and the discourse thereof. The difference betwixt
reason, and judgment, and contemplation.
For reason discoursing, is as it were the inquisition of the truth that is
sought for, and judgment is as the election that makes choice of the truth,
and of that which it takes to be most certain: and Contemplation is as it
were a quiet and settled beholding of all those things which were gathered
together by reason, and received with approbation by judgment. For there is no
more place for disputation, seeing all things are certain and clear. Now all
pleasure and delight proceeds from the conuenience and agreement, that is
betwixt the thing that pleases, and him whom it does please. And because
there is nothing more agreeable to the nature of the spirit and mind of man
then truth, hereof it comes, that notwithstanding al corruption that is in
him, there is no man but naturally desires knowledge and skill, accounting
science to be excellent and worthy of great praise, and ignorance to be
full of shame, yea, he judges it a very ill thing to be deceived. Wherefore
we may not doubt, but that as knowledge is more true and certain, so does
the spirit receive greater pleasure: and when it has found the truth, it
delights greatly therein. And if for the causes before touched by us, it can
not find the truth so certainly as it desires, yet it takes singular
pleasure in approaching so near unto it as it can. For this cause the more
certain the truth is which it knows, it is the more agreeable and pleasant
unto it, especially when it knows the true spring and first causes thereof.
Therefore as the minds of men delight more in those things that resemble them
most, of so much the more noble and excellent nature they are, yea more
heavenly and divine, and so will take pleasure in such things as are most
excellent and celestial. Contrariwise, the more earthly, vile, and abject they
shall be, the more will they delight in mortal, base and contemptible things,
and despise such as are of greatest value. For this cause many Philosophers
have esteemed more of the study of Philosophy and the knowledge thereof, Why
some have preferred Philosophy before riches.
then of kingdoms and great riches, being provoked and pricked thereunto, by
an unspeakable pleasure which their spirit took in the knowledge of those
things that were reveled unto them therein. On the other side, we see that
ambitious men delight more in honors and worldely greatness, then they would
do, at leastwise in their own opinion, in all the skill of the Philosophers.
A couerous man pleases himself a great deal more in telling and beholding
his crowns, then in any other thing whatsoever. It is no marvel therefore if
ambitious, covetous, and voluptuous men, and such like do commonly deride
those that take delight in learning, and chiefly in the doctrine and
contemplation of those celestial and eternal things, which they set before
their eyes, or if they prefer greatly their own estate and condition, before
others that take pleasure in such things. For they are pearls cast before
swine, which are not valued as they are worth, but only of such as know them
and their value.

Now if heathen Philosophers have oftentimes willingly abandoned all their
goods, that they might wholly addict themselves to the study of their humane
Philosophy, and to the contemplation of such things as they could know
thereby, notwithstanding that it was always accompanied with some doubting,
and that they could never attain to a certain knowledge either of the
beginning or end of things: what ought Christians to do, when the question is
of Divine Philosophy and Wisdom, the treasures of which are opened and
offered unto them in the word of God? For it is without all comparision far
more certain then any science, and contains in it other trueths, Of the
benefits that comes by the contemplation of divine things.
and matters that are great deal more profound, excellent, and more worthy of
contemplation. And they to whom God has been so gracious, as to give some
taste and experience of these things, are able to judge well of them, yea far
better then any others. For it is certain that even for a little true
knowledge of God, and of the truth of those things which he has revealed
unto us in his doctrine, we receive singular delight, with great joy, and
sweet consolation. So that every man may perceive, how much greater the
pleasure will be when the knowledge shall be greater. If then this small
taste, which we may have in this world of these delicacies and spiritual
delights, brings unto us such singular joy, we may easily judge how great it
will be in that most happy contemplation, which we shall have in heaven with
God, when we shall behold him face to face, and know him as we are known,
whereas here we see him but as it were in a glass, Of the contemplation that
is after this life.
and through a cloud. For that is the contemplation of all contemplations,
seeing it is the beholding of God, with whom nothing may be compared. Then
there shall be no cloud of ignorance, when we shall have, not a likely or
probable, but a most certain and true knowledge. For the truth shall be
showed unto us most certain in GOD who is the Author and Father thereof, in
whom we shall thoroughly and perfectly see and know the causes of all things.
For our spirits shall be held no longer in such an obscure and dark prison,
as here they are constrained to suffer in our mortal bodies. When all men
shall be of one judgment.
Therefore there shall be no more diversities, disagreements, or contrarieties
of opinions and judgments, that some should condemn that which others
approve, but all shall be of the same judgment. But seeing we are fallen into
the matter of contemplation, it shall not be unprofitable, if upon occasion of
that division, which is commonly made of the active and contemplative life, we
note, that although the spirit desires above all things the pleasure that is
in contemplation, as the proper food and delight thereof, yet we must always
consider, that we are not only borne for ourselves, but also for others, and
to this end, that we should all in common serve one an other, both generally
and specially. For God does not only command the performance of that
service, which he requires of us toward his own person according to that
which is contained in the first Table of the Law, but he commands us also
in the second Table to do that which he requires of us toward other men.
The active life must be joined with the contemplaiue.
Therefore he will not have us dwell always in contemplation, but we must
put to our hand, and discharge us of our duty toward every one, according as
he teaches us by his word. We are then to learn, that so long as we live in
this world, we must not separate the active life from the co^templatiue, but
always join them both together, until we come to that blessed life, which
shall be altogether contemplative, when we shall be delivered from all the miseries
and necessities, and from all the troubles and lets in which we are wrapped and
detained in this mortal life. God grant us his grace to use all our senses so
well, both external and internal, and all the powers, faculties and virtues
of our soul and spirit, of which we have hitherto spoken, that we may cause
them all to serve to his glory, and that we may attain to that blessed
contemplation, which is prepared for all his elect in his celestial palace:
and that to this end he would dispose in us our will, and all the affections
of our soul, of the nature of which we will begin to morrow to discourse.
And first, ASER, I think thou art to entreat of those appetites that are
naturally in man, seeing Desire is the proper subject of the Will, as thou
shall instruct us more at large.

The end of the fourth days work.
THE FIFTH DAYS work.
Of the Appetites that are in all living creatures, and namely in man, and of
their kinds: and particularly of the Natural and Sensitive Appetite. Chap. 33.
ASER. As God and all that is in the world, is propounded to the mind of man,
that he might know him so far forth as is needful for him, so is he
also propounded to the will, that he might will, The object of the will is as
large as that of the mind.
desire, and follow him as far as his nature is capable thereof. Wherefore if
man had not sinned, but had continued in his first estate wherein God created
him, this great and eternal Goodness had shed in our souls that divine word,
together with his holy spirit: which word, being the eternal son of God,
would have always taught and showed us the Father, of whom be was begotten
before all time; and would have lightened our minds with the light of all
wisdom that we might have beheld and seen him: and the holy spirit would
have joined our hearts and wills unto the Father and to the Son, through a
mutual love replenished with all joy and gladness, and through certain
motions agreeable with the divine nature. By which means there should have bin
in our hearts a great fire of love toward God, and next to him we should
have loved all other good things, according to that order which is showed unto
us in his heavenly wisdom and doctrine, and should have desired them for the
love of him. But now in the estate of natural corruption in which we are,
all this goodly agreement, harmony, and concord which ought to be between God
and man, is wholly perverted and overthrown. What great confusion is in our
corrupt nature.
For in place of the true knowledge of God, there is nothing but ignorance and
doubting in our minds: and as for the will, it searches after and desires
other things whereunto it applies it self, and seeks not after God. Neither
does it keep any order in those things which it has for objects, and which
it sets down in stead of the things commanded in his word. So that while
it thinks to attain to that good whereunto naturally it aspireth, it
obtains nothing to it self but a very great evil.

Now when we spoke before of the brain, and of the internal senses of the
soul, and of the principal part and virtue thereof, we made some mention of
the will, which ought to be directed and led by understanding and reason. It
remains now that we look more narrowly into the nature thereof, and of the
affections of the soul, of the vital virtue, of the heart, and of other
members, which are the seats and instruments thereof, even as when we
entreated of the animal virtues of the soul, we considered of their seats
and instruments. First then we must mark what has been hitherto spoken,
namely, that God has given to all his creatures a natural inclination, that
leads every one of them to that which is natural and agreeable to itself.
Of the desires that are in creatures.
Beasts have an appetite to follow that good that is fit for them, and
therefore also has God given them the knowledge of that good, and senses meet
for that purpose, to the end they might show unto them, what is good for their
preservation to follow it, and to shun the contrary. We have learned also
how God has given both the one and the other to man, and unto what degree
concerning both of them, he has lifted him up above all living creatures. For
as he has created him to enjoy a far greater and more excellent Good then
he has beasts, and has given unto him a will to wish and desire it, so he
has endued him with a deeper knowledge whereby to know that Good: because he
could not wish for it and desire it, except he did know it, and he could not
know it, if he had not a mind capable thereof, and endewed with greater
knowledge then that is, which he has given to beasts. For this cause as they
have a kind of knowledge agreeable to their nature, and to the quality of that
Good, which being fit for them is the greatest they can attain unto: so also
has man a knowledge according to his nature, and to the end for the which he
was created. So that the knowledge that God has given him, serves to stir
up his appetite and desire of that Good which he knows: and this appetite
also serves his knowledge, so far forth as man being moved and pricked
forward to love God, rejoices and reposeth himself in him, huing known him
to be his sovereign Good.

But to the end we may the better understand this whole matter, we must note,
Three kinds of appetites.
that there are three kinds of appetites among the creatures, which are
commonly called, the one natural, the other sensitive, and the third
voluntary. Of the Natural appetite.
As for the natural, we may divide it into two sorts. For there is one
general to all creatures, whether living or without life, which is nothing
else but a natural inclination without any action, proceeding from any soul
or life: as when we say, that heavy things desire to go downward, and light
things upward, as we see it in the nature of the Elements, which are without
soul and life. But beside this natural appetite common to all creatures,
there is an other that has action joined with the inclination, which
nevertheless proceeds not of any sense. This appetite is proper to the
vegetative and nourishing soul and life, whereof plants are partakers. For we
see by experience, that they have a natural appetite to draw unto them, and
to retain that which is meet for their nature and food, and to expel the
contrary. For if a plant wax dry, it desires to be watered, and draws and
keeps humor and moisture necessary for it self. We see the like in men's
bodies. For when the members want nourishment, they suck the veins, and the
veins draw unto them blood. And as the members desire their food, so they
desire to be unburdened when they have too much. The appetite which we call
hunger and thirst, Of hunger and thirst.
may be referred to this kind of natural appetite, if this be excepted, that
we can not say, it is without sense and feeling. For beside the desire of
eating and drinking, there is withal a sense of this attraction, whereby the
members suck the veins, and the veins the blood: and this sense is not
without grief and displeasure. So that every living creature is stirred up to
seek for his food, and to take his refection. Whereupon we may divide this
natural appetite also into two kinds, whereof the one shall be proper to plants
that have no sense, Two kinds of Sense.
and the other belong to living creatures that have this feeling, of which I
made mention even now, and which differs from that sense that is proper to
the outward senses already spoken of. The reason whereof is, because it is
properly such a kind of feeling, as those creatures have, which keep a mean
between plants and living creatures, being partakers of both their natures,
and yet are neither simply plants, nor perfect living creatures, as it has
been already showed. As therefore we heard in our former discourse, speaking
of the growing up of man's body, and of the manifestation by little and little
of the powers of the soul, namely that as long as the child is in his mothers
womb, he is like to plants, so also he has then great agreement with these
middle sorts of creatures in regard of this kind of appetite, and of the
manner of nourishing whereby it is fed. For the seed, whereof he is
begotten and conceived, is nourished and grows up as plants do, until such
time as the Infant that is fashioned, have sense and feeling, much like to that
sense of the aforesaid creatures, which are partakers of the nature both of
plants and of living creatures. For as yet he has no use of his external
senses, Of the seat of the natural appetite.
until such time as he be borne. Now the seat of this kind of natural
appetite, is chiefly in the liver and in the stomach, and generally in all the
members that serve for nourishment. For these members have that appetite that
is joined with this kind of sense, of which I spoke even now. And as for the
appetite of the other members, which serve not for the nourishing of the whole
body, but only for themselves, it is more like to that appetite that is in
plants. For they feel neither hunger nor thirst as other members do. And
thus much for the natural appetite and the kinds thereof. Concerning the
sensitive appetite, Of the sensitive appetite and kinds thereof.
it is that which accompanies the sense, and belongs only to living
creatures. There are two sorts of this. For either it is made with touching, or
without touching. Pleasure and grief belong properly to the first kind, and
the instruments and seats thereof are in the sinews, or else in that small
sinewy skin, which gives the sense. For those things delight the sinews
which agree with their nature, and look what is contrary unto them, the same
affects them with grief, which tends to their destruction, as delight
procures their preservation. So that heat, cold, dryness, and moisture,
rejoice, help and comfort the sinews, or else grieve, hurt and indamage them,
according as they are either well or ill applied unto them. The use of the
sinews.
Therefore the sinews were created, to the end they might be instruments of
sense and motion, and that they should receive pleasure and pain. Now all
these sorts of appetites, are not in the will and power of man, neither proceed
they from his imagination. For whether he will or no, he shall be subject to
hunger and thirst, and shall in the same manner feel and perceive things as
they are applied unto him, if he be so disposed in body as he ought to be. True
it is he may well abstain from eating and drinking, and from touching
whatsoever he pleases, but this abstinence in the mean time will not take from
him that appetite which he has, but will increase it the more. For it cannot
hinder, but that all the members will still desire their nourishment, and the
body will always have this sense and feeling. And as for the sense of
touching, it will always feel that which it touches, and even such as it is
when it shall be touched. But there are appetites of an other kind, which are
bredde without any touch at all, and follow the thought and imagination of a
man. These are properly called affections, and have their seat in the heart.
Therefore they must be distinguished from others that having sense of
delectation and of grief, are placed in the stomach, or in the sinews, or in
the rest of the body. Of the affections.
Now by the affections, we mean properly those motions of the heart, which
follow knowledge, and either seek after or reject, that which is offered unto
them: so that according to the order of nature, knowledge goes before these
motions. Hereof it is, that we commonly say, that a man must know before he
love, and that no man desires that which he knows not. But before we enter
into a deeper and more particular consideration of the affections of the soul,
and of the heart, we must note this, that all knowledge is given of God to
this end, The end of knowledge.
to desire that Good which it knows, and in desiring to follow the same,
until it has joined and knit it unto it self, as near as is possible. For
in this manner Good will be good unto it, and not otherwise. To this end
sensual knowledge is given for sensual goods, and spiritual knowledge for
those goods that are spiritual. And as the knowledge both of the one and the
other is given to desire it, so also is it given that it might turn aside and
flee from evil, which is contrary to good, to the end that the Will might
not join it self thereunto, by which means evil would indeed become evil
unto it, and could not otherwise be avoided. For as good could not be good
unto us, but only so far forth as we did apply it and join our selves
thereunto, so fares it also with evil. And because GOD has not created
beasts to enjoy any other good then corporal goods, and such as belong to
their brutish life, which goes not beyond this temporal life, therefore he
has not given them the knowledge or appetite of any other good. So that as
they have no other knowledge but that which is sensual, so they have no other
appetite but sensual, The best thingsin beasts are sensual.
which is guyded only by natural inclination, wherein they have nature only
for their Mistress, which pricketh forward both their outward and inward
senses without any direction at all of Understanding and of Reason. Therefore
this sensual appetite common to all living creatures, cannot properly be
called Will. For as we cannot call by the name of Understanding and Reason,
that natural inclination which is given to beasts for their direction, seeing
men only are endued with Understanding and Reason, Beasts have no Will.
so is it with Will, the name whereof agrees not to that sensual appetite,
except we would call it sensual Will, in respect of the resemblance of Will,
which it has, wherein it differs much from the Will in man: as the sequel
of our speech requires that we should now learn, to the end we may know
the third kind of appetite which we set down in the beginning of this
discourse, namely the voluntary appetite, which is proper and peculiar to man,
and the subject of his Will. Thou shall tell us therefore, AMANA, what Will is
properly, what her actions are, what liberty and freedom she has, and what
power Reason may have over her.

Of Will, and of the diverse significations and uses of these words, Reason and
Will: of the actions, freedom, and nature thereof: of the power which Reason
may have over her. Chap. 34.
AMANA. The love of GOD toward men has always been, and is such, that
albeeit he has just occasion to hate us as sinners, yet that hinders him
not from loving us always as men. For he considers man otherwise in the
nature and substance with which he created him, and as he is his work, then
in that disorder and confusion, which after entered upon his nature by the
work of Satan in him. Matthew. 5.
For this cause we see that he causes his sun to shine as well upon the
evil as upon the good, sends rain to the one as well as to the other, and
powers many benefits upon all in general. But besides this love, whereof
every one receives fruit, there is another more special toward his elect,
whom he loves not only as he loved us all in Adam the stock of mankind,
and as his creatures created after his image, but loves them also as
regenerated and new creatures in Jesus Christ his Son, the latter and just
Adam, GOD and man, and the stock of spiritual men framed again by him to the
image and similitude of God. Therefore we must vnnderstand, that God has and
does love men in regard of the good he has put into them, (which is wrought
chiefly through the benefit of spiritual regeneration) the remnant of which
Good he still loves. And in loving that he loves himself, because he is the
sovereign and only good, which is worthy to be loved in respect of it self.
Whereby we may see, what is the true fountain of all love, and of all the
desires, appetites and wills of all creatures. From whence the desires of all
creatures ought to be derived.
For they must all be drawn out of one and the same spring and fountain,
namely the love and will of God, and that good which he loves and wills. And
the greater the Good is, the more it ought to be loved, so that every Will
should desire to join it self thereunto, to follow after it, and to have the
fruition thereof. And because there can be no Good greater then God, therefore
no other can be loved but that. So that whilst he loves himself, he loves
all the good that may be, because there is none but in him and from him.
Therefore this follows necessarily, that as all good things proceed from
him, so they must be all referred to him, and return thither as to the
Wel-head, even as all waters return into the Sea from whence they came first
of al. Having then learned of our former discourse, that God has given to man
understanding to know good, and will to desire and follow it, it is his duty
always to refer all the good things he has, unto him that is sovereign and
eternal Good, and to account nothing good, as in truth it cannot be, but him
that ought to be so accounted, and to look at him as the last and most
blessed end.

We understand then properly by Will, What Will is, and how it works.
that faculty and virtue of the soul, whereby we desire that which is good,
and eschew evil by the direction and guyding of reason. Therefore there are
two actions of Will, whereof the first is that inclination to good by which it
imbraceth the same, and the second is the turning aside from evil. And when it
is idle and inclines to neither side, it is deprived of both these actions.
Now although we said before, that reason held the sovereignty amongst the
powers, virtues and offices of the soul, yet we must know, that reason
reigns not over Will as Lady and Princess, but only as Mistress to teach
and show it, what it ought to follow, and what to fly from. For the will has
no light of it self, but is lightened by the mind, How reason is set over the
Will.
that is to say, by reason and judgment, which are joined with it, not to
govern and turn it from one side to another by commandment and authority,
either by force or violence, as a Prince or Magistrate, but as a counsailer or
directer, to admonish and to conduct it. And so the will desires or refuses
nothing, which reason has not first showed that it is to be desired or
disdayned. Therefore the act of Will proceeds indeed from Will, but it is
judged of and counseled by reason: so that a man may say, that it is as it
were begotten by reason, and brought forth by Will. But that we deceive not
our selves in these names of reason and of Will, we are to know, that both of
them are taken diversely, as the names of Mind and Understanding are. Diverse
acceptions of the words, Reason and Will.
For sometime they are taken for that virtue of understanding which is in the
soul, and sometime for the action thereof and the thing which it does
understand: as when we say that we have the understanding of something. So
reason is sometime taken for the mind that gives direction and counsel, and
for the will which obeys it, and restrains the affections: and in this
sense, it comprehends both the Understanding and the Will. But sometime it is
taken only for that part, which understands and has knowledge to conduct
and guide, as now we must so take it, in making it the Mistress and
counsailour of the Will. Besides, reason is also taken oftentimes for the
arguments and discourses of reason, as when we say of a man, He has good
reason in that: or else, He has proved his saying by good and pregnant reasons,
that is to say, by good arguments. And if we take reason so, it signifies not
only that power and virtue of discoursing which is in the soul and in the
mind, but also the act and effect thereof. The like may be said of this word
Will. For it is commonly taken, not so much for that power and virtue which the
soul has to Will, as for the Will it self, which is the action and effect
thereof: as when one speaking of tyrants says, that their Will is all their
reason. For then we mean, that they take nor Reason for their counsailer,
neither follow the advice thereof, but only their Will, and that which
pleases them. So then we use this word Will for that which proceeds from
it: Psalm. 115.
and so likewise it is often taken in the holy Scriptures, when they speak of
the Will of God, whereby we do not understand that power of Will that is in
him, but that which he wills and commands us. Matthew. 6.
And therefore we crave that his Will may be done, and not that which we will.
But speaking now of the Will of man, we take it not in this sense, but we use
it for the power and virtue of Willing that is in the soul, which power is
above the sensitive appetite, whereof we have already spoken. For we see by
experience, that there are certain degrees of appetites, and that the appetite
of the senses is subject to the Will, as I hope we shall entreat more at large
in the sequel of our speech. The Will is the chiefest appetite^
Wherefore the Will is the highest and most sovereign virtue of desiring,
far above all other appetites, and that which woorketh with liberty, after
the mind has showed unto it what it ought to follow, and what to eschew, what
to make choice of, and what to refuse. The actions thereof are to Will, and not
to Will: and the mean or middle thing which she has between them twain, is
to suspend her action, until she decline either on the one side or the other.
And as concerning the natural disposition of the Will, it is to will that good
which is truly good, or that which seems to be so: and to shun evil,
either that which is evil in deed, The Will aymeth always at good.
or that which it thinks to be so. Now if she choose and follow evil for
good, it follows not therefore, but that she would always follow the
good, as that which properly appertains unto her, and reject evil as her
enemy. But the reason why she makes choice of evil for good, is because
she is deceived, taking one for another, which comes to pass through the
ignorance and corruption that is in the nature of man. For albeeit she can
will and not will that thing which is propounded unto her, yet she cannot
simply will and not will one and the same thing all at one time, nor yet make
choice of clean contraries. For she can desire nothing but only under some
show of good, nor refuse any thing but under some show of evil. Wherefore it
may well be, that it will not desire that which shall be showed under some
appearaunce of good, but it cannot hate or reject it. Likewise it may
peradventure abstain from rejecting or flying from that, which shall be
presented before it with show of evil and not of good, but it cannot desire,
love, and pursue the same.

Whereupon it follows, The Will is free and vnconstrayned.
that our Will is at liberty and free, and cannot be constrained: yea God the
Creator and Lord thereof would have it so, otherwise it should not be a
Will. It is very true, that it follows reason always, because the Will has
no light of it self, but only so far forth as it receives the same from
reason, which guides and directs it. And therefore it never applies it
self to any thing whatsoever, but has reason always for a guide, whom it
follows. Nevertheless it is not so subject thereunto, as that it may compel
it to follow all the reasons that are propounded unto it by reason, or tie it
to any of them, but that always she has her liberty to make choice of which
reason she please, out of all those that are set before her. And so it is
always a Will, although it change sometime, being persuaded by reasons to
will when it was unwilling, or dissuaded from Will to be unwilling. But in the
mean time she wills whatsoever she will, and that as long as it pleases
her to remain in one opinion. For not only no creature whatsoever is able to
take from her that which GOD her Creator has given her, but she cannot
deprive her self thereof, no more then she may not be that which she is. For
as God will have his image shine in the mind of man by understanding and
wisdom, of which he has made it partaker, so he will have his image also
to shine in the Will by that freedom and liberty which he has given unto
it. Of the image of God in the Will.
As therefore he cannot be constrained, but woorketh and does what pleases
him with all liberty, as being a Sovereign that has no superior, so he
has appointed, that the Will which he has given to men and Angels, should
be always frank and free, and not be subject to violence or constraint: to
the end he might have them children, not slaves, because he requires of
them a voluntary obedience, and such a service as is not forced or
constrained, but agreeable to his own nature. For as he does nothing
himself by constraint, so he will not constrayne those by whom he will be
obeyed: neither delights he in any service that is not voluntary and
proceeding from a good heart, and from a sincere and pure affection toward
him. Therefore seeing God has so loved us, and done us so great honor, as to
create us after his own image, and likeness, we are vile and ungrateful
wretches, if we do not acknowledge the same, and cause our Will to be
serviceable to him that has bestowed it freely upon us: as we ought also to
perform the like service unto him with our mind and reason, wherewith he
has endued us for the ruling and direction of the Will. But when our Will
takes any other object beside obedience to God, it proceeds from the same
cause that blinds our mind and reason, namely sin, which reigns in us
through the corruption of our nature, as we have already touched it. Good is
always the object of the Will.
Nevertheless that which I have said is always true, that the will has Good in
such sort for her object, that she cannot truly and without dissembling Will
that which is evil, if it has no show or reason of some good. But
notwithstanding she has free liberty, yet is she so ordained of God, that
she cannot will that which is evil, but only that which is good, whether it
be good in truth, or in opinion only. For if she were not created and
ordained of GOD to desire and follow after good, there would be no cause why
she should love or desire virtue more then vice, or love God, rather then hate
him. Diverse degrees in the actions of Will.
But we must consider diverse degrees in the actions of Will, and in the
freedom theereof. For some there are whose heart and Will agree so together,
that there is no dissimulation, neither any commandment of the Will either
toward it self or toward any other, but it heartily desires or refuses
that, which it seeks after or escheweth. As we may say of an ambitious man,
that he does truly and with all his heart desire honor and glory, as also
a covetous man does riches. But there are other actions of the Will, wherein
she commands her self, or else the inferior powers that are subject unto
her: as we see in a man infected with the dropsy, who being very dry and
thirsty, desires greatly to drink. But this appetite that comes from the
senses of the body, is restrained by the Will that has power over it, which
knowing what hurt would issue thereof to the sick party, commands this
appetite, and appoynteth that he shall not drink. The reason why she will
have it so, is, to the end that the patient might avoid greater evil then
that which he endures, knowing well, that to drink would hurt him more then
help him, because the thirstinesse would not be taken from him, How the W^
commands the appetite.
but increased. Wherefore although the sensual appetite puts the patient in
mind to desire drink, yet Will following the judgment of Reason, opposes it
self against this appetite, and commands it self to abstain, and also the
outward members, as namely the mouth not to drink, and the hands not to give
it any drink. Now if it so fall out, that the Will give place to the appetite,
it is always with her consent, and that because she agrees rather unto the
sensual appetite then unto Reason. Which agreement proceeds of her
impatiencie and incontinencie, because she has not patience to stay for the
better, but rusheth upon that pleasure, which at that present seems best unto
her and nearest at hand. Therefore it is always requisite that the grace of God
should govern our mind and will, to persuade them evermore to counsel and
to embrace the best: otherwise we shall make choice of the worst, and of evil
rather then of good. Which we shall easily understand, if we consider what good
things the wisest and most virtuous men, guided only by the light of nature,
are able to propound to themselves and to follow: and what difference in that
point there is betwixt them, and those whom God does guide and govern by his
spirit. The discourse then of this matter belongs to thee, ARAM.

Of those good things, which both men, guided only by the light of nature, are
able to propound to themselves, and to follow; and they also that are guided by
the spirit of God: of the power and liberty of the Will in her actions, both
external and internal. Chap. 35.
ARAM. Among the heathen Philosophers there have always been some great
personages endued with excellent doctrine, who seemed to have been led with a
burning affection toward good and virtuous things: this no man can deny. But
if we compare them that have had none but natural light, The difference
betwixt the natural and regenerated man.
with them who believing the word of life, have received that light, which the
spirit of GOD has kindeled in their hearts and minds, we shall find very
great difference betwixt them. For they that follow the light of nature, take
not an infinite, spiritual and eternal good, which is God, for the object of
that good which they desire, but a finite, carnal and temporary good, and
that also no farther then their reason and sense judge it good for mankind, or
for the society of men, or for themselves, and those whom they love. The like
respect they have in eschewing evil, which they judge contrary to such a good.
And yet there are very few that go so far, who give not themselves to
virtue, rather for their own profit or glory, then for the love they bear
to virtue, or to the benefit of the common society of men. And surely I
think, that if glory had not more moved so many excellent men, as have been
heretofore among the Grecians, Latins, and other heathen people and nations,
then their love to virtue, and to things profitable for the common wealth,
they would not willingly have incurred so great dangers to effect so many
valiant deeds as Histories specify of them: neither would they have set
virtue at so high a price, if no glory or profit should have redounded to
them in following her, or at leastwise in seeming to seek after her. If any
have been found to have done otherwise, as we read of some, it is to be
attributed to a special grace that God has bestowed upon them in their
ignorance, more then to others. But yet all this would be nothing, or very
little, seeing the good which the Will propounds to it self, and pursues in
this sort, is not the true and sovereign good, which of it self is able to
make men blessed.

We are then to know, What is the chief good that mere natural men seek
after.
that the wisest and most virtuous men, guided only by the light of natural
reason, do not propounde to themselves, nor seek after any other good then
that, which consists in civil honesty, in worldly honor and glory, in
this bodily life, and in the commodities thereof, and in those delights and
pleasures, which their humane sense and reason desire, according as some
delight either in the knowledge of things, or in civil and moral virtues, or
in honors, or in riches and in such like things. Yea the best that ever were
among the Heathen, and the wisest of this world that are like unto them, never
went farther, neither in deed could. For seeing they know not GOD truly,
they can neither love him nor seek after him) either because they are not
thoroughly persuaded that there is a God, or if they be sure of that, yet they
stand doubtful what he is, whether he have care of men or no, and whether he
hear and help them, when they call upon him. And if they be in adversity,
then they love him much less. For if they think that their miseries come from
their own nature, or at all adventure, they suppose they are not bound unto
him, neither ought to love him, seeing he has provided no better for their
affairs. And if they think, that himself does send them because of their
sins, they are so far from loving him, that contrariwise they hate him, and
storm against him: as it is most manifest by infinite blasphemies contained in
the books of Heathen Poets, Historiographers, and Philosophers, as well against
God, as against his providence, judgments, and all his works, when they fell
not out to their lyking. Now if their Understanding was so blinded in the
Knowledge of God, their Will was much turned out of the way. For it is always
like to a ship carried hither and thither by diverse tempests, which seeks
still some haven to arrive at, but can find none. So the Will seeking after
the good which it desires, runs and skippeth from one to another without
order, and can find no rest, except that heavenly light shine into the mind,
which may teach it the true good, and frame it to the seeking and embracing
thereof. What good men are taught to aim at by the heavenly light.
Therefore when this light is in the spirit of man, it first presents to the
Will that infinite good, namely God, in whom alone she may satisfy her self,
and then all other good things that depend of that, all which she desires,
every one in his order. Thus shall God have the first place, and the next his
creatures, all which we ought to love so far forth as he has created
them, and so consequently are good. And if we place God in the highest degree
of love, as the sovereign good, with whose love we ought to be as it were
wholly swallowed up, we will love nothing but in him and by him, and for his
sake: and consequently we will desire nothing but according to his Will,
because we can Will or desire nothing but that which we shall love, and we
shall love nothing, but that which we ought to love, neither with any other
affection nor to any other end. Which is the proper effect of the spirit of
God in them that are regenerated and guided by him. And thus when the
darkness of our mind is driven out by light from heaven, which is brought
unto it by Jesus Christ, and the Will inflamed by the holy Ghost, then do our
hearts rejoice in the goodness of God, and our conscience rests therein,
then do we love him, and begin to obey him, not desiring any other thing.
Therefore we beseech him to guide and govern us, to reform us daily more and
more after his own image and similitude, to ye end we may be made conformable
to him both in mind and will, How we must carry our selves both in prosperity
and adversity.
and become true temples for him to dwell in. And whatsoever he sends us,
whether it be prosperity or adversity, we take and receive al as from his hand,
giving him thanks in prosperity, and not abusing or extolling our selves
against him: and calling upon him in adversity without murmuring or despiting
his majesty, which we adore always, whether we understand and comprehend his
judgments, or no. Likewise we are led by him to love all good things,
according to yt order which is showed unto us by his heavenly wisdom, namely,
other men made after the image of God as we are, and those virtues, life, and
things that are agreeable unto him, desiring the^ for the love of God, and
knowing that we serve him in the lawful use of all these things, yielding
praises and thanks unto him, as to the author and creator of them. Nevertheless
it comes to pass that we see oftentimes a very great confusion in the manners
and works, even of the holiest and best men that may be: but yt is when God
withdraws from them his spirit and grace, Of the frailety of man's estate.
although it be never so little a while, or when he does not manifest and show
forth his virtue and power in the^. For without God we can do nothing, and
through him nothing is impossible unto us. It is very certain, that there
remains always natural infirmity and corruption in man, and that the mind,
reason and memory may be troubled by the affections of the heart, which
rese^bleth a fiery surnce, and is like to a thick smoke ascending out of a
great fire which would dim the eyes and make them as it were blind. And when
the light of ye mind is thus darkened, reason cannot discourse so well, nor
judgment judge so uprightly, nor memory retain so firmly, or bring forth so
readily yt which it has kept, as if none of them were thus hindered with
darkness, which compasses about the light that ought to guide the^. Now if
there be such a let and impediment in regard of ye mind, the Will is much more
troubled by this fire of affections that heateth and kindles it, whereby it is
made a great deal more untoward to follow the counsel and advise of reason,
then reason is well affected to admonish and counsel it in that which is to be
followed, or to be fled. And when these two principal parts and powers of the
soul are thus troubled and moved, it is no marvel if man forget God and
himself, and if with al his soul and body he turn aside from yt which he ought
to follow after. As contrariwise there is no doubt, but yt as long as the
celestial and eternal father disperseth his divine light into our minds by his
son, who is his eternal word and wisdom, preparing them by his holy spirit
to receive the same, and by this means also kindeleth the heart and Will with
the heat thereof, disposing and framing them to follow this light, no doubt I
say, but there will ensue a good agreement and great conformity of the mind
and heart, of the Reason and Will, and of all the affections, yea of all the
senses and members of man. But let us return to the sequel of our speech,
which has an especial respect unto the Will, we have then to consider more
narrowly of the power and freedom of the Will, both in her internal and
external actions. For the first, Of the power of the Will in all actions.
if the question be of deliberating about any thing, it is in the choice of
the Will to propound the same to the mind, to advise and consult thereupon, or
otherwise not to propounde the same unto it. After whilst the matter is in
deliberation, she may command either to prosecute the same, or to defer it to
some other time, or to give it over quite, and to turn the mind to some other
thing, as it were a Prince among his council. And if the consultation be
finished, and sentence given by judgment, yet may the will stay it self from
desiring and following after that which is counseled, and judged to be good
by reason. So that the whole consultation lies in the liberty and choice of
Will. For men are not drawn by an immutable violence of nature as beasts are,
but reason enquireth what way is to be taken or left, and wayeth and examineth
what good or evil is in every thing, Therefore Will may go about again with
that which was once deliberated of, to the end the first conclusion be not
approved and stayed in, but that greater inquiry may be made, to find out, if
it may be, some better or more profitable thing. And thus when many things
are showed and set before her, she may choose what pleases her, although it be
not that which was best approved by judgment, and which reason upon very
evident arguments counseled her to follow. For if there be another side that
has some show of good, albeit never so small, she turns to that if she
please: so that upon one only conjecture, or opinion of good, she will lay
hold upon that, and reject the other side in which peradventure the ture good
is to be found. The chief cause whereof is in the corruption of our nature,
and in those impediments of good discoursing, and of upright judging, whereof
we have already heard, and which hinder reason and judgment diverse and
sundry ways. And this also takes place in respect of Will, which likewise
has great occasions offered to beguile and deceive it self, because all the
affairs of men are intermingled with good and evil things. Therefore it is
very hard to be able to discern and separate them well one from another. For
men being compounded of diverse natures, namely of a body and of a soul, they
propound also diversity of good and evil things unto themselves: and because
they know corporal and terrestrial things better then spiritual and eternal
things, Why men prefer earthly things before heavenly.
therefore they prefer them oftentimes before the other. Which is the cause
why there are so many that love this life a great deal better, and those
outward good things belonging thereunto, then they do eternal life, and those
goods, which are able to lead men thither, and give them full fruition thereof
when they come thither. Therefore in so great diversity of good and evil
things, it is no marvel if there came nothing into deliberation, wherein
reason finds not some good or evil, which in the end it counsaileth us to
follow or to avoid, according to the circumstances of times, places, persons,
qualities and other such like things. It comes to pass also oftentimes, that
Will refuses all counsel and exhortation to do that only which she
pleases, Will sometime rejects all counsel.
thereby to show that she is Lady and Mistress and subject to none. And
being mounted up to that pride, she accounts this Lordshippe which she
takes to her self to be a great good, and so makes known her power and
magnificence, as it were a tyrannical prince, making choice in the mean time
of a false kind of good, which is no way good, but a very great evil. And thus
much concerning the liberty of the Will in her internal actions: which
freedom also appears plainly enough in the outward actions. For after she
has liked of a thing, What freedom the Will has in outward actions.
she may put it in execution, or stay execution: yea after she has begun,
she may give it clean over, or do not so much, or so speedily as she might.
And although it falls out oftentimes, that men are hindered from executing
their Will, yea are forced and compelled to do the clean contrary, yet their
Will, if we consider the matter well, is neither hindered, forced or
constrained. For that keeps it not from willing still that which it pleases:
but the violence offered outwardly, stays the effects and execution thereof.
Hereof it is that we commonly say, that a man's Will is taken for his deed,
although it be not put in execution. Now to conclude our speech, we know
that the Will has hindrances to let her from choosing those good things which
she ought to follow, and refusing those evils she ought to eschew and
avoid. For Reason being appointed as Mistress, to guide and direct Will by
her judgment, The near conjunction of Reason and Will.
the selfsame things that move Reason and Judgment, do move Will also, as
if the one touched the other, or as if there were a certain knitting and
joining of them together, not unlike to the linkes of a chain, of which if ye
move or touch one, the like is done to the others that are near unto it, by
reason of the conjunction they have one with another. We ought also to know,
that although the Will often choose evil in stead of good, yet it ceasseth not
therefore ever to desire good naturally, which is most fit and agreeable to
the nature thereof: but it is deceived in that it has no skill to discern
between true and false goods, Eu^^ spirits have power over the Will.
and to distinguish the greater from the less. And as we have heard, that
evil spirits may trouble and move the fantasy and mind, so no doubt they
can do the like toward the heart and Will, to induce them to evil, and to
drive them to do greater things then weak nature would do of it self, if
it were not helped by them, even to cause them to commit such crimes as
nature abhors. Therefore we must without ceassing watch and pray that we
enter not into temptation, and if we be tempted, that we fail not, neither
be overcome. And this we may assuredly believe we shall obtain, if through
regeneration by the spirit of GOD our mind be taught, and our Will guyded by
his light. Now then having spoken enough of Understanding and of Will, which
are the principal powers of the soul, let us come to the affections thereof:
and first it shall be good for us to consider of the distinction that ought to
be made betwixt all these faculties of the soul, and between their seats
and instruments, which they have in the body. But we shall learn these
things of thee, ACHITOB.

Of the distinction that ought to be between the Understanding and knowledge,
and the Will and affections in the soul, and between the seats and
instruments which they have in the body: of the agreement that is between the
heart and the brain. Chap. 36.
ACHITOB. The heavens, the earth and all the elements, the stones, plants,
beasts and all the other creatures that want reason and understanding, obey God
in their kind, but yet they know him not: and the obedience which they yield
unto him proceeds not of any knowledge they have of his will, or of judgment
in them to discern good from evil, but only so far forth as they are drawn
by their natural inclination in those things that concern their nature. The
difference of man's obedience to God from that of other creatures.
But Angels and Men, in whom God would have his image to shine in every part
of them, and after all sorts, were created by him of that nature, that he
would be known of them, and that they should follow his Will, not without
Understanding and judgment thereof, nor without agreement of their wills with
his. Therefore he has given them a nature that is partaker of Understanding,
and prescribed unto them rules of judgment and of certain knowledge, which are
unto them as it were laws ordained by a sovereign Prince for the ruling of
his subjects. And to the end that these laws should not be in vain, he has
placed in man a Will to execute them, and an affection of joy, that is brought
to him by means of the good which he receives or expects, when he obeys
these laws that command nothing but just things. So that he would have the
nature of man to lead a joyful life, and by this means be preserved, that he
might solace himself in the knowledge of God his Creator, and in obeying him,
settle and rest himself in him. As contrariwise, it pleased him to place there
an affection of sadness, to take vengeance of rebellion against his laws, and
of the transgression of them, to the end there might be a flame of anger and
grief to destroy that nature, when it does not conform it self to the rule
of his divine wisdom and will. Hereby we know by experience, what difference
there is between a joyful life, and that which is sad and full of grief, and
how joy preserves and maintains the one, and sorrow consumes and
extinguisheth the other.

But to the end we may fully understand these things, and be able to judge
aright of the diverse powers, virtues and offices of the soul, we must
diligently consider, that as GOD has distinguished the Understanding from the
Will and affections, and the Animal virtue and life from the Vital, so also
he has given them diverse seats and instruments in the body. Difference
betwixt Knowledge and Affections.
There is likewise great difference betwixt Understanding and Knowledge, and
the Will and Affections, as we see it by experience in common life. For it
falls out often, that after we know a man, we either love him or hate him.
And if at the first we loved him well, yet after he is known unto us, we may
fall to hate him: or if we first hated him, afterward upon better knowledge we
may receive him into our love. Now although these affections of love and of
hatred be thus mutable in us, yet the self same knowledge remains always
with us. For if we did not still know him, we could neither love nor hate
him: because as a man cannot love without knowing the thing loved, so he
cannot hate that which is unknown. Therefore it is no difficult matter to
judge, that the Understanding differs from the Will and affections, and that
they are distinct offices, and several properties and virtues of the soul:
which have also their diverse seats and instruments. For the internal senses
are joined with that power which the Soul has to know: and the heart with
the power of the Will and Affections. Hereof it is, that we see many endued
with great knowledge of honest and virtuous things, but they have no good
affection to follow after them and to put them in practice: Of the discord
between the heart and the brain.
so that their heart agrees not with their brain, nor their will and
affections with their understanding and reason. Contrariwise, there are others
that have not so great knowledge of goodness and of their duty, and yet they
have a good affection and Will to do well, but for want of understanding what is
right and just, they observe and keep it not according to that measure of
desire which is in them. Where we see again how and in what sort there is no
good agreement between the brain and the heart, and between those powers and
virtues of the soul, which we have already named. A comparison.
So that we may compare the former sort of men to one that has eyes to guide
him, but no legs or feet to go upon, or if he have any, yet he will not
set them on work. As for the other sort, they are like to blind men that
long to go and to walk, and have legs to carry them, but they cannot go
whither they would, because they have neither eyes nor sight to direct them,
nor guides to lead them. Now by the consideration of these two sorts of men,
we may well conclude and judge with ourselves what they are, that want all
these things mentioned by us, because they have neither sound knowledge of
the truth and of that which is good, nor Will and desire to have any, nor any
affection to follow that which is good: whom I would compare to them that
are blind, and withal have both hand and feet lame at one time. But this
matter may yet be understood better, if we make this our speech to agree
with that which Saint Paul writes to the Romans, Romans 1. 18.
where he says, That the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, which withholde the truth in
unrighteousness. For we may understand by truth, those true and natural
impressions of the knowledge of GOD and of his law, and of good and honest
things which are in men as beams of the divine wisdom, shining in that part
of the soul whereby he knows. But because the Will and the affections of
the heart agree not with this knowledge, and there are no divine motions, nor
celestial flames to stir up and to kindle the heart with the love of God,
and to procure it to follow after that knowledge, therefore men are detayned
in unrighteousness, and yield not unto God that honor and obedience that
they owe unto him. Wherein they show themselves unthankful and unrighteous.
And therefore the Apostle expounding himself says by and by after, verse 21.
That when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful, but became vain in their imagination, and their heart void of
understanding was full of darkness. Whereby he declares, that their
ingratitude and naughty heart was the cause why they abused that understanding
and knowledge which they had received of God, and afterward also he deprived
them of these excellent gifts of his grace, which he attributes to the heart
for certain reasons which we are to note. For we may see in many places of
the Scripture, and in their writings and exhortations that follow the doctrine
and style thereof, How the Scripture takes the word heart.
that the heart is often taken for the seat of the mind, of the understanding
and of reason, as well as for the affections of the soul. Nevertheless the
Philosophers and they that follow them in such discourses, attribute these
sovereign powers of the soul only to the brain, which they make the seat
of them, as we have sufficiently showed heretofore: and as for the affections
of the soul they assign the seat of them to the heart. Now one body has not
two, but one soul. Therefore although it have many faculties, powers, virtues,
and offices, yet they are all comprehended under those two and depend of them,
even as in one body there are many members appointed to diverse operations. Now
because reason ought to be the Gouernesse and Mistress of the affections, it
is necessary they should agree together. For as reason guides before, the
affections will follow after. Therefore we may always judge of reason by the
affections which it ought to govern, as of the government of a good Prince by
the estate of his subjects, and of a good father of a family by those of his
household. Matthew. 22. 40.
Moreover, seeing the affections proceed from the heart, there is the seat of
that love which we ought to bear as well toward God, as toward men, which
comprehends the whole law of God and all justice. For he that loves God, is
not only afraid to offend and displease him, but desires also to serve and
please him: and he that loves his neighbor, does not only abstain from
procuring him any dishonor or loss, but labors also to advance his honor
and profit. Therefore if the mind be lightened and inflamed with divine light,
and the reason also that rules therein, then the heart will wax hot, and
burn with the love of God and of his neighbor. Of the agreement that ought to
be between the mind and the heart.
Which if it fall out so, the heart will not be slack in showing forth those
heavenly motions that are within it, and in giving matter to the soul to
glorify God, and to the tongue and mouth, which will speak out of the
abundance thereof. Likewise there will be an accord and consent between it,
and the voice and tongue, which then will utter nothing but the truth. And
this is the cause of that which we were taught before, namely, that God by his
providence and wise counsel has joined near unto the heart the chief
instrument of the voice, which is the lungs: as the other instruments that are
higher, are lodged near to the brain, and cheefely the tongue, as the
Orators and Ambassadors of Kings are placed next unto them. Wherefore if man's
nature had not been corrupted through sin, but had continued perfect and
sound, there would always have been a goodly concord and consent between
the heart and the brain, the voice and the tongue, the reason and the
affections. Why the heart is taken sometime for the seat of reason.
Next, we must note, that seeing the heart is the first member of the whole
body that receives life, and the^ gives the same to others, as also the last
that leaves life: and seeing it is the shop of all the vital spirits, without
which neither the brain, nor the rest of the members can have life, or
perforume their duties, it is not without cause, that this member is taken to
be as it were the seat not only of the affections, but also of reason.
Therefore it is taken in the Scripture one while for the mind, as when Moses
says to the people of Israel, Deuteronomy 29 4.
Yet the Lord has not given you a heart to know: and another while it is taken
for the affections, as when our Savior Christ says, Matthew. 22. 37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind. For we see here how he puts a difference between the
heart and the mind. Sometime they are put indifferently one for another, or
one for both, especially the heart, as when the Lord said to Solomon, 1.
King. 3. 12.
Behold I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart, the heart is
taken for the senses and mind, as it appears very evidently. For the same
cause Saint Paul continuing his speech of Gods punishment above mentioned,
against the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, he adds to that before
recited, this saying: Romans 1. 24, 25.
Wherefore also God gave them up to their hearts lusts, unto uncleanness, to
defile their own bodies between themselves: which turned the truth of God
unto a lie. In which place we see how the Apostle makes the heart to be the
seat of the appetites and of the affections, and how he calls the unruly
and disordered affections of the heart by the name of lusts; for so he
expounds himself by and by after, calling them Vile Affections, unto which
God gave them up. Whereupon we will note this, that the natural affections of
the heart, which prick it forward to the desire of pleasure, and which
minister pleasure unto it, Pleasure of it own nature a gift of God.
should be no sin at all unto men, but a benefit given them of God in the
perfection of their nature, were it not that by reason of the corruption which
has raken hold of it, such desires and affections cannot contain themselves
within the limits of their sound nature: but there is always some excess
even in the perfectest, and that being sin, is properly called evil
concupiscence, because it continually provoke us to evil, and causes us to
go beyond the bounds which God had set to our affections. Whereof it is come
to pass, that that which should be a benefit unto men in their natural
pleasures, is become hurtful unto them. Now forasmuch as the order of our
discourses has brought us to the tractate of affections which have their seat
in the heart, before we go any further, we must say somewhat of the nature of
this part of the body, as we have done of the brain, to the end we may the
better know the seat and instruments of the vital power and virtue of the
soul, and of the will and affections, as those which belong to the animal
power and virtue, have been declared unto us. Let us then hear ASER handle
this matter.

Of the nature and composition of the heart, and of the midriffe: of the
tunicles or skinny couerings of the breast, and of the Pericardion, or cawle
about the heart: of the motion, office, and use of the lungs, of the heart, and
of the arteries. Chap. 37.
ASER. It is not without good and just cause, that God has ordained that
reason should lodge in the highest part of the frame of man, and that the will
and affections should lodge lower, namely, in the heart. For by this order he
would admonish and tell us, what part and power of the soul ought to bear
greatest sway therein, and that understanding and wisdom, which teach us the
true rules according to which we must square our whole life, ought to reign
and have the first place, The end of man's creation.
seeing the principal cause wherefore God has created us, is to know him, to
the end that knowing him we should love and honor him as we ought: and as for
the affections, they are to be (...) and governed by wisdom and
understanding. Wherefore if this order appointed by God be confounded and turned
topsie turuy in us, he causes us to feel and know it well enough. For
although sin be the cause, yet the impression of that divine image, which God
has set in the nature of man, cannot be so wholly defaced in us, but there will
always remain very evident and wonderful testimonies thereof. And therefore
presently after we have overthrown this order, and that the will lifts her
self up against reason, even then does reason condemn that fault of hers, and
compels the heart to take vengeance thereof, and to punish in it her self
disobedience and rebellion, with great torments and griefs: insomuch that
either it must consume away and perish, or else return to his due order and
place, and the will must know, that she has a mistres, not only to teach her,
but also to correct her when she shall do amiss, and pervert her order.

But let us speak of that, which more particularly concerns so wonderful a
part of the body, namely, the heart. First we must remember how we divided
before the internal parts of the frame and building of man into three bellies
and lodgings, of which the first, I mean the brain, Of the second belly of
the body.
was showed unto us with all his parts. Now we will come to the second, which
is in the midst between the other two, namely, in the breast, which
contains the vessels and instruments of the vital faculty and virtue, and
those are the heart, the arteries, the lungs, the rough artery, with the
appurtenances thereof. Here of it is that the name of the heart is oftentimes
taken in the holy Scriptures for the midst, Ezech. 27. 4. jonas 2. 4. matthew.
12. 40.
or for the inward and secret part of a thing, as when it speaks of the heart
of the earth and of the sea, and of the heavens. Now, as we have heard how
reason has his throne and judicial seat in the brain, what ministers and
what secretary he has near about him, and in what chambers and lodgings they
are placed, as also what ministers and officers are joined with him for the
execution of his judgments and decrees, namely, the will and the affections: so
also we must consider what manner of lodgings and habitations are assigned to
these latter sort in the heart. And although these officers and ministers are
not always obedient to reason, but rise up against it oftentimes, and do
clean contrary to that which it judges and appoints to be done, yet by that
order which God set down, they were to obey, and to agree well amongst
themselves, as he shows it by the disposition of their lodgings. We have
heard before, that the heart and the lungs are lodged within the breast, as in
a strong hold, and are compassed round about therewith for their safeguard and
defense. But we must note, that there is a partition called Diaphragma by the
Graecians, Of the midriffe and of his use.
which separateth the (...) of the vital parts, from the nourishing parts that
are in the third belly and lodging of the body, of which we will speak
hereafter in his order. This partition is above in respect of the natural
instruments appointed for nourishment, and beneath in regard of the spiritual
instruments that serve the vital part. And because it is a great round muscle
of the breast about the end of the nether part thereof, it has two uses, of
which the first and greatest is to be an instrument of breathing: the second is
to help to purge and expel the excrements of the body. Of the skins of the
breast and of their use.
Next to that there is a tunicle or skin which is very thin and slender,
much like to a Spiders web, and is spread over the whole capacity of the
breast, out of which two others proceed that divide it throughout, to the end
there might be two distinct places of receipt, that if a man had some great
wound in one part thereof, whereby the office of respiration and breathing
which it has, should utterly perish, yet the other part that is unhurt, might
at leastwise retain the one half. These skins serve also to cover and bind
together all the vessels and instruments contained within the breast: and the
former of them, which hemmeth in the ribs, serves chiefly to defend the
lungs on that side where it is joined to the bones of the ribs, to the end
they should not touch the bare bones, when they execute their office, Of the
cawle of the heart.
namely, when we breathe. Concerning the heart, it has for his next dwelling
house a membrane or skin called by the Graecians Pericardion, which
signifies as much as if in our language we should say in a word, a
compasse-heart. And therefore this skin is made of the same fashion the heart
is, namely, very large and ample beneath, but afterward it narroweth by little
and little, so that it ends pointwise, Of the fashion of the heart.
being in proportion like to a pine apple or to a pyramide, which is the figure
of a flame of fire. Whereby it seems that God has made the heart of this
fashion to admonish us, that it is the place of that natural fire which is in
the body, and appointed to give it so much natural heat as is necessary for
the life thereof. This skin, which is also called the little closet of the
heart, is of such capacity, that it is severed from the same on every side as
much as is requisite, that his motion might in no wise be impeached. Some
think, that there is some water within this vessel, Of the water in the cawle
of the heart.
or some moisture like to a dew to water the heart, that it should not dry up
through the great heat that comes of continual motion, in which it is
without ceasing. Now because this humor cannot be seen but only in dead
bodies, there be that think it is made there only after death, through the
exhalation and gathering together of the spirits, which are there dissolved.
And in deed it seems to be a hard matter to know this by Anatomy, because
commonly it is not practiced but upon dead bodies. And although a man would
try the experiment upon quick and living bodies, yet they would be always
dead before he should come to that part, or at leastwise there would be such a
change and alteration, that it would be very hard for a man to give a right
judgment. Nevertheless this might be known by cutting up that part in some
beast or other. For there is always some moisture found there even before it
be stark dead, although indeed it cannot live long after that part is opened.
But let us return to that which we begun to speak of the heart, which being
the root and fountain of natural heat, disperseth it abroad by the
arteries into the whole body, and gives life to every part thereof. Of the
office of the heart.
For albeit the instruments of respiration serve the voice, yet they were
created principally for the hearts sake, that the natural heat which is in
it, might be refreshed, increased and fed by them. For this cause has the
Divine providence made the lungs to be as it were the forge and shop of
respiration, to this end, that the air without might be sent even to the
heart, Of the lungs and of their use.
for the causes and ends before spoken of. For the air that is to be brought
to the heart, is first prepared in the lungs, to the end it might moderate the
heat of the heart and spirits, and not enter in thither either too hot, or
too cold, or in too great abundance, whereby it might be damnified or quite
choked up. Therefore has God made the flesh and substance of the lungs very
light, soft and spungie, more then any other part of the body, so that it
holds much of the nature of the air, and that for two notable causes. For
first, seeing the lungs have not their motion of themselves, neither are
fastened to the body to receive motion from it, it was needful to have them of
such matter, that they might be easily moved and follow the motion of the
breast. Next, they will receive the air more easily without any violence, if
at any time it enter in vehemently and in great quantity. To conclude this
point, How the lungs cover the heart.
they are so seated in regard of the heart, that they wrappe it and clothe it
both on the right side and on the left, and serve to defend it against all the
neighbour-bones near about it.

But here we are to note the agreement and mutual relation, which the heart
has with the heavens, in that as the first motion of the whole world
begins by the heavens, How the heart agrees with the heavens.
of which all the other motions that are in nature do depend, so the heart is
that member in man's body, which first receives life and motion, and which is
the wel-spring and fountain thereof: whereupon also it is the first that
lives, and the last that dies. Of the arteries and their office.
And because God has created it to put into it the vital faculty and virtue
from whence the life of living creatures proceeds, he has also appointed
the arteries, who receiving their original from the heart, are afterward
distributed and spread throughout all the members of the body, as the sinews
and veins are, to give unto the air and vital spirits necessary for life,
even as the blood is likewise distributed by means of the veins that come
from the liver, to nourish them withal, and as sense and motion are carried by
the sinews that are derived from the brain and marrowe of the back bone, as
we have already showed. Therefore as the air has his motion, and the winds
their course, even such as GOD has appointed them in the whole body of this
great world: How the vital spirits agree with the air and winds.
so we see that the air and vital spirits are in man's body, which is the
little world, as winds that have their course and passages therein, to be
carried unto all the members, and to be distributed and communicated unto them
by means of the arteries. Hereof it is that they heave and beat in those
places where arteries are appointed to be, so that by their peace and
quietness, Physicians judge of the virtue and strength of the heart, and
consequently of the whole body, of health and sickness, of life and death,
and of the whole position thereof. Therefore the heart has a double motion to
serve for this use: which I speak, because it has yet a third motion and that
of another nature, Of the double motion of the heart, and the uses thereof.
of which we will speak hereafter. But as for this first double motion which
is here mentioned, it is so called because the one is made when the heart
gives out, and the other when it shrinketh in. For when it extends it self
forth, then is it refreshed and cooled thereby, and when it gathers inward
and restrains it self, then does it expel and drive out those fuliginous
and smokie excrements, which otherwise would stifle it. This twofold motion
is natural, proceeding from the proper nature of the heart, and not voluntary
as that of the muscles is, which is governed by the motion of the brain and
sinews that come from it. For the heart has his filaments or small threedes,
apt and convenient for that purpose. Now this motion serves not only for the
uses already spoken of, but also for the nourishing of the vital spirit, I
mean to draw the blood wherewith it is nourished, and also to prepare food
for the lungs, thereby to return such mutual help unto them as it receives
from them. For as the lungs serve to send breath unto it, thereby to cool it
and to further it in the execution of that office which it has, An admonition
to mutual love.
so the heart serves to nourish and feed the lungs. Whereby we have a goodly
aduerticement concerning that mutual agreement that ought to be in us, and of
that reciprocal help which we owe one to an other, and how we ought to
acknowledge the good turns that are done unto us, and do the like again to
them, according to that ability which every one shall have so to do. For if
we deal not in that sort, it will be all one with us in humane society, as
if one should separate in our body the heart from the lungs, that the one might
not do his duty toward the other: which questionless would cause the
death and overthrow of the whole body.

Moreover, we must note, that between these two motions of the heart now
spoken of, there is some small space, in which there is a little rest: and then
does the heart restrain it self and draw from all sides round about the
air which is drawn in by the lungs, which it enjoys and has use of. And
for this cause the heart, whose flesh is hard and can hardly suffer, has three
kinds of filaments called Fibers, which serve for all these motions. Thus you
see the heart that is lord of man's life, how he hangs as it were in his
coffer, and withdraws himself into his chamber or closet, being in a manner
separated from the rest of the body to which he gives life, but only that he
is joined thereunto by veins, arteries, and sinews, which he uses as pipes,
some to receive the benefits that come unto him from others, and some to
distribute his good things by. Wherein we have a fair resemblance of that
mutual communicating which ought to be among men. For although the heart be as
the fountain of life, which it imparteth to all the rest of the members and
parts of the body, yet can it not live alone, without those necessary helps
of the other members unto which it is serviceable. Now we are to consider the
substance, situation and countepoize thereof, with the nature and use of the
vital spirit: which shall be the matter subject of thy discourse, AMANA.

Of the substance, situation and counterpoize of the heart: of the nature and
use of the vital Spirit, and of the forge, vessels and instruments thereof:
of the sundry doors and pipes of the heart, and of their uses. Chap. 38.
AMANA. All men, how ignorant and brutish soever they be, carry about with them
in their hearts a great testimony, that they have both a God and a Judge, who
approoueth that which is good, and punishes the evil. For although they never
heard one word of his word, yet they cannot be ignorant of this, which they
sensibly feel and know by experience in themselves, that nothing but evil
can befall them for evil, howsoever it be long a coming, and that they cannot
feel the evil which their sin has brought upon them, but they will repent
them for committing it, and wish it had never bin done. This is natural
Divinity, which no body can be ignorant of. Whereunto Saint John leading us,
says very well, If our heart condemn us, 1. John 3. 20.
God is greater then our heart, and knows all things. And we see that
repentance ordinarily follows sin, and that a sinner can not but feel some
heaviness and grief. Yea nature it self teaches us, when we are displeased
for some thing whereof we repent us, Whereof the striking of the breast arose.
to strike our breast, because the heart is within it, as also to hang down
our eyes for shame. But the vexation, sadness and sorrow, which after the
fault committed, a man is stricken with, because of the hurt that takes hold
of him, and the punishment he expects or endures already, serves not but
for a continual torment unto him, as if he were in a hell, except he change
his mind, amend his fault and return to God again, and so betake himself
again to that place and order of his, which God had assigned him. Behold what
good instructions we have in our selves, which ought to prick us forward to
goodness, and draw us back from wickedness: especially our heart bears us
certain testimony of that which is acceptable in the sight of God.

Now as we have heard, Of the substance of the heart.
that the form thereof is aptest for the motion it has, so the substance and
matter whereof it is made, is a kind of flesh that has none like it in all
the other parts of the body. For it is needful it should be so thick and
fast, that it may the better discharge that office and duty that is laid upon
the heart. The situation of the heart.
On the other side, it is so seated in the breast, that the foundation and
foot thereof is directly in the midst of it: but the narrow end of it
bends somewhat toward the left-side. Which is done in regard of two great
commodities, whereof the one is, that it should not rush against the bones of
the breast: the other, that it should heat the left side the more, seeing the
right side is helped by the heat of the liver, which is on that side. And
although the left part of the heart be very big, and hard, and consequently
more heavy then the right, which is more subtle, thin and soft, and
therefore lighter, nevertheless God has given it such a counterpoize, Of the
counterpoize of the heart.
that both sides are of equal weight: so that although there be no ligame^t or
band to tie it unto the other parts that are near about it, yet without
inclining or bending any one way more then other, it hangs in the midst of
the vessel and skin that compasses it round about. For the left part, which
of it own nature is heauiest, contains in it a lighter matter, namely, the
vital spirit, and the right side that is not so heavy has in it a more heavy
matter, which is the blood. Whereby we see how the providence of God has so
well framed the counterpoize, that both parts are equal, like to an even and
just pair of balance. From whence also we may take a good lesson concerning
the uprightness that ought to be in our heart and will, A good lesson for every
one.
and in all our affections, and with what heart we ought to follow the ordinances
of God, and that way which he shows us in his word* how we should continue
and abide steadfast therein, Deuter. 5. ezech. 20.
and turn neither to the right hand nor the left, as we are often commanded
in the holy Scriptures. Moreover, forasmuch as the skin that co^passeth the
heart* has the bones of the breast on the one side, and the lungs on the
other, it was requisite that it should be of a matter so well te^pered, that it
might receive no harm by ye hardness of the bones, and on the other side should
not be so hard as to be able to hurt the lungs, which are of as soft and tender
a flesh as any is in all the body. Which teaches us sufficiently, that the
providence of God has forgotten nothing in any respect. Of the two void
places in the heart, and of their use.
But we must further know, that there are two capacities or holow places in the
heart distinguished one from another by a partition, the one being on the right
side, the other on the left. That place on the right side serves to receive
the blood that comes from the liver to the heart by veins, both for the
nourishing of it self and of the lungs, and for the generation of the vital
spirits, whose forge and shop is in the other void place on the left side,
where the heart does exercise his chief office, which is to ing^nder the vital
spirits of the finest and thinnest blood, which resolves it self there, as
if it came of the sweat that proceeds out of the right capacity. What the
vital spirit is.
Now the vital spirit is as it were a most bright and lively flame, like to the
celestial nature, which carries heat and life to the whole body, and is the
instrument of the chief actions and works thereof. Of the great artery.
In this left hollow place there is a great artery, which is as it were the
stock of all the arteries in the body, which a little from the heart divides
itself into two branches, whereof the one ascends upward, to carry the
vital spirit into the upper parts of the body: the other, which is some what
bigger, descends downward. By means of these arteries, which are as it were
the pipes of the heart, the greatest benefit of all is communicated to all
parts of the body.

Now because the arteries and veins have need one of an others help, they
meet one another, and are so linked and joined together, that the arteries are
seldom alone without the veins. For the arteries being joined unto the veins
do give them air and spirit, which through the vital heat stirs the
blood, and helps to bring it to perfection, and to preserve it. In like
manner the arteries suck some small quantity of blood out of the veins,
whereby the vital spirit is carried, A^example of ^utuall succor.
sprinkled, and increased. Wherein we have again a notable example and
goodly pattern of that mutual communicating, that ought to be among men*
without which neither nature nor humane society can be preserved: the like
also hereof we see between the heart and the lungs, in which there are pipes
that pass from the one to the other for their mutual helping and succouring
one of an other. For the Arteriall vein, that proceeds out of the right side
of the hear^, carries the blood to the lungs to nourish it: and the veiny
artery, which comes out of the left side of the heart, carries air unto it
from the lungs to refresh it. For after it is brought to the lungs by the
artery or windpipe, Of the veiny ^^^ery.
the lungs communicate the same unto the heart. Likewise by that same veiny
artey, the ouer-heated air and fumes are carried from the heart: and serves
besides to carry the spirit and the arteriall blood unto the lungs to heat
them. Therefore this artery is not altogether so thick as the rest are, nor so
thin as the veins, to the end it may easily enlarge or straiten it self,
or give and receive the air, and that through hardness it hinder not the
motion of the lungs, as also that the foggy blood may not euaporate and sweat
through. For this cause it is called the veiny artery, because it holds of
the nature both of an artery and of a vein, and has this office belonging
properly unto it, to carry the air and the spirit.

There are also in the heart other small pieces, Of the doors and pipes of the
heart.
which Anatomists distinguish from it, as the two little ears, the right and
the left, which are as it were little doors, as there is also in all the pipes
thereof, which are so small, that uneath may they be discerned by the eyes.
These doors and pipes that are in them ^erue partly to this end, that when
the heart sucketh such blood as is necessary for it self, the vein wherewith
it draws should not break, through any ouer-great, vehement, and sudden
attraction: and partly, that the air might enter in more gently and better
wrought, according as need requires. For this cause also it is, why the heart
does not draw the air immediately from the mouth, both because if this space
were not between, it could not draw so much as it wants, and so would be
choked, as also because it should receive it in too cold, whereupon it
would be greatly hurt. Therefore it has pipes, passages, and instruments, not
only to bring this air unto it, as it is brought to the lungs, but also to
dispense and prepare it as is most convenient for it, as we have learned
already by our speech of the rough artery, and of other instruments of the
voice and of respiration. Out of which we are to note two goodly points of the
providence and wisdom, whereby he does admonish us of that moderation,
Goodly instructions for all men.
which we ought to keep in all things, and how we ought to behave our selves,
not only in one work, but also in all things that we take in hand. For
concerning the first, GOD has provided always throughout the whole work of
man's body in such sort, that there should be no violent thing, but has so well
framed, disposed, and linked all together, that no one part or member should
receive hurt of another, but al might help and support each other. Therefore if
there be any burden to carry from one to an other, God has so distributed it
by little and little, and by such convenient means, that no part is pressed:
Moderation is (...) be kept in all things.
teaching us thereby, that he loves moderation and hates violence in all
things: for which cause he dispenses all and distributeth drop by drop, as it
were by destillation. And to the end he may conioyne in one, things of a
contrary nature, he always places between two contraries, things of a middle
disposition which are most apt to tie them together and to keep them. Besides,
we see how he has ordered all the parts of the body so well, that one only
member and instrument serves oftentimes for many offices and uses, as we have
already touched it. Wherein God does admonish us further of two things well
worthy the noting. The first is, that we ought to look so well unto al things,
that we neither forget nor omit any thing that shall be requisite and necessary.
The other, that we should employ our selves about every thing that we can and
may do, according to those gifts and graces, which we have received of God,
and that we should use al things to every such purpose as they will serve,
Superfluity to be avoided in all things.
and so avoid al vain and superfluous charges. For (as it is commonly said)
nothing is to be done by many things, that can be performed by fewer: otherwise
there will be more hindrance then help, and greater loss then profit. For
this cause as God has not given to the body one member less then there ought
to be, so he has not given it one more. For if there were either more or
less, it would not only be monstrous, but there would be either some want, or
some let and hinderance. And when as one member is able to satisfy two offices,
he has not created many to do it, if either profit or necessity required not
the help of many. Good counsel for Princes.
Whereupon governors of Commonwealths ought to learn, that their people are
not to be burdened with unprofitable and unnecessary offices and persons. If
therefore men would learn those lessons that God gives them in their own
bodies, and in the members thereof, they would always keep a mean in all
things, following this heavenly example, and never offend either with too
little or too much. But notwithstanding we have all Nature to be our Mistres,
so that she keep a school within us, and teach us these things her self,
yet we profit little thereby. Now leaving this speech, seeing we have taken
a view of the nature of the body, and of the natural motion thereof, which is
commonly called the Pulse, and what use it has in this corporal life, as also
of other things concerning this matter, it shall be good for us now to speak
of another motion that is in the nature of the soul, which serves not only
for this life, but also for the spiritual, in respect of which especially it
is given unto it, an image and representation whereof we have had in this
motion of which we have already spoken. It belongs to thee, ARAM, to
discourse upon this matter.

Of the second motion of the heart, which belongs to the affections of the
soul, and of those that go before or follow after judgment: of the agreement
that is between the temperature of the body, and the affections of the soul.
Chap. 39.
ARAM. As God is not only an eternal and infinite essence, but also
infinitely good and happy, so has he not rested in giving unto his creatures
life and being, as it were imparting to them some part of his being, but it
has pleased him also to make them partakers of that Good which is essential
in him, and of his blessedness and felicity, according as every one was
capable thereof in his kind. Man was created not only to be, but also to be
well.
For he will not only have them to be, but also to be well. For this cause we
see, that although men desire much to be, and therefore are greatly afraid of
death, as of an enemy that seeks to undo them, yet many times it falls out
so that they desire death, to the end they might be no more, because they
think it a greater good, or at leastwise a less evil to be no more, the^ to
be miserable and unhappy. And by this we may know, that man was not created of
God only to be, neither was that his principal end, but also to be blessed. For
this cause as God has given to the creatures an inclination to preserve
themselves in their life, to the end they might be, so he has put into them a
natural appetite and desire of that which is good, to the end they might be
well, and that good might be fall them, but man specially is thus affected:
which desire of good is also joined with an eschewing of evil. For in the
pursuit of good, his contrary, which is evil, must of necessity be fled from.
And of this natural inclination to good proceed all those affections of the
soul that draw it hither and thither to seek for it: but because of her badde
judgment, proceeding of the darkness of ignorance which is in the mind, she
chooses oftentimes the clean contrary to that which she desires, What the
affections are.
as we have already touched.

We call then properly by the name of affections, the motions and acts of that
natural power of the soul, which consists in following after good, and
eschewing of evil. For receiving of God in our first creation to be and to be
well, we have still some natural seeds of the perfection of these two great
gifts, which teach us naturally, that it is a good thing for one to preserve
himself and his being, as also to be well and happy in his being: but this is
only generally. For when we are to come from these generalities unto
particulars, there are wonderful errors and disorders throughout the whole
course of man's life. Two kinds of affections.
Now among the motions of the soul, some go before judgment, others follow
after: although oftentimes they are so sudden and headstrong withal, that it
appears plainly they have shaken off the bridle, and never expected and
stayed for any judgment. Notwithstanding it is true, that the heart is not
moved before there has bin some judgment to determine, whether that which is
then offered unto it be good or evil. But because the motions of our spirit and
mind are very light and sudden, and need not so long time, as otherwise is
requisite for us if we will take good heed to our matters, hereof it is that
they seem to us many times to prevent and go before judgment* given, What
affections go before judgment
when indeed they follow it. And as for those natural motions, which in truth
go before it, they are such as are bred and borne of the disposition of the
body, as the desire to eat in hunger, and to drink in thirst, and sorrow in
time of sickness, or the motion of a melancholic humor, or joy proceeding from
good and pure blood in the heart. But the other motions follow the advice of
judgment and as that is moved and changed diversely by such means as have
already bin declared, so the affections alter, and increase or decrease, or
otherwise vanish clean away and come to nothing. Whereof it follows, that
they are appeased by the same means by which they are moved, according as they
are applied unto them. But although it behooves that the affections should be
pricked forward by judgment, yet it follows not thereupon, that they can not
be stirred up, except this mature and ripe judgment be always there, which
ordains things to be done after the discourse of reason. For it is enough for
them if they have another judgment, that observes not such an exact and
diligent examination, but only that which fantasy offers without any other
discoursing. And this judgment thus moved by fancy, is most usual and
ordinary, and that which most guides and rules the affections of men.
Therefore it is a sudden and tumultuous judgment, of which a man may truly say,
a short sentence of a sottish judge. Thus fancy, being very turbulent and
skittish, and drawing to it self confusedly some show and appearance of opinion
and judgment, whereby it deemeth that which is offered unto it to be either
good or bad, is the cause that we live in the midst of marvelous troubles
in respect of our affections of fear, of desire, of sorrow, of joy, and that
one while we weep, and suddenly we laugh again. And because it has great
power over the body, as we have already declared, these perturbations do
manifestly incline that way. Agreement between the temperature of the body and
the affections of the soul.
We see also by experience, that there is great agreement between the
qualities and temperature of the body, and the affections of the soul:
insomuch that as the bodies of men are compounded of the qualities of heat,
cold, moisture, and drienesse, so among the affections some are hot, others
cold, some moist, others dry, and some mingled of these diverse qualities. So
that every one is most subject to those affections that come nearest to the
nature, temperature, and complexion of his body. As for example, the affection
of joy is hot and moist, and therefore they that are hot and moist, as
children, young men, sound and healthy folks, and idle persons, are more easily
inclined to that affection. Contrariwise, sorrow is a cold and dry affection,
and therefore they that are cold and dry are most given to that affection,
and such are old folks and they that are of a melancholy humor, which is
earthy, cold and dry. For the like reason, they that have a soft and tender
heart, receive more easily the impression of joy and grief, as wax takes the
print of a seal: and they that have a hand and hot heart, quickly receive joy
and keep it a long time. And on the other side, they that have hard and cold
hearts, receive sorrow and grie^e very soon, and retain it long, as
appears in melancholy and melancholic persons. And as the affections follow
the temperature and complexion of the body, The affections can do much with
the body.
so they for their parts have great virtue and power over the body. Therefore
we see, that joy is as it were a medicine to the body, and food to the
natural heat and moisture, in which two qualities life chiefly consists,
as we have already heard. For it greatly preserves and increases them:
forasmuch as it strengthens the animal and natural virtues, stirs up the
spirits, helps digestion, and generally profits the habit and disposition
of the whole body. For the heart thereby sends with the blood, much natural
heat, and more spirits unto all parts of the body. By means whereof the
members are watered and moistened by the humiditie contained in the fountain of
blood: whereupon it follows, that all the parts increase in bigness and
wax fat. ^oy good for the body, and Grief hurtful to it.
For this cause Physicions always exhort sick persons to be as merry as they
may, and to avoid sorrow and sadness, which being cold and dry is contrary
to life, and so consumes men. For it dries up the whole body, because the
heart thereby is closed up and restrained: so that no great quantity of
spirits can be made there, and those few that are there, can not easily be
distributed and dispersed with the blood throughout the members. Whereupon the
vital virtue and her companions being weakened, the lively color of the face
waxes wanne and pale, and in a manner vanishes clean away: and so
consequently the whole body becomes lean and consumes, as if it took no
nourishment, yea death oftentimes follows thereupon. This agreement
therefore, which is (as we see) between the temperature and complexion of the
body, and the affections of the soul, ought to teach us to be very temperate
in our eating and drinking, and in all other things belonging to our life. For
as we arre either temperate or intemperate, so will the qualities be whereof
our bodies are compounded: and so consequently according to the temperancie or
intemperancie that is in us, the affections of the soul also will be more
moderate or immoderate, and the perturbations which they shall bring with them,
will be greater or less, and more easy or uneasy to be provoked or appeased.
Whereby we might know what great agreement God has made between the body
and the soul, For not withstanding their natures differ much one from an
other, yet seein they must be linked together, it is necessary they should
have some agreement between them, to the end they may be conjoined and united
in one. It is true, that by the reasons of humane Philosophy, we know well
how the conjunction of corporal things and of their qualities, what
contrariety soever it is between them, may be effected and wrought. But as
we cannot see or know our soul, or any spiritual nature, as we know our
bodies and bodily natures, so can we not judge so easily of the means whereby
the body agrees with the soul, How the agreement between the body and the
soul may be discerned.
and corporal natures with spiritual, but only as experience and the
effects give us some sight thereof. For we see by experience from whence the
good or ill disposition of the body, and health and sickness proceed,
namely, from the good or ill temperature of the qualities thereof, We see
also, that according to the nourishment which the body takes, and that
sobriety or gluttoni^ it uses in eating and drinking, and according to the
abstinence or the effects it brings forth in all things, it is either
better or worse affected and disposed. We see likewise the changes and
alterations that befall it, according to the ages and exercises it has.
Wherefore although we had nothing else to look unto, but to maintain and
preserve our health, yet ought we to desire to be sober, moderate, and very
temperate in all things, seeing moderation bears so great sway in all the
parts of man's life. But it ought to be more precious in our eyes, when we see
that the temperance or intemperance that may be in our bodies, extends it
self unto the estate of our soul, and that it can do much either in the
helping and maintaining, or in the hurting and troubling thereof. For we know
already by experience, that which is of a choleric nature, is more subject to
those diseases that are bredde of a choleric humor, then a flegmatike person
that is of a contrary temperature, and that a flegmatike body is most subject
to diseases proceeding of phlegm. Natural qualities breed diseases.
The like may be said of all the other qualities and complexions. If then
every one incline more to such diseases, as may proceed from those natural
qualities which abound most in his body, it is an easy matter to judge, what
is like to fall upon him if they exceed, whereby they are increased much more.
And if that humor which naturally exceeds most in a man (and of which his
temperature and complexion has his name) cause him to incline most to those
diseases that may be bred thereof, a man may judge into what disposition of
body he may fall through excess of other qualities, which are more repugnant
to his nature and complexion, if there be no such counterpoize and equality,
that one contrary may serve as a remedy against another. But having considered
of these things, we must go forward and prosecute our speech of the affections
of the soul, which are as it were health and sickness therein, according as
they shall be either well or ill moderated, and see what conueniencie there is
between corporal and spiritual physic. Finish therefore this days work,
ACHITOB, with some discourse upon this point, which may serve to instruct us in
the matter of the affections of the soul, of which to morrow we are to
entreat particularly and in order.

Of the Health and diseases of the soul: of the agreement between corporal
and spiritual Physic: how necessary the knowledge of the nature of the body
and of the soul, is for eueryone. Chap 40.
ACHITOB. It is always in his power who has given us being, namely God the
spring and fountain of all essences, to preserve and keep us therein, and to
take it also from us when it pleases him. But forasmuch as he delights not
in destroying the works which himself has wrought, he has given unto his
creatures certain means to preserve themselves in that nature wherein he
created them. And that they might have those means near at hand, he has
placed them even in their own nature. For they have by nature an inclination,
that moves and urges them to keep and defend themselves as much as they can
possible, from every thing that may corrupt their nature, that is contrary unto
it, or that will bring to an end that being, which they have received of God.
Men are more careful for the health of their bodies then of their souls,
But that which herein is most to be lamented in man, is his over great care
and curiosity in searching out remedies meet for the maintenance and
preservation of his body, the least grief and ill disposition whereof seems
unto him to be very burdensome: but as for thinking either upon those means,
whereby God has appointed him to attain to an eternal and blessed life, or
upon the diseases of the soul, which in steed of life will bring death unto
it, and are far more dangerous, stubberne, and uneasy to be cured then those
of the body, he dreameth little thereof, his care is very small, he esteems
them not great, and therefore is very slothful in seeking remedy for them.

We are to know then, The affections breed the health or sickness of the soul.
that the affections of the soul are as it were health and sickness therein,
according as they are either temperate or intemperate. For as there is no evil
disposition or sickness in the body, but contrariwise good health, if there
be not some excess in the qualities of which it is compounded, which may
destroy that equality that is requisite for the keeping of it sound: so is it
with the faculties, powers, qualities and affections of the soul, which
according to her nature has her health and her diseases. Wherefore when the
harmony, conueniencie and temperature of her powers and affections, is such as
her nature requires, then is she well disposed and in health: as contrariwise
thee is ill affected and diseased, when in place of temperance and mediocritie,
there is intemperance and excess. Now according to that which we heard in
the former speech of the conueniencie between the temperature and complexion
of the body, and the affections of the soul, we see that a man of a
choleric nature is a great deal more easily stirred up to anger, then an
other that is of a flegmatike or melancholy nature. How the soul receives
from the body in regard of the diverse temperatures thereof,
For seeing the choleric humor is by nature hot and burning, like to fire,
that man in whom this humor reigns is sooner inflamed with anger and wrath,
then an other that is of a contrary nature. For fire will more speedily kindle
in a matter that comes nearer to it own nature, and of which it may more
easily take hold, then in another that is more contrary to it. It is
otherwise with flegmatike or melancholic men, according as the humors which
rule in them, dispose and incline them more to be carried with one affection
rather then with another. Therefore we see that they which are of a choleric
complexion, as they are of a more hot and dry nature, so their affections are
more sudden, burning and violent, like to fire. Flegmatike and melancholy
persons as they are colder, so they are not so easily moved, but are more
slow and heavy, and have also other inclinations and other affections. And as
they that are commonly said to be sanguine, are of the best temperature so
their affections are for the most part more cheerful and more temperate. And as
there are diverse mixtions of bodily qualities, so there are sundry sorts of
temperatures and complexions of the body, and consequently of souls in regard
of their saculties and affections. Therefore also there is great agreement
between corporal and spiritual Physic. Agreement between corporal and
spiritual Physic.
For this cause the Physicions both of the bodies and souls of men are to
follow almost one and the same method, and observe a like order in their art
and practice, every one according to the subjects propounded unto them:
insomuch that look what the one does unto the body, the other is to deal so
with the soul, such things being applied as best agree with their several
natures. Wherein they may further each others work greatly, observing that
end at which both of them aim, which to the one is the health of the body,
and to the other the cure of the soul, considering that the one may help the
other, as has bin already touched. For if the body be not temperant, hardly
will the soul be: and if the soul be intemperate, the body desires not to be
temperant. Therefore also we see, that not only Physicions for the body appoint
men diets, both for the preservation of their bodily health, and also for ye
recovery and restoring thereof again, but also spiritual Physicions do the
like in regard of the souls health, so far forth as bodily sobriety will
serve greatly to that purpose. For this cause not only ordinary sobriety and
moderation, which ought to be kept throughout the whole life of man, Luke 21.
34.
is so greatly recommended unto us in the holy scriptures, but fasts also, Romans
13. 3.
which being more strict abstine^ces, are very profitable, yea necessary
oftentimes according to times, Ephesians 5. 18.
places and persons, For they serve to tame and humble the flesh, Act. 13. 2.
that it may be the better kept in, and less hinder the spirit, which thereby
is the better enabled to attend to every good work, and to the contemplation
of divine and celestial things. Judge. 20. 26.
Therefore the people of God and holy men fasted often, whereof we have many
testimonies in the scriptures. Psalm. 69. 10.
And as it is necessary that bodily Physicions should know well the te^peratures
and complexions of men's bodies, Esth. 4. 16.
and their natures, their health and diseases also, with their convenient and
apt remedies: so is it needful, that spiritual Physicions should know the
nature of souls, of their faculties, powers and affections, and the natures of
virtues, which are their health, and of vices, which are their diseases,
together with those medicines and remedies that are necessary for the
preservation and increase of virtues, and for the diminution and abolishing of
vices. For without this knowledge, neither of them can be good Physicions, but
it may be feared, least they make ye diseases worse, or in steed of curing the
sick persons, kill them outright. But we must yet draw more instruction out of
this matter here offered unto us. For whatsoever has been hitherto spoken
concerning the agreement between the temperature of the body, and the
affections of the soul, or concerning the health and diseases of them both, or
the knowledge that is requisite in Physicions to follow a good method in their
art and practice for ye healing of their patie^ts, I say the understanding of
al these things is not only necessary for ye Physicio^s both of souls and
bodies, The knowledge of physic necessary for all*
but even for every one of us particularly, For if we were all skillful in the
art of corporal Physic, I mean not such skill as is needful for them that
make public profession thereof to all, but only so much as is necessary for
the preservation of our own health, I doubt not but we might easily avoid
many infirmities and diseases, whereinto we fall daily for want of good diet,
good government and the use of those means, which might either retain us in
health, or restore it quickly unto us, when it is somewhat altered or
impeached. Moreover we should have this advantage besides, if we fell into any
disease, that we should know the better how to keep and govern our selves
more moderately and wisely, and obey the Physicions counsel the better,
because we should have greater knowledge of that which we ought to do, and of
the danger whereinto we might fall, or which we might easily avoid. We may
say as much of the souls physic, the knowledge whereof is a great deal more
necessary for us, not only because the soul is more noble and precious then
the body, but also because it is a harder matter to know the nature and
diseases of the soul, then of the body. And if we prove so happy as to be
able to comprehend any thing, we shall know daily better and better what
things are in us of God, and what is his order, as also what there is of
Satan's, and what is that disorder and confusion, which by means of sin he
has brought into all things. For as sin is cause of that excess, Sin is
the cause of all disorder, discases and of death.
which is in the qualities of which our bodies are made, and consequently of
the diseases that proceed from thence, which afterward bring death to the
body, so is it in respect of the soul, and of the excess that is in the
affections thereof, and in all the other parts of it, contrary to that nature
in which God created the same. And as sin is the cause of the disorder and
confusion that is in both of them, so it is the cause that one helps to
spoil another, whereas there should be a pleasant harmony and concord, not
only of the bodily qualities among themselves, and so likewise of the
qualities of the soul among themselves, but also of the qualities both of
soul and body one with another. For God has put, nor only into our souls,
but into our bodies also, the seeds of all the virtues, and the pricks and
means to incite and to lead us unto them, in such manner and form as shall be
declared hereafter. Although we may learn somewhat by that which we have
heard already of the conueniencie that is between the body and the soul,
between the temperature of the one and the affections of the other. For if the
one be answerable and correspondent to the other, no doubt but God so
disposes of the temperatures and complexions of the body, as he has disposed
of the nature of the affections in the soul, seeing the one is to serve the
other through that mutual agreement, which they ought to have one with
another. Now to morrow we will prosecute our speech begun concerning the
affections of the soul, to the end we may fully understand this goodly and
large matter, which may procure to the soul and body, both life and death. And
first, me thinks we are to enter into the consideration of four things,
which are in the will and in the power to desire, that is in the soul, namely,
natural inclinations, actions, habites, and affections, This shall be then, ASER,
the subject of thy discourse.

The end of the fifth days work.
THE SIXTH DAYS Work.
Of four things to be considered in the Will, and in the power of desiring in
the soul: and first, of the natural inclinations: of self-love, and the
unruliness thereof. Chap. 41.
ASER. All the actions of the soul are bredde of the powers and faculties
thereof: and therefore by the benefit of nature, which is the gift of God, she
has received powers for all things, which she ought to do. Now concerning
the faculty of knowing in the soul, and in the understanding part thereof, of
which we have entreated heretofore, Three things to be considered in the
faculty of Knowledge.
we find three things worthy of diligent consideration, namely, natural
principles, actions, and habites gotten by long custom. We may remember those
sundry degrees, which we said were in the knowledge of the mind, and how by
this faculty it does not only know simple and particular things as beasts
do, but also compoundeth and joins them together: how it compares one with
another, separateth them and discourses upon them: finally how it judges,
and either approves or refuses them. All which things are actions of the
mind, proceeding from those notices, and natural principles of knowledge that
are therein. Now if these actions be sudden, and pass lightly, so that the
mind does not stay in them, nor acquaint it self with them, the bare and
simple name of action belongs to them. But if the mind does one and the
same thing often, museth much upon it, calls it often to memory, and
accustometh it self thereunto, How hab^tes are bred in ye mind.
so that it is in a manner imprinted in it, and thereby the mind becomes
prompt and ready in regard of thelong continuance therein, then do these
actions take the name of habit, which is bredde by the often repeating and
reiterating of the same things. Whereby the mind is made more skilful and
ready, and the spirits more fit and apt to perform those exercises, unto
which they have addicted themselves, and wherein they have continued. So that
such a habit is as it were a light in the spirit and in the soul, whereby
the actions there of are governed.

In like manner we find in the Will, Four things to be considered in the
Will and desires.
and in that power o desiring, which is in the soul, four things to be
considered, namely natural inclinations, actions, habites, and affections
which intermingle themselves in every one of the other. All these things are
good of their own nature, even as nature it self, being considered as God
has created her. But as nature was corrupted through sin, so is it with
these things by reason of that disorder which the nature of sin has brought
unto them. Of natural in^linations and affections.
But let us first speak of natural inclinations, and then we will prosecute
the rest. As therefore the mind has his natural principles of knowledge, so
the will has her natural inclinations and affections, which of their own
nature are good, as they are taken from that first nature created of God:
neither would they at any time be wicked, if there were no excess in them
proceeding from nature corrupted, which afterward breeds in us such
inclinations and affections as are altogether evil and damnable. We love our
selves naturally, our wives, our children, our kinsfolks and our friends, yea
we are by nature so inclined to this love, that if it were not in us we should
not only not be men, but not deserve so much as to be accounted and taken
for beasts, no not for the wildest, most savage and venomous beasts that can
be. For we see by experience what great inclination and affection there is in
every one of them toward their little ones. Therefore when S. Paul makes a
beaderoll of the vices and sins of such men as are most vicious and
execrable, and as it were monsters of nature, Romans 1. 30. 2.
he says expressly, that they are without natural affection: Tim. 3. 3.
which indeed cannot be clean rooted out of any nature living, unless it be
altogether monstrous and unnatural: For it is an affection which is as it were
a beam of the love that God bears cowards all his creatures, and which he
causes to shine in them, so that it is not possible, that they which are
capable of any affection of love, should not love their own blood and their
like, especially men. Wherefore if this love and this affection were well ruled
and ordered, it is so far from being vicious, that contrariwise the spirit
of God condemns as Monsters, those men that want it. And therefore God does
not forbid and condemn this love and affection in his law, so far forth as
it is ruled thereby, but he approves it, and appoints it to be the rule of
our love toward our neighbor, Leuit. 19. 18. matthew. 5. 43.
when he says, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. But when this love
and affection is disordered in us, it is not only vicious, but also as it were
the original and fountain of all other vices and sins, whereas if it were
well ordered and ruled according to the will and law of God, it would be as it
were the fountain and welspring of all virtues. For we should not love our
selves but in God and through him, nor consequently our wives, nor our
children, nor our friends, nor any other creature whatsoeur: whereas clean
contrariwise, we set God aside, and seek nothing but our selves and the
things of the world. Therefore this love and affection being now so unruly
through sin, is so violent in us, that it withdraws us from the love of God
and of his creatures, to love the devil and his wicked works, because it
seems to us, that he is a greater friend unto us then God. Of the v^^^lines
of our natural affections.
For whereas the holy spirit does resist and set himself against our evil
affections, and will have us to bridle them, Satan on the contrary part lets
them loose, and not only gives us over to follow our perverse and vicious
affections with full sway and liberty, but also provoke and thrusts us
forward with great vehemency. Whereby we may judge, what love and affection a
man may carry toward creatures in those things wherein they may be contrary
unto him, and with what fury and rage he may be led against them that resist
his disordered affections, seeing he carries such an affection toward God his
Creator. Therefore Saint Paul speaking of wicked men that should be in the
latter times, 2. Tim. 3. 2.
says first, That they should be selfe-louers: and having set down this
disordered love as the root, after he comes to the branches and fruits of
such a tree, saying, That they shall be covetous, boasters, proud, cursed
speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of
them that are good, traitors, heady, bie minded, lovers of pleasures more the^
lovers of God, having a show of godliness, but denying the power thereof. And
in the Epistle to the Romans he expressly mentions haiers of God. Romans 1.
Thus we see what the love of me^ is toward themselves, being left in ye
corruption of their nature, in respect of yt which ought to be, if it were not
unruly and disordred. For man should love himself as the gift of God, as also
his life and being which God has given him, Of true love toward a man^ self,
and toward his.
and that blessed estate for the enjoying of which he has his being, and that
Good wherein it consists, and whereby he may at^aine unto it, and should
love no other thing, nor otherwise. But the great excess that is in the love
of our selves, causes it to be clean contrary, both to that love which ought
naturally to be in us, and also to our love toward God, so that it
overthrows and confounds all heavenly order, and the whole course of man's
life. Nevertheless, when it so falls out that this love and affection is
moderate in us, although in deed it be never so as it ought to be according to
the rule of Gods will, yet are they acceptable in his sight, as our other
natural affections and friendships are, which we bear toward them that
belong to us: provided always that they be ruled and guided by faith and true
love, and kinded with the flames of the holy Ghost, as they were in Zachary
and Elizabeth toward their son John* and in so many other holy men, as have
loved both themselves and theirs according to God, Genesis 22.
whereof we have a notable example in Abraham. For out of all question if ever
father loved his children, he loved his son Isaac. But he showed evidently
by the effect, that he did not only love him with the love of flesh and blood,
as commonly we love our children, but he loved him also in God, toward whom
yet his love was far greater, seeing he was very ready to offer him up in
sacrifice unto him, when ^he so commanded it. But although this natural love
and affection be not so pure in us as in these holy men, but that still there
is mingled with it some thing of our own because of sin, which we hane by
inheritance, yet is it always acceptable to God, so that he be first and
chiefly loved. For through his mercy he bears with our infirmity, which
evermore accompanies our desires and wills. As for those that are guided
only by the light of nature, and are not regenerated by the spirit of God,
albeit these natural affections are too unclean in them, yet they do not so
much displease him, as inhumanitie and cruelty do, that are clean contrary
to the other, and which do utterly dispossess men of love and charity. We
may consider the same things in all the other natural inclinations. For we
see that some are by nature inclined to civil justice, some to liberality,
and others to such like virtues. Natural inclinations are seeds of virtues or
vices.
Now if these inclinations be well guided, they are goodly seeds of virtues,
but if they be not well ordered and ruled, they corrupt and degenerate* ye^
they turn into the vices that are contrary to those virtues. For justice,
which is never without moderation, may be turned into over great rigor, or
into cruelty, as we see it in many, who being naturally inclined to
severity, which many times is very necessary injustice, become so rigorous
and extreme, that their seue ritie, which ought to be a virtue, is turned into
cruelty. The like may be said of other inclinations and affections. Now that
which befalls these inclinations, is procured also unto them by the humors
and qualities of the body, which have acertaine agreement with the affections.
For a sanguine man, in whose nature blood bears greatest sway amongst the
other humors and qualities, will naturally be more inclined to love, to joy,
to liberality, and to such other affections as are most agreeable to his
nature. But if this complexion be not moderated and well guided, it will
easily pass measure in every affection, so that it will fall into foolish and
unlawful loves, into excessive and unmeasurable joys, and into prodigality
in steed of following liberality. The same may be said of all the other
temperatures and complexions for their part, in that they may be seeds and
prouocatio^s either to virtues or to vices, according to that correspondencie,
which is between the body and the soul, and the temperature of the one with
the affections of the other. The original of all diseases.
Therefore we may well conclude, that as diseases engender in the body of the
humors that are in it, according to their change, mingling and corruption: so
it falls out in the nature of the soul and in the affections thereof. For as
good natural humors become evil by corruption that seazeth upon them, and
turn that health which before they affoorded into diseases: so the
inclinations and natural affections of our soul, which of their own nature
are good and the seeds of virtues, are turned into vices and into their
seeds, through that corruption which sin brings unto them. Behold then
what we have to consider of those natural inclinations that are in the Will and
in the desiring power of the soul, and of the actions thereof, namely to will
and not to will, and to suspend and stay her action, and to command over the
power of the appetites, of all which we have largely entreated in our
discourse of the Will. Wherefore we will come to the habites, of which thou
shall now discourse, AMANA.

Of the Habit of the soul in the matter of the affections, and of what force
it is: of the causes why the affections are given to the soul, with the use of
them: of the fountain of virtues and vices. Chap. 42.
AMANA. If a man will learn any occupation, he proves not a woorkeman the
first day, but learneth by little and little, and begins to labor therein:
afterward by long continuance and custom he grows more ready in his art,
and practices it with greater facility and ease. A painter waxes expert in
his science by often painting, and his hand wherewith he labors, by long
continuance becomes more steady, more ready and able, so that he can handle
his pensill with greater ease, and is far more expert therein then he was in
the beginning. We may note the like in the soul, and in the chief powers and
actions thereof. For there are some of them, which incontinently follow the
nature of the faculties of the soul, when they have their just times, and are
come, as a man would say, unto their ripeness, as we may see by experience in
the corporal senses. For not long after the child is borne he sees and
hears, the reason whereof is because the senses of seeing and hearing are by
nature absolute and perfect. Therefore in such actions there needs no
exercise to cause them to perform that which they do well, but only a good
vigor and strength, because in them nature is a great Mistres that has all
efficacy. But there are far more excellent actions, as science, art,
prudence, fidelity, and such like, which had need of use and exercise to
cause them to do readily and well. This use brings custom, which has in it
a facility to work, and a disposition tending thereunto. And then such actions
take the name of habit, which is bred by the reiterating thereof.

Thus the actions of the Will and power of desire in the soul, of which we
have spoken before, when they are often reiterated, so that they grow to be
firm and steadfast, are called habits, because the Will is so accustomed
thereunto, that it becomes more constant eithet in desiring one certain
thing, or in eschewing the same. Therefore as the affections are more or less
forward, more seldom or often used, more weak or strong, What a habit is.
so they are called either inclinations or actions, or habites. But we are to
note, that habites extend not themselves only to those things which we do,
but also to those which we suffer and abide, which displease us and are
contrary to our nature. For custom diminishes and moderateth by little and
little the sense of that grief and pain which they bring us, whereof we have
trial in all diseases, which commonly seem not so grievous and intolerable
after we have bin long accustomed unto the^, Of the force of custom.
as in the beginning of them. And although poverty be a heaui^ burden,
nevertheless custom makes it familiar unto us, and familiarity causes us to
think it lighter. Wherefore we ought not to marvel, if our God does usually
send affliction to his children to acquaint them therewith, as also to the end
they might obtain the virtue of patience, which is learned by often suffering:
insomuch that there remains a habit in men, which being nothing else but a
common custom, causes them mildly to bear and sustain all events. Whereas
there are some that like furious and desperate men are carried away we great
impatience, either because they never suffered much before, or if they did
suffer, yet they never accustomed themselves to bear their afflictions
patiently. Moreover we know by experience, that although the way of virtue at
our first entering thereinto, seem unto us very difficult to tread in, yet
afterward we find it very ^asie, when we have walked in it a certain time.
Sweat is Gentleman-usher to virtue.
For there is no honest trade of life in which we find not great difficulty.
And the more excellent it is, so much the more troublesome and tedious it will
seem to our flesh, whereas the path of pleasure will seem to be very
delectable and easy, because it is a great deal more natural to our corrupt
nature. But how hard so ever it be to our flesh to follow after a virtuous,
honest, and sober life, yet custom will make it easy to ouerpasse, as
likewise to forsake that which is contrary unto it. Therefore it has not
without just cause been given out long since by wise and skillful men, that it
is very good and profitable to be accustomed to good things, especially from
ones infancy: that it skilleth much how eu^rie one has been brought up from
his youth: that nothing is of greater force then custom, either to good or to
evil, as that which seems to be another nature. Now upon this speech of
habites we are to note further, The cause and profit of an habit.
that as all other natural things in the soul are given unto it for the good
thereof, so is this habit, which is no other thing but a custom rooted
therein. For except continuance of time did confirm this power of the soul, I
mean, that it ought not only to do a thing, but to do it well and as it
ought to be done, that it is to get a facility therein through use and
exercise, to the end it may do the same thing afterward more freely and
readily, and be more willing to occupy it self about the same thing, and
that after the same manner, I say except this be so, many inconveniences will
ensue thereupon. The first is, that it should labor altogether in vain. The
second, that it should always come rude and unskillful, as it were a new
prentice, to the exercising of these excellent actions and works. Whereof
this would follow, that having profited nothing with the time, it would not
do any thing perfectly. And this we ought not only to understand of those
things which we do willingly but even of that which we suffer and endure
maugre our wills: where with of all other things we had need to be best
acquainted. For seeing we are compassed about daily with so many miseries,
seeing we must suffer and undergo so many sharp and unworthy assaults, how
much greater will our misery be, if long custom and an habit in suffering
should afford us no ease and refreshing? But let us come now to yt which
particularly concerns the affections of the soul, that we may be fully
instructed in ye nature and sundry kinds of them. First we will note, that we
understand by affection that natural power in the soul, which opens it self
toward Good, and with draws it self from evil, as we have already
declared before. Now when the actions of an affection are grown to be
habites, What affection is, and from whence virtue and vice first spring.
then are they called either virtues or vices, according as they are either
well or ill done. And from hence proceed good or ill manners, of which moral
Philosophy took that name, because it in^reateth of them. For that shows
what virtue and vice is, how many kinds there are of them, and what
difference there is not only between virtues and vices, but also between the
sundry sorts of them, as we have discoursed at large in our first Academical
assembly. The fountain of moral philosophy.
But let us understand this, that the knowledge of the soul and of the powers
of it, about which we now labor, is the right springhead and fountain of
that moral Philosophy and doctrine. This knowledge therefore is very
profitable and necessary, to the end that by it we may know the original and
beginning of all virtues and vices, of their whole generation, and their
sundry kinds. For if we be well instructed in all the parts and powers of
the soul, we know the causes of these actions: we know how the mind judges,
how the will chooses and commands, as we have already spoken. And thus we
see, that there are most sure and certain principles of knowledge, which shine
in the mind as it were a light, which are the rules whereby the soul squareth
out her actions, and which discern between truth and falsehood, good and
evil, to the end that all the actions thereof might agree with these rules,
which are the beams of heavenly wisdom in our selves. For it is an order
which God has so ordained and established. Why the affections are given to the
soul.
And forasmuch as the soul was to dwell in the body, God gave unto it this
natural power of the affections, that it might be wakened and stirred up by
them as it were with pricks, thereby to be kept from idleness, and from being
lulled asleep and oppressed with the heaviness of the body, and so neglect all
care of good things, and of that which is very expedient and profitable for it
self. For this cause the soul has her affections of which some serve for
spurs to prick her hither and thither, and as often as need requires:
others serve for a bridle to keep her back and to stay her from rushing unto
evil, and from following those things that are hurtful for her. And indeed we
stand in need of such spurtes and bridles: but herein we err greatly in that
we know not how to keep a moderation between these twain. For because we
make these spurs too sharp, and prick the horse too much which we have to
guide, the bridle on the other side is two grievous unto him, so that he
lifts up and girdeth forward over furiously. And this comes to pass
because we do not content our selves with that which is requisite for the
succouring of our natural necessities, but we add there unto infinite
superfluities. For upon some light necessity that might soon be dispatched,
we torment our selves a great deal more then need is, because we persuade
our selves that our necessities are greater then they be, and so seek after
more remedies and helps then is requisite. Of this we have daily experience in
that care which we take for things necessary for this life, which is the
cause that we burn continually with insatiable covetousness, which is such a
marvelous spur unto us, that we take very little rest for it. For if we
would be contented with enough, it would not put us to that torment, which
we daily suffer. The affections compared to the winds.
But nothing suffices us: and therefore the affections are in our soul, as
the winds upon the sea. For some winds are very small, and move the water
but a little: others are more vehement, and raise up certain waves: and some
again are so tempestuous, and make such horrible storms and gustes, whereby
the Sea is so moved, that sea and sand and fish and all seem to be turned
topsie toruie. The like may be said of the motions of the soul. For some are
so light, that they seem to be nothing else but small beginnings of moving.
There are others stronger which move it somewhat more. And some also are so
violent, that they altogether trouble the soul, even in such a vehement
manner, that they drive her from her seat of judgment. Therefore these two
first kinds of motions are properly called affections, and the other that are
so violent are termed Commotions and Perturbations. Of commotions and
perturbations.
For they bring a kind of blindness with them, which is the cause that
judgment and reason see never a whit. Whereupon it follows, seeing neither
Reason nor Judgment bear any more rule, that the soul is as if she had no
more power over her self, but were subject to the jurisdiction of some other.
The Grecians term such affections with a word that signifies as much as if
we should say passions. And in deed we commonly say, that a man is
passionate, when he is tormented by such violent affections. For as the whole
body suffers when it is moved, or thrust too and fro, and stricken on
every side: so is it with the soul beeng violently moved every way. And as
the moving is more or less moderate, so she suffers more or less: and if
the motion be very violent, confusion follows thereupon. Now for the
sequel of this speech, let us consider how the affections are more or less
moderate, according to the disposition of the judgment: and what is the spring
and original of so many sundry affections, as we see in men. It belongs then
to thee, ARAM, to handle this matter.

That according to the dispposition of the judgment, the affections are more
or less moderate or immoderate: of the cause of all the motions of the soul
and heart: of the variety of affections: of the generation: nature and kinds
of them. Chap. 43.
ARAM. Whatsoever we do or wish for, we do or desire it for some Good,
whether that which we judge to be good be so in truth, or in opinion only.
And therein we resemble God our Creator, who is not only good, but also
goodness it self, even the perfection of all Good Wherefore if we desire to
know what is the true Good, we must understand, that there is but one only
true Good, even the same, by participation of which we are first made good, and
then of good, most happy. For we cannot be happy and blessed, which is the end
we all look for, but we must first become good. For as there is no true
felicity and blessedness but in Good, being th source and fountain, yea the
perfection of all happiness and contentation, so also there is no felicity nor
bless dues but in goodness, which is as proper to God as his very divinity:
because that as he cannot be God except he be good, so he cannot be good with
that goodness that is in him, but he must be God. And as he is the essence of
all essences, so he is the essential Good, and the essential Goodness of al
Goods and of al Goodnesses. But although our nature does of it self always
tend to that which is Good, as we have showed in the handling of the chief
powers of the soul, Understanding, and Will, nevertheless we differ much, nay
we are clean contrary to God, when we come to the election of Good, because
of the bad judgment we have, by reason of the darkness of ignorance wherewith
our minds are blinded.

Hereof it comes, that the more the judgment is corrupted, infected, and
deeper plunged in the flesh, How (...) the judgment can prevail over the
affections.
the more evil and carnal are the affections, the more in number and the more
violent: yea such as do not only trouble and pervert the internal senses of
the soul, but the external senses also of the body. This we may observe in
them that are carried away with love, who think oftentimes, and are verily
persuaded, that they see and hear those things, which indeed are nothing so.
Contrariwise, the purer the judgment is, and the higher it is lifted up from
the flesh and from the earth, the fewe^ and lighter are the affections which
trouble and molest it. For then it takes greater heed and marketh what truth
or what falsehood, what good or what evil there is in all things. Whereupon
it comes to pass, that the judgment is not so often nor so easily moved.
And when it is moved, it is not so violent nor headie, but more mature and
moderate. The original of violent motion^ in the soul.
For all great, violent, and turbulent motions proceed of ignorance and
inconsiderateness, or through a false persuasion, which makes us to think,
that the Good or Evil is greater then indeed it is. And this comes for want
of experience, which being as it were a dark cloud and mist before the eyes
of our mind, do greatly trouble it: insomuch that we aim not at that
certain Good, after which we ought to seek, but contrariwise we propounde to
our selves many sorts of Goods, with many and sundry ends and means to
attain unto them, which we change and rechange from hour to hour, very
inconstantly, according to places, times and occasions, whereby it is evident
that there is no stayednesse in us. Besides all this, there is another great
mischief, namely that we have not that prudence which beasts have by
natural instinct only without reason or judgment, whereby to know how we
may keep our selves from those tempests, which our affections may move in us.
For when beasts perceive any tempest coming, they suddenly withdraw
themselves, and seek for means to avoid it. A similitude showing the
perilous motions of of the soul.
And they that sail on the Sea foreseeing the tempestuous storms which
threaten them, provide thereafter in good time, leaft they should be carried
away therewith. For otherwise they bring themselves within the compass of this
danger, that afterward they cannot be Masters of their ship, neither arrive
at their desired haven, but rather hazard the breaking of their ship against
some rock, or of sticking fast in some sand, or of being swallowed up and
overwhelmed with some whitlewindes and tempests. The like may be said of the
motions of the soul made by affections. For there are not so many sorts of
winds, whirlewindes, or tempests in the Sea, as there is variety of motions
that come from the affections in our hearts. Therefore we ought to be very
careful, that when we see and perceive any beginnings in our souls, we
straightwayes give not our selves over into the power and swinge of our
affections. But we are so far from looking to this, that we throw our
selves into the midst of the tempest, that it may carry us, not whether we
would, but whether that will. For seeing we enterprise our affairs, not by
the appointment and decree of an upright judgment directed by reason, but at
the judgment and lust of our corrupt and crooked nature, we are so much
moved as our nature has power. For natural actions are not bounded by our
will, but e^tende themselves as far^e as the power and virtue thereof is able
to permit. But it is clean contrary with a prudent and wise man. The
effects of a prudent and wise man.
For he is not deceived in the election and choice of that which is good,
because he chooses with good judgment, and propounds not to himself many
uncertain Goods, but one only, which is the true and certain Good. Like
wise he chooses not many ways and means to come unto it, but a few that are
well sifted out and infallible: besides, he is not governed by his affairs
and affections, but governs them, neither gives himself over into their
power, but abides always in his own: insomuch that if any affection
begins to move by virtue of his natural inclination, he presently stays
it, compelling it to give place and to obey right judgment. Thus much
generally of the nature of affections: now it remains, that we should say
something of the number and variety of them. Surely it is very difficult, yea
impossible to set down a certain number of an infinite thing: Of the variety
of affections.
although indeed the number of the affections is not infinite by nature, but
only in regard of us, that cannot comprehend them all. But we will reckon up
the chiefest of them, which are the fountain of the rest.

Here then we have first to note, The cause of all motions in the ^oule
that all motions of the soul are in regard either of some good which they
seek, or of some evil which they would avoid, because it is contrary to
that good. Therefore every motion of it self tends always to that which is
good, or withdraws it self from evil, or else se^teth it self against it,
as we have already heard in the handling of Will. Now every good, and every
evil, is either present, or to come, or past, either possible or impossible.
And as we take the absence of evil for a good, so we judge the absence of
good to be an evil. For this cause the Divines make two kinds of ^ayne or
punishment, Two kinds of punishments.
whereof the first is the pain of loss and damage, and the other is the pain
of sense and feeling. By the first they understand that pain which a man has
because he wants some good that he should and would have. For men account
it damage, to loose that profit, which they ought to have. By the second they
understand a pain which is felt, not only when some good is wanting, which a
man should or would have, but when some evil is present, that is contrary to
this good, which men fe^le by effect. Therefore they say that the pain of the
loss and damage, is the privation of the joys of Paradise. For although there
were no torments of ^ell for the wicked, but only a privation of that eternal
life and happiness, for the which man was created of GOD, yet were this no
small punishment to be deprived thereof. But there is a great deal more, when
the wicked are not only deprived of a blessed life, but besides that are
detained in perpetual torments, as a malefactor that does not only want all
good company, but is withal kept in perpetual prison and torture. But let us
proceed with our matter.

When any good is propounded, Of the generation, nature and kinds of the
af^ections.
so soon as ever the soul and mind knows it, it is well liked of. And this
liking or delight is as it were a little pleasant wind of motion in the heart,
which begins to arise and to follow after this good. Now when this
pleasure and liking is confirmed and waxes strong, it is turned into love. And
the motion of that present Good, which we have already gotten is called joy:
and the motion of some Good to come is called Desire, which is enclosed within
the bounds of love. If the matter be of some evil, it is called offense,
because the soul is offended thereby: and therefore she is displeased therewith
and disl^keth it, whereas she is well pleased with Good. If this displeasure
or dislike be confirmed, it is turned into hatred. And as grief is for some
present evil, so is fear of some evil ^o come. The motion against a present
evil, is anger, envy, indignation* and against an evil to come, is confidence
and boldness. Now all these affections have others under them. For favor,
reverence, and mercy are comprised under love, delight under joy, hope under
desire, and desire under grief. As for pride, it is a monster compounded of
diverse affections, How the affections are bred or brideled one of another.
as of joy, of desire, and of boldness. And as the affections are quickly
bredde one of an other, so some of them are brideled and restrained by others.
For the first, envy, hat^ed and anger spring of love. For they are motions of
the heart that loves, against him that hates or hurts her who is de^re or
beloved. And desire rises of revenge* and the joy that comes thereby,
proceed from anger and malice. If a man love any thing, he wishes it would
come, and hops also that he shall enjoy it: and contrariwise, he fears
that it will not come to pass. If it come to pass, he rejoices. If it come
not to pass when he thinks it will, or when he expects it, he is
grieved. In like manner, great joy is lessened through grief, and envy through
mercy* or through fear. And one grief alters another* when it is greater:
and fear makes grief to be forgotten, and causes the lame to run. To be
short, these sundry motions of affections are like to stormy waves and
billows, which being driven one of another, do either augment, or diminish,
or wholly oppress one another. Goodly similitudes*
Wherefore the like happens in the motion of our affections, that comes to
pass in a sedition and civil dissension, in which no man considers who is
the worthier person to obey and follow him, but who is the stronger and most
mighty. So in the fight of the affections there is no respect had to that which
is most just, but only to that which is strongest and most violent, and which
has gotten such power over the soul that it has wholly subdued her to it
self: which thing we ought to stand in great fear of. But whatsoever
affections are in us, there is always some grief or some joy joined with
them. Therefore following our matter, it shall be good for us to consider
particularly of the nature of these two contrary motions, of which, joy serves
greatly for the preservation of life, but grief dries up and consumes the
heart, even unto the death of it, as we shall now learn of ACHITOB.

That Joy, or Grief are always joined to the affections: and what Joy and
Grief are properly. Chap. 44.
ACHITOB. The knowledge of the Affections of the heart and soul is very
necessary for every one, because they are very evil and dangerous diseases in
the soul, but yet being known they may be cured more easily. This cause has
moved us, after we have spoken of the heart and of the natural motion
thereof, and of the use it has in this life of the body, to enter into the
consideration of a second motion it has, which serves not only for this
corporal life, but also for that spiritual life, in regard of which it was
chiefly given, and of which we said, that there was as it were an image and
representation thereof in the first motion. The first motion of the heart is an
image of the second.
Now we shall better understand this by the subject of this discourse
propounded unto us, being handled particularly as we intend to do. For as by
the first natural motion of the heart, it receives such refreshing as is
necessary for the sending of life unto the whole body, and for the maintenance
and preservation of the same, as also for the expelling and driving out of all
such things as might hurt and stifle it: even so is it in this second motion,
as far as we can conceive of the nature of it. For seeing God has appointed
joy as a means to preserve life, he has likewise put this affection in the
heart, whereby it is as it were enlarged to receive within it self, and to
embrace all Good that is offered unto it: as also it restrains and shuts
it self up through grief which is contrary thereunto.

Moreover we shall find, that there is no affection in us, which is not
intermingled with some grief or else with some joy. Grief or Joy in all the
affections.
For seeing the heart is the proper seat and instrument of all the affections,
when it is as it were stricken and beaten with some unpleasant thing that is
offered unto it, then does it retire, close up it self and feel grief, as
if it had received a wound, then does it fly from the thing it likes not.
Yea the heart does always either enlarge or shut up it self according to
those affections that are within it, the causes of which are in it own nature,
God having so disposed and willed the same, for the reasons which we have
already touched. For if the heart be joyful, the joy that it has, does bring
so great pleasure unto it, that thereby it is opened and enlarged, as if it
would receive, embrace, and lay hold upon that thing which rejoices it, and
brings unto it that pleasure, which it has in this joy. Now because there
is joy in love and hope, the blood and spirits are gently and mildely
dispersed by their moouings, by reason of the rejoicing at the Good that is
present, or that is expected, as if it were already present. And forasmuch as
such motions are made by the enlarging of the heart, whereby we embrace the
thing offered unto us, Joy appears in the face.
the face also appears smiling, cheerful, and ruddy. For a man may easily
judge, that the object presented to the heart, moves that power whereby it is
stirred up, because that before the heart does move it self, it must know the
thing that offers occasion unto it to be moved, either with joy or grief, or
some such like affection. For as we have learned already, the outward senses
do first perceive the things that are offered unto them, and then they present
them unto the common sense, which presently by a singular providence of God
sends them to all the other senses, and to al those powers that are in the
sundry parts of the soul and body. This done, if there be matter of joy, the
heart being stricken with that which is acceptable unto it, enlarges it self,
and being thus gently enlarged, as it were to embrace the same, it disperseth
much natural heat with the blood, besides great quantity of spirits, of
which it sends a good portion to the face, if the joy be so great that it
moves a man to hearty laughter. The effects of laughter in the face.
For the face it self is in some sort blown up and enlarged: the forehead is
made clear and smoothe, the eyes glister and shine, the cheeks become ruddy,
and the lips gather in themselves. In a word, the heart does so enlarge it
self, that it is represented in the face, as it were in a glass, or in an
image framed to express the joy and gladness which it has.

Moreover, experience teaches us sufficiently, what difference there is
between a cheerful and a sad countenance. Therefore when we love one, we
embrace him, as if we would join him to our selves, and put him into our
bosom and heart, as some dear and very precious thing. Which we see chiefly
in mothers, when they hold their little infants between their arms, and
embrace them with great affection of heart. For this cause Saint Paul being
desirous to let the Corinthians understand what good will he bare them, how
loving, ready and cheerful his affection was toward them, what joy he
received thereby, as himself speaking plainly does with his mouth give full
testimony of his heart, 2. Cor. 6. 11, 12
writes thus unto them, O Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you: our heart
is made large: you are not kept strait in us. And then complaining of them
that their heart was not so bent toward him, he says: But ye are kept
strait in your own bowels. And here we may note, What is meant by bowels in
the Scripture.
that by this word Bowels is meant generally all the internal members and
parts of man, especially the heart, and those that are next unto it. Now
because the heart is the seat of the affections, and the other members near
unto it serve for his use, therefore the bowels are taken in the holy
Scriptures for all the motions of the heart, and for all the affections of men
that proceed from it, but chiefly for love, also for joy, pity and compassion,
which have their beginning from love, whose nature is to open the heart: which
in stead of opening shuts up it self against those that are not loved, or
that a man hates. Therefore as love or hatred is great or small, hot or cold,
so does the heart open or close it self. Hereof it is said in the history of
the two women that stood before Salomons judgment seat about their two
children, 1. King. 3. 26.
whereof the one was dead and the other alive, that the bowels of the true
mother were moved toward her child. And Saint Paul exhorting the Colossians
to charity and compassion, Col. 3. 12, 13, 14. The true works of a Christian.
says, Now therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on the
bowels of mercy (that is to say of tender affection) kindness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long suffering: forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, if any man have a quarrel to another: even as Christ forgave you, so
do ye. And above all these things put on love, which is the bond of
perfectness: and let the peace of God (namely that which God has established
among his) rule in your hearts, to the which ye are called in one body, and be
gracious, or amiable. We see here what virtues accompany these bowels of mercy,
of which he spoke in the beginning, as in deed al th^se virtues and heavenly
gifts are so knit together, that they cannot be separated one from an other.
And Saint John speaking of that liberality and love, which ought to be among
Christians, says, Whosoever has this worlds good, 1. Ioh. 3. 17, 18.
and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his bowels from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? Then he adds, Let us not love in word,
neither in tongue only, but in work and in truth. And to this purpose Esaias
says, Isay 58. 10.
If thou power out thy soul to the hungry, and refresh the troubled soul,
then shall thy light spring out in the darkness, and thy darkness shall be as
the noonday. All which places agree very well to that which we have touched
concerning the motion of the heart, whereby it is either opened or closed up,
as the affections are disposed that move it. But let us consider more narrowly
the nature of these affections of joy and sorrow, and what difference is
between them, seeing we have taken them for the ground of our speech. What joy
is.
For the first, let us know, that joy is properly a motion or an affection of
the heart, whereby it takes pleasure and stays it self in that Good, which
is offered unto it: or if we had rather thus, it is a motion of the soul,
proceeding from the judgment of some Good, which is already present, or
certainly near at hand. And therefore when the heart is enlarged therewith,
not only laughter is bred, but all the body also leapeth, when the joy is so
great that the breast cannot contain nor keep in the heart. But when the joy
is moderate, it purges the blood by heat, it confirms health, and brings
with it a lively and vigorous heat, which is very wholesome and acceptable to
the heart. True it is, that the heart and will often deceive themselves in the
choice and election of that which is Good: whether it be that following reason
and judgment corrupted, How the heart chooses evil for good.
which should show what is Good, they embrace their error: or whether it be
that Will being corrupted of it self through sin, lets loose the bridle
against the judgment of reason, and so suffers her self to be carried
headlong by her evil affections, in following some false show of good.
Whereupon it commonly comes to pass, that in stead of joy which the heart
should receive of Good, unto which the will tends naturally, it receives
great sorrow and grief after knowledge taken of the fault. This is the cause
why we are so often admonished by the spirit of God, to renounce our own
sense, reason, prudence, and wisdom, and to submit our selves wholly to the
counsel and wisdom of God, and to judge of good and of evil, of the true
and false Goods according to his judgment, and not according to our own: as
also to renounce our own desires to follow his will. As for grief or sorrow,
we may judge of this affection by the contrary, which is joy, What sorrow is.
namely, that it is a motion and an affection of the heart, whereby it is
restrained and pressed either with some present evil, or with some that is in
a manner present: which displeases the heart as if it had received some
grievous wound. Therefore it trembles and languisheth, as a sick body, who
drying up with grief by little and little, in the end dicth, except he have
some remedy against his sickness. For the like happens to the heart of man
through grief as long as it is within it, insomuch that it never forsakes it,
until it has quite dried up and consumed the same. And therefore as there is
pleasure and rest in joy, so in sorrow there is dolor and torment. For it
ingendreth melancholy, Of melancholy.
and melancholy ingendreth it, and increases it more, so that we often see
melancholy men very sad, although no harm has befallen them, neither can
they give any reason of their heaviness. Moreover, this black melancholy humor
is of this nature, that it will make the spirit and mind darkish, whereby it
grows to be blockish, and the heart loses all his cheerefulnes. And because
the brain is cooled thereby, it waxes very heavy and drowsy. Now when grief
is in great measure, The effect of sorrow.
it brings withal a kind of loathing and tediousnes, which causes a man to
hate and to be weary of all things, even of the light and of a man's self, so
that he shall take pleasure in nothing but in his melancholy, in feeding
himself therewithal, in plunging himself deeper into it, and in refusing of
all joy and consolation. To conclude, some grow so far as to hate
themselves, and so fall to despair, yea many kill and destroy themselves. And
as the heart by enlarging it self with joy appears in the countenance, so
does it also in sorrow and grief. For as in sorrow the heart dries up and
gathers it self in, so it causes the face, which is the image of it, to
retire and draw back, yea it depriueth the face of all color, and causes it
to fall away. Briefly, it marreth all health, and has for continual
companions, sighs, plaints, groans, tears, and weeping, and oftentimes
gnashing of teeth, as it is written of the damned, because of that sorrow and
indignation in which they are, by reason of the torments which they suffer. It
is true that the most of these things serve as a remedy against sorrow. For
howsoever grief shuts up the heart as we have said, yet by groaning, sighing
and weeping the heart does in some sort open it self, as if it would come
forth to breathe, least being wholly shut up with sorrow it should be
stifled. Again, tears are given unto us to testify our grief and to
manifest it to others, that we may move them to have pity and compassion on
us, and to help and succor us. They serve us further to declare what
compassion we have of other men's sorrow and grief, A commendable use of
tears.
which use is very necessary for us to get and preserve friendship one toward
an other, and for our mutual comfort and consolation. For we are greatly
comforted, when we see any take pity and compassion of us. Wherefore when we
can not otherwise solace them that are grieved, but only by declaring that we
are sorrowful for their heaviness, and for those euilles which they suffer,
yet does that affoorde great consolation. And although it seems an easy
matter to give this comfort, yet is it harder then many think it is. For
before we can find this in us, we must first have love in our hearts, which
causes us to open our bowels, and moves us to compassion toward our like,
that we may weep with them that weep, as we must rejoice also with them that
rejoice according as Saint Paul exhorts us thereunto. Romans 12. 15.
For by this means we testify that union and conjunction which we have one
with an other, as members of one and the same body, and as if we felt in our
selves all that good and evil which others feel. Now because in our
definition of these affections of joy and grief, we made two sorts of those
that men feel in their hearts, namely, either of that good and evil which is
present, or if that which they look for, we must consider more particularly
of these things, and see first, why God has put these affections in the soul,
and what is true and present joy, as also what that other kind of joy is, which
has regard to that which is to come, which is properly called Hope. Now let us
hear thee, ASER, upon this matter.

Of the causes why God has placed these affections of Joy and Sorrow in the
heart: of true and false Joy, and of good and badde Hope. Chap. 45.
ASER. Men have commonly sharp wits to know vain, earthly and carnal
things: but as for heavenly, true and eternal things, they are able for the
most part to understand nothing. So that we may compare the eyes of their
soul to the eyes of an Owl, A comparison.
which sees clearly by night, but when the sun is risen, sees never a
whit. Even so man has some knowledge of the troublesome things of this world,
but his sight cannot pierce unto the celestial and divine light. Therefore it
falls out often, that being beguiled by his own sense and reason, insteade
of Good and Joy, he chooses and follows after that which is evil and full
of grief. For when the affection of the heart, which naturally desires Good
and seeks after Joy, is missed and deceived by humane reason, it easily
embraces evil in place of Good, and that under some vain show of good,
which seems to be in that evil thing it chooses. And although at the first
the heart feels not that which happens unto it, yet has it leisure enough
after to complain of the torment, which is always equal both for age and
time, to the fault committed, and to the abuse of those gifts and graces which
God has placed in the nature of the soul.

Forasmuch then as the heart is the beginning of life, we may well know, that
God has not without good cause placed therein such vehement affections of joy
and grief, which serve either to preserve or to destroy it, and have for their
companions hope and fear, as we will declare hereafter. For by these
affections God would give us pricks and solicitours, to cause us to think
seriously of that lesson, which David gives us, when he says, Taste ye and
see how gracious the Lord is: Psa. 34. 8, 9, 10.
blessed is the man that trusts in him. Fear the Lord ye his Saints: for
nothing wants to them that fear him. The Lions do lack and suffer hunger,
but they which seek the Lord shall want nothing that is good. What man is he
that desires life, and loves long days for to see good? Keep thy tongue
from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. Eschew evil and do good,
seek peace and follow after it. The Prophet shows here plainly, wherein
true life and felicity consists: and the reason thereof he sets down
afterward, namely, that the Lord looks both upon the good and bad, and that
as he preserves the good, so he rooteth out the remembrance of the wicked
from off the earth. Verse. 19. 21. 22.
Therefore he says afterward, Great are the troubles of the righteous, but
the Lord delivers him out of all. Malice shall slay the wicked, and they
that hate the righteous shall perish. The Lord redeemeth the souls of his
servants, and none that trust in him shall perish. Of the joy of the godly.
Wherefore as the children of God that are partakers of his promises, can not
be without great joy in their hearts, which feeds and preserves them, and
causes them to live happily, through the testimony and taste which they have
of the sweetness, goodness and favor of God toward them: so contrariwise,
perpetual sorrow dwells in the heart of the wicked, who cannot have that joy
in them, because they want that which should bring it unto them. For howsoever
it seems that there is no joy in the world but theirs, yet they never have
any true joy, neither indeed can have. For they seek not for it, neither do
they know what it is. And therefore in stead of seeking it in God in whom
only it rests, they seek it in creatures, and in all kind of vanity, and
yet find nothing but in offending the majesty of God. For this cause Jesus
Christ has long since pronounced their sentence saying, Lu^e. 6. 21. matthew. 5.
4. Esaias 61. 3.
Wobe to you that laugh, for ye shall weep. Contrariwise, ye that weep are
happy, for ye shall laugh. Blessed are they that mourn: that is to say, that
feel their miseries, and seek for joy and consolation in God: for they shall
be comforted. After speaking to his disciples, he says, Verily, verily I say
unto you that ye shall weeepe and lament, Ioh. 16. 20, 21.
and the world shall rejoice: ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy. And then he compares their sorrow and their joy to that which a
woman with child has, which is pained so long as she is in travail, but
when she sees it borne, she receives joy, and soon forgets her anguish.
Whereby the word of God teaches us, that the grief of good men shall be
turned into double joy, that their sorrow shall be short, and their felicity of
long continuance. For there is one joy even in being delivered from evil,
although it be not so great as when any Good happens unto us. But the joy is
doubled, when besides this deliverance, there comes unto us some joy which we
had not, which is procured unto us by means of that pain and evil which we
suffered. Therefore our Savior says further to this effect, Ye are now in
sorrow: but I will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy
shall no man take from you. If this joy can not be taken away, it is eternal,
so that death it self can not abolish it. Whereupon it follows, that it
remains yet after death, and that there is an other life after this in which
we shall have fullness of joy. Therefore we may well call it our own, seeing
it always continues with us. For if it were not so, Jesus Christ who is the
truth it self should not be true. But as he cannot lie, so we may assure
our selves of his promise. For seeing it is grounded on him, and upon his
grace, resurrection, and immortal life, we may be as certainly persuaded of
it, as we are assured of his resurrection, and of his eternal joy and life,
wherein he lives and reigns for evermore. Wherefore all those to whom it
is promised, and that are assured of the fruition thereof by faith in him, have
just occasion to live in great joy So that Saint Paul not without good cause
says, Philip. 44.
Rejoice always in the Lord, and again I say rejoice. But of the joy of
carnal men we must say as Solomon writes, Eccles. 7. 4, 6. Prou. 6. 25.
That it is better to go to the house of mourning, then to the house of
feasting. And that there is away that seems right to a man, but the issue
thereof is the way of death: yea, in laughter, the heart shall be grieved, and
the end of joy is sorrow. The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning,
but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth. For they think of nothing
but of iollitie, whereas wise men meditate on the miseries of this world.
Therefore we may know how greatly Epicures, How worldlings deceive themselves.
and such as give themselves to pleasures and dissoluteness beguile
themselves. For they think there is no joy nor pleasure but in their life, and
that there is no life more sad or melancholy, then that of the children and
servants of God. But it is clean contrary. For they that fear and honor GOD,
have more joy in their heart in the midst of their greatest sorrows, by
reason of that sense and feeling engraven in them of heavenly and eternal joy,
which thy certainly expect and begin already to taste here. then all
worldlings and carnal men can have in the greatest triumphs of al their
pleasures. Now, as there are two kinds of joy in the hear of men, so are there
also of sorrows. For we do not only feel joy for some Good, or sorrow for some
evil, which we now taste of, but also for that which we attend and look for.
Concerning this latter kind of joy, What hope is.
it is properly called Hope, which is an affection and motion of the heart,
whereby it wishes some Good to come, and prepares to open it self and to
receive it. Therefore we said before, that Hope was comprehended under
desire, unto which it gives form and being. For Hope is a desire joined with
confidence, that the Good which we wish for will come to pass. Therefore the
motions of Joy and Hope are very like, seeing Hope is always mingled with Joy,
neither is there any difference but in the time, Difference between joy and
hope.
because the one is of a present Good, and the other of that which is looked
for. In the mean time Hope has no evidence or science, but is grounded only
upon conjecture of opinion, or likelihoode and probability, or possibility.
And yet there is nothing so light, or so small, or strange, unto which the
heart will not easily join it self and take hold of it, when it seeks for
helps and proppes to ground and stay it self upon. Nevertheless there is great
difference between having already, and hoping for a thing, namely, in respect
of men, and of hope, which has no other grounds, then those of which I now
made mention. But when the expectation is grounded upon God and his promises,
Of the true and certain hope.
it is as sure of that which it expects, as if it did already possess it:
which is very comfortable to a man, in respect of that which happens to them,
who can have no certain hope or expectation of Good. For although there be
hope, yet if it be not grounded upon God, it can bring no certain joy, or of
any long continuance. Besides, when such a one shall fail of his hope, his
grief will be doubled. Wherefore they that build not their hope upon the word
of God, can have no true and certain hope, but they feed themselves only with
their fantasies, as they that dream they find great riches, which vanish away
when they awake. Such is the hope of the wicked, and of al worldly and carnal
men. Nevertheless the persuasion of hope, The profit and necessity of hope
which holds us up with the expectation of better things, is very pleasant
and necessary for the life of man, in the midst of so many miseries, of so many
sharp and almost intolerable pains and travails which accompany them. So
that it brings great comfort to men, and is in stead of sauce unto them,
without which they would find al things to be not only without taste, but also
of a very bitter and unpleasant taste. Therefore has the providence of God
provided a remedy for this, namely, that hope should breed of very light causes,
and should lean and stay it self easily upon them: as if it self were very
light, or very hooked and gluish, being ready to take hold of, and to retain
whatsoever it meets withal, or can lay hands upon, to ground and lean
thereon.

Now if men find so great comfort in hope such as it is, and being laid upon
so weak a foundation, it is easy to judge, what joy the faithful receive by
that most certain hope of eternal life, and of all the good things that God
has promised them: in regard whereof S. Paul says, Ephesians. 4. 4.
There is one body and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your
vocation. Romans 5. 3, 4, 5.
It is not then without cause that he says in another place, We rejoice in
tribulations, knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed: because the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us:
Psalm. 25. 3.
as if he should say, that they which stay themselves upon such a hope, shall
never be ashamed nor deceived. For the expectation thereof is never frustrated,
but it has always a good and a happy issue. For when we perceive that we are
deceived of our hope, we are ashamed and confounded. But this never happens to
true hope, which proceeds of a sound faith in Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 2.
by means whereof we have access through him unto this grace wherein we
stand, and rejoice under the hope of the glory of God, as Saint Paul said
alitle before. Therefore he exhorts christians to rejoice in hope, Romans 12.
12. and 15. 13.
and calls God the God of Hope, praying that he would fill the Romans with all
joy and peace in believing, that they may abound in hope through the power of
the holy ghost. And in the epistle to the Hebrews, Hebr. 6. 19.
hope is compared to a sure and steadfast ancre of the soul. For this cause God
is so often called in the holy Scriptures the hope and fortress of his people
and of his. Ier. 17. 7, 13, 17. psalm. 65. 5. and 91. 2, 9. psalm. 31, 1. and 71.
Psalm. 118. 8, 9.
It is written also, that they which hope in the Lord, do rejoice. For he that
hops in him shall be healed and preserved. Therefore it is not without cause,
that the spirit of God so often repeateth unto us this sentence, Blessed are
they that put their trust in the Lord: for they shall never be confounded. It is
better to hope in him then to put any confidence in Princes. But unfaithful and
wicked men can never be partakers of such a Good, because they have no such
hope. Prou. 10. 28. Job 8. 13, 14, 15
For it is written, The expectation of the just is gladness, but the hope of
the wicked shall perish. And again, The hope of the hypocrite shall perish,
his confidence shall be cut off, and his truct shall be as the house of a
spider. He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand, he shall hold
him fast by it, yet shall it not endure. But to prosecu^e our matter, now that
we have seen the hope of good men together with their joy, let us consider
what remains to the wicked of their vain and false joy, namely, Fear, which
is the second kind of sorrow mentioned by us. Tell us then, AMANA, what Fear
is, with the nature and effects thereof.

Of Fear, and of the nature and effects thereof toward the body, the mind,
and soul, and how it troubles them: of the true harness and armor against
Fear. Chap. 46.
AMANA. As wicked men can have no certain hope of any good they look for, so
they never have any true joy of any present good, because they always forsake
the true Good, and stay in that which is not Good but in their opinion and
fantasy, neither do they at any time ref^rre the end of good things unto
God, but look only upon the things themselves. Therefore it is never in their
power to rejoice in that joy which they account to be their true joy, but only
by offending God, as we heard before. Which is the cause why they seek after
nothing more then to hide themselves, The wick^d can not abide to speak or
hear of God.
and to depart from him as much as they can possible, so that they would never
hear any speech of him, but desire to bury the remembrance of him for ever,
because they can hear nothing spoken of him but as of their judge, neither
think of him, but he awakeneth their conscience, which they labor with might
and maine to rock asleep. Wherein they take a clean contrary course to that
which they ought to follow to obtain the true Good. For seeing God is the
sovereign Good of all creatures, what Good can they find that is greater,
wherein they can fully rejoice and satisfy themselves? Or what other Good dare
they promise to themselves to find without him, and when they have him for
their enemy? But they are like to drunken men, who cannot understand this
Divinity, until they have slept out their wine, and are awaked out of their
drunkenness. Then shall they know what is true and false Joy, what is good
and badde Hope, when their joy shall be turned into sorrow, their expectation
and hope into fear and terror, wherewith the wicked shall be continually
haunted, as the Spirit of God teaches us.

Now, as sorrow is a grief for some evil which a man presently feels,
shutting up the heart as unwilling to receive it: so fear is a sorrow, What
fear is.
which the heart conceiueth of some looked for evil, that may come unto it.
Therefore it restrains the heart also and closes it up, as being desirous to
avoid the evil. We see then that there is the same difference betwixt
sorrow and fear in respect of evil, that is between Joy and Hope in regard
of Good. So that we may well say, that Fear is not only a fantasy and
imagination of evil approaching, or a perturbation of the soul proceeding from
the opinion it has of some evil to come, but it is also a contraction and
closing up of the heart, which comes from that which every one judges to be
evil for himself, when he thinks it is at hand and will light upon him.
Therefore first of all it draws in and shuts up the heart, and so weakneth
the same. Whereupon nature being desirous to relieve and succor it, sends
heat unto it from the upper parts: and if that be not sufficient, she
draws away that heat also which is in the nether parts. How palenesse,
cold and shaking are b^ed in the body.
By which doing she suddenly calls back the blood and spirits unto the
heart, and then follows a general palenesse and cold in all the outward
parts, and chiefly in the face, with a shiuering throughout the whole body.
For seeing the first moving thereof is in the heart, the other always
follows: so that when the heart trembles, the whole body does so likewise.
Whereupon it follows, that by reason of the great beating and panting of the
heart, the tongue faltereth and the voice is interrupted. How death comes
through fear.
Yea it comes to pass sometimes, that present death follows a great and
sudden fear, because all the blood retiring to the heart choaketh it, and
utterly extinguisheth natural heat and the spirits, so that death must
needs ensue thereof. Therefore we cannot doubt but that fear has great power
over all the body, and over life it self. For this cause Esaias, after he had
denounced the judgment of God against the Babylonians, and the coming of the
Medes and Persians, by whom their city should be taken and themselves
slain, Esaias 13. 7, 8.
says thus: Therefore shall all hands be weakened, and all men's hearts shall
melt: which is as much to say, as that their hearts shall fail them for fear.
And therefore he adds, They shall be afraid: anguish and sorrow shall take
them, and they shall have pain, as a woman that trauaileth: every one shall be
amassed at his neighbor, and their faces shall be like flames of fire. A place
of Esaias expounded.
But here we will note what he means by these flames of fire. For if the face
wax pale through fear, as it falls out for the most part, it seems that
it cannot be enflamed, for then it would be red rather then pale. But we are to
know, that when nature will strengthen the heart, she sends unto it from all
parts, succors of heat and blood, to encourage it the more. Therefore they
that have but a little warm blood in the heart are naturally the greater
cowardes: The cause of cowardlines, and the sign of courage.
so that it is a better token of courage when the face is pale through fear,
then when it waxes read. For this cause Cato misliked that a child should
become pale in the face through shame, in stead of being red: and that a
soldier should look red in time of danger, in stead of being pale. For as it
is a token of impudency in a child not to blush for shame, so is it a sign of
cowardlinesse in a man of war to look read when he sees himself in any
danger. Therefore a pale countenance shows that the blood and natural heat
are gone to the heart to strengthen it: but when it is read, that argues that
the blood and heat are not much gone inward to strengthen the heart: whereupon
it is made more weak, and so the fear of it is greater and the trembling much
more. And because the blood and natural heat mount upward in stead of
descending, therefore does the face look red. Which argues want of courage
and a fainting heart: as it befell the Babylonians, whose hearts were
possessed with fear and terror at the coming of their enemies, because God
would give them over into their hander. We might also refer this redness
and inflammation of visage to the pains and griefs which they were to endure.
For when one is pressed with grief, his countenance is read and fiery:
because men are then as it were shut up in a fire.

And as the face is red through Fear, for the reasons set down by us: so if
the natural heat leave the heart and go downward, the fear is not only
increased, but it brings withal a looseness of the belly. Therefore it is
written in the Book of Job, where it is spoken of the fear that Liuiathan
brings upon men, Job 41. 16.
that the mighty tremble at his majesty, and purge themselves through his
moouings: that is, through fear of him. Hereupon a heathen Poet, when he
would note a fearful and dastardly fellow, says to this purpose, That his
heart was fallen into his heels. Effects of Fear in the soul.
Now if fear moves all the body in this sort, no doubt but it greatly
moves also the mind and the whole soul of man. For it so troubles the
mind, that it confounds all the thoughts thereof: as we may try by this,
that many times the least fancy of evil that enters into our brain, is
enough to trouble the mind very much. For as imagination and fancy bear
great sway over the affections, so they show what power they have, chiefly in
the affection of Fear. And surely among all living creatures, none has such a
confused fear, or is more amazed therewith then man is. Therefore we may well
say, that no misery is greater, no bondage more shameful, servile or vile,
then fear is. For it makes men very abiects, flatterers, and suspicious, and
so daunteth their courage, that it leaves them as it were half dead, yea,
causes them sometimes to despair utterly, so that they are as it were Images
destitute of counsel, not knowing which ways to help themselves. For this
cause the holy Scriptures make often mention of a heart that is powered out like
water for fear, Joshua 7. 5. Psalm. 22. 14. Ierem. 4. 9.
or that melts like wax. And in Jeremy it is said, In that day, says the
Lord, the heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of the Princes, and
the Priests shall be astonished, and the Prophets shall wonder. For truly if a
man be once possessed with fear, especially if he be inclined thereunto by
nature, but above all, if GOD terrify him, a man may well exhort him to
boldness and to take courage unto him, and allege all the reasons that can
be to strengthen him against Fear, but it will be to small purpose. Therefore
one says very well, that no harness can be found, which is able to
encourage fear and to make it hardy. For if any Armorers had the skill to make
such harness, they should want no customers. But only God is able to arm us
against this, because it is he that gives or takes away the heart of man,
that sends fear or boldness, as pleases him. For although he has sowed
the seeds of them both in the nature of the body and soul of man, with the
means also that lead thereunto, yet he has not subjected himself to all
those means, no more then he has to the whole order of nature: but has
always reserved in his power both Fear and faintness of heart, and
boldness and assurance, which are their contraries. The definitions of
assurance and boldness.
For assurance is a certain persuasion and trust, whereby we are confirmed in
danger against euilles that threaten us and come near us: and boldness is a
confidence, which pricketh forward the courage either to repulse euilles, or to
follow after good things, which are excellent and hard to obtain. Therefore
when GOD is minded to punish men, he takes away their hearts whom he will
destroy, causing them to tremble and to fly for fear: as it is written in
Joshua, where Rahab speaking to the spies of the Israelites that were sent to
Jericho, Joshua 2. 9.
uses these words: I know that the Lord has given you this land; for the
fear of you is fallen upon us, and all the inhabitants of the land faint
because of you. Contrariwise, our GOD heartneth and emboldeneth those by whom
he will overthrow others, and to whom he minds to grant victory.
Therefore it is written, Psalm. 53. 5.
that he will cause the fear of his servants to fall upon his enemies, that
the wicked and such as have not called upon GOD, shall fear where there is no
cause of fear, and shall tremble and fly for fear, although there be none
that persecute them. So that if we do desire to find a harness that will
arm our heart thoroughly against all fear, let us put on the armor of the true
fear of GOD, and of sound Faith in him. Psalm. 112. 1, 7, 8
For as the Prophet David says, Blessed is the man that fears the Lord:
the just shall live in assured hope: he shall never be moved, he shall not be
afraid of evil tidings, for his heart is fixed and believes in the Lord:
his heart is stablished, therefore he will not fear. For whosoever fears
God and walks in innocence, God is with him: and he that has God on his
side, what can he or ought he to fear? For when he is with us, who shall be
against us? May he not well say with David, Psalm 56. 3, 11. and 118. 6. prou.
14. 26.
When I was afraid, I trusted in thee. In God do I trust, I will not be
afraid what man can do unto me. In the fear of the Lord, (says the wise
man,) there is assured strength, and his children shall have hope. Therefore
Jesus Christ says to his Disciples, John 14. 1.
Let not your heart be troubled. And then he shows them the means, saying,
Ye believe in God, believe also in me. For nothing but faith in God through
Jesus Christ is able to give us this assurance. On the other side, if we be
not armed with the fear of GOD, and with true faith, that we may be certain
of his help and providence, and of his love toward us, there is nothing that
can assure us: but rather that which is written in the Law will befall us,
L^uit. 26. 36.
I will, says the Lord, send a faintness into their hearts in the land of
their enemies, and the sound of a leaf shaken shall chase them, and, They
shall flee as fleeing from a sword, and they shall fall, no man pursuing them.
And in an other place where mention is made of them that despise the Law of
GOD, and rebel against the Lord, it is said, The Lord shall give thee a
trembling heart, Deu. 28. 65, 66, 67.
and looking to return till thine eyes fall out, and a sorrowful mind, Thy
life shall hang before thee, thou shall fear both night and day, and shall
have none assurance of thy life. In the morning thou shall say, would God it
were evening, and at evening thou shall say, would God it were morning, for
the fear of thine heart which thou shall fear, and for the sight of thine
eyes, which thou shall see. Therefore when we see, that in many great and
dangerous affairs, the boldest and most courageous are oftentimes the greatest
cowardes, and most astonished and carried away with fear and terror, and even
many times without any great cause are amassed and void of counsel, whereas
contrariwise cowardes by nature grow to be most hardy in the midst of
dangers, thereby GOD shows very well, whether strength and courage come from
him or from men, God is the author of courage.
and who is to have the praise thereof. But now that we have seen the first
motions of the heart, in the affections of joy, of sorrow, of hope, and of
fear, and know that they have respect to good or evil, either present or to
come, let us learn in the next place, that as contemplation consists in the
rest of the Spirit after the discourse of reason and judgment, so after the
heart has the fruition of that Good which belongs unto it, it is still and
quiet, resting it self therein: which rest is called Delight or pleasure, of
which the order of our speech requires that thou should dilate, ARAM, at
this present.

Of the delight and pleasure that follows every joy, and of the moderation
that is required therein: of diverse degrees of pleasures, and how men abuse
them, especially those pleasures, which are received by the corporal senses.
Chap. 47.
ARAM. It is certain, that all the affections which God has placed in the
nature of man, were given unto him in regard of so many good things, which
were meet and convenient for his will to long after and to desire. For joy and
hope, which afford pleasure and consolation to the heart, were bestowed upon
him to be spurs and sollicitours to induce him to seek after God his
sovereign Good, Why God has given men affections.
in whom alone he may find all delight, rest and pleasure. As for sorrow and
fear, they are sure testimonies unto men of the judgment of God, and
executioners of his vengeance: to this end that the fear of evil, which may
come unto them, should keep them in awe, and that sorrow and grief for evil
which they have already committed, should be unto them both hangman and
punishment. It is true that these affections being natural in every one, bring
forth contrary effects both in the good and in the bad. For the children of God
never separate his power from his goodness, and the fear which they have of
him, is not joined with hatred, The diverse effects of fear in the godly and in
the wicked.
but with trust in his mercy, which moves them to be grieved for offending
him, and to love him, to seek him and to rejoice in him, and to have him in
singular honor and veneration. But the wicked who fear and tremble, like to
malefactors fearing their judge, hate and despite God, desiring nothing more
then to escape his hands, and to flee from him as far as they can. If they be
grieved, it is because they may not enjoy false joys, and unlawful pleasures.
Therefore that which is given them for Good, is turned by them into sin and
evil, and pleasure into pain and grief.

But here we must call to mind what we have spoken already concerning the
signification of this word Good, as it is commonly taken, not considering
whether it be true or false, but only according to that opinion which men have
of it. For there are many, whose fancy is sufficient to afford them as much
pleasure, as if indeed they enjoyed that Good, A fantastical Good.
which they think to have. We see many such fools in the world. For some are
Popes or Cardinals by fantasy: others Emperors or Kings and great Princes, or
otherwise very rich, or possessours of some such great Good. And yet such
fantastical fellows are better contented and pleased with that which they
think they have in their foolish imagination, then they that have them in
truth, unto whom commonly they serve for nothing but to torment them more.
Therefore I know not which of them I should esteem more foolish and
fantastical. Who are to be accounted wise men.
For none ought to be taken for truly wise men, and of ripe judgment, but
they who know that all things in the world and under the sun, are only
vanity, as Solomon shows in his book of the Preacher. Therefore he says
thus: Eccles. 2. 1.
I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with joy: therefore
take thou pleasure in pleasant things: and behold this also is vanity. I
said of laughter, thou art mad, and of joy, what is this that thou do? But
to go forward with our matter, let us consider what delight and pleasure is,
so far as men may enjoy it in this life. It is then a rest which the heart
takes in the enjoying of some Good that it likes: even as contemplation is
the rest of the spirit after the discourse of Reason and Judgment. Now we
are to note, that there is no delight and pleasure in any thing, Of delight and
pleasure what it is, and how it is received.
except there be some agreement between that part or power that receives
pleasure, and that which brings the same unto it. This agreement cannot be
without good proportion of the one with the other, whereby there is some
similitude and resemblance between them. For this cause also, the thing that
brings delight must not exceed too much, either in greatness, or in
smalnesse above the power which receives it, in regard of that part or
instrument whereby the pleasure is received.

Hereupon when we spoke of the eyes and ears, we showed that light was to
be dispensed to the eyes, and sound to the ears, in good measure and
moderation. For if the light be too great, the eyes cannot receive it:
insomuch that they will be hurt and offended, in stead of receiving delight.
On the other side if it be too little, it will not suffice them: and therefore
it must be between both. And as every man's sight is sharper and stronger, or
more dull and weaker, so must the light be dispensed according to that
measure. The like may be said of soundes in regard of the ears, and of all
other things in respect of those senses unto which they agree. And if this
moderation be requisite for the outward senses, it is no less necessary in
respect of the inward senses, and of all the powers of the soul. Therefore as
God is incomprehensible and infinite, so is he received with delight of that
part of the soul, which comes nearest unto his nature, and which is most
incomprehensible, most ample, and most infinite in regard of other parts, and
that is the Spirit and Understanding. On the other side, How God communicates
himself unto men.
because there is no proportion or agreement in greatness and infiniteness
between GOD and the Soul, she receives and comprehends him by such
means, whereby he may be applied unto her, and she made after a sort
capable of him. For if he should present himself unto her, such as he is in
his high and divine majesty, especially man being in this estate wherein he
is in this mortal life, she could not bear so high majesty, as being too
exceeding great for her. So that insteede of receiving pleasure, joy and
delight, she should not only be very much frighted, but even wholly
overwhelmed and swallowed up as a drop of water would be consumed being
thrown into a great fire: as we may judge by so many examples as are in the
holy Scriptures to this purpose. For when God manifested himself to the
Patriarchs, he never appeared unto them in the greatness of his majesty, but
took unto him always some shape, and used such means as were agreeable to
their nature. Therefore also it is very requisite, that GOD should descend
and apply himself unto our small capacity, to the end we may enjoy him and
his Goods, and take pleasure and delight in them. For this cause, he has not
only appointed the ministry of his word and Sacraments to show and
communicate himself unto us by them, applying himself unto our nature and
capacity, but has also manifested himself in flesh, in the person of his
son Jesus Christ, to become more like unto us, and to draw nearer unto us in
our own nature, to this end that we might enjoy him and all his benefits
the better, and receive more true and entire delight in them.

And thus much for this point of the agreement that ought to be between the
thing that delights, and that which receives pleasure. Next we are to note,
that a man may take pleasure by all those parts whereby he may know, as well
by the internal as the external senses, and by all the powers of the mind
and soul. Of the diverse degrees of pleasures according to every man's nature.
Whereupon it follows, that as every one is more or less addicted to any of
these parts, so he delights most in those pleasures, which he may receive
by that part unto which he is most given. Therefore we see that the baser and
more vile sort of people, and such as are most rude and ignorant, are more
moved by corporal and external things, which move the bodily senses, then
by spiritual and high things, that are more meet for the spirit, and wherein
it takes greater pleasures. But with prudent and wise men, and such as are
more spiritual, it is otherwise. So that as every ones nature is more noble
and excellent, or more vile and abject, and according to the nature of those
things wherein every one delights, so is the delight, either more noble and
excellent, or more base and contemptible, more pure and quiet, or more impure
and troublesome, of longer or of shorter continuance, and has more or fewer
pleasures, The delights of the bodily senses.
and those either more or less tedious. Now among those delights which a man
may take by the bodily senses, the basest and most abject of all, is that which
is received by the sense of touching. For as it is most earthy of all the
external senses, so are the pleasures that are taken by it. That delight which
is taken by the sense of tasting, is a little more honest and less
contemptible, and yet is it brutish enough. As for the delight that may be
received by the sense of smelling, it is very light, and nothing so pleasant,
as the irksomeness that comes of the contrary, is unpleasant. For a good
smell brings not so great pleasure, as an evil smell causes displeasure:
besides, that this sense of smelling is not so sharp in man as in beasts. And
concerning those pleasures, which a man may receive by the ears, they have
some more beauty and excellency in them. For the more they hold of the nature
of the air, they are so much the less earthy and brutish. And those which we
receive by the eyes, are yet more excellent then all the rest, because the eyes
are of the nature of the fire, which comes nearest to the celestial nature.
And thus much for those pleasures, which a man may receive by the corporal
senses, of which the noblest and best are baser and of less excellency then
the least of those, which we may receive by the basest parts and powers of the
soul. The delights of ye internal senses.
For, as much as the soul is more noble and more worthy then the body, so
much is the least thing in it greater and more magnificall, then that which is
most noble and most excellent in the body. And as there are diverse degrees of
pleasures according to the variety of the external senses, and according to
the difference that is betwixt them and the powers of the soul: so is it
between the powers of the soul, as some of them are more noble and more
divine then others. For those which appertain to the nourishing and generatiue
powers, are more corporal, earthy and brutish, then those that belong to the
vital parts and to the heart. And those that are proper to the spirit and
mind, are purest and best of all: among which, that delight that is in
contemplation is the chiefest, Co^templation is the greatest delight of the
soul.
as we may judge by that which we have already spoken. Wherefore if we would
consider well of all these degrees of delight and pleasure, and could judge
well of them, we should not be so deceived in them as commonly we are,
preferring the least before the greatest, the basest before the noblest, those
that are most earthy before them that are most heavenly, Of the abuse of
pleasures.
and those that fade soonest before them that continue longest. Besides, the
very enjoying of every one of them ought to suffice to make us know their
nature, and the difference between the one and the other, and how far one is
to be preferred before another. For how do we see men given over to those
pleasures wherein they delight, not only in eating and drinking, in dainty
morsels and delicate drinks, but also in other carnal pleasures that are more
earthy and vile, especially when they are excessive and unmeasurable, as they
are in whoredom? For those which we receive in eating and drinking, belong to
the sense of taste, which is brutish enough: but these others to the sense of
touching, which is a great deal more brutish We know by experience also, that
these senses are sooner wearied and tired with their pleasures, then any other,
and that such delights commonly bring with them more yrkesomnes and loathing,
then joy and pleasure: leaving many times behind them a long and shameful
repentance for pollutions received by them. The pleasures that belong to the
other senses, as they are of longer continuance, so they weary not a man so
quickly, especially those that delight the sight. Yea the baser and more vile
the pleasures are, the sooner do they loathe a man, Against the immoderate use
of pleasures.
as they know by experience that are given to whoredom. For how insatiable
soever they be, yet can they not but be glutted therewith: neither are they
able to continue their unruliness so long in that pleasure (howsoever they
want no goodwill) as in the pleasures that come by eating and drinking. Neither
can the greatest gluttons, drunkards, and dainty mouthed persons follow so
long together after the delights of their gluttony, drunkenness, and dainty
diet, as they may after those which they receive either in smelling, or in
hearing, or in seeing. As for the pains yt are to be taken in the obtaining and
using of these pleasures, the more earthy and brutish the delight is, the
greater labor is to be had about it: and the more excessiuely the pleasure is
used, the greater hurt comes thereby, as we daily see in gluttons,
drunkards, and whoremongers, by the testimony of those diseases which take
hold of them through their excess. Thus then we may learn by the use of
those pleasures, which are received by the bodily and outward senses, which of
them are to be preferred before others, with the agreement necessary therein,
and the moderation that always ought to be observed in them. But to go
forward with our matter, we are now to compare together the delights and
pleasures that are received by the spiritual and internal senses, and to
understand what difference there is between the use of the pleasures of the
spirit and of the body, and how the one drive away the other. Now let us
hear what ACHITOB will tell us of this point.

Of the comparison of pleasures received by the internal senses: and how men
descend by degrees from the best to the basest pleasures: of the difference
between the use of spiritual delights and corporal: and how the one chase
the other. Chap. 48.
ACHITOB. Experience daily teaches us, that we need but a little grief to
diminish a great pleasure, or otherwise to take it clean away, and to change
it into great displeasure, yea to turn a great joy into extreme sorrow and
sadness. But few there are that meditate and know the cause thereof. The cause
why a little grief is stronger in us the^ a great pleasure.
The truth is, we can think of no other cause, then of the corruption of our
nature, of the estate and disposition of our body, of the course of our age
and life, which decline continually and wax worse and worse. Therefore a small
grief finds greater strength within us to cause our heart to give back and
to close up it self, and wholly to cast us down, then a great joy and delight
is able to open and enlarge it, and to sustain and hold us up. For a little
force will throw down this shaking and reeling body, but there had need to
be a great deal of strength to underprop and stay it up firm and steadfast.
On the other side we can more easily want pleasures, then not feel their
contrary griefs. For we do not perceive so much the want of a good which we
have not, as the presence of an evil, which we suffer. For in the first, it
seems that we want nothing, but in the other the sense is afflicted, and the
sound estate and disposition thereof is clean taken away and overthrown.
Now if we desire to feel such griefs as little as we may, and to approach
as near as our nature will permit, to true delight and pleasures, we must
withdraw our selves from vile and abject things, and contemplate most high and
excellent things.

Now as we have learned by the former discourse, that those delights and
pleasures which are received by the chiefest senses that savor least of the
earth, are of longer continuance then the other, so we are to know, Of the
pleasures of fantasy.
that the pleasures of the fancy are more stable and firm then those which
come by the corporal senses. Hereof it is, that men are cloyed a great deal
sooner not only with the pleasures of eating and drinking and of other more
abject things, but also of sweet smelles, of music, of harmonicall soundes,
and of the beholding of goodly sights, then with those good that are in the
fancy and in opinion, whereby the mind is deceived, as namely the getting and
possessing of silver, of riches, of power, of honors, and of glory. For these
Goods are goods rather in opinion then in truth. But because fancy propounds
them unto her self for Goods, therefore she takes pleasure and delight in
them. Therefore the covetous man delights in his gold, silver, and riches:
and the ambitious man in his power, gloy and honors, which are the pleasures
of fancy: and with which she is not so soon wearied, as the body is with
corporal pleasures: but contrariwise, the more she has, the more her delight
increases, The pleasures of reason and of the mind.
and becomes insatiable. But the pleasures of reason, of the mind and of the
spirit, continue a great deal longer then they: because the spirit is not
weary or tired, but is recreated and refreshed. But none can judge well of
this, but those that have had experience thereof. No marvel therefore if such
men as are addicted to these other more base and earthly pleasures, mock and
deride them that contemn their delights, and make so great account of these
spiritual and heavenly pleasures, that they are content to renounce all the
rest, and to forgo all the goods in the world that they may enjoy these, as
we see it was with those holy personages that have tasted of them. As for
those carnal and beastlike men, we may say of them as we do of hogs, that
delight more in a puddle or sink, then in precious stones or sweet odours,
namely that they follow that which is most agreeable to their natural
disposition, because they want judgment to discern the value of those things
which they contemn and make no account of.

Now among the pleasures of the spirit, those that consist in contemplation
are of their nature by which we shall become blessed in the the life that
lasts for ever. Therefore it is no strange thing, if many of the
Philosophers affirmed, that this kind of life was the best of all and most
excellent: and if Aristotle placed the end of all Goods and of beatitude in
contemplation. Now if these Philosophers that never knew what was the true and
chief Good, did notwithstanding mount up so high, what a shame is it for us to
whom the sovereign Good is revealed from heaven, if we stay and as it were
rotte in these base, brutish and supposed pleasures? Therefore we must
consider, how we come down by degrees from the highest unto the lowest step,
by reason of this heavy burden wherewith our nature corrupted through sin,
is sore charged: whereupon she is driven downewarde to seek for delights and
pleasures, How we descend from true pleasures to false delights.
and to recreate her self in these earthly things. But according as she
retains more or less of her first purity and nobility, so she keeps
higher, or descends lower from the contemplation of the highest and most
excellent things, to those that belong to the affections of this life.
Therefore some take pleasure in the administration either of the common wealth,
or of their domestical affairs. There are others, who not being able to
soar up so high, delight themselves in the knowledge and remembrance only of
those things that were done by other men, yea many times in histories and
fables. Some take pleasure in handy-works, and in such arts and occupations as
belong to the^. There are many, that cannot apply their minds to so good
things as those, but give them the bridle to recreate and delight themselves
either in unprofitable sports and pastimes, or in vile and abject idleness. Yea
there are others that come lower. For they suffer themselves to be overcome by
the allurements of their corporal senses, so that they fall into brutish
pleasures, as if they were become brute beasts, and as if their mind and
spirit were wholly swallowed up and plunged in the most bottomless gulf of
immoderate and excessive pleasure. And when a man is come down solowe, he can
descend no lower. But yet he may seek after pleasures crosse-wise, Of
pleasures which men seek crosse-wayes.
and turn clean out of the way from reason and judgment, feeding and
delighting his fancy and imagination with false opinions. From hence it is
that he has found out nobility, renown, glory, popularitie, favor of
Princes, and all other vain things that consist in external goods. Yea if he
could, he would gladly be deprived of that spirit and mind which God has
given him, that he might not retain and keep any gravity or severity
beseeming his nature, but plunge and give over himself with full sail to
follow all kind of pleasure, voluptuousness and delight. For his nature is
become so nice and tender, that he can away with nothing that would molest him:
so that every little burden waieth very heavy upon him. Again, it is already
so pressed with the fardell of corruption, that of it self it draws
downward continually, and needs not be driven that way by any other means.
Therefore a great many, that of themselves would not seem to stoop so low,
fearing to loose any part of their reputation, if they should not keep that
gravity that beseems their person, find means to do that by others which
they durst not do of themselves. Hereof it comes, that they delight in
Mummers, fools, tumblers, and oaths of like trades, which are not only
unprofitable for the life of man, but very hurtful also, by reason of the
corruptions which they bring with them. In all which things we may see the
vanity of our corrupt nature, and of those pleasures it takes delight in. But
there are other notable reasons, whereby we know what difference there is
between the pleasures of the mind and spirit, and those of the corporal
senses. Of the use of the delights of the spirit.
For the spirit needs no space of time wherein to intermit his pleasures,
and then to take them in hand again, but only changes them from one to
another, namely from the greater to the less, or from the less to the
greater. In the mean time I say, there is no intermission, but it is
continually busied: only it changes from one delight to another. For seeing
our spirit is in continual motion, it can in no wise cease from doing,
unless the power from whence the motion thereof proceeds, be stayed by some
impediment of the instruments which it uses. How the spirit is hindered in his
actions.
As in deed it falls out in a drunken man, whose spirit and mind is as it
were buried by those vapors that trouble it, of which the brain is full. The
like is in an Apoplexy, or falling sickness. For these are violent things,
and such as resist the nature of the spirit. But presently after the violence
ceasseth which hinders his power, he falls to his accustomed action
again, for the doing whereof he needs no external aid, but only that all
lettes and impedients should be removed and taken out of the way. Which being
removed the spirit and mind cannot be idle, but necessarily thinks of
somewhat continually, about which it is occupied. Therefore whosoever labors
to stay it altogether from thinking, so that it should not be busied about
something, it is all one as if he went about to change the nature of the fire,
and to keep it from burning, after it has found convenient matter and is
already kindled. For either it will be utterly extinguished, if the
impediment it has be stronger then it, or else being of greater force it will
make way for it self. Therefore we had need to be well advised always what
matter we minister to our spirit, and look that it be agreeable to the
nature thereof, and beseeming the same, least it should be distracted and
wander after those things that might hurt it. How the spirit must be
occupied.
And when we would recreate the mind, seeing it is in continual action, we
must so change the matters about which it is to be employed, that they be
good and honest, howsoever they be diverse and sundry. But it is not so with
the corporal senses. For they must necessarily have some space of time to rest
in even from their pleasures, and to cease for a while from using them: becaue
they are more fresh and pleasant after they have abstained for a time. But the
spirit cannot rest. In the mean time the pleasures of the body, and those of
the soul and spirit have one another in chase. How corporal and spiritual
pleasures chase each other.
Therefore they that are addicted to corporal pleasures, have less knowledge
and feeling of those that are spiritual: and contrariwise they that delight in
spiritual pleasures abstain from those that are corporal. For these delights
are in continual combat one against another, so that they cannot be acquainted
together, because they are contraries. This combat is such another as that
which is between the flesh and the spirit.

Moreover, we see by experience, that those delights which we receive of
natural things have more force and are purer, and continue longer then
artificial pleasures. For let a man show us the goodliest works that can
be, either of gold or of filuer, or pictures, or garments, or houses as
curiously wrought as can be devised, either for beauty or cost, yet when we
have seen them four or five times, we begin to be full of it, and take
not so great pleasure therein as we did. But who is ever weary of beholding,
Natural pleasures are more purethen artificial.
I will not say the heavens, the sun, the moon, and the stars, but the
earth, the sea, rivers, mountains, valleys, gardens, trees, herbs and
flowers? The cause hereof is the agreement of nature. For we being natural,
natural things are more agreeable unto us then artificial. And because we
were created and made, not by the hand of a Paynter and mortal man, but by
the hand of the living God, who paynteth living images and pictures, therefore
we take greater delight in his handie works, then in the works of any
other, how excellent a woorkeman soever he be. And indeed they are are of
far greater perfection then those that are made by the art of man. Therefore
Art laboreth always to follow nature, and to express her works as near as
it can: insomuch that they are accounted the best woorkemen, and men delight
most in their doings, that come nearest unto nature. How much more then ought
we to like the works of nature, and consequently God himself, who is the
Author and Creator of nature, and of all her works? For the least work of
his in nature is more excellent in his kind, then the perfectest work that
humane art is able to show. Now if we come from his natural works, to
those that are supernatural and above the reach of nature, we shall find in
them a great deal more matter of all kind of delight. Degrees to ascend vpto
sound and perfect delight.
For if we could consider aright of these things, we would ascend up from
artificial things, and from that delight which they affoorde us, even unto
natural things, and from these unto the Author and Creator of them and of all
nature, and there we would seek for our true delight and pleasure. Herein
nature her self is our good Mistress, as she that leads us thereunto as it
were by the hand. But our inconsiderateness, our blockishnesse and
ingratitude is the cause, why we cannot learn this lesson of her, and why we
have not the marvelous and excellent works of GOD and nature, in such due
admiration as we ought to have.

Whereupon it comes to pass also, that we take not so great delight and
pleasure in them, and that custom, which ought to increase this delight in us,
is a mean rather to diminish the same. And by this means also we are kept
from that admiration, which we ought to have of God the Woorkemaster of them,
and of that delight and pleasure, which we should find in him, if we mounted
up so high and sought him there. But because we are always musing about vile
and abject things, we have no leisure to consider of and to contemplate
higher and more wonderful things. Now to end this days speech, seeing we
are taught that God has given us the affections of joy and of sorrow, to
induce and move us to seek him, to the end that by eschewing the evil that
is contrary unto us, we might attain to that sovereign Good, which he has
prepared for us, and to that true delight, pleasure and bliss, which we may
find in him, let us know, that we have good occasion to pray unto him
incessantly, that he would vouchsafe so to lighten our senses and mind, and
to rule all our affections and wills in such sort, that we may at the length
attain thereunto. For then we shall not only be delivered from all sorrow and
grief, but have the full fruition of perfect joy and perpetual delight. And
to the end that we may go forward to morrow with our matter of the
affections of the heart and soul, thou shall entreat, ASER, of the affections
of love, which follow those of which we have already spoken.

The end of the sixth days work.
THE SEVENTH days work.
Of the affections of love, of the nature, kinds and object of it: of the
beginning of friendship: of the virtue and force of alluring that is in
likeness and in beauty: of the agreement that is between beauty and
goodness. Chap. 49.
ASER. If we know not thoroughly the affections of our soul, which, by reason
of the corruption of our nature, are so many diseases in us, we shall never
know our selves well, nor the image of God, which is imprinted in our soul,
nor the affection of his goodness toward us. The knowledge of the affections
very requisite.
Likewise we can never learn what pure and sound parts of the nature of the
affections remain yet in man, and what is added thereunto by reason of sin
that is in us, neither yet what virtue and vice are, except we truly know the
nature of the affections. Moreover, without this knowledge, we can never make
choice of good from evil, or of truth from lying. For being, as we must needs
be during this life, subject unto and tossed on every side with an infinite
number of strange passions, if they be unknown unto us, we cannot discern
amongst a multitude of contrary opinions, which of them is soundest, every one
of the^ pretending some show of good and of truth. Therefore as we saw
yesterday the affections of joy and of sorrow, of hope and of fear, and of
delight and pleasure, which follow joy, whereby we may conceive the contrary unto
it, namely grief and torment which follow sorrow, so this day we are to
proceed in learning what other affections there are of the heart and soul.

I will begin then with the affection of love, What love is.
which is a motion whereby the heart lusts after that which is good indeed, or
which seems unto it to be so, desiring to draw the good to it self, to the
end it may enjoy the same. This affection comes near to the nature of hope,
but it is a great deal more hot. Therefore after the heart is once moved, it
presently draws unto it that thing which is offered for good, laboring as it
were to have the fruition of some great Good. But let us consider how this
affection is bredde in the heart. After that Judgment has judged a thing to
be good, How love is engendered.
so soon as the same thing is presented to the Will, it does by and by move,
allure, and draw the same unto it self by a certain natural agreement, even
as the like is between the mind and the truth, and between the eye and
beauty. This motion of the heart and will, has even then joined with it a
certain kind of rejoicing, as testifying thereby, that the thing pleases it,
and is very good and agreeable unto it. Now when this rejoicing is confirmed,
it is called love, which is an inclination or a proceeding of the will toward
that which is Good. For it fares with the Will, as if it went before to meet
with the good that is coming, to receive and to embrace it. Whereupon arises a
desire of conjunction to knit the same thing to it self: and this love is
called, Cupiditie, Lusting, or Coveting. But because this affection is so out
of square in this our corrupt nature, these names are commonly taken more in
the evil then in the good part. Of the kinds of desire.
Now this affection of desire or coveting, has respect either to that good
which we enjoy already, or which we have yet in hope only and in expectation.
If it be already present, this cupiditie breeds a desire to retain and keep
it still: if it be yet in expectation, it brings forth a desire and longing
to enjoy it. And in this sort we love all those things, which we esteem and
take to be profitable for us, either for the soul, or for the body, or for
the external goods. Of the love of men toward God.
For this cause many love God, because they know that it is he who gives good
things unto men. But this is not that true love wherewith we must love him. For
although they are very wicked and too unthankful, which love him not, at
leastwise with such a love and for that cause, yet if we go no further, we
love our selves more then we do him in this kind of love, seeing the chief
cause for which we love him, is not in respect of himself, but of us. For we
love him by reason of that good, which we receive from him. But true love is
that, which causes us to love a thing, because it is good in it self, and not
in respect of any profit that may come unto us thereby. With this love we
ought to love God, and our neighbors and friends: and of this love we have a
very clear and manifest image in the love of Fathers and mothers toward their
children. The love of parents toward their children.
For they love them, not because they have respect to some good, which they may
receive of them, but because they are their children. For although they receive
nothing but trouble by them from the time of their childehood, and expenses
rather then profit, yet that lets them not from loving them tenderly and
with great affection. Now if by this love grounded upon such a cause, we judge
the like of the love of God toward us, The love of God toward men.
seeing it is he that has imprinted the same in the hearts of parents
toward their children, as an image of his love toward us, we conclude well.
For seeing he is the fountain of all true and perfect love, all other loves
are but as it were little rivers, which flow from this lively spring. But
there is none so express an image thereof in all the creatures, as in the love
of fathers and mothers toward their children. For does God love us in respect
of any profit, which he looks for at our hands? Hereof it is that he
sets forth himself unto us as a Father, to the end we may the better know,
that he loves us with a right fatherly love. Therefore also he will have us
to call him Father, and so to accou^nt of him: yea he will not have us to take
any other for our Father of whom to depend wholly, but him alone. And no
doubt but we should receive wonderful joy and consolation, if we could as
well feel within us that love which this good Father bears us, as we feel
the love which we bear toward our children. Now when love is reciprocal and
mutual, The original of friendship.
so that he which is loved does also love for his part the party that loves
him, then is friendship bred of love, wherein there is mutual benevolence and
goodwil. Wherefore as God loves us, so muust we for our parts love him,
seeing this is the chief cause why he has created man according to his image
and similitude, and has given him a soul that is immortal, and endued with
understanding and reason, to know him first and then to love him. Therefore if
we consider by what steps we ascend up to God, we shall find, that as by
the love which he first bare us, we descended from the highest to the lowest,
so likewise we mount up again from the lowest unto the highest by that love
which we bear him. In what sort by love we ascend up to God and descend
againt.
For our soul descends from the highest, which is God, unto the lowest,
which is the body, by the love of the Creator toward her, who by means of
this descending and conjunction communicates his blessedness both with the
soul and with the body. And as she came down from him, so through the
knowledge which she has of God, and love which she bears him, she ascends
up again, and returns to her first birth. Concerning those degrees by which
we come thither, we begin first at material and corporal things, as the
beginning of man's generation and birth teaches us: then we come to the senses
of the body, by that use which we have of them. Afterward we use imagination
and fantasy, and from that we come to reason and judgment, next to
contemplation, and last of all to love. Hereby we may learn also to know the
steps of descending, seeing they are the same, but begun at the contrary
end. Wherefore if judgment be governed and overcome by the affections, and
reason by fantasy, the estate of the soul is wholly ouerturned and perverted,
as if the body being minded to walk, should set the head upon the ground,
and lift the heels upward. So likewise is it if in steed o mounting up to
God by love, we descend in such sort to the creatures, Of the union that is in
love.
that we ascend up no more to him, that we may be one with him. For love
makes all things one. Therefore if we be united with God, there must needs be
perfect friendship between him and us. For as he loves us, so we love him,
and then our selves for love of him. And from the love of our selves springs
our love toward our wives and children, as though they were a part of us, as
also toward our like and toward our works. Similitude is a cause of love.
For similitude and likeness is a great cause of love, seeing that when one
resembles us, it is as if we our selves were another: because similitude
makes many things to be as one and the same thing. Wherefore seeing God has
created us to his image and likeness, it cannot be but that he loves his
image and similitude in us, and us also in respect of that, as if it were
himself. For this cause the more this image is reformed and renewed in us, the
more (no doubt) he loves us: and the like also may be said of our love
toward him. Beauty draws love.
In like manner beauty has great virtue to procure love, and that for many
causes. For first, the beauty which appears without in any body, is as it
were a witness and testimony of the beauty in the soul, according to that
which we have already spoken of the agreement of the powers and affections
thereof with the temperature of the body. For God has created all things in
such manner, that he has commonly joined beauty and goodness together. And as
it is written in Genesis, Genesis 1.
That he created nothing but that which was very good, so there was nothing
made, but it was very beautiful in his kind. Therefore as there is agreement
between the body and the soul, so bodily beauty is as it were an image of the
beauty of the soul, and promises after a sort some good thing of the inward
beauty. Beauty a flower of goodness.
For internal perfection breeds the external. Whereupon the internal is
called goodness, and the external beauty, which is as it were a flower of
goodness that is the seed. It is true that this which we say does not always
fall out so, but that oftentimes a man may see the clean contrary: whereupon
we have this common proverb, Proper fellows at the gallows, and fair women
in the stews. For ordinarily the goodliest me^, and such as are best furnished
with the gifts of nature in the disposition of their body, are most wicked and
vicious: A caveat for fair women.
and more beautiful women are strumpets, then foul women, at leastwise they
are in greatest danger, and have much more a do to keep their chastity. For
there is always great strife between chastity and beauty, which is so much
the more increased, as beauty is the greater, because it is so violent, The
force of Beauty.
that oftentimes many desire willingly to die for the beauty of others: and
some are so tossed and tormented, that they become senseless and out of their
wits, being overtaken with looking upon a beautiful face, which has such
pricks, that they pearce even to the liueliest part of their heart and soul.

Whereupon it comes to pass that poor silly lovers are so tormented and full
of passions, that they stand altogether amazed, and are like to them that are
roasted by a soft fire: yea their soul is so subjected to their concupiscence
and desire, that she must obey them, as if she were some poor chambermaide
and drudge. Whereby we may know what good there is in such beauty, and what
good comes with it, also what conjunction and agreement it may have with
goodness, and whether a man may not truly say according to our common
proverb, That beauty without goodness is worth nothing. But we are to consider
what is the cause hereof. For we speak not of that which is now done, The
causes of the abuse in beauty.
but of that which should be done, if the nature of man had continued sound:
and of that which yet would most commonly be put in ure, were it not that
evil education, besides that natural corruption which is already in every
one, did infect even that little good of natural inclination which remains
in man. But howsouer it be, bodily beauty does always promise more good of
the soul, then deformity does. If it fall out otherwise, it is because God
will show, that all good things come from his only grace and not from nature:
and therefore he does not always follow one course and one selfsame order
without any change. Besides, he commonly recompenceth in one thing, that which
is wanting in another, so that he supplieth that in the spirit, which is
wanting in the body, or in the body which is wanting in the spirit. On the
other side, because many abuse that beauty of the body which God has bestowed
upon them, as they do all other his gifts, he lets them fall oftentimes
into great vices, whereby they show the deformity of their soul, Beauty
makes vice more ugly.
which brings also their bodily beauty into great obloquie and shame. For as
beauty causes virtue to appear more fair, when it is joined therewith, so
contrariwise, it makes vice more ugly and loathsome to look upon. Therefore
Socrates had reason to say, that it was good for every one to behold himself
in a glass, A good use of Looking-glasses.
that they which saw themselves fair should be the more afraid to blotte
their beauty with vices, and that they which were foul should labor to
beautify themselves with virtues. Now seeing we are entered into the causes
why beauty draws love, following this matter, we would know of thee,
AMANA, what other things are to be considered herein, with the sundry
degrees and kinds of beauty, and what is the proper effect of love.

Of other causes why Beauty procures Love, and of diverse degrees and kinds of
Beauty: how it is the nature of Love always to unite, and what other effects
it has: how Love descends and ascends not: what power it has to allure
and breed Love. Chap. 50.
AMANA. Many amongst the Philosophers have made three kinds of good, or of
good things: namely, that which is pleasant, profitable, and honest. Hereupon,
forasmuch as Love is a desire of good or goodly things, or at leastwise of
things so accounted: they have also made three kinds or fortes of Love, Three
kinds of Love.
of which the first is toward delightful and pleasant things, and such are
those things which tickle and delight our senses, being properly called the
goods of the body. The second kind of Love is toward profitable things, as
honors, riches, greatness and such other like things, called external goods
or the goods of fortune. The third kind is toward honest things, as
wisdom, prudence and other virtues, which are the goods of the soul. As for
the two first kinds of Love, we may well place them amongst the perturbations
of the soul, because so many evil affections spring from them, that al
confusion proceeds from them, yea every man's life is thereby made miserable.
But to love and desire good and honest things, is that which truly makes a
man famous. For this love makes the chief part of his soul excellent, even
that part whereby he is man, and which is farthest removed from bodily matter
and from obscurity, and nearest to divine brightness, I mean the spirit and
understanding, which of all the other parts and powers of man, only is void
of the blot of mortality. The consideration of the diverse degrees and sundry
sorts of beauty does prepare the way whereby we may come to this laudable and
honest love. For by them we may ascend up from the lowest to the highest, and
turn our corporal and earthly loves into spiritual and heavenly.

They that are most ignorant know that Love is a desire of beauty, and that
Beauty draws Love. God created the world by Love.
Yea some of the learned Heathens have taught, that it was Love which moved
God not only to create the world, but also to create it beautiful, and of so
goodly a form in every part of it. And the name whereby it is called, yields
testimony of the beauty of it. For world signifies as much as a goodly and
well decked ornament. Therefore seeing God has created and framed it by love,
no doubt but love is dispersed and shed throughout the whole world, and is
continually drawn and procured by beauty, to the end it might be conformable
and like to the fountain from whence it came. On the other side, all beauty
is as it were a beam of that infinite and divine beauty that is in God: and
therefore as the divine form draws unto it true and perfect loves, so the
image and similitude thereof draws the images of loves. And that love whereby
almighty God was moved to create all things, proceeded from his own
goodness. Now forasmuch as beauty is a beam of that goodness which is shed
over all, as the sun spreads his light by his beams, the goodlier any
thing is, so much the more amiable and lovely it is. For the mother of Love is
goodness, and the mother also of Beauty is goodness: so that both of them
are bredde and borne as it were of one mother. Diverse kinds of beauty and love.
And according to the diversity of natures created by God, so are there diverse
kinds of beauty, which are all as it were beams, flames, and lights of that
heavenly and infinite beauty, which is fountain of all the rest. The first,
chiefest, and most excellent kind of all, is that beam of heavenly beauty,
whereby the spirit and mind is adorned and polished with understanding and
contemplation. The secondis, in that illumination whereby the soul receives
knowledge. Therefore the understanding mounteth up to those two first degrees
of Love; which is drawn by such beauties: and from thence proceeds the love
of spiritual things. The third kind, which is as it were an other beam of
divine beauty, appears in the effects of lower degrees, which are in that
fruitfulness, which God has given unto the creatures, putting into them
seeds to preserve and to increase their kinds. The last and lowest, yea, the
most troublesome and earthly kind, is in corporal matters, which are
purtraited and painted with great variety of forms and shapes. And as the
understanding ascends up to the two first degrees, of which I have already
spoken: so the imagination stays it self in the two last, and from thence
proceeds the love of the body and of bodily things, and the affection to
beget of that goodly thing, thereby to draw out a form like to that beauty
toward the which a man is affectionated.

Now when we shall consider aright of all these degrees and beams of beauty,
it is certain that we will strive to ascend up from the lowest to the highest,
whereas commonly we descend from the highest to the lowest, feeding our
spirits with corporal and terrestrial loves, Love tends to unity.
which differ from their nature, in stead of spiritual and celestial loves,
which is their proper food. But we must note further, that the greatest, last,
and chiefest force of love, is of many and diverse things to make one and the
same. Therefore he that loves our friend, or does him any good, seems to do
that to us which is done to him, and we esteem of it, as if we received it our
selves. For it is the nature of love, which way souer it turn, always to
join and knit unto it self: as on the contrary side hatred is of this nature,
that it will evermore disioyne and separate. For this cause Jesus Christ prayed
so earnestly for his unto his Father, John 17. 21.
to the end (says he) that they all may be one, as thou O Father art in
me, and I in thee; even that they may be also one in us. And Saint John says
likewise of him, John 11. 52.
that he should gather together in one the children of God which were
scattered. For seeing he came to destroy the works of the devil, 1. John. 3.
8.
(as he says elsewhere) and seeing it is the nature of this enemy of mankind
to scatter, to disioyne and separat, by reason of the envy and hatred which he
bears to God and men, it must needs be that Jesus Christ should gather
together that which the devil has scattered, and unite in one that which he
has separated: to the end that as man was one with God, before he was
seueuered by sin through the envy and malice of Satan, so he might return
into unity and union with his Creator by the abolishing of sin, Sin the
cause of our separation from God.
which is the cause of the separation, and by the likeness of virtue with God
through the means of Jesus Christ. Therefore so great goodness and beneficence
of God toward us, ought to inflame our love toward him, and moreover to
increase the same, when we daily feel new benefits powered upon us, which
proceed and come from his burning love and charity wherewith he loves us,
although he receive no benefit thereby. For we are to understand, that
although he which has received a benefit from another, ought to carry greater
love toward him, then he that bestowed the benefit is bound toward the
other to whom he has done a good turn, yet the contrary oftentimes falls
out. A double ground of love.
The cause whereof is, because his love that bestows a good turn proceed^th
from his own bounty and goodness, whereas the love of him that receives a
benefit, comes of necessity. So that the one has a great deal better
foundation then the other. For that love which proceeds of necessity
respects our selves, because we love for the good which we have received,
and not in regard of the person from whom the good comes. And this love
proceeds from the love we bear to our selves, so that it ought rather to be
called Love of concupiscence, then true Love. For as we love the person that
does us good, because of the good which we receive, so we love him, and wish
his good, not so much for it self as for ourselves, and for that profit,
which we hope will come to us thereby. But after we have begun with this
kind of Love, it serves us oftentimes as a step for to pass by afterward
unto true and perfect love. For acquainting our selves to love them that do us
good, we learn afterward to love them, not only for love of that good which
they do unto us, but also because of themselves: insomuch that we will not
cease to love them although it fall out so that they can do us no more good,
yea although they stand in need of the like good at our hands again. Now when
we are come to this degree, our love is a great deal more pure, yea, then is
it true love which now loves not the person beloved only for love of it
self but for love of him, even with the like love wherewith it has been and
yet is loved of him. And as he that loves, is void of true Love, if he love
only in respect of the good he receives, Love is free.
so he that does good, loves not with true love, if he do it to receive
some profit thereby, and with hope of recompense, and not merely for his
love, to whom he does it. For such a man respects himself more then him
whom he pretends to love. Such is the love of hypocrites toward God.
Therefore they honor and serve him as hirelings do, so long as he uses them
well, and they see reward: as Satan accused and slaundered Job before God, Job
1. 9.
as though he served him for no other cause but for the benefits, which he
received of his goodness. Whereupon it pleased God to take trial of that love
which his servant bare unto him, to confound the slaunderer, and to propound to
every one in the person of his servant Job, an example and pattern of true
fear, Two sorts of hired love.
of true love, of true faith, and of true patience. We see then that there are
two sorts of hired love, because it may be such, not only in respect of him
that receives a benefit, but of him also that bestows it, when he does it
for the causes aforesaid. But he that does good only of charity and love
has no such scope, but looks only to the good, which he delights to
communicate to others in respect of that goodness which is in himself.
Therefore he has a more sure and excellent beginning of his love, namely, his
own goodness and will, then he has that receives the good, whose love
begins at need and want. That Love also which is grounded upon goodness
goes on more easily, and with greater courage from good to better, then that
which comes from necessity proceeds to good. For he that does good,
imparteth the same frankely of his own good will because he will do so: and
therefore it redoundeth to his great honor. But he that receives a good
turn, takes it because he has need of it: and therefore he must
acknowledge himself bound to his Benefactour. For this cause he is somewhat
ashamed of his need and want. For as Saint Paul witnesses, according to the
saying of Jesus Christ, It is a blessed thing to give rather then to receive.
Acts 20. 35.
Therefore that may well be said in this respect, which is commonly spoken,
namely, that although Love be of the nature of fire, which always mounteth
upward, Love descends but does not ascend.
yet does it descend but never ascend. For Fathers and Mothers always love
their children, yea their childrens children better then their children love
them. The like may be said of others that are in the place of parents. And by
a greater reason this may be spoken of the love of God our Father toward us,
as also of the love of Christ Jesus. For he did not only love us before we
loved him, yea, even then when we were yet his enemies, but now also we come
far short of loui^^ him as he loves us. Therefore he is called by Saint
John, 1. John 4. 8.
not only loving and charitable, but even Love it self. For as he is the
Creator of all things, so he loves, perfecteth, and preseueth them all, and
turns them unto himself. Love breeds Love.
But among all other things which draw Love, nothing is of greater force then
Love it self. For as one fire draws another, so is it with love: for one
draws and engenders another. Therefore if we would be loved, we our selves
must love. But when the contrary falls out, nameely, that we are hated of
them toward whom we are well affected, it is because he that is loved does
not know nor feel the love that is borne him. For likeness has such force
and virtue in love, that it is as it were the mother thereof. For seeing every
one by nature loves himself greatly, and similitude is as it were the same in
many, it causes him that resembles us, to be as it were our selves: whereupon
it follows, that the same likeness which causes us to love an other,
induces him also to love us. And again, love causes him that does love to
engraue and imprint in his heart, The heart of a lover compared to a looking
glass.
that face and image which he loves: so that the heart of him that loves is
made like to a looking glass, in which the image of the party beloved shines
and is represented. Therefore when he that is loved and beholds and
acknowledges himself in him that loves him, he is moved and whetted on to
love him again, as one within whom he knows himself to be as it were
Inhabitant, yea, as a second self. Moreover, he that loves, does as it were
deprive himself of himself, and give himself to him whom he loves.
Therefore he that is beloved accompteth him dear, and is as careful of him as
of a thing of his own. So that if we love God, we shall be in his heart, as
if our image were engraven there: and his image also shall be in ours, yea,
he will be careful of us, as of his own children, as we likewise will be
very careful of his honor and glory. And the more we know his love toward us,
the liker we shall be unto him, and shall love him the more: as he in like manner
will love us the more. Now because men can neither see nor know one another
heart and will to judge of their love, Love ought to show it self by works.
we must declare the same by outward works. For none but God knows the
hearts and wills of men. Nevertheless he will have us to manifest by works
our love toward him and our neighbors, as he has showed us his love by
giving himself with all his benefits unto us. Therefore we must yield
testimony of our love, by obeying his word and keeping his holy
commandments, the fulfilling of which consists in true and perfect
charity. But forasmuch as the love of men is so disordered nowadayes, we are
to take (...) heed, and to look diligently that we deceive not our selves,
by loving that which we ought not to love, esteeming that to be a good thing
which is wicked, and well done that which is ill done: to the end, that our
love be not inordinate, and bestowed upon false and evil things, and so prove
a vicious desire rather then true love. Therefore it shall be good, if
following our matter, we consider what this affection of cupiditie or desire is
properly, and what are the kinds of it, and how we may separate it from Love.
Let us then hear ken to ARAM discoursing of this matter.

Of Desire and Coveting, and of the kinds of it: of the infiniteness of men's
desires, and what Good is able to satisfy and content it: of the difference
between Desire and Love, and of the utmost limit and end of Love. Chap. 51.
ARAM. As at the entry of a forest some one path may seem to be broad and
beaten enough, yet afterward when a trauailer is well entered into it, he
begins to loose it by little and little, and being amazed the farther he
walks on, the more he wandreth out of his way: even so when as sensuality
inuiteth us to the fruition of some object, we think it an easy matter to
attain thereunto, and hope to get some great good thereby: but the further we
enter into and follow that path, which our concupiscence does show unto us, the
worse we find the way to be, and can see nothing before us but a large field
full of thorns and thistles, which notwithstanding seem for a time unto sore
eyes to be fair flowers of very goodly fruit. But the tasting of them always
brings with it a long and late repentance in the end. Now as the body of
the sun when he first rises may be easily looked upon, but after being
mounted up certain degrees in the Zodiake, dazeleth the eyes of them that
behold it: so we may in some sort know our evil when it begins first, but
when it has gathered full force it wholly dimmeth our reason, Evils must be
resisted in the beginning.
and yields to no counsel. Therefore before any passion grow to be strong,
we must labor, that whatsoever shall be rashly desired, may be suppressed by
a prudent and an advised discourse.

We have heard by our former speech, What Desire is.
that Desire and Coveting is an appetite or longing to obtain some Good, which
we judge is profitable unto us, or to preserve it if we have it already.
Diversity of Goods.
For this cause we must always consider advisedly what Goods we want, whether
they be necessary for us or no, whether we seek after them, either because we
need them, or for profit sake, or else only to satisfy the vanity of our
mind, and our foolish and carnal affections. For there are some Goods so
necessary for us, that without them we can neither live, nor preserve our
life. The necessity and want of these is fitly called natural, and ought
rather in deed to be termed appetites then desires. In the number of these
Goods are meats, Good^ belonging to this life.
drinks, clothing, dwelling places, Physic, fire, water, and such like
things which man's life cannot be without. Therefore our appetite to these
things is awakened as it were by a certain natural instigation, which
pricketh and provoke the soul to make it desire and seek them, so that they
stay not until judgment have given sentence, but proceed on forward as we
may see by experience in hunger and thirst. It is not therefore without cause
said, that the belly has no ears. But there are other goods not altogether
so necessary for man's life, which yet we cannot be without when need
requires, and they serve to this use, that men might live more commodiously
and better at ease: as wine, exquisitenes in dressing and preparing of meats,
spices, and many such like things. For it is certain, that although there were
no wine nor any artificial drink, yet nature would be content and could well
away with water: and although meat be not so delicate, nor so well and finely
dressed as it might be, yet will it nourish well enough, so it be natural. The
same may be said of the rest, of which there is great use in the life of man,
and of those pleasures and delights which we take by all the corporal senses.
The desires of these things are not to be condemned, seeing they are natural
also, provided always that moderation be kept in them. For God has not
created any creature, which he will not have man to use, so that he abuse it
not, but being contented with those pleasures which he permits unto him,
keep himself within the limits thereof, and fall into no excess, neither
lash out beyond all reason and measure.

There is yet an other sort of goods whereof we have spoken before, Goods of
fanci^ and in opinion only.
which is more in fancy and in opinion the^ in any other thing, namely, ye
getting and possessing of silver, of riches, of power, of honor, and of glory.
These goods fill men full of innumerable desires, which have neither measure,
term, nor end, insomuch that amongst all creatures living none is so
burdened with them as man: who notwithstanding might well satisfy himself with
a few, if he could be content with that which will suffice nature and follow
her. And therefore of all these sorts of desires mentioned by us, we may well
say, that those which concern natural things have some limitation, but such
as concern things found out and invented by men, have no bounds nor measure at
all in them. For what end is there in the coveting of riches, honors, glory
and such like things? True it is, that of their own nature, and as being the
creatures and gifts of God, they are not ill: but they become such through the
fault of men, I mean through their insatiable coveting and abusing of them,
and through that false opinion, which commonly we have of them. For we propound
these things to our selves, that we may live with greater ease, pleasure, and
rest: but it falls out clean contrary. For being such goods as reach not
unto the spirit, they cannot profit the same: or if they do reach unto it, yet
the profit that comes by them is very light and vain. For they are not able
to sound the bottom thereof, it is so profound and capable: much less are we
to think that they can make us happy. Nay, they are so far from performing
this, that it is impossible to believe how troublesome it is to the spirit to
search and find them out, and to obtain and keep them. The effects of
ambition and covetousness.
For after that ambition and covetousness be once moved and pricked forward
through false opinions and vain judgments, they grow and wax disordered out
of measure. For the spirit thinks in it self, that if once it could get
either those honors and glory, or that money and riches which it wishes for,
it should be very happy, and live at great ease and rest. But when it has
obtained that, it is not only in the same estate wherein it was before, but
oftentimes far worse, and less contented. The reason is, because the spirit
considers not, that those things which it labors to get, are unable of
their own nature to affoorde that which it requires of them. Whereupon, not
knowing his own vice and foolish imagination, it it persuaded, that this
falls out so in respect of the greatness and excellency of that thing
whereunto it aspireth, and therefore not having gotten so much as is requisite
fully to satisfy the desire it has, it setleth it self to get more. And when
it has proceeded in this sort, yet is it always new to begin, being as
far from contentation, yea a great deal further then it was before. So that
we may conclude, that desire or coveting is bottomless, and void of all stay.
Therefore we must know, that the mere wants of this life, do neither breed
nor increase these desires in us, but they proceed from a false opinion and
persuasion, which we have of them. For it is certain, that the opinion we
conceive of those wants, which we imagine we may have, breeds such a fear^
in us, as engenders and increases these desires. Of the false opinion of want.
And the carking care to preserve those things that are without us, namely,
external goods, proceeds from the same fountain. For our foresight
stretches it self not only to urgent necessities, or to such as we verily
think are to come to pass, but even to all those that may any way happen: so
that we propound to our selves all the wants in the world, as if heaven and
earth should fail us. Besides, many do not only look to those necessities
which they may fear, but also to those pleasures, which they would have. For
they suppose that by means of power, riches, authority, and dignities, they
may attain to the fruition of all the pleasures and delights they wish for.
And when a man has tasted of pleasure, this taste does breed an other desire
to continue therein, and to preserve those means whereby they may always
enjoy such pleasure. Whereby we may judge how the desire and coveting that is
in man, wandereth and goes astray, when as notwithstanding it is given him of
God, to the end he might wish for that which he judges to be good for him,
and that he might follow after it, and having obtained the same, might hold
and keep it fast.

Now Forasmuch as God is the true, The right use of coveting.
steadfast, and firm good of man, he does naturally wish and desire him: and
because this good is infinite, it falls out thereupon that the largeness,
length, and depth of our coveting is infinite, and can be filled with no other
thing but with God. Wherefore when it is come thither, there it stays and
rests it self. But whilst it wandreth hither and thither, there will be no
end, but one desire begets another: insomuch that there are infinite kinds
of them, which take their particular names of those things which they covet.
The diverse kinds of Desires.
For the unmeasurable coveting of honors is called ambition: of gold and
silver, covetousness: of meats and drinks, gluttony and drunkenness: the
unlawful and immoderate desire of conjunction between man and woman, is
called Whoredom: which also has diverse kinds under it, according to the
degrees of their filthiness and enormities in whom it abounds. The virtues
opposite and contrary to these vicious desires, are justice, liberality,
continency, chastity, and temperance: of which virtues and vices, and of
others proceeding of them, we have discoursed at large in our fist moral
institution. Therefore to conclude that which has been hitherto spoken of
Love and of Desire, I think we ought to make two sorts of Love, the one in
virtue the other in vice. Two sorts of Love.
For that Love proceeding of Desire and Coveting, such as we see commonly in
men, is false and fained. And because it counterfaiteth often the actions of
true love, therefore we ought to be very wary, that it beguile us not, and
that we take not the one for the other. Concerning the first, we must
remember, that all love is begotten of Good, that it bends and draws
toward Good, as we have already learned. Now Good is of that nature, that it
breeds in us a desire to be joined unto it, in regard of that agreement
which it has with us: of which agreement and conjunction comes delight, and
then blessedness and felicity. The last end of Love.
So that the utmost bounds and limits of Love is to be knit together in unity
as much as may be. And the straighter and closer the bond of love is tied and
conjoined in one and the same essence, so much the more truly and perfectly is
love come unto his end, and consists in the perfection of his nature.
Therefore the desire of conjunction which is in Love is given to man, to the
end he should wish and covet to be united with God his true Good, that being
made as it were a little God like unto him, he might be partaker of his
eternal blessedness. This is the true, firm, and fruitful conjunction of
love, and the great and excellent reward thereof. For all the rest are nothing
in comparison of this, but only vain and fruitless. Now the Love of the
body desires the conjunction of the body, and the love of souls desires to
be joined with souls, that there may be as it were one soul in many bodies.
And this conjunction is the greatest, truest, and of longest continuance, which
causes but one heart and one will among friends, as if they were one only
body, and one only soul, and as if he that loves were the same party that
is beloved. Therefore it is written of the first Christians that were in the
Church of Jerusalem, Acts 4. 32.
that the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and one soul;
neither any of them said, that any thing of that which he possessed, was his
own, but they had al things common. Neither is it said without reason in
common Proverb, Community among friends.
that all things are common among friends: which is the cause that a friend
calls and accompteth as his own, whatsoever belongs to his friend, whether
it be in prosperity or in adversity. Therefore also it is commonly said, that
a steadfast friend is tried in doubtful matters. Whereupon it comes to pass
in true love, that friends lift up into great dignity, are more careful of
those whom they love (how base soever they be) and of their affairs, then of
themselves and of their particular estate. Moreover we are to know, that as it
is the nature of Love to join together, Love brings equality.
so does it also bring equality with it, so far forth as the nature of
those things that are conjoined, will bear: insomuch that the highest stoop
down to the lowest, to lift them up unto themselves, and they that are equal
associate themselves together. Therefore, as we have often said, that the
fountain and pattern of all true love is in God, so in this point it does
chiefly show it self unto us. For he abaseth himself to our smallness, as
though he would reach us his hand from heaven, to draw and lift us up unto
himself by the mean of Jesus Christ, unto whom and by whom we are truly
united with him. But here we are to know, that the desire, lust, or coveting
which is bredde of Love grows to be vicious through the corruption of our
nature, which otherwise being directed by good means and by reason according
to the will of God, and aiming at the right Good which is God, Love must first
begin at God.
would cause us to love God first for his own sake, and then his creatures in
him, and for the love of him. Neither should we ever covet worldly goods with
an unbridled desire, but would rather account all mortal things unworthy to
be cared for by our immortal souls. Whereunto we shall be the rather
persuaded, if following that which we have begun to speak of true and false
love, and of the difference between them, we consider what good things are to
be found in the one above the other, what sundry rewards men propound unto
themselves in love, what knowledge is required therein, and how the one is
increased by the other. This then shall be thy matter subject, ACHITOB, which
thou shall take to make an end of our discoursing of the nature of Love.

Of the good things that are in true Love, of the diverse valuations of Love,
and of the benefits which it procures: what knowledge is requisite to allure
Love, and how one Love grows by another: of the friendship that may be both
between the good and the bad. Chap. 52.
ACHITOB. Good is loved so much as it is known, and as we are able to
understand what it is. For things are first known, to the end they may be
loved. Three means of knowledge.
Now there are three means of knowledge in our soul, namely, by sense, by
reason, and by the mind. From the sense springs appetite, which is common to
us with beasts: from reason grows election, which is proper to man: and from
the mind and spirit, in which the image of the divine essence is engraven,
proceeds the will. As then sense knows none but sensible and corporal
things, so the appetite desires only the same things: and as the mind of it
own nature enclineth to the contemplation of spiritual and intelligible
things, so the will feeds and contenteth it self only with eternal and
heavenly goods. Now Man, that is to say the soul, by nature reasonable, being
placed as it were in the midst of these two extremes, and sustaining
wonderful assaults and combats through the impression of these two
contraries, takes part one while with the desires of this side, an other while
of that, according as he inclines by his election either to this part or to
that, by stooping down to the sense, or by lifting up himself to the mind.
But because of the darkness of error, which shadoweth his reason, it is very
necessary that the spirit of God work mightily therein, to this end that by
the power and virtue thereof, the natural affection of earthly things, which
offer violence to all the powers of the soul, might be transported and lift up
to the desire of celestial and eternal things.

Truly for so much as Good is the object of Love, good reason it is that we
should lift it upward, and separate it from the earth as much as we may. For as
so many rash affections, which are the spring of all vices, The benefits that
come of true love, whose scope is God.
have their beginning from earthly love: soco^trariwise celestial and heavenly
love adorneth the soul with two excellent ornaments, namely, wisdom and
virtue, the ground of all true Beauty, in which all good, all contentation and
felicity consists. And this love which has God for his end and scope, has
three great benefits among many others, which are not to be found in any
other love, especially in that of concupiscence. For first, there is no good so
excellent in the enjoying of earthly things, but it is mingled with some thing
that may displease us, or some way harm us. Whereupon taking it to be a less
benefit, and not altogether so good for us, we are of this judgment, The
first benefit of true love.
that it is the less to be wished for of us. But there is no such thing in
God. Therefore if the soul of man did behold him by contemplation, not such a
one as he is (for that is impossible) but as she might contemplate him
notwithstanding she is enclosed in this body, she would be ravished in her
love with greater vehemency, then she is stirred up to embrace that, which of
all mortal and transitory things she judges best and most certain. For she
should know, that God is a Good, wherein there is nothing mingled, that may
breed irksomeness, or be hurtful, but is altogether profitable and full of
pleasure. Although it can not be gainsaide, but that the contrary seems to
come to pass oftentimes, when we see that they which love God as they ought,
and which by means of this love are driven forward and induced to procure his
honor and glory with all their might, are commonly most visited with griefs,
losses, and sorrows. Whereof it comes to pass, that many are alienated from
this love, because they greatly dislike that troublesome estate. But we must
know, that this humane and frivolous consideration proceeds only of this,
Diverse estimations of Love.
that the price of love is diversely valued. For there is one kind of love that
is perpetual and firm, and another which is temporary, according as the
present motion of the heart pricketh one forward to follow any thing, because
at that instant it seems unto him to be good, or in regard of the profit,
which he sees therein, or of the appearance of good, which he imagines is in
it. As for example, we know well, that health is a greater good, then is the
swallowing down of dainty morselles, the pleasure whereof passes away very
quickly.

And yet it comes often to pass, that our appetite stirs us forward with
such vehemency, that mere lickerishnes causes us to eat such meats as we
know are contrary to our health. The reason hereof is, because we compare not
the good that is in taste and in dainty fare, which suddenly passes away,
with that which is in health, which is of a longer continuance: or else because
we think there will not come so great hurt thereof as there may come, or else
we hope easily to remedy the same. The cause of men's error from the true Good.
And thus is it with them that consider not what great good there is in God,
but forget him, or else suppose that they ca^easily recover that which they shall
lose, by following after a terrestrial and transitory Good, which causes them
to turn aside from God. For if they thought well upon it, and knew what loss
they received, they would never suffer themselves to be governed by their
appetites and worldly desires. But the bare imagination and consideration of
honors and of earthly goods does so dazell the eyes of their mind, that they
can not know the greatness and excellency of celestial goods, which they
forsake for those other. Whereas contrariwise, if they were not altogether
blind, they should perceive, that this light affliction of good men, which
passes away in a moment, brings forth in them an eternal weight of most
excellent glory, and makes them partakers of God, who is the perpetual and
steadfast reward of their true and holy love. The second benefit that is in
true Love.
Now touching the second benefit, which being in his love, is not to be found
in the love of creaturs, we are to know, that this latter is always in fear
and care for that thing which it loves, lest some evil should befall it. So
that notwithstanding any security that may be had, yet there is always some
vexation in all love toward men and toward mortal things. But in that love
which is toward God there is nothing but delight without care, grief, or
disquietnesse. For we are very certain, that all things are most safe there,
full of joy and lasting happiness. The third benefit.
And for the third, we see that in the love of concupiscence, there is
commonly envy and evil jealousy (which is one kind of it) because many covet
that which one alone would wholly possess. But it is clean contrary in the
true love of the soul, wherein is vprightnes and fellowship. For he that
loves virtue and a virtuous man, is so far from being jealous, that he would
not only have many companions, but wishes that all the men in the world were
like affected with him. The same may be said of him that loves God. For he
would have al men his companions in that amity, and judges al those to be
miserable and wretched, which are estranged from it. As for that friend, who
would alone love his friend, he loves not perfectly, but rather loves some
thing in him that is profitable to himself, as namely to enjoy alone
whatsoever good he judges to be in his friend: which is the nature of the love
of concupisce^ce that looks inwardly to it self. But true friendship looks
outwardly upon him whom it loves, insomuch that he which loves does die by
little and little in himself, but that which he loves, lives in him. Wherefore
S. Paul not only knowing the nature of true love, but also having felt by
experience the vehemency thereof, Galat. 2. 20.
says, I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me. For he that truly
loves, cares no more for himself, but for that thing which he loves. The
highest degree of Love.
This degree of love may be rightly called Rauishing, in which the lover is so
rapt out of himself, that he sorgetteth himself altogether, being wholly in
him whom he loves, and he whom he loves being in him. Knowledge requisite in
Love.
But as we said in the beginding of our speech, Good is loved so far forth as
it is known, and as we can understand what it is, therefore it is necessary
that the knowledge of it should be so great, that it be sufficient to draw love,
which increases by thinking often of that thing which is beloved. For thereby
it is planted and rooted more deeply in the heart. Wherefore there is nothing
more contrary to love then forgetfulness, the mother of ingratitude, especially
in our love toward God. For the more we think of him, the more do we call to
mind his goodness toward us: whereupon also our love does increase and is
inslamed in us toward him. And the greater and more burning our love is, the
nearer are we united and linked unto him. Therefore we may well conclude, that
we love God according to that measure of knowledge which we have of him and of
his benefits, and according as we consider and remember them: and if we want
these things, we love him not as we ought. Now when we are joined unto the
thing that is dear unto us, according to the end of love, we know it a great
deal better, because we behold it nearer: and then are we said to enjoy it.

Hereupon we may note two kinds of knowledge in love: Two sorts of knowledge
in Love.
the one first, the other last. By the first, we believe that thing to be good,
which we do know: and by the last we have experience of it, which is of great
force in all love: because the fruit thereof is the fruition of the thing
beloved. This enjoying, is the action of delight and of pleasure, which is not
only of the will, but also of the understanding, as it is in GOD. And if we
take it so, Love shall be as the mean between the first knowledge which is
only begun, and the last, which is full and perfect: which consists in the
union of him that loves with him that is beloved, and wherein the desire that
is in love, and which afflicts and tormenteth the party loving, is always
abolished, not the love it self: but being united, the greater number and the
more excellent it finds the goods in regard of those which the first
knowledge affoorded, the more is it increased and inflamed. Hereof it is that
we put a difference between Love and the Desire that is in love, The
difference between Love and Desire.
because when we love a thing, we desire therewithal the fruition and
possession thereof. And if there be delaie made, so that we cannot enjoy the
thing so soon as we would, this delay tormenteth us by reason of the desire,
which presses and pricketh us forward to get the possession of it. But this
torment comes not of Love, then which there is nothing more sweet and
pleasant, but of that desire which ends in the union and fruition of the
thing beloved. In the mean time as long as this desire lasts, the love from
whence it proceeds, causes the torment to be abated, yea it is not without
some pleasure, especially when there is some hope that at length it may be
obtained and brought about. And the more confident this hope is, the greater
solace, yea the greater delight and pleasure it brings withal. For as love
has great delight in union and fruition, so is it not small in hope, because
it propounds unto us the enjoying of the thing as being present, even as if
our imagination had already led us unto it. Therefore forasmuch as the hope of
Gods children is certain, they are now being in this world as it were
blessed in heaven, although the desire which they have of greater goods hoped
for yet, and to be enjoyed in that full union and conjunction which they shall
have with God in the life everlasting, causes them to groan and to sigh
continually with all the creatures, Romans 8. 22.
waiting for their full and perfect deliverance from all corruption and from
this miserable life. So that we can not doubt but that our love toward GOD
will be far greater and much more vehement, when as we shall have this full
fruition of God our sovereign Good, and when we shall be perfectly united
unto him by true Love, not seeing him obscurely in a glass only, 1. Cor. 13.
12.
or knowing him in part, as we do now, but beholding him face to face, and
knowing him as we have bin known of him. For the knowledge which we have now
of him is yet but begun, in respect of that which we shall have fully and
wholly in that glorious and immortal life. And then also we shall be wholly
swallowed up with his love. By the same reason we may well believe, that the
love and charity which the godly bear one toward another in this mortal
life and pilgrimage, shall be a great deal more enflamed in the other life,
then ever it was in the holiest and most perfect that ever was amongst them in
this world. For the better men friends are, the more steadfast and firm is
their friendship, which among good men is always of long continuance: but
contrariwise with the wicked. And to speak properly there is no friendship
betwixt them, Of friendship between wicked men.
but only some familiarity and fellowship, or to speak better, a conspiracy
against right, and common peace. Howsoever it be, whether familiarity or
fellowship, it is very short and weak, because it has no good foundation.
Wherefore they can not long continue united and knit together. We have daily
testimony hereof in worldly and carnal men, who having made for a time
profession of very great friendship, upon a Yea or a Nay, assault one another
even unto death. But we are not greatly to marvel at it. For seeing their
amity and union is ill grounded, as it cannot be of long continuance, so they
can receive no great joy or delight. But it is contrary in the friendship of
good men, as that which has a far better foundation, namely, God and his
word. What foundation the friendship of good men has.
Wherefore if the better men that friends be, the greater their friendship is
and more firm even in this world, no doubt but it will be greater, more
burning and constant in that blessed and eternal life, which we expect, where
we shall be much better men and more perfect then we are here, better linked
one with an other, as also we shall be altogether a great deal more conjoined
with and in God. 1. Corint. 13. 8*
For this cause Saint Paul had good reason to say, that Love does never
fallaway, though prophecyings be abolished, or tongues cease, or knowledge
vanish away. Wherefore in this respect he concludes, that love is the
greatest of these three, Faith, Hope, and Love. But we have spoken enough of
the nature of Love for the subject of our discourse of the natural history of
man. Now I think it will not be unprofitable, if we say somewhat of other
affections that are near neighbors unto Love and joined with it, as of
favor, reverence, honor and pity, which have such good or ill qualities in
man, as the nature of that love has which brings them forth, as ASER will
give us to understand.

Of favor, reverence, and of honor: of their nature and effects: of those
outward signs whereby they show themselves: of pity and compassion, and how
agreeable it is to the nature of man. Chap. 53.
ASER. I cannot marvel enough at the drowsines of many great spirits, who are
so delighted with the vain dreams of their own fancies, that they employ all
the gifts and graces of their mind, to lift up even unto the heavens the
pleasures that are received in the love of humane and mortal things,
especially in the fruits of concupiscence, and yet the least of them cannot be
gotten without a thousand troublesome discommodities, besides that they leave
always in man an insatiable desire of them. I would ask of them gladly, when
the most voluptuous man of them all, has not, even in the midst of his
pleasures, sighed and been subject to passions, desiring some other thing
besides: or when there was ever found between twain that loved each other
corruptly, that conformity of wills, that communication of thoughts, those
continual agreements, and that concord of life, which is necessary in all true
love: especially seeing it is a hard matter, yea impossible to see a wicked
man, that is not daily at variance with himself, insomuch that if he could
leave himself, as two men forsake each other, there are many, who upon every
occasion would leave themselves to take another body, A similitude showing the
vanity of the love of worldly delights.
or another soul. And as when one being very desirous to eat, and thereupon
falling asleep, dreameth that he is feeding and yet is not satisfied, because
it is not a dream of meat that will content the sense and appetite, which
seeks to be appeased, but substantial meat it self: even so it falls
out when men dreaming in spirit, which is as pernicious a thing as the sleep
of death, give themselves by a certain natural inclination which they have to
the love of Good, to seek for the beauty, contentation and delight thereof
upon earth, when they are not to be found in the whole world. As for their
shadows, which in some sort appear in corporal and earthly things, and in
those delights which proceed of them, they do not feed their minds with
sound and good things, but rather abuse and deceive them. Therefore we ought
to take great heed, that we set not our heart and affection rather upon those
miserable, corruptible and deceivable pleasures, wherein worldlings and carnal
men do glory, then upon that great and infinite brightness, of which the
sun is but a very small beam, and upon those singular, blessed, and heavenly
trueths, which the word of life does teach us, and which are the only true
and solid meats that can content and satisfy our spirits eternally.

It is certain, that nature moves us to set our affection chiefly upon some
one thing rather then upon another: forasmuch as love is a gift bestowed by the
Creator upon all natures at the time of their birth. Now unto Love many other
affections are joined, among which Favor commonly has the first place. What
savor is.
This affection is a kind of good will and liking, which springs from a
judgment conceived of some Good, so that we may call it a love begun. For
in this judgment of Good, we esteem well of him, toward whom our favor
is extended, and judge him worthy of some good thing, and by this means we
begin to love him. Wherefore although favor may be without true love, yet
love cannot be without favor. Notwithstanding, when we favor one before we
love him, even then we enter into the way that leads to love him. And for
the least shadow of love in our heart toward another, we favor him: as we
see it in those that are linked unto us by some degree either of
consanguinitie, or of affinity, or by means of some acquaintance and
knowledge. Now forasmuch as GOD loves us, he bears us favor also, although
not in the regard or for the judgment of any good, Why God favors us.
which he sees in us or in our corrupted nature: but because of the love he
bears us in Jesus Christ, his well-beloved, in whom by his grace he has made
us acceptable to himself. Therefore this favor brings with it the
perfection of all Good unto us. For what can he want that is favored of God,
who can do all things? This favor which God bears unto us, is called grace
and blessing in the holy Scriptures, which comprehends all those benefits
which we receive of his goodness. For they proceed all of this favor, and
this favor of the love he bears us in Jesus Christ. Reverence also commonly
accompanies love, Of reverence.
whereby we understand an affection proceeding from the judgment of some great
good, that hurts us not. For if we thought it would hurt us, there would
be fear joined with hatred, and not true reverence. For although there is
evermore in all reverence, some fear mingled with shamefastness,
nevertheless this fear brings no hatred with it. This reverence is bredde
in us by comparing the greatness of another with our smalnesse, as if we
admired those excellent things that are in him. For as the heart does enlarge
it self through the consideration and opinion it has of it own greatness,
so does it restrain and close up it self upon the reputation and conceit of
another man's greatness, so it be good, or at leastwise without hurt.
Therefore if we compare our greatness with some other man's that is far
greater, we know our own smalnesse thereby.

Whereupon it comes to pass, The caause of humility.
that we do not only esteem worse, but even dislike and contemn our
selves: by which means we become more humble, whereas before we were puffed
up with pride through the opinion of our greatness, of which we have
experience as often as we compare our selves with GOD, and lift up our spirit
even to the consideration of his divine majesty, comparing that with our
baseness. For then being ravished with admiration of his highness, and
infinite greatness, we honor and reverence him by reason of his power, unto
which we join also his wisdom and goodness. And according to that
reverence we bear toward him, we reverence those also in whom we see the
same gifts and graces shine. For power breeds reverence, and goodness love.
Wherefore if we judge, that power and greatness are joined with goodness and
tempered therewithal, we shall not only be moved to reverence, but this
reverence also will engender love, as it is in the hearts of the faithful
toward God: because that as they consider him almighty and the greatest of
all, so they behold him most wise and most good. But as I have already touched,
if we think that this greatness or power either is or will be hurtful unto us,
there is another kind of reverence, which only has fear that breeds hatred,
as it is in them that consider the power of God only, and the rigor of his
judgment, not meditating of his clemency and benignity. Therefore as the
great excellency, which in all things appears in God, especially in power,
wisdom and goodness, induces us to reverence him aright: A good lesson for
princes.
so if we would have men to honor and reverence us, there must be excellent
virtues in us, in which men may see the image of God to shine, that so he may
be honored and reverenced in us and we in him. For therein consists that
true honor, and that true reverence which we ought to seek for and to desire.
And although reverence has respect principally to the divine majesty (at the
name of which every knee ought to bow) and to those superiorities which are
images thereof, unto which they that are of less degree, estate and condition,
ought to give honor, Reverence requisite in true friendship.
and service, nevertheless mutual reverence is necessary in all true friendship,
as well in respect of ye party beloved, as of him that loves. And indeed we see
how that true friends reverence and honor one another, and all because of
that good opinion which they have conceived each of others desert. Concerning
this word Honor, it is properly a token, whereby we testify that we judge him
to be endued with virtue whom we honor. Wherefore as the consideration of
virtue breeds honor, Of honor and of majesty.
so honor breeds reverence, and then honor and reverence breed majesty,
which is the highest degree of honor, and increases continually according as
those virtues and good things excel, which induce us to honor them. For if
the virtues be mean, we honor them with a more simple honor, if greater, we
add thereunto reverence: and then majesty is that honor which can be given
to the greatest of all. And as this affection of honor is in our heart, we
show it forth by diverse outward signs, whereby we signify and testify,
that we acknowledge their greatness and excellency whom we honor, and that we
submit our selves thereunto. Therefore the more humble and modest a man is, the
readier he will be to yield reverence and honor to them unto whom it is due.
Contrariwise, the more drunken a man is with the love of himself, the more he
will presume of himself: and the greater this presumption is in him, the less
will he desire that another should be more excellent then himself, and will be
the hardlier persuaded to believe it is so. Therefore he will hardly yield to
give him honor and reverence. But Saint Paul admonishes the children of God
to go before one another in giving honor, Romans 12. 16.
and to be of like affection one toward another, not being high minded,
neither wise in themselves, that is to say, arrogant and selfe-weening,
presuming very much of themselves. So that as pride or humility abounds in
us, God, our superiors and friends shall be more or less honored by us. As
for those signs, whereby we testify this honor and reverence, we are to note
that they are many, according to the diversities of nations and countries, and
of their manners. Of the signs of honor and of reverence.
Most commonly we use to bend the knee, in testimony that we abase and submit
our selves to those unto whom we do this honor. Likewise we uncover the head,
which is a token of servitude, according to the custom of the Grecians and of
the Romans. There are many other such like signs, as to rise up, to give
place, to accompany, to salute, and infinite others, which would be too long
to rehearse, and without profit: all which we call bearing of honor and
reverence, or yielding of reverence. Wherefore although God looks chiefly to
that which is within, and not to that which is without, yet will he have us by
external signs to declare that honor, which we owe and bear unto him, and
by them to yield him homage. Thus he requires that we should testify our
faith and our love toward him, by confession of mouth and by all good works,
that there may be always an agreement between the body and the soul,
between the heart, mouth and hands, and between the workmaster that works,
and his instruments and works, to the end that the one may be known by the
other. For if the outward signs agree not with the heart, we make them false
witnesses, as the tongue is when it lies. For they bear witness to that
which is not: which is right hypocrisy, displeasing God and men. Therefore we
must beware of this vice, and take heed that we make no other outward show,
then will stand with the affection of the heart.

Now having spoken of honor, reverence and majesty, by reason of that
conjunction which they have with love, as also of favor and grace, Of Mercy
and Compassion.
it remains now that we should speak somewhat of Mercy, and compassion,
seeing that also has great agreement with love. Mercy then is a grief
conceived in our heart in respect of some evil, which (as we think) is
befallen one that has not deserved it: and this we call also pity and
compassion. Now because this affection moves us to aid, succor, and to do
good to them that are afflicted, as also to pardon such as have offended us,
therefore Mercy is often taken in the holy scriptures for aid, succor,
favor, grace, beneficence, good will, benefiting, friendship, benignity, as
also for the affection and inclination of the heart to do good and to succor
all them that have need of help, and this proceeds of charity. Therefore
Saint Paul says, Romans 12. 8, 9, 10.
He that shows mercy, let him do it with cheerfulness. Let love be
without dissimulation. Abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is
good. Be affectioned to love one another with brotherly love: not slothful to
do service: fervent in spirit, serving the Lord: distributing to the
necessities of the Saints: giving your selves to hospitality. Whereby he
admonishes us, that all the succors which we give to others, ought to
proceed from a sincere and cheerful affection of the heart, which should
provoke us to perform the same: and this cannot be in us without the
affection of pity, of mercy and of compassion. (...)
In regard whereof the name of alms is taken from a word, which in Greek
signifies Mercy: and therefore also alms signifies as much as mercy, or that
succor that is done of mercy and compassion, wherewith we are affected in
respect of the misery of our like. Whereupon it follows, that as every one
is of a more tender heart, so he is more merciful: as contrariwise hardness
of heart extinguisheth mercy and compassion. As for this word Compassion, it
signifies as much as alike compassion, that is, a like sense and feeling of
evil and of grief, as if we our selves suffered that which we see others
endure, by reason of that conjunction which we ought to have one with another,
1. Cor. 12.
as members of one and the same body, among which there is such agreement that
if one suffer all feel it, and so all are careful for it. Therefore it is
written in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that brotherly love continues. Heb.
13. 3.
Be not (says he) forgetful to lodge strangers. Remember them that are in
bonds, as though ye were bound with them: and them that are in affliction, as
if ye were also afflicted in the body. Wherefore we may well conclude, that
this affection of mercy is very necessary for men, yea as sweet, as mild, and
as profitable an affection as any can be amongst them, which they have received
of God for their mutual succor and consolation, in the midst of so many
miseries as commonly happen in the life of man. Math. 5. 7.
And this he commands us expressly in infinite places of his word, Luke 6.
36.
that the image of his unspeakable mercy might shine in us by our mercy
toward others. Prou. 21. 21.
Hitherto we have spoken of man, Iam. 2. 13.
as of man and of those affections that are most humane in him, now others
remain, which often make him more brutish, then any savage beast that is. For
seeing they come of the opinion of evil, they provoke and stir him up
greatly, making him marvelous wild and untamed. To the end therefore that we
may enter into the discourse of this matter, we will first see what Offending
and Offense is in the heart and soul, and consider what degrees it has, and
what good or evil may be in this affection. This we shall learn of thee,
AMANA.

Of offense in the heart and soul: of the degrees of offense, and of the good
and evil that may be in this affection: of contempt that is bred of it, and of
mockery, which follows contempt. Chap. 54.
AMANA. The Philosophers have set down four causes of all the troubles of the
soul, from whence all the residue proceed, and into which they return and
have their end: Four causes of all the troubles of the soul.
namely, immoderate desire, unbridled joy, unmeasurable grief, and extreme
fear. These, as they say, proceed through imprudence or ignorance of the
mind, and pusillanimitie of heart, from the opinion of good or evil things,
present or to come, which we imagine to be in the things of this world, being
imperfect and of small continuance. Now forasmuch as these four causes are the
springs of all vices and sins, into which men plunge themselves in this life,
they are called perturbations of the soul, which if they be not mastred by
reason, do so carry the soul hither and thither, that in the end they
constrain the reasonable power thereof to give over all authority and
liberty, and to obey the lusts of the sensual and unreasonable Will. Now
desire and joy, they commonly accompany the perishing goods of the body. For
they are of that nature, that they inflame the soul with an insatiable lust,
inso much that the obtaining of one thing is the beginning of a new and
vehement desire of having another. The nature of corporal goods.
And the enjoying of them besotteth the spirit with a sugared poison of fained
delight and pleasure, under the yoke of which it easily suffers it self to be
overcome, to be bound and to be governed, As for grief and fear, although
they also be not far removed from such false and vading goods of the body,
yet for the most part, they respect those adversities and miseries, which in
our opinion we judge to be in the want and privation of those goods. For they
fill the soul with trouble and disquietnesse, as she that thinks her estate
to be most miserable, if she obtain not the end of her carnal and inordinate
affections. So that if the body endure never so little, she casts forth
strange cries and complaints. And although the body suffer nothing at all,
yet is she always in extreme fear, least some evil should befall it.

But these very passions may be divided into good and badde. How the passions
may be good.
For honest desire, modestioy, and moderate grief and fear, are naturally in
us, for the preservation of our being. Yea all these affections are endued with
the qualities of commendable virtues, if they respect the sovereign Good of
man, as we may learn by our former speeches touching this matter, which were
chiefly of good affections, and of such as are most natural in man. Therefore
following our matter subject, we must from henceforth consider of a great
number of other affections of the heart, which for the most part make men more
beastlike then the very beasts themselves, that are void of all understanding
and reason, yea then the wildest beasts that are. All which affections take
their beginning from the opinion of evil, as these that are good proceed from
the opinion of Good. For the fear of evil does wonderfully provoke a man, and
when he is touched therewith, he waxes very savage and wild. Now the first
sting and biting of evil is offense, by reason that the heart is offended,
even as when one rusheth against a thing and hurts himself. Of offense.
Therefore by offense we understand properly a certain grief of the soul and
of the heart, which comes through some touch of evil that agrees not to our
nature. This first sense of grief is like to the first pricking of ones body:
and is contrary to the first pleasure, which we receive of some Good that is
offered unto us, and is agreeable to our nature. So that as this pleasure, when
it is confirmed, is turned into love, so out of this first feeling of grief,
which I call offense, the other affections that are joined with grief do
budde forth afterward, namely, anger, hatred, envy, indignation, revenge,
cruelty and such like. The evil that may offend us, What evil may offend us.
is whatsoever we judge to be contrary to us and to our nature, as well in
regard of the body as of the soul. For as the body is offended by those evils
which trouble the harmony and temperature thereof, and which bring grief and
hurt unto it: so is it with the soul, and with all the powers, senses and
affections thereof. For she may be offended in her imagination and fantasy, in
her reason, in her will, and in her affections. Now because every one
follows his affections, or his natural inclination, and not the right rule
and judgment of reason, it is an easy matter to offend and displease many,
and that in many things, but not so easy to please them. For there is but one
only reason, or at leastwise it has no great diversity in it. But the
natural dispositions of men are infinite, and wonderful diverse and
disagreeing, yea clean contrary one to another. And because there is nothing
in all the life of man, in which both good and evil are not mingled together,
or at leastwise some show of them, therefore also there is nothing that may not
be taken both ways, Why men are so easily offended.
either this or that way. Whereupon that which pleases some, displeases
others: beside that the want of the true knowledge of things, and of examining
thoroughly what good or evil is in every one of them, is the cause of this
error that beguileth men so. But howsoever it be, we ought to be very wary
that we offend no man by doing evil, and by turning aside from the duties of
true charity. And that which offends, is so much the more grievous, What
offenses are most grievous.
as it pearceth more inward and deep into the thing offended. For the
chiefest part of any thing is that which is most inward. Wherefore that which
enters in so far touches the quick indeed, and so offends and hurts.
For this cause that offense and hurt is very grievous: but those offenses that
are in the will, are greatest of all. As for those that are in the reason, they
are not so grievous: and those that are in the other senses, especially in the
senses of the body, are less then they. Nay, we think not our selves
offended at all, if our will be not offended. Therefore we will suffer many
things done by some, which we will not abide in others, according as we esteem
them to be friends or enemies, and as we are well or ill affectioned toward
them. Likewise many things please us that are done or uttered by our selves,
which would offend us if they were spoken or done by others. And forasmuch as
there is no offense but where there is sense and feeling, therefore they are
soonest offended and most difficult to please, Of the nature of mankind, and
how hardly it is pleased.
that are most tender and delicate both of body and soul, whether they be so
naturally, or through custom, or of weakness. And surely amongst all living
creatures man is most testie, and can suffer least. For he can bear with
nothing, and himself is intolerable to all. Wherefore if all men generally be
so hard to serve, no marvel if there be nothing so well, so justly and
holily spoken that can please a whole people, or a great multitude. But some
are so accustomed to contemn all things, that they are offended at every
thing, and grieved without any judgment or distinction. Yea there are some to
be found amongst them, that think it a point of great wisdom to do so, and
to like of nothing how well soever it be done. Now when men are led with
such a froward and peevish affection, they are very careful to enquire
diligently into all things, but with an unjust judgment, to see if they can
find any thing to condemn: thinking thereby to show their great wit, which
notwithstanding none will commend but fools and ignorant persons. For they
must needs be so who admire such a kind of people, whereas they ought thereby
to be moved not only to despise them, but also to hate and condemn them. For
as we use to speak in common proverb. That it is an easier matter to
reprehende then to imitate, so it is easier for every one to condemn all, or
to commend all indifferently, then to discern aright between the good and
the evil, and to give a good judgment thereof: because there is none so
ignorant, or blockish, or malicious, which cannot do the first with ease, but
the last is not so easily done but by men of good wits and upright of heart.
Now having said, that offense is the first sense and feeling of evil, let us
show that it is not without certain degrees, by which it ascends up higher.
The lowest degree then that is in it, is simply to turn aside from that which
displeases it: Of the degrees of offense.
and this degree may be called Dislike or Trouble. The next above that, is
when offense waxes hot in it self, and kindles the heart in such sort, that
all the body is moved therewith. And when offense is as it were shut up, that
it cannot range at will, then it turns into rage, and offers violence to it
self, extending it self even unto those that have not offended it at all. For
it is stirred up and waxes sharp in it self, and by this mean it increases
more and more continually. So that in the end it is like to a mad dog,
which byteth as many as it meets withal. And although this affection does
then testify sufficiently, that it sauoureth wholly of the corrupt nature of
man, nevertheless if it were well ordered and did not exceed measure, it were
commendable, so that we might justly place it amongst the affections of
nature being sound, which ought to be the seeds of virtues in us. How
offense may be wel^ used.
For God has given it unto man, to the end he should presently withdraw
himself, as soon as he perceives any evil, even at the first taste and
touch of it, that so it may go no farther, least through custom he grow into
a liking of evil, and afterward follow it with might and main. For if he
suddenly retire, as if he touched a serpent and feared to be bitten, he will
depart so far from it that it cannot hurt him: but if he stay in it and like
it never so little, he cannot withdraw himself in such due time, but that
he shall feel some hurt thereby. For evil is like to thorns, which a man
cannot come near unto, or handle them, but he shall be pricked: as likewise
no man can touch pitch and not be defiled therewith. The remedy to cure
offenses.
But the remedy to cure offense so far forth as it is vicious, is the
moderation of the heart, whereby it becomes so deep and so well tempered,
that it is able with ease to swallow up and to digest those troubles and
offenses, which others can in no wise bear or endure. But now that we know
what this affection is, we may easily conceive how it breeds contempt. For
contempt is an offense and displeasure conceived of some evil that cannot
hurt, What contempt is.
and thereupon is esteemed to be vile and abject. So that it proceeds of an
evil whereof we are not afraid. For we use not to despise them whom we
fear, but them only of whom we make small account, because they have not
ability to hurt us howsoever they want no good will. Therefore although we
desire not to do him good whom we despise, yet we will not hurt him, if
there be in us but only a simple contempt of him. We think it enough for us
to mock him, and to show what small account we make of him, and what small
regard is to be had unto him.

Hereof it is that proud persons are such great despisers and mockers of
others. For seeing they esteem of none but of themselves, it cannot be but
that they disdain others, and so consequently mock them. Of mockery.
For derision and mockery follow contempt, and they are expressed by many
outward signs, and by diverse kinds of behavior, which oftentimes are
hardlier borne withal and suffered, then greater evils and injuries which men
may receive: as indeed they are blows and wounds, which pearce even unto the
heart and soul. Therefore contempt and mockery engender commonly anger in them
that cannot digest them with modesty and patience: as the true servants of GOD
do, and followers of Jesus Christ, who sustained so patiently all the
contempts and reproaches that were offered unto him, that no evil word or
voice ever came out of his mouth, whereby he gave any signification or sign
of wrath, Esaias. 53. 7.
but was always quiet and dumb, as it were a sheep before her shearer,
according as Esaias had foretold. Which ought to be unto us an example of all
modesty and patience, to the end we may know how to bridle our anger and wrath
in time conceived against all them that offend, contemn and mock us. But let
us now consider of other affections, which we said were joined with grief, and
followed offense. And first let us learn what anger is, what are the nature
and effects of it, and for what use it may serve man: and this we shall
understand of thee, ARAM.

Of anger, and of the vehemency and violence thereof: of the difference that
is between anger and rancour: of the affection of revenge that accompanies
them: of the motions of the heart in anger, with the effects thereof: wherefore
this affection is given to man, and to what use it may serve him. Chap. 55.
ARAM. Diverse opinions of the Philosophers touching the affections.
There has been always great contentions and disputions amongst the best
learned of all the Philophers, to know whether the affections and passions of
the heart and soul were necessary to prick forward and to help men to the
effects of virtues, or otherwise hurtful and contrary unto them. Aristotle and
all the Peripatecians mainteyned, that all the affections of the soul were not
only natural, but given also by nature to great purpose: as among the rest,
anger and choler, which served for a prick to provoke and stir up fortitude
and generositie. And because virtue was a habit of that which is good and
comely, yea the mediocritie of the affections, therefore it ought not in any
sort to be without these motions, neither yet to be too much subject to
passion. For the privation and want of desire, would have made the soul
immovable and without cheerefulnes, even in honest things: as over vehement
desires altogether trouble it, and set it as it were beside it self. The
Academikes and Stoikes contended hard against this opinion, alleging many
great arguments against it: as this among the rest: That all is either virtue
or vice, and that there is no mean between them: that one of these cannot be
the cause of the other, seeing they are directly and in all things contrary,
having nothing common between them, and therefore that virtue never proceeded
of vice. And concerning Fortitude and Generositie, which were bred in the heart
by mature consultation and election of reason, that these virtues could by no
means be helped by anger or choler, but rather troubled and hindered in their
actions, because such passions did never use any consultation, but performed
all things inconsideratly and at adventure. There are many yet to be found
amongst us, that would take part with either opinion of these Philosophers,
but unless they study thoroughly the book of nature, and have the spirit of
God for their master and teacher, they shall never be able to yield causes and
certain reasons of their resolution, nor of the wonderful effects wrought by
the powers of the soul, as we may learn by the sequel of our speech.

First then we must know, What anger is.
that Anger is a vehement motion of the heart, because it sees those good
things which it has, to be contemned, whereas it judges them not to be such as
ought to be so lightly set by. And herein it thinks it self despised. For
every one valueth himself according to the opinion of those good things which
he judges to be in himself: therefore there is no anger which comes not of
offense. But all offense is not anger. How it differs from offense.
For offense is more general, and anger more special, albeit they are commonly
confounded and taken one for another. But there are many things that dislike
us, with which notwithstanding we are not angry, because there is no contempt
of us joined with them. For oftentimes we are grieved by those things that have
neither sense nor understanding, when some thing happens against our mind
and offends us: and it seems that we are provoked to anger against them,
but this is not anger properly, seeing there is nothing but simple offense
without contempt of us. Also it falls out often, that our blood is heated,
and our heart pricked forward and inflamed to do some great work, for the
performance whereof it is requisite that it should be much moved, but this is
only a kindling of the heart without anger and offense, because it is not
stirred up thereunto by any evil. But when a man lets loose the bridle unto
this affection in such sort, that he accustomes himself thereunto, Of rancour.
this use and custom turns it into rancour, which is an inueterate anger
that has taken root in the heart. Now the better that a man thinks of
himself, the sooner he is offended at every thing, and the readier he is to
be moved to anger, as taking himself to be despised. This is a very vehement
and violent affection. For it overthrows very often the whole mind and
soul, The violence of anger.
so that it forgets all right, justice and equity, all good will and
amity, and pardons not, no not women or children, neither yet kinsfolks or
friends Therefore Solomon says, Prou. 27. 4.
That anger is cruel, and wrath is raging: but who can stand before envy?
Ecclus. 8.
And Ecclesiasticus, Contend not with a choleric man: for he esteems the
sheading of blood, as a matter of nothing and he will fall upon thee in a
place where there shall be none to help thee. To be short, The fruits of
anger.
after that anger has once got the bridle at will, the whole mind and
judgment is so blinded and carried headlong, that an angry man thinks of
nothing but of revenge, insomuch yt he forgets himself, and cares not what
he does, or what harm will light upon himself in so doing, so that he may be
avenged. And many times he will murmr against heaven and earth, and against
all the creatures, because they are not moved to revenge his quarrel: yea,
which is worse, he despiteth God himself and waxes wroth against him,
blaspheming him, because he takes not pleasure in serving his revenging mind.
Which is as much as if he should spette against heaven: and therefore it is
very necessary, that his spettle, proceeding from such a stinking mouth,
should return and fall back upon his own face. And when this passion of
anger is very vehement, it leads a man even to fury and rage, and procures
unto him not only many diseases, but oftentimes death it self. Therefore
although we knew not what hurt this affection does to the soul, yet the
evil which it brings to the body, ought to be of sufficient force to turn
us from it. What effect it has in the body.
For it is a vice that has wonderful effects in the body, and such as are
very unbeseeming a man. For first of all when the heart is offended, the blood
boyleth round about it, and the heart is swollen and puffed up: whereupon
follows a continual panting and trembling of the heart and breast. And when
these burning flames and kindled spirits are ascended up from the heart unto
the brain, then is anger come to his perfection. From hence comes change of
countenance, shaking of the lips and of the whole visage, stopping of speech
and such other terrible looks to behold, more meet for a beast then for a
man. For this cause the Philosopher that counseled an angry man to behold his
face in a glass, had reason so to do. For he that beholds his own face
and countenance when he is in choler, should find matter enough to be
appeased. Now because anger is a grief proceeding of the contempt of those
good things that are in a man, who thinks that it ought not to be so,
therefore he desires to show that they are not lightly to be esteemed of,
which he supposes may be done this way, by making his power known, especially
in hurting. Whereupon this appetite of revenge is engendered, The fountain of
the appetite of revenge.
which is common to anger with offense, hatred and envy: so that anger is
always mingled with sorrow and with desire of revenge. And indeed revenge is a
motion of the heart, whereby it does not only turn aside and withdraw it
self from that which offends, but labors withal either to repel it, or
to overcome and vanquish it, and to punish him that is the cause of it.
Wherefore we may note herein two motions, as there are two respects, namely,
the one to eschew the evil that offends, and the other to pursue with great
violence him that is the author thereof. Hereof it is, that some when they are
angry become pale, because the blood retireth unto the heart: The causes of
looking pale and red.
and these are most courageous, and most dangerous. Others wax read, because
the blood ascends up to the head: therefore these are not so full of
stomach, nor so much to be feared, in respect of those causes, which were
showed before when we spoke of Fear. But howsoever the difference is, yet in
anger the blood does not wholly go back unto the heart, as it does in fear
and sorrow, but disperseth it self outwardly. For the heart is as if he strove
to go out of his host or camp, not unlike to a Prince or Captain that is
desirous to march forward in battle array: whereupon he sends forth the
blood and the spirits, as his men of war, to repel the enemy: which is not
done without great moving and tumult, and much stirring in the heart, which
sets it on fire, and inflameth the blood and spirits.

Whereupon it follows, that by reason of this motion of the blood, and of the
confusion of the spirits, which ensue thereof, the actions and motions of all
the members of the body are troubled. But the brain is chiefly offended, How
anger troubles the brain.
because that also is heated by the inflamed blood, and by those burning
spirits which mount up thither, by whose motion it is stirred up and
disturbed, as also by the sinews which come even to the heart. For how hot
soever the heart and breast are or may be, yet man abides always still and
quiet, if the heat pearce not up to the brain. For it falls out herein as
it does with a drunken body, who is not said to be drunk, because he has
taken in store of wine, except it ascend up into his head, and trouble his
brain and senses. Hereof it is, that vehement anger is often accompanied with
frensinesse, and with the falling sickness. And because the heart being
inflamed, the blood and spirits also are set on fire, they cause the whole
body to tremble, yea the very bones themselves. For the blood that boyleth in
the breast, puffs up and thrusts forward the Midriffe, whereupon it
follows, that the motions of angry men are very troublesome, like unto
those of drunkardes. Now because there are many means to stir men up to
anger and wrath, and seeing it is so dangerous a passion, it is very needful
for us to have many good remedies against it, as indeed there are many to be
found. Although we should not stand in need of so many, The best remedy
against anger.
if we would only consider who we are, and compare our selves with God,
and mark narowly how many ways we offend him daily, what causes we give
him to be bitterly incited and kindeled with wrath against us, and how he
bears with us, turning his anger into pity and compassion toward us. For
if we enter into this consideration, first we shall be greatly ashamed that we
are angry, secondly our anger will be easily appeased. For who can despise us
as we deserve, and move us to anger, seeing we despise God unto whom we owe
all honor and reverence, and whom we ought to set at so high a price above
all other things, that we should esteem all the world as nothing in respect
of his value? And yet we show plainly, how far we are off from this,
seeing we stand in so little awe to offend him, yea, are more afraid to
displease men then him. Beside, we commit no offense against him, in which
there is not great contempt of his majesty, even hie treason against his
divine majesty. Whereas if we feared, loved and honored him as we ought to
do, we should rather fear to offend him then to die. But there is nothing
which we care for less. Wherefore questionless before him, who is a terrible
auenger of his contempt, we are all lost, if he should pursue us in his
anger, as we deserve, and as we pursue others, and not change his anger into
mercy. If we consider well of these things, we shall know what occasion we
have to swell with pride like toads, and to think so well of our selves as we
do, or to be so soon kindled with choler against them that have offended us:
we shall know what excellency and dignity can be in us that are but dust and
filth, whereby we should be so soon provoked when we see our selves despised
and wronged of others. Moreover, when we know, that we are utterly undone,
except GOD extend his grace and mercy toward us, shall we not, in stead
of anger and revenge, be ashamed to crave pardon of him, if we continue still
to be angry, and use no pity and favor toward them that have offended us,
as we desire that God should show favor unto us? And indeed what cause have
we to hope for it upon any other condition? Ecclus. 28.
For it is written, that the Lord will take vengeance of him that reuengeth
himself, and will observe his offenses narrowely. Forgive thy neighbor his
misdeede, and when thou prayest, thy sins shall be forgiven thee. Shall man
keep anger against man, and will he ask remission at the Lords hands? He
will take no pity upon his like, and shall he demand pardon for his sins?
Seeing he that is but flesh keeps his anger, and yet sueth unto God for
pardon, who will blot out his iniquities? Another remedy against anger.
But this ought not to be forgottten of us, to cause us to abstain from all
anger toward them that by offering us injury provoke us thereunto, namely, yt
we acknowledge the^ to be ye scourges of God to chastise our faults, which are
worthy of greater punishment.

Thus let us always look to the first cause of our affliction, and to God who
visits us justly (whatsoever the means are which he uses) and not to
second causes and to the next means, to the end that we do not as dogs
do, which run after the stone thrown against them, that by biting it they
may be revenged of it, not looking unto him that threw it. For if we consider
that the blow given unto us comes from God, we will let the stone go, and
not follow after it with anger and revenge, but turn unto God who threw it,
not to stir up our selves to despite him, or to be avenged of him, but to
crave for pardon and grace at his hands. And this is the right way which we
are to take for the quenching of our choler, that so we may bridle our anger,
and keep our selves quiet. Now for the end of this matter, it remains that
we should know whether this affection be altogether vicious, and wholly
proceeding from our corrupt nature, or whether it have within it any seed of
virtue, Why the affection of anger is natural, and what good comes by it.
as well as the rest. It is certain, that it is given of GOD to man, to stir
him up to the desire of excellent things, to the end that when he sees
himself despised and rejected for base actions and abject things, and is
grieved for the same, he should endeavor to leave and forsake them, and to
addict himself to better and more noble things, which can not be contemned,
nor he despised in regard of them. And this kind of anger is very good. For
being angry in this sort, our anger is turned upon our selves only, to blame
and reprehende our selves for our sloth and looseness, and for our other
vices and imperfections: and by this means our anger should not be sin, but
being acceptable unto God, it would be unto us a Schoolmaster, and as a
spur to solicit and persuade us unto virtue, and to such things as beseem
us, and that estate whereunto we are called. If then we would be angry
according to the will of God, let us first be angry against our selves for our
faults and imperfections: and when we have just occasion to whet our selves
against others, let our anger be turned against their vices, not against their
persons. And such an anger will show zeal for the honor of God, and the
salvation of our neighbors. Now the sequel of our speech requires, that we
should speak of hatred and of envy, which for the most part follow offense
and anger. Let us then hear ACHITOB discourse of these affections.

Of Hatred, and of the nature and effects thereof: of a good kind of Hatred,
and of the remedy to cure the evil Hatred: of Envy, and of the kinds and
effects thereof: of the difference between good and evil Envy. Chap. 56.
ACHITOB. Forasmuch as nature, wisdom and goodness teach, that men ought to be
knit together by love, as we have seen heretofore, and that we are by the
self same nature framed and fashioned thereunto, as we may learn by that
which we have heard of the form and disposition of the heart, we must needs
confess, that the spirit of man can bring forth nothing more unworthy it
self, then to suffer it self to be overcome of Hatred and Envy, which are so
contrary to love, that they comprehend under them all general injustice and
wickedness of men. For from these wild plants nothing can proceed (by reason
of the corruption of man's nature) but effects that draw us clean contrary from
wishing well to our neighbor. So that if we pluck out of our heart the cause
of this natural obligation concerning the succor we owe one to another,
namely, Love, what can be either found or placed there but hardness,
inhumanitie, cruelty, and all kind of barbarousnesse, which are to be
accounted and taken for monsters in man's nature? For how strange and monstrous
a thing were it, to unclothe a man's heart of Love, and to put upon it hatred,
envy, extreme backebiting, bitterness and cruelty, which proceed all from
one fountain? Nevertheless we see, that men are inclined rather to Hatred
then to Love: but let us search out the cause thereof.

There are many that take Hatred to be an inueterate anger, What Hatred is.
because it is a habit of anger, whereby the heart escheweth something as evil,
and desires to repel and drive it away. Wherefore this affection is directly
contrary to love, and so likewise is anger. For it is an offense rooted in the
heart, which causes it to wish greatly his hurt by whom it takes it self to
be offended. Now because contempt does often accompany hatred, and envy is
never without it, besides that it breeds strife, contentions, manslaughters
and murders, therefore in the holy Scriptures hatred is often taken for all
these things. The causes of it.
As for the vehement causes of hatred, they are in every one according as a man
esteems of the things he hates. Therefore proud and envious persons are
always very much inclined to hatred. Some men also are of such a hateful
nature, that they scarce wish well to any body: and surely these are very
deuillish natures. Some likewise are given thereunto of custom, which they
have gotten by reioicing at other men's harms. But the cause why it is easier
for us to hate then to love, Why it is an easier matter to hate then to love.
and why Hatred takes deeper root in our heart then love, is because hatred
finds a better soil there, and a more apt foundation to be laid upon, then
love does, and that chiefly for two reasons. The first is the corruption of
man's nature, which being left unto it self, favors more of the nature of
Satan, who is hateful, a liar, and envious from the beginning, then of the
nature of God, who is love, truth, and charity. Therefore Saint John says,
1. Ioh. 3. 10, 12.
that Cain hated his brother and slew him, because he was of the devil, and
Abel was of God. This hatred will be always in those that have one and the
same Father that Cain had, against all good men and children of God. The second
is, because the infirmity of our nature will not permit us to enjoy any good
things in this world, that are pure and of long continuance: and therefore
they suffer us to have but a little sense and taste of them. But it is clean
contrary in regard of euilles. For they quickly find whereupon to stay and
to plant themselves within us, and to spread their roots so deep and broad,
that they cannot easily be plucked up. Whereupon they are felt a great deal
more, and continue longer in our heart and memory. Not without cause then do
men say, that the pleasures, services, and good things done unto us are madeof
feathers, and therefore they are easily carried away by reason of their
lightness: but offenses, euilles, and displeasures are made of lead, and
therefore they abide in the bottom of the heart by reason of their weight. And
forasmuch as love proceeds of that which is good, and hatred of evil,
whether it be evil in truth, or in opinion only, as evil is commonly
greater and of longer continuance then Good, for the causes spoken of, so is it
with Love and Hatred, and with their roots and long abode.

Now of Hatred comes backebiting and evil speaking, The fruits of Hatred.
which being kindled, brings forth bitterness and cruelty: and as love
whetteth a man on to do well, so contrariwise Hatred turns men aside from
well doing, and provoke them to hurt. For this cause it sows the seeds of
enmity, and labors craftily to cause the party hated to fall into danger.
For it desires to hurt him, and to bring evil upon him, either by it self or
by an other, secretly or openly. In a word, seeing it is wholly contrary to
Love, we may without any long discourse know the nature thereof, by that
which has been spoken of the nature of Love, taking it clean contrary
thereunto. But let us see whether the affection of hatred be altogether
together evil of it self, or whether a man may reap any profit thereby.

We may say of this as we did of anger, Of a good kind of hatred.
and of other affections already spoken of. For it is given to man to cause him
to withdraw himself from all evil that may hurt him, to flee from it and to
repel it, Romans ^2. 9.
as being contrary unto him. Amos 5. 15.
Therefore Saint Paul says, Hate that which is evil, and cleave to that
which is good. For true and perfect hatred should hate nothing but that which
is evil indeed, as true love should love that only which is good indeed.
But contrariwise we commonly hate the Good and good men, and love the Evil
and the workers thereof. Besides, we are faulty in this, that in stead of
hating men's vices, we hate their persons. Wherefore it is needful, that in
this matter of Hatred, we should put that in practice which we have already
said of Anger, namely, that we should above all things hate our own vices,
and that evil which is in us and in ours. But we that practice the clean
contrary, change Love into Hatred, How love is turned into hatred.
and Hatred into Love. For when we supporte and bear with our own vices, or
with the vices of our friends and kinsemen, which are not to be suffered or
borne withal, it seems that this toleration proceeds from the love we
bear either to our selves or to others: but it is far otherwise. For if we
loved our selves well, and our neighbors as our selves, we would be
careful to remove all hurtefull things far from our souls, and to furnish
them with that which is convenient and wholesome for them, and so likewise for
our friends: whereas we procure unto them that which turns to their
dishonor, hurt, and overthrow, by nourishing them in their vices through our
dissembling and bearing with them. And thus much for that profit, which we
may receive by this affection of hatred, being well guided according unto the
will of GOD, and to a sound and reasonable nature.

Now against the passion of evil Hatred, amongst a great number of remedies
which may very well be applied thereunto, we have two principal ones,
Remedies against the evil kind of hatred.
that are very good and profitable. The first remedy is, the example of the
love of GOD, and of Jesus Christ toward us, of which we have spoken already,
with those holy Precepts which do command Love and forbid Hatred. The
second remedy is, the contempt of all earthly things, and the regard that is
to be had unto the things that are Celestial and Eternal. For if we shall
set light by all mortal and corruptible things, and lift up our hearts to
higher things, we shall very easily break off all hatred and enmity,
neither will we take any thing greatly to heart, but when we see God offended.

Now as concerning Envy, Description of Envy.
that always accompanies hatred, it is an affection quite contrary to mercy,
which is a sorrow conceived by reason of the miseries of an other, whereas
Envy is a grief arising of other men's felicity. Therefore it does naturally
rejoice at another man's harm, Diverse sorts of Envy.
and is grieved at his good: so that according to the variety of good things
that may befall other men, so there are diverse kinds Envy is never without
grief.
So that sorrow is always joined therewith. The goods against which envy
rusheth most, are such as are in greatest reputation amongst men, as honor and
glory, insomuch that it is more moved at the good renown, honor and praise
given to men, in respect of the good things that are in them, then at the good
things themselves, in regard of which men are honored and esteemed. For the
envious man cares not for the virtues that bring renown and glory, but only
for the honor and glory which follow them, as the shadow does the body.
Forasmuch then as a proud man desires still to be preferred before all,
therefore he is more greedy of these goods, of honor, and glory, then of true
goods of which the other are but shadows. Hereof it is, that a proud man is
naturally envious, because envy springs from such a desire of preferrement:
yea, it is commonly bredde of pride. Yea, the farther a man is off from that
which he would be thought to be, and the less endued with those good things
for which he would be honored, Against what good things Envy is most bent.
the more envious he is. But amongst all the good things against which envy
strives most, and for which it is most stirred up, those of the soul are the
chiefest, because they are more excellent then those of the body, and such as
never have end. Therefore also the reputation and honor which men obtain by
their means abide with them continually. But the contrary falls out in
corporal and external goods, as they that have more narrow bounds.
Wherefore, as they cannot grow to that greatness unto which the other do, so
their use also is nothing so great, and consequently the price and reputation
that proceeds from them is not so great. Therefore if the question be of
honor and glory, no man of any good judgment but will more willingly give
over that which may be gotten by corporal and outward things, then that which
follows knowledge, wisdom, virtue, and the other goods of the soul. So that
envy may stand us in stead of a witness to testify and show unto us, which
are the greatest goods of all, seeing it is always busied about the highest,
noblest, and most excellent Good. Now as there is no wicked affection, which
carries not about, it own torment to take vengeance thereof by the just
judgment of God, so this of envy passes all the rest in this respect.
Therefore it was well said of them that taught, that envy is most just,
because of self it is the same punishment to the envious man, How an envious
body is tormented.
which it deserves. For first, it is vile and servile, because an envious man
knows this in himself, that he judges the good things in an other to be
greater and more excellent then his own, or at leastwise, he fears least it
should so come to pass. Therefore there is no affection in a man, which he
dare less disclose then this of envy: so that he receives less comfort in
this then in any other. For by opening our heart to an other we receive solace
and comfort: whereas the envious person judges his affection of envy to be so
vile, that he dare not discover it, but hides and concealeth it as much as
he can. If he be angry or hate any one, he will declare it a great deal
sooner. And albeit fear be thought to be dishonorable, yet will a man rather
disclose this affection, then he will envy. The like may be said of sorrow and
of love. But the envious body is constrained to bite on his bridle, to chew and
to devour his envy within himself, and to lock up his own misery in the
bottom of his heart, to the end it break not forth and show it self, The
countenance of an envious man.
whereby the body receives great detriment. For it becomes pale, wanne,
swart, and lean, the eyes sink into the head, the looks are askew, and the
whole countenance is disfigured. And within the heart the furies are enclosed,
which give him so small rest, that greater torment can not be imagined.
Therefore Solomon says very well, That a sound heart is the life of the body:
Prouer. 14. 30.
but envy is the rotting of the bones. And Ecclesiasticus says, Ecclus. 30.
17, 24.
That death is better then a bitter life: that envy and wrath shorten the life,
and that carfulness brings age before the time. To conclude, although all the evil affections trouble and corrupt the mind very much, yet none of them
offends it so much as envy does. Which comes not to pass so much because
it self judges or esteems good to be evil, as because it desires that
others should so esteem thereof. But howsoever this vice be very vile and
infamous, and hurtful both to the body and soul, yet in this affection of
envy, we must put a difference between that part of it, which proceeds from
sound nature, as it was first given of God to man, and that which is in it
through the corruption of nature. Of a good kind of envy.
For there is a kind of envy, which serves us in stead of spurs to prick
us forward, and to work in us a will and desire both to obtain and to keep
great good things. And this envy is very good, when we apply our selves to the
true Goods, and are not grieved at the prosperity and virtues which we see in
others, but are moved by their example to desire and to seek after the self
same Goods, yea greater if the means be offered, provided that all be referred
to the glory of God, to our own salvation, and to the profit of our
neighbors. Unto this kind of Envy Saint Paul exhorts us, when he writes to
the Corinthians, speaking of the diversity of gifts wrought by the spirit of
God in his Church. 1. Cor. 12. 31.
Be envious of the best gifts: albeit in our usual translation it be Desire,
yet the Greek word signifies to envy: but the sense is in a manner all one.
And the same Apostle speaking of the relief and collection made for the poor,
says, 2. Cor. 9. 2.
Achaia was prepared a year ago, and your zeal has provoked many: that is
to say, the emulation and envy, which they have conceived by your example: and
this was a good, holy, and christian envy. But if we seek our own glory, and
in that respect are grieved that others excel us in virtues, and in the gifts
and graces of GOD, only because we would have that honor which they have, and
be equal with them, or above them, this is a perverse and Satanicall
affection, declaring evidently that we seek our selves and our own glory more
then the glory of God. For if we had respect to that which we ought, it would
be all one to us who were the instruments either our selves or others, so that
God were glorified, and that were well done, which ought to be done. As for the
evil sorts of envy of which we have spoken, they are placed by Saint Paul
amongst the works of darkness and of the flesh, Roman. 13. galat. 5. 21.
where he says, that They which are defiled with them shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. But forasmuch as in this discourse we placed Jealousy amongst
the kinds of Envy, and yet it is often taken in the good part, proceeding as
it were of true love, as Zeal also is bredde thereof, it shall be good for
thee, ASER, to begin the days work to morrow with a treatise of these two
affections.

The end of the seventh days work.
THE EIGHT days work.
Of Jealousy, and of the kinds thereof: how it may be either a vice or a
virtue: how true zeal, true jealousy, and indignation proceed of love: of
their natures, and why these affections are given to man. Chap. 57.
ASER. The holy Scripture applying it self to the capacity of man's
understanding, Esaias 3. 16. and 48. 4.
describes men's affections oftentimes by those testimonies, Ezech. 3. 8, 9.
which their outward members affoorde, conuincing them of vices rooted in their
heart, by the carriage of their eyes, of their eie-liddes, of their forehead,
and of their whole countenance. Which is to this end chiefly, that when they
know, that men may read one in another face as it were in a Book, that which
is covered and hidden in the heart, they should persuade themselves, that God
sounds and sees more easily the most secret thoughts of their hearts, and
that they can hide nothing from him. Likewise the holy spirit to condescend to
our rudeness, Psalm. 34. 15.
and to teach us to know God by our selves, 1. Pet. 3. 22.
not only by our soul which we see not, Esaias 29. 23.
but also by our body which we see, speaks often of his high, infinite, Exodus
13. 14.
and incomprehensible majesty, as it were of a man, attributing unto him eyes,
Job 40. 4.
ears, a nose, a mouth, arms, legs, feet, hands, a heart, and bowelles.
Moreover, albeit this pure, simple, and eternal essence be in no wise
passionated with affections, yet the same heavenly word does not only attribute
unto him wrath, revenge, anger, jealousy and other affections, but does
oftentimes propound him unto us as an yrefull man, Exodus 15. 7, 8.
having the face, behavior, and whole countenance of one greatly stirred up to
wrath and revenge, Job 9. 17.
yea even to great fury. Which is done to this end, both, that by the knowledge
which we may have of the nature of these affections whereunto we are inclined,
and of the effects which they bring forth, and causes from whence they
proceed, we should meditate the same things to be in God when we offend
him, and know what reward we are to look for: and also to teach us that
right rule of all our affections, which we have in his divine goodness.

Now if we remember what has been declared unto us of the nature of Love,
we heard that true and pure love was without jealousy, and that this
affection sprang of the love of concupiscence: and yet it was told us
yesterday, that Jealousy was placed amongst the kinds of envy. Let us then
see what this affection is properly, and whether all jealousy be vicious. What
Jealousy is.
I understand by Jealousy, a fear which a man has, lest an other whom he
would not, should enjoy something. This comes to pass two ways, namely,
either because we our selves would enjoy it alone, or else because we would
have some other, to whom we wish the same thing to enjoy it alone: the reason
hereof is, because we judge it hurtful either to our selves or to those whom
we love, if others should enjoy it. As if the question were of some honor, or
of some other good, which we would have to our selves alone, or for some one
whom we love, and should be grieved that an other enjoys it, and thereupon
envy him, either because we are afraid he shall enjoy it, or because he
enjoys it already, herein appears envy and evil jealousy, which brings
with it great mischiefs. James 4. 1, 2.
For as Saint James says, From whence are wars and contentions among you?
are they not hence, even of your lusts that fight in your members? ye lust,
and have not: ye envy and are jealous, or have indignation, and can not
obtain: ye fight and war and g^t nothing. Wherefore to avoid this envy and
evil jealousy, we must consider of what nature that Good is, which stirs
us up to this affection. For according to the nature thereof, our jealousy may
be either a vice or a virtue. For if the question be of some Good thing, which
belongs in such sort to me alone, or to any other whom I love, that none
may enjoy it except it be unjustly, and to the dishonor of God, it is no evil
jealousy if I fear lest any should abuse it, A good kind of jealousy.
or be grieved when it falls out so. If it concerns some body whom I
l^^ue, who is abused by another to the displeasure of God, and to the dishonor
and hurt of the party beloved, I have yet greater occasion to fear, to be
grieved, and even to be jealous both over my own Good, and over the good of
the party beloved. And as I have just cause of Jealousy in this case in that
thing which properly belongs unto me, so also I have like occasion when an
other unjustly enjoys that Good which belongs to him whom I love, and of
whom I ought to be careful, and be grieved when any reproach or wrong is
offered unto him. As for example: seeing the husband has such an interest in
his wife, and the wife in her husband, as no other either may or ought to have
the like, both of them have just cause to beware that no other have the
fruition hereof but themselves, to take the matter heavily if it fall out
otherwise, and to be very much offended and full of indignation against him
that should attempt any such thing. For that can not be done, as not without
the great dishonor and damage of the parties so knit together, so also not
without the great dishonor of GOD, whose law and covenant is thereby
violated. What mutual love ought to be between man and wife.
On the other side, that mutual love which ought to be betwixt the husband and
the wife, does bind them to desire and to procure the honor and profit each
of other, and to keep back all dishonor and hurt that may befall them.
Wherefore both of them have just cause to be offended with those that seek to
procure any blemish in this respect. The like may be said of fathers,
mothers, and children, and of all that have any charge over others, or that
are linked together by friendship. But on the other side a man must beware,
that he be not too suspicious, and that he carry not within himself matter of
Jealousy, and so torment himself and others without cause: as likewise he
must be very careful, that he give no occasion of Jealousy to any other.

And thus you see how there may be a good jealousy, notwithstanding that in
this case it be mingled with love and anger. For Jealousy causes the party
that loves, to be angry with him by whom that thing which he does love,
receives any dishonor or detriment. Therefore this anger comes of love,
which inciteth him to set himself against him that offends the thing
beloved. So that these affections are always commendable, arising of this
cause and being ruled according to that Zeal and Jealousy, which the holy
Scripture attributes unto GOD in regard of us. For he is called a jealous
GOD, Why Jealousy is attributed to God.
not only in regard of his honor and glory, which he will not have given to
any other besides himself, (and indeed all the creatures joined together are
not able to diminish or to add any thing thereunto whatsoever they do) but
also because he loves us, he is jealous of our salvation, and desires to
reserve us wholly to himself, and to make us partakers of his immortal
blessedness. Therefore he will not have us spoil him of his glory, and
forsake his service, in regard of that hurt and damage which should befall
us thereby. For he bears that affection toward us, which a good Father
does toward his children, who loves them not for any profit coming to him
thereby, but only for their own good, and because he both will and ought to
love them. This love then, which God bears unto us, causes him to be jealous
over us, when, through impiety and wickedness of life, we leave him and
join our selves unto his adversary the devil. Whereupon he does not only
become angry, but is full of indignation also, both against him and us. What
Indignation is.
For indignation is a grief wrought in us, when we see some good thing befall
to an unworthy person, and him that is worthy, deprived thereof. This affection
therefore proceeds from the same root from whence compassion springs,
namely, from the judgment of that which is good, and from the love thereof.
But the diversity of both their objects causes them in some sort to be
contrary affections: forasmuch as indignation is bred in regard of some good
that happens to one that is unworthy of it, and compassion or pity arises of
some evil that befalls or is procured to him that has not deserved it. From
whence Zeal proceeds.
And of these two contrary affections mingled together, a third affection is
bred, which in holy Scripture is called Zeal and Jealousy, being taken in the
good part.

Hereof it is, that the love and compassion which God has of his children,
when he sees them go about to bereave themselves of that good, which he
wishes them, and the indignation that he has in regard of the good, which
happens to the wicked in the accomplishment of their evil desires, (for to
them evil is in stead of good) causes him to be moved with jealousy and to
be avenged thereof. For this cause the Prophet Joel says, Joel 2. 18.
Then will the Lord be jealous over his land, and spare his people. And the
Prophet Esaias, having declared to Ezechias the deliverance of Jerusalem, and the
succor which GOD would send him against Senacherib, Isaiah 9. 7.
says, That the zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this. In like
manner, when the true children and servants of God behold a confusion in
stead of that order which the Lord would have observed, and which he has
prescribed unto his creatures, they are greatly moved in regard of that
zeal, which they bear as well toward GOD, as toward their neighbors.
What Zeal is.
For Zeal is nothing else but an indignation conceived in respect of those
things, that are unworthily done against him that is dear unto us, and whom
we love. Therefore if we love GOD and his Statutes, if we love the
Commonwealth, our Princes, our Parents, and all others whom we ought to
love, we will be jealous for them, and can not behold without indignation
aniething done against them, that ought not to be. This Indignation and
Jealousy will induce us to set our selves earnestly against all injustice, and
to overthrow it with all our might. With this Jealousy Saint Paul was
affected toward the Corinthians when he wrote thus unto them, 2. Cor. 11. 2.
I am jealous over you, with godly jealousy: for I have prepared you for one
husband, to present you as a pure virgin unto Christ.

This kind of Zeal is very requisite in all the true servants of God, but
chiefly in them that have any public charge, A good lesson for Princes and
Pastors.
whether it be in the Church or in the Commonwealth. For except they be
endued with great Zeal toward the glory of the Majesty of GOD, toward
justice and all virtues, they will never have that care which they ought either
of the honor and service of GOD, or of public benefit, or to reprove,
correct, and punish vices, or lastly, to maintain good Discipline, upright
justice, and good conversation, in such sort as becomes them. For this cause
has GOD given to the nature of man, this affection of Zeal and Indignation
for the communion that ought to be in the society of men, to the end there
should be a right and indifferent distribution of all good things, so that
none of them should light upon the unworthy that use them ill, but to such as
deserve them and know how to use them aright.

Now when these affections are thus ruled, they are very good and profitable:
The abuse of Indignation and of Zeal.
but commonly they are abused unto vice. For Indignation is quickly bredde of
Envy, which being unjust, is also of a corrupt and badde judgment, so that an
envious body thinks that whatsoever good thing an other has befallen unto
him, he is unworthy of it. And so in like manner the Zeal that is without
true knowledge, brings forth most pernicious effects. For it proceeds
from a love which judges not aright of the thing that moves it, but
esteems it to be evil and worthy of hatred, whereas it is good and worthy
of love. Of this Zeal Saint Paul speaks when he says of the Jews, Romans
10. 2.
I bear them record, that they have the zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge. For being deceived in their judgment, and calling themselves
defenders and lovers of the law of GOD, they persecuted the Gospel, (which was
the accomplishment of the Law) and also them that believed in Jesus Christ:
insomuch that their very Zeal was through their ignorance turned into
Cruelty and Tyranny, which is a very dangerous zeal, and ought most carefully
to be shunned of us, as that whereinto the best minded men of all do commonly
fall, when they are blinded with ignorance: as the Apostle Saint Paul
propounds himself in this case for an example before he was converted. 1.
Timot. 1. 13.
For he freely confesses, that he was a blasphemour, a persecutour, Act. 26.
10, 11.
and an oppressor, but he did it ignorantly, and through unbelief.

There have been many such, not only amongst the Jews, but even among the
Heathen. For albeit their Religion was altogether superstitious and idolatrous,
yet they always maintained and defended it with very great zeal, persecuting
such as professed Christianity among them, and condemning them as the vilest
and most detestable men upon the earth. But if the Lord be greatly offended
when as we bear hatred and envy against any body, we cannot doubt but that
this does likewise displease him, when we commit these things, being blinded
with ignorance: and that he is carried with greater indignation against us,
when we maliciously cloak these vices with a false title of zeal, of
religion, and of his glory, thereby to revenge our selves, and to exercise our
cruelties much more easily. But let us now proceed to consider of other
affections of the heart, and first of Revenge, Cruelty, and Rage. And because
Revenge is appointed to punish offenses, and every vice finds a Judge within
it self, we will speak also of the affection of Shame which commonly
follows every vile act. It belongs therefore to thee, AMANA, to entreat
of this matter.

Of Revenge, Cruelty, and Rage, and what agreement there is among them: what
Shame and Blushing is, and why God has placed these affections in man: and of
the good and evil that is in them. Chap. 58.
AMANA. If every one might be a Judge in his own cause, and execute his own
decrees, the malice of men does declare sufficiently, that there would be no
justice observed in the world, but robbery publicly put in practice, insomuch
as the strongest would always carry away the spoil. For that blind love,
which every one bears toward himself, causes us that we cannot see clearly
either into our own, or or into other men's affairs, so that we are always
more ready to do wrong to others, then to depart from any thing of our own.
Even so, if we might be suffered to revenge those injuries, which oftentimes
without cause we suppose we have received, it is certain we would observe
neither measure nor mean, but suffering our selves to be guided by the passion
of anger and wrath, we would fall into more then brutish cruelty and rage.
Hebr. 10. 30.
For as God has reserved vengeance to himself, and promised to recompense it,
so no man carries that mind to do it justly that is in him, neither indeed
can any: because it is the spirit of a man that offers injury to an other,
whereas the body is but the instrument of the mind, and as it were a sword
unto it, which the spirit manageth and causes to cut. Whereupon it
follows, that the party offended can not revenge himself of his chiefest and
greatest enemy. For God only is able to take vengeance of the soul, Matthew.
10. 28.
and to throw it together with the body into hell fire. Moreover, when we
think to hurt the body of our enemy, which is but the executioner of the evil
disposition of his Spirit, we hurt our own soul, making it guilty of the
judgment of God, Luke 21. 19. prouer. 20. 22.
who forbids us all revenge and commands us to possess our souls in
patience, and never to requite evil for evil, but to wait the Lords
leisure, being assuredly persuaded that he will save and deliver us.

Now look what the affection receives and embraces, the same does it
desire to return and send back again where it did receive it, whether it be
good or evil. Therefore as a good affection both wishes and does well to him
of whom it receives good will and beneficence: so a naughty affection
desires to return evil received, unto him of whom it has received it. For
this cause when the heart is wounded with grief by any one, it desires to
return the like to him that has hurt it, and to rebite him of whom it is
bitten. This affection is a desire of revenge, What revenge is.
which being put in execution, is revenge accomplished: namely, when we cause
him that has offended us to suffer that punishment, which in our judgment he
has deserved. This punishment is to damnifie him either in soul, or in body,
or in his goods, yea, sometimes by all the means that may be. And when power
to revenge is wanting, there are some that fall into outrageous speeches, into
horrible and execrable cursings, crying out for vengeance either at GODS hand,
or of some other that can perform it. Every offense therefore that
ingendereth hatred, anger, envy or indignation brings with it a desire of
revenge, which is to render evil for evil, and to requite grief received with
the like again.

And when the offense is grown to that pass, that nothing can assuage the
extremity thereof, What Rage is.
nor stay it from breaking forth into revenge and hurting by all the means
that may be, then is this Revenge turned into Rage. For a man in such a case
is not much unlike to a mad dog. For because Revenge can not take that
effect which it would have, it vexes and closes up as it were the heart,
bringing great grief and great torment to the whole body, so that a man so
affected is as if his heart and body were ready to burst asunder.

Now, Of Cruelty.
when the heart is hardened with Revenge, it is turned into Cruelty, which is
a privation of pity and compassion. For when Offense and Anger are set on
fire, they exclude all good thoughts out of the mind, and persuade to all
kind of Cruelty, of which there are three degrees. Three sorts of Cruelty.
For there are some that procure it, who nevertheless would not execute it
themselves. There are others that execute it. Besides, there is a third kind
of Cruelty, when we fail in perfourming our duty toward them that are in
necessity, whom we both ought and might help and succor, whether this come
of evil will or through negligence. For thereby we show that we are without
pity and compassion. Hereof follows inhumanitie, which is as if we should
lay aside all humane affection and be transfourmed into brute beasts.
Therefore we may well conclude, that all private Revenge proceeding of envy,
or of hatred, or of anger, is vicious and forbidden by God, who commands us
to render good for evil, and not evil for evil. For he has ordained the
means, whereby he will have vengeance execucuted among men. Therefore he
has appointed Magistrates to execute it according to his Law, and following
his ordinance, not with any evil affection, but with just indignation
proceeding from love, and from true zeal of justice. For to punish the wicked
is a very acceptable sacrifice, How magistrates ought to punish.
so that there be no intermingling of our own passions withal, and that we
exercise not our enuies, rancours, and reuenges under the name and title of
Justice and of the glory of God. For if we do so, we cease to exercise the
punishments and corrections of the Lord, and put our own in practice. We
must therefore follow his example. For he suffers not evil to go
unpunished, if men avoid not punishment by his grace and mercy, and by those
means which he has appointed for the obtaining thereof. Therefore it is often
said of the wicked in the Scripture, that GOD will return into their bosom
the evil which they have done: and his children and servants desire him also
to perform the same. But when he does it, he is not moved with any evil
affection, but only with the love he bears to justice and virtue, and to
his children, and with pity and compassion toward them in regard of the
injuries done unto them. With what affection God punishes offenders.
And as himself comes in judgment to take vengeance, so he would have
them that supply his place among men, unto whom he has committed the sword
for the defense of the good and punishment of evil doers, to follow his
example. But whether they do so or no, there is no sin that can avoid
punishment, and that finds not a Judge even in him that committed it, to take
vengeance thereof, by means of the affections, which God has placed in man to
that end. Among which Shame occupies a place, which we ought well to consider
of.

Concerning this affection, What Shame is.
there are some that are ashamed in regard of some fear of dishonor, of
which there follows no damage: or in respect of some grief or perturbation
of the soul, arising of some things that seem to bring some dishonor with
them. Forasmuch therefore as Shame is a fear of dishonor, it is of great
force in them that love honor. For the more they love it, the more do they
fear dishonor, which is the contrary thereof, as a very great evil. And for
this cause there is in Shame not only a fear of villainy, but indignation
also, after the committing of some fault. For he that is faulty, chafeth, and
is angry with himself, because of the dishonor he receives through his
offense. And this kind of Shame is the simplest and lightest, and may be called
Blushing, being very common especially in children and virgins. Now for as much
as herein the spirits withdraw themselves unto the heart, as unto a center, and
presently as it were in the same instant return back again, the face is
painted with a vermillion color, Blushing commendable in some persons.
which is very pleasant and comely, namely, in that age and in those persons.
Therefore is this color rightly called the color of virtue. For God has
placed this affection of shame in the nature of men, to the end it should be
unto them as a bridle to stay them from committing vile things, and as a Judge
and Revenger to punish them after they have done such things. Therefore also
there is yet another kind of shame more vehement, A second kind of Shame.
which approaches near unto the affection of anger, and is mingled with wrath
and fear. For it is a motion of the heart, in which he that feels himself
guilty of any dishonest crime or act, is angry with himself for the same, and
punishes and reuengeth himself upon himself: and withal fears the
judgments of others, and the rebuke and dishonor that may come unto him for
it. For as we have heard already, God has placed in the nature of man sundry
affections, of which some are sweet and pleasant, to the end they should be
unto us as it were spurs unto virtue: others are bitter and unpleasant, that
they might be unto us in stead of punishments, and that the grief which
they bring might teach us to know more clearly what diversity there is
between virtue and vice, and what difference we ought to put between good
and evil deeds. Therefore there is not a worse thing in man, nor any disease
more dangerous to the soul then impudency, which is wholly contrary to Shame
and Blushing. For whosoever is once past all Shame, Impudency a very dangerous
disease.
he has no care at all of his honor, much less of the honor of GOD.
Hereof it is that the holy Ghost by the Prophets does greatly accuse the
impudency of the wicked, saying unto them by way of reproach, that they had
whoores foreheads, Ierem. 3. 3.
and would not be ashamed: that they were impudent children and stiff
hearted, Ezech. 2. 4. and 3. 7.
and that they did glory in their wickedness after they had done evil, in
stead of being ashamed and amending their faults. Now whereas we said, that
Shame painteth the face with a vermilian color, The cause of redness in the
face in blushing.
we are to know, that the passions and affections of the soul breed great
change in our bodies, as they that move the spirits and the natural heat, by
opening and shutting up of the heart: whereby the spirits are either enlarged
or restrained.

Thus it comes to pass, that the color of the face is changed, it being a
property of the heart to set in it certain marks and signs of the
affections that are in it, as we have already heard. Therefore does Shame
paint the cheeks with redness, because the danger that springs of fear is
of that nature, that the heart stands in need of help to repel and drive
it away, namely, of that heat that retireth back unto it. Now forasmuch as
there is perturbation in Shame, by reason of the opinion and fear of dishonor
and blame, heat is drawn up to the head, and so from thence it is dispersed
over the face. And although Shame does not trouble the heart and mind so much
as fear does, yet does it confound the head, and causes it oftentimes to
forget what it thought and was purposed to have done. As we see it sometimes
in very wise and skillful men, when they are to speak or to do something
before personages or companies whom they reverence. And this is incident for
the most part to such as are most modest, and to them that presume least of
themselves, who indeed can not hear their own praises without shame and
blushing, A cause of fear in men.
such is their nature and modesty: or else it is because their hearts are very
little, which makes them also fearful.

Now although too much shamefastness, when it is causeless, is worthy of
blame, because it often keeps them that are overtaken therewith from doing
many good things, and from employing the gifts which they have received of God
as it becomes them: yet is it more praise-woorthy then impudency, which as it
makes men altogether shameless and brasenfaced, so it usually accompanies
proud and arrogant persons. For it is clean contrary to modesty. Seeing
therefore we learn, that shame is a fear of dishonor and blame, and of doing
that that might procure it, we must take good heed that we judge aright of that
which is to be accounted vile and dishonest, and of that which may bring unto
us honor or dishonor, praise or dispraise. For our nature being full of
darkness through sin that reigns in it, our natural judgment is not so
entire and upright as it ought to be, to judge well either of that which is
truly honest, and which brings with it honor and commendation, or otherwise
of the contrary unto it. Whereupon it comes to pass, that we oftentimes take
one for another, and so light upon that, which we least sought for or desired.
Therefore let us know and learn this, that there is nothing honest but virtue,
nor any thing dishonest but vice: and that as nothing is more beautiful and of
greater renown then virtue, so nothing is more ill-favored, dishonorable and
infamous then vice. But forasmuch as there is great diversity of opinions,
what is to be accounted honest and dishonest, what virtue, what vice, what
praise what dispraise, let us learn to frame our judgment out of the law and
word of God, The rule of all true judgment.
which is the rule of all justice and truth. Otherwise it will come to pass,
that we shall be oftener ashamed of well doing then of evil doing, and of virtue
then of vice: which were a vile shame, and such a one as that we ought to be
greatly ashamed thereof. For in well doing we must never be afraid of that
shame, Shame of well doing.
which the wicked think to bring upon us, but rather account it honorable and
glorious. Yea themselves shall be ashamed and confounded when their vices and
vile actions shall be discovered by our honesty and virtue: whereas if we join
with them, we shall cause them to be void of shame when they do ill, yea,
they will boast and vaunt of it before us. But enough of this matter. Now
forasmuch as arrogant and proud persons are farthest off from using aright any
of those affections of the heart, of which we have hitherto discoursed,
especially of shame, I am of opinion that we are to look into the nature and
effects of the passion of pride. Therefore, ARAM, this shall be the subject of
thy discourse.

Of Pride, with the consideration thereof as well in nature entire, as
corrupted: of the original thereof, and of such as are most inclined
thereunto: what vices accompany it, how great a poison it is, and what remedy
there is for it. Chap. 59.
ARAM. There is nothing more easy then for a man to deceive himself. For
look what a man earnestly desires, he supposes it is already as it were
come to pass, or at least he promises to himself that he shall easily
obtain it. But oftentimes things fall out otherwise then men look or hope
for. The cause why men deceive themselves.
Now the chief cause of their error herein is that presumption, which
commonly they have of their own wisdom and virtue, whereby they are lift up
with vain confidence and puffed up with pride. For when men are carried away
with an inordinate and blind love of themselves, they are soon persuaded that
there is nothing in them worthy to be despised, yea they think that their
ignorance is wisdom: insomuch that knowing nothing, they suppose they know
all things, and having no dexterity to perform one commendable work, they
presume very inconsideratly to set their hand to every great matter. But the
more care and diligence they bestow, being led with a desire to show great skill
and thinking to win honor and renown, so much the more they discover their
ignorance and blockishnes, purchasing to themselves shame and infamy. Now the
truth of God teaches us to consider otherwise of our selves, namely, that we
want both sound understanding, and strength also to accomplish any good thing.
Which knowledge ought to keep us back from all presumption, and ouerweening of
our own wisdom and strength, and take from us all matter of pride and
glory, to lead us unto modesty and humility. This rule we ought to follow
if we will attain to the white of good judgment and well doing.

Now as shame and confusion is bredde of some vile and dishonest fact, What
pride is.
as we have heard, so vice fetches his beginning from pride. I call pride a
puffing up of the soul and heart, proceeding from the opinion of some
excellent good thing in us more then is in others, whereby a man is in
estimation and honor, whether this good thing be present, past, or to come.
But we are to consider of two fountains and first causes of this inflation and
affection of the heart, namely of one that proceeds from nature pure and
entire, and of another that comes from nature as it is corrupted. Two kinds
of pride.
So that we may boldly say, that there is a kind of pride which is no vice but
a virtue, or at leastwise the seed of virtue. For there was no vicious or
evil thing in the first nature as it was created of God, but every thing in it
was virtuous, and the seed of virtue, as we have already showed in the former
discourses already made by us. Wherefore that natural pride of man, being
such as he should have been if he had continued in his first nature, would
be an excellent virtue, and as it were the mother of all the rest, whereas
now it is the most ugly and monstrous vice that can be found in the whole
nature of man corrupted, by means of which it is become the father of all
vices and sins. For seeing GOD has done this honor to man above all other
bodily creatures, as to create him in regard of his soul, of a celestial and
divine nature (for which cause the very Heathen affirm that mankind is of
the lineage and parentage of God) he would not have him ignorant of the
excellency of his being, and of those great and wonderful benefits, which
he has received of him in his creation, and of which he has made him
partaker chiefly for three causes. Three causes why God created man so
excellent.
The first, to this end that knowing what grace and honor God his Creator
has bestowed upon him, he might be moved continually to acknowledge and
honor him as it becomes him. The second, to the end that knowing the
excellency of his nature, and of the stock from whence he came, he should
love himself in God his Creator, and in him think himself worthy of true
goods, even of the greatest and most excellent that may be, namely of
heavenly and eternal goods: and that he should know that he was created
for them, and that through the knowledge and consideration thereof he might be
provoked to wish for and to desire them with great courage. The third, that by
this means he might fear to degenerate from so high and noble a lineage as
that is from whence he is descended, and to fall from so high a degree of
honor and dignity into dishonor and shame, and to loose those excellent
goods whereunto he was allotted, if he committed any thing unbeseeming so
noble and so excellent a nature as was the nature of God according to the image
of which he was creted. Of a good kind of pride.
This then is that holy pride, which ought naturally to remain in man, and
whereby he might well have desired to be like unto GOD, especially in
goodness, and that by those only means by which the Lord would have him
be brought unto this similitude, and which himself had taught him: namely
obedience, and that so far as was agreeable and meet for his nature. But our
first parents giving ear to him, who first degenerated from this holy pride,
under color of being equal not to the goodness but to the power and greatness
of God, were soon persuaded to believe the promise, which this liar had made
unto them of a far greater and more excellent estate, then was that wherein
God had created them: insomuch as their humility and obedience whereby they
were united and conjoined in great glory with God, was turned into arrogancy
and disobedience. Whereupon doubting of the truth of Gods word, they
hearkened to the Devils counsel, propounded unto themselves the self same
means and degrees to make themselves equal with God their Creator, which this
wretch and his angels had taken before, and whereby he fell from the highest
estate of glory to the most bottomless gulf of misery. And this is that
bastardly and earthly pride that is entered into man's nature, of which it is
said, Ecclus. 10. 14, 19.
That pride is the original of sin, and he that has it shall power out
abomination, till at last he be overthrown. And a little after: Pride was not
created in men, neither wrath in the generation of women. And indeed God has
made man of a mild and communicable nature, apt to society, and to live with
company not solitarily as savage beasts use to do. Of the evil pride.
Therefore there is nothing more contrary to his nature, and to that end for
which he was created, then this vicious pride, whereby he is so puffed up and
swells in such sort, as if he were of some other nature and condition then
humane, and as though he meant to live in some other estate and degree then of
a man. By which doing he degenerateth from that first nature in which he was
created: Ecclus. 10. 7.
whereupon Ecclesiasticus concludes, That pride is hateful before God and
man. Now the more arrogant and proud a man is, the more ignorant may he be
said to be of true goods, and such as are eternal; and whereas he should wish
for and long after these, his whole affection is turned to the desire of
worldly glory and of earthly things. Which desire proceeds from that
inconsiderate love that every one bears toward himself, which keeps a man
from the knowledge of himself. For if be knew himself well, he might see in
himself nothing but such matter as should cause him to abase and to humble
himself, not to be puffed up and to presume of himself in any respect. Who
are most given to pride.
Hereupon it follows, that they are naturally most inclined to pride, which
are most ignorant, most rude, most abject, most inconsiderate, most hasty and
headstrong. For they that are skillful and wise, sharp witted, moderate and
well stayed, who look into and take a view of themselves, and know well what
is within them, such men understand and are able to judge very well, that there
is nothing in man that should cause him either to swell or to be blown up with
pride. Therefore we commonly see, that they which have most excellent virtues
in them, that have greatest gifts of God, and could find in themselves most
matter of pride, are notwithstanding most modest and most humble. And
contrariwise the greatest blockheads, and such as are most unapt to every good
thing, most destitute of all good and excellent gifts of nature, are for the
most part the loftiest and most proud: so that a man may well say of them that
they are proud pesants, especially when they are blown up like bladders with
some wind of prosperity, when their noses are perfumed, or their eyes dimmed
with some smoke of honors, or of worldly wealth. Many other causes of pride
might be noted in the nature of man. Causes of pride.
For those that are of a hot and burning nature, as choleric persons are
more subject to this vice then many others, and that chiefly for two reasons.
For holding of the nature of fire, which always ascends upward, if they
follow their natural inclination, they will take also of the nature thereof,
aspiring continually unto high matters. And as the fire is light, quick and
violent, so will their judgment and all their affections be, which will carry
them away headlong and greatly trouble them. It is very requisite therefore,
that water should be cast upon this fire. What vices follow pride.
Now as pride breeds arrogancy, so envy, ill will, anger, rancour, and
desire of revenge do follow and accompany it, together with impatience,
indignation, self-will, obstinacy, and other such like vices. For a proud
person waxes envious at the good of another, as if he thought himself only
worthy, or as if he accounted all greatness in others a hinderance to his
own. And because he supposes that he is never so well esteemed of as he
deserves, he waxes very angry, being desirous to revenge himself if there be
any means. Besides, to the end he might always seem to be better then
others, he never ceasseth boasting and bragging. For pride being nothing else
but wind that puffs up the heart (even as fire causes water to swell and to
send forth great waumes) if the proud man should not find some issue for this
wind, he would burst asunder. Therefore he speaks big, he chideth and
threatens, thundreth and lighteneth, and waxes so insolent, that both for his
words and deeds he becomes intolerable unto all. And because he cannot
give place to any, if he stand in contention for any thing, he holds his
opinion with invincible obstinacy: insomuch that no authority whatsoever, no
truth how apparently soever it be laid before him, no benefit or profit shall be
able to turn him from that which he has once imagined. For his desire to be
preferred before all, and in all matters is so hot and fervent, that he
fears nothing more then to be accounted inferior in any one matter to any
other body whosoever he be. And this causes him also to be unteachable and
unapt to learn. For by reason of his pride, he is ashamed to learn. Besides,
the ambition and insatiable desire of glory that is in him, causes him that
he cannot suffer any admonition, but continues resolute in that which he had
once taken hold of. And he is so far from suffering patiently, that any man
should condemn him, or any word or deed of his, that he will have his vices
taken for virtues, and looks to be commended for them. Yea some are so
passionate, and carried away with so great impatience and furious indignation,
that they storm and rage not only against men, Pride lifts men against God.
but also against God, even so far forth as to despite and blaspheme him
openly. For the ignorance and inconsideratenes that engenders pride is so
blockish and rash, that it gives us no leisure to consider of and to judge
what good things are in us, neither from whence they come, or who it is that
gives them, or in what manner, or for what reason. To be short, God comes
not at all into our thought, neither do we attribute anything unto any other
besides our selves. And although many proud persons dissemble these damnable
affections, and dare not oftentimes lay their hearts so open, but rather
think there is no such matter in them, nevertheless it is so in truth and in
effect, so that all men would judge them to be such, if they were able to see
and know as God sees and knows. Moreover, we are to note, that pride is
such a vice, that it is a harder matter for a man to be at peace and concord
therewith, then with any other whatsoever. Prou. 13. 10.
Whereupon Solomon says, That only by pride does man make contention. Yea
there is always strife and dissension amongst the proud themselves, when
every one desires to be preferred one before another, and cannot. As for
humbling and abasing themselves, there is no talk of that, unless they draw
a little backewarde that they may the better leap forward, and debase
themselves, that they may ascend up higher. And as for friendship, a proud
man has never any in him that is true and sound, but only that which is
counterfeite and feigned, toward them that submit themselves unto him through
flattery. Pride bred of virtue.
But that which is most dangerous in pride, is when it is bredde of humility,
of modesty, and of virtue. For there are many, who considering their own
modesty and other virtues, and condemning pride and other vices, are delighted
therewith after an insolent manner, and are puffed up with pride thereby.
Whereby we see what windings and slipperie turnings are in that old serpent
the Father of pride, into how many fashions he changes himself, and in
what manner he has infected and poisoned our heart. For he has brought it
to this pass, A similitude.
that as venomous beasts turn all they eat how good soever it be into
venime, so the proud man turns all his thoughts, words and deeds into
pride. For he draws and refers every thing to his own honor and glory:
and therefore Saint Chrysostom very aptly compares Vainglory to a Mothe.
For as the mothe marreth and consumes that cloth in which it is bredde, so
vaineglorie sometime springs of virtue, and afterward corrupts it. For
there is no virtue so excellent, which is not turned into vice and made
abominable before GOD, so soon as it is mingled therewith.

Seeing then pride is such an horrible monster, as that which breeds and
brings forth so many other monsters, we ought to seek diligently after
all remedies for it that may possibly be had, whereby it may be tamed and
kept under, and so our souls cured of such a dangerous disease and plague.
Now forasmuch as it proceeds of ignorance and of inconsiderateness, and
through the want of the due knowledge of God and of our selves, we must
redress this evil by the virtues contrary to these vices, A remedy against
pride.
namely by the true knowledge of God, of his word and of our selves. Which we
shall obtain if he deal so graciously with us as to fill us with his holy
spirit, and to give us an humble heart, that renouncing all pride and all
arrogancy, we may learn to walk in his fear, and in all obedience to his
holy will, so that we wholly consecrate our selves unto him both in body,
soul, and spirit, in will, heart and all our affections. Now having spoken
sufficiently of that matter into which we fell whilst we handeled the second
belly, which God has placed in man for the lodging of the vital parts, and
namely of the heart, which is the seat of the affections, it remains, that
we consider of the third beilie, which is the seat of the natural powers and
virtues of the soul: of which thou shall begin now to discourse, ACHITOB.

Of the natural powers of the soul, and what sundry virtues they have in the
nourishment of the body: of their order and offices: of their agreement and
necessary use: where the Vegetative soul is placed in the body, and what
Virtue it has to augment the same. Chap. 60.
ACHIT. The disposition and placing of ye principal parts of our body, and of
yt noblest members thereof, is a goodly schole, wherein we may learn, how much
more careful we ought to be of heaven then of the earth, and of the spirit
then of the body. We have already heard, how the internal parts of man were
divided into three bellies and lodgings, of which the two former, namely the
brain and the heart, together with the virtues, offices and works of the soul
in them, have been declared unto us. It remains that we consider of the last
lodging of the body, which properly bears the name of belly, and which is
the seat of these natural powers and virtues of the soul, which we call
Vegetative and nourishing, Three kinds of the Vegetative faculty in the soul.
and is divided into three kinds, namely, into the virtue of nourishing, of
augmenting or growing, and of engendring. Now when we see this order and
disposition in our nature, A profitable meditation.
we ought seriously to think, that seeing God has placed the heart between
the head and the belly, the Vital virtue of the soul between the Animal and
Nutritive, and the will between the understanding and the most sensual part
in us, therefore the heart, affections, and will ought to look always on
high, and not downward, to the end they should join to the most noble,
celestial and divine part, and not to that which is most base, sensual, and
earthly. Whereunto that also ought to induce and lead us, which we learned
before of the agreement between the highest and middlemost of these principal
and more noble parts of the body, unto which this last is inferior in all
kind of excellency, beauty, and dignity.

This belly of which we are now to discourse, Of the third and last belly of
the body.
contains all the members and instruments that serve for nourishment and
generation: whereupon it is termed the Kitchen and Nurserie of the body, and
the seminary and welspring of mankind. But before we enter into a particular
consideration of these members and instruments, we are to look into the
natural powers of the Vegetative soul that is in them. And first we will note
that which we spoke of elsewhere, The office of heat in man.
of the office of heat and moisture in the nature of the body, that as
moisture keeps heat within it, so heat drinks and soaketh up moisture as
much as it may, digesting and dispelling it by the virtue and action of it own
nature. Now whilst this moisture is thus digested by the heat, there is a
separation made of that which is profitable in the body, from that which is
superfluous, and consequently, hurtful to the body. That which is profitable
for it, is the juice and humor that agrees with it, in regard of the
similitude and likeness that is between them. Whereupon it follows, that
all moisture that is greatly diverse or contrary to the body, is hurtful for
it, as also all dry matter, which likewise hurts the health and life
thereof. So that this virtue of the soul, which we call natural, or otherwise
Vegetative, and which comprehends under it the virtue of nourishing, The
power, order and office of the Vegetative soul.
of augmenting and of engendring (every of which having six others tending all
to one end as we heard already) this virtue I say, causes that which is
profitable for the nourishment of the body, first to be distributed unto the
members, and then to be turned into the bodily substance of the living
creature, because that virtue and power of the soul does embrace and receive
it, acknowledging it already to be a part of the body. Therefore the virtue
of drawing nourishment that is in the soul, has for an helper the virtue of
retaining and keeping, until there be a convenient change thereof made by the
faculty, and power of digesting, and as it were dressing of it. For otherwise
the attractiue and retentiue power, were to small purpose. Now when the meat
is digested, so much of it as is pure must be separated from that which is
impure, by the virtue of purging: and that which is impure, must be delivered
over to the expulsive virtue to be cast out, and the rest which is pure to the
virtue of distributing, after which the virtue of incorporating executes his
office and duty.

Thus you see how all these particular virtues, serving to the general virtue
of nourishing, do their duties one after another according to that order,
which nature has assigned them. For except this agreement and order were kept,
there would be great confusion, and the body could not receive his due
nourishment. Therefore does one of them attend upon and help another, yea
all of them tend to one and the same end by diverse means. For after the
meat is received, attracted and retained, it must be digested before it be
separated; so that the expulsive virtue is to attend upon this separation and
distinction. Neither can the attractiue or drawing virtue do his office well,
unless the body be first empty: neither the virtue of concocting or
preparing, if the body be not purged of the meat received before. And if any
of these virtues does not his duty, the residue are made more dull, slow
and languishing. For there is such agreement betwixt them, and they are by such
equal proportion tempered throughout the whole body, that nothing can befall
any one of them, but the residue will feel it. Neither can that which is
wanting in one be supplied by an other. For GOD having assigned to every one
his proper office, they deal not one in another affairs, but every one
abides in his own office, and goes not beyond his appointed bounds and
limits: A similitude taken from (...).
as the like is to be seen in the printing house and amongst them that
stamp money. For if the Compositor fail in the (...) of his letters, the
Printer that puts ynke upon the fourmes, does not correct the faults of
the Compositor. And if the Printer does not distribute his ynke well, he that
draws the sheets from the press corrects not his fault. For every one
has his office apart, with which only he medleth. So likewise in Coin, if
he that cutteth prepares and fineth the metal fail in his duty, he that
cutteth it in pieces will correct nothing, but divides it as it is delivered
to him. Then he that makes it flat, that it may be fit for him that
stampeth it, does nothing but that which is committed to his charge: and if
he that stampeth it, finds it not so flat or so round, as it ought to be,
yet does he nothing but mark it, and so leaves it as he found it.

Moreover, A good lesson for every one.
we are to note well, how God gives us even in our nature, a goodly
instruction concerning that order and concord that ought to be amongst us
all, by doing every one his duty, and helping each other so far as we may.
For we may learn three principal points in that order, which God has set
between the virtues of the Vegetative soul for the nourishing of the body,
which serve greatly for the preservation of humane society, First, how every
one ought to behave himself in his office, and not leave others to perform
that work which is enjoined him. Secondly, how every one of us ought to
keep his rank and order, not making over much haste nor being too slack,
and without any confusion of offices, or usurping any thing of that which
belongs to others. Thirdly, the consideration of those inconveniences which
may befall every commonwealth and society of men, if this order be not well
kept and observed. For the like will happen unto it, that does to a body,
which is not nourished as it ought to be, and in which the natural virtues
do not their duty, as I have declared. For from thence proceeds all the
confusion that is in the life of man, and all those miseries which we daily
see therein.

Concerning the seats of these virtues of the nourishing soul mentioned by
us, Of the seats of the natural virtues.
we are to know, that although they be greater and more apparent in some
parts then in others, yet they are spredde throughout the whole body, but
after a diverse manner. For in perfect living creatures, the concoction of the
meat is first made in the stomach, that so it may be prepared for the liver;
the second is made in the liver, that it may be turned into blood: the third
is in all the members, that it may be changed into their substance. So that
there is no end or stay in the body of concocting, and consequently of
purging the meat, and of casting out that which is superfluous. For the heat
does continually warm, and as it were seethe the moisture: neither is there
any meat so pure, which has not always some excrements and superfluities,
that are to be separate and eiected.

Hereof it is, that the whole body of living creatures is as it were bored
through, and has diverse pipes to the end there might be more open passages
for the avoiding of these excrements according to that purging which is done
day and night by the parts appointed thereunto, How excrements are voyded.
as we have already touched it, speaking of those members whereby such
purging is performed after a diverse manner, especially when we spoke of the
brain. Now besides that purging which is under the armepittes and in the
groyne, we see how the thinnest excrements void at every part of the body,
as we may judge by that filth which daily is seen in the head, hands, feet
and in all the rest of the body. For we cannot busy our selves so much in
washing and cleansing all the parts and members of the body, but still we
may find somewhat to wash and to make clean. Therefore we stand in need of
daily nourishment, that whatsoever diminishes continually from us, may from
time to time be restored and made good again. But this virtue of nourishing,
is the first and simplest of all the natural virtues of the Vegetative soul.
For there are two others necessary for the life and preservation of living
creatures, of which we have already spoken, namely the power of augmenting, and
that other of engendring. Of the growing of bodies.
So that living creatures are not only nourished by that food which they
receive, but they grow bigger and begette their like. For there is no living
creature that has a body, but it grows up until it come to a certain
greatness and measure. For this cause the virtue of augmenting and growing was
added to the nourishing virtue: and the virtue of engendering to them both,
Wherein the natural virtues differ each from other.
but so as they differ in many points. For first, although the virtues of
nourishing and of augmenting agree in this, that they are both given to every
living creature, yet they differ herein, that the virtue of nourishing
continues always so long as the creature lives, even from the beginning of
it unto the end. But the virtue of growing greater, although it begin with
the other, yet has it a set time limited, wherein it staieth: and as before
the creature waxed bigger and increased in greatness and vigor, so after it
comes to the appointed time, it begins to fall and to diminish, and as it
were to retire back, and to restrain it self. And as for the virtue of
engendering, it differs from both the other, first in that it is not given so
generally to all living creatures as they are, and then in that it begins
not so soon. For it comes then when the living creature through nourishment
and growth, has attained to those virtues that are necessary for generation.

Besides, it has this common with the virtue of augmentation, that it has
certain limits and bounds, unto which after it is once come, it weakeneth and
in the end decays utterly. Wherein it differs from the nourishing virtue.
Now the virtue of growing greater has as many other particular virtues under
it for the execution of it own office, as the virtue of nourishing has
according as was touched before. Whereby we learn, that bodies grow not
greater, neither augment by the heaping up of much matter outwardely applied,
as when a house is set up, we see timber joined to timber, and stone to stone
in the building of it, but this is done by the same hidden and secret art and
cunning in nature, whereby we are nourished. For in this point there is no
difference between the virtue of nourishing, and that of augmenting, but
only herein that in nourishment the meat is turned into the substance of
the body, How meat nourishes the body.
and in augmenting the food being thus turned, does from within stretch
forth the quantity of the body outwardly. And so this virtue of augmenting
depends of the nourishing virtue. For meat nourishes as it is a substance
with qualities meet for nourishment, and augmenteth by reason of the quantity
it has. For this cause has God created the bodies of living creatures with
such a substance, that as they have sundry passages and holes in them like to
sponges, to the end to purge by them, so he would that the substance they
receive by their food might pass by the same holes, that they might augment
and grow greater. So that all of them have their pores and little holes albeit
they appear not to the eye, whereby nourishment enters and extends it self
in greatness, length, and thickness. The consideration hereof has caused
some skillful men, How metals and stones grow.
to place metals and stones in the rank of living creatures, because they
grow in the earth, as the bodies of plants and living creatures do. Neither
is their opinion without some show of reason. For we know that they grow and
increase and that inwardly: which seems not to be done without drawing unto
themselves some inward nourishment, as living creatures use to do. Besides
they have also their pores and passages to stretch foor^h and augment
themselves by. Notwithstanding all this there is greater reason to place them
in the rank of those natures and creatures, which augment and grow greater by
adding and joining of matter unto them, as we see fountains and rivers to
increase: and so likewise fire. Which albeit it seems to be nourished and
augmented with that matter which is put unto it, yet is it not nourished as
living creatures are by means of that food which they receive. For they have
their bounds of growing set them which they cannot pass, as we see the like
also in plants: but fire has no limits, as that which always increases, as
long as it finds any matter to burn.

Whereby we may conclude, that natural heat in man or in other living
creatures, is not the cause of their nourishing and growth, but only the
instrument; The true cause or nourishing in creatures.
and that the true cause, in regard of second causes, is in the soul next
after God, who is the first cause of all things, yea the cause of causes.
Therefore it is he that has allotted out to every man the term first of his
life and growth, and then of his declining and death: so that according as he
will either prolong or shorten our life, and cause us to increase or diminish,
so he disposes the second causes, and those means whereby he will bring it
to pass. Now we must consider what instruments the soul uses to execute
in the body of man, her natural works of nourishing and augmenting it, (of
which we have now spoken) and after what manner she uses them. First then
we will look into the ventricle and stomach, and see what figure, what
Orifices and filaments it has. This matter then, ASER, belongs to thee to
entreat of.

What instruments the Soul uses in the body about the natural work of
nourishing and augmenting: of the Ventricle or stomach, and of the figure,
Orifices, and Filaments it has: of the coats of the stomach, and of what
substance and nature it is: of the causes of hunger, and of appetite: of the
inferior Orifice. Chap. 61.
ASER. We should be very happy if we knew how to follow that order in
all our doings, which God has set down in all his works, and whereof he
gives nature unto us for a Mistress. But if the simplicity of our
understanding be not able to attain to so high wisdom, at the least we may
know how far short every one of us comes of our duty, and from whence
proceeds all the confusion that is in the life of man, and all those miseries
which we commonly behold. On the other side, nothing could hinder us were it
not a voluntary and malicious ignorance, in that we consider not, what a
marvelous and excellent Woorkemaster, God the Creator shows himself to be,
in this part of the soul whereof our present discourses are, and in that
order, which he has set therein, and in those virtues which he has bestowed
upon it. For his work is so excellent, and worthy of so great admiration,
that no wisdom or power whatsoever is able so much as to imitate it.
Wherefore we are to account it a very great and noble blessing, to have only
some knowledge of it, and to be able to comprehend some thing thereof by our
understanding. For there will be always enough whereat to marvel greatly,
and namely in the consideration of those instruments, which the soul uses in
the nourishment and growth of bodies, as we shall know in the sequel of our
discourses.

Therefore as heretofore we have handled and spoken of the diverse powers of
the soul, and of those instruments it has in regard of the Animal and Vital
parts, as of the brain, heart, head, and other external members of the
body, so now we are to consider of the internal instruments, which serve
the natural powers of the soul. The instruments of the natural powers of the
soul.
And first, it has the liquors and humors of the body tempered together by a
certain Law and reason of the Creator that created them. Secondly, the other
instruments of the soul, are those members both external and internal, which
are framed and have their several proportion, every one as need requires,
for the office assigned unto them by God their Creator. For before the soul
be clothed with the body, these instruments are fashioned and made fit for
it by nature in those things wherein it could do nothing of it self. For the
soul cannot create her body. But after that God has created the body for
it, and that by his appointment nature has disposed and fitted the same for
the soul, so far forth as is requisite, before it can show what virtue it
has, and settle it self to work in the body, then is she left to do that
which she is able to perform by the powers of her presence, and to exercise
her self therein, beginning always at the least and basest of her offices,
before she apply her self to the chiefest, by displaying her principal
powers. For whilst the child is in his mothers belly, the soul practices
upon it her Vegetative and nourishing virtue by which it is nourished and
grows in greatness, How the soul uses the instruments of ye body.
as we see the like in plants. And when it is borne, it receives besides
from the soul the power of moving and of sense, as we see beasts have: and
last of all by little and little the soul displayeth her other principal
virtues. But to speak of our matter subject, and to handle particularly those
instruments of the soul, which she uses in the nourishing and augmenting of
the body, we will begin at the Ventricle, commonly called the stomach.

Now because this name is used diversely, Of the Ventricle and stomack^
we are to note, that the Physicions, who distinguish the parts of the body
more exactly and properly, apply this name of stomach more specially to the
upper mouth of it, and call the whole by the name of Ventricle, whereof we
will speak anon. Oftentimes also they take the stomach for the whole passage
and pype, called Oesophage or the throat: but commonly the whole Ventricle is
called by that name. Therefore I will use it indifferently, thereby to apply my
self the better to the usual manner of speaking. We are to know then first
of all, that amongst all the members serving to nourishment, GOD has
appointed this to be the first, as that which receives the meat and drink
sent unto it by the throat. And to the end we may the better know the
providence of God, in the offices and commodities of this member, I will first
speak somewhat of the figure and form thereof, then of the situation of it,
Of the figure of the stomach.
and last of all, of the substance of it. The figure of it is round and long
much like to a bagge-pipe, as that which is being somewhat larger at the
bottom, and arising upward toward the left side, grows narrower by little
and little. For seeing it was to occupy the whole pace that is betwixt the
liver and the spleen, it was requisite that it should be long, to the end
it might not trouble that place which is assigned unto them, but give them
place. Likewise it was requisite that it should be round, both because the
round form is most capable, and also because it will not so easily be broken
and marred as other forms will be.

Unto the stomach is joined this narrow, pipe called Oesophage, to the end it
might receive into it thereby, all kinds of meat and drink, as we declared
when we spoke of the pipes in the throat, and of meats and drinks. Of the
mouths of the stomach.
For this cause there are two mouths or doors in the stomach, called
Orifices, of which the one is called the higher Orifice or mouth, because it is
uppermost, and the other for the same reason is called the lower Orifice. The
first is to receive the meat that is sent to the stomach by the Oesophage.
And this is that which the Physicions call by the proper name of stomach, as
we heard before, although commonly it is called the heart. How the name of
the heart is abused.
For when we feel any weakness there, or any desire to vomit, we
commonly say that we are ill at the heart, or that something lies upon our
heart. But this sense of grief is not at the heart, but in that part of the
Ventricle, which is called the uppermost Orifice or stomach, whose seat and
place is on the left side near to the backe-bone. And this Orifice or mouth of
the stomach, is a great deal more large then the nethermost, because the
meat is oftentimes not well chewed, besides many great and hard morsels that
are swallowed now and then. Again, this part is very sensible, The original
of appetite.
because there is the original and place of appetite, by reason of those
nerves of which it is chiefly made, that grow together like unto nets.
Hereof we may note this, that the providence of God has so well provided for
all the members and instruments of nourishment, that there is not one of them,
but it has some small sinewe to give it sense, whereby it may feel and
perceive what humors are hurtful unto it, that by the grief which it
receives, men may be moved to have recourse to such remedies as are able to
relieve it.

But to return to our matter, The door of the upper Orifice.
we are to know, that the upper Orifice has the Midriffe joined unto it,
which is in steed of a door to close and shut it up, that when it is full
of meats and drinks, they should not ascend up again by the throat.
Concerning the nethermost Orifice it is both by the Greek and Latin Writers
called by a name that signifies a Doore-keeper, Of the lower Orifice.
being made to let out the meat concocted in the Ventricle together with the
superfluities and excrementes. Therefore also it is narrower then the upper
Orifice, and compassed about with a certain kernelley flesh, to the end that
nothing should pass by which were not well digested before, and that by
means of the mouth of it made in the manner of a ring. It is situated on the
right side under the hollownesse of the liver, a little lower then the other
Orifice. But it is not at the very bottom of the Ventricle, but a little
higher, to the end the food being retained and kept at the bottom, might
be heated and digested there. So that after the stomach has received into it
the meat and drink, both these doors as well above as beneath are shut, that
the heat within might be retained and kept close. Of the small strings of the
Orifices.
For this cause there are certain filaments or small stringes, of which some
are direct and straight, having in them a marvelous secret virtue of nature to
draw unto them: others are ouerth wart, and pass clean cross the former
through certain little corners that lie long-wise. Their office is to close up
the upper part from the body of the stomach. Besides, there are other crooked
filaments, which through oblique corners pass along the sides of both the
other: and these, because they close the whole body of the stomach, have power
of retaining, and serve to shut up the mouth of the stomach. So that these
filaments or threedes in regard of their office, may be compared to the
strings of a purse whereby it is shut. And because the stomach, being closed
and shut up, digesteth the meat a great deal better then if it were gaping
and wide open, therefore nature has provided in this sort. The stomach
compared to a pot on the fire.
Wherein we see it resembles a pot set to seething, which retains the
heat, and seetheth that which it contains better when it is close covered,
then when it is without a cover.

Now we are further to know, that the stomach is made of two coats or skins
one within an other, consisting partly of a fleshy, and partly of a sinowy
substance. The innermost is fuller of sinews and thicker, having straight
filaments within, wherewith as it were with fingers, it draws the meat
downward: and without, it has certain oblique filaments, which compass it
about, and serve to hold it in. The outward coat, which is more fleshy, has
overthwart filaments that serve for expulsion. For when the stomach is
sometime ouercharged with meat, so that it is not able to embrace and keep it
for digestion, then by means of the expulsive virtue, it drives out that
which is superfluous, and provoke a man to vomit, to the end it be not
stifled through the weight and burden of the meat it bears. For this cause
the throat is a pipe appointed for the moving of things up and down, not
having any attractiue force in it, but being only a mere way and place of
passage, through which meats and drinks pass to and fro as need requires.

Concerning the seat of the stomach, How the stomach is placed.
it is placed in the midst of the body between the liver and the spleen, and
that in such sort that the liver embraces and warmeth it on the right side,
and the spleen does the like on the left side. Of the substance of it.
As for the substance of it, it is of the nature of sinews, that is cold and
dry. For it is very convenient it should be so, first, because of the sense
and feeling, that it might be incited by such things as agree with it,
rejecting all others: secondly, in regard of appetite, that it might be the
greater and of more efficacy. Moreover, it was requisite that it should be of
such matter, to the end it might be the harder, and receive the less hurt
from the hardenesse and sharpness of meats. How it is warmed by other
neighbor parts.
And besides the natural heat which it has of it self, it is heated also by
the neighbor parts, to the end it may the better perform that duty that
lies upon it. For this cause it has on the right side the liver, which is
unto it in stead of a boiling pot or cauldron: and on the left side it has
the spleen for the same purpose: the muscles of the chine bone are behind it,
and before is the skin commonly called the Kell. Likewise as the heart is not
far from it, so the midriffe lying over it, does greatly heat it by
continual motion. Whereby we see, how the providence of God has well fenced
and clothed it on all sides, that it might have as much heat as is needful
for it. Touching this skin called the Kell, Of (...) Kell or Kall.
it is a double coat or covering, spreading it self wholly over the
intralles, being in fashion like to a purse, by reason that it is double and
wouen like to a net, consisting of fat, of veins, of atteries and of a
skin. Moreover, the stomach is warmed by the spirits that enter into it in
great abundance, by reason that it is knit unto the neighbor parts by veins
and arteries. The causes of appetite in the stomach.
Now because it serves to the nutritive faculty, the natural virtue thereof
is to desire food, the sense and feeling of which appetite is in the upper
Orifice, into which many sinews are wouen that come down from the brain.
Therefore when the members of the body being empty desire nourishment, and
labor to draw it from the veins, and the veins from the liver, and the
liver from the stomach, and the stomach from the Orifice, then is there a
certain contraction and wrinckling as it were of the Orifice, by reason of the
veins that suck it. In which contraction and gathering together of the
stomachs mouth, there is by means of the nerves a kind of sense and grief,
The original of hunger.
which we call Hunger, whereby living creatures are stirred up to seek after
food and nourishment. I make no repetition here of that which has been
spoken before, namely, of the drawing, reteining, altering, and expulsing
virtues of the vegetative soul. For by our discourses we may easily
understand, how every one of them does his duty both in the stomach and
liver, and in all the other members of the body. But the altering virtue is the
chiefest, whose office is to change in the stomach, and to convert into juice
and liquor, that meat which it has received.

This liquor is called by the Physicions Chylus, which is a Greek word, and
resembles the reme of a ptisame: it is concocted in the stomach, until it be
so well prepared that it may be sent unto the liver. Which concoction is first
and principally made by the natural virtue of the stomach, as it appears in
this that every stomach does after a wonderful manner embrace and warm all
the meat, which it receives, The stomach compared to a womb.
even as the whole womb embraces her burden and fruit until it come to
ripeness: and when the time of birth is come, the expulsive virtue thereof
drives it forth. So fares it with the meat in the stomach, excepting this
difference, that the stomach needs not so long a time to finish his work in,
as the womb does. Afterward this natural virtue of the stomach, is helped and
warmed by those means before declared. And when the stomach has finished this
first concoction, The office of the lower Orifice.
whereby the meat received is so duly prepared that it may be sent into the
liver, then the lower Orifice and door called the Porter, opens it self,
and sends this liquor into the intralles and bowelles, which are ordained as
well to receive it, as to purge forth the superfluities and excrements.
Therefore, AMANA. thy speech shall be of these, that so we may go forward
with our matter of those instruments of the vegetative soul, which she uses
in her natural works.

Of the intralles and bowelles, and of their names and offices: of the nature
of the three smaller guts, and of the other three that are greater: of the
instructions which we may learn by these things. Chap. 62.
AMANA, If there were no other reason but this, that the poorest and basest
persons amongst men are the creatures of GOD, and created after his image and
likeness, as well as the richest, mightiest, and highest in dignities and
honors, and that as well the one as the other, are members of the body of
mankind, it were enough to with-holde us from contemning any person, The
poorer sort are not to be contemned.
of what condition, estate or quality soever he be, so that his vocation be
of GOD, and profitable for mankind. For in contemning any creature and his
estate, GOD, who created him and ordained his vocation, is contemned and
iniuried thereby, considering that he is his work, which cannot be mocked,
but the workemaster that framed it must needs be scorned. Besides, we are to
consider, that many of them that are taken to be the vilest and basest
persons, are a great deal more profitable and necessary, and so likewise their
callings and offices, then many others that are in greater reputation, and more
honorable according to man's judgment, who notwithstanding might more easily
be spared, then those of whom there is less account and reckoning made.

The like may be said of the use of the members of our bodies, and of the
necessity and need which we have of them that are accounted most vile and
abject: which albeit they be less honorable then the rest, yet are they more
necessary for this life of ours, then many others that are a great deal more
noble and more excellent. For we may live without eyes, The necessity of the
bowelles.
without ears, without hands, without feet, and without many other goodly
members: but not without the intralles and bowelles, which are but the sinkes
and wide-draughts of our bodies, although there be but one of them only
wanting. For there is not one of them but it is profitable, yea necessary for
us, insomuch that no other can do that office which lies upon it: the Lord
having so disposed it, that every one of them must discharge his own office by
himself.

Of these intralles and guts there are six in number, The number and names
of the guts.
near unto the stomach, namely, three small and three great ones, being all
of a round and hollow figure, according to the greatness and thickenesse of
every one of them. They are called the instruments of distribution and
purgation, because they distribute the food, and send forth the superfluities
and excrements. Now to contain all these in their place, they are covered and
wrapped about together with the other entralles of the natural parts, with
two coats or couerings, The bowelles have two couerings.
namely, with that which is called the Kell, whereof mention was made in the
former discourse, and which covers the bowels, stretching it self even to
the privy parts: so that it executes the same office unto them, that it
does unto the stomach, as we were given to understand. Besides, there is an
other coat or skin called Peritone, Of the Peritone or inner ^ine of the
belly joined to the kall.
because it is spread round about the lower belly, and enuironeth the stomach,
the bowelles, the kall, the liver, the spleen, and the kidneys: in a word, it
covers all the members from the midriffe down to the sharebone. The use of
this is great. For first it serves for a covering to cover all the members:
then it serves also for the muscles that are laid upon them. Moreover, it
causes the superfluities of dry meats to descend more speedily. Fourthly, it
keeps the stomach and bowels that they swell not easily: The uses of it.
and fifthly, it knitteth together and conioyneth all the members within it, as
we have seen how the other parts of the body are separated and clothed with
skins and membranes. For this cause it is framed and fashioned like to an
egg, and has his beginning from the ligaments, which bind together the
turning joints of the reins, and is knit unto them. So that the use of it is
to tie and knit unto the back the members of the inferior belly. Now
concerning the intralles and bowels, although they ^e united to the stomach,
and so jointly follow each other, yet they ^iffer in figure, in situation, and
in offices. True it is, that their substance differs little from that of the
stomach. The substance of the bowels.
For they are of a certain whitish flesh, having no blood in any of them:
neither is there any other difference, but only in this, that the bigger guts
are more full and fat, The bowels are made of two coats.
and the smaller are otherwise. Again, they have all this in common together,
that they are made of two coats, which God has given them for the greater
preservation of them, and of the life of living creatures. For oftentimes
ulcers and sores breed, chiefly when some great inflammation has gone
before, so that they putrify and fret, and one of the coats be spoiled.
Nevertheless a man may live by the other that continues sound, and
discharges well enough all his duties.

Now forasmuch as they are instruments appointed for the purging of the body,
the fibers or little strings both of the inner and utter coats, are all in a
manner crosse-wise, except some few intermingled long-wise, to the end that
the purging might be moderated in such sort, Of the three (...) gut^.
as that it neither be too much nor too little. The three smaller are placed
uppermost, which because they were made that the meat being turned into liquor
might be conveyed through them, therefore it was requisite they should be so
slender, and that chiefly for two causes. The first, to the end the passage
might be more easy: the other, because that in the very passage some
concoction is made of the liquor and food: so that they are the sooner warmed,
by reason of their slender and thin making. Of their names.
Now concerning the name and peculiar office of every one: The Duodene or
stomach gut.
the first is called Duodene; because of the length of it, which is without any
folding or turning. It is as it were a part of the stomach hanging down, or as
a changing of the stomach into a gut, being twelve fingers long, whereupon it
was so called by the ancient Physicions, although now there is none found of
that length. It begins at the porter of the stomach, and is so seated beside
the liver, that look where that leaves, and the other following (called the
hungry gut) begins, there is a passage from the bladder of gall, to bring
the yellow humor thither called choler, to the end it might help forward the
meat, and make clean the gut. The second, The hungry gut.
called the hungry gut, is so termed, because it holds but a little food in
regard of the other following, so that it may be said after a sort to fast:
whereof there are three causes. The first is, the great number of Meseraicall
veins and arteries, which are in greater number about that gut then about the
rest. Whereupon they suck out more speedily the liquor and food which passes
through that, then if they were fewer in number. The second cause is, because
the liver, which is nearest to that gut, does likewise draw nourishment from
it, which is sooner done then from the rest that are farther off. The third is,
the falling down of the chollericke humor into it, which intermedleth not it
self with the liquor and food, but glideth down by the side of this gut unto
that which is called Colon, to the end it may thrust forward the excrements
and purge the humors: which it perfourmeth because it is sharp and biting.
Now by reason it continually provoke this gut to expulsion, it falls out to
be more empty then the residue.

Then follows the third small intralle, The Ileon or folded Gut.
called Ileos by the Graecians, both because it has many fouldings, as also
for the manifold knitting of it to the Mesenterium from whence sundry veins
come into this. The hungry gut and this have both one office: only herein
they differ, that the hungry Gut is sooner sucked then this, which retains a
longer time, that liquor and food that it receives. For this cause it is of a
greater length, and has more foldings and turnings, to the end it may the
better concoct the liquor, and be tempering with the food the longer time:
whereby it shall not need to be filled, and stuffed presently with other
meats. And herein we have to note the good forecast of nature. For if we
were presently to return again to the Table after we had taken our meat, we
should do nothing all our life time but eat and drink. Therefore some of
the ancient Philosophers have in this respect acknowledged the providence of
GOD, saying that these foldings, plites, and windings were made to this end,
that men might not live ignorantly as beasts that are destitute of all
knowledge: which would follow undoubtedly, if they were of necessity to attend
always upon the belly.

Now let us speak of the other three great Guts, which follow the small
ones. Of the three great Guts.
These then are lower, more fleshie and thick, because their chief office is
to receive the excrements of the above named Guts, and to retain the same
until the just time come to send them forth: even as it is the office of the
three former to distribute the liquor and food by the Meseraicall veins. The
first of these great ones is called the Blind Gut, The blind Gut.
because that being large and great, it has but one way, both to receive in,
and to let out the matter received: whereupon it is commonly called by some the
Sack or Budget Gut. His office is to receive the excrementes from the last
lesser Gut, and having drawn out some nourishment from them to cast forth the
rest to the other Gut called Colon. For this cause the doors and holes of
these three last Guts, concur well together in a hollow place.

Now because this blind Gut is wide and round, and has many foldings, among
other things it stands in stead of an other stomach, to keep and to
preserve meat in it against some want and necessity to come, The fifth gut
called Colon, or the great gut.
and to distribute it to the neighbour-members after a long hunger. Whereunto
the Gut called Colon does also help, both by reason of the capacity of it,
as for the oblique situation thereof, as also because it keeps within it
food and nourishment. Concerning the name of it, the Greek word from whence
it is taken signifies Gain, because it is greater and more capable then any
of the rest: or else it may signify as a man would say, Cut, because it is as
it weree cut into sundry holes, and has diverse turnings. For it receives the
excrementes, and to the end they should not pass away by and by, it sends
them by little and little through straight passages. The chollericke humor
descends out of the hungry Gut into this, whereby the dirt is both colored
and driven forth.

Of this Gut called Colon, The colike and Ileacke passions.
the Colike passion takes the name: as the Ileaca passion does of the Gut
Ileon. Now because this Gut is puffed up more then any of the rest, and is
very painful to them that have it stopped, it has certain straight threedes
wouen amongst the overthwart Fibers, which strengthen the coats and skins
thereof, to the end they should not break or crack, when they are blown up
and strained. Whereby we see again how the counsel of Gods providence has
notably provided for all things, whose excellent majesty has not despised
these most base, earthly, and brute parts.

Now it remains that we should consider of the third Gut, The straight gut.
called the Straight Gut. For although it proceed from the Gut Colon, yet it
differs from it both in place and figure, and is called the Straight Gut
because of the straightness of it. Some call it the Fat Gut, because it is
passing fat in beasts. It reaches unto the very fundament, at the end
whereof is placed a muscle, being fashioned round like to a Ring, to keep in,
and to retain ventositie and excrementes until Nature please: to this end
that expulsion of them might not be made upon every occasion, and in every
place indifferently, against our wills, and contrary to natural and civil
honesty. The use of it.
For the use of the straight Gut is to carry and throw forth clean out of
the body the filth, dregs, and grossest excrements thereof, being such as are
altogether unprofitable, and hurtful to the body. Now forasmuch as it is the
lowest gut and most burdened, by reason that it must hold all the gross
excrements of whatsoever enters into the body by the mouth, and is oftentimes
very much blown and stretched up, therefore the divine providence has given
unto it more threedes and fibers of all sorts then to any of the rest, and
has made it strong and able to bear the charge. So likewise his heavenly
counsel has provided, that amongst all the members of the body, those should
be strongest, that have the greatest burden and stresse to bear. And for this
cause also this straight gutte has this muscle, which the Physicions call
Sphincter, Of the muscle Sphincter.
being taken from a Greek word that signifies to restrain and close up,
because it is an instrument of voluntary motion, that opens and shuts as
we will, when need requires.

Now for the end of this speech, if we consider well of those parts whereof
we have spoken, we shall find that we carry about with us sundry sorts
of sinkes, which are oftentimes ilfauouredly looked unto. And this ought to put
us in mind of our infirmities and of those goodly shoppes we have in our
bodies full of stinking drugges, A lesson against pride.
which ought to take from us all matter of pride. Moreover we may learn here,
that which was spoken of in the beginning of this discourse, namely, the use of
these members, and the necessity of the basest and less comely parts.
Therefore if there were no other respect to be had but this of necessity, we
ought to be so far from despising them, especially the workemaster that has
made and disposed them, as that we ought rather thereby to acknowledge his
great providence, and the care he has had of us, seeing it has pleased him
even from the high degree of his majesty, to provide for the least and last
necessities and infirmities of our bodies. Against the contempt of inferior
persons.
So likewise by admiring his so great bounty and goodness toward us, we
have good occasion by his example, to do the like one toward an other, in
the performance of all duties appertaining to a holy and true friendship. Now
that we may prosecute our matter subject, let us look into the other natural
powers of the soul. First let us consider of the Mesentery, of the Meseraicall
veins; of the sweet bread, of the liver, and of their natures and offices.
The handling of these things belong to thee, ARAM.

Of the Mesentery and Mesareon: of the Meseraicall veins, of the Pancreas or
sweet bread, and of their nature and office: of the liver, and of his nature
and office: of the roots, bodies, and branches of the veins, of their names
and uses, and of the similitude between them and the arteries. Chap. 63.
ARAM. When we consider how the providence of God reaches so far unto those
things that are profitable and necessary in our bodies, that it forgets not,
neither omitteth the least thing that is in them: we should be very blind of
understanding, if we doubted that our God provided not as well for all things
that are profitable and necessary for our souls, for the spiritual food and
growth of them, and for their perfect purging and salvation. For albeit there
is no superfluity or excrement, in that spiritual food wherewith the soul is
nourished, yet is it requisite and needful, that the soul be purged from those
excrements and filthiness of sin, wherewith the devil has infected and filled
it. And so indeed is it purged in Jesus Christ, who has washed and cleansed us
from our sins by his blood, and does daily purge us by his holy spirit, and by
those means which he has ordained in his church. Therefore I am out of doubt,
that God meant to put men in mind of these things, by the order and necessity
which he has appointed in the nature of their bodies, both in regard of their
food and of their nourishment: and that we shall always find good and holy
instructions for the soul, by considering the nature and office of every part
of the body. Let us then consider of other instruments of the natural powers
of the soul, then hitherto we have spoken of.

After the entrals and guts, Of the Mesentery.
the Mesentery follows, which is placed in the midst of them, whereupon it is
so called of the Graecians, as if you would say, dwelling in the midst of the
guts. And because it is carried and lift up into the middle of all these
vessels, Of the Mesareon.
it is also called by some Mesareon, which name signifies the self same thing
in Greek. Others take Mesareon to be the highest part of the Mesentery, which
is also called Calicreas by the Graecians, because the flesh of it is very
pleasant to eat, according as the name gives us to understand. So that it is
no entrall or gut, but a coat and folded covering in the midst of them: or
rather a thick white flesh, of a sinowy and kernelly substance, that bears
fat, distinguishing the entralles, and knitting them unto the back. The chief
use of it.
But it was chiefly created to bear up and sustain the Meseraicall veins
and arteries, with the sinews that are in that member: which because they are
in danger of breaking, through the vehement motions of the body and such other
accidents, therefore the providence of God would not have them without a
foundation, prop, and defense to countergard them. For this cause he has
fortified and fastened the branches and divisions of the veins, by such a
member and instrument, which serves in stead of a band and stay both to the
great and little ones. Other uses of the Mesentery.
Besides, his action and use also is to fasten and keep the entralles every
one in his place, and to convey unto the liver by the meseraicall veins, that
are called the hands thereof, that liquor which the Graecians call Chylus, of
which we have already spoken. For as the bodies of trees have their roots,
which spread abroad in the earth to draw nourishment from thence: even so
there are branches dispersed throughout the Mesentery, and derived from the
liver vein, which are joined to the bowelles, as it were small roots to draw
food, Of the Meseraicall veins.
being much like to hairs or cob-webs. These branches or small roots are the
Meseraicall veins, so called, because they are placed in the upper part of
that member and instrument that is called Mesareon, Their use.
whereof I spoke even now. Their office and nature is to draw and suck out
nourishment from the guts, and to carry it to the liver, from whence they have
all their beginning, as appears by Anatomy: howsoever there are that think,
that some of them come not from thence. The flesh of the Mesentery is kernelly
and fatty, not only serving in stead of a munition and defense, as has been
said, but also to moisten the entralles and guts, and to preserve the heat
both of the bowelles and veins. So likewise the arteries are joined to the
veins, to give them heat, and to the guts also to concoct the liquor and
nourishment. Besides, the nerves and sinews there, serve to give sense to the
guts. There is moreover a kernelly flesh, which the Physicions call Pancreas,
Of the Pancreas or sweet bread.
because it does wholly resemble flesh, as the Greek name imports. It is
placed in the hollow part of the liver, that it might be as it were a cushion
unto it, and a preserver of the divided parts thereof, by filling the void
places that are between the stomach, The uses of it.
the liver and the spleen, to the end it may uphold and protect the
meseraicall veins, and keep every thing from breaking either by falls or by
violent motions. Now touching the liver, it is a very noble member. Of the
liver and excellency thereof.
For it is the principallest member of all the natural parts, and the
chiefest instrument belonging to the vegetative and nourishing power of the
soul. It is the first of the nobler parts that is made perfect, when the
child is framed in the mothers womb: it is the author, shop, and forge of the
blood, the original and fountain of the veins. Therefore the substance of it
is a soft and red flesh, like to blood newly pressed out and clodded.
Nevertheless in it own nature it is perfect flesh, having sundry, different
veins dispersed throughout as it were threeds, and arteries also joined unto
the^ for their refreshing. The second coction is made in the liver.
Now after the stomach has finished the first concoction of meat, and turned
it into liquor as it has bin declared unto us, the second is made in the
liver, after it has received this liquor so prepared by the stomach and guts
as we said, and turned it into blood. This concoction is perfected in the small
veins, that are dispersed throughout the body of the liver. And because God
has enjoined this office to this member, he has compounded it of such a flesh
and matter, as has given unto it this proper and peculiar virtue, to convert
into blood that food and nourishment that is brought unto it, to the end it
may be the instrument of the generation of that thing wherewith the body is
nourished. Having thus transformed the liquor received, it makes it red like
unto it self: as contrariwise, blood is made white in the breasts of a woman,
both by reason of their nature and substance, as also for other causes touched
by us. The temperature of the liver is hot and moist, such as becomes the
blood and concoction it has to perform, which is like to boiled meat. Now
forasmuch as this instrument and member is the chiefest in the kitchen of man's
body, GOD has given unto it such a nature and property, as if there were in it
a harth, Four degrees of concoction in the liver.
a table, a knife, and a wagoner, as some name them, having regard to the
diverse actions thereof, and to the sundry degrees of concoction made therein.
They call the first action or degree of concoction by the name of a harth,
because it serves to heat the food, as a harth does in a kitchen. The second
is called a table, namely, when the food begins to gather it self together
in the liver, and is there placed as it were upon a table to be sent unto the
members. The third action has the name of a knife given unto it, because it
divides and makes a separation of the humors. And the fourth is as it were
the wagoner, because there is the carriage and conueiance of all from thence
into the hollow vein. For the natural virtues and powers govern the humors
very well, conducting and leading them to their due places. The fountains of
the blood and veins, spirits, and arteries.
For this cause the liver is the fountain of blood, and the spring of all the
veins by which it is distributed throughout the body as the heart is the
fountain of the vital spirits, and the original of the arteries, whereby the
spirits necessary for the body are conveyed into it, as the blood from the
liver. Wherefore even as the arteries are a kind of veins to carry and to
distribute the air, breath, and vital spirits: so likewise the veins
proceeding from the liver, are ordained to distribute the blood into all parts
of the body. These two are lincked together with such a near alliance and
agreement, that the veins administer matter to the vital spirit, which is
engendered in the heart of the purest and most spiritual blood, as the spirit
likewise helps the blood by his heat in the arteries. Therefore they have
mouths joining each to other, to the end the spirit, as it were a little flame,
may receive norishme^t out of the veins, and that the veins may draw spirit
and heat from the arteries. Our life compared to a lamp.
For as we have already touched, our life is much like to a flame in a lamp,
that receives food from the oil put into the lamp: even so the vital spirit,
which is as a flame within us, draws and takes norishme^t from the veins.
Wherein we have a goodly example of that mutual society, which we ought to
have one toward another in this life. Now of those veins that derive their
original from the liver, Two great veins in the body.
there are 2. principal ones that are very great, of which the others are but
as it were branches, that from the liver spread themselves upwards and
downwards through all the parts of the body. These two veins coming out of
the liver take their beginning from many little veins, which being as it were
their roots, join together afterward into two trunks or great bodies, that
divide themselves again into diverse boughs and branches, whereof some are
greater and some lesser, after the manner of trees. The first is called the
Port-veine, The Port-veine.
because it is as it were the door of the liver out of which it proceeds,
being placed in the hollow part thereof. The use and profit of it is to receive
nourishment prepared by the stomach and guts, and then to keep it until the
liver has turned it into pure blood, for to send it afterward to all the body
by the other great vein called the Cave or hollow vein. The hollow vein.
And this proceeds from the outside of the liver, resembling the body of a
tree, and dividing it self into two great branches, of which the lesser
ascends up to the vital and animal parts, and to the ends of them, and the
bigger branch descends down along the hinder part of the liver, upon that
part of the chine bone that is between the kidneys, and so goes to those
parts that are contained under them. Forasmuch therefore as the arteries and
veins are the principal instruments, whereby the soul gives life unto the
body, some learned men expound that of the vital and natural parts, Eccles.
12. 6.
which Solomon speaks of the silver coard not lengthened, of the golden ewer
broken, of the pitcher broken at the well, and of the wheel broken at the
cisterne.

We have already spoken of the silver chain and of the golden ewer, when we
discoursed of the chine bone of the back, and of the marrowe of it. A place of
Solomon expounded.
Touching the residue, they understand by the well the liver, which is the
fountain of blood: and by the pitcher, the veins, because they are the
vessels whereby the blood is taken out of the liver and drawn thence, that
it may be distributed to all the body: and by the cisterne is understood the
heart, and by the wheel, the head. For we may already perceive by that which
we have already said of the heart, how serviceable the liver is unto it,
considering that the heart is the fountain of the vital spirits and the
original of the arteries, (as the liver is of the blood and of the veins) and
that the vital spirits are engendered in the heart of the purest and most
spiritual blood, which it draws and receives from the liver. Moreover,
these vital spirits are by mean of the heart sent unto the brain and the
head, to serve the animal powers that have their places and instruments there,
and to serve all the senses as well spiritual as corporal. Therefore the head
is aptly compared to a wheel, both for the roundnesse of it, as also because
it draws and receives the vital spirits from the heart, which sends them
unto it, as the water is drawn from his fountain, well, or cisterne by means
of the wheel. Further, as it is needful, that there should be a coard to
reach from the wheel down to the well, and a pitcher or bucket at the end of
the coard to draw water withal: so the arteries reaching from the heart up to
the head, are like to the coarde and pitcher, whereby the brain draws vital
spirits from the heart. For the great artery, Of the artery Aorta.
called Aorta by the Physicions, which comes out of the heart, and is divided
into two great branches, of which the one goes upward, to carry the vital
spirit to the superior parts, and the other downward to do the like
below, forasmuch as it joins unto the heart, may be taken for the pitcher
that draws from thence the vital spirits, as from a well; and the branch
that ascends upward may be taken for the coard joined unto the wheel.

The like may be seen in the liver. For the great veins of it are as it were
the pitcher, and the veins that ascend up unto the head, as likewise the
arteries, are the coarde that draws up the blood from out of the liver. If
then we join that which we have already heard of the silver chain or
coarde, and of the golden ewer, with that which we speak now of the pitcher
and of the well, of the wheel, and of the cisterne, we may be well assured,
that Solomon has most wisely comprehended in so small a number of words, all
the internal parts of the body, and all the powers both animal, vital, and
natural, together with all the instruments, which they have in the body and
in the members thereof. For first behold, the brain signified by the golden
ewer: then the pith of the chine bone and the chine bone it self by the silver
coard: uext, the liver by the well, which has also his pitcher: and lastly,
the heart which is signified by the cisterne. As for that particularly spoken
of the pitcher and wheel broken, which draw water out of the well and
cisterne, it is all one as if he had said, that when the fountain of blood in
the liver waxes dry and decays, the wheel above, namely, the head, is
broken, because all the senses both exterior and interior, and the animal
virtues fail in the body. For the soul wants sound instruments to give
life, motion, and sense unto it, they being worn and consumed by those means
and causes, which we shall understand hereafter. But to follow our purpose, and
not to depart from the matter, we must entreat of the nature of blood, and of
other humors in the body, and of their diversity and nature. This then,
ACHITOB, shall be the matter subject of thy discourse.

Of the blood and of other humors in the body: of their diversity and nature,
and of the agreement they have with the elements: of the similitude that is
between the great garden of this great world, and that of the little world,
touching the nourishment of things contained and preserved in them. Chap. 64.
ACHITOB. If in many of our discourses we saw great testimonies of the image
of the great world in man, the matter we have now to handle will set before
our eyes such as are most clear and evident. A similitude.
For look how the sea is as it were the great fountain and womb of all
waters, and of the floods and rivers that issue out of them to water the whole
earth: so likewise the liver is as it were the fountain of the blood and
veins, which are like to brooks and rivers, to carry and distribute the blood
throughout the whole body, to the end that all the parts of it might be
moistened, soaked, and nourished according to their several natures. So that
the liver in man's body, and in man, who is the little world, is as the sea in
the great world, and the veins are like to the floods and rivers. Neither are
the parts of the body by this means moistened, watered, and nourished with blood
only, but also with all the other humors, wherewith it is tempered, and without
which the body cannot live. For the blood carries all the rest with it. But that
we may the better understand this matter, and what is the proper nature of
blood, we must first know what a humor is, and how many kinds of it there are.

We understand by a Humor, What a humor is.
a liquide and running body into which the food is converted in the liver, to
this end that bodies might be nourished and preserved by them. And as there
are four elements of which our bodies are compounded, so there are four sorts
of humors answerable to their natures, being al mingled together with the
blood: as we may see by experience in blood let out of ones body. For uppermost
we see as it were a little skimme like to the flower or working of new wine, or
of other wine when it is powered forth. Next, we may see as it were small
streams of water mingled with the blood. And in the bottom is seen a blacker
and thicker humor, like to the lees of wine in a wine vessel. So that if we
know how to consider wisely of these things, it will be easy for us to
understand the distinction of these sundry humors, Of the nature of blood.
and their nature. Now concerning the first of them, we are to know that the
proper nature of blood is to be hot and moist: wherein it answers to the
nature of the air. It is temperate, sweet, and fatty, as also the best and
chiefest part of nourishment. For albeit all the other humors do nourish
likewise, and are carried of the blood, nevertheless that humor which is
properly called blood, is the chiefest part of nourishment. For it is requisite
that nourishment should be sweet, or at leastwise tempred with sweet liquor.
Next, Of the choleric humor.
that thin skimme which is seen on the top of it, resembling the flower of
wine, is that humor that is called yellow choler, or the choleric humor
which is hot and dry, of a bitter taste, and answering to the nature of fire,
which is of the same nature. For it is bred of the hottest and driest parts of
that liquor, in which the nourishment of the body consists, when through
their great heat they boil together. Of the flegmaticke humor.
Moreover, those small streams of water, which we see mingled in the blood,
proceed of the flegmaticke humor that is cold and moist, like to water of
whose nature it holds. For this humor is in part concocted for the turning
of it into blood, but not wholly perfected. Hereof it comes that the color
of it remains white, much like to water, and without taste, or as some
affirm, it is some what brackish, Of the melancholicke humor.
but not fatty. Lastly, the black humor and most earthie which looks like
the very bottom of a deep, read, and thick wine, or like the lees in a
vessel full of wine or oil, is the melancholic humor, or as some term it,
black choler, being cold and dry like to the earth, with which it has some
agreement, and of taste somewhat sharp.

Now in this diversity of these humors mingled altogether with the blood,
The agreement betwixt the humors and the elements.
two things are worthy to be well marked. First, the agreement and conformity
which they have with all the elements of which the body of man is compounded: so
that each of them has his proper element agreeable to his nature, to the end
they may nourish and preserve all the parts of the body, according to the
nature of the elements of which they hold. The other point is, not only the
disagreement, but even the manifest contrariety that is between al these
humors, as there is betwixt the elements: and again the vnio^ that appears to
be between the^ in the midst of this contrariety, as the like is among the
elements, whose nature they follow. Moreover we see, that between light and
darkness, day and night, cold and heat, drienesse, and moisture, between
the diverse and contrary seasons of the year, besides sundry other such
contrarieties that are in nature, and in all other things, I say between these
so contrary, God frames notwithstanding such a wonderful concord, tempering
and knitting them in such sort one with an other, that they are so far from
defacing and destroying each other, as contrariwise they could not possibly
be preserved, except they were tied together with such a knot and conjunction.
Now beside that which we have here spoken of the nature of these humors,
we have further to note, that they do not only agree with the elements in
qualities, but also in regard of their places in man's body, I mean in the
whole mass and distribution of the blood, and in the conjunction they have
together, even as the elements have their places each after other. How the
humors and elements agree in places.
For as the fire of it own nature is light, and therefore labors always to
ascend upward, to attain to his natural place: so the cholerike humor, which
agrees with the nature thereof, occupies the highest place among the humors
mingled with the blood, as we may perceive by that that has been already
spoken of the flower and skimme of blood, according to that comparison which
we made betwixt blood and wine. The like may be said of the rest. For as the
air is lightest next to the fire, and the nearest element unto it and to the
rest of the celestial fires: so the blood properly so called, keeps the
place of the air among the humors of the body. For it is not so light as the
fire, nor so heavy as the water or the earth. And so consequently the
flegmatike and melancholic humors occupy the lower places according to their
degrees, as the water and the earth do in this great world. For this cause all
these humors besides their common offices and effects, have others more
special agreeable to their nature, as (God willing) we will declare hereafter.
And namely, the flegmatike humor that holds of the nature of the water, is
to be considered of. For as in this great visible world, there are waters both
above and beneath, I mean those that are contained and retained within the
clouds in the air, and those that are in the sea and in rivers, kept within
their bounds assigned them for their course: so the like is to be found in the
little world, which is man.

Now hitherto have we learned, how the water and the other humors are
carried with the blood throughout the body, as well upward as downewarde, by
means of the veins which water all the parts of it, how high or low soever
they be, and therewithal carry unto them their food and nourishement. And
this agrees fitly to the wonderful work of GODS providence in nature,
Agreement betwixt the great garden of the world, and that of the little world.
which, of the vapors arising out of the earth, gathers the clouds
together, and these like to sponges suck up vapors from the waters of which
themselves are engendered, and which afterward they carry about (as it were in
chariots) to distribute them into all quarters of the world, according as it
shall please God to dispose of them, by sending his blessing upon the earth by
the means of rain, wherewith being watered, it nourishes all those herbs,
trees, plants, and fruits which it brings forth, not only for the
sustenance of men, A goodly conte^plation in nature.
but also of beasts. Let us then imagine before us a garden wherein is infinite
variety of trees and plants of all sorts, and that this garden is watered
either by rain from heaven, or by pipes and conduites whereby the water is
brought thither and dispersed in all places thereof. We shall see that in this
great diversity of nature, there is but one and the same nourishment for them
all, and but one place. And albeeit the liquor that affoordeth this nourishment
to so many sorts of plants be but one, nevertheless it is converted into the
nature of all those things which it nourishes, so that the nature of it is
changed according to the distinct property of each of them. For there are
plants and herbs of all qualities, and of all tastes and colors. Some are
hot, others cold, some dry, others moist, either in the first, or second or
third or fourth degree, or else are tempered and intermingled according to
their several natures. As for their tastes, some are sweet, others sharp, or
bitter, or of no certain taste. In a word, there are of all kinds of tastes,
both simple and compound. And yet the humor or liquor is but one that
receives all these qualities, as in wormwood it becomes bitter, and in the
Vine or Fig Tree sweet. And if the herbs be either for food, or for
physic, or of a poysonfull nature, the same may be said of the humor that
nourishes them. The like is seen also in colors. Neither do we observe all
this by experience only in some great diversity of trees, and of all sorts
of plants, but even in each of them severally. For I pray you what difference
is there in every herb, or in every several tree, I mean between the root
and the stalk, the body and the branches, the boughs and the leaves, the
flowers, seeds and fruits? And yet all these sundry parts receive
nourishment from one Mother, and from one and the same substance and liquor. Of
the heart of plants.
Moreover we see, that as man and all other living creatures have their heart
in the midst of their bodies, which is the fountain of life, so all trees,
herbs and plants have their heart in the midst of them according to their
nature, without which they could not live. For we call their heart the inward
part, within which their pith remains, which is unto them as the heart is to
living and sensible creaatures. Whereupon we have further to note in regard of
those herbs that have weak stalks, especially hollow ones, or such as have
strawes insteede of stalks, that the providence of God has given unto them
knots, severed as it were into sundry small knees which are unto the^ in place
of their stomach, and of other nutritive members to retain their nourishment
the longer, and to concoct it the better, as also to strengthen them thereby.
And this we may evidently see in all sorts of corn and pulse. Even so does
nature, or rather the prince thereof work in a man's body, The body of man
compared to a garden.
which is as it were a garden that has a soul. Wherein the Creator of this
whole frame shows himself no less wonderful, nay rather much more then in
this great garden of ye whole earth, and of the great world, of both which he
is the Gardener that watreth them, to nourish all the fruits they bring forth,
and to cause them to grow. For from whence proceed, or are nourished the bones,
gristles, ligame^ts, sinews, arteries, veins, flesh, kernels, fat, together
with all the other parts of which the body is compounded? May not the like be
said of the eyes and of their coats and humors, of the ears, nose, tongue,
teeth, belly, stomach, guts, liver, spleen, kidneies, and of all the other
bowls and inward parts? And if we come to the hands and feet, and to the other
outward members, and to all the other parts called Isntrumental, and
distinguished according to their office, we shall find that only through the
alteration of their food into liquor, they all receive such nourishment as is
proper to each of them. Yet notwithstanding one and the same sustenance is
offered to so many sundry members, being made familiar and of the same nature
with that part unto which it is joined. For if it go to the eyes, it becomes
of the same temperament, that the nerves and spirits belonging to the sight
are of, which bring the faculty and virtue of seeing unto the eyes: as
likewise it is of the same temperament with the coats and humors of which the
eyes are compounded, being divided and distributed to each sundry part by a
natural property inherent in them. The like is done in the ears and in other
members and instruments of the corporal senses, and in all the other parts of
the body, even to the very nails and hairs thereof. Wherein truly we see
wonderful alterations, and a most admirable work of Gods providence, whether
it be considered in the whole earth, and in this great world, or in man, who
is the little world. Now for the sequel of our speech, before we come to
speak of the special offices and effects of the three humors joined with
the blood, of which we have here spoken, we are to consider besides this
distribution made of the nourishment by means of the veins, as it has been
told us, of another mean by which these humors, and especially the
flegmatike, ascend up unto the brain: whereby it comes to pass that in man,
as well as in the great world, there are waters above and below, which are the
cause that man's life swimmeth in the midst of a great danger. Man's life in
the midst of two waters.
Also we are to know why the soul and the blood are often taken each for
other, and to be instructed in the temperature of the humors, necessarily
belonging to the body for the health and life thereof: as likewise to consider
of the causes of health and sickness, and of life and death. But this shall
be for to morrow, when thou ASER, shall undertake the discourse of these
things, so far forth as is requisite for us to know.

The end of the eight days work.
THE NINTH days work.
Of the vapors that ascend up to the brain, and of the waters and clouds
contained therein, and in what perils men are thereby: why the soul and blood
are put one for another: of the temperature of the humors necessary for the
health and life of the body: of the causes of health and of diseases, and of
life and death. Chap. 65.
ASER. It is the saying of an ancient Philosopher, that they which sail upon
the water, are not above two or three fingers breadth distant from death:
namely so far off as the thicknes of the plankes and timber of the ship is,
in which they are carried into the Sea. For if that timber were taken from under
them, they cannot avoid drowning unless they can swim like fishes. But not
to sail on the sea, or upon a lake or river to approach near to death, we have
it a great deal nearer us, when we carry about us infinite causes and means,
whereby we are every hour in danger of stifling, and as it were of drowning,
and that both waking and sleeping, eating and drinking, within doors and
without, at all times and in all places whersoeuer we become. Insomuch that of
what estate and disposition soever, men are, we are oftentimes astonished to
hear tidings of a man's death, sooner then of his sickness, whom we saw not
long before, merry, cheerful and in good health.

Now we may learn some chief causes hereof by this days handling of that
matter Subject, which was yesterday propounded to be discoursed upon. And
first we must know, that besides the distribution of all the humors together
with the blood into all parts of the body by the veins, and that for the
causes before learned, there is yet another mean whereby these humors,
especially the flegmatike humor, Vapors ascending up to the brain.
which is of the nature of the water, ascend up unto the brain, by reason of
vapors arising upward out of the stomach, like to the vapor of a pot
seething on the fire with liquor in it, and like to vapors that ascend up from
the earth into the air, of which rain is engendered. Now when these vapors
are come up to the brain, they return to their natural place, and into the
nature of those humors of which they were bred, as the vapors that are held
in the air turn again into the same nature of water of which they came.
Therefore as the waters are contained within the clouds in the region of the
air allotted unto them, Watery clouds in the brain.
so is it with our brain which is of a cold nature, and of a spongie
substance fit for that purpose. So that we always carry within it as it were
clouds full of water, and of other humors that distill and run down
continually by the members and passages, which God has appointed to that end,
as we have already heard. And these places albeit they serve especially to
purge several humors, as has been told us, yet oftentimes they void them
altogether, both by reason of their mingling and conjunction, as of their over
great abundance. Yea many times they are so plentiful, namely the flegmatike
humor, that because the brain cannot sufficiently discharge it self of them
by the ordinary way, these humors ouerflowe on all sides wheresoever they can
find any vent and issue, even as when a thundering cloud bursteth asunder. So
that the water runs not down as it were a mild and gentle rain, but as a
mighty flood that brings great ruins with it, or as a river passing his
ordinary course, breaks down both bank and wall, and ouerfloweth every
where. Therefore we may well say, that many times we have floods of water
enclosed within our heads and brains, when we never think of it, nor yet
consider in what danger we are. Which the more secret and unknown it is unto
us, the more perilous it is, and greatlier to be feared, especially
considering it is so near us, and that we have fewer means to avoid it, as
we have daily examples in many, who being in health and merry, are suddenly
choked by catarrhes, which like to floods of waters, Inconveniences that come
from the brain.
run downwards, as the very name derived from the Grecians does import as
much: or by some sudden Apoplexy, how healthy soever before they seemed to
be. Others also there are, who if they be not presently choked with such
floods from the brain, yet they are taken with palsies, lamenesse, and
impotencie in all their members, or at leastwise in some of them, as if some
waterflood had carried them away, so that nothing had been saved but the bare
life, and that more frail and miserable then death it self. I speak not of
gowtie persons, who although they be not assaulted with such great and vehement
floods of waters, and with evil and superfluous humors, so that some few
drops only (of which they are so called) fall upon some parts of them, yet
are they greatly tormented and constrained to cry out, and that oftentimes in
extreme distress. Which consideration ought to stir us up to know wherein
our life and preservation thereof consists, and of whom we hold it. And on
the other side, although we had no examples of floods and inundations of
waters, of earthquakes and such other judgments of God whereby he punishes
men, Instruction for every one.
nevertheless these water-floods which we always carry about us, ought to
admonish and induce us to fear him, to call upon him by prayer, and day and
night, yea hourly, to recommend our life unto him, seeing he can take it from
us by stopping our breath, yea by a very small matter: or at least deprive us
of all motion and sense, as though our bodies had neither soul nor life in
them, but were like to poor dead carkases. For the doing hereof he needs
not to thunder or lighten from heaven against us, but only to cause a small
shower of water to power down from our head, which is the highest, the
goodliest and most noble part of all the body, and as it were the heaven of
the little world: or if it please him to cause a few drops only to distill
down upon the sinews and joints, it will torment men more grievously then if
they were in some continual torture, as the daily songs of such gowtie persons
do testify, who are impatient and void of the fear of God. Testimony of
the providence of God.
Now besides this profitable advertisement, which every one may take by that
which has bin here uttered, we ought on the other side to consider the
providence and goodness of God toward men, in that as he holds up in the
air and clouds, the water that hangs over us, not suffering them to break
down upon us all at once to ouerwhelme all the earth by them, with all the
beasts and other creatures contained in it, but distributeth them by good and
just measure: so deals he with the humors that ascend up continually, and
are kept in our brain, where they have their vessels to retain them in, as it
were in sponges, which yield forth water according as they are either
loosened, or restrained and closed together. And as for that which is said of
the testimony which we have of the frailty of our life, appearing in the
principal and most noble part of our body, as the like was showed us before in
that instruction, which we learned by the office that God assigned to our
lungs, and to the passages allotted by him for the taking in end letting out of
the air: so we have a very notable lesson in the consideration of the liver
and of the blood, of which that is the forge and fountain, and of the
distribution thereof into all the parts and members of the body by means of
the veins, as we heard yesterday. For as a man may judge by outward
appearance that the life of man consists in his breath, and that he gives up
both soul and life when he dies, as it were in giving up the last gasp: so
it seems also, that it is placed in the blood, as that which goes as it were
with the blood, so that when the blood is drawn out of a man's body, the life
also may seem to be drawn out therewithal. Hereupon as the soul is
oftentimes in holy Scripture put for the life, because it gives life to the
body, so it is also put for the blood, and the blood likewise called soul,
because it is the instrument and means whereby the soul gives life: and when
the Lord forbids his people to case the flesh with his soul, Genesis 9. 4, 5.
that is the blood thereof. Whereby his meaning is to teach men, to abhor the
effusion of man's blood: and therefore he says further, I will require your
blood, even the blood of your souls. Wherefore he that sheadeth blood, does
as much as if he drew the soul out of the body. Now forasmuch as the blood
is so necessary unto life, we are likewise to understand, that as it is
either pure and sound, or vnpure and corrupted, so is it disposed either to
health or sickness, and to life or death. For as the natural life of man
consists, especially in heat and moisture, so a man may easily judge, that
as every thing is bred by means of them, chiefly living and sensible
creatures, so nothing can be preserved in this bodily life without these two
qualities, that are proper to the air and to blood, as we have already
heard. But these qualities must be so tempered, that there be no excess on
either side. And for this cause GOD would have all the humors to be mingled
together with the blood, The mixture of the humors necessary.
that so it might be tempered as is requisite for the life of man. For if it
be too hot and dry, or too moist and cold, it cannot do that office, for
the performance whereof it is ordained: but in steed of bringing health and
life, it will breed diseases, and in the end cause death. For natural death
comes only of diseases, amongst which old age is to be reckoned, which is
an incurable sickness that lasts until death. Neither do diseases
proceed, but only of the distemperature that is in men's bodies, and in the
humors of which they are compounded. The causes of health and of sickness.
For as long as they are in a good, moderate and proportionable temper, and are
distributed to all the parts of the body, according as need requires, so
that none of them exceeds, then is there an equality in all the body, which
does not only preserve it in life, but in health and good disposition. For
there is the like concord and harmony between these humors, that is
between the parts of a good consort of music agreeing well together, or of
an instrument of music well tuned, from which you shall hear nothing but
pleasant melody. Whereas if all the parts thereof agree not well together,
there will be no musical harmony, but only a very unpleasant discord. The
like may be said of all the concordes and discordes that may fall out in the
humors of our bodies. And therefore GOD had so tempered them in the first
creation of man as was requisite, so that he, would have preserved him in a
perpetual life, if by true obedience he had always been knit and united
unto God his Creator. Sin the cause of all the discord in the world.
But since man fell at variance with God through sin, all this goodly
concord, which God had placed not only in man's body, but also between the
rest of his creatures, has been troubled and turned into discord by means of
sin. So that all this, goodly temperature and harmony of the humors in
which man's body was created, was dissolved and broken asunder, and that in
such sort that it was never since sound and perfect in any man, of how good
constitution soever he has been. For even in the best complexions there is
always some defect or excess in some of the humors: so that if there were no
other cause, The causes of death.
yet no body could naturally be immortal. For always in the end the
excess or defect that is in it, would cause it to decay, and finally bring it
to corruption. But besides this, there are so many other wantes and
superfluities throughout the whole life of man, whereby this evil already
become natural, is so much augmented, that there die more without comparison of
ordinary, diseases and of violent death, then of old age and natural death:
and all this by means of sin.

Therefore we may well conclude, that health is the effect and fruit of peace
and concord between all the parts and humors of man's body, and so
consequently is life: as contrariwise, sickness and death proceed of discord,
dissension, and war between them. For as concord brings peace, and peace
all good things with it, so contrariwise, discord breeds war, and war a
heaped measure of all miseries and evils. Wherefore a sound body of a good
constitution is like the body of a whole people and society, that has the
members agreeing well together, so that every one keeps his rank, not
hurting one another. But a sick and diseased body, is like to the body of a
mutinous and seditious people, that breaks the order it ought to keep, A
politic instruction.
and goes beyond the appointed bounds. Therefore we have a goodly image of
peace, and of that peaceable life whereunto men are created and borne; in the
disposition and temperature of the humors and members of our body, whereby we
ought to learn what great account we are to make of peace, amity and concord,
and how we ought to hate and abhor all war, discord, and dissension,
seeing the one is as it were health and life, and the other as diseases and
death. Now let us see the use and profit, the particular and special
properties of the humors joined with the blood: and what vessels are assigned
unto them, together with their nature and offices. It belongs to thee, AMANA,
to handle this matter.

Of the uses and commodities of the humors joined with the blood, and what
vessels are assigned unto them in the body, and of their nature and offices:
and first of the choleric humor, of the gall and vessel thereof: next of
the melancholic humor and of the spleen: then of the flegmatike humor, and
of the kidneyes and other vessels, which it has to purge by. Chap. 66.
AMANA. As we ought to labor to cut off all discord, and to nourish all
concord, that we may enjoy peace and those benefits that proceed thereof: so
we must be very careful to preserve all the parts of our body in such a
temperature, as may keep them in a harmony and concord, that we may live in
health. For this cause as God has tempered all the humors one with another, so
he has assigned to every one his proper place and seat, both to withdraw it
self therein, and to perform the office enjoined unto it, and also to purge and
cleanse it self, and to discharge the body of superfluities and corruptions
that otherwise might hurt it. Now we have already heard, how he has assigned
the liver to be the seat of the blood, because he has appointed the blood to
water all the body, and to give life and nourishment unto it, out of which also
the vital spirits arise, as small and mild winds proceed out of rivers and
fountains.

As for the choleric humor, Of the choleric humor.
it is joined with the blood for the concoction of humors that abound, and to
awake and stir up the body least it become heavy, sleepie and dull, as also
to penetrate and open the passages when it goes with the blood, and
therewithal to nourish those members that agree with the nature of it, as the
lungs, with whose nourishment choleric blood does better agree then any
other. Whereby it appears evidently, that this humor holds of the nature
of fire, which gives unto it this quickness and virtue. And because it is
hot and dry, it serves also to temper the moisture of the blood, and to
meet with all cold that might come unto it, and helps to preserve it in his
natural heat. Now forasmuch as it is not all carried and distributed with the
blood, but the greatest part of it remains for other uses, God has assigned
a vessel unto it, into which it retireth and is contained therein so far
forth as is requisite. The end hereof is, that the blood should not be
infected with too much choler mingled therewith, as also that it might descend
into the guts, by those passages that are given unto it to that purpose to be
voyded by them, and to provoke them to discharge those excrements which they
receive, and so to purge the whole body. For this cause there is a bladder in
fashion like to a long pear, Of the Gall and of his bladder.
placed under the midst of the liver, about the hollow part of the right
side of it, within which it is half hidden. This bladder is the vessel into
which that yellowe humor withdraws it self, and is contained therein, which
we call Gall. And as this bladder has his filaments and threedes, both to
draw unto it and to retain, as also to expel forth, so it has two branches
coming out of the neck of it, the one upward to draw away the choleric
humor in the purifying of the blood, the other downward toward the guts
to carry this humor unto them, both for the thrusting forward of nourishment,
and for the casting forth of the excrements. For it was necessary, that the
great abundance of this humor should retire into some place in the purging of
the blood: and therefore it was as requisite that it should have a fit
vessel to retire into, wherein it was not to remain unprofitable. The uses of
the choleric humor.
For besides the uses already spoken of, it serves not only to cleanse all
the guts of ordure, but also to heat the liver, and to hinder the
putrefaction of the blood. Besides, experience sufficiently shows, how
needful it is that the blood should have such a vessel wherewith to purge it
self. For when the passages thereof are stopped, great diseases follow
thereupon, as inflammation of the liver, and the dropsy, but especially the
yellowe iaundies. For when this humor is not duly separated from the blood,
so that it is not purged thereof as nature requires, then does it begin to
corrupt: whereupon it cannot send such food to the members as is necessary
for them, but that which is corrupted by this gall, whereby they are driven out
of their natural disposition. And this we may see chiefly in the yellowe
iaundies by reason of this yellowe and bitter humor, that makes the body
yellowe, into which it is dispersed by means of the veins, in steed of
being nourished with good blood. Of the melancholicke humor.
The like may be said of the melancholicke humor, which is as it were the
lees of the blood. For if the blood be corrupted and infected, great
inconveniences ensue thereof unto the whole body, through which this humor is
dispersed after the same manner that the choleric humor is: insomuch as it
becomes black thereby, as the choleric humor makes it yellowe, and for
the like cause, breeding the like disease, the difference of humors only
excepted. Now because we have not in our usual speech a special name to
declare this difference, this disease is commonly called the black iaundies.
Of the spleen.
Therefore God has assigned the spleen for a seat to this black humor,
which being placed on the left side contains this humor in it, having
proper pipes and passages, both to draw from the liver this dregs of the
blood, and also to communicate the same unto the stomach, thereby to provoke
appetite, as likewise to purge it self by diverse means. The chief use of it
is to receive the gross and muddie blood, and to that end there is a great
vein, which being the pipe of this blood, goes from the Port-veine to the
spleen, which is nourished with the best of it, and concocteth the abundance
of this humor. Therefore God has created it with such a flesh as is meet and
apt for that office: and further has helped it with certain arteries, whereby
it is heated and made warm. And when it has taken so much of this gross
blood to nourish it self withal as is requisite, the rest is partly retained
still, and partly thrust out and sent to the bottom of the stomach, by a
vein serving for the same purpose, to the end that from thence this humor
may be voyded out of the body. What effects follow the oppilation of the
liver.
Now when these veins are stopped, dangerous diseases follow thereupon,
chiefly when this happens to the first vein whereof I spoke even now. For
when the liver is not purged, his whole office is hindered, and it self
decays by little and little, by retayning still the excrementes thereof: from
whence the vapors ascending up to the brain trouble it very much, and cause
it to fall into very strange and foolish conceiptes. And when the body is
burdened with this humor, it causes that man to be very melancholicke, and
sad, and many times brings that irksomeness upon him, that he desires
nothing but death. It was very requisite therefore, that God should give both
a vessel and passages to this humor, which is not without his great
commodities, if it be tempered and distributed as it ought to be. The
commodities of the melancholic humor.
For it serves to stay and to retain the floting spirits, which arise out of
the blood, least if they should be made more pure and subtle, then is
expedient for the body, they vanish and pass away altogether. It is
profitable also to thicken the blood, and to help to restrain and keep it
from running over hastily: besides, it nourishes therewithal the
melancholicke members, which hold most of the nature of that humor, as
namely, the bones and the spleen.

Likewise, the dryness both of this and of the choleric humor stands the
blood in some stead: and the coldness thereof serves to cool and moderate
the heat of the blood, and of the choleric humor. Of the flegmatike humor
and profit of it.
As for the flegmaticke humor, which is also called Pituita, it is not without
his commodities. For first, it is the matter whereof the blood is made, when it
is by little and little concocted better: it mitigateth the heat of the blood,
and is unto it in place of nourishment, and in stead of a bridle to restrain
the burning and devouring heat thereof from present consuming of all. Besides,
it keeps the blood from being too thick and dry: and being carried with
the blood, it nourishes the flegmatike and cold members, such as the brain
is. And as the other humors joined with the blood, have their superfluities
and vessels to keep them in and to purge them, so is it with this. For this
humor is not only carried with the blood to keep it from overmuch thickness,
that it may the better pass through the veins: but there proceeds also from
the whole mass of blood, an excrement like to very thin water, which by
reason of the thinness of it, can no way be profitable to the body. For it
is a water that differs as much from blood, and from the flegmatike humor
joined with it, as whay does from milk, when the butter and cheese with all
the substance that can be had from it, is drawn out of it. For it is like to
sweat, with which it has some resemblaunce. Therefore it has his proper
place assigned unto it in the kidneyes, Of the kidneyes.
which draw to themselves the watrish matter from the blood, thereby purging
it from water that would corrupt it, and fill the veins in stead of good
blood: as we see it in the dropsy, which blows up the body that is stuffed
with water in stead of good nourishment, which by the veins it should draw
from the blood, if the liver were well affected, and if all the other parts
that ought to help it, did well perform their duties. And to the end, that
the kidneys may the better do their duty, God has not only created two, but
has so placed them by his providence, that the right kidney is higher then the
left, so that they do their duties one after another. For if they wrought
both together, if they were both in one place, and if both drew unto
themselves with equal force, in steed of mutual help, they would greatly
hinder each other: which inconvenience the providence of God does very well
meet with. And as all the inward parts, of which we have hitherto spoken,
have their pipes both to draw from the liver that humor that is meet for
them, and to send it where need requires, and also for to purge themselves:
even so the kidneyes have their passages apt and meet for the performance of
all these things. For first they have Emulgent veins, Emulgent vcines.
so called because they draw this waterish superfluity, as a child sucketh
milk out of the breast, and having received this water separated from the
blood, they send it unto the kidneyes. It is true, How the urine is made
yellow.
that a little blood passes together with it to nourish the kidneyes withal,
with which there is some yellowe choler mingled, that serves afterward to
help expulsion, and the water being colored therewith, is made yellowe and
brackish, and then it is rightly called Urine. Now after the kidneyes have
drawn from the liver this water, whereby the blood is purged, and themselves
also in part nourished with some little of the blood, and that by means of the
veins and passages given unto them for that purpose, they have two other
passages, Of the Vreteres and of the bladder.
called Vreteres, or Urine pipes, whereby they purge and discharge themselves
of that water that is called Urine, after the blood is wholly separated from
it. This done, these pipes send the water unto the bladder, which is a vessel
meet for the receipt thereof, and which does as it were distill the same by
little and little through these pipes that enter into the bladder, both on the
right side and on the left. Moreover the bladder has a neck and passage near
to the two urine pipes, whereby it discharges it self of this humor, after
it has kept the same awhile, voyding it forth of the body as a superfluous
excrement. For if this were not so, after the body were full of this water
ouerflowing in it, not only many parts and members would be broken, but men
also should be stifled, by reason of the compression and contraction of the
Midriffe. I speak not here of the stone which we carry in our kidneyes, or
of that which oftentimes breeds both in the kidnes and in the bladder, I
mean of such stones as bake there as it were in a Tilekill, or potters
furnace. I omit also the passions of the kidneyes, and the extreme pains
proceeding from thence, which are further instructions unto us of our
infirmities and miseries, and of the frailetie of man's life: but the handling
of these things properly belongs to the Physicions. Of the neck of the
bladder.
I will only add to that which I have spoken of the neck of the bladder,
where the Vrinary pipes end, that the hole thereof is full of wreathings and
turnings, to the end it may the better hold and keep in the water. And for
this cause also it has a muskle, as well as the fundament, to open and to
shut, and to yield and retain the urine according to natures will, even as it
is with the other excrementes that are purged by the bowels. We propounde
these things as it were a general Anatomy of the body, because if I should
lay them open at large and by peece-meale, each member has in it sufficient
whereof to make a great book. For as I have already declared, the artificial
woorkemanship of man's body is incredible and incomprehensible, if a man
consider all the parts of it. For there is nothing, be it never so small, but
the work of it is very marvelous, the use great, and so fitted to the
purpose as cannot possibly be better. But we need not discourse more
particularly of the composition and nature of man's body, and of the parts of
it, What it is to be a natural divine.
seeing our intent is not to become Physicions, but in some sort natural
Divines, by learning to know the providence of God in his works, especially
in our creation, composition, nourishment and preservation, that we may
glorify him in them, as becomes us. Now in all that we have hitherto
propounded of the four natural humors of the body, we have spoken of them
according as naturally they are, and ought to be without corruption, and such
as are necessary for the life of man. But forasmuch as they are of great virtue
and power in regard of the affections and manners of men, whether they abide
in their right nature, or whether they be corrupted, we must speak somewhat
of their corruption, and of the hurt that comes thereby, not only to the
health and life of the body, but also to that of the soul: considering
withal what are the sundry natural temperaments of men. Mark therefore,
ARAM, what you have to say unto us concerning this matter.

Of the names whereby the humors of the body are commonly called, with the
causes wherefore: of the comparison between the corruption and temperature of
the humors of the body, and between the manners and affections of the Soul:
of the means whereby the humors corrupt, and of the Fevers and diseases
engendered thereby: of the sundry natural temperatures in every one. Chap. 67.
ARAM. The nourishment of man's body has many degrees, and passes through many
pipes and vessels, before it be perfect and converted by true generation into
the proper substance of every member whither it is carried, as we may judge by
that which we have already heard to this purpose. But there is such an
accord between all the members of the body, whereby every one executes his
office, and such a communion of all their powers, that each member keeps his
rank and order, neither does any one retain, and keep to it self more
nourishment then is requisite, but sends as much as is needful unto the
rest, even unto the nails, and hairs and uttermost excrements. Now if
through some defect or corruption falling out in their nature, any of them
break the order of this equal distribution, a common detriment seazeth upon
the whole body, and upon all the members generally, so that those parts also
taste of the hurt, that offered wrong unto the residue. For they cannot live
alone, nor without help from others. What communion ought to be among men.
The like is seen in the Commonwealth, and in the members thereof. For what
is the cause that some are ready to burst for farnesse and multitude of
meats, whereas others are empty and die of hunger? that some have so much
wealth, that they are greatly troubled therewith, and others are so poor?
Nay, what is the cause of all the confusion in the world, but that every one
raketh to himself, and no such equality and communion is observed, as
becomes the estate of every one? Wherefore as sundry diseases are bredde in
man's body, whereby in the end it is utterly overthrown, when there is no
such communion between the members thereof, nor any such distribution of the
nourishment as there ought to be: so is it with the body of the
Commonwealth, when some oppress others, and when every one has not that
that belongs unto him. For, first there follows great confusion, and of
confusion, subversion, as diseases follow faults committed by the members,
and after diseases death it self.

Now the infinite number of infirmities and ordinary diseases, whereby more
violent deaths are procured then natural, by reason of the defectes and
excesses brought in by sin into the whole life of man, causes men to speak
diuersely of the four humors of the body, necessary for the preservation
and nourishment thereof. For they are more often taken for the vices and
excesses, whereby they are corrupted, then for the true natural humors, which
are the chief instruments of the soul, whereby it gives life and nourishment
to the body. Why the humors are taken in the evil part.
The cause whereof, as I think, is because men do sooner and more easily
perceive and mark what is evil and hurtful unto them, then that which
breeds their good and profit. And indeed it falls out commonly, that they
know not the good things they have until they have lost them, or else are
become hurtful unto them. No marvel then if they know not from whence these
good things come, or of whom they have received them, and so become
ungrateful toward GOD. Wherefore let us not wonder when God withdraws
them from us, or suffers them to corrupt and to be spoiled that they might
hurt us in steed of helping us, to the end that by this means we might
learn to acknowledge that good which before we knew not, and not to despise
it when we have it, I mean that we should learn this by the evil that
succeeds after we have lost the good. The cause of men's ingratitude.
For we are such scholars as cannot otherwise imprint in our minds those good
things which God bestows upon us, but by being deprived of them, and by our
own hurt.

Hereof it is that we always learn to our own cost, as we say, because
we cannot conceive so well, as we ought to do of the free goodness of God.
Nay, it were well if all could learn aright by their own harms. For there
are but few that profit thereby as they ought. How many are there that in
steed of amendment, wax worse through the chasticements of God? But in the
mean time our usual manner of speaking teaches us, that men have more
knowledge of corrupt humors that hurt them, then of the good ones that nourish
them, and continue in their natural soundness, seeing their names are more
often taken in the evil part then in the good. Now when we spoke before of
these humors in the body, it was as they are and ought to be naturally, and
such as being void of corruption, are necessary for the life of man. And
forasmuch as they are of great force in regard of the affections and manners
of men, whether they abide in their own nature, or whether they be corrupted,
we will speak somewhat more of their corruption, and of those hurtes which
they bring to the health and life of the body: afterward we will consider of
their effects in the soul. The agreement between the manners and humors of the
body.
But we must here call to mind what we heard before of the agreement between the
manners and affections of the soul, and the temperature of the body, and how
the one serves the other. Whereby we may gather, that it is so with the
affections in regard of the soul, as it is with the natural humors in
regard of the body. For according as these humors are well or ill tempered,
so is the body well or ill affected: and according as they increase or
diminish, so the health of a man is more sound and steadfast, or more crasie
and inconstant, and so ready to turn into more grievous and dangerous
diseases. The like may be said of the stayednesse or vnstayednesse of the
affections of the soul, and of the spiritual health and diseases thereof. For
this cause, if we ought to be so careful to reduce our body to a good
temperature when there is any defect: and being so, to preserve it in the
same estate still, and so likewise for the equality and agreement that ought
to be between the humors from whence it comes, so that we desire to
obtain health when we are sick, and to keep it well when we have it: then
ought we to be much more careful for the temperature and moderation of the
affections of the soul, and of the spiritual health that proceeds thereof.
And therefore in the corruption of the bodily humors, we are to consider
diligently of the corruption of manners, and of the affections of the soul.
For there is great agreement between the one and the other.

But to come to the chief point of this present speech, By what means the
natural humors corrupt.
we are first to note, that the natural humors corrupt two manner of ways,
when they leave the order of nature and change their natural properties. For
that comes unto them, either because their proper substance degenerateth
without any mixture of other humors, or through the mixture of some other
vicious and corrupt humor. Now how much the more requisite the humor is,
and necessary for the body of man being in his natural soundness, so much
the more hurtful is it when it is corrupted. Therefore forasmuch as the blood,
which is properly so called amongst the humors of the body, is more
convenient, apt and necessary for the life thereof then any of the rest, as
has been declared unto us, it follows that the corruption thereof is more
dangerous then of any other humor. Now it degenerateth from his own
substance, when (the pores being shut) it putrifieth within the veins, and
is turned into a certain choleric humor, not natural but corrupted: The
original of Fevers and other diseases.
whereupon the continual Fever arisech. Besides, it corrupts after another
manner, namely, through the mixture of some other humor, as when the first
mass of blood is corrupt through the abundance of a raw humor that is not
well digested in the liver, whereof the dropsy follows, as likewise the
yellowe iaundies is bredde of the blood corrupted through too great abundance
of the choleric humor. The corruption of the flegmatike humor.
In like manner the flegmaticke humor is corrupted in his substance, when it
ouerfloweth and gives upward in men's bodies, and continues raw for want of
good concoction and digestion: it being sometimes more thin, and sometimes
more thick. From hence comes spettle, snattines of the nose, catherres, and
distillations, and oftentimes vomiting, when it is gross and thick. Besides,
this flegmatike humor corrupts through the mixture of the choleric or
melancholicke humor: and then it waxes salt or sharp, according to the
humor that is mingled therewith. And as the continual fever is bredde of
blood corrupted in substance, so the quotidian ague proceeds of the
corruption of the flegmaticke humor. Of the cholerike humor.
As for the choleric humor it degenerateth of it self, when it burns and
is turned into a vicious melancholic humor that is like ashes, thick and
biting. And because this alteration grows by little and little, either by
reason of age, or of violent motions in them, that are naturally very
choleric, it comes to pass that such persons are in their old age subject
to a furious kind of anger. On the other side, this choleric humor
corrupts when it is mingled with some other humor, as when it is mixed with
phlegm, which as it is either more thin, or thicker, so is the color of the
choler more or less yellow, pale, or green. The like may be said of the
mixture of all the other humors.

Now as the tertian ague, I mean the right and perfect tertian, is engendered
of the choleric humor corrupted in his substance: so the bastard tertian is
bredde of the same humor, when it is mixed with a vicious and corrupt
flegmatike humor. From whence all sorts of agues proceed.
And truly this is very strange, that the corruption of every several humor
does in this sort breed sundry kinds of agues according to the diversity
of the humors. For as there are four sundry sorts of humors, so there are
four kinds of ordinary agues that have their several relations to each of
these humors. So that as the continual fever is bredde of blood corrupted,
and the quotidian of phlegm, and the tertian of the choleric humor, so the
quartane proceeds of the melancholicke humor corrupted.

Now besides these ordinary fevers, there are others mingled and compounded,
according as the putrified humors of which they are bredde, are mingled and
compounded together. From hence spring demi and double tertians, and quartanes
and such like. And sometime one and the same man shall have sundry sorts of
fevers in one disease, according to the diversity and abundance of corrupt
humors that are in him. We may say as much of all other diseases that are
bredde of corrupt humors, according as they are either simpler, or more
mingled and compounded. The corruption of the melancholy humor.
Therefore as the other humors corrupt in such sort as we heard before, so when
the melancholicke humor putrifieth, either it burns of it self, or else by
the mixture of other humors, insomuch as it waxes gross and biting, and
holds of the nature of ashes.

Now when a body subject to choler, From whence madness comes.
phlegm, or blood, waxes melancholicke, that man, by reason the fumes can not
euaporate and get out, falls into frensies and mad fittes, and those of
diverse sorts. For as the melancholic humor is mixed, either with blood, or
with phlegm or with choler, so is the melancholy person more or less merry
or sad, heavier or lighter, colder or hotter, and his fits and furies either
more moderate, or more vehement and violent. But howsoever it be, we see by
daily experience, that there are many sorts of melancholic persons, of mad,
senseless, and furious people. And besides the mixture of vicious humors, we
must consider also the sundry natural temperaments of every one. For as we
see that wines are diversely tempered according to the variety of countries,
lands, and air where they grew, and that albeit they are always wine, yet
there is great difference in the one from the other, both in substance,
nourishment, color, smell, virtue, and strength: even so is it with the
humors of the body. For the same humors are more pure, or more moderate, or
more noble and exquisit in some then in others, according to the natures of
their bodies, and not only of their own, but also of their parents bodies
from whence they were derived. For children commonly take much after their
parents. I speak nothing of that which the temperament may take of the
heavens, and of all the celestial bodies, and chiefly of the special grace of
GOD, the prince of nature, who rules over all temperaments and complexions.
But it is time, that following our purpose, we consider what effects the
humors have toward the soul, and that we look into the diversities of the
temperatures and complexions of men, according unto the nature of those humors
that reign most in them, and to that disposition which naturally they do
work in them either to virtues or vices. This we shall learn of thee
ACHITOB.

Of the diverse temperatures and complexions of men, according to the nature of
humors that bear most sway in them: of the disposition whereunto they are
naturally moved by them either to virtues or vices: of the means to correct
the vices and defects that may be in our natural inclinations. Chap. 68.
ACHITOB. It is not without great show of reason, that the Philosophers made
three principles and beginnings that effect men's actions, Three chief workers
of men's actions.
namely, powers, habits, or qualities, and affections, or passions. For we see
plainly by experience, of how great force these things are in man so long as
he lives. Concerning powers, they come to us by nature, and are effectiue
principles of all actions both good and badde: yea by them we know in
children, during their young years, the signs and tokens of some virtue or
vice, that will reign most in them afterward, which we commonly call
Inclination or Disposition. The passions and affections are likewise natural
in us, being forcible pricks to provoke men to embrace either good or evil,
whereof we have already spoken sufficiently. As for the habites or qualities,
they are accidental in man, as they that are gotten by a long and continual
custom of doing good or evil, whereupon also they take their names of good or
evil habits. He speaks of such goodness and virtues as were ^o esteemed of by
the heathen that knew not their natural corruption.
Now we commonly see some to be naturally inclined to one virtue and not to
another, or to one vice and not to an other. For it seems sometimes that
nature has bredde some to be temperate, others to be liberal, and
contrariwise. And when a man endued with natural powers tending to good,
obtains qualities answerable thereunto, he is worthy of commendation,
because unto his inclination he has added greater help, namely, care and
study, by means whereof he is come to some perfection. So likewise he that
being naturally borne impotent, attaineth to those virtues that are contrary to
his impotency, deserves greater praise: because fighting as it were with
nature, he remains conqueror over himself, and becomes virtuous with
greater difficulty. But contrariwise, if a man that is naturally ill disposed
to some particular vice, does add further a habit to his badde inclination,
he is worthy of blame, because he has not resisted evil, but pleasing
himself therein has made it greater. As likewise he that has excellent
graces and gifts of nature to do well, and suffers them to vanish away
through his negligence and custom in evil, is much more to be blamed,
because that voluntarily he suffers himself to be overcome of vice.

But we must consider of these things somewhat higher, and by the self same
reason judge of the natural temperaments, which in the former speech we heard
were diverse in every one. For we ought to acknowledge one God, Prince, and
Author of nature, who rules in all and over all. God rules in all, and over
all.
Therefore as he has appropriated to the soul those instruments, which he
has given unto it in the body, to work in them and by them: so himself
disposes and orders those instruments, which he will use amongst men, yea,
even from their mothers womb, Ierem. 1.
as it is written of the Prophet Jeremy, and of the Apostle Saint Paul, Galat.
1.
whom our Savior also called achosen instrument to be are his name before the
Gentiles, Acts 9. 15.
and Kings, and children of Israel. No doubt therefore, considering the
agreement which we have heard is in the affections of the soul with the
temperature of the body, but that the more temperate the complexion of every
man's body is, and the nearer it approaches to the perfectest temperature, the
more quiet and moder^^e, the more gracious and comely will his affections and
manners be naturally, yea all his gestures and whole behavior. True it is, as
we have elsewhere touched, that no body is so framed, or has such an harmony
and equality throughout, but that there is some disagreement and inequality.
But we account those natures to be well tempered, which approach nearest to the
perfect temperature: and as every humor rules more or less in every one, so
he is called either sanguine, or flegmaticke, or choleric, or melancholicke.
Again, as the other humors bear sway next unto the principal, so is a man
said to be either flegmaticke sanguine, choleric sanguine, or melancholic
sanguine. The like may be said of the other humors according to their
temperature, as also of the affections which have some agreement with them. The
nature of flegmatike persons.
Hereof it is, that when there is excess of the flegmatike humor in men,
their natures are commonly slothful, they shun labor and give themselves
to bodily pleasures, they love dainties, and delicate meats and drinks, they
are tender and effeminate, and clean contrary to stowt and valiant men. And if
there be excess of the choleric humor, their natures are easily provoked
and stirred up to wrath: The nature of a choleric complexion.
but their anger is as a fire of thorns, that being soon kindled and making a
great noise, is by and by quenched again. Their gestures also are more quick
and vehement, and their hastiness is commonly foolish and turbulent: they
bablemuch, and are like to vessels full of holes, unable to hold in and keep
any secret matter: they are fierce in assailing, but inconstant in sustaining
the assault, in some sort resembling the nature of dogs, which bark and bite
if they can, and afterward fly away. And if there be excess of the
melancholic humor, The nature of the melancholicke body.
the natures of such are sad, still, hard to please, suspicious, conceited,
obstinate, some more and some less. And if the choleric and melancholic
humors be corrupt and mingled together, their natures become monstrous, proud,
full of envy, fraud, subtilties, venomous and poisonfull, hateful and
diabolical. And when the malignant spirits know men's natures thus disposed,
What natures are most abused by evil spirits.
no doubt but they take occasion thereby to intermingle themselves, if God
permit them, and purpose to use them for the punishing of men: I say, they will
join themselves unto them, and make them their instruments, as God on the
other side uses those natures that are most moderate and best tempered, making
them instruments of his glory.

Now we may call to mind what we learned before almost to the same end,
touching the means whereby evil spirits might trouble the imagination,
fantasy and minds of men. We may say as much of the humors of the body,
whose motions and nature they know very well. Whereby they can so much the
more easily abuse them in their damnable work and will, as we may judge by
the example of him that was possessed and lunatike, Matthew. 17. 15. mar 9. 20.
luke 9. 39.
of whom the Evangelists make mention, and whom they call by those two names.
And by that which they wrote of him, it seems that he was subject to the
falling sickness, that returns oftentimes according to the course of the
moon, which naturally has great affinity with the humors, and great power
over them. And therefore it is very likely, that the evil spirit which
tormented this poor lunatike, watched the occasions of his disease to afflict
him the more, and to cause him to fall either in the fire or in the water, as
he did indeed, thereby to work his death if he had could. Which example
shows unto us what is the malice of the devil, How vigilant the Devil is to
hurt us.
what pleasure he takes in hurting of men, what means and what occasions he
seeks for and makes choice of, and what access unto us we may offer him
through our corrupt nature, through our vices and sins, and through our
inclinations and manners that are naturally evil and perverse, if God lets
him loose the bridle by his just judgment: seeing he spares not the little
children, as it appears in that which is written of him, of whom we spoke
even now. For this cause we ought to take good heed, that we give not our
common enemy those occasions that he seeks to have from us, to the end that
he abuse us not, nor any thing that is ours, and which God has bestowed upon
us. What profit we reap by the knowledge of our complexions.
This is the reason why the consideration of our temperature, complexion, and
natural inclination is very necessary for us: because the knowledge hereof
affoordeth unto us many good instructions that may stand us in great stead
throughout our whole life, as well for the preservation of the health of our
bodies, as for the rule and government of our affections and manners, as also
in regard of the familiarity and acquaintance which we have one with an
other. For through the contemplation hereof, we may know, not only the
causes of health and sickness, of the life and death of the body, but also of
that of the soul. For as the good humors corrupt in our bodies according as
we have heard, and breed in them sundry diseases, which finally lead them
unto death: even so by means of sin all those good and natural affections,
which ought to be the seeds of virtues in us, are corrupted and turn into
vices, that are the diseases of the soul, and bring unto it the second and
eternal death: as contrariwise virtues are the health and life thereof.

But as GOD has provided corporal medicines for the body, so he has
prepared spiritual Physic for the soul against all the diseases thereof.
Therefore when we consider with our selves unto what vices we are inclined by
nature, we must labor to correct, and bridle them, and to quench such
inclinations, as much as we can, through sobriety, vigilancie, and continual
practice to the contrary: least we nourish and increase them, when as we
ought to diminish and wholly to abolish them. For the common proverb is not
without reason, that Education passes Nature, or that it is another nature.
We see by experience what Education and Instruction are able to do both to
goodness and vice, according as they are either good or evil. For as there is
no nature so good, which can not be corrupted and perverted through evil
education and teaching: so there is none so vicious and evil, which can not,
at the least in some measure, (through the help and grace of GOD) be
corrected and amended by good education, What natures we are to eschew.
instruction, and discipline. And because conversation and familiarity are of
great efficacy in this point, we are diligently to consider with what persons
and natures we acquaint our selves, and be careful to eschew such natures as
are vicious, proud, fierce, envious, hateful, malicious, suspicious,
disloyal, and traitorous, as well in regard of the corruption of manners
wherewith we may be infected by them, as also in respect of other harms that
may befall us, by reason they are unsociable natures, or at the least very
difficult to converse withal, being indeed such as toward whom no man can
bear any true love or firm friendship. But when we have used all the
diligence we can possible about these things, The true means to cure our
vices.
the chiefest point wherein the whole consists, is this, that we have
recourse to Jesus Christ the eternal son of GOD, to the end that by his holy
Spirit, he would correct, repress, and quench in us all the vicious
affections and disordered motions, that we have contrary to his holy will:
according to that promise which is made unto us, wherein it is said, Matthew. 7.
11.
that if fathers know how to give good gifts to their children and such
things as are necessary for them, Luke 11. 13.
much more will our heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to them that ask it
of him. And this is the true means we ought to keep for the correcting of
these vices and defectes, that are in our natural inclinations. Now we have
spoken sufficiently of those things which concern the natural powers of the
soul, in respect of the nourishment and growth of the body, and of those
instruments which it has in the same for the performaunce of her actions. It
remains now that we consider what effects it has in Generation. First
then ASER, thou shall handle the restoration and reparation of all natures by
that virtue and power of Generation that is in them, and namely, in man: to the
end we may after proceed with those other points that concern this matter.

Of the restoration and reparation of all natures created by the Generatiue
power and virtue that is in them, and namely, in man: what Generation is, and
what the Generatiue power of the soul is: what the seed is, and how
Generation proceeds of strength and of infirmity. Chap. 69.
ASER. Psalm. 127. 1.
When Solomon says in the Psalm entitled with his name, Except the Lord
build the house, they that build, labor in vain, we must not think that by
the building whereof he speaks, he understands a frame of stone and wood
to make a lodging and dwelling place of it, but he respects specially that
building that consists of houses and families, through the generation of
children, and their good education and instruction: as himself shows
plainly when by and by after he says in the same Psalm, Behold, Verse 3.
children are an inheritance from the Lord, and the fruit of the womb a
reward. Whereby we have a sure testimony, as in many other places of the
Scripture, that we must acknowledge the Generation of children to come from
God, and not from nature, and the fruitfulness and barrenness both of men and
women.

By our former speeches we may learn what was the creation of the the first man
and first woman, with the lawful conjunction betwixt them, by means whereof
God would have mankind preserved and multiplied by good order, and not by a
brutish confusion, such as is amongst the beasts. Now it remains, that
following the order of our discourses, we speak of generation, whereby we shall
know the virtue that God gave for that purpose to our first parents, when he
said unto them, Genes. 1. 28.
Bring forth fruit and multiply and fill the earth. Which has had such power
and virtue, that from thence have issued all the men, women, The virtue of the
blessing of God for generation.
and children, that have been since the beginning of the world, that are now,
and that shall be unto the end thereof. The like also proceeded from the
blessing which God gave not only to al other living creatures, but also to al
herbs and plants. For we have already heard, how after the living body is
grown up to his full vigor and strength, it begins then by little and
little to fail, and to tend unto death, whereby in the end it falls away
altogether. For, according to that comparison and similitude, which has been
already propounded unto us of a lamp, the flame whereof cannot be joined still
with the week except there be some cleaving moisture to knit the parts
together: so there is in a living body a certain humiditie that holds of the
nature of the air, which moisture is very good, and is dispersed throughout
the whole body, having his propagation of the seed, and joining together all
the parts of the body. Of the Radical humor.
This is commonly called the Radical humor, because it is as it were the
root of life, and has the celestial and quickening heat brought immediately
and directly unto it: so that when this moisture is extinguished, the heat
also vanishes, and fades away. And look as the heat drinks up and
consumes by little and little this humidity, so does the heat it self diminish
and languish away, because his food fails that is in the moisture: even as
the flame lesseneth and loses his vigor, Of the defect of man's life with the
causes thereof.
as the oil, or tallow, or wax fails in a lamp, or in a candle. And although
this radical humiditie be nourished by the ordinary food which the body daily
receives, nevertheless, forasmuch as that nourishment which every member
receives, is not so pure nor so fit, nor so natural as the radical humor it
self, neither can wholly restore that which diminishes and consumes thereof,
it must needs be that life should fail in process of time, by reason that
neither the vigor of the heat, nor the pureness of his nourishment
continues sound and entire. For the same thing agrees to this radical
humor, which we see by experience in wine, which so long as it is pure and in
his natural strength, does easily turn a little water into it own nature, so
that it can not be perceived that there is any water at all in it. But if ye
continue still pouring in of water and mingling it therewith, it will weaken by
little and little, and always loose of his pure substance, so that in the end
it will be no better then water. And thus the radical humor and the natural
heat destroy one an other. For the humor that is gotten by sustenaunce
differs much from the Radical that was consumed by natural heat. Whereupon
it follows also, that this natural heat has not so good and pure
nourishment as before, so that it must needs grow weaker: and being thus
weakened, it has less virtue to concoct well, and to turn that humor into
nourishment wherewith it ought to be maintained. By this means it comes to
pass, that the radical humiditie and natural heat fail and perish both
together. Wereby we may easily understand why men's bodies abide not always in
their strength, but fail and wax old, and so death follows olde-age. We
have already spoken somewhat before both of the length and shortness of man's
life, and of natural and violent death: but we will speak more fully of them
hereafter, God willing.

Now we are to consider, how the providence of God has provided for this
defect of nature through that virtue of Generation, which by his blessing he
has given unto it, and whereof I spoke even now, to the end, that the whole
race and seuerall-kindes of things created should not perish. What is meant by
nature.
Whereupon we may well say, that that nature which has this virtue, is no
other thing then the blessing of God, whereunto all honor is to be given. For
as GOD has created all things by his mighty word, so by the self same word
he has created and placed in the first kinds of the creatures that he has
created, those seeds whereby he would have every one preserved both in the
whole and in his several kind. Genes. 1.
And therefore as in blessing the earth after he had created it, and
commanding it to bring forth herbs, trees, and plants with their fruits
according to their kinds, he did therewithal endue it with virtue to do so,
as it has always done so hitherto, does so daily, and will do so to the end
of the world: even so is it with that blessing which he has given to all the
plants, and to all living creatures, and namely, to man and woman, and with
that commandment which he has given them to grow, to multiply and to fill
the earth. Wherefore we ought without ceasing to consider and to contemplate
God the Creator in the generation of all things, and principally in that of
man, as if we beheld him daily pursuing his work of creation. For although he
work now by other means then he did in the first creation of the whole frame,
yet he is no less now the Creator of all men, and of all other creatures that
grow daily in the world by generation, then he was of the first man and first
creatures, which he created of nothing in the beginning. For he created us all
in Adam and Eve, and shut us up as it were in a storehouse, or in a spring or
fountain, or as in one stock of mankind, out of which he produces men
continually.

Wherefore we ought diligently to consider of this work of GOD, and of this
virtue which he has given to Nature by his word and blessing to engender
like, and to increase the whole race and kind thereof. For this cause as it is
the office of Nature in the beginning to nourish bodies, and then to cause them
to increase and augment: so in the end it is her duty to preserve the
several kinds of things as long as she may, What Generation is.
by Generation of the like. Whereby it appears, that Generation is a work of
living creatures after they are come to their growth and vigor, as we see the
like also in plants themselves. For in the beginning of the Spring al their
virtue is in the root, and from thence it comes after into the boughs and
leaves, next into the flower and fruit, What the generatiue power is.
and lastly into the seed, which being sown, another plant is brought forth
like unto the first. Wherefore we may say, that the Generatiue virtue is a
power in living creatures that engenders his like, being ordained for the
preservation of the same kind. So yt we must diligently meditate and often set
before our eyes this goodly order of nature, according whereunto the nourishing
faculty is first given to the soul for the preservation of every particular.
Next, the power to cause it to grow and to augment to a just and sufficient
greatness: and lastly, the generatiue virtue whereby the kind is preserved.
For albeit the order that is throughout the whole course of nature be an
evident testimony, that neither the world nor any thing therein, stands upon
chance or fortune, yet among others this is most singular and excellent, in
that the same kinds of al things abide continually, and that every one
begets and multiplieth his like, without any manner of confusion amongst
them: which could not be eschewed, if so be that creatures were bredde and
borne at adventure, without the counsel and providence of their Creator, and of
him that wrought such a work.

Now we are to understand, What seed is.
that the seed is a body that has in it self a vegetative soul, which body
in Generation is turned into an other like to that from which it is taken: and
because nourishing, growing, and engendering are the effects of food and
sustenance, they are contained under the name of a vegetative soul, which is a
faculty and power, What is meant by a vegetative soul.
that not only conuerteth food into the substance of the living body, for
the good thereof, and by that conversion augmenteth, that it may attain to a
convenient bigness, but also engendereth an other body of the same form and
kind. And therefore after that this vegetative power has done that duty
which it ought to perform about the growth of the living body, then has it
time and means enough to gather together into a small room many of those
qualities that keep the soul in the administration of the body, out of which
it can soon draw and engender a like kind, so far forth as the qualities
of the matter will be able to bear. For when they are repugnant to the
qualities meet for that kind, whatsoever comes thereof degenerateth, as we
see it in the earth, when in stead of wheat, whereof it received the seed,
it brings forth darnell, or some other herbs of an other nature, and as we
see it also in monsters, that are borne both of women and of other living
creatures. Of the cause of monsters.
For there are in many countries (namely, in Sicilia, and in the kingdom of
Naples, and in Flaunders, as many Authors worthy of credit have testified)
women in whom have been bredde oftentimes sundry kinds of beasts in stead
of children, and sometimes together with the child either living or dead.
Which thing comes to pass in such women as abound with evil humors that
are putrified and corrupted, either by reason of the air, or of badde meat,
or of excess in eating: as in such bodies wherein worms, and such other
filthiness breeds. The Astrologians refer this unto constellations, as
they do all other things. I leave the secret judgments and punishments of
GOD, whereby such things may come to pass: nevertheless these things ought to
admonish women to pray unto God, to recommend themselves to him, and to be
sober. The moon calfes in the womb, which fall out often, proceed also of the
like causes. In like manner it falls out oftentimes that the kind
degenerateth through corruption of the seed.

But to go on forward with our matter of the Generation of living creatures,
and namely, of man, we must know that forasmuch as the male has naturally
more heat in him then the female, he is also by nature the chiefest in
Generation. For this cause when the holy Scriptures speak of mankind, it is
ordinarily comprehended under the name of man. And when mention is made of his
generation, they speak as though all proceeded only from man: as when
Malachie speaking of his creation says, Malach. 2. 15.
Did not he make one? and wherefore one? because he sought a godly seed. And
Saint Paul, He has made (says he) of one blood, all mankind. Nevertheless
GOD has put in nature such a temperature between the male and the female,
that if both their natures were altogether alike, there could be no Generation.
For it consists in force and in infirmity. But the wisdom of God has so well
provided, as that it knows how to draw strength out of weakness, so that the
one can do nothing without the other in generation, because he has so willed
and ordained it. Now I leave to thee, AMANA, to discourse unto us more
particularly of such things as are most worthy to be noted in this maruailous
work of God, and of the principal cause why he has given to man the
Generatiue power.

Of the powers of the Generatiue virtue, and of their offices: of the
principal cause why God gave to man the power of Generation: in what sense the
reins are taken for the seat of Generation: how we ought rightly to consider
of the generation of man. Chap. 70.
AMANA. As novelty causes a man through the error of judgment, to think
that rare things are greater and more worthy of admiration: so most men
imagine those matters to be small and not worthy to be wondered at, which fall
out daily before their eyes. But ignorance is the cause of both these effects.
Two effects of ignorance.
For as a man admireth that which he never knew could be performed, so he
makes no reckoning of that thing which he usually beholds, because he has
always been ignorant of the secrets of nature, or rather of his Author and
Creator, who appears wonderful in the least of his works, even in the
very Ant or Pismire. This self same ignorance is the cause that so few
contemplate as they ought the form and fashion of their being, or that give
due glory to him who daily brings them into the world by such wonderful
workmanship. Neither is it possible that men should give such glory to GOD
as they ought, except they esteem all those works which he effects daily
amongst them, to be so many miracles worthy admiration, which way soever
they turn their eyes. Moreover, let them know, that what measure of knowledge
soever they are able to get of his works, yet that which they do know is
very little, yea, almost nothing, in regard of that whereof they are ignorant:
even in that which concerns their creation and generation.

Now following that which we have already heard touching this matter, we are
to consider a maruailous providence of God, in the similitude that is between
the creature engendering, and that which proceeds from it. Where by the way
we may observe this, that there is greater resemblance in the Generation of
plants then in that of living creatures, and more in that of beasts then in
that of men: forasmuch as plants are void of imagination, Of the similitude
that is in generation.
and that imagination which is in beasts is more firm and stayed then that
which is in men, because our minds are more floting and unstable. But it is
wonderful to consider what great similitude there is, insomuch as we commonly
see, that the infirmities of some members in the parents are found also in
their children: and that oftentimes they express their very looks,
countenances, and gesturs. Which also may serve for a further confirmation of
that which we have already touched, concerning the agreement of euilles with
the complexion and temperature of the humors of men's bodies. Again, it
appears by the strength or weakness that is found to be as well in
children as in their fathers and mothers, that the seed of which they are
begotten descends not only from the brain, From whence the seed comes.
as some have thought, but that it is also taken from all the other members,
and from all parts of the body. And because it is a profitable superfluity
taken from the nourishment of the blood scattered throughout the whole body
after the fourth digestion, it has peculiar vessels in the body, some to
draw it, others to perfect and preserve it for generation, and some to expel
it out. And as this expulsive virtue is necessary in Generation on the behalf
of the male, so in regard of the female it is requisite that there should be
a virtue to contain and preserve, and secondly to change, mingle, and temper
it with the woman's seed, so far forth as shall be expedient for the
temperature of the whole body, The several virtues of the generatiue power.
and of every member thereof. Besides, there must be another virtue to fashion
into members all this matter mingled and tempered, and to give unto them that
figure and shape which agreeeth to every one of them. Lastly, there is an other
virtue requisite, which should drive out the child after it is fashioned, at
the time which GOD has appointed in nature for that purpose. And these are all
the parts with their offices, which are to be found in the Generatiue power
of the vegetative soul. Now because there are so many sorts of them, it is
very meet that they should have sundry places and diverse instruments in
the body for the exercise of them. For this cause there are, to serve all
these offices, sundry parts and many members, composed with wonderful Art,
and distinguished in most admirable fashion both with figures and qualities.

But our meaning is not to make any long particular narration, both by reason
of the matter which would be very long, as also because sin has made the
Generation of man so full of shame, that men can hardly speak of it, or of
those members that serve thereunto, especially of one part of them, without
shame. Nevertheless, as before we have considered the counsel and
providence of God, in that he has joined to man created to immortality, that
part wherein the light of his divine wisdom shall shine, the love of God
shall be fervent, and righteousness shall dwell for evermore, with the kitchen
of man's body, whose use shall pass away after this life: so we must consider
the cause why he has joined unto this kitchen the Generatiue power, The
chief cause why the generatiue power was given to man.
and wherefore he has given it to man. Let us know then, that as man was
created for an other end then plants and beasts, so God has given to him the
power of Generation to an other end then he has to them, upon whom it is
bestowed only for the preservation of their kinds. For it was especially
given him, because the Creator of the whole world purposed to collect and
gather together a perpetual Church out of mankind, that is, a company of men
begotten after this manner, to be dedicated and consecrated unto him.
Therefore we ought diligently to meditate and to think often upon this
wonderful counsel of GOD, and to yield him praise, in that he has
manifested himself unto us, and of this weak and corrupt mass of flesh has
assembled and culled out an everlasting Church: and in that he aydeth,
nourishes and preserves us, yea, is careful over us, and hears us calling
upon him. Neither does he only preserve the whole course of nature for our
sakes, but also gives himself unto us: which are such benefits as exceed
all the imagination and eloquence of man. Wherefore we ought so much the
rather to awaken our minds to consider them well, and be very much displeased
with our selves, because we do^ not so well as we ought, behold this
presence of GOD in that obscurity and darkness wherein we live; as also
because we are no more stirred up to love, serve, and honor him, in regard
of that true and great love wherewith he loves us.

But to go forward with our matter of Generation, we must call to mind what
we heard before of the use of the kidneis for the purging of blood, in respect
whereof we call all that part of the body wherein they are seated, Of the
seat of Generation.
by the name of Reins. And by reason of the neerenesse that is between them
and the seed vessels serving for Generation, which are many in number, all
that part is taken, chiefly in the holy Scriptures, for the seat and spring
thereof, and as it were for the seminary of mankind. Therefore it is written
in the Hebrews, Hebr. 7. 10.
that Leui was yet in the loins of his father Abraham, when Melchisedec met
him. Genes. 35. 11.
And Moses speaking in the person of the Lord, of the promise made to Jacob,
says, Kings shall come out of thy loins. David also minding to show what
knowledge God has of men whom he has created, Psalm. 139. 13.
says, Thou have possessed my reins: thou have covered me in my mothers
womb. And Job declaring the self same thing more fully, and speaking of the
seed whereof he was begotten, Job* 10. 10, 11*
after he had said, Have thou not powered me out as milk? and turned me to
cruddes like cheese? he adds presently, Thou have clothed me with skin and
flesh, and joined me together with bones and sinews. This is that covering
whereof the Psalmist spoke, which was given him of God in his mothers womb
after her conception. Whereupon we have to note, that these holy men speaking
in this manner, teach us sufficiently what is the chief part of man, which
they account to be the true man. What is man properly.
For they declare unto us evidently that the soul which dwells in the body
is truly man, and that the body in comparison thereof is but his covering, and
the lodging wherein he dwells. Therefore the Heathens themselves compared
man's soul to one placed in a garrison, in which he is to abide until he be
called from thence by the Prince and Captain that placed him therein: meaning
thereby to teach us, that we must abide in this life and discharge our duty
therein, so long as it shall please God, who has brought us into it, to have
us to continue therein.

Truly, if we consider well of those maruailous works, which GOD effects
daily in the Generation of men, we may well say, that it is a great miracle of
God in Nature, and ought to be diligently considered of, as David testifies
that he did so in his own person. Therefore he says, Psalm. 139. 5.
Thou hold me straight behind and before, and layest thine hand upon me:
showing throughout the whole psalm, that there is nothing in man so hidden and
covered, which is not discovered before GOD, and which he knows not and
searches not unto the bottom, to the end that men deceive not themselves
through their hypocrisy, thinking to hide themselves before him. For this
cause he says in the beginning, that he is so known to GOD on all sides,
both within and without, that there is not so much as one motion in him, nor
one thought or affection, which is not wholly manifested unto him. And to
prove and confirm his saying, he takes his argument from the creation of
man, giving us to understand thereby, that forasmuch as GOD is his Creator and
Maker, it can not be but that he should thoroughly know his work. Whereby we
have a certain testimony of that which we spoke in our former discourse, of
the creation of all those men that are daily created by Generation, according
to the order of Nature appointed by GOD. For the Prophet does no less
acknowledge that GOD has made him, then Adam the first man did. So that look
what the Prophet speaks of his own person, it is also to be understood of
every one, both in regard of his creation, as also of that knowledge which
GOD has of all things in man, be they never so hid and covered. Afterward
he adds, Verse* 6.
that this knowledge is too wonderful for him, and so high that he cannot
attain unto it. Now we may judge well, both of the composition of man's body,
and also of the nature of the soul, by those discourses which we have already
made. And if we did consider but of the body by it self, yet had we just
cause to say as much as David says here. What then might be spoken if we
joined the soul with the body, and considered only of that which might
generally be known by such means as are already set down? For by that which
we do know, we shall judge well enough how far this knowledge exceeds
our capacity, and what remains yet behind, which we cannot comprehend.

Forasmuch then as the Prophet woondereth so much at this great and high skill,
whereof God gives us so excellent testimony in the creation and generation of
men, we ought not to think it superfluous and unprofitable, but well
beseeming a Christian man, to enquire after that which God would have us know,
and which we may know, and to consider well of his works wherein he
manifests his providence and wisdom, especially in man, who is, as we have
heard, the chiefest of all his works amongst the visible creatures, and as it
were an other world created within this. Now as David from the creation of
man, infers the knowledge which God has of him, so Job in the same place
that I alleged even now concludes, that forasmuch as God is the Creator and
Artificer that made man, he delights not in destroying his work. Job* 10. 8.
Thy hands (says he) have made me and fashioned me wholly round about, and
will thou destroy me? Which is as much as if he had said, is it possible that
I who am the work of thy hands, should be brought to nothing by thee? For
besides that this were against nature, Psalm. 36. and 138.
the Scripture testifies unto us in many places, that he is not only a
preserver of that which he has made, but also that he leaves not his works
imperfect: and that he is so far from defacing them, that contrariwise it is
his manner to lead them to perfection. A good lesson to be learned from our
creation.
Whereby we ought to learn, that the only consideration of the work of our
creation ought greatly to solace, comfort, and confirm us in all afflictions
and adversities, how rigorous soever the hand of God should be upon us. For
first, we ought to be thoroughly resolved of this, that no affliction can come
unto us, but by his good will and from his hand, whatsoever the means and
instruments are, of which he makes his rods and scourges, and by which he
strikes and beats us. Now then seeing the hand that touches us is the same
that has made and fashioned us, we know well that he sets not himself
against a strange work unknown unto him, but against his own wherewith he
is very well acquainted. Whereupon we may certainly conclude, that it proceeds
not of cruelty and fury that he strikes us, nor yet without good cause: as
he that is neither cruel, nor furious, nor void of reason. So that it
follows necessarily, either that we have given him great occasion, or that it
is very requisite for us. The afflictions of Gods children turn to their good.
But howsoever it be, he ever knows well how to turn all the afflictions of
his children to his glory, and to their great honor and profit, as we have
many notable examples hereof in all the servant of God, and namely in those
two personages David and Job, of whom we have spoken in this our discourse.
Which we continuing so far forth as it respects the work of man's
generation, are to consider more narrowely of the admirable secret of nature
therein, so much as daily experience and diligent search has learned men to
know. Tell us then, ARAM, of the fashion of a child in the womb.

Of the fashion of a child in the womb, and how the members are framed one
after another in the mothers belly: of the time and days, within which a
child is perfectly fashioned.
ARAM. I cannot marvel enough at the pride and presumption of many, who
think themselves to be such great Philosophers, and so skillful in the
knowledge of natural things, that they persuade themselves, that nothing is so
secret in nature which they know not, and whereof they are not able to show
the causes and reasons. But experience shows unto us daily, how far short
they are of that which they think, and in what ignorance the best learned are
wrapped at this day. For how many things are daily manifested unto them, which
the greatest searchers of nature, that ever have been, were ignorant of, unto
whom notwithstanding they that now live are but disciples? And how many
things do continually come to pass, into which the chiefest, sharpest
sighted, and most expert have no sight at all, No man's knowledge perfect.
or very small? And among them that suppose they have good knowledge, how are
they deceived oftentimes? How many are doubtful in many things whereof they
have but small conjectures, whereupon they guess at all adventure, and as they
imagine? We may easily judge hereof by this, that continually one reprehendeth
and corrects another, and that the later writers condemn sundry things in
the former. But not to seek afar off for examples, we may see them daily in
the science of the Anatomy of men's bodies. For there was never yet Physicion
or Anatomist either old or new, that attained to perfect knowledge, and
could render a reason of every thing that is but in one body,
notwithstanding that they are continually conversant in that matter. Therefore,
to leave unto God that secret which is hidden from our understanding, let us
consider of that which we may know touching the form of a child in the
womb.

If we look narrowely into that order that nature follows in the framing of
man, who is the little world, we shall find it like to that which the
Author of nature observed in the creation of the world, which Moses calls
the generations of the heavens and of the earth. Genesis 2. 4.
For in the beginning the earth was without form and void, and covered with a
great gulf of waters, The creation of the world, and of man compared together.
so that the earth and waters and matter of all the elements, and of all
creatures created afterward, were mingled and confounded together in this
great heap. Unto this the Almighty afterward added a form, and created so
many goodly creatures, and of so diverse natures and kinds as are to be seen
in the whole world, which he has adorned with them, and endued with so great
beauty that it has received the name of that, which is as much as Ornament or
Order of things well disposed. After the same manner does nature, or rather
God by nature, work in the creation and generation of men. For the seed of
which they are formed, and which is the matter prepared, disposed and tempered
by the same providence of God for the work he has in hand, receives not
fashion presently upon the conception, but remains for a time without any
figure or lineaments, or proportion, and show of a humane body, or of any
member thereof. The natural Philosophers and Physicions, who have searched
most carefully into this work, and have had greatest experience, they say
that there are certain membranes and skins that are wrapped round about the
infant in the womb, which some commonly call the Matrix, others call the
Mother: and that within these skins (which are three in number as some
Anatomistes say, others but two) as it were within certain bands, the fruit
is preserved until the birth. An argumont of the providence of God.
Wherein we are to acknowledge the providence of GOD, who has so disposed of
nature, that even from our mothers womb, she is in stead of a mother to us,
folding us up within bands before she that has conceived us can perform
the same.

But let us proceed on with our matter, so far forth as we have learned of
the fashion of the child in the discourse of Philosophers and Physicions. They
say then, that after the womb has received the seeds joined together, of
both which the child is to be framed, it comes to pass that the heat of
the Matrix warmeth all this matter as it were in a little furnace, and so
rayseth a skin over it which being as it were roasted by little and little,
waxes crustie and hard round about the seed. Of the form of an infant.
This causes the whole matter to resemble an egg, by reason that this skin
compasses about the seed, which boyleth inwardly through the abundance of
natural spirits that are within it. Of the Afterburthen.
This is that skin which is commonly called the Secundine, or After-burthen,
being joined on every side to the womb, by reason of a great number of
Orifices, veins and arteries reaching thereunto, to the end that by them the
blood, spirits, and nourishment should be conuayed to the infant. For as the
whole womb imbraceth the seed, so likewise it heateth and nourishes the
same. Therefore this skin that serves in stead of little bands has two
uses: the first is to take fast hold of the womb: the other, to serve for the
nourishment of the burden, and of the child. For this cause there are two
veins and two arteries in it (besides a passage in the midst) which are as
it were the roots of the burden, and make the Nauill.

This work with other circumstances belonging thereunto, The first six days
work from the conception.
which we omit for brevity sake, is brought to pass the first six days
of the conception. After this skin, they that make three, speak of a second
skin that is in the midst, which they say was created to receive the urine
of the child, which in the former months is voyded by the Nauill, and in the
latter months by the ordinary passage. This voyding place is ordained to this
end, that the urine might not frette and rent in sunder the tender skin of
the infant, who is therefore covered with a third skin next to the other,
and that is very tender. So that the urine touches not the infant, but is
voyded by the middle way, as I have already declared. Thus you see the
beginning of the conception, before the burden be wholly formed like to an
infant. Whereunto that saying of the Prophet has relation: Psalm. 139. 16.
Thine eyes (says he) did see me when I was without form: for in thy book
were all things written, which in continuance were fashioned, when there was
none of them before. Then he compares the secret parts serving for
generation, especially the belly, and womb of the woman, unto the earth, and
to an obscure, secret and hid place, even to deep and dark caves in the
ground. For as the earth having received the seed in which is the vigor,
keeps, cherishes, and increases the same: even so fares it with the womb
and with the mother. On the other side, as these parts are lowest in regard of
the trunk of the body, and of all the receptacles and vessels thereof, so are
they very secret and hidden, and as it were in the midst and center of the
body, if the whole be considered together, namely the trunk with both ends
thereof. For this cause the work that is there wrought by God, is so much the
more marvelous, because even in that obscure place, it receives the goodliest
and most perfect form that can be imagined. And who will not be abashed to
consider, that out of that slymie seed of man there should come bones,
sinews, flesh, skin, and such like things so diverse one from another? But
yet it is a far greater marvel to see all this great diversity of matter,
to be framed in so many sundry members, and of so many sundry forms, and
that with such excellent beauty, so profitable and so fit for those offices
that are assigned unto them, as we have learned in our former discourses. Now
as God did not create all creatures in one day, although he could well have
done it, if it had so pleased him, so does he in the generation of men. For
albeeit that the members are fashioned all at once, All the members receive
their form together.
so that not one of them is framed before another, nevertheless because there
is great variety betwixt them, both in respect of their dignity, and of their
strength, nature their mother does not set them forward all alike. For in
displaying her power generally toward all the parts of the body, it comes
to pass, that her work, and the figure given unto it, appears sooner or
later in some members more then in others. Hereof it is that the greatest and
chiefest members appear naturally before the rest, albeit they are not the
first that are fashioned. So likewise all the members are not beautified and
made perfect at the same time, but some after others, according as they have
heat and nourishment. Nature therefore observes this order, that the
worthiest parts and such as have in them the beginning of motion, show
themselves first, and then those members that are profitable, and serviceable
to the former, and are created for their cause. And according to this order the
highest parts are seen sooner then the lowest, and those within before them
without, and they that receive their substance from the seed before those that
have it from blood. These also amongst them that are most excellent are first,
notwithstanding many times they have their accomplishment and perfection after
the other, as it appears in the Nauill. The nauill first made perfect.
For although the heart, liver, and brain, being the chiefest parts of the
body, have their beginning before that, yet is it the first amongst them all
that appears perfect. Now then after the Nauil with his pipe or passage is
formed and fashioned within the first six days, the blood and spirit are
next drawn by those veins and arteries, whereof we spoke even now, to be sent
to the seed, and mingled therewith, that the principal members might be
figured, as the liver, the heart, and the brain, which begin first like to
little bladders, and so consequently the rest which are fashioned by little and
little according as they receive nourishment. For the veins whereby the burden
is nourished, may well be likened to small roots, whereby plants are
cherished: as also the burden it self may be compared unto plants in this
point, as we have already learned. So that the seed receiving this form
already spoken of in the first six days, during which time it is called by
no other name then seed, nine days after that the blood is drawn thither, of
which the liver and the heart receive their form: so that after twelve days
added to the former, a man may discern the lineaments and proportion of these
two members, and also of the brain, albeit they are not then altogether
fashioned. At this time the burden is called Faetus of the Latins, When the
seed is called Embryon.
and Embryon of the Greeks, which is as much in our language as Sprouting or
Budding. Next after this, within the space of other eighteen days, all the
other members are fashioned and distinguished. So that about five and forty
days after the conception, the members receive their perfect fashion: and then
does the burden begin to live not only as plants live, When the burden is
called a child or infant.
but also as other living creatures. For it has sense and feeling about the
six and thirtieth day, and from that time forward it is called an infant. But
as yet it is void of motion. For by and by after it is formed, it is very
tender, until that by virtue of the heat it waxes more dry and firm, which
is by reason that the moisture, whereby it is made so soft and tender, consumes
away by little and little, so that the nails begin to take root at the
fingers ends, and the hairs in the head. When the child f^^st moves.
Now after the child is come to the third month if it be a male, or to the
fourth if it be a female, it begins to stir it self according to the
testimony of Hippocrates, because then his bones are more firm and somewhat
harder. But this is not always alike in all women with child. For there are
some that always feel it stir about the two and fourtieth day, others never
feel the same until the midst of the time from the conception to the birth.
Yea in the same woman the same time and order is not always observed. For
according to the strength and good complexion of the child, and the nature and
disposition of the mother, these things change, and not only because of the
sex. Nevertheless it is most ordinary and usual for male children to move
within three months or thereabouts, as likewise to be borne at the ninth
month: whereas females are commonly somewhat slower both in stirring and also
at their birth, the reason whereof is this, because male children are naturally
a great deal more hot then females. Galens opinion of the birth of sons.
Galen attributes the cause of the generation of sons to the strength and
heat of the seed, and says that they are carried on the right side of the
womb, as the daughters on the left, which is the colder side, as being
farthest removed from the liver. He yeldeth also this reason why some children
are more like the father, and some the mother, because of the greater strength
of seed which they have either from the one, or from the other. And when it
comes to pass, that the womb receives seed at two sundry passages which
it has, then are twins engendered either at one conception or at twain, so
that the later be not long after the former, according to the opinion of the
Philosophers, and namely of Aristotle, who rehearses many examples thereof in
his seventh book of the history of living creatures, saying that a whore was
delivered of two children, whereof the one was like the father, and the other
like the adulterer. But now we are to consider of the childe-birth, which is
as wonderful a work of God in nature as any other. It belongs then to
thee, ACHITOB, to end this days work by a discourse tending to this purpose.

Of Childbirth, and the natural causes thereof: of the great providence of
God appearing therein: of the image of our eternal nativity represented unto
us in our mortal birth. Chap. 72.
ACHITOB. Men are of that nature, that they cannot acknowledge what they are
themselves, or what they have received of God, except they be brought back to
that first dust and earth, out of which they are taken, even to their first
creation and generation. Therefore the holy spirit does esteem it a thing
not unworthy his divine majesty often to instruct and to admonish us by his
word, The word profitable for all.
and that so plainly and familiarly, as no man, be he never so skillful or so
ignorant, but he may greatly profit in this school, at leastwise be made
altogether inexcusable, if he learn not that which the spirit does there
teach him. For concerning them that are most ignorant, he speaks very plainly
to be understood of them, propounding that unto them whereof they cannot be
ignorant, although they would, at leastwise which they cannot easily know. And
as for the skilfuller sort, who by their knowledge are able to understand more
then others, they are so much the more guilty, if they will not give credit
to the works of God, as they are propounded unto us in the holy scriptures.
For what idol of nature soever they frame to themselves, yet must they always
come to this first beginning of man, which is clean contrary to the reason of
humane sense and understanding, and so give glory unto God: otherwise the
fruit of all their study will be nothing else but confusion and ignorance.
Now the more we consider of the daily generation of men, the more like we shall
find it in all admiration to their first original and creation. For who could
ever, I say not believe, but only think or imagine, that out of pressed milk
and cruds as it were, such as the beginning of man seems to be, there could
proceed any living creature at all, especially such an image of God as man is?
And yet we see this daily come to pass. Now from whence comes this milk?
We cannot for shame speak it without blushing. So that if the work and
providence of God be wonderful in the conception and fashioning of man, Man's
birth a wonderful work of God.
and in the life and preservation he affoordeth him in his Mothers belly, as
we have showed heretofore, surely it is no less admirable in his nativity
and birth, as we may now understand.

We have already heard, how by the faculties and powers of the soul, and
generatiue virtue thereof, the seed is retained and preserved, How the child
is nourished in the womb.
and how the child is formed thereof in the womb. Now all this while it is
nourished by blood, which is drawn unto it by the veins of the nauill ordained
to that end: and therefore also the issue of this blood commonly ceasseth in
women with child, as that which is then divided into three parts. For the
child draws the purest thereof to it self, and is therewithal nourished.
Secondly the womb by veins leading directly to the breasts, sends that part
which is less pure, whereof the milk is prepared that feeds the child after
it is borne. The third part which is the worst, staieth still in the womb, and
so soon as the child is borne, it issues forth also. This food which the
child receives thus in the womb, caused Galen to allege an ancient sentence
out of Athenaeus, saying, That the child receives more from the mother then
from the father, even as the plants draw more from the earth then they do from
the husbandman. For this menstrual blood first increases the seed, and after
serves toward the growth of the members by ministering food unto them. And
for this cause this Author teaches, that naturally the love of the children
is very great toward their Mothers, and so of the Mothers toward their
children, as also in respect of the exceeding great mixture of their
substance. But when the child is now increased and grown so great and
strong, that he is well able to move himself, and to receive his food at the
mouth, as he is waxen greater, so he must have more store of nourishment then
he is able to draw in at the nauil. Likewise forasmuch as natural heat is
more augmented, he had need of the more air, and to receive it in by
respiration and breathing, so far forth as is necessary for his refreshing.
The cause of childbirth.
Whereupon the child stirs and moves with greater strength and violence,
so that it breaks the skins and bands wherein it was wrapped, and some
veins also, and so makes an issue and way for it self, as that which cannot
any longer be kept in the womb. Now when the child feels that air entering
in which it desires and seeks, for the reason before alleged, it moves
it self toward the mouth of the womb; Which is the easiest kind of
childbirth.
which is the most natural and easy way of birth, by reason that it is borne
with the head forward. Now so soon as it is come into the light it cries,
as if it did prognosticate and foretell of the miseries of that life into which
it is entered. The Philosophers and Physicians refer the cause of this
weeping to that motion which drives it to the birth, Why children cry when
they are borne.
as also to those handlings and touchings wherewith it is received, which
cannot be without some sense of grief conceived by this little tender body.
Which body so long as it is in the womb, is bowed round as it were in a lump,
so that the heels of it join to the buttockes, and the hands lay fast hold
of the knees, toward which it does bow down the head so low, that the eyes
are joined to the thumbes as if they were fastened to them, and the nose is
thrust down between the knees. Now when it has attained to the ninth month,
so that it may no longer tarry there, for the reasons before mentioned, it
turns it self in the womb, first with the head downward, and stretching out
the legs and other members upward. Then when the hour of childbirth
approaches, the babe by kicking and turning it self more violently, makes
many ruptures by little and little, so that the skins wherein both the Urine
and the sweat are contained bursting asunder, whole streams gush out, which
show that the birth is hard at hand. For presently upon the renting and breach
of the After-burthen through the violence of the child, because there is
nothing else that holds it up, the babe falls down, even as an apple or a
pear falls from the tree when it is ripe. And as the child does his best
to come forth at that time which God has prescribed unto it, so the womb and
the mother of the child do their parts as much as lies in them to perform
by the providence of God, A testimony of Gods providence in the womb.
who has provided accordingly. For during the space of those nine months
wherein the child is contained in the womb, it is shut up, and embraces the
burden as close as it may. And when the time of birth comes, the womb does
not only open it self by little and little, but all the top of it does gather
it self as close together as it can, and so thrust the babe toward the mouth
of it, whereunto also the neighbor parts lend their helping hand. The woman
likewise labors, and helps as much as she is able; and the child falling
downward with his head turned toward the mouth of the womb, makes way for
all the rest of his body, and so casts it self forth, at whose issuing
out, the humor wherewithal it was before abundantly moistened, helps very
much, by reason that both the child's body, and the way also is thereby made
more gliding and slippery. Wherein we have a great argument of Gods providence
to be observed. For the child's head being of a round fashion, his coming forth
cannot be so hindered, as we see it is when the child offreth it self
crosse-wise, or when the arms or legs come forward. Besides, all the rest of
the members are greatly benefited hereby, both because ye way is already made
before them, as also because themselves are thereby the better placed to
prevent all impediments with which otherwise they might encounter. For we see
by experience what inconveniences fall out in childbirths, in what dangers the
mothers and children are, and how often the death of the one or the other, or
of both ensues, when the child comes otherwise then by this order, which is
most natural and most ordinary. Wherefore women with child have great occasion
offered to recommend themselves unto God, especially at that time. For howsoever
the child comes, we must then acknowledge the almighty hand of God, and his
help and assistance both toward the mothers and their children. For let there
be never so good concord and agreement in the ioynt-labour of ye child, of the
mother, and of the womb, yet the work being so difficult, who will not wonder
that ever it could be borne? Who would ever believe yt a child should come
forth, or yt it could be drawn out of the mothers belly, without cleaving the
same asunder in the midst, or without the death of the one of them if not of
both, but that we see the experience thereof daily before our eyes? Galen,
Gal. de vs^ (...). lib. 15.
who made such an idol of nature, confesses that he knows not how the child
can find any issue and passage out, and therefore wondreth at it very much,
Auicenna thinks that there is an opening of some bones, but he is deceived:
for it cannot be so, neither has experience ever showed the same. An argument
against Atheists.
Wherefore both Philosophers and Physicions, but especially Epicures and
Atheists, must needs be driven into an astonishment at this, and have their
mouths stopped and closed up, except they will open them to give glory to God,
Psalm. 139. 17, 18. and 22. 9.
and to acknowledge and magnify his great providence and goodness toward men,
singing with David, O God how precious are thy thoughts unto me! how great is
the sum of them! If I should count them they are more then the sand. It was
thou that did draw me out of the womb: thou gave me hope, even at my
mothers breasts. But we have here to note, that there are many causes which
hasten forward ye childbirth, but we speak here of the^ that are most common
and ordinary. Children that are borne at the sixth month or sooner, live not,
as not having then their whole perfection. They yt are borne in the seventh
month may live, for then is the fruit perfect. And yet they that are borne at
the eight month, commonly die: and the reason is, because the child stirs
very much in the seventh month, preparing it self for the birth. So that if
the child be of a strong nature it comes the^ into the light: but if it be
yet weak, it cannot come forth, but tarieth two months longer in the womb to
gather new strength. For it remoueth from the one side of the womb to the
other. Therefore when the child after the seventh month is presently borne in
the eight, it cannot live. For nature was weak in the first endeavor: neither
could it be to purpose, before the matter receives motion after the critical
time, with which name the Philosophers call the seventh month. Moreover,
double motion weakneth the strength of the child. For it had removed unto the
other side of the womb as is said, and presently after it came into the light:
but the nature of the child cannot sustain two brunts one in the neck of
another, so that death follows thereupon. The Astrologians likewise allege
these reasons why the seventh month is critical, namely, either because the
sun is carried into a sign that is opposite to the sign of conception: or
else because every planet answering his several month, the eight month is
given to Saturn, who is an enemy to them that are borne. Two things to be
considered of in our birth.
Now for the end of this matter, we will consider two things in our generation
and birth, which offer unto us great cause both of humility and of spiritual
joy. First then we see how God would have us humbled in our generation, by
creating us of a matter that is but slime and dung, whereunto notwithstanding he
has given such an excellent and goodly form, to the end that his powerful
virtue, wisdom, justice, and kindness should be so much the better
manifested unto us, and that in our selves, so that we shall not need to seek
for testimonies thereof elsewhere. So that as our beginning ought to take out
of our heart all swelling and pride, even so the form and beauty wherewithal
God has honored this mire of which he has made men, and the great graces
which he has communicated with them, especially in regard of the soul which
he has joined to the body ought to teach us to acknowledge and to celebrate
incessantly his providence and great goodness toward us. To conclude, we ought
to consider the image and similitude we have of our eternal nativity in this
our mortal birth, What similitude there is between our spiritual and our
natural birth.
and that birth whereby we are borne unto an immortal life, as here on earth we
are borne to enjoy a life that is subject to mortality. For first, as man is
formed and fashioned in dark places in the belly of his mother, that afterward
he might come forth and enjoy the light of the world: so likewise being come
hither, he is after a manner so upon the earth, as if he were to be borne
again. For this world is unto him as his mothers womb, wherein the light is
to him as darkness and as a very obscure night, in comparison of that other
divine and eternal light, in which he is to enjoy a happy and an immortal
life. And therefore as the child is prepared in the darkness of his mothers
belly, that after he may come forth into the light of the world, so are we
prepared in this dim light, that we may attain to that other divine light,
which is far greater and more excellent without comparison. Again, when the
time of birth approaches, the life and vigor of the womb, which is as it were
the child's mother, withers and decays, and the child likewise is as if he
were dead, in regard of that kind of life which he enjoyed in his mothers
belly. For as he lives no more after that fashion, so he is in an estate
that differs much from the former. So fares it with man when he is to
depart out of the life of this world, as if he were to be delivered of it in
childbirth for another life. For he dies in regard of this life, to the end
he may live another life, which as far excels this, as this is better then
the other, which he enjoyed before in his mothers belly: yea it is so much
the better and of higher price, in that the length of time of this second and
blessed life shall be eternal and endless. Moreover, as a child comes out when
he is borne, so does a man when he dies. And in coming forth both of them
enter into a new and unacquainted light, and into a place where they find all
things much altered and far differing from those which they used to have in
their other kind of living. For which cause both the one and the other being
troubled and scared with this nouelty, are unwilling to come forth of their
clapper and to forsake their closet, were it not that they are urged and
constrained thereunto by the art, laws and rights of nature, whereby God has
better provided for our affairs then we our selves could conceive or
comprehend, both in our nativity and life, and also in our death. The ignorance
whereof causes our spirit to abhor the departure out of this life, Why we
abhor natural death.
in regard of this great change that is therein, because it knows not what
good is brought to it thereby, no more then the little child knows wherefore
he is borne into the world, or what he shall find there. And therefore albeit
nature presses to come forth nevertheless according to that sense which it
can have, it weepeth by and by after it is borne, as if it were fallen into
some great inconvenience, and that some great evil were fallen unto it: as we
do also at our death, for the cause before alleged, not considering that it is
our second and better birth* Thus you see what I have thought requisite to be
noted in the discourse of our generation: and to morrow, God willing, we must
look into the life and death of man's body. But it shall not be without
profit, if first we speak somewhat of the causes why God created man naked,
and with less defense for himself then he did other living creatures. It
belongs then to thee, ASER, to speak of this matter.

The end of the ninth days work.
THE TENTH days work.
Why God created man naked, and with less natural defense then he did all
other living creatures: how many ways he recompenceth this nakedness: of the
general beauty of the whole body of man, joined with profit and commodity.
Chap. 73.
ASER. As often as men shall consider in such sort as becomes them, that they
are borne men, and not brute beasts, they will be suffcie^tly admonished of the
civil and sociable nature, in which God has created them, and of that
humanity for which he has endued them with such a nature, so that they will
keep them selves from being transformed into savage and cruel beasts to hurt
one another, as commonly they do. Truly it is not without some great and
notable cause, yt among al living creatures there is not one to be found, that
has a more delicate and tender skin, and less furnished with couerings for the
defense thereof, then man has: considering that God himself created him as
his principal work amongst all visible creatures, and made him as it were
Lord of the whole world. And yet he is of that nature, that the skin
wherewith he is clothed is not so sufficient a garment for him as is necessary
to keep him from heat and cold, and from other inconveniences that might happen
unto him, except he be clad with some other covering then that which he
brings from his mothers belly. For he neither has feathers as birds have,
nor wool as sheep have, nor bristles as swine have, neither yet any skin or
hide so hard, nor so well covered and furnished with hair, as foxes, wolves,
bears, bulls and other four footed beasts have. Neither has he any skales as
fishes have, nor any shells as cockles, sea creuisses, tortoises, and such
other creatures have. The first point to be considered touching man's nakedness.


But we have four things to consider of touching this point. The first is,
that if man had not sinned after that God by creation had in great larges made
him partaker of his heavenly gifts and graces, he should not have been subject
to the want either of garments, or of any such like thing whereunto he is now
after a sort brought in subjection, at leastwise he should have had all these
things without pain and grief. For this cause it is said in Genesis, that
after our first parents had transgressed the ordinance of God, by eating of the
forbidden fruit, they knew that they were naked and covered themselves with
leaves. And for a punishment of their offense it was said unto them, Genesis 3. 19.
that they should eat their bread in the sweat of their face: under which
word of bread was comprehended all things whereof they stood in need for the
maintenance and preservation of their life: as we understand it in that prayer
which we daily make to God, when we demand of him our daily bread. The second
point*
The second point which we ought to note in this matter touching the nakedness
of man, is this, that God would admonish him, not only by the whole frame and
composition of his body and of all his members, but also by his very skin,
that he created him to live in company and fellowship, and in peace with those
of his own kind, to help all and to hurt none. Therefore he did not create
him with natural weapons, as he did other living creatures, unto whom he gave
all things necessary for their defense and preservation. For some of them have
strength and weapons by nature to resist their enemies: others wanting this
have swiftnes to convey themselves out of all dangers: and some wanting both
these, have yet subtlety and places of refuge to defend themselves withal. As
for man, God has placed him in this world unarmed and naked, so that if men be
disposed to hurt and to war one upon another, Man by nature has least
defense for himself.
they must deforme themselves, and borowe weapons from others, whereby they
transform themselves and become monstrous, as though they were transfigured
into savage beasts and into monsters. For they have not (as has been said)
hard and strong hydes as some brute beasts have, neither prickles and darts in
them as Hedgehogs and Porcupines have. Neither are their feet, hands and
nails like to the hoofes of Horses, Asses, and Mules, or to the tallents of
birds that live by pray, or to the paws of wild beasts, neither yet are their
teeth like to theirs. God has not given them sharp bills like to birds, neither
has he armed them with stings or with venim, as he has done venomous beasts.
True it is that man has an advantage above other living creatures, namely his
hands given him of God for ye doing of any work that he will, A commendation of
the hand of man.
as we have already declared. Wherefore if he be to fight against beasts, his
hand will furnish him with more weapons, then all theirs are, which they have by
nature, although they be put all together. For he can not only make weapons of
all sorts, but handle them also, and manage them as pleases him in his own
defense, both against beasts, as likewise against those of his own kind. And I
would to God he used them but in his own defense, and did not abuse them as
he does to his own hurt very unnaturally. The third point.
But let us proceed forward and come to the third cause, why God has thus
created man all naked: which is, that he would admonish him thereby of his
natural infirmity, in regard of those wants and necessities that hemme him
in on every side, unto which he is more subject the^ any other creature. Which
instruction ought to work two things especially in him: A double use to be
made of our wants.
first, it ought to induce and move him to that peaceable and sociable life
with his kind, for the which God created him. Secondly, by this means he is
the more bound to acknowledge the providence, bounty and liberality of God
toward him, whereby he brings to pass, that the necessity and want, which
seems to be greater in man then in any other living creature, declares him
to be the richest, and best provided for, yea to be Lord of all. For all the
garments of beasts of what quality soever they be, and whatsoever else they
possess, belong to him. Whereas if men were not subject to such necessities as
are incident unto them, what use should they have of so many creatures as God
has created for them? or what service should they have of their hands? For
here again we see how that by them he provides for their garments, by setting
on work ye skins, wools and hairs of al other living creatures, besides the
silks of worms, and other matter which the fruits of the earth afford unto
them, as flax, hemp and such like. And if necessity did not teach them the
use of all these things, how would they consider the power, wisdom, goodness
and providence of God in his works, and in his creatures, to praise him and to
give him thanks? For although they have necessity and want for their
schoolemistres, to the end they might learn this science in their school, yet
do they profit very little thereby, but rather become most ungrateful toward
God their Creator, who is so bountiful and liberal a father toward them.
Whereupon we have further to note, that God has not given to men many things
belonging particularly to beasts, because he has enriched them with so many
other things, of which all other creatures are altogether destitute. For
besides the help he has of the composition and placing of those members,
which he has given to their bodies, being so convenient to perform that which
beasts cannot do with theirs, Wherein men excel all other living creatures.
he has endued them with speech and reason, whereby, not only all that is in
other creatures which is not in them, is more then recompensed, but they have
more in them, then all other living creatures have being put together. For
albeit they have no feathers and wings to fly and mount aloft by as birds have,
yet how many means have they to ascend and to descend to go and to come
whither they will? And as for swiftnes and nimblenes, how many beasts are there
with whose swiftnes they may help themselves? And although they have not finnes
whereby to swim in the sea, and in waters like fishes, yet they have skill and
hands, whereby they can make and guide ships, and so convey themselves whither
they will. Now as for strength which they want to carry heavy burdens afarr off,
how many ways is it recompensed both by land and by water, and that by means
as well of beasts whose service they use, as of arts and sciences wherein they
are skilful? When by we see that God has put more within a man, namely in ye
sense and understanding wherewith he has endued him, The fourth point*
then he has put without in all beasts. Concerning ye fourth point of which I
have to speak touching this matter, it is this, that as it pleased God to give
unto man a far more excellent body for beauty then he did to any other
living creature, so he would have this beauty also to appear in all the parts
thereof. For first this body, was not fashioned, either to fly in the air as
birds do, or to glide upon the earth, and to draw it self upon the belly as
creeping things do, nor to march upon al four as fourefooted beasts do, nor
with the head bending downward as theirs is, but to stand and go upright with
the head lifted upwards toward heaven, to the end he might be admonished, that
his true beginning and birth came higher the^ from the earth, and from other
corruptible elements, What we ought to learn by the proportion of our bodies.
namely from heaven. He is also admonished hereby, that he is not borne to
serve his belly as brute beasts do, and to follow after gluttony, drunkenness,
whoredom, and such other carnal and more then brutish pleasures, wherein
licencious men commonly observe less moderation then beasts that are
altogether without reason and understanding. For although the matter whereof a
man's body is compounded, diffreth nothing from that whereof the bodies of brute
beasts are made, nevertheless seeing it pleased God to lodge within it a soul
of a divine and celestial nature, that is far more excellent then all natures
and creatures with bodies, he would it should have a lodging agreeable to the
nature of it, whereby also man might be admonished of his excellency, and
that he was created, not only to look down upon the earth as beasts do,
but to lift up his eyes unto heaven, and to behold therein the high works of
God his Creator, and to do the like in the residue of the whole world. For as
we have heard, man is not properly this body which we see, What man is?
but chiefly the soul and spirit which we see not, and which has the body for
his lodging. So that if we consider both the house and the inhabitant, we
shall see that the things given of God to beasts and denied to men, do bring
great beauty both to beasts because they have them, and to men because they
have them not. For if the beasts were deprived of their armor and natural
ornaments, they should lose all their beauty and profit that redoundeth unto
them: as likewise man should be deformed an ugly, if in any sort he were made
partaker of that which is proper and agreeable to other creatures. But because
God has created man so that he might be eternal and immortal, he has armed
him inwardly, even in that part that shall be the means unto him of eternal
life. Neither would he clothe him with natural garments, nor arm him with
corporal weapons, both because that had been superfluous having given unto him
that which is far better, as also because his beauty had been thereby much
diminished, and his spirit should not have been so well known as now it is, by
means of that skill and of those arts of which God has made it capable. For
what could he invent and do, and wherein should he show that natural light
and dexterity that is in him, if nature had furnished him with all those
things, wherewith his reason given unto him, is able to enrich him? But to
conclude our speech, having spoken sufficiently of the creation, generation,
and birth of man, let us look into this beauty that is in the form and
figure of man's body, by calling to remembrance our former discourses. And let
us know, that both for the matter, and also for the form and composition
thereof, there is not the like work in all the world, none so goodly, The
excellent frame of man's body.
so proper, nor so well united and knit together: none so well proportioned and
polished in every respect, and in every part thereof. So that when we consider
thereof from one end of it unto ye other, we shall find that the workemaster
that made this body, has throughout the whole work joined beauty and profit
together. But there is yet another excellency worthy of great admiration, in
that he has not only beautified this body with so goodly a shape as we see it
has, but has also endued it with virtue and ability to make other bodies
altogether like it self, as we heard yesterday. Wherefore men show indeed,
Who they be that know not themselves.
that they know nothing of the excellency of their nature, and that they have
altogether forgotten or at leastwise very ill considered of that instruction,
which God has given them by the composition of their bodies, but principally
by the soul that is lodged therein, if despising celestial and eternal things
for which they are created, they affect, and seek after earthly and
transitory things, preferring the earth before heaven, as commonly they do.
Which is all one as if they declared openly, that they are displeased that God
has made them men, and not beasts ramping on the earth, or marching upon all
four, and turning their snoute always downward, because they have nothing in
them that sauoureth of a divine and celestial nature as man has: and so they
deal no otherwise then as if they would reproach God for that honor, which he
has bestowed upon them, by creating them differing from brute beasts, unto
whom notwithstanding they had rather be like. But enough is spoken of this
matter. And seeing we may be sufficiently instructed by all our former
discourses, what are those principal parts, powers and offices of the soul,
I mean the animal vital and natural virtues, as also what instruments they
have in man's body, let us now look into the life and death thereof, and
consider more narowly then hitherto we have done, what are the causes both of
the one and the other.

Whether the life of the body can proceed either of the matter, or of the
composition, form, and figure, or of the qualities thereof, or else of the
harmony, conjunction and agreement of all these: whether any of these or all of
them together can be the soul: of the length and shortness, of the diverse
degrees and ages, and of the end of man's life: of death, and of the causes both
of life and death: of the difference that is between natural and
supernatural Philosophy in the consideration of things. Chap. 74.
AMANA. Jesus Christ purposing to teach us, that we cannot have life but in
him, and by him, who is the life, and who has the words of eternal life, Ioh.
15. 1, 2, 3, 4*
compares himself to a Vine, and his disciples unto Branches. For as the
branch has life and vigor, and bears fruit, so long as it remains in the
vine, and receives nourishment from thence, so if it receives no sap from
thence, or if it be cut off, it withers and dies. We may say the same of the
members of the body, if the soul be not in every one of them, and if it give
not life, virtue, and vigor to them all for the performance of their offices.
For if it fall out so, that it withdraws it self altogether from any one
part of the body, that part is without life: as we see by experience in a
member dried up, or putrified, or cut off from the body. And so is it with the
whole body, when the soul is separated from it. But we are to handle this
matter more at large.

By our former discourses we may learn the nature both of the soul and of
the body, what is that union and conjunction which they have together, albeit
their natures, substances, and essences are diverse and very different: also we
have learned that the one of them, namely the spiritual essence, is a great
deal more excellent then the other, which is corporal. The soul proceeds
not of the matter.
Wherefore we may well conclude, that the life in the body proceeds not of
the matter whereof it is made, nor of the qualities joined unto it, nor yet of
the composition form and figure thereof. For if the life and soul were in the
matter of the body, the larger and greater men's bodies were, and the more
matter they had in them, the more life and soul, the more wit, spirit and
understanding should be in them. But we see by experience that it is far
otherwise, and that there is no more life and soul in a great body then in a
little. And if it were so that the life proceeded from the matter, a dead body
should be as well a man, Nor of the qualities.
as a living body. We may say the same both of the qualities joined to the
matter according to the nature of the elements, as also of that conformation
and agreement that is between all the members both within and without: And as
for the harmony conjunction and concord that flows from the diversity of
these qualities, Nor of the harmony.
and from their temperature, it may be increased and diminished. Wherefore that
cannot be the effect of nature, which causes a thing to be that which it is,
and gives unto the same thing his form and kind, that continues always in
his estate and natural disposition. For if it were otherwise, the nature of
kinds might be changed, which never any of the Philosophers did so much as
imagine, Nor of the composition of the body.
or think to affirm. And as for the composition and figure of the body, there
is yet less reason to say it comes from thence, forasmuch as that continues
the same in a dead body which it was in a living. Again, those living
creatures, that resemble most the nature and form of the members of man's body,
and the matter thereof, are oftentimes farther off from the nature of humane
sense and understanding, then they that do less resemble the^. Which we may
easily know by considering the natures of a Hog and of an Elephant. The nature
of a Hog. And of an Elephant.
For they that through want and famine have been constrained to eat man's
flesh, have testified that no flesh or meat whatsoever approaches nearer in
taste, or is more like it then the flesh of a Hog. And if we consider the
inward members and parts, there is no beast, if we will give credit to them
that have had the experience thereof, that has them liker to those in man,
then the Hog has, both for substance, disposition, form and figure.
Contrariwise, wherein does the Elephant resemble man either for form or
composition of body, or of the members both internal and external, in
comparison of a Hog? And yet there is no beast more teachable then the
Elephant, or that approaches nearer to the sense and understanding of man: as
on the other side there is no beast further off in this respect, nor more hard
to be taught and more brutish, then is the Hog. And if any man think that the
industry and docilitie of an Elephant proceeds, either from the greatness of
the matter whereof it is made, or from the abundance of the qualities joined
unto the matter, or from the harmony, conjunction and concord that is between
them, or lastly, from the composition, form and figure of his body and of the
members thereof, we will oppose unto him the Ant, which is one of the least
among the creatures of the earth, as the Elephant is the greatest of all, as
far as we know. The like may be said of the Be. For, are there many
creatures although greater in substance, that yet have such industrious and
ingenious natures, as these little beasts have, that are to be reckoned among
the smallest of them? And by this it appears plainly, The soul of a beast
differs from the substance and nature of his body.
yt the soul of beasts is of some other substance and nature then their
bodies, notwithstanding there is great difference betwixt ye soul of beasts
and the soul of me^. But we have further to note touching the soul of man, yt
the spirit does not only not follow the nature of the body, but which is more,
governs, carries and recarieth it whither it pleases: yea, it withstandeth
the affections, which approach nearest to ye corporal and terrestrial nature.
The faculty of sense comes not from the body.
And as for ye faculty of sense and of the senses, it is a virtue that
surpasses all bodily power and virtue, and all things depending of the body,
so that there is no faculty of the body that is able to express the actions
thereof. What shall we say then of the virtue of understanding, which is the
highest and most sovereign faculty that is in man? Which we cannot say is a
body compounded of matter and form. For that thing is the fountain and
original of life, which first moves a living creature to the works belonging
unto life. So that when we inquire what this fountain and spring is, then do
we seek to know what the soul is. Now we may soon know by that which has
been spoken, what the soul is not: but as yet we cannot perceive what the
proper substance and nature thereof is. And in deed it is not that which we
have to speak of at this time, hereafter we may say somewhat of that matter.
Let it suffice for this present, The cause of the life of the body.
that we know that the true cause of the life of the body, in regard of second
causes, is in the soul next unto God, who is the first and principal cause of
all things. Therefore it is he that has ordained and limited to every living
creature his appointed time wherein to live and to grow, and next to decrease
and to dye: and as it pleases him either to prolong or to abridge their life,
so does he dispose of the second causes and means whereby he will have it
brought to pass. Wherefore although every one has his certain bounds and
term of life set him, yet none but God only can attain to the knowledge
thereof. For all come not to the last age, which he has appointed to be the
ordinary end of every ones life, following those degrees into which it is
divided, The degrees of man's age.
according to that division which we make of days and years. For the infancy
of man may be resembled to the morning, and to the spring time of the year:
man's age to midday and to the summer: olde-age to the Evening and to Autumn:
and death to night and to winter. Therefore Job says very well, Job 14. 5.
speaking of man, the number of his months are with thee: thou have appointed
his bounds, which he cannot pass. Now if it be demanded what is the
ordinary term of life appointed by God, we are to know, that nature by the
ordinance of God appropriateth the matter being in the form of members, unto
the soul, that is, to give life unto the whole body. Now when the soul is
entered into it and has taken possession thereof, The cause of the length and
shortness of life.
by little and little it prepares and makes fit the internal instruments,
until at length it has brought them to that perfection, which the quality,
constitution and composition of the matter is able to receive and to bear. And
after these instruments are come to their greatest perfection, by usage they
waste and consume away, returning by little and little unto their first nature,
and so in the end wholly corrupt and dye. Thus you see how the members are
appropriated in the belly of the mother, how the spirits and humors are fitted
in the time of infancy: after which the flower of age in youth is as it were
the vigor and use of the perfection of the instruments, and olde-age is the
decreasing age, wherein they decay continually and become worse and worse, even
until they come to their corruption, which is death. And this death we call
natural, What natural death is.
when following this course it attaineth without violence to these bounds. Now
although this be no long course, yet there are but very few that hold out to
the uttermost end thereof, in regard of them that stay by the way: of whom
some are cut off, even before they have begun their course, others presently
after they have begun it, and some in the midway: and that through so many
sorts of sicknesses with other inconveniences and accidents, that a man cannot
possibly comprehend or conceive them all. Therefore Moses said long since, Psalm
90. 10.
that the time of our life is threescore years and ten, and if they be of
strength, four score years: yet their strength is but labor and sorrow: for
it is cut off quickly, and we flee away. And after he has compared man to a
stream of water carried violently away, to a Morning dream, to the grass that
florisheth and grows in the Morning, and in the Evening is cut down and
withers, he gives the reason of all this, saying, Psalm. 7. 8, 9.
for we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled. Thou
have set our iniquities before thee, and our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance: for all our days are past in thine anger: we have spent our
years as a thought. Job also agrees well with Moses in this point when he
says, Job 14. 1, 2.
Man that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance, and full of trouble. He
shoots forth as a flower, and is cut down, he vanishes also as a shadow,
and continues not. Now it is certain, that if we look to the causes of the
life and death of men laid down by us, we shall think that all this is done
naturally, and that there is a certain order of nature, unto which we must all
be subject, and a natural necessity which none can eschew. But we see that
Moses mounteth aloft, and searches higher for the cause: for he seekth it in
God and in his determination, yea in his wrath conceived against our sins.
Therefore the children and servants of God, that have been instructed in his
word, do not only consider of that in death, which profane men behold
there: but they mount up even to this highest cause, and behold there the wrath
of God against sin, and against all mankind for the same. So that we may
know by that whith has been said, Of the true difference between natural
and divine Philosophy.
what difference there is between humane and natural Philosophy, and that
which is divine and supernatural: and wherein they deceive themselves, that
stay altogether in natural Philosphie. And hereby also we may learn the
cause why so many become Atheists and Epicures thereby, The cause of so many
Atheists.
whereas it should serve them in place of steps and degrees to cause them to
ascend up to that Philosophy that is supernatural and heavenly. For their
noses are altogether poring in this base kitchen, of which we have entreated in
our former discourses: as though God had not created men for another life and
end then he has done beasts. Whereupon we may imagine, what true joy and
consolation they can have, I say not only in death, but also throughout their
whole life, seeing their life, will they nill they, must pass through so many
dangers and miseries. For whether they will or no, they must be subject to this
sentence passed from God against all mankind, in the person of our first
parents, Genesis 3. 17, 18.
when he said to Adam, Cursed is the earth for thy sake: in sorrow shall thou
eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns also and thistles shall it bring
forth to thee, and thou shall eat the herb of the field. In the sweat of
thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return to the earth: for out of it
wast thou taken, because thou art dust and to dust shall thou return. Job 5. 6.
Therefore Eliphaz says in the book of Job, that misery proceeds not out
of the dust, and that affliction buddeth not out of the earth. Which is as much
to say, The cause of barrennes.
as that the cause of barrennes of ground proceeds not from the earth, but
from the sin of man. Wherefore men cannot lay the blame upon any other beside
themselves, as being the cause of all the evils which they suffer, because they
bear the matter of them in themselves. Now if any think, that this sentence
pronounced by God against all mankind is not so much executed upon the wicked
that are without God, as upon others, because we see commonly that they are
richest, and live in greatest ease, in pleasures and in delights, we must know
that they are not therefore exempted from those miseries, whereunto the life of
man is subject, and which are all comprehended under this sweat of the face
mentioned in the holy Scriptures. For there is not one of them to be found,
that can so save himself, but that he has always his part and portion in
these things. And if we could consider well the whole course of their life, who
seem to be the happiest amongst them, and had the patience to wait until the
end of their race, we should still find by experience the truth of that we
speak of. But let us go on with our speeches touching the causes of the
length and shortness of this bodily life, and of natural death, as also of that
which is violent, whereof we have not yet spoken. Also let us consider of the
things that are chiefly required for the upholding of this bodily life, and
without which it could not consist. This then shallbe the matter subject, of
which thou, ARAM, shall take upon thee to discourse.

Of the causes generally of the length and shortness of bodily life: of natural
and of violent death: in what manner the life of man consists in his breath:
of the principal things required to life, and without which it cannot be: of
the difference betwixt the life of men and the life of beasts: of the image of
the spiritual death in the corporal: of the true comfort which we ought to
have therein. Chap. 75.
ARAM. This law was laid upon nature by GOD the Creator thereof, that the
things which it should bring forth in this inferior world, should have small
beginnings at the first, and after grow by little and little, and when they were
come to their full greatness should stand a while at a stay, and then fall by
little and little, and return to their original and first beginning: as we see
a pattern hereof and an example twice a day in the Ocean sea. For after it is
mounted up to the highest, and has spread it self in length and breadth as
much as it may, it returns again unto the fountain and womb from whence it
came, and there closes up it self. For God has compassed it with certain
bounds beyond which it cannot pass. Nothing abides still in the same state.
So likewise every thing has his course and set time of continuance: neither
do we see any thing under the Moon, either of the works of God, or of the
inventions of men, which keeps not this course. And so is it with the body,
which being created by little and little, decays after the same manner, as it
were by the same degrees by which it mounted upward. And that which we see in
every particular body, the same we perceive to be in the whole frame and course
of the world, and in all the estates thereof. For the world has had his
infancy, next his youth, then his man's estate, and now he is in his olde-age.
For we see how all things decline daily, and continually wax worse and worse,
as it were approaching to their end. In like manner if we would consider the
course and estate of all Commonwealths, Principalities, Kingdoms, and
Empires, and of all the greatest and chiefest Monarchies, that ever were from
the creation of the world, we should find that all of them were very small and
weak in their beginnings, and that afterward they increased and mounted up
until they came to their highest degrees: and after they had attained thither,
they descended and fell by little and little continually, until in the end they
were wholly ruinated. Now the first causes of all these things proceeding from
God and from his eternal counsel, we know that the second causes are in the
nature of every thing that has beginning and must end, and chiefly in the
nature of men's bodies.

By our formmer speech we have learned already how this corporal life
consists in the preservation of those instruments which the soul uses in
the body: and that the chiefest of them is heat, the second moisture agreeable
to the heat, which must needs have something to feed it and keep it in a
moderate stay. Lastly we learned, that the nourishing and cherishing of the
heat is the preservation of the moisture: and therefore those living creatures
that are best able to maintain and keep these two qualities within
themselves, are of longest continuance in life. The cause of the length of life.
So that the chief natural cause of the long continuance of life, consists
in every man's composition, namely if it be hot and moist by due proportion,
both in the sinews and in the marrow, in the liquors and humors, and in the
spirits. The second cause consists in the long continuance of this
temperature, which being interrupted and marred by diseases, the instruments of
life are thereby also spoiled, and so they failing, life it self must needs
cease. Whereupon death ensues: even as when the instruments and tools of some
handicraftes man are worn and fail him, it cannot be but that his art and
occupation should also be at an end. So that death is a defect of those
instruments of the soul, What death is.
whereby life is prolonged. For the soul leaves the body by reason of the
defect of instruments, and not for any disagreement that is between the body
and it, as may appear by this, that it was not any proportion or agreement
that joined the soul and the body together. For albeit a workman uses his
instruments, yet there is no proportion and agreement between him and them, in
regard of the matter and form of him and of his tools: unless peradventure
this proportion may be imagined (...) be between the art of the workman, as
he is a workman, and between the aptness of the tool he uses, whereby it
is made fit for the doing of that which the workman has in hand. Seeing then
all life consists both in heat, as we have already said, and also in
moisture requisite for the heat, Natural death.
we call that natural death, when heat fails by reason that the moisture
is dried up through the heat that drinks it up, which heat also in the end
vanishes away, even as a lamp does when the oil of it is consumed. But that
is called a violent death, Violent death.
when through some accident, either the moisture is drawn out of the body, or
the heat is put out and extinguished either by some inward, or else some
outward oppression and violence. Internal violence is either by poison, or by
gluttony and drunkenness, or by such excess: as a when a lamp goes out
because there is too much oil powered into it. And if this oppression be done
outwardly, it is called external; as when the air and breath that refreshes
the heart, is shut up and retained, either in the sharp artery, or in the
mouth. For it is as if a fire were suddenly covered and choked by some great
heap of stones, or of earth, or of ashes laid upon it. We heard before, that
if the Lungs had no respiration by the mouth and nostrils, no man could breath,
but he should be choked by and by: as we see it by experience in them that are
strangled. The reason hereof is, because the pipe that reaches from the Lungs
to the throat, Of the windpipe.
is so closed up, that it is altogether stopr, or at least so narrow and
strait, that there is not space enough for the air and breath to pass in and
out by. We see also daily how this windpipe is troubled, if whiles we eat or
drink, there fall into it a little crumb of bread, or meat, or else a drop of
water or of wine, or of any other drink, yea although it were but a little
drop of our own spettle. For the breath that ascends up from the lungs by
this pipe, will not suffer any other thing to enter in thereat, except it be as
subtle and thin as the air is, but it drives it upward, insomuch as when
that happens to any man, he is in great pain and as it were stifeled for
the time. We see the like also in the cough. For from whence proceeds it but
only of those distillations that descend from the brain unto the lungs by
this pipe? From whence the cough comes.
And truly the consideration of all this, ought to be unto us in place of an
other special testimony of the infirmity of our nature, that we may always
learn the better by this to humble our selves. For what an excellent gift is
this life, which God has given to man? and yet a matter of nothing will
deprive him of it. For let his breath only be taken away, which is but a
little wind, and behold he is stifled and dead by and by. And for the taking
away of his breath, and so of his life withal, there needs nothing else but
the stopping of his mouth and nosethrilles, or of his windepipe only, which is
soon done, and he is dispatched presently without all help and remedy by man.
Therefore Esaias has a good speech: depart (says he) from the man whose breath
is in his nosethrilles: Esaias 2. 22.
for wherein is he to be esteemed? In a word, his meaning is, that man is but
as it were a little wind and blast, as if he had his life in his
nosethrilles, and as if it were as easy a matter to take away his life as his
breath. Moreover, the mixture and temperature of all the elementary qualities
and of all the humors is so necessary for life, as we have already heard,
that if any one be wanting, The blood necessary for life.
our life can not continue. But the chiefest and most necessary of all, are
heat and moisture placed in the blood, which is so necessary for the
maintenance of life, that after it is out of the body death follows presently.

Concerning the members of the body, it has been told us already, that there
are some of the^ without which the body can not keep life, nor be kept therein,
amongst which the heart is the chiefest of all, The difference between the
death of beasts and of man.
for the reasons, which we have already heard. Now these things standing
thus, we must consider what difference there is between the death of brute
beasts, and that of man: namely this, that the soul of beasts perishes
utterly in their death, as does the vigor of men's senses in the death of man.
But the soul of man suruiueth after the death of his body, and continues
always in being and in life. For, considering that beasts do in this life
all that can be done by them, according to those gifts, which they have
received of nature, therefore they live and die here altogether, having
nothing bestowed upon them for an other better life. But forasmuch as GOD has
given unto man a divine and immortal spirit, which has here great
impediments and can not well exercise all his offices, it is requisite that it
should have an other life wherein it may display all the virtues it has, and
enjoy whatsoever GOD has prepared for it, even that which is most agreeable
and proper to the nature thereof. Wherefore we may say, that the death of man
is a separation, or a departure of the soul from the body: wherein GOD
propounds unto us a perfect image of our separation and departure from him,
which comes by the means of sin. For we see what becomes of the body
when the soul is gone from it, and what it is during the time that it is
joined therewith. An image of our spiritual death in the bodily.
The difference is very great. Let us then propound our soul, as if it were in
the place of the body, and imagine that God were insteade of the soul in it,
as we fee the soul is in the body. Then let us consider what might be the
estate of the soul both when it is joined with GOD, and when it is separated
from him. For there is greater difference between the soul separated from
GOD, then between a body separated from his soul. Forasmuch as there is no
body so stinking nor so infected, when it is separated from the soul, as the
soul is when it is separated from GOD, if we will compare spiritual things
with corporal things. And contrariwise we may judge of the estate thereof
when it is joined with God, by the estate of a body joined with his soul, and
by that difference which is between a dead body and a quick.

Now if we would well consider these things, and compare the corporal death
of the body with the spiritual death of the soul, we would abhor sin
in greater measure then we do, and be more afraid of it then of any thing
that may come unto us. Only sin hurts the soul.
For there is nothing either in heaven or earth, that can hurt us but sin: as
in deed nothing can bring damage to us, but that which can hurt the soul.
But it is sin only that is able to hurt the soul, because by it those
means are taken away from the soul, whereby GOD bestows spiritual life
upon it. Therefore we ought not to think that bodily death can any way hurt
the soul, unless it be in regard of the evil life past. It is true, that
seeing GOD has created man to be of such a nature, as to be compounded of a
body and of a soul, and that his true and perfect estate consists herein
that they should live united and joined together, it is very like that there
is some evil in the seuering of the^ asunder, especially if any of them corrupt
and perish, and the evil may seem to be doubled, if both of them should
corrupt and perish, as many epicures and atheists would have it. For if it be
evil to have but half a being, the evil and imperfection is much more, not
to be at all, seeing there is nothing more goodly or more excellent then to
have a being. And if it be an excellent thing to be, What it is to be well.
then to be well, is a far more goodly and excellent thing. For therein
consists the perfection and absolute felicity of man. Now there is no sound
or perfect estate of any man, but only that in which, and for which GOD
created him. And although man be fallen from that estate, yet it has pleased
GOD not only to restore him again thereunto by his Son Jesus Christ, but
also to make it unto him more entire and more perfect, yea much more sure and
steadfast then it was in the beginning. For this cause, if besides the benefit
of creation we consider also that of regeneration, and of the restoration and
repairing of man, we shall find therein ample matter of true and sound
consolation against death. A comfort against death.
For we know that this tabernacle of our body, which is infirm, faulty,
corruptible, frail and tending to putrefaction, shall be destroyed and as it
were pulled down, to the end, that afterward it may be restored unto a
perfect, firm, incorruptible and celestial glory. We see that by death we
are called back again from a miserable exile, to the end that we may dwell
in our country, even in our heavenly country. In a word, we are assured by
death to enjoy such a blessed and permanent estate, as the like whereof
appears no where upon the earth. And if the brute beasts, even the
insensible creatures as Saint Paul teaches us, Romans 8. 22.
as wood and stone, having some sense of their vanity and corruption, do
wait for the day of judgment that they may be delivered from the same: shall
not we be very miserable, having both some light of nature, and also boasting
that we are inspired with the spirit of GOD, if we do not lift up our eyes
above this earthly corruption, when the question is concerning our being?
Shall we not contemn and disdain the vanity of the world, to aspire after
the good being of the immortality to come? Let us know then that we can not
find any true and sound consolation without this consideration and hope which
is most assured to them that believe in Christ Jesus. Therefore they that went
not beyond the bounds of natural Philosophy, Natural philosophy affoordeth
no found comfort against afflictions, or death.
could never enjoy any true consolation, either against the miseries of man's
life, or against corporal death. And although they believed, that together
with the body whatsoever is in man, was extinguished, or otherwise that after
the death of the body, the soul remained immortal, yet notwithstanding some
have done nothing else but mourn and complain in this life, insomuch as they
have laid violent hands, as it were, upon Nature, reuiling her and calling her
the stepmother rather then the mother of mankind: and others have doubted of
their future estate and condition, not being able to learn and know whether
their souls should live either in joy and rest, or else in pain and torment,
but only by opinion. Of which if we would discourse at large, and consider
particularly of their reasons, we should be confirmed more and more in that
true consolation, that ought to be in the heart of every Christian against the
honor of death. Therefore I greatly desire ACHITOB, to hear thee discoursing
upon this matter.

Of the chief consolations, which the wisest amongst the Pagans and Infidels
could draw from their humane reason and natural Philosophy against death:
of the blasphemies used by Atheists and Epicures against God and Nature: what
Nature is, and who they be that attribute unto it that which they ought to
attribute unto God. Chap. 76.
ACHITOB. Trees have their seasons, in which they begin to budde and
afterward do blossom: which blossom in convenient time takes the form and
fashion of the fruit, and after that it continues growing, until it
becomes ripe: and being come to the greatest maturitie and ripeness that it
can have, it falls down of it self, and still consumes more and more. The
same may be said of leaves. But this happens not to all, nor yet altogether
after the self same manner to all those unto who^ it does happen. For some
fruits perish even in the very bud, or else in the flower: and some after they
are come to the fashion of fruit. And of these latter sort, some fade away
sooner, some later, according to their sundry accidents. For some are eaten by
worms, other by noisome flies, and some through diverse kinds of creeping
things, which bred in the fruit it self. Again, some are shaken down
violently, either through great and mighty showers, huge storms, blustering
winds, or else by hail and tempest, being plucked forcibly from the trees
before they can come to any ripeness. A profitable contemplation in nature.
By all which things God propounds unto us, a goodly picture and
representation of the whole course of man's life, yea of all estates and
conditions of men in the world, both generally and particularly. For although
in our former speech we heard what order nature usually follows in natural
things, and namely, in that which respects the estate of Empires and
Monarchies, yet if we look well into it, we shall there find also this very
difference, which we have observed to be betwixt natural death, and that
which we call violent death. For as amongst men all come not to the uttermost
of old age, but many are stayed by the way, so is it with estates. We see
some men ascend up through all degrees, even until they attain to the
highest: and then by the same degrees descend again, until they come to the
end and period of all. But we see others that are stayed in ascending, or if
they come to the highest degree, are suddenly thrown down. Moreover, among
those fruits which attain to maturitie and ripenes, all have not one and the
self same time of rypening, but every one has his proper season: and those
that are most forward and soonest ripe, are of shortest continuance; and
quickly gone. This self same thing also we see to be observed in the life of
men, and in the course of this world. The miserable estate of Atheists that
have no hope of another life.
Wherefore if we had no hope of another life besides this, our estate would be
more miserable, not only then the estate of beasts, but also then that of
trees. For as trees decay yearly in regard of their flowers, fruits and
leaves, so they are yearly renewed, whereas many men perish after that manner,
that being once dead they shall never be raised up and renewed again to glory.
For although they have some opinion of another life, yet if by the certainty
of faith they do not apprehende the fruition of eternal happiness, which is
prepared for the blessed through the grace of Christ Jesus, they can neither
live nor die without some doubt of that which they desire most to be persuaded
of.

When the greatest and most skillful Philosophers, the wisest and most virtuous
personages that have been amongst the Heathen, went about to comfort either
themselves, or their friends in their great afflictions, and chiefly in death,
this was thought to be one of their strongest reasons, that the laws of nature
are unavoidable, and that it must be so. For they had no hope of the
resurrection of their bodies: as indeed it is a doctrine yt humane Philosophy
does not understand. And as for the immortality of the soul, albeit the best
Philosophers, and most learned men amongst them were of that opinion, which
also was for the most part generally received of the people, yet they were
never so assured thereof, but that still there remained some doubt in them,
because they had no certain knowledge of it, but only so much as they could
get by their natural light and humane Philosophy. Therefore when such as
excelled others amongst them labored to comfort and strengthen men against the
fear of death, and would persuade them that there was no evil in it, they
used for their principal reason this disjunctive speech, Philosophical reasons
against the fear of death.
saying: Either man is wholly extinguished by death, or else some part of him
remains afterward. If he perish altogether, so that nothing of him
continues still, then he feels no ill: and so death hurts him not, but
delivers him from all those evils whereunto he is necessarily subject in this
life. But if some part of him abides still, so that he die not altogether,
then is death no death unto him, or at leastwise it is not evil unto him,
seeing his principal part, which is his soul, and in regard of which he is
man, lives and abides whole and sound. Now these are very lean and slender
consolations. For seeing GOD has created man of that nature that he is
compounded of body and soul, no doubt but his true and perfect estate
consists herein, that these two natures be united and lincked together:
Sin the cause of death.
as in deed they should have done, had it not been for the sin of our first
parents, who thereby brought upon man both bodily and spiritual death. And it
is against reason to think, that a separation of these two natures so well
knit together could be made, and that one of them should corrupt and perish,
and all this without grief. Now if they perish both together, the evil that
follows thereupon is the greater. For nothing can be imagined to be more
goodly and excellent then to have a being. Now can any body call that thing
excellent which cease to be, or which having a being, fades incontinently?
But what a horror is it to a man only to think of death? And how much more
will his horror be increased, when he shall think that he must so vanish
away by death, that no part of him afterward shall have any more being, then
if he had never been at all? And what profit arises to him that was never
borne, Atheists more miserable then beasts.
more then to the brute beast? But yet the estate of this man is more
miserable. For to what end should the reasonable soul serve, which God has
given him, as also the understanding, reason and all the other virtues
wherewith God has endued it above the soul of beasts, but to make him more
miserable and wretched then if he had been created a beast? For seeing
beasts have no mind, understanding or reason, to conceive and know what a
benefit and gift of GOD it is to have a being and to live, they have no such
vehement apprehension either of death as men have, or of the loss of any good
thing, which they are in danger to loose. And by this reason it follows, that
the more blockish and brutish men are, the less miserable they should be: as
contrariwise, the greater spirits they have, and the more they acknowledge the
excellency of man's nature, and those gifts wherewith God has endued it, so
much the more miserable and wretched should they be, instead of receiving
greater joy and consolation. Whereupon it comes to pass, that they are more
ready to despite and blaspheme God, then to praise and glorify him for those
graces and benefits wherewith he has adourned mankind. We see how Epicures
and Atheists, and all they that consider in man this present life only, and
go no further, draw near to this point of which we speak. The common
sayings of Atheists.
Therefore some of them say, that it were best for a man not to be borne at
all, or else to die so soon as he is borne. Others set themselves against
nature and speak evil of her, saying that she is, rather a badde stepmother
then a good mother to mankind. And because they know not what GOD is, they
set upon Nature, through whose sides they wound him, speaking evil of him, and
blaspheming him under this name of Nature. Thus you see what comfort and
consolation they find, who look for no other life after this. And as for
those other that have but some bare motion and slender opinion of the
immortality of souls, what greater joy or contentation can they have? Nay
there are three things that do greatly diminish their comfort. The first is,
their doubting wherewith they are continually possessed, which hinders them
from having any assurance of the same. The second is the separation of the
soul from the body, whereby they conceive and imagine, that the body does so
turn into corruption, as that it wholly perishes without any hope of the
resurrection thereof, or of conioyning it again with the soul from which it
was disioyned. The third is the ignorance of the estate of souls after this
life. For albeit they were very certainly persuaded that our souls are
immortal, yet they have no assurance of their estate, neither know they
whether they live in joy and rest, or in pain and torment, but only by
opinion, as they esteem by every ones merits, which they measure according to
that knowledge they have, and that judgment which they are able to affoorde of
their virtues and vices. Natural reason not sufficient to stay the conscience.
Therefore, whatsoever they think or hope, seeing they are not very sure and
certain, neither indeed can be, if they have no better assurance then by
their natural light and reason, they must needs be subject continually to
sorrow and grief, which way soever they turn themselves. For if they are of
opinion, that there are punishments for such as have led an evil life in
this world, who can assure them that they shall be exempted and freed
thereof? For howsoever they labor to enforce (as it were) their conscience,
and strive never so much to rock it on sleep, and flatter themselves in their
sins, yet can it not affoorde them any such peace and quietness, as will
altogether satisfy and content them.

And as for persuading themselves that there is no punishment for the wicked,
they are never able to do it. For the same natural light and reason whereby
they judge souls to be immortal, does likewise constrain them to
acknowledge, that there is a God a just Judge, who suffers not evil
unpunished, as also he will not pass by that which is good without accepting
of it as it is. So that seeing they cannot assuredly know, that God will
approve and receive their works as good, or refuse them as evil, they must of
necessity be always in fear, Two sorts of Atheists.
whatsoever they believe. Therefore as the one sort endeavor with all their
power to be persuaded of this, that men's souls are mortal as well as their
bodies, and that after death there remains no more of the one then of the
other, thereby to deliver themselves of this fear, and of the torment that
accompanies fear: so the other sort that have a better opinion of the
immortality of souls, labor to persuade themselves that there is no Hell nor
punishment for souls after this life, but that they are only poetical
fictions and fables. But although Poets used fictions in that which they wrote
of Hell, and of those infernal furies and torments, yet they derived the
ground and foundation of them from that testimony, which God has planted in
the nature of us all. So that none ought to flatter and seduce themselves by
means of such opinions as ouerturne all nature: for that were to take away all
difference between good and evil, Why there must needs be a second life.
virtue and vice, things honest and dishonest. For if there be no reward
either for the one or the other, or if it be all one, it follows either that
there is no difference betwixt all these things, or that there is no justice in
God. But both these are impossible, whereupon it must needs be concluded, that
not only there is another life after this, but also that in the second life
there is joy, rest, and felicity for the one, and grief, pain, and dolor for
the other. Wherefore we must not think, that because the Kitchen and Nurserie
of this mortal body is by the appointment and providence of God, joined with
the soul that is immortal and divine, therefore there is no other life for
man besides this bodily life, or that the soul which gives life and
mainteineth it in the body, is no more immortal then the body that receives
the same from it, and that the body in like manner ought not to expect another
life after this. But I hope that these things shall hereafter be better
declared unto us in those discourses, which we are especially to make touching
the immortality of the soul. Now to end this speech, forasmuch as in this and
in our former discourses, we have oftentimes made mention of Nature, which for
the most part men join as companion with God, when they speak of the counsels
of his providence over all things created according to that common proverb,
that God and Nature have made nothing in vain, I say in this respect it shall
be good for us to know, What Nature is.
what Nature is, to speak properly, and into what detestable error they fall,
who attribute that to it, which appertains to God alone. And first they that
use this proverb might speak more directly and Christianly, if they
attributed the whole to God only, not joining unto him nature for a companion,
as though he had need of her help, and could not well finish all his works
alone, and as though he had not been able to have done all that he has
done, without her. It may be they will say, that they do give this honor
unto God, and that they speak not of Nature, as Galen and many other Heathen
Physicions and Philosophers, or rather Epicures and Atheists do, who place
Nature in God his stead: but that they speak of her as of a means created of
God, by which he performs all these things. But there is no such necessity
to join Nature with God as his fellow worker. For when he created the first
man, what Nature had he with him that did help him to make this work?
Besides, the very name of Nature does it not declare, Nature is a creature.
that it is a thing borne and created, and so consequently has her creation
and birth from God as all other creatures have? For if we take Nature for that
divine virtue and power, which appears in the works of the creation, and in
their preservation and order, we must of necessity take it, not for a thing
that is borne and bred of others, but that gives birth and being unto others.
And if we take it so, then God and Nature shall be taken to be all one. Wherefore
in this respect it were better to let the name of Nature alone: and to speak
of God only, to whom Nature is but a servant, and seeing that by him it was
created, and that all things were made before Nature had her being. Otherwise
we are like to fall into that error of Galen and others his like in these
days, The error of Galen, and such like Atheists now adays.
who albeit they be convicted and ravished with admiration, through the
contemplation of those wonderful works, which they behold in all the parts
and powers of man's body, are notwithstanding so ungrateful, that insteade of
yielding unto God that honor that belongs unto him, it seems they would
despite him to his face, and seek all possible means to put out their own
eyes, and wholly to blind their understandings, to the end they might not be
constrained to acknowledge that there is a God, the Creator and maker of this
so excellent a piece of work, and so to glorify him as becomes them. Now
rather then they would give him this honor, they will make an idol of Nature,
thereby to cast a veil before men's eyes, that they should not see and
acknowledge God in his works. They will rather put out their own eyes then
follow this Nature, which they forge unto themselves as a sovereign Mistress,
whereas she is but the means to lead them to God her and their Creator, of
whom she is but a servant, and a very small image.

Thus much I thought meet to be known concerning Nature, that we might
learn to speak better and more reverently both of God and of his works,
What we are to judge of Nature.
and that we might know that Nature is nothing else but the order and
continuance of the works of God. Now that we are instructed in the causes of
life and death, and what true comfort and consolation we may have against the
horror thereof; and so have finished our discourses concerning the frame of the
body, and of the powers and faculties of the soul therein, we must enter into
a particular contemplation of the nature of the soul, and learn what is the
creation and immortality thereof, so far forth as the mind of man is able
to comprehend, and as the word of truth shall afford us sure and certain
doctrine thereof. First then, it is necessary and very profitable for us to
consider, that there is but one soul in one body, which has all those powers
and virtues of which the effects are daily seen: also what place the soul
has in the body, and what union there is between them. Now ASER, this shall
be that matter Subject, which thou shall have to continue our speech withal.

That there is but one Soul in every several body: that one and the same
soul has in it all those virtues and powers, whose effects are daily seen:
of the seat of the Soul in the body, and of the principal instrument
thereof: of the union of the body and Soul: of the diverse degrees of nature,
and of the excellency that is in it; of the fountains and bounds of all the
powers and virtues of the Soul. Chap. 77.
A SER. Saint Paul makes a prayer in the end of his first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, which agrees very well both to that matter whereof we have
already entreated, touching the nature as well of the soul as of the body,
and to that also which we have yet to handle concerning the nature, creation,
and immortality of the soul. Now the very God of peace (says he) sanctify
you throughout: 1. These. 5. 23.
and I pray God that your whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be kept
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Where first he shows
us, that none but God, who only is holy, sanctifies us through Jesus Christ
his son the most Holy, Dan. 9. 24.
and that by the virtue of his holy spirit. Moreover he teaches us, that as
we are to acknowledge all sanctification already begun in us to proceed
from God alone, so we must expect from him the accomplishment of that work,
which he has begun in us. For as he is the beginning, so from him must
proceed the perfection, which comprehends all the parts of man. Therefore
the Apostle here makes a division of three members, placing the spirit
first, Man divided into three parts.
in the second place the soul, and in the third the body. Then he teaches
us, that the entire and absolute sanctification of all these parts of man
shall be in the coming of Jesus Christ, in which it shall obtain the last
perfection. Now we understand already sufficiently by our former discourses,
that man is compounded of two diverse natures, namely of a body and of a soul:
and yet here we see that Saint Paul sets down three parts, and joins
the spirit unto the soul, as if they were two diverse and different things,
as well as the soul and the body are. Therefore we must search out the
cause of this division of man after this manner. But before we enter into this
matter, it shall be very profitable for us to refresh our memory with those
things we have already entreated of, so far forth as they may serve for the
understanding of this, and that according to the matter subject propounded to
discourse upon.

We heard before how the body is the lodging and instrument of the soul,
and how the soul serves it self with all the members thereof, One soul in
one body.
and sets them on work. And as for the Soul, albeit there be but one in
each several body, nevertheless that one soul has diverse faculties, powers
and virtues, which we also call parts and offices thereof. Wherefore as we
say not, that there are so many bodies in one body of a man, as there is
diversity of parts, members and offices therein, but account them all jointly
together, as one and the same body: even so we mean not that there are so
many souls, as there are powers and offices in the Soul, or according to
that variety of effects that appears in every part and member thereof,
albeeit we know very well, that they are distinguished one from another both
in time and place. For we perceive by the effects thereof, that the sight is
in the eyes, hearing in the ears, understanding and cogitation in the brain,
and the like is to be said of all the other parts and members of the body,
according to the nature and office of every one, and according to the offices
of the Soul in them: as we have already showed when we handeled all the
powers thereof particularly. Moreover, we see how the child, so long as it
is in the Mothers womb, differs almost nothing at all from plants: and
after it is borne, how it differs but a little from brute beasts, as
elsewhere it has been already declared unto us. Nevertheless, as in every
body there is but one and the same kind, fashion and essential form of
nature, whereby it comes to be that which it is: so there is but one only
Soul in every living creatures body, by which it does live, but yet this
soul is distinguished according to the virtues and offices thereof. Wherein it
falls out with the soul as it does with a man that has many charges and
offices, The soul like to a man yt has many offices.
or that exercises many Arts and occupations, which he practices in several
places, at sundry times, and by diverse instruments and servants. Yea, the very
variety of those instruments which the soul uses, and the repugnance that is
between the actions thereof, do show manifestly that there is but one
workemaster from whom the whole proceeds, and which governs and moderateth
all, as a living creature ought to do. For there could not be so great
agreement in such diversity, if there were diverse workmen, and so many souls
as there are effects and actions in all the parts of man. Besides, if there
were such diversity of kinds of all things, as there is diversity of
effects, the number of them would be infinite: whereupon there would great
confusion follow in the searching out of nature, and of natural things.
Therefore seeing there is but one soul in every body, we must learn whether it
has any certain place and seat in the body, or whether the whole body be the
lodging for it. Of ye seat of the soul in the body.
Now as every form of each body is in the whole body, so the soul is wholly
in the whole body, in which the true form and principal essence of man
consists. For if there were any part thereof that had no soul within it,
that part should have no life: as we see it by experience in a member that is
dry, or putrified, or cut off from the body. So that as an Husbandman has his
sundry instruments for the trimming of the ground, The soul compared to an
Husbandman.
and by them effects diverse works, according to the use of each several
instrument: so fares it with the soul in the body. For the husbandman
works another work with his plough, then he does with his harrowes, and
otherwise with his spades and shouels then with the other above named
instruments: so that according to the diversity of his tools he works
diverse works. And yet all this while there are not so many husbandmen as there
are sundry instruments, but one alone uses all these to serve his turn. And
he that should demand in which of all his instruments the Husbandman were,
should he not (think you) move an impertinent question? For he may be both
without his instruments and also with them: and when he uses them, he applies
them to himself, and himself unto them. And to ask which of his instruments
is the chiefest, were not to speak very much to purpose. For every one of them
is principal in his use, and for that work whereunto it it is applied: and so
is it with the soul and with the instruments thereof. For it can be both with
them, and without them, in that manner that has been already declared. And as
the plough is the chief instrument which the Husbandman has to cut and
divide the ground into furrows, and the pickaxe to dig in hard places, The
chief instruments of the soul.
so the eye is the chief instrument, the soul has for seeing, the ear for
hearing, the brain with the thin, clear, and bright spirits therein, for
all kind of understanding and knowledge, and the heart for the fountain of
life. Now because the soul has so many sundry powers, offices and actions,
it is also taken in diverse senses and significations, but especially in the
holy scriptures, as (God willing) we shall learn hereafter. In the mean time
that union which it has with the body, is marvelous, and ought to be
diligently considered of us. We are to know then, that all things whatsoever
are joined together in nature, are always so knit and united by some means:
which mean consists either in this, Two kinds of uniting things together.
that the essence of two extremes do participate one of another, and join
together, or else in the agreement of action and of work. Now as the bond of
the first mean is between the elements themselves, and also between them and
that matter whereof bodies are compounded, because there is between them an
agreement and participation of nature, every one in his degree, according as
they are nearer or further removed off one from another: so we have the bond of
the second mean, between the body and the soul, Of the union between the
soul and the body.
namely the agreement of action and work. Let us then consider of the
conjunction and agreement that is between a workman and his work, together
with those instruments whereby he effects his work. For there is an
agreement and conjunction between the painter and his picture, by reason of
the pensill wherewith he woorketh. And the like may be said of all other
workmen. Even so the form and kind of all things is as it were the Workemaster
in regard of the matter: and the qualities and fashioning of the matter, are
the instruments whereby the Species or kind of any thing is united and knit
unto the matter. How the soul is joined to the body.
Now the soul is joined to the body as light is unto the air. For by reason
of the conjunction of the air and light together, the air is made clear and
lightsome: and yet the air and light remain whole and perfect, without any
mixture or confusion of the one with the other. For they are not mingled
together as the elements are in natural mixtures, or as herbs that are
beaten together into powder, or drugges of the Apothecary in a medicine, that
lie mingled and confused one within another. But the union and bond of two
substances joined together, is a great deal more near in other kinds and
creatures then in the soul, wherein it is removed farther of, by reason that
the nature of corporal things admits of a nearer conjunction and agreement
among themselves, then there can be naturally between corporal and spiritual
things. So that the greater agreement of natures there is, the straiter is the
bond and vnion-betweene them. Now we may know of what nature every kind
of thing is by the offices and actions thereof. As if the question were
touching the nature of that soul, Diverse degrees of nature in ye soul.
which heretofore we called the Nourishing and Vegetative Soul, it appears
by the office and actions thereof that it is hot, and that it takes part (as
also all the actions thereof) of the nature of fire, which is the highest and
purest element, and that which approaches nearest to the celestial natures.
But that kind of soul, which we called Sensitive and Cogitatiue, such as it
is in brute beasts, ascends yet higher and by agreement is linked nearer to
the heavens, and to the nature of heavenly bodies. And therefore beasts have
not only sense, but some kind of knowledge also, whereby they do in some
sort mark and perceive the course of the heavens, and heavenly bodies, and do
seem after a sort to understand them. For they have knowledge both of the day
and of the night, Beasts have some kind of knowledge.
of Winter and of Summer, yea, they have some sense and perseverance of the
alteration of seasons, according as they fall out by the course of the spheres:
but yet not by any such knowledge and understanding as is in man. Now sense
and knowledge cannot proceed of the power of the elements, but is derived from
some higher thing. For it is by means of a more celestial power that beasts
are distinguished from plants, holding more of the excellency of their
Creator, declaring it a great deal more. But man he mounteth up much higher.
For he ascends up above all the heavens, even unto God and to those
spiritual natures, by means of reason and understanding, which make his soul
capable of heavenly light and wisdom, and of divine inspirations.

Whereupon it follows that the original and birth of the Soul is
celestial. The original of the powers of the Soul.
And therefore in this diversity of the faculties and powers of the soul and
life of man, we must note this, that the lower kinds of the soul and life
are not the Well-springs and fountains of the highest, as if those powers and
faculties did first set these latter awoorking; or as if the highest did spring
of the basest, and received their virtues from them: but they are only
certain aids and degrees of help, whereby the highest and chiefest descend
and ascend. So that the Vegetative and nourishing life and virtue, is not the
original of the senses, and sensitive virtue: but only a degree by which the
faculty of sense is derived to the body, and by little and little ascends
up to her powers and offices. The like may be said of the understanding and
of reason in regard of the sensitive faculty. For every sort and kind of
life, and every power of the soul has beginning of it self, An admirable
work of God.
and certain bounds within which it is contained. Wherein we have to consider
a marvelous work and providence of GOD, in that he has joined and linked
togethet in man things that are so diverse. For we take this as granted, that
the soul of man is a spiritual nature and not corporal, that it is
immortal, and created for the contemplation of celestial and eternal things.
On the other side, we see, how this so excellent and divine a nature is
joined to that part and power that is called Vegetative and Nourishing, which
seems rather to be corporal then spiritual, to be more terrestrial then
celestial, and to be as it were the Kitchen of the bodies of living
creatures, and the Storehouse and Original of their generation. So that there
is no man of any sound mind, who knowing this marvelous conjunction of
nature in things so diverse, and considering that it cannot come to pass by
happe-hazard and at adventure, but he must needs be ravished with great
admiration, and acknowledge an admirable providence of God the Creator and Lord
of nature.

But they that are instructed in the holy word, Why God has joined the body
to the soul.
and in the doctrine of the Church, have yet a further consideration of these
things. For they know well, that albeeit this Kitchen of man's body shall
have no necessary use in the life to come, nevertheless God has established
this order, and would have it thus joined to the soul and spirit, to the
end that those beginnings of eternal life, and of that true and perpetual
wisdom, which he has put into us, should be kindled and inflamed in this
mortal life. For they shall not shine forth in any there, who have not here
had some beginnings, but have suffered those to be clean extinguished, which
they have received of GOD. For this cause does the voice of God and of his
heavenly doctrine sound in men's ears, and to these ends has he ordained
that government, which ought to be amongst them, and has bound and
fortified it with many bonds and rampires. Wherefore we stand in need of
doctrine of instruction and discipline, The natural knowledge of man's body
very profitable.
unto which things the consideration of man's nature may greatly help us. For
there is no science or humane wisdom, how great soever it be, that is able
to rehearse and comprehend the great profit, which this consideration can
affoorde to men, even so far forth as they may very well learn and know.
And of this we may the better be resolved, if we consider well of that which
has already been handled: yea we may the better judge hereof, if we
perfectly understand that division of man made by S. Paul, and mentioned by us
in this discourse. Therefore, AMANA, proceed you in the residue of this
matter, giving us first to understand what is the nature and offices of those
pure, animal, clear and bright spirits, which we said were serviceable to the
soul for all kind of understanding and knowledge. Afterward you may more
easily instruct us at large and teach us, what difference there is not only
betweenethe soul and the instruments thereof, whereby it works, but also
between the instruments themselves, and their nature and offices, and which of
them are nearest, or removed farthest from the soul.

Of the nature and variety of the animal spirits, and how they are only
instruments of the soul, and not the soul it self: of the nature of those
bodies wherein the soul may dwell and work: of the difference that is, not
only between the soul and the instrumenes by which it woorketh, but also
between the instruments themselves, and their natures and offices, and which
of them are nearest or farthest of: of the degrees that are in the union and
conjunction of the soul with the body. Chap. 78.
AMANA. It is requisite that workmen should have instruments answerable to
those works which they are to make: and if they have taken in hand but one
single and simple work, they need but one tool fit for that purpose: as to
saw timber, there needs but a saw. But they that are to make many works,
or one work that is full of variety, stand in need of many instruments: as
painters, ioyners, Why the soul works with sundry instruments.
carpenters, masons and such like. The same may be said of the soul: and
therefore it has many members in the body, that are given unto it as
instruments to serve for those works, which it has outwardly to perform.
Moreover, the soul has humors to preserve and uphold the members, and to
keep them always ready for their work, by those means which we have heard
already: besides, it has vital spirits of which the animal spirits are bred,
which serve in stead of a light to guard and conduct it in the actions both of
the external and the internal senses. And as there is great force in a tool
or instrument to cause a good or evil work, so is there in the humors,
spirits, and members of the body, whereby we are made fit to exercise and
to execute all actions whether they concern life and sense, knowledge and
understanding, or will and affections. For it fares in this matter as it does
in the disposition of the air, which the thicker and more obscure it is, the
less clear will the light appear unto us: and contrariwise the more pure and
thin it is, the brighter and more shining it will show it self unto us.

Now for this matter, we must call to mind what we heard concerning the
generation of spirits both Vital and Animal, in those discourses of the
nature and office of the heart. And as they are thin vapors, engendered of
blood, concocted, and set on fire through the virtue of the heart, that they
might be as it were little flames, having diverse actions in diverse members: so
according to the purity and impuritie of the blood in the composition of the
body, we are to judge of the spirits that proceed from them. And albeeit
they have all one and the same fountain, namely the heart in which they are
bredde, nevertheless they change according to those places and members wherein
they work, and being so changed, they have diverse and several actions. We
understand then by the Vital spirit, Of the Vital and Animal spirits and of
their operations.
a little flame bredde and borne in the heart of the purest blood, whose office
is to carry natural heat to the other members, and to give them virtue and
strength to put in practice those actions and offices, which they exercise by
the same heat. It has been told us also before, that the arteries serve to
carry this vital spirit to all the members. But we are farther to learn,
that when the vital spirits bredde in the heart, are in part transported to
the brain, others are engendered of them, which are called Animal spirits,
in that sense in which we called those Animal faculties and powers, from
whence the Soul deriueth her vessels and instruments in the brain. For after
the spirits sent by the heart, are come thither, they are made more clean and
bright through the virtue of the brain, and agreeable to the temperament
thereof: and then being infused into the brain by means of the sinews, they
are insteade of a light whereby the actions of the senses are incited and
stirred up, as also those motions which are from place to place. And as we
have heard, that a good temperature of the blood and of other humors does
much help forward and profit the manners and conditions of men, the same may
be said of the heart and of the spirits proceeding from the same. For when
the heart is in good temper, so that it is not troubled either with anger, or
sadness, or any other evil affection, it is manifest that the spirits are a
great deal the better in the brain.

Now let us consider the wonderful work of God wrought in man by means of
the Vital and Animal spirits. The effects of the Vital and Animal spirits in
man.
For what are the chief actions effected in him? Are they not the preservation
of life, nourishment, and generation: and then sense and motion, with
cogitation and the affections of the heart? And what were all these things
without spirits? Hence it comes that in the holy Scriptures the heart is
taken for the fountain not only of life, but also of all the actions of men,
as it has been already declared unto us. And for this cause also some have
said, that these spirits and little Vital and Animal flames were the soul
it self, or the immediate instrument thereof, that is to say, the very next
whereby it woorketh immediately, so that there is none betwixt them twain. The
Vital and Animal spirits are not the soul.
But the latter is more certain and more agreeable to truth then the former.
For if the soul were nothing else but the Vital and Animal spirits, it
should fail and perish with them as the bodily life does: and so it should
not be immortal. But seeing they are but the instruments thereof, as the
humors of the body are, and namely the blood from which they proceed, the
soul can well be without them: albeeit they cannot be without it, and
although it cannot without them perform the works it does with and by
them. And forasmuch as God has given them to be as it were a light, it is
certain that the light of these surmounteth the light of the Sun, Moon or
stars: and that all these lights have great agreement one with another.

But it is yet a far more wonderful work of GOD, A wonderful work of
God.
when not only the soul uses these instruments for the life of man, but
also when the celestial spirit joins it self unto them, using them in the
elect, and making them more clear by his heavenly light, that the knowledge of
God might be more evident, that their assurance and trust in him might be
more firm, and that all the motions of his children might be kindeled the
more toward him. So likewise the evil spirit knows well how to take
occasion by the badde temperature of the humors to abuse men, as we have
already declared, thereby to set forward their ruin, when he possesses the
heart, troubles and poysoneth the spirits in that and in the brain.
Whereupon he attempteth to hinder reason and judgment, to bring men to fury
and madness, 1. Sam. 18. 10. and 31. 4.
and to thrust forward their heart and their other members to commit foul
and execrable factes. Whereof we have examples in the fury of Saul, 2. Sam.
17* 23.
and in his death: in the death of Achitophel, Matthew. 27. 5.
of Judas, and of many others whom he has brought to slaye themselves: as
likewise in many other horrible factes daily committed by men. Therefore it is
very requisite, that we should diligently consider our nature, and be
careful to govern and guide it well. We are to know that our spirits are
the habitations of the holy spirit, and therefore we are to pray to God
through his son Christ Jesus, to repel and keep back evil spirits far
from us, and to inspire his divine and celestial spirit into our spirits,
hearts, and minds, that it may guide and govern them. And this agrees very
fitly with that prayer, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
which we heard already uttered by Saint Paul, touching the entire
sanctification of the whole man, whom he divided into spirit, soul and
body. So that, if we have thoroughly tasted of the former discourses, as well
concerning the nature of the body as of the soul, we may perceive wherefore
the Apostle has thus divided the whole man. For first we cannot doubt but
that the soul being the principal Woorker, is such a substance and nature
as dwells in a body apt and meet to receive life in. I speak this
purposely, because all sorts of bodies are not capable of soul and life: and
they that are capable, are not yet capable of every kind of soul and life,
but only of such as are agreeable to their nature, having those instruments
in themselves which may be used by them according to their nature. Wherefore
the soul of man must of necessity have another body, with other instruments
and of another nature, then the soul of beastesmay have: and the soul of
beasts another then the soul of plants, according as every one of them
differs from other both in nature and offices. But of what nature soever
either the soul or the body is, the soul has this property* like a busy
woorkeman to be in the body, having all her instruments therein. A
comparison of the soul and a workman.
Now when a woorkeman woorketh with his tools, he must have within himself
the virtue and skill to do that which he does, because it is not in the
instruments whereby he works. For albeit they be appropriated and fitted to
the work that is wrought, yet of themselves they can do nothing at all,
except they be set on work by the woorkeman, because they have not in them
any virtue to work. But this power and faculty is only in the woorkeman,
to whom it belongs to perfect his work. So if the virtue of woorking were
not in the soul, it could work no more with instruments then without.
Therefore albeit it seems that the natural heat, the humors and the spirits
work in the body, and effect something therein, yet we must know, that they
do nothing there of themselves, but that they receive of the soul whatsoever
they have. A similitude.
As when a Paynter draws a picture, his pensill and colors have it not of
themselves to do that which is done by them, but of the Painter. The soul
then is the Woorkeman that works, receiving her virtue and faculty of
working not from without, but even in the selfsame body in which it is.
Therefore, to speak properly, we may say that she dwells in the body,
because she abides therein, as in her house with all her implements and
household instruments: so that she must needs have the body appropriated and
made fit unto her nature. For every soul cannot be indifferently joined to
every form and figure of a body, to exercise and execute therein the works
of life: but it must work by that order of nature, and according to those
laws which the Creator of all things has ordained from the beginning of the
world. Against the transmigration of souls.
Whereupon we may note, that if we had no other reason but the consideration
hereof, against the Pythagoricall transmigration of souls from one body to
another, it were sufficient to make known the greatness of this foppery, and
what error there is in that opinion. For if it were so, there would be no
difference betwixt the souls of men, of beasts and of plants, neither should
there be any propriety and aptness of body, and instruments more to one
soul then to another. Whereupon all nature touching this point and order
appointed by God herein, should be confounded and overthrown.

But to return to our matter, The aptest instrument for the soul.
forasmuch as the temperature of liquors, humors and qualities, (under which I
also comprehend the spirits) is most inward and profound, as well in the body
as in the workmanshippe of nature, it is undoubtedly the fittest instrument the
soul has, and such a one as is nearest linked by agreement and conjunction,
with the workman that uses the same. Insomuch that if the soul want this
instrument, it departs away: and if the soul be gone and so be wanting to
it, then must it also necessarily fail presently, although the members abide
yet after the departure of the soul. For the confirmation and strengthening of
the members both internal and external, is separated farther from the Soul:
but the mixture of the humors and spirit that is in the members, is more
near and more inward. True it is, that the humors and qualities are
instruments of the soul, as well as the members: but the humors are such
instruments as set the rest on woorking, The necessary use of the humors.
I mean the members, yea, by means of them the soul uses the members.
Wherefore if the humors fail; the members are very unprofitable, as it
appears in them that are dry or puffed up, or taken with the palsy, or
oppressed with any other malady. For the members are fit instruments for
outward uses and exercise, but the temperature and mixture of the humors and
spirits, is ordained to preserve such instruments, to the end they might
always be apt and ready to do their duties. The humors are in continual
motion.
Therefore the humors and qualities are in perpetual motion, but the members
are not. For the humors must always keep the members in a readiness to
work, if need require. Now in the consideration of all these things, we
see wonderful degrees in the union and conjunction that is between the body
and the soul, and the instruments which it uses in the body. For as all the
elements have their combinations, and are linked together, according to that
agreement of nature which they have one with another, every one in his degree
from heaven down to the earth, and so likewise all the humors and qualities of
all things: even so is it with the soul and body, and with those instruments
and means whereby they are joined and knitte together, every one in his
degree, according as their natures are more or less corporal or spiritual,
What parts of the body come nerest to the soul.
terrestrial or celestial. For as the vital and animal spirits approach
nearest to the nature of the soul, secondly, the humors come nearest to the
nature of the spirits, thirdly, the members next to the humors: so all of
them keep their rank and order in their degrees, and in that conjunction
which the body and soul have together, as also the instruments whereby the
soul woorketh in the body: whether we consider them either in ascending
upward from the lowest to the highest, or else in descending from the highest
to the lowest, as we consider the union and conjunction that is betwixt all
the elements from the earth to the heavens, and from the heavens to the earth.
Whereby we daily see more and more the great marueiles of God, and by what
means and art he joins the heavens with the earth, and bodily natures with
spiritual. This being thus, we are to learn, that all the instruments of
the soul are prepared for it in the body, as it were for a Woorkeman that is
to do some work, and that there is none but the soul that does use them.
So that it is very evident, that the soul is the perfection of this aptness
of the body, and that there is great agreement between the soul and the
body, and between all the parts and faculties of both. Forasmuch then as
there is such a conjunction, and that GOD has created them both to be
glorified in them, Saint Paul has good cause to pray for sanctification in
them both, to the end that God might be served and honored, and that both of
them might be glorified in the day of the Lord. But that our speech may yet
be better understood, we must consider in what signification the names of
soul, spirit and heart are commonly taken, namely in the holy Scriptures, and
how we may and ought to use them. This will help us greatly to attain to
the knowledge of the nature and immortality of the soul, wherein we are to
be instructed before we dissolve our present assembly. Teach us therefore,
ARAM, what divisions the scripture makes of the whole man, as well in regard
of the soul as of the body, and in what significations the names of soul,
spirit and heart are taken, with the causes wherefore.

Of the divisions of man made in the holy Scriptures, as well in respect of the
soul as of the body: in what significations the names of soul, spirit and
heart are used therein, and the causes why: of the entire sanctification of
man: how the soul is taken for the life, and for the members and instruments
of nourishment, and for nourishment it self Chap. 79.
ARAM. Forasmuch as God so honors our bodies, as to call them Temples of his
holy spirit, 1. Cor. 6. 19.
I think they cannot be such in deed, except they be wholly dedicated and
consecrated unto him, so that we separate them from all filthiness and
pollution, by giving our selves to all kind of sanctimonie and honesty of
life. For then is the body wholly sanctified, when all the senses and members
apply themselves only to good and holy works commanded by God, and when
they abstain from the contrary. Whereupon it comes to pass, Of the entire
sanctification of man's body.
that the eyes turn aside from beholding all vain things, and take pleasure
only in seeing that, which may ravish man with admiration at the excellency
of the works of God, and induce him to well-doing. The like may be said of
soundes, of voices, of words, in regard of the ears. And as for the tongue,
it is not polluted with vile speeches, with lying, slandering and blasphemy:
but prayseth God, and rehearses his works and woonders, speaking always with
a grace to the edifying of all. In like manner, the mouth serves man for the
selfsame use, as the stomach also and the belly, with all the rest of the
members that serve for the nourishing of the body, are not defiled through
gluttony and drunkenness. The body lives not to eat, but eats to live.
So that the body lives not to eat, but eats to live, and to make supply
to those necessities unto which GOD has made it subject. Therefore it
observes sobriety, and is contented to minister to the natural affections,
that God may be served in this life. Neither does it abuse the members of
generation to whoredom and villainy, but contains them within their office
and lawful use. And as for the feet and hands, with all the rest of the
external members, it keeps them also within the compass of their duty. But
seeing the whole body and all the members thereof, take from the soul all their
actions and uses, they cannot be sanctified for the service of God and of holy
things, unless the soul be first sanctified, which gives unto them life,
motion, and sense.

For this cause Saint Paul speaking of the sanctification which he wishes to
the Thessalonians, 1. These. 5. 23.
before he makes any mention of that of the body, he begins with the
Spirit and Soul, as we have already heard. Now because the soul has
diverse powers, he uses two words the better to note them out, especially the
chiefest of them. For as it has been already declared unto us, albeit the
soul has many powers and offices in the body of man, yet there are not so
many souls in the body, as there are faculties and effects thereof, but one
only soul which does all that. For this cause the name of soul is diversely
taken in the holy scriptures. The name of Soul taken diversely.
Sometime it is taken for that spiritual substance that is joined with the
body to give life unto it, and for all the powers thereof: and sometime again
for one part of those faculties and powers. The like may be said of the name of
spirit, and of heart, and that for the same reason. Thus does the Scripture
sometimes divide the whole man into two parts only, namely into body and
soul: Math. 10. 28.
as when Jesus Christ says: Fear ye not them which kill the body, but are
not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him, which is able to destroy both
soul and body in Hell. Genesis 6. 17.
And often also the same holy word takes the one of these two parts for the
whole, esai. 40. 6. luc. 3. 6. leuit 4. 2.
even in that signification wherein we take the name Person in our tongue.
ezech. 18. 4.
For this cause we read so often in the word, All flesh and every soul,
romans 13. 1.
for every person. Genesis 14. 21. and 46. 27.
Also, Give me the Souls, for give me the persons: And all the Souls of the
house, for all the persons thereof. Now because the understanding and the will
are the principal faculties and powers of the soul, when the Scripture
means to set them down distinctly, and to express them together with the
nature and virtue of the soul, it takes the spirit for the one, and the
soul for the other: namely the spirit for the reason and understanding, and
the soul for the will and affections. For otherwise how should every man be
entire and sound, unless his thoughts were pure and holy, all his affections
rightly ruled, and finally his whole body made obedient, and serviceable to
every good work? For we have heard already what Lordship is attributed to
the reason and to the understanding: then how the will and affections are in
the midst to command, and lastly the body to serve and obey. So that a man
is then altogether pure and sound, When a man is perfectly sanctified.
when he thinks nothing in his mind, desires nothing in his heart, neither
executes any thing with his members, but that which pleases God. We have a
place in Esaias which teaches us very clearly, that the spirit and soul are
so taken and distinguished as we say: Esaias. 26. 8, 9.
The desire of our soul (says he) is to thy name, and to the remembrance of
thee. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, and with my spirit
within me will I seek thee in the morning. We see how first he attributes
desire to the soul, thereby to declare the affection of the people toward
the Lord. Then he makes mention of the remembrance and memory that he has
of God, which is in the mind. So that it seems he comprehends the
understanding, and will in the first verse under the name of Soul. Afteward in
the verse following, he distinguishes them more specialy, attributing desire
to the soul, then watchfulness and diligent inquisition to the spirit, which
is not without thinking and discoursing that appertain to the mind. Wherefore
the Prophet minding to signify how he was wholly addicted to the Lord, with
all his senses and understanding, and with all his heart and will, and that all
his affection was toward him, he uses this distinction between the soul
and the spirit. Likewise we find these two names Soul and Spirit, joined
together in this signification in the Psalms: and I am persuaded, that for the
same reason the blessed Virgin joined them together in her song, when she
said, Luke 1. 46, 47.
My soul magnifieth the Lord, and my spirit reioy^eth in God my Savior. Now
as the Scripture uses this distinction the better to express the faculties
and powers of the soul, so Saint Paul* sometimes distinguishes them into
three, The soul divided into three parts.
that they may the better be known: as when he writes to the Ephesians in
these words, Ephe 4. 17, 18.
This I say therefore and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not
as other Gentiles walk, in vanity of their mind, having their cogitation
darkened, and being strangers from the life of God through the ignorance that
is in them, because of the hardness of their heart. We see here that in the
first place he puts the mind, by which he means understanding and reason,
which is the principal faculty and power of the soul, and that which is so
much magnified by the Philosophers, that it is called of the^ the Queen, Dame
and Mistres. Nevertheless S. Paul testifies clearly, that all of it is vanity
without Christ: so that a man may well judge, what we are to esteem of the
rest that is in man. Therefore also we see, how from the mind he comes to
the thought, whereby he comprehends both imagination and memory, and all the
faculties and powers of the internal senses, which he testifies to be
shadowed with darkness, John 1. 9. and 8. 12. and 9. 5. and 12. 46.
so that there is no heavenly light at all therein without Jesus Christ, who is
the light of the world. For which cause also he affirms that they are
estranged from the life of God: that is to say, from that life by which he
lives in his, and which he commands and approoueth. Afterward he refers
the cause thereof to their ignorance, which he joins with darkness and with
the thought obscured thereby. Finally he comes to the will and affections,
which he comprehends under the name of heart, to whose hardness he
refers their ignorance as to the fountain thereof. For by reason that
through their malice and contumacie they reject the light of God that is
offered to their hearts and minds, they blind themselves by the just
judgment of God, by which also they are made blind, as they justly deserve,
seeing they love darkness more then light, and lying more then the truth.

Now when al these faculties of the soul are reformed with the body, according
as we have already declared, then is man come to that entire sanctification of
which Saint Paul speaks in the place before alleged, which is requisite for
the true children and servants of God. But it seems that in all these
divisions and distinctions of the faculties and powers of the soul rehearsed
out of the Scriptures, there is not one of them wherein any mention is made of
the natural powers, by which the soul gives life and nourishment to the
body, notwithstanding that this office also is assigned unto it as well as the
rest. Hereof three reasons may be rendered. Why the natural powers are not
mentioned in these divisions.
The first is, that the word of GOD makes express mention of the chief
faculties and powers, which most properly belong to the nature of the soul,
and are given unto it more specially to know and honor God by, and which
appertain not only to this life, but also to the other. The second is,
because these natural powers may be comprehended under the vital, and under
the seat of the affections, by reason of that communication which they have
both with the spirits, and with the humors used by the soul in the body, not
only to nourish it and preserve life in it, but also to serve for all other
things spoken of before. The third reason is, that forasmuch as these natural
powers are more terrestrial then celestial, and more corporal then
spiritual, and the use and profit of them ends with this humane life, we
may comprehend them under the name of body, as things more nearly joined to it
for the use of this life, and of which it shall have no need after this life,
when it shall be made incorruptible and immortal. And because this power of
the soul appears more in this life, then any of the rest, therefore it is
better known. For this cause the name of soul is oftentimes taken not only
for this natural power which we call Vegetative and Nutritive, but also for
the life it self, and for all the commodities and desires thereof, yea, for
the whole estate of life.

We may call to mind what we heard before of the soul which is in the blood.
And when Reuben said to his brethren that would have slain Joseph, Genes.
37. 21.
Let us not strike his soul, it is as much as if he had said, Let us not
kill the soul. Now it is certain, that the soul can neither be slain nor
stricken: therefore by the soul he means the life. And so his speech was all
one as if he had said, Let us not take his life from him: as himself
declares it by and by after in the verse following where he says, Shead not
blood. Also when Moses speaks of the Law that requires punishment like to
the evil committed, as he says, Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for
hand, and foot for foot, so he says, Soul for soul, Deuteronomy. 19. 21.
that is, life for life. And to seek the soul of one, in many places of
Scripture signifies to lie in wait for the life, and to pursue it unto death:
Ierem. 11. 21.
as it is written of the enemies of Jeremy, and of Herod against Christ Jesus.
Matthew. 2. 20.
There are infinite such like places, both in the old and new Testament, in
which the soul is taken for this corporal and natural life. Now because the
soul gives life by means of the stomach, belly, and other members and
instruments of nourishment, of which we have spoken before, therefore it is
often taken for them also: Esaias 5. 14.
as when Esaias says, Therefore Hell, (that is to say the grave) has enlarged
his soul, and has opened his mouth without measure, and their glory, and
their multitude and their pomp, and he that rejoices among them, shall
descend into it. The Prophet propounds here the grave as a great and
horrible monster, that has a throat, with a stomach and belly, as it were a
deep gulf and bottomless pit to swallowe up and to consume all. And
therefore as he says, that he has opened his throat or mouth, so he
says, that he has enlarged his soul, that is to say, his stomach and
belly, that it may be more capable to receive greater store of meat. The same
Prophet in an other place, meaning to set down the vain hope, that shall
deceive them that band themselves, and enterprise any thing against the people
of GOD, and that look for aid and deliverance from any other besides him,
Esaias 29. 8.
says, that They are like to an hungry man, who dreameth that he eats, but
when he awaketh, his soul is empty: or to a thirsty man, who dreameth that
he is drinking, but when he awaketh, behold he is faint, and his soul
longs. Which is as much as if he had said, that such a one supposing he
has well eaten and well drunk, finds his stomach and his belly empty, and
is still as hungry and thirsty as he was before. Also when Jeremy says,
Ierem. 31. 25.
I have satiate the weary soul, and have replenished every languishing soul,
it is certain that by the soul he means the members and instruments of
nourishment, with the body that receives it and the life that is preserved:
for the soul neither eats nor drinks. Ezech. 7. 19.
But Ezechiel shows us this yet more clearly, saying, They shall not
satisfy their souls, nor fill their bowelles. For himself expounds that by
the word Bowelles, which before he called souls.

Moreover, we have further to note, that forasmuch as the soul can no more
give life to the body without food, then without these members and instruments
by which it distributeth and delivers the same, it is likewise taken not
only for the food of the body, but also for those instruments and means
whereby men get and obtain food. Therefore it is written in the Law of the
hired servant that is poor and needy, Deuteronomy. 24. 15. leuit. 19. 13.
Thou shall give him his hire for his day (that is, the same day he labors)
neither shall the sun go down upon it: for he is poor, and therewith
sustaineth his soul: as if he should say, it is his life and food whereby
he must be sustained. So that he which beguileth him of his hire, takes
away his soul and life from him, as much as in him lies. It is written also,
That no man shall take the nether nor the upper millstone to pledge: Deute. 24.
6.
for this gage is his soul. By which phrase of two milstones that serve to
grind the corn, the Lord comprehends all those instruments wherewith men
get their living by their labor, of what occupation and trade soever they be.
For as a man can not grind without a millstone or without corn, to have meal
for bread to maintain life withal: so poor Artificers and Handicraftsmen
can not grind, nor consequently live, if those tools and instruments be
taken from them, whereby they must get both their own living, and the living
of their wives and children. Therefore God says that such a gage is the
soul, by which he understands the life, and by life the food and
nourishment that preserves it, and consequently the instruments by which
poor men and Artificers get their living. To conclude, it seems that this
kind of phrase used by the Hebrews, agrees well enough with our common
speech, in which we often take the life for food and charges to maintain
life. As when we say, that a man gets and purchases his life or living
with the sweat of his face. We say likewise, that we give life to those whom
we feed, and take life from them whom we deprive of food and nourishment,
and of the means to get it. But we must learn some other significations of
this word soul, taught us in the holy Scriptures. And first, what is meant by
a living soul, and what by a natural, or sensual body: and what is a
spiritual body: and how the name of soul is taken for the desires of the
flesh, and for all things belonging to this life. Therefore it belongs to
thee, ACHITOB, to discourse upon this matter.

What is meant by a living soul, what by a sensual and natural body, and
what by a spiritual body: how the name of soul is taken for all the desires
of the flesh, and for all things belonging to this life: and not only for the
whole person alive, but also for the person being dead, and for a dead corpse:
and lastly for the spirit separate from the body. Chap. 80.
ACHITOB. Men may well study in the schools of the most skillful and excellent
Lawmakers, Philosophers, Orators, and Doctors that are in the world, yet
they shall reap small profit thereby, except they come to that school where
the spirit of God is our master and teacher. For this cause Jesus Christ,
after he heard the confession that Peter made of him, Matthew. 16. 17.
said thus unto him, Blessed art thou Simon, the son of Jonas: for flesh and
blood has not reueiled it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. Now in
that he opposes flesh and blood to the Father in heaven, he declares
sufficiently, that according to the manner of the Hebrew speech, he
understands by these two words, whatsoever is in man, that is of man. As when
Saint John says, John 1. 12, 13.
that as many as received Christ, to them he gave power to be the sons of
God, even to them that believe in his name, which are borne not of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. 1. Cor. 2. 11, 12*
And to confirm this it is said elsewhere, What man knows the things of a
man, save the spirit of a man which is in him? even so the things of God
knows no man, but the spirit of God. Now we have received, not the spirit
of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know the things
that are given to us of God. To this purpose when Saint Paul opposes a
spiritual man, to him whom he called before a natural man, and altogether
incapable of the spirit of God, he says that the spiritual man discerns
all things, and is judged of no man. For being such a one, he has certain
knowledge of heavenly things, to be able to discern light from darkness, and
truth from lies, that he be not deceived by a false show of truth. Neither
is he judged of any body, because the truth of God is not subject to the
judgment of men, how skillful and conceited soever they be, without the spirit
of regeneration.

Now then as we have heard, that the soul is taken in sundry significations
declared by us, we may now know, that it is taken oftentimes in the holy
Scriptures for all the virtues, for all natural gifts and graces, for all
affections and desires, for all pleasures and commodities, What is meant by
living soul.
and for other things appertaining to this life. For this cause living soul
signifies in the Scriptures as much as creature, Genes. 1.
having soul and natural life, and it is so taken for all living creatures of
what nature and kind soever they be. And Saint Paul in the place alleged and
in the fifteenth of the same Epistle, 1. Cor. 15. 44.
calls a natural man and a natural body, that man and that body, which
lives with such a soul and such a life: unto whom he opposes diversely, a
spiritual man and a spiritual body. What is meant by a natural and by a
spiritual man.
For by a natural man he understands a man not regenerated by the Spirit
of GOD, and by a spiritual, a man regenerated: and by a natural body he
means a body that lives by this corporal life, such as it is in this world
before the death and resurrection thereof. By a spiritual body, he
understands not only such a body as men have that are already regenerated in
this life, but also such a one as it shall be after the resurrection, when it
shall be fully regenerated and made immortal, and like to the glorious body
of Jesus Christ. For besides the humane soul wherewith it lives here, and in
regard of which Saint Paul called it natural, it shall have also a divine
virtue, that shall wholly change in it all corruptible and mortal qualities,
and all humane infirmities, unto which it is subject in this life, into
incorruptible and immortal qualities. And so does the Apostle expound it
saying in the same place, The body is sown in corruption, and rises in
incorruption: it is sown in dishonor, it rises in glory: it is sown in
weakness, and is raised in power. It is sown a natural body, and is raised
a spiritual body: there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.
As it is also written, Genes. 2. 7.
The first man Adam was made a living soul: and the last Adam was made a
quickening spirit. Whereupon we have to note, that Saint Paul speaks still
of the self same body, which remains always one in substance. But
forasmuch as it alters in qualities and kind of life, therefore as he
calls it spiritual, in regard of the Spirit of Christ, and of his
spiritual and heavenly virtues, by which he changes the first qualities of
it, as the Apostle teaches us by such as are opposed against them: so it is
also called an animal or natural body, of the soul, which gives unto it
only that natural life that it has in this world, and not that spiritual
and immortal life, which it shall have after this. For the soul, which now
can give none but this mortal life by reason of sin, shall then have another
virtue, when sin shall be wholly abolished, to give unto the body an
immortal and blessed life, by means of that spiritual and divine virtue of
Jesus Christ, whereby it shall be quickened, that it may quicken the body with
the same life. But because this word Animal derived from Anima, that
signifies the soul, is not very common in our English tongue, we find in
the usual translation of these places of Saint Paul alleged by us, these
words natural and sensual insteade of animal, which the Greek word
properly signifies. What is meant by an animal or natural man.
Therefore in expounding the sense of these kinds of speech used by the
Apostle we must understand, that he does not call animal, or sensual and
natural, the body of man only, or man by reason of his body only, but the
whole man compounded of body and soul. For he is altogether animal, that is,
natural and sensual both in body and soul without Christ Jesus: but being in
him, so long as he lives in this world, he is both animal, that is to say,
natural and sensual, and also spiritual. First, he is animal, both because
he is not yet perfectly regenerated, as also because he is not yet immortal
and glorified, as he shall be after his resurrection. On the other side he
begins even now to be spiritual, because he has a beginning of
regeneration wrought in him, which being once made perfect, he shall be
regenerated much more absolutely, and made wholly conformable to Jesus Christ
both for immortallitie and eternal happiness. For then he shall be no more
animal, natural, sensual, and spiritual altogether, but only spiritual,
according as I have already declared. Wherefore let us know, that every one
shall retain still the self same body and soul, which he has in this life,
but by reason of that change of evil qualities, which being in both shall be
made in the other life, Saint Paul calls it spiritual, and not for any
conversion that shall be of the body into the spirit. For as a man is called
animal, in regard of the soul that is given him, because the soul is the
chiefest thing in him: so he is called spiritual in respect of the other
life, and of the excellency that shall be added to the soul, and by the soul
to the body, through the heavenly and spiritual virtue and power of Jesus
Christ.

Now then seeing the soul is taken in the holy Scriptures for the natural
life, The soul put so the affections.
which is not without affections, we may see it sometimes also put for them.
Therefore when the word of God would express a great affection of love, Genesis
34. 3.
it says of the son of Sichem, that his soul claue unto Dinah: and after
it is added, that he loved her and spoke to the heart of the maid, that is to
say, kindly, and as her heart could wish. Genesis 44. 30.
In like manner it is written of Jacob, that his soul was bound to the soul
of Benjamin his son: to signify, that he loved him tenderly, as his own
soul and life. And of Jonathan it is said, 1. Sam. 18. 1.
that his soul was knit with the soul of David: which phrase is afterward
expounded by the Scripture where it is said, that Jonathan loved David as his
own soul. We are also commanded to love GOD with all our soul, Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
as also with all our heart and mind. matthew. 10. 39.
Therefore Jesus Christ says, that whosoever seeks and saves his soul,
mar. 8. 35.
shall lose it, but he that hates and loses it for his sake, luke 9. 24.
shall find it and save it unto eternal life. john 12. 25.
In which words, the soul is not only taken for the life, but also for all
the commodities thereof, and for the desires of the flesh, such as are glory,
honors, riches, pleasures, delights, ease, and all kind of prosperity: for
the obtaining of which things many turn aside from the way of salvation, and
take the path that leads to destruction. Also we read many places in the
Scriptures, in which the soul is taken not only for the whole person living,
but also for the person dead, yea for the dead body, and sometimes for the
spirit separated from the body.

But we must well consider in what sense there is mention made of the death of
the soul. How we are to understand that the soul dies.
Balaam wishes that his soul might die the death of the just: Number. 23. 10.
but he speaks after the manner of the Hebrews, who use many times to say My
soul and thy soul, for my self and thy self: or for my person and thy
person, according to that before mentioned, that the name of soul and of
flesh, are often taken for the whole man, and for that which we call Person.
For this cause whereas Moses said, Genesis 22. 16.
that GOD swear by himself, Jeremy and Amos say, Ierem. 51. 14.
that he swear by his soul, Amos 6. 8.
in the same sense and signification. Likewise, Leuit. 21. 1.
the name of Soul is not only taken for a living person, but also for him
that is dead: The name of soul put for the dead body.
as when it is written in the Law, Let none of you be defiled by the dead among
his people, it is in the Hebrew, over the soul of his people, that is, over
the dead body of any of the people, by touching it after it is dead. Job 33.
18, 22.
And when Job says, that the soul of a man draws to the grave, and his
life to the buryers, and that God delivers his soul from going into the pit,
he takes not the name of soul for that spiritual essence that gives life
unto man, but for the life it self; or for the man and body it self, which is
laid in the grave after death. So that his meaning is no other then to say,
that God delivers man from death, whereby otherwise he should be brought into
the pit. And when David says, Psalm 30. 3.
Lord, thou have brought up my soul out of the grave, he shows after very
evidently what he understands by his soul when he says, Psalm. 56. 13. and
22. 20.
Thou have revived me from them that go down into the pit. He takes this
word Soul in the same sense when he says, that God delivered his soul from
death and from the midst of lions: and when he prays him to deliver his soul
from the sword, his desolate soul from the power of the dog. For it is easy
to judge by these words, that he takes not the soul in these places for the
essence of the soul and proper substance thereof: because the soul can not be
smitten with the sword, nor devoured of lions, nor carried away by dogs.
Therefore seeing the soul is so often put in the Scripture for corporal life
which ends with the body, and which the soul gives unto it by means of
those instruments, which it has in the body, the name of Spirit is many times
used therein, What is meant by Spirit in the Scriptures.
to signify more specially this essence and spiritual substance, which we
call the soul, and which may be separated both from the body and blood, as
that which lives after the death of the body. Psalm 31. 5.
Therefore David did so use the word Spirit, luke 23. 46.
when he recommended his soul to God by the same words, which Jesus Christ
used upon the cross. Afterward Saint Steven took it in the same sense when he
said, Acts 7. 59.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. For this is that spirit of which Solomon
says, Eccles. 12. 7.
that it returns to God that gave it, after that the body is returned to the
earth and to dust of which it consists. And yet this difference is not
always observed in the Scriptures. For as we have already heard, both the
heart, and soul, and spirit are oftentimes generally and indifferently put
for all the parts and powers of the soul, and not only for those of men, but
also of beasts: as when the Wise man attributes spirit unto them, having
regard to this corporal life. For when Solomon speaks so, it is in
consideration of this life that consists in breath, which is also called
Spirit in the holy Scriptures, which use one and the same word to signify both
wind and breathing, and whatsoever we call spirit, taking it both for the soul
of man, for the Angelical natures, and for the Divine nature. Job 27. 3, 4.
Therefore Job speaking of this present life says, So long as my breath is in
me, and the spirit of God in my nosethrilles, my lips surely shall speak no
wickedness, and my tongue shall utter no deceit. But when Saint Paul says,
Romans 8. 16.
The same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children
of God, he takes the word Spirit in an other sense then Job did in the
place now alleged. For in the first place he takes the name of Spirit for
the Spirit of GOD, and in the second place for the Spirit of man, which
signifies the humane soul. It is true that in this place he takes it for
the soul and for the spirit, such as it is in regenerate men: but when he
says elsewhere, that the spirit of man knows the things of man, 1. Cor. 2.
11.
he takes the spirit simply for a humane Spirit, and for the understanding
part thereof. Likewise the name of soul is put, not only for this natural
life and for the will and affections, but also for the self same thing that is
comprehended by this word Spirit, when one would signify thereby the
greatest excellency of the soul. As when David says, Our soul waits for
the Lord, Psalm. 33. 20, 21.
for he is our help and our shield. Surely our heart shall rejoice in him,
because we trusted in his holy name. And again, My soul rejoices in the
Lord, and is glad in his salvation. 1. Pet. 2. 11, 12.
And when Saint Peter says, Abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against
the soul, and have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, he takes the
name of Soul for the spiritual man, who has his mind and all his affections
well ruled according to the will of GOD. As then we have heard in what sort
the soul may die, in regard of this corporal life, according to the phrase
of the Scriptures and of the Hebrews, so by this which Saint Peter says,
that fleshly lusts fight against the soul, we may learn after what manner
the soul may be said to die and to be slain. For nothing can bring death unto
it but sin. Wherefore it is not said without good reason in the Book of
Wisdom, Wisd. 1.
that the mouth that tells lies slays the soul. Albeit then the soul is
immortal, in that it can never be without life, no more then the Angels, who
are spirits like to it: nevertheless it is after a sort mortal, How the
soul is after a sort mortal.
so far forth as being far off separated from God through sin, it lives
no more that blessed life, wherewith it should live if it were united and
joined unto him by true faith and sincere obedience. For it should enjoy the
self same life, which the heavenly Angels, with the souls and spirits of
the blessed do enjoy. As contrariwise the souls of the wicked live with the
same life that the Diuelles do, which is called dead, because it is a more
accursed life then death it self, and therefore called the second and eternal
death.

Now we may think our selves sufficiently taught touching the diverse
significations in which the name of Soul is taken. It seems to me, that we
have spoken enough of the Anatomy of the body and soul, of which the most of
our discourses hitherto were made: which may suffice for the contentation of
every one, that will keep himself within the bounds and limits set down unto
us by the wisdom of GOD in his word. But to finish this whole matter
concerning the soul, which we have chiefly considered in her parts, powers,
and effects, we are further yet to be instructed in the creation, generation,
nature, and immortality thereof. And because they are marvelous difficult
matters, and such as are not without great contrarieties of opinions even
amongst the learned, I am of opinion that these things are to be discoursed
of, according to that manner of teaching of the ancient Academickes, The
ancient Academicall kind of teaching.
which we followed in our first meeting: namely, upon the theme propounded
unto us, to balance the arguments on the one part, with the reasons of the
other side, that so we may diligently search out the truth. Notwithstanding it
shall be lawful for us to deliver our opinion, so long as we ground it upon the
infallible testimony of the word of God, leaving to every one his liberty to
judge which is best, and to embrace and follow the same. For our entrance
therefore into so goodly a matter, thou shall begin, ASER, to morrow to
declare unto us what thou shall think good concerning this proposition,
namely, whether the soul is begotten with the body, and of the seed thereof:
or whether it be created apart and of another substance, and what is requisite
for us to know therein.

The end of the tenth days work.
THE ELEVENTH days work.
Whether the soul of man is engendered with the body, and of the same substance
that the body is of: or whether it be created by it self and of another
substance: whether it be needful for us to know what the soul is, and what is
the essence thereof, or only to know of what quality it is, with the works
and effects thereof. Chap. 81.
ASER. P^at^n Phad.
I am of opinion, that in discoursing philosophically concerning the knowledge
of the soul, we ought to practice that which Socrates said, being tired with
the consideration of the nature of things, namely, to be very careful lest it
happen to us as it does to them that are busy beholders of the Sun
eclipsed, whose sight is dazeled thereby except they behold the image thereof
in water, or in some such like thing. For even the Spirit that is wholly given
to the understanding of it self, is often as it were amazed and carried far
out of the way of true contemplation, unless it know how to consider it
self in the glass of all brightness, The word of God the true glass for the
mind.
laid open in the sacred word of GOD, and not stay altogether in the
discourses of natural Philosophy and humane reason, which many times blind
even the sharpest wits of men. True it is, that we have many things in
Nature that affoorde us evident testimonies of the creation, nature, and
immortality of the soul, which have greatly moved, not only those
Philosophers that have borne greatest reverence to GOD, and acknowledged him to
be the Creator of all things, but even those also that were most profane,
and made the greatest Idol of Nature. Nevertheless the knowledge of so high
and difficult a matter, Who know the soul best.
could never be perfectly comprehended, but of them only that have heard the
doctrine of the Spirit of GOD, and have received the testimonies of his word,
as certain demonstrations of those things, which the sense of man is not able
to conceive. For in deed we can not pronounce any thing certain of so high
a nature as is that of the soul, except it be by his testimony who has
created it, and who only knows it, as the workman knows his work. Yet
we ought not to contemn natural reasons found out by the learneder sort,
which are as it were beams of that true light: but rather diligently consider
of them, as helps that may greatly further us in the understanding of that we
seek, and serve for the confounding of so many Atheists as impudently dare to
deny the immortality of the soul, and that judgment of God, which shall be
to the everlasting happiness and joy of the good, and to the perpetual grief
and torment of the wicked.

Now albeit the soul of man has no parts nor members into which it may be
divided as the body may, nevertheless in the sequel of our discourses
concerning the Anatomy of the body, we have also made as it were an Anatomy of
the soul, in regard of her faculties, powers, and offices, whereby we may
attain to some good measure of knowledge touching the nature thereof, and of
the difference that is between it and the souls of all other creatures that
have soul and life. But there remain yet very great difficulties concerning
the creation and substance thereof, upon which points it shall be very
profitable for us to be well resolved.

We know well enough by that which we heard before, that the soul of man
can not be of any corporal nature, or compounded of any corruptible nature,
as the body is. For if it were so, then must it necessarily be mortal as the
body is, and be far from doing that which it does. Besides, it would
follow thereupon that the soul of man differed in nothing from the soul of
beasts. But we know by the effects of it that there is great difference
between them, yea greater then between heaven and earth: The soul is not
bred of corporal seed.
which being so, it follows well, that it is not engendered with the body of
the same substance with it, and that the substance of the soul is not derived
from the same seed. Again, if the soul be created of some other substance,
and not begotten with the body of any humane seed, a man may ask from whence
then comes that pollution that is in it through sin, whereby the whole race
of mankind is corrupted, and what power Original sin ought to have over it.
For if GOD daily creates souls for those humane bodies that come into the
world continually, as we do believe, and that to place and lodge them in
those bodies even from the womb, surely he creates them no otherwise then
he did all other creatures, Genes. 1.
which he created good. Whereupon it follows, that he created not souls
corrupted and infected with sin, but pure and sound, as those were of our
first Parents before sin entered into the world. Nevertheless we see that
the chief corruption and infection in man through sin, is in the soul. For
if the soul were not infected, the body should not be stained therewith, as
that which is but the lodging and instrument of the soul, and as it were the
servant thereof. Wherefore when the soul is clean and pure, the whole man,
both body and soul is altogether pure: but when that is defiled, all is
defiled. From whence then, will some man say, does the soul receive this
infection of sin, wherewith she is polluted after her creation? Has she it
of her self, or of the body after she is lodged therein, and of the
corruption of that seed, of which the body is begotten? These are very
profound questions and wonderful difficult, about which many great Divines
have troubled themselves a long time. But the wiser sort enquire soberly into
them, Modesty requisite in searching the truth.
so as they give evident testimony of that modesty, wherewith they seek after
the understanding of the great secreats of God, rather then make profession
that they have found them out. Others there are, who one while with conjectures
according to their fancy, an other while with reasons drawn from the nature
of things, set down for a certain truth whatsoever comes into their mind.

Now then being to hear what reasons can be alleged, we will omit and
pass over, as well them that walk wholly in the darkness of ignorance, as
those that will not go fair and softly, and as it were feeling with the hand,
but run on swiftly whither they please, without fear of downefalles. We will
take a middle course, neither too high nor too low, keeping our selves within
the limits of the word of truth, which teaches us that we incur
original sin, because we are all the children of Adam, to whom, and to
whose posterity God gave original justice, How we become guilty of original
sin.
which made man obedient to God, and the body subject to reason. But it was
given him with this condition, that if he kept not the commandment of God,
both he and his posterie should be deprived of that gift and privilege: even
as if some nobleman having committed treason should be disgraded from the
title of Nobility, both he and his children. This deprivation of gifts
bestowed upon man by God, of which we should have been the Inheritours, What
original sin is.
but for the sin of our first Parents, is called by the Divines, Original
sin. To proceed then with our former matter, first I say, that in my mind,
it is not so necessarily required of us to know what the soul is, or what is
the essence and substance thereof, How we must learn to know the soul.
as to know of what quality it is, and what are the actions and works of
it. And that this is so, we may judge by that bountifulness, which GOD the
Lord of nature uses toward us, and which he manifests unto us on every
side by manifold signs and testimonies. For whatsoever is expedient for us,
the same he propounds unto us both very abundantly, and with such facility,
that we may easily find it out and bring it into use. Wherefore we can have
no more evident token, that a thing is not profitable or not very necessary for
us, then this that it is rare, far off, and hid from us, yea very hard to
find out and to attain to the use of it. So that when we are admonished to
know our selves, we must not refer this to the knowledge of the essence of
the soul, which we are not able to know or comprehend, but to the knowledge
of the effects and works of it, thereby to know how to frame our manners
and our whole life, to the end that chasing vice away, we might follow after
virtue. And this by the grace of Christ Jesus, will lead us to that life in
which we shall be perfectly wise and good, and live immortal and blessed
with GOD for evermore.

Then, as we shall see the Creator of all things face to face, who otherwise
is incomprehensible unto us, so we shall know our selves perfectly in him.
When we shall know our s^lues perfectly.
True it is if we understand well the principal cause that is taught us in
his word, why he created man after his image and likeness, and gave him an
immortal soul partaker of understanding and reason, we shall be well
instructed in that point we desire to know touching the nature of the soul.
So that although we can not thoroughly know or define what is the essence or
substance thereof, nevertheless seeing it was created of GOD, that being
joined unto him it might have eternal happiness; we must needs say, that it
is a substance in some sort capable of the divine nature, and that may be
joined therewith. For being endued with the knowledge of the divinity, the
love of the same is bredde within it, by which love the soul is so joined unto
GOD, that it is endued with perpetual happiness.

And thus we may say, What the soul is.
that the soul of man is a spirit that gives life to the body whereunto it is
joined, and which is capable of the knowledge of GOD to love him, as being
meet to be united unto him through love, to eternal felicity. But let us
consider the diversity of opinions of the best learned, as well upon this
matter, as upon the doubts mentioned by us in our speech. Variety of opinions
touching the essence of the soul.
For the first, there are many who think, that we take our generation and
birth of our fathers and mothers, not only in regard of our bodies, but also
of our souls: and that souls are produced of souls, as bodies are begotten
of bodies, being led by the reasons before spoken of. For they can not
conceive how original sin, which is the pollution of our nature that before
was good and pure, by reason of the hereditary corruption of the first father
of men, can be derived from Adam to all his successors, and from father to
son, if the souls of children take not their original from the souls of
their Parents, as the bodies do of their bodies: considering that the soul is
the chief subject of original sin, and of all the rest that proceed from
it, as rivers issue from their fountain. Wherefore, as we set Adam before our
eyes for the first stock or root of all mankind, in regard of men's bodies
that have all their beginning from him: so these men do the like with his
soul, and the souls of all other men, as if souls were derived from souls,
and bodies from bodies. And in deed at the first blush a man might think,
that Christ Jesus was of this mind when he said, John 3. 6.
That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of the
spirit, is spirit: if it be so that the name of flesh in that place ought to
be taken for the whole man, comprehending under it the body, soul, and
spirit, and whatsoever excellent thing is in man, being considered in his
corrupt nature, as the word flesh is commonly taken in the holy Scriptures,
when it is opposed to the spirit, or to God. And for this cause many do not
take this word flesh so largely, neither in this place, nor in any other like
to this, as if the spirit of man and the chief power of his soul were
comprehended therein: but they restrain it to that part which they call
sensual, under which they understand not only the body of man, but also those
powers of the soul, which we have common with beasts. Therefore they doubt not
to say, that the soul, which is called Vegetative and sensitive, like to that
of plants and beasts, is produced of the same seed that the body is: and that
it is as well contained in the seed, as the matter and nature of which the body
is compounded. Whereupon it would follow, that in this respect there is no
difference betwixt the soul of man and the soul of beasts and plants. They
say well, that every living creature has but one only soul, albeit there be
diverse powers thereof in certain creatures, Why one soul is called
vegetative, another sensitive, the third reasonable.
in some more, in some less. Hereof it is that they call that of plants by a
more special name Vegetative, because it has but this virtue and office only
of which it takes the name. And albeit the soul of beasts has the same
virtue also, yet they call it not by the same name, but only sensitive, under
which they place the vegetative soul that is in plants, as a power and
property thereof. So likewise although the soul of man has both these
together, yet they call it not either vegetative or sensitive, but only
reasonable: under which they place the vegetative and sensitive soul that is
in beasts, for powers and properties thereof, as before I said, they placed the
vegetative under the sensitive. But I would very gladly, AMANA, be instructed
in that which thou can deliver very well to this purpose, following this
excellent matter: which will serve greatly to cause us more specially to
understand the nature and immortality of the soul, the chief object whereat
we aim.

Whether there be any thing mortal in the soul of man: of the distinction
between the soul and the powers of it: of the opinions of Philosophers, and
what agreement is between them touching the soul of brute beasts, and the
nature and substance of it: of their opinion that derive the soul of man and
the soul of beasts from one fountain: of them that ascend higher, and of
their reasons. Chap. 82.
AMANA. That which we read of Jesus Christ his saying to Nicodemus in these
words, John 3. 12.
If when I tell you earthly things, ye believe not, how should ye believe,
if I shall tell you of heavenly things? may give us occasion to say in like
manner, that if we can not know the earth, neither the body and soul of man,
nor the nature and virtue thereof, how should we attain to the knowledge of
Heaven and of those spiritual natures, of God and of his works? And if we
can not comprehend in our selves the works of our soul how shall we
understand the works of GOD in the whole world? And if we be not able to
conceive them, does it follow therefore that he does them not? and yet
there are many that conclude after that manner. For they believe no more then
they are able to know and comprehend by their natural reason, according as
they deal also with their soul. For because they understand not what is the
proper essence of it, neither can see it after it is entered into the body and
joined therewith, nor yet when it departs away, therefore they conclude, that
it is no other thing, but as it were a fire that lasts so long as there is
matter agreeable to the nature of it, and is quenched when that fails.

But for that which you delivered to us, ASER, of the sayings of certain
touching the diverse kinds of souls, and the powers of every one of them, it
seems to me that (understanding them as you say these men do) one of these
three things will follow of their opinion. Of the distinction of the soul
from the powers there of.
For they must of necessity yield to this, either that the soul of man is
partly immortal and partly mortal: or that a man has three souls, one
immortal and two mortal: or lastly, that the powers of the reasonable soul,
which we call Sensitive and Vegetative, are not of the proper essence and
substance thereof, but only of the body, and that they are instruments of the
reasonable soul, as members thereof. For I doubt not but they will readily
confess this, that the soul is immortal: and if that part of the soul which
they call Vegetative and Sensitive, be of the self same essence and substance,
in that respect it shall be mortal. Now if we so distinguish all these three
sorts of souls in man, that we make three kinds of them, the first and
principal shall be immortal, and the other two mortal. And if they will say,
that they take not the vegetative and sensitive soul in man, for two diverse
kinds of souls, but only for two sundry powers of the reasonable soul, I
demand of them whether these two powers are so joined unto it, that it may be
a soul as it is, both without them and with them, even as before we said that
it might be with the body and without the body. I doubt not but every one will
answer me to this question, according to that opinion he has conceived of
the nature of man's soul. If the question be made touching the soul of
beasts, the Philosophers agree well amongst themselves herein, that it is of
the same matter of which their bodies are compounded, The soul of the beast is
of a corporal substance.
whether it be derived and taken from the same, or whether it be the
propriety of the matter. Therefore they mean, that it is the Vital spirit
only therein that gives life unto them, which is of a corporal matter and
substance: or else that it is the temperature or temperament of the whole
body generally, which is the propriety of that matter. And so the soul in
beasts shall be the life it self, of which the Vital spirits, or the
temperament are the instruments. Which seems to agree well with that which
Moses says, Genesis 9. 4.
That the soul of the flesh in the blood thereof, Leui. 17. 14.
that is to say, the life, according as we showed when we spoke of the nature
of blood, and of those means by which it gives life to the creatures. For
when Moses speaks so, a man might say that it is as much in effect as if he
said, that the blood is as it were the pipe and instrument that conueyeth life
to the body, and that the Vital spirits are the thing that gives motion and
sense to the body, which is the same that we call Soul: neither is there any
inconvenience to yield to this in regard of the soul of beasts. And albeeit
we see not with the eye how these Vital spirits, or the temperament of all
the parts of the body, do give unto it that life which it has, yet a man
may judge and have some knowledge hereof by the things we see in nature,
which have some agreement and resemblance with this. For we conceive well, The
Vital spirit compared to the flame of a lamp.
how the flame is nourished by the oil and match that is in a lamp, or by
the wax and week that is in a candle. In which we see two sorts of matter
differing one from another, joined both together. Besides, we see how that by
means of this conjunction, and of the temperature and agreement that these two
matters have each with other, the flame being kindled in them, is nourished
and preserved. So likewise we propound the Vital spirit in the bodies of
living creatures, It is engendered of the blood in the heart.
as a thin flame engendered of the blood by virtue of the heart: and this
flies as it were throughout all the parts of the body, distributing unto it
Vital heat, which quickens it, and endueth it with that virtue by which it
has motion and sense, and exercises all her actions, so that every member
does his office. Now we see well in this comparison the matter that is in the
lamp or in the candle, and the temperature and agreement that is between the
parts of it, and how the flame is fed and mainteyned after it is lighted.
We may see also from whence this flame is brought to the lamp, and how this
matter is lighted, and that neither the matter, nor the agreement and
temperature thereof breed this flame of themselves, but that it is brought
from elsewhere.

In like manner, we may easily conceive that which has been told us of the
vital spirit, and of the blood whereof it is bredde, and of the virtue and
power of the heart in the generation of it. But one may say unto me, that
there is great difference between the comparison we made of a lamp or candle,
and of his flame, and between that which we have spoken of the generation of
the vital spirit, because this flame, which we call the vital spirit,
springs of the self-same matter, by which it is nourished and preserved, and
is kindled there. And therefore it were requisite that we should further know
what is the cause of this, as also why the life and motion that are therein,
are inflamed by this vital spirit, and not by any other means whatsoever,
whether it be the blood or the flesh. And yet this spirit is as well of a
corporal and bodily matter, as all the rest, of which the body is compounded:
so that it has his original of the selfsame elements from whence that
matter is derived, out of which it springs. But of such inquisitours I would
likewise demand, from whence the heavens, the Sun and Moon, with the other
planets and stars have their motion, God the author of nature.
their light and properties. It is very certain they can yield me no other
true cause, but that God has created them of that nature, that he has so
framed them, and that he always preserves them such, by the divine virtue
and power of his providence. So I say to them, that we ought not to search
for any other cause or reason of that we mentioned before, or go any further,
or mount higher in the inquisition thereof. But forasmuch as that which we
have now delivered of the nature and matter of the Soul, is proper to that
Sensitive and Sensual soul which we attribute to beasts, we must come more
particularly to that that is proper to men, which we call the reasonable
soul. This is that matter and point, about which the greatest and most
ingenious wits have most labored and disputed from time to time. Sundry
opinion of the reasonable soul.
For they that affirmed the soul of man to be no other thing then the Vital
and Animal spirits, by means of which the body receives life, or the
temperature and temperament of the humors, and matter of which the body is
compounded, these men put no difference between the soul of beasts, and the
soul of men. And as for them that take it to be the breath, or a fire of
which the natural heat proceeds, they iumpe in opinion with the former, who
place it in the Vital spirits. And they that say it is in the harmony of the
whole body, are of the same mind with them that place it in the temperament.
So that according to the opinion of all these, the soul of man is nothing else
but natural heat, or else the Vital spirit that is in the blood: as the
Physicions commonly take it, whose consideration reaches not farther then to
that they can comprehend by their natural reason, following therein
Hippocrates, who agreeable to this opinion says, that the soul is daily
engendered, after that manner, which we have already declared. But they that
more diligently look into the properties and excellent gifts, The soul
proceeds not from the elements.
wherewith the reasonable soul is endued, know assuredly by their natural
reason, that these opinions are very unworthy the noble excellency thereof,
and that they are of no force in regard thereof. For they judge very well,
that the understanding and reason with the discourses thereof, that the
judgment and such memory as it has, that the discerning of good and evil, of
things honest and dishonest, of virtues and vices, with the knowledge of
humane and divine things whereof it is partaker, are works and actions,
which cannot proceed from such matter as the elements are, as we have touched
elsewhere. Whereupon it follows, that it is some other thing then the Vital
spirit, or the temperament of the body: and that it is of a far differing
nature from that of beasts, which consists in these things. And by the same
reason also they conclude, that if the soul of man were of any such matter as
to be the Vital spirit, or the temperament of the body, it would follow that
it were mortal like to the body, and that nothing should remain of it after
the death thereof. Which thing they find to be too much contrary unto that,
which a man may judge of the nature and substance of the soul by those
effects of it, that were even now mentioned: which effects are such as
cannot agree to a corruptible and mortal nature, nor to any other then to a
celestial and immortal nature, like to that of the Angels and blessed
spirits, which are endued with such virtues. But I desire to hear thee, ARAM,
upon the things now spoken of, that thou may go on with the matter of our
discourses.

Of the opinion of Galen, of Plat^, and of Aristotle, touching the substance
and nature of man's soul: of the opinion of Occam touching the Vegetatine and
Sensitive power thereof, and of the distinction of souls he makes in man: of
the sentence of the Platonists, and of Origin touching the creation, birth and
nature of the soul: of the conjunction of the Soul with the body, and the
estate thereof in the same. Chap. 83.
ARAM. The Ancients speaking of man, often call him a great miracle: and
indeed the more we bend our minds to consider of it, the more marvelous
weshal find it to be. Insomuch as in the particular contemplation of the soul,
which is truly man, I would gladly ask whether it were better, either to
discourse Philosophically of this matter having store of argument, or by way of
admiration to cry out with S. Paul, Romans 11. 33.
O the deepenes of the riches, both of the wisdom, and knowledge of God!
Nevertheless being drawn on with the same desire that has hitherto pricked
us forward, to search out and to be instructed in the truth, according to my
knowledge I will go forward ARAM, with thy speech.

For the causes then alleged by thee, out of them that consider more diligently
ye properties and excellent gifts of the soul, Galens opinion of the soul.
although Galen, who otherwise was a profane man in respect of the knowledge
of God, and an idolatrous worshipper of nature, durst not boldly determine what
the reasonable soul was, yet as for that which is commonly called the
vegetative or nourishing, Gal. d^ pl^s* Hip.
and the sensitive or sensual soul, he fears not boldly to affirm, that it
is no other thing then either the natural and vital spirits, or the
temperament. But as for the reasonable soul, he leaves it in doubt whether it
be of a bodily nature, or of some other that is not corporal, and which
subsisteth by it self being separated from the body. Neither does he conclude
any other thing, but that it is either a shining substance, and an ethereall
body, that is to say, of a more pure and celestial nature then any of the
elements: or else that it is of a nature that is not corporal, but yet has
this body, by which he means the animal spirit, to be as a chariot to carry
it. Platoes opinion touching the soul.
Plato before him said, that souls were little portions taken from the
substance of the celestial fires: and he makes three parts of a man's soul,
dividing them according to the principal parts of the body, and those
instruments which they have in the same. Which division is understood of some,
as if he made so many sorts of souls, as we have showed that there are
principal powers and offices, which have their several seats and places
assigned unto them in the body. Therefore Galen mainteineth, that the
vegetative and sensitive soul is no other thing then the temperament of the
liver and of the heart, which are assigned to be the seats and chief
instruments of the nourishing and vital power and virtue. And as for the
animal or reasonable power, whose seat is commonly placed in the brain, we
have already showed his opinion. Now of this part, there are many, even of
them who greatly magnify it, that are not yet well resolved whether they ought
to take it for the animal spirit, or for the temperament, or for an
incorporeall nature that comes elsewhere then from the body. Aristotle's
opinion of the soul.
Aristotle he calls the soul by a new Greek name, that signifies as much as
a perpetual motion, and says that it proceeds from a fifth nature and
beginning, which he calls Heaven. But he speaks not so plainly, that a man
may judge by his words, what he thinks of the reasonable soul in man,
whether it be mortal or immortal. Nevertheless he confesses, that there is
great difference between that power of the soul, which we call more specially
by the name of spirit, and between the other twain, which he calls the
Nutritive and Sensitive powers. For he uses this word Powers, and affirms,
that these two first proceed only from the body, and are bredde there, and
that the Vegetative soul and power is more in the seed and burden, then the
Sensitive. But as for the third, he says plainly, that it only comes
from without els-where, and that this only is divine, not communicating her
action with any corporal action.

Thus we see sufficient agreement between the Philosophers and the Physicians
concerning the Vegetative and Sensitive soul or power: but there is not so
good accord about the reasonable soul and power. Yea many great Divines and
Doctors agree with them in the two first points. Occams opinion of the soul.
For this cause Occam says plainly, that there are two distinct souls in man,
the one reasonable, the other sensual: the reason is, because it is manifest,
that the Sensitive soul has no actions, but isntrumental, that is to say, by
means of those instruments whereby she exercises her actions, and from which
she has them. Whereupon he concludes, that this sensual soul seems to
have her original and generation from the seed, and that it is either the
temperament, or some faculty and power in the body. He confirms this
opinion by another argument taken from the contrary appetites and desires of
the reasonable and sensual soul: out of which he draws this conclusion,
That it is very likely that these are two distinct substances, because it
seems inconvenient, in one and the same nature not divided or distinguished
to place appetites so wholly contrary each to other, He adds farther, that
it is a thing very agreeable to nature, that every living creature should
beget his like: therefore man begets man like himself, at leastwise in
respect of the Sensitive soul, if not of the reasonable soul. Whereupon it
follows, that the Vegetative and Sensitive soul proceed from the nature of
the seed. Of the creation of souls according to the Platonists.
The Platonicall Philosophers were of opinion, that souls were bred in heaven,
and were taken out of the divine nature as a portion thereof, and that there
they were instructed and adorned with sundry sciences, with knowledge and
virtue: and that afterward being given of God, they descended from thence
into the bodies of men, as into stinking, filthy, and contagious prisons.
Whereof it followed, that through the infection of these prisons they were
corrupted by evil affections, as it were with the filthiness of them. So that
they forgate all those gifts and celestial virtues where with they had been
endued and adorned in their first birth, and which they had brought with them.
And being thus detained as prisoners in this dark and filthy prison, they
could no more use all those goodly gifts, but only so far forth as they
were taught and instructed again by doctrine, which in respect of them may be
compared to a light brought to prisoners kept in a dark dungeon, to light and
refresh them. For this cause those that were of this opinion affirmed, that the
knowledge of men is but a remembrance and calling again to mind of that which
their souls had learned and did know in heaven at their first birth, before
they entered into their bodies, according as we heard even now. For being
descended into this base and obscure prison, and having forgotten that which
they knew, their memories are rubbed up by doctrine and instruction bestowed
upon them, which kindles again these celestial sparkles of their mind, and
portions of the divine fire, by inflaming them and causing them to burn, that
were almost utterly quenched. Whereupon like Philosophers they conclude, that
souls so infected by descending and entering into their bodies, cannot return
again nor be received into heaven, and into the place assigned for the blessed
spirits, unless they return pure and clean, and decked with the selfsame
ornaments wherewith they were adorned at their first birth. And this (they say)
may be wrought by good instruction, by virtue and by good works: or otherwise
they say they have sundry purgings being separated from their bodies. Some
divines among the Grecians have followed, at least wise in some part, the
opinion of these philosophers, Lib 11. chap. 23. of the city of God.
and by name Origin, of whom S. August. thus writes: But we may marvel much
more, that some believing with us, that there is but one only beginning of all
things, and that no nature which is not God, can have any being but from the
Creator, nevertheless would not believe rightly and simply this point of the
creation of the world that is so good and simple, namely, that God creating all
those good things that were after him, although they were not the same that
God is, notwithstanding they were al good. But they say, that the souls not
being parts of God, but made of God, sinned in departing from the Lord, and so
by sundry degrees according to to the diversity of sins, from the heavens
unto the earth, have merited sundry sorts of bodies to be as it were their
chains and fetters. This say they, is the world, and this was the cause of
making the world, not to the end that the good things might be created, but
that evil things might be stayed and repressed. Origens opinion of souls.
Of this opinion is Origin, who is worthily to be blamed. These are the very
words of this great Doctor of the Church. And by that which follows in the
same place, he plainly confuteth Origens error, who in his first book of
Beginnings writes, that things without bodies were first made of God: and that
amongst spiritual things, our spirits or minds were also created, which
declining from their estate and dignity were made or named souls, of which
the Greek word (...) signifies, as it were to grow cold, and to decline
from a better and more divine estate; being so called, because it seems that
the spirit or mind is waxen cold, and fallen from this natural and divine
heat. Therefore the soul lies now in this estate and condition, but when it
is repaired and amended, it shall return again to the condition of a spirit
or mind. Which being so, it seems that the departing and declining of the
soul is not alike in all, but is turned either more or less in the soul: and
that some spirits or minds do yet retain somewhat of their first vigor,
other some, either nothing at all or very little. These souls by reason of many
defects of the spirit, stood in need of more gross and solid bodies: so that
for their sakes, this visible world was made and created so great, that it
might contain all those souls which were appointed to be exercised therein.
And forasmuch as all of them did not depart alike from goodness, the Creator of
all things took unto himself certain seeds and causes of variety, to the
end that according to the diversity of sins, he might make the world
variable and diverse. This is Origens sentence concerning souls, which
self-same opinion we may read also in Saint Hierome writing to Anitus: whereby
we may see how this opinion agrees in part with that of the Platonists. For
the greatest disagreement between them consists herein, that these
Philosophers attributed the cause of the infection of souls to the bodies into
which they were sent frrom heaven. And Origin, with many that followed him,
supposed that the souls were sent into bodies as prisoners, to be punished
for their offenses committed in heaven. From such fancies have issued so many
dreams about souls as are to be read in infinite writings. But do thou,
ACHITOB, take occasion hereupon to continue our discourses.

Of the opinion of the Platonists, and some others touching the substance of
men's souls: in what sense not only the Poets and Heathen Philosophers, but
also S. Paul have said, that men were the generation and Image of God: of
their error that say, that souls are of the very substance of God: of the
transmigration of souls according to the opinion of the same Philosophers.
Chap. 84.
ACHITOB. It is wonderful to consider, how hard a matter it is to find out
the truth of such things, as are commonly disputed of, because
notwithstanding any solution or answer that is made, yet still some doubt may
arise in our minds: insomuch as there is no point how doubtful soever it
be, but that a man may allege likelihood both with it and against it. But
this comes to pass, especially in matters of greatest reach, the
difficulty of which is so much the harder to be defined, as the true knowledge
thereof is more necessary for us. Those men therefore are happy, who are
assured of that which they believe, by certain testimonies cut of the word of
truth: especially when the question is concerning the soul, which is the
instrument of God whereby he works in us, and lifts us up to the
contemplation of his divinity.

Now my companions, by your three former discourses we may gather both what
agreement and what difference there is amongst those whom you have mentioned,
touching their opinions, as well in regard of the birth of souls, as of their
distinction, division, and corruption. For they agree herein, that they are not
engendered with the body, neither of the same seed and matter, at leastwise the
reasonable soul: but say that it is of a celestial, divine and immortal
nature. But herein they disagree, in respect of the nature of the matter, and
about the time, creation, and birth of the soul, and also in regard of the
means, by which it is defiled and infected with sin. The Platonists affirm,
The Platonists opinion of the soul confuted.
that the soul is so extracted out of the divine nature, that it is a part and
portion thereof. Which thing cannot agree with the nature of God, because it
would follow thereupon, that it were not one, but might be divided into diverse
parts: and that those parts of which the souls should be created, might be
subject to the pollution of sin, a thing too contrary to the nature of God.
Or else they must say, that there is but one soul in all and through all, and
that God is this soul. And this were to f^l into their opinion who said, that
God was the soul of the world, God is not the soul of the world.
and that the world was his body: which is far from the truth. For if it
were so, then must God be mortal and corruptible in respect of his body, and
that still one part or other should be corrupted, as we see corporal things
daily to corrupt. On the other side, God should not then be infinite and
incomprehensible, as he is: neither is it the world that comprehends and
contains him, but it is he who comprehends and contains the world.
Wherefore neither is the world God, neither is God the world, but the Creator
thereof, and he by whom it is and does consist. So that forasmuch as all
these opinions are very strange, and unworthy the divine nature, they deserve
not that we should stay any longer in them, as they that overthrow themselves.
But I know well, that some would have that place alleged out of the Poet by
Saint Paul, to serve their fantastical opinion, Act. 17. 28.
where it is said, that We are the lineage and generation of God. Arat.
For Saint Paul does not allege it only as an opinion of an Heathen Poet,
Phae.
but does also approve and confirm the same, taking his argument from
thence, that our soul being of a spiritual and divine nature, we ought to
make the same account of God, How men are the lineage of God.
whose lineage and generation we are. Now albeeit the Apostle speaks thus,
yet his meaning is not that the souls of men are of the very substance and
essence of God, as we say that the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, are
one and the same essence and substance in the the unity of God, being
distinguished, and not divided into three persons. Neither does he mean, that
the souls are engendered of the proper essence and substance of God, or that
they proceed from it, as we say that the son is begotten of the Father, and
that the holy spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, according as it
is testified unto us in the holy Scriptures. But he would have us learn,
that the soul of man is of another nature and substance, not only then the
body of man is, but also then the soul of beasts, and that the nature and
substance thereof is celestial and divine, not because it is drawn from the
very substance and essence of God, but by reason of that difference which is
between the soul of man, and the bodies and souls of beasts: and also in
regard of that agreement which is between it and the divine nature, both
because of the immortality of the soul, as because it approaches more near
to the nature of God then of any other creature, except the Angels, whom we
say also are of a divine nature and celestial, for the like reason. For if the
Angels and souls of men were of the proper substance and essence of God, they
should not be creatures, but Gods themselves, equal in substance and essence
with him, as we say of the Son begotten of the Father, and of the holy Ghost
proceeding from them both, in the matter of the unity and trinity of the
divine nature: which by this means should be divided into parts, and so
nothing at all resemble the fountain and substance from which they are drawn,
as I showed even now. And albeit the Philosophers and Heathen Poets did not so
well understand this matter as Saint Paul, nevertheless when they said, that
the soul of man was of the divine nature and part thereof, it is very likely
they had regard to the reasons touched by me, not meaning that it was of the
very substance and essence of God. I speak of them that were of greatest
understanding and that wrote best: and namely of them that did best understand
the Philosophy of Plato. For he confesses and testifies plainly, that the
Angels themselves both good and bad, whom in his language he calls dae^ones,
Platoes opinion of Daemones, or celestial spirits.
as the other Grecians do, are creatures of another essence and substance then
God is of, and that they are not immortal of themselves, but have their
immortality of God their Creator, who both gives it and preserves them in
it, and could take it from them if he would, and dissolve them as well as he
has made them. Now if he supposed God to speak so to his Angels, and to
declare these things unto them, a man may easily judge, that he places not
the souls of men above the Angels, whom he takes to be of a more excellent
nature, as he shows evidently by that which he has written of them both. In
which writing we may see many things touching these matters, which come
nearer to the doctrine of the holy Scriptures and of true religion, then in the
writings of many others, who yielded no further then they were able to know
and conceive by natural things, without going any further. For they do not
conceive so well either of the nature of God, or of that of Angels, or of the
souls of men, as this Philosopher does. Moreover, we are to know, that Plato
had other helps, and more light them from his natural reason, whereby he
attained to the understanding of that, which others were ignorant of, who
busied themselves only about nature and natural things. Plato dwelt with the
Egyptians.
For he conuersed with the Egyptians, as Pythagoras did before him, of whom
they learned many points touching divine things, which they should never have
learned of the Grecians, nor out of their Philosophy. For the Egyptians had
great acquaintance and familiarity with the people of Israel that dwelt in
their land, and with many of the ancient Patriarchs, of whom they had learned
many things of the divinity, and of the nature of souls. But all they that
have been destitute of the chief light of the spirit of God, have still
mingled many dreams a midst their writings, as we have already heard, and
shall hear more in the sequel of our speech. Yet first we will note, how not
only many amongst the Heathen Philosophers, but also amongst the Christians
have imagined that the souls of men are the substance of God. I omit to speak
of the Heretics, as the Priscilianists, and some others that have been of this
opinion, Lactautius lib. 2. cap. 13.
but I wonder at Lactantius, a man of a right Christian heart, who seems to
have been of this opinion. And there have been some, that reasoned after this
manner, that if it be to be understood, that of the breath issuing forth out
of the mouth of God, the soul was created and inspired into the body of man,
then it follows thereupon, that it is of his very substance, and equal to
that wisdom which says, Ecclus. 24. 5.
I am come out of the mouth of the most High. But that wisdom says not,
that she was breathed out of the mouth of God, but that she came out of it.
Now as when we breathe, we make a blast, not of our nature whereby we are men,
but of this air round about us, which we draw in and out by breathing: The
Soul created of nothing.
so the Almighty God made a blast, not of his nature, nor of this creature of
the air round about us, but even of nothing. Which was said very fittely to
have been inspired or breathed, when it was created in the body of man by
God, who being himself incorporeall, and not of a bodily substance, made the
soul also incorporeall: but yet he being unchangeable, made the soul
mutable, because himself being uncreated made that a creature.

But let us go on with the Philosophy of the Platonists. We have heard their
opinion touching the birth of souls, their entry into the body, and the
pollution which they receive thereby: namely, that the souls of men are
created long before their bodies, but are afterward sent into them when they
are begotten and borne in the world, at which time they are defiled, Of the
transmigration of souls.
as has been declared. But further, according to the opinion of Pythagoras,
who is said to be the first Author thereof, they imagined, that after a
soul was once entered into a body, it never ceased to go from body to body,
entering into one body out of another. So that when it went out of one body it
entered into another, whether it were of a man, or of a beast, or of a plant.
For they put no difference between the bodies of any living creatures
whatsoever: but spoke, as if every soul were fit for every body: so that
according as every soul guided and governed it self in that body in which
it had lived before, it was received into another body, being such a one as
it had deserved, either by her vices, or by her virtues. Therefore those that
had taken the way of virtue, entered into humane bodies worthy their virtue,
into such as had been called to honorable offices and estates: and as virtue
had prevailed most with every one, so were they more or less honored in
their bodies. And if so be they had led a brutish rather then a humane and
reasonable life, they passed into the bodies of plants, or of beasts, whose
nature resembled the life which they had led in their former bodies. The
regeneration of the Pythagoreans.
This Transmigration of Souls they called Regeneration, because it was unto
them as it were a generation and new birth, in respect of their life and
conversation, which before they led in the world. Moreover, they accounted
this regeneration to be a kind of purgation and satisfaction, because that by
this means every soul was punished or rewarded, honored or dishonored,
according to her worthiness or unworthiness, and that so long until she
were reduced to her first and right estate. There have been Heretics of old,
A fond opinion of certain Heretics.
who following the opinion of the Platonists, affirmed, that no soul could
be fully purged and be at rest, and cease from passing out of one body into
another, until such time as it has done and finished whatsoever can be done
in the world, whether good or evil: accounting both evil deeds and good
deeds, vices as well as virtues to be a kind of penance and purgation of
souls. Besides, these Heretics affirmed, as the Libertines their successors
do the like in our days, that there was no sin but only in the opinion and
fancy of men, and that it is but a conceit in their mind that breeds this
opinion.

Now when I think upon this manner of regeneration and passage of the soul
from one body to another, Against the transmigration of souls.
I muse how it is possible that ever any men, especially those that are taken
for such great Philosophers, should fall into such foppery, and above all how
Plato should be of that opinion, who is by them surnamed, The divine, For
first of all, we have already learned by our discourses of the nature both of
body and soul, that the soul cannot dwell nor exercise her offices in any
other then in the body of a man, seeing that is the true form and perfection
of man and of that kind, without which he cannot be man. We may say the
same of the soul of beasts and of plants. For if every creature had not his
proper form, and some thing in which the perfection of it consists, without
which it cannot be that which it is, and by which it differs in kind from
other creatures, there would be a wonderful confusion throughout all
nature, yea the whole order thereof would be ouerturned. For all kinds of
nature should be confounded together, neither should there be any one kind
certain and distinct: which thing is contrary to all natural reason, and to
all order appointed by God. Therefore it is a very hard matter to believe, that
ever any man of a sound mind and good judgment, would admit of such a
fantastical opinion. But we may learn of thee, ASER, in proceeding with the
matter of our discourse, what thou have learned of skillful men concerning this
that Plato has written of transmigration of souls.

The chief causes, as learned men think, that moved Pythagoras, and Plato to
broache the transmigration of souls and transformation of bodies: the ancient
opinion of the Jews touching the same thing. Chap. 85.
ASER. The world was never without certain witty men, that boasted they
could answer upon a sudden to any thing that should be demanded of them.
And there have been always some others, that in every controversy and
disputation mainteyned one while this part, and by and by the contrary: which
has given occasion as I think, to certain of the ancient Philosophers to
believe, that a man can know nothing perfectly, and that no man ought
certainly to determine any thing otherwise then upon his bare and simple
opinion. But in my mind this consideration will find but few defenders now
adays, except it be amongst the ignorant, who leaving all search of things,
live only at all adventure, or else amongst them that believe every thing
that is told them, and are led with every sentence, which they hear of
others, without any further inquiry made of the reason thereof. Now as we
would be loath to perish with the ignorant, so we must beware that we
commit not our selves and our belief so easily to the danger of other men's
errors. And in deed oftentimes we judge not aright of their meaning, namely
when the question is concerning the sense of their writing. As I purpose to let
you see my companions, in that which has been already spoken of Plato.

I have learned of many skillful men, Why Plato invented the transmigration of
souls.
that Pythagoras and Plato never believed that transmigration of souls into
many bodies, which we read in their writings, but that by these feigned kinds
of speech, their meaning was rather to withdraw men from beastly affections,
unworthy their nature, and thereby to paint out and to express the
diversity of those affections, and to set them as it were before their eyes:
thereby to declare unto them, how by reason of their unruly affections they
resemble all other creatures, and chiefly brute beasts. Wherefore we may
with good reason call man a little world, if there were no other cause but
this, albeeit in this respect it stands not with his honor and credit. For
there is no kind of beast whatsoever, nor yet of any other creature unto which
he does not in some sort transform himself by his affections and by his
manners and vices. For when he pleases, he transformeth himself one while into
a sheep, then into a woolfe, again into a fox, or into a hog, or into a
dog, or into a bear, or into a Lion, or into some other such like beast.
Moreover, sometimes he transfigureth himself, not only into one kind of
beast, but into many together,, and yet those very differing and contrary the
one from the other. And as he can at his pleasure transform himself into an
Angel, so does he likewise turn himself into a Devil. Man's nature
compared to a Monster.
It is not then altogether void of reason that Plato says, that the nature
of man is as it were a monstrous nature: yea he compares it to a Monster,
whose uppermost part resembles a Virgin: whose breast, which is the midst,
is like to a Lion: and the lowest part, to a barking and bawling dog. For he
compares the highest part to a Virgin, because he places reason in the head,
as in the proper seat thereof, and of the animal powers of the Soul, for
their nature and office sake. Next, he says that the breast resembles a
Lion, because he takes the heart to be the seat of the Vital power of the
Soul, and also of the affections, that often may well be likened to a Lion
and to furious beasts. Lastly, he compares the lower parts to dogs,
because that part is appointed to be the seat of the natural and nourishing
power of the soul, and of the generatiue virtue, as that which is very brutish
and given to all carnal pleasures, How me^ become like to beasts.
and chiefly to fornication. If then a man cannot moderate his affections and
concupiscences, he makes himself like to so many beasts, as he has
affections holding of their nature. This also is the cause, why the spirit of
God in the holy Scriptures, so often compares men to sundry sorts of beasts,
to teach us that they are as it were transformed into them, and into hideous
and horrible monsters, to the end they might be the more ashamed of
themselves: and that knowing how they turn themselves into beasts and into
Devils by their vices, they should learn also, how contrariwise through
virtue they become men of beasts, and angels of Devils. Therefore it is very
like, that Pythagoras and Plato had respect to this which has been said in
those transformations and transmigrations of souls of which they spoke. I
think also that the Poets, following the same invention have for the like
reason, feigned the transformations of men into diverse beasts, and into other
creatures forged by them: but men through ignorance have taken them in a wrong
sense, The ignorant wrest the sense of good writers.
and so reaped small profit by them. No marvel then if this has happened
both to Philosophers and Poets in their doctrine and manner of teaching, seeing
there are so many that profit so little by the doctrine of the holy
Scriptures themselves, and by the study thereof. For were there ever any
Heretics, that did not wrest the sense of many places of Scripture to make
them serve for their heresies? And do we not daily see the like in all
seducers and false prophets? It is very certain, that there were never any
so absurd and strange heresies, which the favorers of them have not labored
to mainteyne by the holy Scriptures themselves.

But to return to our purpose, what meaning soever the Authors and inuenters
of such things had, their doctrine was so understood, that many held this
opinion, that men's souls passed from body to body, as we have heard.
Insomuch that this error how gross soever it were, came not only to the
Jews, but to the Christians also, who boast of true religion, and of the
authority and knowledge of the holy Scriptures. I speak not of the Manichees
ancient Heretics, who were open mainteiners of this opinion. But what shall
we say of them, who not only have their brains infected with this folly,
but, which is worse, imagine they can confirm and prove it by testimonies
out of the word of God? As where it is reported, that when Herod heard the
fame of Christ Jesus spread throughout all Judea, Math. 14. 2.
he said, mark 6. 14.
This is John Baptist: he is risen again from the dead, and therefore great
works are wrought by him. And Saint Luke says expressly, Luke 9. 7, 8.
That Herod doubted, because that it was said of some, that John was risen
again from the dead: and of some, that Elias had appeared: and of some, that
one of the old Prophets was risen again. We read likewise that when Jesus
Christ demanded of his disciples, Mat. 16. 13, 14.
saying, Whom do men say that I, luke 9. 19.
the Son of man am? they answered, Some say, John Baptist: and some Elias:
others, Ieremias, or one of the Prophets: and some that one of the old
Prophetsis risen again. Of the Jews opinion of the transmigration of souls.
A man my judge by these speeches, that not only Herod was tainted with this
Pythagoricall and Platonicall opinion, but also that it was very common among
the Jews with whom he conuersed, and whose religion he followed, at least
in part and in outward show. For Jesus Christ was known well enough in
Judea, and in Galilee, and amongst all the Jews, as it appears by the
testimony of the Evangelists. They knew his kindred according to the flesh,
and could tell that he was brought up in Nazareth in the country of Galilee:
Mark. 6. 3.
for which cause they called him him a Galilean, matt. 13 55, 56
a Nazarean, john. 6. 42.
a Carpenter, the son of a Carpenter, and the son of Joseph and Marie. They
said that they knew his brethren and sisters, whereby according to the
Hebrewe manner of speaking, they meant his cousins, Neeces and his kindred:
taking occasion thereby to despise and reject him. But on the other side, many
seeing the works and miracles which he wrought, were constrained to pass
farther, even Herod himself, hearing only the fame that went of him
throughout the country: so that some took him to be that Christ, others, to
be some great Prophet. And of them that held him for a Prophet, it appears
by those sundry opinions that were among the people, that they did not think
him to be a Prophet borne at that time, but that some one of the old Prophets
was risen again in him, not in body but in spirit. For they knew well
whence he issued in respect of his body, as that which was commonly known
throughout the country. Therefore it is easy to judge that they spoke of
resurrection in regard of the soul, as the skilfullest Interpreters expound
these places, referring these speeches of Herod and of the people unto that
Pythagoricall opinion, of the transmigration of souls from body to body. For
according thereunto, those souls that had behaved themselves virtuously in
their first bodies in which they dwelt, were sent into other more honorable
bodies, endued with greater gifts of God according to their deserving. Now
because Saint John the Baptist had not the gift of miracles annexed to his
Ministry, neither did work any all his life time, it might be thought
that this gave occasion to Herod to think thus of him, that being risen
again from the dead after a Pythagoricall manner, he had this gift and virtue
added unto his former graces, that so he might have the greater authority.
Neither ought we to think it very strange, if a great part of the Jews were
infected with many foolish and naughty opinions, seeing they were not only
corruptly instructed by their teachers, but also had sects amongst them there,
which plainly denied the resurrection of the body, the immortality of
souls, and that there was any Angel or spirit. Therefore we see their great
brutishness who would ground their transmigration, upon that which is said
in the Scriptures touching the opinion of the Jews in this point, which
notwithstanding is openly reprehended and condemned by the selfsame word of
GOD. True it is, that the ignorance of the true sense thereof gave occasion to
many to fall into such dreams. For the Lord speaking thus by Malachie, Mala.
4. 5.
Behold I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the great
and fearful day of the Lord, the Jews understood this place diversely. Some
of them thought, that the ancient Prophet Elias, who was rapt up into heaven,
should be sent again in proper person: others understood it only of the
transmigration of his soul and spirit into an other body. John 1. 21.
For this cause they asked of John Baptist whether he were Elias: but Jesus
Christ himself expounded those words of Malachy, Matthew. 11. 14. and 17. 12, 13
and declared unto the Jews that John Baptist was that Elias which should
come, and that although he were come yet they did not know him. For when he
spoke so of him, he meant not that he was the very person of Elias in body
and soul, or that the natural soul and spirit of Elias was entered into his
body: but his meaning was according as the Angel spoke to Zachary, when he
told him of the Nativity of Saint John his son, Luke 1. 15, 16, 17.
saying, He shall be filled with the holy Ghost, even from his mothers womb.
And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to their Lord God. For he
shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias. A man may easily judge
by these words, that he meant not to say, that the natural spirit of Elias
should enter into the body of Saint John Baptist, but that God would give a
spirit adourned with such gifts and spiritual graces, and with such zeal
and constancy as he gave long before to Elias. Therefore he adds power unto
spirit, thereby to declare the better what is meant by Spirit. And before he
showed the means whereby this spirit should be given him, when he said, that
he should be filled with the holy Ghost from his mothers womb: that is, with
the gifts and graces thereof, as the Scripture calls them ordinarily.
Afterward also, the Angel declares more at large, after what manner Saint
John came in the power and spirit of Elias, signifying that he ought to
behave himself and to do as Elias had done in his time, and as Malachy had
foretold of him. Moreover, we have in the Scripture other kinds of speaking,
that agree very fitly with this of the Angel, so that the one may well serve to
open the other. For it is written of Moses, Numb. 11. 25.
that the Lord did separate of the spirit that was upon him, and did put it
upon the seventy ancient men, whom he appointed under him to be an help and
comfort unto him in the government of the people of Israel: and when the
spirit rested upon them they prophesied continually. Every one knows, that
the spirit of Moses whereof the Lord speaks, is not his natural spirit:
but that he means by this spirit, part of the gifts and graces which Moses
had received of the Lord, such as were necessary for their charge: as likewise
he gave to Moses according to the charge committed to him. Some also understand
this separation of the spirit of Moses, to be only a communication of the
graces of the spirit of God, like to those which Moses had received for his
charge that was given to those, who were joined unto him for his help. Now if
we take it in this sense, we may say, that God uses this manner of speech,
the better to let us understand thereby the nature of his gifts and graces, and
the means he observes in dispensing of them. For he does not only
distribute so much as is needful for them whom he minds to employ in his
work, but gives also unto them such manner of graces as are requisite for
the work, 1. Cor. 12. 11.
as Saint Paul testifies. Besides all this, his purpose is also to teach us
what agreement there is betwixt all his gifts: as likewise what unity
proceeds hereof betwixt them that are partakers of these gifts, whereby we
may perceive, that they come all from one spirit, which, albeit God thereby
powers out his graces in so great abundance, is yet a fountain and sea that
is not only not dried up, The fountain of Gods graces diminishes not.
but not so much as any way diminished.

Thus we see how one and the same Spirit of GOD governed Moses, and the rest
that were joined with him, inspiring them all with his grace, and distributing
to every one according to his measure: as the wind is dispensed into many
Organ-pipes all at once, according to their several capacity, and according
to that sound which every one is to yield for the making of a good harmony: or
as many Candles or Lamps are lighted by an other, with the same fire wherewith
that was first tined. Also we are to understand in this sense, 2. King. 2. 9.
the request that Eliseus made to Elias, when he demanded a double portion of
his Spirit, because he succeeded him: in regard whereof he stood in need
of such gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, as Elias was guided by, that he
might faithfully execute his charge as he had done before. Thus we see how
places of Scripture expound one an other, and how little they help the
Pythagoreans: of whom I would not have made so long a discourse, if this
foppery were driven out of men's brains, and namely, among Christians. For to
this day there are too many fantastical heads (I say not amongst true
Christians) but amongst them that falsely bear that name, who are as much or
rather more infected heerewith, then any Pythagoreans or Platonists in former
times. And for this cause, AMANA, I leave you to go on with this point, that
afterward we may return to our chief matter of the nature, generation, and
immortality of the soul.

Of the Pythagoreans of these days amongst Christians, and of their foolish
opinions: of the opinions of many doctors and divines touching the creation and
ordinary generation of men's souls: of the moderation that ought to be kept in
that matter: of the cause of the filthiness and corruption of man's soul.
Chap. 86.
AMANA. There was never yet any opinion, error, or heresy so strange or
monstrous in the world, which has not always found men enough to receive it, so
that there were authors and masters to broach it abroad. For God does thus
punish the curiosity, ingratitude, malice, and perverseness of men, and that
contempt of his word and truth, which is ordinarily in them, together with the
pleasure and delight they take in vanity and lies. Wherefore God through his
just judgment delivers them up into a reprobate sense, insomuch as they can
not but reject the truth continually and embrace that which is false, Esaias 29.
14.
according as he often threatened them, 2. tim. 3. 2, 3.
and foretold it by his Prophets and Apostles. 2. these. 2. 10, 11.
And this is the cause why the Pythagoreans do at this day find men void of
sense and understanding who cleave to their fantastical opinions, and why
Epicures and Atheists are never without a great number of disciples.

Now albeit these men be in truth most blockish and gross beasts, yet we
cannot persuade them so, nor many others also, who imagine they know much. The
Pythagoreans of our time.
For there are even doctors and some that read lectures in Universities, who
keep not their opinion of the transmigration of souls so secret to
themselves, but they make some profession thereof, at lestwise amongst their
scholars and familiar acquaintance. There are some also, who, boasting of the
knowledge of tongues and of the turning over of many antiquities, have published
this fancy of theirs in books written by them: yea they themselves are
persuaded, and they would make others believe the same with them, that their
souls are the very souls of some famous personages that have lived heretofore
in the world, and that they have already passed through many excellent bodies,
which have done great things: as likewise they promise to themselves, that they
shall bring to pass great matters, seeing they have their souls. True it is,
that according to our manner of speaking we say sometimes of such as agree in
manners with others who have lived before them, that their souls whom they
resemble is entered into them, and that the others are raised up in their
persons. Of the true transmigration of souls.
For example sake, if there be a cruel tyrant like to Nero, we say that Neroes
soul is entered into his body, and that Nero is raised up in him. But yet every
one knows well enough, that we use to speak so by reason of the agreement of
natures and of manners, not because of any transmigration of soul.

And this may be spoken in respect of that Deuillish spirit, which possesses
the wicked and rules in them: as we say of the Spirit of Gods servants in
regard of his virtue, that it is given to such as resemble them and have
received the same graces from above. For as the holy Spirit, who wrought
heretofore in others, works now also in them that have received like grace:
even so it is said of that evil spirit in regard of the wicked, who are all
led with the selfsame spirit of Satan. Wherefore he does such works in
them whom he now possesses, as he wrought heretofore in their
predecessors. So that in this sense it skilleth not though we say that the
spirit of one enters into another, who succeeds him in the same wicked
works. But the Pythagoreans of whom I now speak, take it not so, but as has
bin already declared. And to set the more color upon this so strange an
opinion, their profaneness is such, that they dare to allege those places
of Scripture, which were spoken of in the former discourse, whereby they labor
to persuade themselves and others also with them, that the word of God
confirms the same. No doubt therefore, but that they who have yet such toys
in their head, are not without others also: yea, there is no question, but that
there are wonderful puddles of errors and of very strange heresies in their
fantastical brains, so that they are ougly monsters among men, and would be
abhorred of every one, if that which they carry enclosed in their frantike
heads might be seen with corporal eyes. But leaving this point, we are to
return to our principal matter into which we have made some entrance, namely,
the nature and original, the pollution, purgation, and immortality of the
soul of man: concerning which thing, we have heard the opinion of the
Philosophers, and of many that follow them. Whereupon we have to observe this,
that notwithstanding any error in opinion which they held, yet they always
came to this point, that they concluded the immortality of the soul.

Now as touching the ancient Doctors of the Church and the late Divines, they
have written diversely of the original of men's souls and of their entrance
into their bodies: about which point there have been and are at this day,
great disputations and controversies namely, Of the creation and generation of
souls.
amongst the Physicions and the Divines. Some have been of that opinion
touching the generation and beginning of the soul with the body, whereof we
have already spoken. But some restrain this to that soul which they call
Vegetative and Sensitive, as has bin showed unto us, others comprehend also
the reasonable soul therewithal. And besides that which we have spoken
already touching original sin in the soul, they ground themselves upon that
which is written in Genesis, how that after God had created man, who was the
last in the creation of all the creatures, he rested the seventh day from the
work which he had made, after he had accomplished whatsoever it pleased him to
do. Therefore they conclude, that from that time forward God created not any
new creatures, but having set such an order as it pleased him to appoint in
the nature of things created, he preserved the same afterward by his
providence, whereby he works always in the guiding and conservation of his
creatures, although not after that manner whereby he works in the creating of
them. And thus he rested in regard of the work of creation, How God rested
the seventh day.
so as he created no more any creatures in such sort and manner as he did the
first creatures in the beginning. Nevertheless, he rested not in respect of
the work of his providence, which never cease, but daily creates all those
creatures that come newly into the world, by means of those seeds, which he
has put into every one of them according to their kinds, and by other means
which he has ordained to that purpose. Having then laid this foundation,
they conclude that men's souls are not daily created of nothing, nor in such
manner as the soul of the first man was created, but by that means which God
then appointed for the preservation of mankind. But because they know well
enough that there is great difference betwixt the souls of men and of brute
beasts, they agree that God uses other means in the procreation and producing
of men's souls, then in that of beasts, by the concurring of his general
action, whereby he sustaineth and preserves the natures of all things,
according to that natural disposition which he has endued them with from the
beginning, agreeable to that which is written, Acts 17. 28.
that In him we live, and move, and have our being. Therefore as God used
other means in the creation of the soul of man, then he did in that of
beasts, and placed it also in the body of man after an other fashion that was
special and peculiar unto man: even so in the procreation and production of
men's souls, he has his special order for them, which differs from the
order used in the generation of the souls of beasts. And indeed he shows
very evidently, that he rules after another fashion in the production of men,
and namely, in regard of the soul, then in that of beasts, by the excellent
gifts wherewith their souls are adorned, not only in that their souls do
far exceed the souls of beasts, but also in that one soul excels
another in the nature of man: as we see it in many to whom God has given
heroical spirits, which are gifts that cannot proceed from the body. And so
much for the opinion of these men.

Others do not only deny the reasonable soul to be taken from any portion
either of the divine nature and essence, Another opinion of the creation of the
soul.
or of the body of man, but they say farther, that God by his divine power and
virtue creates it of nothing, after that the body of the infant is made
perfect in the womb of the mother, having all the parts and members thereof.
And being thus created of God, he presently places it within that body, which
he has appointed for the lodging of it, that it may dwell therein until after
the death of the body it depart immortal out of it, as it was created
immortal, and was so indeed when it entered thereinto. These men ground
themselves upon that which we read in Genesis, where it is said, that after
God had fashioned man of the dust of the earth, Genesis 2. 7.
he breathed into him the breath of life, and he was made a living soul. For
it appears plainly by this testimony of Moses, that the soul of the first
man was not only not created together with the body, as the soul of beasts
was, but also that it was given unto him of some other nature and substance.
For if there were no more in it then in that of beasts, and if it had no kind
of participation with the divine nature, why should God inspite it into the
body of man after another fashion then he did that of beasts? and what should
that inspiration or breathing of God, signify and import? We have heard
already what some answer unto this. For they deny nothing of all this, but
they say only, that God did then establish this order now spoken of, which
he daily continues in the generation of man. I omit here many other opinions
touching this matter, which come not so near unto the truth: namely, a great
controversy between the Doctors in Divinity and in Physic, touching the
vegetative and sensitive soul, and the time when the burden begins to be
nourished and to have sense thereby: considering that it is a great deal
better to inquire of these things to sobriety, and to leave the resolution to
GOD, who knows that which is hid from us, then by vain questions and
curious disputations to think to determine of the matter according to truth,
and to the contentation of every one. For as we have before touched, we can
know nothing either of the generation, or original, or of the substance and
nature of our soul, or of the immortality thereof, but only by those
testimonies which by the effects it aftoordeth unto us, and which God sets
down in his word. Wherefore, according to that which has been already
handled, we must distinguish those things unto which our minds may in some
sort reach, and of which we may have some knowledge, from them that are so
hidden from us, that we can not know or judge of any thing, but like blind
men, by groping and gessing.

This is a matter then of which we must speak very soberly, The nature of the
soul is not curiously to be searched after.
and with great reverence of God, contenting our selves with that which it
pleases him to make known unto us by the means aforesaid, and go no further
by desiring to know that which we can not conceive or comprehend, until such
time as God himself shall give us more ample and clear knowledge thereof. And
I suppose we shall not err, if we say the like touching the question
propounded by us in the beginning of our speech about this matter, namely, of
the means by which the reasonable soul should be infected with original
sin, seeing it is not engendered of that corrupt seed of which the body is
bredde. How the soul is stained with sin.
Let it then suffice us to know, that albeit the soul can not be defiled with
sin, as it is created of God, yet as God created all mankind in Adam, so
when he fell, all the rest of the world fell with him, and in him was bereaved
both of original justice, and of other gifts which he lost by his fall. So
that albeit men's souls are created and produced of God pure and entire, yet
they keep not that purity still, neither can they be the souls of men and
joined unto their bodies, and so become members of mankind in them with any
other condition, then with that into which the first Father brought all his
children by his sin, as we have before touched. Wherefore we must not search
for the cause of that original sin wherewith they are infected, either in
their creation, because they are created by God of a divine and immortal
essence: or in the generation of the body and in that seed of which it is
engendered, as if the soul took her original and infection together with the
body from the seed. Moreover, we must not (as the Pythagoreans do) search for
the corruption of souls in their entrance and conjunction with their bodies,
as if they received it from them: but we must seek it in that blot of sin
unto which the whole race of mankind was made subject through the fall and
corruption of the first stock, and in that decree of God, whereby he has
condemned all mankind by his just judgment, without any further inquiry
after the means and manner how it came to pass. For this cause Saint Paul
does bring us back to this consideration, when, in propounding unto us the
first stock of mankind, Romans 5. 12, 15.
he says, that by one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death. And
then he propounded unto us this stock of sin, so on the contrary side, he
propoudeth to us the stock of justice and righteousness, namely Christ Jesus
the; new man, who is an other stock of mankind regenerated, renewed, and
reformed after the image of GOD. Therefore he says, that as by the
disobedience of one man, Verse 19.
many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, many are made righteous.
Now as humane Philosopie knows not, either the corruption of all mankind
such as it is, or the fountain thereof, Humane philosophy is blind.
so it is ignorant of the means whereby it must be restored, neither knows
it that the wound is so great and mortal, as that it cannot be cured but only
by the hand of God. For which cause he was to give us his own son to be the
Surgion and Physicion. The ignorance hereof, is the cause why humane
Philosophy so greatly magnifieth the nobility and excellency of the soul,
as it is well worthy being considered in the first nature, in which it was
created. But the sequel of this matter we will hear of thee, ARAM.

Of those powers and properties, which the soul of man has common with the
soul of beasts: of those powers and virtues, which are proper and peculiar to
it self, according to the Philosophers: of the difference and agreement that
is between humane philosophy and Christian doctrine touching these things.
Chap. 87.
ARAM Amongst the heathen, they that were most ancient, and nearest to the true
Church of God, and conuersed most with his servants, had greater knowledge and
better understanding of the nature of God, of Angels, and of men's souls, and
of other matters belonging to true religion, then they that were farthest off
and succeeded latest after the other. The causes of errors.
For the farther off that the doctrine of heavenly things was drawn from the
fountain of it, the more has it been altered and corrupted both by ignorance
ouerwhelming it, and by false understanding of it, as also because every one
has added to and taken away what seemed him best: and that, either to boast
themselves that they may seem some body, or to cover their thefts, that none
might know from whence that thing was first taken and borrowed, that so they
might be thought to be the first members thereof: or lastly, to please and
satisfy the curiosity and vanity of the mind of man. No marvel therefore,
if there were heathen Philosophers among the ancients, who believed and taught
many things agreeable to the word of God, and if there be now some amongst us,
who boast of their study in philosophy, and yet have no part of that first
innocence and purity, but have their minds filled with strange opinions
contrary to all reason and truth. We see well enough by experience what
impiety reigns in this our age. For there are an infinite number to be
found of whose religion no man can judge, except it be herein that they
think there is none at all, and therefore mock at all religion, what show
soever they make to the contrary. But I know not why they should not blush
for shame, when they hear from heathen Philosophers so many goodly
instructions as they have left us, concerning the nature and immortality of
the soul.

It is true that the reason of man cannot of it self contemplate the soul in
her first and perfect nature, in which it was created: but it does consider of
it as it is at this present, and yet as though it were very sound. Whereupon
the Philosophers greatly magnify the nobility and excellency thereof.
Therefore when they are to consider of those points upon which they ground the
powers and virtues of the soul, for the first they take the vegetative virtue,
which it has common not only with the beasts, Three faculties under the
vegetative virtue.
but also with the plants: and this comprehends three other faculties
underneath it, namely the virtue of nourishing, secondly of increasing, and
lastly of procreation, as it has been already declared unto us. This virtue
with the rest that are comprehended underneath it, is the basest, most earthy
and vilest of them all: besides that it follows the sensitive virtue, which
may be referred as well to the internal as to the external senses. Two parts
of the sensitive virtue
So that we may divide it into two parts, and more properly call that the
sensitive virtue, which the soul has in taking knowledge of corporal things,
by corporal senses, and by their use in the body. The other part that
belongs to the internal senses may more specially be called, the cogitatiue
virtue. And because these two powers serve to increase knowledge and
understanding, they are as it were the fountain thereof, or rather helps and
instruments. How the Astronomers refer the powers of the soul to the stars.
The Astronomers, who refer all to the virtue of the stars and planets,
place the influence of the vegetative power with the parts of it, under the
Moon, of which the soul (as they say) receives it: the other two parts of
the sensitive power, of which I spoke even now, they place under the Sun, as
they do the fourth, which is the will and virtue of desiring, under the planet
Venus. The fifth, which is called the angry faculty, giving heart and courage to
a man, and moving him to wrath, under the planet Mars. Then for the sixth, they
place the virtue that gives motion from one place to another. For the seventh,
that which the Physicians call the vital virtue, and others the spiritual,
because it contains under it the power of respiration, and both these are
attributed to the same, because it is a property of the sensitive power to
move and breathe. Now all these powers of the soul are common to man with
beasts, or at least wise there is no great difference. But these which now
follow are proper and peculiar unto him, Powers proper to the ^easonable soul.
namely the reasonable power, of which the other that ensue are kinds, of
which number the Philosophers or Astronomers place in the first rank the
virtue of speech, Of speech.
where by the soul expresses her conceits, Of speech.
thoughts and affections. And although all me^ use north same words to utter
their thoughts each to other, by reason of the diversity of languages that is
amongst them, notwithstanding as the things which they understand and conceive,
and by which they are moved to speak, are al of one substance and nature
amongst all nations, so all the conceits and affections of men, which are
signified by their language, are alike in their soul and mind, where they are
written and engraven. This virtue they attribute to Mercury, as the other that
follows to Jupiter, which they call the practicke and active virtue, whereby
a man that has his will at liberty, does by counsel and settled reason,
exercise and bring to pass through art, prudence, and wisdom, those things
of which he has sure knowledge. Of the speculatiue and active virtue.
For it is not enough to have the contemplative virtue, unless the active also
be joined unto it to declare it by effect.

Thus you see where they place free will, which comprehends under it, first
election, then action, which is the practicke that follows it. And because
the practicke depends of the theoricke, which is the speculatiue and
contemplative virtue, and goes before the active virtue, therefore they join
this to that, and so refer it to the planet of Saturn which is
melancholicke. And this is that virtue of the soul, whereby man has
understanding, knowledge, and wisdom: and it comprehends the seats of such
things as the mind is able to understand and comprehend, as also those
general rules and principles, which it must afterward bring into use and
practice. For this cause this speculatiue virtue must of necessity go before
the active, because the practike is not very certain and sure without the
theorike. Of the politic virtue.
Afterward follows that which they call the pollitike virtue, which has for
her subject al moral philosophy. They understand by this virtue of the soul,
that whereby a prudent, wise, and well experienced man, moderateth his naughty
desires, and pernicious affections through his virtue, and whereby he declares
by practice and settled reason, that virtue and goodness, which is requisite in
the public society of men, and that not only in his private behavior, The
kinds of it.
but also in his public affairs. The principal virtues contained underneath
it, are prudence, justice, fortitude and temperance, which are commonly called
cardinal virtues, because they are chief, and contain under every one of them
many other virtues, which depend of them, as branches do of their stock. He is
accounted a civil good man and a just, that has this virtue which is divided
into sundry kinds, according to the diversity of estats that are in common
society. For it is sufficient for a private person to have so much of it, as
whereby he may know how to guide himself honestly according to his estate. If
he be a father of a family, he has need of that prudence and skill which is
necessary for the government of his house. If he have any public charge
concerning civil affairs, it is needful for him to have that art and skill, and
those virtues without which he cannot well execute his office, according to that
place and degree in which he is set. For if he occupies the room of a Lawier
or Counsailour at the Law, he must have skill and knowledge of the laws. If he
be a captain or soldier, he must be skilful in military discipline. If he be
a judge and magistrate, it is necessary likewise, that he understand what
belongs to his office. If he be a divine and pastor in the Church, the
science of Divinity, which is the knowledge of the holy scriptures, is
necessary for him, not only so much as is requisite for his own salvation, but
also that he may be able to instruct others, and to direct them in those things
that appertain to religion. Of the heroical virtue.
Besides, to al these virtues they add the heroical virtue, which is no
vulgar and common virtue, but very rare and excellent, and if I may so speak,
rather divine then humane. In regard whereof they that were endued with this
virtue among the Heathen, were placed in a rank and degree by themselves
between God and men, and were accounted and taken for demy-gods. And these are
those virtues, which the philosophers by experience find to be in the
reasonable soul, which are no fained or imaginatiue, but true virtues: neither
are they found in the soul of beasts, as those are of which we spoke in the
first place. Wherefore albeit man has the virtue of desiring common with
beasts, yet he has reason to moderate his desires, which is wanting in beasts.
Now all this doctrine touching the virtues of the soul, accords well with
the doctrine of Christianity, so far forth as the soul agrees with that
nature in which it was first created of God. But that which the Astrologians
affirm of the influences and infusion of virtues into the soul by the
planets, as we heard, I take it to be a bird of their own brain, whereby they
attribute to the creatures that which belongs to the Creator only. Against
the astronomicall influence of virtues.
For although he uses the creatures according to that order, which he has
placed in them, nevertheless when the question is of the reasonable soul, we
must ascend up higher then the heavens, unto which it can not be subject as the
body is, seeing it is of a far more excellent nature. For how should the
heavens, stars, and planets give that to the soul, which themselves have
not? I verily believe that when God created the soul of the first man, and
placed it in his body that was before created of the nature and substance of
the corruptible elements, he took not those virtues, with which he endued and
adorned it, either from the heavens or from the planets. And seeing he created
al mankind in this first man after his image, which he imprinted in his soul,
no doubt but that which yet remains in man's soul, proceeds from the same
fountain: as also what evil soever is befallen since, whereby this image abode
not perfect, it proceeds from sin, and from the nature of man corrupted by
sin, and not from the heavens or planets. And as the Astrologians easily
believe whatsoever they have imagined touching this point, and would have the
will of man subject to their influences and constellations: so the other
Philosophers abuse themselves greatly, Philosophers esteem too highly of man's
nature.
in magnifying the virtues of the soul more then they ought to be esteemed in
this corrupt estate of man's nature, not judging the corruption to be so great
as it is. Hereof it is also that they fail in regard of virtue, which they
attribute altogether to the liberty of man, as if he could by his own virtue
moderate his affections, and make himself just and righteous. Which fault
proceeds from hence, in that they content themselves with a justice that
seems so to be before men, and put no difference between divine and humane
justice: that is, betwixt that which is able to stand and approve it self in
the judgment of God, and that which men approve. What justice God approoueth.
For there is no justice able to satisfy the judgment of God, but that of
Jesus Christ, which it pleases him to impute unto his children, and in regard
thereof to account them just. But let us return to our matter.

We have further to note, that besides the forenamed virtues, the Platonists
attribute to the soul four others, Four contemplative virtues according to
the Platonists.
which they call contemplative virtues, as those that belong to the
contemplative life, unto which they are referred by them. The first is named
the purgation or second death of the soul: for the first death of it say they,
is her descending into the body of man, into which it is thrown as it were
into a prison, and in a manner buried in vices. Therefore they say that the
soul stands in need of this second death, whereby she being purged from her
vices is as it were dead unto them, that she may live unto virtue. The second
kind of these virtues is called pure or purified, because the soul being
purged from all her evil affections, exercises good works by the same. The
third is called by them an exemplarie or patterne-vertue in the mind of God:
whereby they mean, that as God conceiueth and knows the Idaeas, kinds and
images of all sensible and intelligible things, so he sends down from heaven
this virtue into the soul of man, who is thereby purged and purified as we
have already heard. And for the last they add a fourth virtue, which they
account greatest and chiefest above the other, and therefore they call it
Divine, because it brings to the soul a virtue to do more then humane
works, even such as we call miraculous works. Which four kinds of virtues
appear evidently to have been drawn by them from christian doctrine, but yet
disguised after their fashion. As touching the first, it agrees to that which
the word of God teaches us of regeneration, How those agree in some sort to
four christian virtues.
and mortification of the flesh, whereby we die to sin and to the devil,
that we may live to righteousness and to God. The second agrees to good
works proceeding of faith, which being done in the same purify the heart,
and to christian holiness, which accompanies and follows justification by
faith. The third agrees to gifts and graces inspited by the holy Ghost, and
to the infusion of them into the souls of Gods true servants: and the fourth
agrees to the gifts of prophecy and to that virtue of working miracles,
which has been heretofore in the holy Prophets, Apostles, and Disciples of
Jesus Christ. But to conclude this whole point, we are to observe this, that
what praise soever may be given to the Platonicall Divinity, yet it is in no
respect to be compared with Christian Philosophy: because this is pure, and
true, and endited by the Spirit of GOD, but the other impure, disguised, and
counterfaited by men, who have mingled with their Philosophy, many things
which they could either hear or learn out of the holy Scripture.

Moreover, as concerning the whole doctrine of the Philosophers touching the
nature and virtues of the soul, we may truly say, that of it self it
reaches higher, then those politic virtues of which we made mention even
now. For when a civil, good, and wise man has attained to that politic
virtue and to the highest degree thereof, he is able to go no farther, except
he be helped elsewhere, even by the illumination of the holy Spirit. And
indeed all those other virtues of the soul propounded by the Platonists, are
but dreams and opinions in the air, by which the Spirit of error labors
to disguise the doctrine of the holy Scriptures, which leads us to those
true supernatural virtues, which the soul receives by the inspiration and
infusion of the gifts and graces of the holy Spirit, who is the true
Doctor, of whom we must learn this Philosophy, which is not natural, but
supernatural. Now then being instructed and guided by him, having discoursed
of the creation and nature of the soul, let us enter into this goodly field of
the immortality thereof, in which we know there are many ranged battles of
enemies, who wait to enter into the combat with us. It belongs therefore to
thee, ACHITOB, to begin the skirmish.

How men can have no certain resolution of th'immortalitie of the soul, but
by the Word of God: of the perverseness of Epicures and Atheists in this
matter: Of the chief causes that hinder men from believing the immortality of
the soul, and of their blockishnes and evil judgment therein: How we must
seek for the Image of God, after which man was created in his soul. Chap. 88.
ACHITOB. We are now fallen into a time, which discovers unto us not only
false religions, but even an Atheism, that is far worse. For they that are
altogether without Religion are farther dist^^t from true piety, then they
that follow a false religion: and yet at this day there are as many or more that
declare themselves to be Atheists and Epicures, as there be of such as are
taken for good Christians. And if in outward show they pretend some exercise of
Religion, it is but to cover themselves with the veil thereof, to the end
they might not be esteemed and accounted for such as they are in truth. But
in their heart and with their companions they do but make a mock of the holy
Scriptures, and of al those testimonies that we have in them of another life
besides this, of Heaven of hell, of the blessed immortality and eternal death
of the soul. Now it is an easy matter to convince such fellows of error and
lies.

But this is a thing worthy to be bewailed in all the affairs, opinions and
counsels of men, that when any question arises of the truth and of that
which is Good, no proofs or testimonies, how rich or of how great authority
soever they be, seem sufficient to us and worthy to be believed. And yet if
the question be of any evil, falsehood and lies, no testimony, how slender and
bad soever it be, but satisfies us very well. Why men incline to lies rather
then to the truth.
For by reason that we are evil and ignorant, full of blindness and darkness
by nature, we are always the readier, to follow that which is like our selves,
namely wickedness and falsehood, lies and error: as we see it by experience in
Atheists and Epicures, and in all infidels and scorners of God and of his Word.
For there are many skillful in Arts and humane learning, and in natural
Philosophy, who reprehend and condemn Epicurus, Lucretius, Pliny and other
such like Philosophers, Epicures and Atheists, in that which they have taught
and written of natural things belonging to this life, and call them ignorant
men and void of experience. But in that which they have spoken against the
providence of God, the immortality of souls, and all Religion, abolishing
them wholly by their false doctrines and by Philosophy, they embrace and
praise them, for the skilfullest and most excellent Philosophers that ever
were, as having delivered men from the greatest torments that could seize upon
them, The devilish infection of Atheism.
and brought unto them the greatest good that could befall them, by taking from
them all fear of God, of hell, and of all punishment after this life, and all
opinion and hope of Paradise and of a better life after this. In a word, they
extol them, as if they only had found the bean in the cake, as we use to
say, and as if they only deserved to be the Kings of beans among their
fellows. Forasmuch then as we are entered into this matter of the immortality
of the soul, and seeing at this day so many Atheists herein follow the
opinions of these Epicurian Philosophers before named, I say not only more
then they do all the best Philosophers, but also then the authority of the
holy Scriptures, and the testimony of God in them: we cannot gather too many
arguments, whereby at leastwise to cause them to ponder the matter more
diligently, if they will not be confounded wholly by natural reasons, seeing
they make so small reckoning of that celestial and heavenly doctrine. It is
true that it will be a very hard and difficult matter to persuade such in this
point, as give no more credit to this testimony of the word of God, then they
do to all human and natural reasons that can be alleged unto them. For
although the arguments of those Philosophers that maintain the immortality of
the soul, are strong and weighty, yet they can never wholly and fully assure
men of their immortality, except this testimony of God take all doubting from
them. Reasons to prove the immortality of the soul.
But that argument of all others is most forcible, which he has given unto us
in the resurrection of Jesus Christ, whereby his soul was united again unto
his body, and so wrought those heavenly works which followed his resurrection
and ascension into heaven: and namely by the gift of the holy Ghost, which he
sent unto his Apostles, and by the effects thereof, which according to the
promise of Jesus Christ appeared so great and manifest throughout the whole
world, and that in so short a time, that no prudence, wisdom, skill,
eloquence, authority, power or force of man, was able to hinder that virtue,
or the course of the Gospel. But because Epicures and Atheists account these
things for fables, and are of so perverse and monstrous a nature, that they had
rather sight against nature it self, and clean to the worst opinions most
unworthy the nature of man, then to follow the reasons of the best Philosophers
grounded upon a more sure foundation, let us at leastwise put them to some
further trouble by urging them to be fully resolved in that opinion, which is
contrary to the immortality of the soul. For certainly I doubt not but they
will be always without resolution. And in deed from whence should they fetch
this resolution of theirs, seeing they have no certain ground of their false
opinion, and seeing there are so many and so forcible reasons to the contrary?
Why men believe not the immortality of the soul.
But we must note, that the principal cause that keeps men from believing
the immortality of the soul is, partly their ignorance, partly their malice,
and perverseness. For some there are so blockish, that they measure all things
according to the knowledge and reach of their bodily senses: so that they set
down with themselves to believe nothing, but that which they are able to know
and perceive by them. Others there are who besides this are so wicked and
perverse, that they would not only have their souls not to be immortal, but
wish also that there were no God, to the end they might have no Judge. For by
reason they are so wholly addicted to the world, and to their carnal
pleasures, they would have no other God, or other life after this: but wish
that all life might end with their delights, and the soul with the body, that
so they might have no account to make to any Judge. Therefore they are of that
number, whereof mention is made in the Book of Wisdom, Wisd. 2. 1, 2, etc.
who make these discourses, saying, Our life is short and tedious, The sayings
of Epicures.
and in the death of a man there is no recovery, neither was any known that
has returned from the grave. For we were borne at all adventure, and we shall
be hereafter as though we had never been: for the breath is a smoke in the
nosethrilles, and the words as a spark raised out of our hearts. Which being
extinguished, the body is turned into ashes, and the spirit vanishes as the
soft air. Our life shall pass away as the trace of a cloud, and come to
naught as the mist that is driven away with the beams of the Sun, and cast
down with the heat thereof. Our name also shall be forgotten in time, and no
man shall have our works in remembrance. For our time is as a shadow that
passes away, and after our end there is no returning: for it is fast sealed
so that no man comes again. Come therefore, and let us enjoy the pleasures
that are present, and let us cheerfully use the creatures as in youth. Let us
fill our selves with costly wine and ointments, and let not the flower of life
pass by us. I omit other speeches of a voluptuous, wicked, and unjust life,
which they purpose to lead, exercising al injustice, violence, and cruelty,
without al regard had to any right or justice, either to poor or rich, young or
old, but chiefly against the servants of God, who approve not their kind of
life, but reprove and condemn it. Verse. 21, etc.
Therefore it is said after all the discourse, that they imagined such things
and went astray. For their own wickedness blinded them. They do not understand
the mysteries of God, neither hope for the reward of righteousness, nor can
discern the honor of the souls that are faultlesse. For God created man
without corruption, and made him after the image of his own likeness.
Nevertheless, through envy of the devil came death into the world: Wisd. 3. 1.
and they that hold of his side, prove it, But the souls of the righteous are
in the hands of God, and no torment shall touch them. In the sight of the
unwise they appeared to die, and their end was thought grievous, and their
departing from us, destruction: but they are in peace. We see then that these
men go no farther then they can see with their bodily senses: The corrupt
opinion of Atheists and Epicures.
and because they see that man lives by breathing and cannot live without, and
that he dies when his breath fails, they think that the soul of man is
but a little wind and breath, and so is scattered and vanishes away as it were
wind and breath, or as a cloud in the air. The same judgment they are of in
regard of the blood, because life leaves the body with the blood, as if it had
no other soul but the blood, or breath. And forasmuch as the eye discerns no
difference between men and beasts in death, they judge also that there is no
difference between their souls. But if they be resolved to give credit to
nothing but to their corporal senses, and in death consider only what
difference there is between men and beasts, they will not believe that either
beasts or men have any soul at all that gives them life, because they see
nothing but the body only. And then by the like reason we must conclude, that
not only the whole man is no other thing but this body which we see, but also
that there is nothing in all the world, but that which may be seen by the
eyes and perceived by the other senses, and so all that which we have not seen
and known by them shall be nothing. Atheists may well be compared to beasts.
Which being so, men shall differ nothing from beasts, as indeed we can say no
better of these men. For beasts think of nothing but that which they behold
and perceive by their senses, and go no further: which is so far from all
science and discipline, and from all judgment of man, as nothing can be more.
Therefore they that believe nothing but their corporal senses, deserve to be
compared not only to little children, or to fools, who when they see
pictures, or their face in a glass, suppose they are living men, because they
go no farther then they see, but even to the brute beasts, who have less
sense and understanding then children. It is wonderful to consider how men
take such great pleasure and pains to become brutish. For if they do but see
a smoke come out of a place, they will judge that there is some fire within,
although they behold it not: and if they smell any ill savor, their nose will
tell them that there is some place infected, or some carrion lying not far
off, albeit they see it not. What is the cause then, that when by their senses
they perceive somewhat more in men then in beasts, Reasons to show the soul
of men to differ from that of beasts.
they are not induced thereby to think, that of necessity there must be some
what within them, which causes them to differ much from beasts? Which is not
by reason of the body, but of the soul, that is not seen but only by her
actions, works and effects. Whereupon it follows, that if their actions
differ from the actions of that soul whereby beasts live, the cause also from
which they proceed, must needs differ: and so consequently, that there is
great difference betwixt the soul of men and the soul of beasts. For let
them consider only the diversity of arts, which man exercises with his
hands, and the variety of so many witty and wonderful works as are wrought
by him, which cannot proceed but from a great spirit, and from a passing
excellent nature, the like whereof is not to be seen in beasts, or in any
thing they can do. Besides, do they not see how the spirit of man
discourses throughout all nature? what reason is in him, and how his speech
follows reason? which are such things as have a certain virtue, and the
image of a divine spirit shining in them. Wherefore, albeeit we should make
man wholly like to a beast, by reason of his body, both in regard of his
birth and death, yet we must needs confess, that he is of a far more
excellent nature in respect of that great and manifest difference, which we
see is in his soul. If then the soul of man be mortal as well as that of
beasts, to what purpose serve those graces which it has above the other? and
from what fountain shall we say they flow in it, and to what end were they
given unto it? But for this time I will leave these Atheists, hoping that to
morrow we will not leave any one natural reason able to urge them in their
demnable opinion, which shall not be laid out at large. And I demand of them
that have any taste of the holy Scriptures, and yet seem to doubt of the
immortality of the soul, or at leastwise are not fully resolved therein, how
man is said to be created after the image of God, if he shall be altogether
dissolved and brought to nothing? and where shall we then seek for this image
in him? It is certain, that this is not in the body, seeing that God is a
spiritual nature and substance, and not corporal. Then it follows, The
image of God is to be sought in the soul.
that this image is to be sought for in the soul, and not in the body. And if
it be in the soul, we must necessarily conclude, that it differs very much
from the soul of beasts. For indeed if they were both one, why should it
rather be written of man then of beasts, that he was created after the image
of God? And if man be the image of God, especially in regard of the soul, it
must needs be then of a divine and immortal nature: otherwise there would be
no good agreement between the image and the thing of which it is an image.
Therefore a corporal thing cannot be the true image of a spiritual thing, if
there be no resemblaunce or agreement of nature betwixt them. For although a
corporal image should be of another matter then the thing is of, which it
does represent, nevertheless, there is always some resemblaunce when both
the one and the other is of a corporal matter, and when the image has some
agreement in form with the thing represented. Now if any be desirous to seek
for the image of God in a corporal thing, we shall find as many of them as
there are creatures in the whole world. And yet it is not said of any creature,
no not of ye sun it self, nor of the moon or stars, that have no soul,
nor yet of the living creatures themselves, which are endued with soul and
life, that God said in their creation, Let us make them after our image and
likeness, neither that he created them after his image, as it is written of
man. If then there be no immortality of the soul of man, where shall we find
the image of the immortality of God who is immortal? And if there be no
immortality in man, but yt his soul is, either the temperament of his body, or
his vital spirit, as in beasts, God shall have no image that shall more
nearly resemble him in man then in beasts: neither shall he have any spiritual
image agreeable to his nature, in any creature under heaven.

Now if any reply and say, that this image is to be fought for, not in the
immortality of the soul, but only in reason and in the other virtues, where
with it is adorned above the soul of beasts, I say, that these things are in
such sort linked together, that they cannot be separated. An answer to an
objection.
Wherefore he that takes away the one, takes away the other: because the
soul of man should not have that which it has more then the soul of beasts
has, if it were not of another nature the^ theirs is. And we know well, that
whatsoever it has more, is not like to any creature under the heavens: and
that it cannot agree but to God, or to natures that have some participation
with the divine nature, which cannot be mortal, but immortal. So that when
we see so many signs and tokens, which testify unto us, that man has a
celestial and divine birth, it follows that he has in himself some
greater thing, that is more noble and excellent, then can be seen, or touched
with hands. It is true, that they who stay only in the corporal senses, as we
have said, shall never pearce to the contemplation of these things: but they
delight rather, for their confirmation in that beastly opinion, to hear the
common bye-worde used amongst the vulgar sort, that no man knows what
becomes of the souls of men after the death of their bodies, nor into what
country they go: because no body as yet ever brought any news from thence,
and therefore no marvel if no man either do or can know what is done there.
Which speeches albeeit they be very frivolous, yet are they heard many times
from them that think themselves to be none of the meanest. Therefore it will
not be peradventure without profit, if we answer them more at large to morrow,
going forward with our reasons and arguments of the souls immortality against
the Atheists: of which matter, ASER, thou shall begin to speak.

The end of the eleventh days work.
THE TWELFTH days work.
Of those who desire the return of Souls departed, to testify their
immortality: what witness have been sent us of God out of another world to
resolve us therein. Chap. 89.
ASER, We said yesterstay, that they who stay only in their corporal senses,
as brute beasts do, propound commonly against the immortality of souls, that
which is usually spoken of the common people, namely, that it is not known what
becomes of men's souls after the death of the body, or to what country they
go, because none ever returned from thence to bring any news. A reason of
Atheists confuted by a similitude.
Wherefore (say they) no body can tell what is done there, neither can any
thing be known. Now before we make answer to so frivolous and false an
argument, I would gladly demand of them, whether there were nothing at all of
those newfound Islands, (which were lately found in our time) before they were
discovered by them who not only were never there, but did not so much as once
hear of them before. For no body went thither from hence, neither did any come
hither from thence: so that there was no more intelligence between them and
us, then between the living and the dead, or between them that are altogether
of another world: therefore also their country is called the New world. Now
then shall it be thought, that this people were not at all, because they were
not known of us, not their manners and kind of life? And yet now the time
shows evidently, that notwithstanding any distance of place that has been
between them and us, there were means sufficient to communicate and traffic
together, and those more easy then any is between the souls already
departed out of their bodies, and us who yet remain in the world with our
bodies. For concerning the distance and difficulty of the places, who doubts
but that it is far greater between heaven and earth, Paradise and Hell?
Therefore also Abraham speaking of the place and estate of the elect and
reprobate in another life, Luke 16. 26.
says to the rich man, There is a great gulf set between you and us, so that
they which would go from hence to you, cannot: neither can they come from
thence to us. And this we may say in like manner of our selves, and of those
that are already departed into another life, in regard of their return unto
the living. For it is ordained, that they shall not return again into the
world, as also that they shall depart hence but once. And they that go from
hence, do it not with soul and body joined together: for it is not a voyage
like to those which we make in this world, when we go from one country to
another. Now as the Lord has determined how long the souls shall abide in
their bodies in this life, so he has ordained and set the time in which they
ought to depart and the place where they are to be received, according to the
estate of every one, even until they return into their bodies at the
resurrection. If they be souls of the reprobate, they are detained in Hell in
eternal fire, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth: if they be the
souls of Gods elect, they shine as the sun in the kingdom of heaven, in a
life accompanied with perpetual joy and happiness. But we must urge them
better that require testimony for the immortality of souls by their return
into this world, or of some that have come from another world. For it is an
easy matter for us to bring them as credible witnesses as any can be, to tell
them most certain news, if they will believe them, according as they deserve
it. And for the first, have we not Jesus Christ, who first came down from
heaven and became man, to bring us news, and to declare the same unto us in
his own person, not only before his death, but also after his resurrection?
Besides, how many other witnesses have we, that have testified most certainly
of the same? mark 16. 14. Math. 28. 9. luke 24. 36. john 20. 19, 20* act. 1.
2, 3, 10. 1. Cor. 15 6.
who saw with their eyes and touched with their hands, even to the number of
more then five hundred, according as Saint Paul testifies? Moreover, they that
were raised as well by him as by Elias and Elizeus, and by the Apostles and
disciples, may they not serve us also for good withnesse to assure us, not
only that souls are immortal, but also that their bodies shall rise again,
and that God is of sufficient virtue and power to do it as he has promised? I
omit here the testimony which the Angels have given both of the resurrection
and ascension of Jesus Christ: besides that of the holy spirit, which is the
chiefest of all, with signs and gifts wherewith he came accompanied, and
those works and effects that followed them. Wherefore seeing we have for
this point the word of God that is most certain and clear, which teaches us
what we ought to believe and hold, let us rest our selves in the testimony
thereof, and not desire to make further inquiry. Exodus 3. 6. mat. 22. 32, 33.
mar. 12. 26. luke 20. 37, 38.
For it is he that said to Moses, I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
Jacob. Whereupon Jesus Christ concludes, that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob do
live yet after their death, seeing God is the God of the living and not of the
dead, that is to say, of them that are yet in being, and not of them that are
nothing at all. For otherwise, if all men should so perish by death, that
nothing of them should remain in life, at leastwise in regard of the soul,
then should he be the God of nothing. And although it seems that Jesus Christ
alleged this place against the Sadduces, not only to prove against them by
the doctrine of Moses, the immortality of souls, but also the resurrection of
bodies, we may well gather, that if it be fit to prove that bodies arise, it
is much more strong to assure us of ye immortality of souls. For when the Lord
spoke these words, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were not alive in regard of their
bodies, but only of their souls. And yet Jesus Christ alleged it to confirm
also thereby the resurrection of the dead, although at the first sight it may
seem not to be very fit and firm to prove that so much as the immortality of
souls. But if it be narrowly looked into, The resurrection of the dead proved.
his argument shall be found to be very well deduced and grounded upon invincible
reason. For Jesus Christ had respect to ye promise which God made to those holy
Patriarchs of whom he spoke, and which was not made only to their soul, but to
the whole man together compounded of body and soul. Wherefore al they to who^
it was made, and to whom it appertains, should not have ye whole effect of
it, nor the full fruition of that which it contains, if they were not whole
inheriters thereof both in body and soul. For if it were otherwise, the promise
should be accomplished but in one part of man, and not in the whole man.
Whereupon it follows, that seeing the promise is not of a temporal benefit,
but of an eternal, therefore ye whole man that must enjoy the same, must of
necessity live an everlasting life being of the same nature that the benefit
is of, which he must inherit. Wherefore seeing the course of man's life is
broken off by death in regard of the body, the body must necessarily rise again
to live again with his soul in a better and longer life, to the end yt the whole
man may possess yt inheritance, which is promised him of God: or else ye
promise made by God to his servants is altogether vain, or ye testimony which
the holy scripture bears is wholly false, and so also the scripture that
propounds the same unto us. But none may once think either of these two last
points, without great horror of blasphemy contained in the^. So that the first
point concludes very strongly, according to that ground which it has most
certain in the word of God. Whereunto may be added further, that seeing the
soul of man is created, not to live always without a body, as the Angels do,
nor yet to wander from body to body, but to be knit and joined to that body,
which is assigned to it of God, it must needs be, that being part thereof, as of
her lodging, she should once again return thither. Besides, seeing the body
has served the soul, either in obeying God, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7.
or in disobeying of his will, the nature of Gods iusticerequireth, that it
should be rewarded also with the soul, according to the quality of those
works whereof it has bin an instrument. Therefore according to that which we
have discoursed of this matter, the resurrection of the body does so depend of
th'immortality of souls, that it follows necessarily upon this: so that if we
have assurance of the one, we ought to have it of the other, seeing both of
them are certainly grounded upon the justice of God, which cannot be just
unless he judge men both in body and soul according to his word, and
according as every one lives. But seeing the matter of th'immortality of
souls, and that of the resurrection of bodies are sundry questions, and that
we are to handle but one of them, we must return to our first point of the
soul touching th'immortality thereof, which is easily believed of all that
approve of the doctrine of holy Scriptures, and that give credit to ye word of
God. For they are thoroughly resolved thereof. Yea we may know by the writings of
al antiquity, that the common opinion of all people and nations of what
religion soever they have bin, has bin this, that men's souls were immortal.
Wherefore in regard of this point, we are to fight only against Epicures and
Atheists. And because they will not believe the word of God, but deride it as
tales made upon pleasure: I am of opinion that now we are to search chiefly for
those testimonies, which God has given us in nature touching th'immortality of
the soul: even the actions and effects thereof, by means of which we come to
the knowledge of hidden and secret causes, from whence they proceed. Therefore
consider Amana, what you mind to speak unto us of this subject.

Of natural reasons, whereby the immortality of souls may be proved against
Epicures and Atheists: and first of the argument taken from the faculty of
knowledge which the soul has, and from that knowledge of eternity which is
in it: how it appears, that it is not begotten of this corruptible nature,
because it ascends up unto God: and how by a special benefit of God, it is
daily created, and not by the virtue of nature. Cha. 90.
AMANA. Seeing Epicures and Atheists give credit to natural Philosophy in
things whose causes it proves by their effects, they have no reason to refuse
it in the consideration of the nature of men's souls. Now it is very certain,
that if we will take this course, besides the testimonies of God in his word
touching the immortality of the soul, which way soever we turn our eyes,
whether above us or beneath us, on the right hand, or on the left, we shall
find every where arguments and reasons concluding the same. For we have
nature, and the necessity of causes, proportion and similitude, life, the
excellent dignity of man, the goodness of God, and the profit of mankind
proceeding from his bountifulness, which with one common consent, and as it
were, all with one voice teach us, and cry out that the soul cannot be
mortal.

First then we observe, How we know the hidden things in nature.
that the true and natural essences of all things are not known of us by
themselves, but continue hid in the secret closets of every one of them, unto
which our mind being burdened with this mass of the body, and overwhelmed
with the darkness of this life, is not able to reach. Therefore we must
enquire by the accidents adhering unto them, and principally by their actions,
whereby our reason discourses, and concludes of every thing, what it is, and
of what quality. For every thing has his actions, and works, according to it
own substance and nature, and by them declares and makes it self known: so
that if we consider the actions of the soul, we shall by them know the nature
and immortality thereof. An argument taken from the knowledge of the soul to
prove it immortal.
Let us then consider her first and principal action, which is to know, and
this imports also to understand, to comprehend, and to conceive. Whereupon
we have to note, that there is no power of Knowing, that can attain to the
knowledge of any thing, but it has some agreement and proportion with the
nature of the same thing: because knowledge is as it were the image of things,
which is imprinted in the soul as in a glass. Now it is certain, that a
looking glass cannot represent the image and similitude of a spiritual thing,
because it self is a corporal thing, which has no agreement in nature with
that which is spiritual. Likewise it cannot represent any thing belonging to
the other senses, but only that which concerns the sight: and therefore it
cannot represent either soundes, smelles, or tastes, because the use thereof is
only for the eyes, neither does it agree with any of the other senses, but
only with the sight. And as for our external senses, they cannot perceive
those things that have neither quantity nor bodily substance, because they
themselves are corporal. Neither yet can they perceive things that are absent.
And the internal senses, as the fantasy and the imagination, cannot perceive
spiritual things, as namely, either God or Angels: but only the spirit of a
man does perceive, know and comprehend them, which power and faculty no other
creature under heaven has. For if it were otherwise, it could not in any wise
comprehend a thing, that surmounteth it with an infinite greatness, and with
which it has no agreement at all. For further confirmation of that which I
say, Eternity considered diuer^ly.
let us consider of Eternity, as it is whole and entire in it self: then let
us divide it into that which was since the creation of the world, and finally
into that which followed the same, and which shall be for evermore. When our
spirit enters into the consideration of that which was before the creation,
our thought is not able to comprehend it, so that it is overwhelmed with the
greatness thereof: but we do well understand and comprehend that part of
eternity, which shall follow us hereafter throughout infinite ages. Whereby
it appears, that this first consideration of it, is too great for our soul,
as having no proportion therewith, nor yet agreeing thereunto: but it is
otherwise with the soul in the consideration of that other eternity, for the
fruition whereof it was created. For the soul is not eternal as God is, as
though it had no more beginning then he had: and therefore it has no agreement
with him in this respect. The soul then enters into a bottomless gulf,
when it discourses of an eternity, of which it is not partaker: but it has
agreement with the eternity of God as angels have, in that it is created
immortal, to live an eternal life with him: which appears in that it is
able to comprehend the same. Therefore Saint John in the beginning of his Gospel
leads us even to the gates of this first eternity: but forasmuch as it is a
gulf in which we shall be swallowed up, if we enter farther into it, he
proceeds not forward, but stays us there: and calls us presently unto the
means whereby. God manifested himself, telling us how he did this by his
eternal word: and first by the creation of the world, then by those other
means, which he sets down afterward: all which our soul comprehends
well, and so cannot the soul of beasts do. Wherefore when we consider God in
his essence and nature before ye creation of the world, and the time that was
before that, we are then overwhelmed therewithal, and see no whit at all into
it. But if we enter into the consideration of the times after the creation of
the world, and into those which shall follow still after us unto all eternity,
we look into it more clearly, and are not so much dazeled therwithall,
because our soul is more capable of this consideration, then of the other,
which was before all creatures. A special difference between the soul of man
and (...) beasts.
From hence we may conclude, that the souls of beasts and plants that have
not in them this cogitation or apprehension of eternity, are produced and
taken out of the power and virtue of that matter, of which they are engendered:
but the spirit of man is more specially bredde in the body by God, above all
the powers of the matter and nature of the same. A firm proof of the souls
immortality.
For nothing arises higher, or passes beyond that thing of which it receives
essence, and being, and those powers and strength that it has: for if it did,
then should it not receive being from thence, but of some other thing before
and above that, or else farther off, unto which it tends. We see this in all
the senses both external and internal, which are common to us with beasts.
For they know nothing else, beside that which is of this nature which we see,
neither do they ascend higher: but our spirit not content with the sight and
knowledge of the heavens, stars and Angels themselves mounteth up to God, and
being come thither can go no further. What other thing else does this signify,
and declare unto us, but that the souls of beasts are engendered of this
corruptible and mortal nature, beyond which they cannot lift up themselves,
but that ours are produced of God above the power of this nature? A fit
comparison.
And so that may be said of our soul, which is spoken of a spring water,
namely, that it ascends as much upward as it descends downward, but can
go no higher. For when a man would carry the water of a spring any whither,
and would have it mount upward, it will be an easy matter to bring it as high
as the springhead from whence it flows: but no higher, except it be forced
by some other mean then by it own course and natural virtue. Notwithstanding
it will easily descend lower. And so fares it with our spirit. For as it came
from God, so it is able to mount again to the knowledge of him, and no higher:
but it descends a great deal lower. And as for our senses, they remain
lower then the works of nature, and pearce not to the depth of them, but are
always busied about the external face of them. Neither is it to be doubted,
but that Moses meant to teach us these things by that which he rehearses of
the means used by God in the creation of man, which differed from that he
kept in the creation of all other creatures, either living or without life. For
we have heard what deliberation and counsel he used, before he put hand to
the work: Genesis 1. 26.
how he fashioned the body, and how he placed the soul therein by and by
after. Therefore in that the Prophet describes the creation of the body
apart, and then that of the soul, he gives us to understand, that we must
seek for something more high and excellent in that of man then in that of
beasts, whose souls were created with their bodies, and of the selfsame
matter with them. Moreover, he teaches us this very plainly when he says,
that God created man after his own image and similitude: which he did not say
of beasts, as we have already heard. Therefore there must needs be in the
soul of man some other power and virtue, then that by which it gives life to
the body, and which is common to it with those of brute beasts. So that as
God gave to this dead body taken out of the earth, a soul that endued it with
life, motion, and sense: so he imprinted and ingraued his image into this
soul, unto which immortality is annexed. Why man was said to be a living
soul.
Therefore when Moses says, that man was made a living soul, no doubt but by
the name of soul he means another nature and substance then that of the
body. And in that he calls it living, he declares plainly, that the body
has not of it self and of it own nature, that life wherewith it is endued,
but from the power of this soul. And although he there makes not any
special mention of the other virtues thereof, it is because he considered the
capacity of the people with whom he lived, unto whom he would frame himself,
being content to speak openly of that power of the soul, which appeared best
without, and which the external senses might most easily know and perceive by
the effects thereof. But I think it will not be unfit for this matter, if we
return to yt question, which before we touched concerning the creation of the
soul, namely, whether, since it was created by God in the first creation of
man, it be still created after the same sort as it were by a new miracle, in
them that are daily borne in the world, or whether it be naturally created,
but yet of God by a certain order appointed for that end by him. Now albeeit
it be very requisite, that we should be sober and not rash in this matter,
for the causes already set down, notwithstanding we will here propound the
opinion of some learned men, grounded upon that order, How God daily creates
souls.
which God has accustomed to observe in his works and in his creatures. For
seeing he has set a law in nature for all other creatures according to which
he creates and produces them, and not by any new miracle, it is more likely
that he creates souls naturally, and that he has ordained a steadfast law for
mankind, but differing from that of beasts, so much as his creation differed
from theirs. For having once established an order, he uses not to change it
into a diverse or contrary order, but keeps still the same, except it be
that sometimes he uses extraordinary means by way of a miracle. For although
all his works be great miracles, and chiefly man; nevertheless, What a
miracle is.
we call none by that name, but only those which he woorketh by supernatural
means, not against, but beside the common order of nature. But that which I
say, derogateth nothing from the nature and immortality of man's soul. For
although it be placed in that matter which is already prepared and
appropriated for the fashioning of the body, yet he does this above the virtue
of the matter and of the work of nature, by a law which he has established
to that effect. For this cause he does not only give a soul to them that are
begotten by lawful marriage, but to those also who are brought forth in
whoredom, whether it be adultery, incest, or any other such like. For although
that honesty, which is enjoined mankind by God, be not kept in such a birth
and generation, but contrarieth the same, yet it is not contrary to the law of
generation ordained by God: as that generation is which is by buggerie, Buggery
violateth the law of nature.
wherein not only the Law of honesty is violated, but also the law of nature.
We will conclude then, that it is not only true, that our soul is not brought
forth by the power of nature, but by the benefit of God only, but also that it
is expedient and very behoofefull, yea necessary for mankind that it should be
true: and because it is behoofefull and necessary, it is true also without all
question. For God has omitted nothing that is agreeable to his glory, and
profitable and expedient for mankind. For seeing the soul is placed within
the body, not by the virtue of nature, but properly and peculiarly by a
special benefit of God, man owes the chiefest and best part of himself, not
to nature, but to God. Which is the cause why he should acknowledge him as the
only father of his spirit, God is the only father of our spirit.
and consecrate the same wholly to him alone: not yielding any right and
interest therein to any other besides him only, who is sovereign, almighty,
and the only father of spirits. For if the question be of the body and of all
the senses thereof, many may claim an interest therein under God, namely
Fathers and mothers, the children themselves, nature, the kindred, the country,
friends, kings, Princes and Lords. But the soul belongs to none but to God
alone, which he wills and commands should be reserved to him only for our
happiness, because he only is the author and creator thereof. If it be so then,
that our soul is not begotten or produced by this nature, which is the
handmaide of God and worker under him, but by God alone, it follows very
well, that nothing in nature can extinguish it, but God only who is able to do
it if he please. Now it is not likely or credible that God would make a thing
by it self, and that after a different manner from other things, which should
have nothing besides the creation of it, and then within a while after would
destroy it. For if it were otherwise, why would he observe another mean in
the creation of man, then in that of beasts? Why would he not rather have
bestowed upon nature, the power of the generation and corruption of man's soul,
as he has done that of other living creatures? Wherefore would he seem to
reserve that thing as proper to himself, which he would make subject to the
law and common condition of other things? Thus much then for those arguments,
which we may take from the knowledge that God has given to man's soul, and
from his constant work in the creation of it, to prove the nature and
immortality thereof. Now we are to consider what arguments we have to the same
purpose, in that virtue of desire, which is given unto it. These things then we
may learn of thee Aram.

Of the argument for the immortality of the soul, that may be taken from that
natural desire thereof, and of perpetuity, which is in it: of another
argument to the same purpose: of the desire which men have to continue their
name and memory for ever: an argument to the same end taken from the
apprehension and terror which men may have both of the death of the body, and
also of the soul and spirit. Chap. 91.
ARAM. Three things inseparable.
These three things are so linked and knit together, namely Gods religion, his
divine providence, and the immortality of the soul, that they neither may nor
ought to be separated in any wise. For if our souls were not immortal, no
reward or punishment for good or bad doings were to be looked for: and then
God should not seem to have any care over us, which if he have not, why should
we worship him? Our hope should be in vain, and religion unprofitable. But if
without the grace and goodness of God we cannot live, and if he will be sought
unto of us by prayer, then religion is very necessary, and the immortality of
the soul certain. And even as a man cannot renounce those excellent gifts,
which naturally are planted in his spirit and mind, and in that reason which
God has bestowed upon him, but he must renounce himself, and become like to
the brute beast: so fares it also with him, when he renounceth his
immortality. But seeing we are now in handling the powers of the soul, to
show that it dies not, and seeing we have spoken of knowledge, we will
consider what arguments to the same end may be taken from the virtue of
desiring that is naturally in it.

Heretofore we learned, that all knowledge both in man and beast, is given to
this end, that they should desire whatsoever they know to be good, and eschew
that which they know to be evil. Concerning the knowledge of our senses, they
conceive well enough what it is to be present, and so do the senses of beasts,
of which and of our whole nature, we may judge both by our external and
internal senses that are common to us with them, and so we may discern of all
such like things. But the appetite or desire of beasts goes no further then
the time present. For that natural desire of their own preservation which is
in them, proceeds not from any knowledge which they have of things, but from
the workmanship of nature, and from that natural inclination which they have
thereunto, without any motion of reason or understanding.

Whereupon it follows, that their desire to preserve themselves, and their
power of procreation proceeds not from their knowing virtue, that is the
chiefest in them, but from the vegetative virtue, which is the basest and most
abject. But man goes a great deal further. For man has knowledge of
perpetuity and of eternity, as we heard in the former speech: and because he
knows that eternity is a good and profitable thing for him, The desire of
perpetuity, an argument of the souls immortality.
he does also desire the same. This desire then is natural: and if natural,
it follows also that it is a very meet and convenient thing for us, and so
consequently, that it is not given to man without cause and to no purpose. We
must then conclude hereupon, that it may be accomplished, and that of
necessity it must be sometime or other. For if it were otherwise, to what
purpose should this knowledge serve which man has of so great a benefit, and
which also moves him to desire the same, if he could never attain to the
fruition thereof? And why should God teach the same to men, if he would not
make them partakers of it? Were it not rather to debase, then to advance them
above beasts, whereas he has created them Lords, and as it were his last
and principal piece of work, in his work of creation? Should it not seem to
be not only a vain thing, but also (if I might so speak) as though God
delighted to torment men, to cause them to desire that thing, of which they
should never have any participation? Were it not better for them, at leastwise
as good, that in this respect he should have created them like to brute
beasts? For so they should live a great deal more quiet, and not torment
themselves as they do, after a thing, which is altogether impossible for them
to attain unto. Now we have a very evident sign and testimony in us,
Another desire, which is to continue our memory for ever.
of the continual being of this desire of enternitie, in that longing which
men have to make their name eternal as much as may be, and that their memory
might remain in all ages that shall follow long time after them. And which is
more, this affection is so natural, and imprinted so deep into men's hearts,
that even they who deny the immortality of souls, and who think that every
man does wholly vanish away by corporal death, do covet notwithstanding the
immortality of their name, and to have a good report amongst men still after
their death. Hereof we have very good proof in the last will and Testament
of Epicurus himself, the Captain and standard bearer of all Atheists and
Epicures, who have received their name of him. For he appointed therein, that
the day of his nativity should be yearly celebrated, and that at certain
times assigned by him, a banquet should be made for those of his sect, in
remembrance of his name. Whereby we see that this dog himself, who made no
difference between the death of men and of beasts, and who denied utterly the
immortality of the soul of man, could not for all that pluck out of his
own soul the desire of immortality: but does what lay in him to make
himself immortal after his death, by the perpetuity of his name and memory.
Another desire of perpetuity, appearing in funerals.
We may take the like argument from that which men usually appoint at their
death, touching their funerals, sepulchers and tombs. For why is it, that they
will have sumptuous funeralles, and stately and magnificent tombs? Why have
many caused Churches and chapels to be erected, themselves to be engraven,
and their escutchions to be hung up, where they have laid themselves? It is
certain, that if they desired not to make their name as immortal as they
could, and their memory eternal among men, their death would not be so
ambitious, neither would they leave behind them such marks of their ambition,
and of their desire of immortality. And as great men affoorde this testimony
of their desire, so the common people are not without some one or other for
their part. For a poor Artificer, as a Tailor or Shoemaker, or some such like,
if he be able he will appoint to have a stone laid upon his grave, in which
his name shall be engraven, and his mark, or some such like thing: to this
end that the Suruiuors, and they that come after him, should know that he
once lived and was in the world, and that he would still live, at leastwise
in name and memory. And this is further confirmed by them, who albeeit they
cannot continue their name and memory by any good deeds and valiant acts,
yet they strive to make themselves immortal by wicked and execrable doings.
As among others we have the example of Herostratus, who set on fire the Temple
of that great Diana of Ephesus for no other cause, but only that he might
be spoken of, and that the memory of him might remain and continue for ever
amongst men: as in deed it has done, notwithstanding the contrary endeavor
of the Ephesians, who by a public Edict ordained, that his name should never
be written in any place. An objection.
But it may be objected unto me, that this argument derived from the desire
of men to continue their name, to prove the immortality of souls thereby, is
not very fit, nor of great force: because this desire is rather found in men
that are most foolish, vain, carnal, and wicked, then in the wiser sort of
men, and such as are more grave, spiritual, and virtuous. For who covet more
this immortality of name and memory, then they that are most vainglorious and
ambitious, unto whose ambition death it self can bring no end, but it reuiueth
and lives still therein? We see also, that they who least of all believe the
immortality of souls and scoff most at it, are greatliest affected with this
ambition, and labor most to become immortal after that manner, The answer to
it.
because they expect no other immortality. All this I confess is true, yet
mine argument continues still firm. For first we have always this testimony
from them, that they know and acknowledge a certain immortality and
perpetuity, and desire to enjoy the same as much as they may, thinking to
continue the same even after their death: which knowledge and desire is not to
be found in brute beasts. And whereas the vainest and worst men are more moved
with this foolish desire, then the wisest and most virtuous men are, the reason
thereof is good and evident. For the wisest men and such as are endewed with
most virtue make least account of this temporary and fading immortality, which
is but as it were a wind that goes from mouth to mouth, or is but in paper,
parchment, wood, stone, brass, or in some such corruptible matter: because
they expect a better perpetuity that is more certain, more glorious, and of
longer continuance, of which they are certainly persuaded. Of the true
immortality.
Which persuasion can not be vain in them, seeing it is grounded upon the
testimony of Gods Spirit, which says, that the just shall be had in everlasting
remembrance, not only before men, but also before God and Angels. But the
other sort of men busy themselves about an immortality, which deserves not
to be accounted so much as a shadow and image of true immortality: because
the desire thereof is infected and corrupted with that darkness of error and
of ignorance, which sin has brought upon the mind of man, with those
perverse affections that proceed from the same, and with their evil educcation
and instruction, who are not taught in the word of God. By means whereof this
natural desire of true immortality degenerateth into a foolish desire greedy
of fame and name among men: (even as when good seed falls into bad ground)
but still it proceeds from a good beginning and fountain, if it were not
corrupted. As we see also that it falls out with the greater part of men in
that natural desire they have of skill and knowledge, which albeit it be in them
by nature, yet they turn it into a vain and foolish curiosity, that
endeavors to know that which is not only not profitable, but very hurtful
and dangerous for them, in stead of seeking to know that which is more
profitable and necessary. But besides that which we have already spoken, our
affections also tell us plainly, what the nature is as well of our spirit, as
of our senses both internal and external: and what difference there is
between them. For if the Spirit enters into a cogitation of it own death,
the internal senses, with fancy and imagination are not greatly moved or
troubled therewith, but pass it over well enough, as if they had no feeling
thereof, supposing that this corporal life will last a long time: An argument
taken from the apprehension of death to prove the immortality of souls.
but the spirit is so confounded and troubled, that it fears and flies
nothing more then it. And surely I doubt not, but that they who being pressed
and oppressed with great euilles, desire death through a blind fury of their
mind, and wish to be wholly extinguished, would change their purpose and
abhor that kind of death, and think it to be a greater mischief then all
those which they suffer, if they might have leisure and means for some small
time to come out of their despair, and to return to their right mind, that
so they might have some rest from the troubles of their spirit, and think
seriously upon the death thereof. And as all the senses are presently troubled,
and as it were carried out of themselves through the cogitation of corporal
death: so the spirit contrariwise, if it be found, quiet, and well settled,
abides firm, and derideth the ignorance, error, and terror of the senses,
correcting and reproouing them for the same. We may then conclude from the
evidence of these things, that the death of the Spirit is contrary to the
nature of it, and therefore is afraid of it, and abhors even to think of
it, or to make any mention thereof. But the senses care not but for this bodily
life, which the Spirit contemns in regard of the other: whereby it
appears, that the death of the body does affect and touch it nothing at all,
but the body only, and those things that are joined unto it, as namely both
the external and internal senses. For this cause, those men that are carnal
and led most by their senses, think little either upon the one or the other,
except it be when they see themselves in danger of corporal death. For,
persuading themselves that they shall live long in this world, or at leastwise
gathering to themselves as much hope thereof as they can, they think nothing
at all in a manner of death during the whole life, no more almost then if they
were borne immortal, until such time as they see in good earnest that they
must dislodge. Then are they awaked out of their sleep, and if they be not
altogether become brutish, they are constrained to think both upon the death
of the body, Of the end of good and evil men.
and the death of the spirit: and the less they are prepared against them
both, the more astonished and amassed they are in themselves. Contrariwise good
and just men, who of a long time, yea all their life have thought upon both,
find themselves less troubled a great deal, because they are resolutely
persuaded and assured of a better life. Moreover, we find by experience, that
when the spirit is troubled with affections, or confounded through fancies and
imaginations, or ignorant, vicious, profane, wicked, without fear of God and
void of religion, it is a great deal more moved at the cogitation and
remembrance of corporal death, then if it be sound, well disposed and settled,
quiet, skillful, innocent, religious, and fearing God. Whereupon we may
consider and learn, which of these two judgments is more certain and true,
either that of a spirit that is troubled, diseased, ignorant, evil, without
fear of God, and void of religion: or that of a spirit, which has all those
perfections rehearsed by us, contrary to these vices. It is an easy matter to
judge. Therefore if we attribute more, as in reason we ought, to that Spirit
whose judgment is most true and certain, the conclusion that I have made,
shall be confirmed thereby. And as by the difference of desires, we may easily
judge of the nature and essence of man's soul, so we may do the like by those
delights wherein it takes pleasure. But I leave thee, ACHITOB, to go forward
with the discourse of this matter.

Of the argument that may be taken from the delights and pleasures of the soul
to prove the immortality thereof: an argument to the same end taken from the
insatiable desires and pleasures of men, even from such as are most carnal: of
the testimony which they may find even in their vices to prove the
immortality of their soul. Chap. 92.
ACHITOB. It has been a saying heretofore, that it belonged not to a vile
person to deny God. Which Proverb came of this, that the nobility and
gentlemen were so ill taught, and so ignorant of true nobility, that they
reserved this occupation to themselves as proper to their estate, turning it to
their glory, and endeavoring to be feared by this means. The right Arms of
Mach^au^llian Nobility.
And surely these were fair Arms, and goodly scutcheons to set forth the
Nobility of their estate by, namely, horrible and execrable blasphemies, which
the very Jews and Turks would never suffer among themselves. I would to God
we might now say rightly, that this was once, but is no more: and so
likewise, that there were not some among them that think themselves the
greatest men, who have this in their thoughts, if they dare not speak it
openly, that it belongs not to men of courage to believe in God and in his
word, or to think that there is a judgment to come, at which men shall
appear: but that this appertains to the simple and foolish, not to these
great and noble spirits, which fly above the clouds, and indeed know more
then they ought, to lead them into hell.

But as by the difference of appetites and desires, An argument of the
pleasures of the soul to show the immortality thereof.
we have showed them that the soul cannot be mortal, which concludes a
divine providence and a second life, as we declared before, so it is an easy
matter to prove the same by those pleasures in which the soul takes delight.
For by how much the more those things that bring delights, do resemble the
virtue of the soul that is delighted, and the greater affinity, proportion
and agreement they have with it, so much the greater, sweeter, and more
pleasant are the delights, as also more firm and of longer continuance.
Indeed it may be objected unto me, that if we look to this we shall find, that
the greatest part of men take more pleasure in those delights which they can
receive by their senses, which are more earthy and brutish, then in others that
are more natural to the spirit, and more spiritual and heavenly: and
therefore the judgment that we can gather from hence of the nature and essence
of the soul, Some more like to beasts then men.
may seem not to agree to this we speak of. It is very certain that some men
are of such a brutish nature, that a man may well doubt whether they be men or
no, and whether they deserve not rather to be reckoned in the number of beasts,
to which they are more like then to men, except it be for their face: in which
respect also a man may compare them with Apes. For if they be led by the same
desires and lusts, and satisfy themselves therein as brute beasts, and go no
further, wherein do they differ from them? and to what purpose serves that
which God has bestowed upon their souls more then upon the souls of beasts,
if they content themselves with a brutish life and pleasure as they do? For
where is the use of reason and understanding which God has bestowed upon them
more then upon beasts? And if they use them no more then beasts do that are
altogether void of them, who can know whether they are partakers of them more
then they? And so consequently, how shall that definition commonly given of man,
agree to them, wherein he is called a living creature partaker of reason?
Therefore when we enquire of the nature and substance of the soul, we must
follow that rule, which is usually propounded in searching out the nature and
essence of all other things. For when a man would have true knowledge of them,
he takes not in each kind of them that which may be in some of the same
kind, less perfect and monstrous. As if there be occasion to judge of the
nature of man's body, no man will take them that have some defect of Nature, or
that are more deformed and monstrous then others: but the soundest, goodliest,
and most perfect bodies. We must do the like when we search into the nature
and essence of the soul. For to know it well, we must not make choice of men
that are borne brutish, so that a man can know nothing in them whereby they
differ from brute beasts, except the outward shape of a man. How we must judge
of the nature of the soul.
Yea there are some borne with less sense and government of themselves, then
beasts have. The like may be said of them, who being better borne,
voluntarily become brutish of themselves. For this cause, we must chiefly
consider what effects the noblest and most excellent souls bring forth, if
we will judge of the nature of al other souls that are of the same kind. For
albeit the souls of some men are more brutish then of others, yet it follows
not but they are al of one and the same nature and substance, seeing they are
all of one kind: but the difference between them proceeds from hence, that
some are more degenerated from their true and proper nature, then others are.
Nevertheless this changes not their natural essence, but that always
continues one and the same in all: as the ill disposition of bodies takes not
from them that nature and essence which they have common with others,
notwithstanding they differ from them, as a sick and deformed body differs
from a sound and perfect body.

Now there is no doubt, Of the true pleasures of the soul.
but that the noblest and most excellent souls take more pleasure in the
internal senses then in the external, and more in reason then in fancy and
imagination, but above all in the contemplation of the Spirit. And among those
things, which the Spirit does contemplate, it delights most and stays
longest in them that are spiritual and eternal, that are highest and of
greatest sovereignty. And as the spirit longs most after these pleasures,
and retains them with greatest affection, so it is less weary in searching
for them and in the contemplation of them. Whereupon it follows, that
spiritual and eternal things are more conformable to the Spirit, then those
that are corporal and temporary: and that it has greater participation and
agreement with heavenly things then with earthly. For it is maruailously
delighted and contented with spiritual things, as if they were his own
things, which is by similitude, proportion, and agreement of nature: as
contrariwise, both the internal and external senses please themselves in
corporal things, and are not able to comprehend or attain to the other, but
only by conjecture. Whereas if the Spirit were as mortal as the senses, then
the excellentest Spirits, and such as approach nearest to the heavenly Spirits
and to the nature of God, would give themselves to transitory and corruptible
things as much as the senses do, and would search after them as earnestly as
it does after true and perfect pleasures. But we see by experience, that they
ascend up a great deal higher. Yea the Spirits even of most carnal and
brutish men, An argument from insatiable pleasures for the immortality of the
soul.
in that they never meet with any pleasures in transitory things that do
fully content and satisfy them, thereby give evident testimony, that they are
borne to enjoy greater pleasures then they can find in all this nature, and
that they are of another nature, surpassing them, which mounteth above corporal
and temporary things. For who ever saw an ambitious man satisfied with
honors, or a covetous wretch with riches? And from whence comes this that
they are so insatiable, but only because the spirit that God has given them,
is of so noble a race and of such an excellent nature, that how much soever it
be fallen from his first nature and nobility, yet it can never content it
self with any thing, that is of another nature more base and vile then it
own, as that which is too much unworthy and unbeseeming the Spirit, and very
much disagreeing from the essence of it. For although, being buried in this
body, as in a sink of all carnal and brutish affections, it can not so well
perceive it own nature, dignity, and nobility, nor acknowledge the same so
well, as the noblest and most excellent spirits, and such as are farthest from
this stinking puddle, are able to do: nevertheless without thinking thereupon
as it were, it has evermore a secret sense of it own nature and dignity,
which keeps it from being contented with any thing whatsoever, although it be
with never so great liking and abundance, except it enjoy that thing which is
most proper and agreeable to his natural disposition, which is of a more high,
noble, and excellent nature, then any thing proceeding from this mortal and
transitory mass. But because it is buried in this darkness, which sin has
brought upon the minds of men, the same thing happens to the spirit, of
which we have already spoken concerning the immortality and eternity of name
and renown. For the right and natural desire of true and immortal honors,
and of eternal riches agreeable to the nature of man's soul, is degenerated
into this false and corrupted appetite of worldly honors and temporal riches.
Notwithstanding this is manifest hereby, that as every Spirit always searches
after God as a blind man goes by groaping, as we have heard already: so it
seeks after riches and honors agreeable to it own nature. But because that
darkness with which it is overwhelmed, hinders it from knowing them well,
and so consequently from taking that way, which it ought to enter in that it
may attain unto them, A corrupt spirit takes the shadow of things for the
things themselves.
therefore it changes them into others, that are of a differing and clean
contrary nature. So that it can never find out or attain to that which it
seeks, because it is ignorant thereof, and so seeks for it under a mask,
which it takes for the true face, and under a shadow, which it takes for the
very body: whereby it comes to pass that the mask and shadow remain with
it, instead of the very face and body that are lost by means of the^. In which
the same thing happens to the spirit that does in the matter of religion, when
it forgeth unto it self new and strange gods, and idols instead of the true
God who^ it searches after, because it knows not who he is, although it
seeks him, and desires to find him. Wherefore being thus deceived, and not
knowing it, neither the means whereby it is deceived, it still desires,
because it perceives very well whether it will or no, that it has not attained
to that which it wants, as indeed it might well know the same, if it were not
become very brutish, by reason that it never finds any contentation in any
thing that it does, or can attain unto. An argument taken from vices for the
immortality of the soul.
By which things we may further learn, that men shall find even in their
vices, testimonies of the nature, essence and immortality of their souls,
whereby they may be convicted, and namely in their ambition and covetousness,
which ought to admonish them of that that has bin set down, and to cause them
to think more diligently therevpo^. We may say the same of their lust. For
although it be in the number of those pleasures that are most earthy and
brutish, and which the senses themselves both external and internal ought to
be soonest weary of, for the reasons before heard: nevertheless they show
plainly how insatiable this appetite is in them, in that no kind of lust can
content them: insomuch as they are carried headlong there withal eue^ beyond
the bounds of nature, within which brute beasts contain themselves. And truly
all these things ought to drive us into admiration, and cause us to consider
the just judgment of God upon men, and how he is reue^ged of them for
dishonoring him, and their own nature, by suffering it to degenerate and wax
beastlike, in forsaking spiritual, heavenly, and divine things, for those are
corporal, earthly, and brutish. Therefore God depriueth them of that
understanding which he had given them, How God punishes vicious de^ires.
that they should torment themselves after such things as vex their spirit,
as it were damned souls, and that so much the more miserably and with less
contentation, as they enjoy more of them. For what a torment is ambition and
covetousness, and other affections and vices that accompany them? And if we
speak of lust, we see what is the vengeance of God upon them, who going beyond
the bounds of nature, so dishonor their bodies and their own nature, that
there is no essence or nature whatsoever, unto which they may be compared. For
none do so much pervert their nature as they: I mean not beasts only, but not
the deuilles themselves. And although they be so beastlike, as to consider no
more of the nature and essence of their soul then they do of beasts, yet the
very figure of their bodies should make them to think, that God has not made
it differing from beasts, and namely in creating the head and face upwards, but
that he has also endued them with a soul differing from theirs, to the end
it might be correspondent to the body in which it is. But it belongs to thee,
ASER, to prosecute this argument, thereby to show unto us the immortality of
the soul.

Of the testimony that men have of the immortal nature of the soul in their
very body, by the composition and frame thereof: of that which is in the motion
and rest of their soul: how the creation of the whole world should be vain,
and how there should be no providence of God no religion no divine justice if
the soul were mortal: of the multitude and qualities of the witnesses that
stand for the immortality thereof. Chap. 93.
ASER. That good king Ezechias complaining in his sickness, said, Mine
habitation is departed, Esaias 38. 12.
and is removed from me like a sheepeheards tent: I have cut off like aweauer
my life. This holy man compares his body and the life of man in it, to a
tabernacle and lodge, or to a tent and pauillion, which are no firm lodgings
but remoueable, and such as may be transported from one place to another, as
soldiers carry away theirs, when they raise their camp to pitch it in some
other place. And indeed a man's body in this world is as it were a lodging
assigned for his soul to abide in a while, not to dwell there always, as it
were in one place. For this life, is like to a military life, and as a
continual warfare, until such time as we depart hence, and that God cutteth it
off, (after we have finished our appointed days) as a weauer cutteth off the
threedes at the end of his web after it is finished. Therefore Saint Peter also
calls his body a tabernacle when he says, 2. Pet. 1. 13, 14.
I think it meet as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by
putting you in remembrance, seeing I know that the time is at hand that I must
lay down this tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me.
Saint Paul also uses the like manner of speech when he says, 2. Cor. 5. 1,
2.
For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we
have a building given of God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the
heavens. For therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with our house, which is
from heaven. And to this agrees that which is written in the epistle to the
Hebrews, For here we have no continuing city, Hebr. 13. 14.
but we seek one to come. Here truly are notable testimonies of the second
and eternal life, against them that doubt of the immortality of the soul.
But according to that which is given us in charge to discourse of touching this
matter, we must bring them other testimonies even in their bodies, seeing
their spirit cannot mount up to celestial and divine things.

We may easily judge, An argument taken from the frame of man's body to prove
the immortality of his soul.
if there be any light of nature remaining in our mind, that God would have us
know, by the composition and stature of our bodies, how the soul and spirit
dwelling within them should be affected, and whither it ought to look. For
why would God lift the head and face of men upwards, and not the head of
beasts, but that he would admonish them thereby, that they are of a
celestial nature? and that they must always look, not to the earth as beasts
do, but to heaven, as to their native country, from whence they received their
Original, in respect of their principal part, which al Atheists and Epicures
do renounce? And if the body be lifted straight upward, the spirit is much
more, which ascending by degrees from inferior things, makes no stay until
it come to heavenly and divine things: and having at length attained unto them,
it stays there and contenteth it self therein. Another argument taken from
the motion and rest of the soul.
In regard whereof, as in natural things we know by their moving and resting
which is their natural place, so by the same reason we may judge of the
natural place of man's soul, which is in perpetual motion, and can find no
rest here below on the earth, as the souls of beasts can: which because they
are altogether earthy, and al their natural and proper good coming from no
higher place then from the earth, their snowts also are continually bending
toward it: and the more earthy and brutish they are, the more downwards do
they always bend. This we may easily perceive, if we compare not only the
beasts of the earth with birds, which hold more of the nature of the air,
and live most therein, but also if we compare the beasts of the earth one with
an other. For albeit all of them have their snowts inclining toward the earth,
yet the hog has his head more bending downward then others have. For it is
fashioned and bowed after such a fashion, that no beast can less lift up the
head and stretch it toward heaven then the hog, neither is any so much
troubled as that is, when by force it is compelled to look upward. The same
may be said of the moule, and of other such like beasts. Therefore if the
Good that is proper and peculiar to the nature of man, consist not in this
eternity and celestial immortality of which we speak, to what purpose is
his head lift upward, and his eyes looking toward heaven, especially seeing
God has joined these things with a soul that is partaker of reason and
understanding? Of a fish called Vranoscopos.
For among the beasts, we find one fish, that has the eyes set in the top of
the head, and therefore it is called by the Graecians Vranoscopos, which
signifies as much as a Beholder of heaven, or looking toward heaven. But
because it is not partaker of understanding and reason, more then other beasts
are, and seeing the soul of it differs not from theirs, we may easily judge,
that the eyes of it were not set in that place for the same reason that man
has his lifted up toward heaven. Shall we say then that God has created
man and endewed him with so many graces and singular properties, to make him
more wretched then beasts in this life, who otherwise is so miserable, and
compassed about with so many euilles on every side? For whereto serves the
disposition of his nature, but to torment him the more by looking up toward
heaven, and by that knowledge which he has more then beasts have, thereby
increasing in him a vain desire of such a happiness as he can never enjoy?
And which is worse, the more noble spirit that any one has, the more learned
and virtuous he is, or the more and longer oppressed he is with the miseries
of this life, the more would this vain desire prick and torment him. And if
there be some, who like beasts pass over al these things without any sense
and feeling, this befalls them, either because they are of a heavy, sleepie
and blockish spirit, or else because they are drunken with that which is
commonly called Fortunes favor, namely, with the honors, riches, and
pleasures of this world. So that we must conclude upon this speech, that
because beasts do here all that they have to do, according to those powers and
gifts that are naturally in them, therefore they live and die here: but
because the Spirit given to man, can not do here according to his natural
disposition, it follows necessarily, that as it is borne in an other place,
so it must have another place wherein to effect that which it has to do.
Except the soul be immortal, man is created in vain.
And contrariwise, if the soul of man be mortal, all that he has to do is
in this life, as it is with beasts: and then also it follows, that he was
created in vain and without cause. For God created nothing, but he propounded
to himself the end for which he created it, and that such an end as is
agreeable to the nature and dignity of every one of his works, else all
things should have been created in vain by him. Now if he created man only
to live in this world, as he did other creatures, then did he not in his
creation propound to himself an end beseeming the excellency of such a
nature. Which thing the greatest Philosophers amongst the heathen have after
due consideration bin constrained to confess. And if man, for whose sake the
whole visible world was created, and who only can, will, and knows how to
use all things contained therein, was created and received this life in vain,
what shall we think of al other things that we created because of him, and for
his sake? Shall not the whole work of creation be in vain, and unworthy the
infinite majesty and wisdom of God the Creator? and he that is the
Governor of the world, shall he not be spoiled of all providence? Who ought
not to abhor the very cogitation of such a thing? The immortality of the
soul is linked to the religion and providence of God.
And yet the religion of God, his providence, and the immortality of our soul
are so fast linked and joined together, and depend in such sort one upon an
other, that they can not be separated, neither indeed is it lawful to
separate them. For he that abolisheth the one, shakes also that faith which
we ought to hold of the rest: because if our souls be not immortal, there
is neither punishment nor reward, either for virtue or vice, or for the good or
ill deeds of men. For we see evidently, how all things are mingled and
confused in the course of this present life, that they are turned into a common
robbery, that the woorst men make themselves Masters and Lords of the world,
as if it were created only for them, that they might be in it as gods upon
the earth: and contrariwise that good and just men may seem to have been
created only for a pray to the wicked, and to be less accounted of them then
the brute beasts. Which if it were so, then should God have no care of men:
and if he have no care of them, how shall he be their GOD and Creator, and
why should they rather then beasts call upon him and honor him? For if it were
so, what has he done, or what does he yet more for them unto whom he has
given his law and commandment to call upon him, to honor and serve him, then
he does for beasts to whom he has given no such law or commandment, and
who do not call upon him nor honor him according to the same as men do? And
what may we account all religion, all fear and reverence of God to be, all
holiness, honesty, and virtue, but superstition, and a vain and foolish
opinion and fancy of the mind of man? Notwithstanding there has always been
a common testimony and consent of religion among all nations, An argument
taken from the consent of all people.
even amongst the most barbarous and rudest people that ever werefound.
Neither ever were any so ill taught, but they have put some difference between
virtue and vice, and between honesty and dishonestie. It can not be then, but
that religion and virtue, naturally engraven in the heart of man, are good
things, yea far better then their contraries. Whereas if God had no more
respect to the one then to the other, and were not to judge thereof, to what
purpose serves this difference which men make between them? and what profit
shall they reap to themselves by esteeming better of that which is good, then
of evil? Good men should not only receive less profit by virtue then by vice,
but further they should be damnified by the same: and wicked men should ever
have the better, yea they should be rewarded insteade of being punished. Other
reasons to the same end.
For the best and iustest men are commonly a pray unto the wicked. And who
shall deliver them out of their hands, seeing for the most part they are the
strongest, and have in a manner the government of the world in their power, so
that the most innocent persons are at their mercy as it were, except God
should let them have justice either here in this world or in some other? And
if God should fail in doing justice, upon what right should the justice that
men use against malefactors be grounded? Shall there be more justice in men,
who are altogether injustice themselves, then in God who is the fountain of
all justice, yea justice it self? All this must be so, or else we must
confess, that all these things testify unto us, that God has care over us,
and that there is an other place and time of rewarding every man according to
his works, then in this world, and here in this life. For this cause Saint
Peter calls the day of the last judgment, in which all shall appear before
God, the time of the restoration of all things foretold of God by the mouth
of all his holy prophets since the world began. Acts 3. 21.
For considering that al things are so confused and troubled in the world,
that it seems there is no difference betwixt the blessings and curses of God
pronounced in his law, and that all things are turned topsie turuy by the
malice of men, the Lord has ordained a place and time, in which he will put
an end to this disorder, and will restore al things to their right estate and
good order. Now if the Lord has appointed that every one shall be rewarded at
that time and place, it follows that then and there also we must search for
the end for which man was created, and that his soul shall live there. And if
the soul then lives, and in that place, it follows well also that there is
the end of it. What the end^ of a thing is.
For we take the end for that which is the last and most perfect in every
thing. So that if the question be of the authority of men, and multitude of
witnesses for the confirmation of that, which has been hitherto said of the
immortality of the souls of men, Of the multitude and quality of witnesses
to prove the immortality of the soul.
we shall have for this purpose all those, who from the beginning of the
world amongst all people and nations, have believed and thought that there is
a God, that there is a Divine nature and providence, and consequently any
religion: yea even those barbarous and savage nations, which were found out of
late days in those new Islands, commonly called the new found world. And if the
quality of the witnesses is to be considered, we shall still have almost all
on our side. For if we look unto the most barbarous and strangest nations
that are, the testimony of nature which all of them carry in their hearts,
compels them to range themselves on this side. And if we come to others that
have bin more civil and better instructed, we shall have a greater advantage.
Or if the question be of the greatest, and of such as by the consent and
testimony of all, were accounted, and were indeed best learned and most
virtuous, we shall not only find them to have been on our side, but also that
they have condemned as ignorant men and unworthy to live, them that have been
of a contrary opinion, betwixt which men and the other there is great
difference. What kind of Philosophers Atheists and Epicures were.
For those among the Philosophers that denied the immortality of the soul,
were such as did abolish also all divine nature and providence, and all
religion, and such as placed the sovereign good of men in pleasure: which
kind of men were always woorthily taken to be the vilest and most abject, and
as it were the skumme and dregs of the professors of Philosophy. For to the
end we may the better understand this, by mine advise we will consider of the
best arguments that are alleged by Philosophers to prove the immortality of
souls, that they who will not credit the testimony of the holy Scriptures,
may feel themselves urged in their conscience with the sayings of Ethnickes
and heathen men, who shall rise up in judgment against them, to aggrauate
their condemnation. Now it belongs to thee, AMANA, to follow this matter.

Of an other argument for the immortality of the soul taken from that
natural desire which men have of knowledge: of Aristoteles opinion touching
the nature and immortality of the soul: of other reasons of Philosophers to
prove that the spirit can not be of a corruptible and mortal nature: and how
just men should be more miserable, and should have more occasion to fear and
to eschew death, then the unjust and wicked, if the soul were mortal. Chap.
94.
AMANA. There is in all men a natural desire of knowledge and wisdom: yea a
man may perceive that most barbarous men desire naturally to know, unto what
Art soever they apply their spirit, judging the same to be commendable and
honest, as contrariwise they account it unbeseeming a man and dishonest, to be
ignorant, to err, and to be deceived. From this desire the wisest and most
famous among the Philosophers took a very good argument to prove the
immortality of the soul. For seeing this desire is natural, and that in this
world all the knowledge and wisdom that men can have, is very small, and as
it were nothing in respect of that which they want, they conclude necessarily,
that there must needs be some other place and time then in this life, wherein
that which is here begun but slenderly, is to be accomplished and made
perfect.

The reason from whence they derive their argument, An argument taken from the
desire of wisedometo prove the immortality of the soul.
is that common saying, that God and Nature the minister of God do nothing
without cause. Wherefore seeing this desire of knowledge and wisdom is
natural in man, it can not be in vain, neither is it given unto him, but that
it should attain to some end and perfection. For to what purpose served the
corporal eyes of living creatures, and for what cause should they be given
them, if they could never see, or were to live always in darkness? So likewise,
why should the eyes of the soul and mind be given to men, thereby to behold
celestial and divine things, which cannot be seen with bodily eyes, if they
could never view them, but in such darkness as they do here behold them? To
what end also should man be naturally pricked forward with a desire to know the
truth and to have skill, if he could never soundly enjoy his desire, but should
remain always in ignorance for the greatest part of those things, which he
desires to know, and which are of so great weight, that whatsoever he is able
to understand and know in this world, is nothing or very little in regard of
that which yet remains behind for him to know? For not to speak of those
things in which all humane philosophy must acknowledge her ignorance, let us
come to that understanding which we may have by the holy Scriptures revealed
unto us of God. For although the knowledge we have by them, surpasses without
al comparison all humane philosophy and science, 1. Cor. 13. 12.
yet Saint Paul compares it to a knowledge that is very obscure, to a light
that is seen through thick and dark clouds, and to an image represented
unto us in a glass, in comparison of that most high and perfect knowledge and
understanding, which is reserved for us in another life, and whereof we have
here but a very little taste and weak beginning. Therefore if we could never
go further, would it not be a vain and ridiculous thing, if God had given
this desire only to men, and never would vouchsafe to let them have the
effect of it? And if it were so, that God had not ordained an other time and
place, for the finishing of that which is here begin in this life, it
seems that the complaint made by some of the greatest Philosophers against
Nature, should not be without some ground of reason. An objection made by some
Philosophers.
For what just cause is there, that he should give a longer life to some
beasts then to men, seeing it skilleth not whether beasts live long or no,
because long life cannot make them more learned or more wise then they are at
their birth? But it is otherwise in man. For seeing that knowledge and wisdom
are his greatest Good, whereby he approaches nearer to the nature of God, and
of which all his other good things chiefly depend, it seems to stand with
reason, that God should have given a longer life to men then to beasts, that so
they might the better attain to so great a Good, so necessary for them, in
regard of which especially, they are preferred before beasts and differ from
them. For we see by experience, that we must die so soon almost as we
begin to taste of Sciences, The answer.
and to wax wise. But we have no cause to make this complaint against the
wisdom, prudence, and goodness of God, who has granted us life long enough,
wherein we may learn here as much as we need (if we could use it well)
both to pass away this life, and also to attain to the other, in which we
shall abound in knowledge and wisdom, and be fully satisfied therewithal.
And although God had given us a life twice as long in this world as that we
now enjoy, so that we might live as long as the ancient Patriarchs, whose
years were so many, especially before the flood as Moses testifies, yet all
that which we could possibly learn during the time of so long life, would
be very little in comparison of the knowledge reserved for us in that
Eternity. For the eyes of our spirit and mind are not able to endure so
great brightness of heavenly knowledge and wisdom, whilst it is here shut
up and as it were imprisoned in this body of sin, and in a manner wholly
overwhelmed with darkness: but it fares with the spirit in this respect, as
it does with the Owl in regard of his eyes, and of the light of the sun.
Therefore every one has better cause to assure himself, that God has
appointed an other time and place for the full accomplishment of this desire of
knowledge and wisdom, that is so firmly engraven in the nature of men, then
to accuse God, as if he offered them injury to deprive them thereof by the
shortenesse of their life. Now let us come to other particular reasons of
Philosophers concerning this matter we have in handling. Aristoteles opinion
touching the immortality of the soul.
Although Aristotele so famous amongst them be very obscure and wavering where
he handles the same, so that it is a very hard matter to understand what was
his opinion and resolution therein, nevertheless he dares not plainly say,
that the spirit of man is of a bodily nature and corruptible matter, or that it
is mortal as the body is. But in one place he says, that if the Spirit be
able to understand without the fantasy, it may be separated from it: but if
it cannot understand without it, then it cannot be separated. Which is all one
as if he said, that if the spirit could understand without the senses, and
the understanding and reason without fantasy and imagination, then a man might
certainly conclude, that there is a difference in nature and substance
between these things, and that there may a separation be made: so that the
destruction of the one does not bring with it a corruption of the other.
Wherefore none may conclude the mortality of the spirit that is capable of
reason and understanding, by the mortality either of the external or
internal senses. But Aristotele leaves it doubtful in this place, whether
this separation may be made yea or no, and whether a man may conclude
thereupon, that the spirit is of an other nature and substance then the
senses are, and so consequently immortal. But it follows not, that if the
soul being in the body understands things bodily, that is to say, by the
bodily instruments that are outward, and then by the conueiance of the
internal senses, therefore it can understand nothing but that which they
declare and bring unto it. How the understanding comes to ye knowledge of
outward things by the senses.
For after the internal senses have gathered together the images and
similitudes of those external things that are offered unto them, and so
retains them fast being secluded and separated from all matter, the
understanding is to receive from thence the first and simple knowledge of
things. So that as the qualities of external things are the matter subject of
the internal senses, so their images conceived by the internal senses, and
purged from all bodily matter, are the matter subject of the understanding and
spirit. And the spirit laboring about them draws out certain motions, and
knows many things from them, which can not move the senses, and which the
senses can not know. And yet the spirit is first moved by these images, as
the senses are by external things. But we must declare these things somewhat
more familiarly. We understand already, how corporal things are the subject
and objects of the corporal senses, and that the bodily senses receive and
know them corporally, even such as they are presented unto them, every one
according to his nature and office. How the outward senses look upon things.
But they cannot receive or perceive any more then that which is laid open
unto them, and manifests it self outwardly. How the internal senses receive
the same things.
Now after the outward senses have thus received them and their matter covered
with their qualities, the internal senses, to which the external are
serviceable, conceive the images without the matters and qualities of those
things whereof they are images. For the eye cannot see either the sun or the
light of it, nor yet any other creature discovered by the light, except it be
present before it. But the Fantasy and imagination receive and conceive the
images of things, even in darkness, although the things of which they are
images, appearant to the eyes, nor yet are perceived at that present by any
corporal sense. We see then already how these images are separated from the
matter of which they are images, and how the internal senses behold them
without their matter and bodies, as the external senses look upon them being
joined with their bodies.

Then having received them thus purged from their corporal matter, the spirit
receives them yet more pure, and goes further in the knowledge and
understanding of them then all the senses do, comprehending other things, of
which the senses can have no knowledge or apprehension. How the Spirit
receives them from the internal senses.
And thus the Spirit beholds and understands corporal things corporally,
that is by means of those instruments which it has in the body, and
spiritual things it beholds spiritually without those instruments. Whereupon
it follows, that although it uses the senses and such kind of instruments,
nevertheless it is not so tied unto them that it can not be separated, or do
nothing without them, or not know and understand that which they are not able
to conceive or know. Other reasons for the immortality of the soul.
So that it is no hard matter to believe, that the soul is of another nature
and substance, as a man may judge also by this that it is the fountain and
beginning of motion begun by it self, and not by any other, but as we have
already declared. Likewise by this, that it is capable of the knowledge of
infinite things, of which it retains the memory, and that it inquireth into
secret things separated from all corporal matter, which can not be perceived
by any sense: and that it does so many and so great things without the help
of any bodily nature. Whereupon the Philosophers conclude, that it is of a
simple nature, not compounded, and so consequently that it is immortal. For
that nature, which is adorned and decked with such virtues, and with the
faculty to understand, the like whereof is not in the body, and which can
understand by it self without the use of the body, can not be compounded of an
earthly and mortal nature, nor have any part thereof mingled with it self,
but it is stayed and sustained by it self, The soul can not be divided.
it subsisteth of it self and is immortal. Hereof also it follows, that if
the soul of man be of such a nature, then it cannot be rent in sunder or
divided, or pulled into pieces, or have any thing in it that can be separated
from it: and so it must needs be that it can not die or perish. And therefore
the best and most excellent Philosophers hold that sentence as immooueable,
which Aristotle says in an other place, namely, that the spirit is a thing
separate and distinct from the senses and from the body, as an immortal thing
from a mortal: and that it comes from without, and elsewhere then from the
body, as we have already touched it in another place. Whereby to my thinking,
he has declared very plainly, that he did not take the soul of man to be
mortal. But yet it is somewhat hard to judge what his opinion was, because he
does not show himself so openly as the matter requires. Yet whatsoever he
thought or resolved with himself, the soul shall not be therefore any whit the
more mortal or immortal. For the immortality thereof depends not upon his
opinion, or of any other man's whatsoever. Nevertheless seeing so subtle and
sharp a Philosopher durst not affirm that it was mortal, every one of any
sound mind may well judge, that he knew there were too many arguments to the
contrary, and those so weighty, that they deserved to be diligently examined,
and were not so lightly to be rejected. For he was not so shamefast and
modest, but he durst boldly reject and condemn the opinions and sentences of
all others that were as well in his time as before him, how great and famous
personages soever they were, when he thought he could do it with any show of
reason, insomuch as he spared not his master Plato. Therefore albeit we had no
other resolution from him touching this matter, but this only that he was in
doubt, and durst affirm nothing on either side, yet his authority ought to
prevail much with us against them who depend only of humane Philosophy and
reason, and are so easily induced to approve rather of the mortality then of
the immortality of the soul. For at leastwise they may imagine, that so great
a Philosopher who is in such woonderful estimation amongst all learned men, did
not judge their reasons frivolous and vain, who maintained the immortality of
the soul, as our Epicures and Atheists think, because they are more blockish
and foole-hardie. And therefore they boldly condemn that which either they
will not or cannot conceive and comprehend, not considering what a confusion of
things their opinion works in all mankind. Other reasons for the immortality
of the soul.
For besides that which we have spoken to this purpose already, if it were so
that the soul were mortal, the wickedest and most desperate men should have
that which they desire most, and which is most expedient for them: and that
should befall the best and iustest men, which they abhor most, and flee from
as very hurtful for them: contrary to that which Solomon says in the
Proverbs, Prou. 10. 24.
That the wicked shall fall into the evil he fears, and that the desire of
the just shall be accomplished. In regard whereof good men should have far
greater reason to fear death, then the wicked to desire it. For what good man
is there of noble courage, who will not greatly abhor death, when he
thinks with himself, that it consumes and swalloweth up the whole man, as
if he were buried in perpetual darkness? What consolation will serve him, and
what comfort can a man offer him, that will be able to surmount the fear and
horror of death, but that he will expect and suffer it with great impatiencie
and despair, when he shall be through necessity brought unto it? As for that
consolation, which is taken from the necessity of nature, and from the common
condition of all men, it is very lean if there be no other. We see by them who
are so greatly tormented, that they wish and ask after death, as after a haven
wherein they may be delivered from that tempest and torment in which they are,
although the grief which they suffer breed such vows and desires in them,
yet if they have but a small respite, they gather some consolation to themselves
by some assurance, that their grief will in time cease, or else that time and
custom will make it lighter unto them, and will teach them to bear it
patiently.

To be short, Every one naturally desires life.
life is acceptable and beloved of every one, that such as are most miserable
and wretched cannot be brought to leave it but with great grief, no not those
who destroy themselves with their own hands. Whereby we may judge, how much
more bitter it is to them that have not all these occasions to desire it. For
every one may imagine, what extreme grief it would be to a good man, who
for living honestly all his life time, and for all the good which he had ever
thought, spoken or done, should not only receive no honor nor recompense in
this world, but which is worse, (as it commonly falls out among men) should
receive nothing but evil for good. And yet in the mean time he should see
the woorst men, that wholly give over themselves to dishonor and despite God,
enjoy the honors, riches, and pleasures of this world: and contrariwise
himself to have nothing but dishonor, shame, confusion, famine, poverty,
misery, sorrow, torment, and oftentimes cruel death. What comfort can such a
body have, if he think that there is no other reward after this life, nor
any better estate for him then for the most wicked and abominable person in
the world? And although none of all this should ever happen to good men, yet
what contentation could they find in all the rewards, which they should
receive in this world for recompense of their virtue? It is an easy matter to
judge by this, that the memory of the name and praise of well-doing does not
always take effect, neither is it always due to them that have it, but
oftentimes very unjustly given. But from thee, ARAM, we shall receive more
full instruction touching this matter.

Of that praise and reward which wisdom and virtue may receive of men in this
world: how miserable it is, if there be no better prepared for them els-where:
how death would be more grievous and lamentable to the best learned and wisest
men, then to the ignorant and foolish, if the soul were mortal: how the best
and most certain judgment of men is for the immortality of the soul: of
them who not believing the same, say that it is good for men to be in such an
error. Chap. 95.
ARAM. If the Philosophers might draw many arguments of great weight from the
natural desires of men, to prove the immortality of souls, this which we have
now to propound of ye purpose and reward, which every one naturally desires,
is of great consideration touching this matter. For it is very certain, that
the best and most just among me^, albeit they could avoid all hurt from wicked
men, wherewith commonly they are rewarded from procuring their good, yet they
should not enjoy any true and sound contentation in any of these rewards,
which they might have in this world as a recompense of their virtue. But rather
whilst they were expecting and hoping for them, they should be ever in doubt
and fear of missing them, by reason of the inconstancy of men, and of the
uncertainty of all humane things. So that nature might well seem to have
given unto them this desire of praise and of reward, if they should never enjoy
their desire els-where but in this present life. Whereof we may easily judge
by the reasons that are to be set down. Reasons taken from reward and praise
to prove the immortality of the soul.


For the first, the memory of a man's name and the praise for well doing, does
not always come to pass, neither does it fall out aright in regard of all, but
is for the most part very unjust. For how often is glory and honor attributed
to vices, yea to very execrable crimes and to the wicked, whereas it ought to
be given to virtue and to good men? And if these have sometime any
commendation, yet it is very sparing. But it falls out much worse, when
virtue receives blame in stead of praise. And when something is given to them
unto whom it appertains, it cannot be stretched out far, by reason of the
diversity and contrariety of natures, of minds and of opinions, of the manners
of men, and of people and nations. For how often comes it to pass, that
some condemn and blame that which others approve and praise? Yea many times
one and the same man will contradict himself through the inconstancy of his
judgment, now dispraysing that which before he had praised, and
contrariwise. On the other side, albeit fame and commendation should be never
so great, yet it could not be of any long continuance, considering that time
consumes, and brings an end to all that is under the heavens. Moreover, we
see what great alterations are daily wrought by time: and although praise were
perpetual among the living, yet what could it profit the dead? The dead have
no feeling of praise.
or what feeling can they have of that, more then of blame and infamy? For the
praise which good kings and Princes have purchased by their virtues, and the
memory they have left behind them among men, can profit them no more in
regard of the world, then the memory of that infamy and dispraise, which
tyrants have left behind them can do them any hurt. For how well or ill soever
men speak and think one of another, the dead have no sense at all thereof.
Yea it is likely, that they care not greatly for it, and that they rest never
the less at their ease for all that. Therefore we may well conclude, that
notwithstanding all the praise and reward which wisdom and virtue can receive
from men in this world, yet they are still very miserable, if there be no
better provided for them else where. And if wise and virtuous men hope for
another reward, they must needs believe a second life, in which they shall
be recompensed for their good and just works. But further, when a learned and
wise man has by his spirit discoursed and gone through the heavens, the
planets and stars, beasts, men, and through all nature, yea has reached to
the Angels, and even to God himself the Creator and king of the whole world,
and has passed through all histories both new and old, and has gotten the
knowledge of all things contained in them, that have come to pass in the
world: Death most lamentable to the best men, if the soul were not immortal.
I pray you let us consider what he can be told of, that will be more grievous,
more bitter and fearful unto him, then of death, and what consolation can he
receive when he shall understand, that his soul which has seen and beheld
so great riches, so many goodly and excellent things, and which has been as
it were the storehouse and treasury of them, shall be wholly extinguished in
the midst of such a goodly, pleasant, and wonderful scaffold and theater,
that is so excellently adorned with all kind of beauty, so that it shall
never be again at any time or in any place, nor shall have any more sense and
feeling then the soul of a beast has. What is he, who after such a
consideration of death, should not have great cause to fear it, in so great
misery as may befall him in this life? Do we think that these men among the
Heathen who have heretofore slain themselves to eschew the hands of their
enemies, and that shame and infamy which they feared to receive among men, and
who have accounted it an act of great virtue and constancy to kill themselves
in that manner for the avoiding of shame, would have done that which they did,
if they had not thought that there had been another life besides this? Cato
believed the immortality of the soul.
At leastwise Cato Vticensis for his part part testifies this unto us, who the
same night in which he had purposed to kill himself (which he did because he
would not fall into the hands and subjection of Julius Caesar, against whom he
had taken Arms in that civil war) caused those Dialogues of Plato to be
read unto him, in which he mainteineth and confirms the immortality of the
soul, according to the doctrine of his master Socrates. What comfort it is to
believe a place of rest after this life.
We may then judge by the contrary, what consolation it is to a good and wise
man, against all the miseries that can befall him in this world, if he knows
and is assuredly persuaded, that there is a resting place prepared for him, not
therein to be deprived of all sense of good and evil, as they imagine who
seek for rest in death without all hope of another life, but a place of
happiness for them that with a good heart and Will have given themselves to
virtue and holiness, which is appointed by God, who is aliust, almighty, and
algood. For what rest can that thing find, which is not at all? So that if man
be no more after the death of the body, then death cannot bring him any rest
at all. And therefore we may say of this rest, that as God is not the God of
the dead but of the living, according to the testimony of Jesus Christ, so
rest is not for them, that are not, but for them that are. For rest
presupposes a being, because the thing it self must needs be, as well as
the rest that belongs to it: otherwise neither of them both should have any
being. Thus then we may judge, after so many reasons taken from nature, and
having had so many testimonies as have hitherto been alleged, from the
authority and sayings of men, on which side the truth is most certain,
whether with them who have all good and wise men on their side, or with the
other, who have none but foolish and wicked men.

We have then in this matter which now we follow, What store of testimonies
stand for the immortality of the soul.
the judgment, authority and sentence of all the greatest and most excellent
men in the world, with the greatest and chiefest part of all mankind. Unto
whose testimony we may further add religion, justice, holiness and all virtues,
which are so grounded, and laid upon the immortality of man's soul, that if
this foundation be taken from them, they are altogether overthrown. For
albeit they have their chiefest foundation in God, nevertheless he has so
ordained and ordered them, that they cannot take place, if there be no
immortality of souls, and that for the reasons already declared. It
follows then well, that truth is on their side. For truth will rather
stand for them, then for vices, villainies, and notorious wickedness, unto
which the mortality of the soul is more agreeable then the immortality. And
if all the Philosophers were not able to attain to the knowledge of the souls
nature, nor define the immortality thereof, we ought not to be greatly
abashed, if such as were most ignorant, vile, and abject of them (as they are
called by some of the best of the Ancients) abused themselves so grossly, and
spoke so irreverently, seeing many of the greater sort and of good account,
fell so shamefully, and showed themselves to be woorser then beasts in some
things whereof a man may judge by the outward senses. For have there not some
been found, who albeeit they saw the snow white, yet they durst maintain
that it was black, and that pepper was white, and although they felt the fire
hot and burning, yet affirmed that it was cold? But for this time let us
leave the opinions of Philosophers, Of such as say, it is good to keep men in
this opinion of the immortality of the soul, and yet themselves believe it
not.
and speak somewhat of them, who although they do not believe the
immortality of souls, nor yet all that is spoken of GOD or of religion, say
notwithstanding that it is good for the life of man, that men should be of
that opinion, without which humane society could not be kept inviolable,
neither would men do any thing, as they ought, if they were not as it were with
a bridle kept back by this fear, that there is another life after this, and
that there are gods to take vengeance of such as have done evil. And therefore
they say, that fear ws the first that made gods. Hereof they conclude, that
religion is nothing, but only in opinion, yea, that it is nothing else but
superstition, which proceeds from this foolish opinion. But seeing this
error serves for the benefit of man's life, it is good, say they, to uphold
it, and to confirm men therein. And they that use this speech, are none of
them that are taken to be fools and ignorant persons, but of the greater and
skilfuller sort of people, yea of the wisest men of the world according to the
judgment of men. How we must judge of a wise man.
For when we speak of good men and such as are wise, we must judge of them
according to the matter which we handle, and according to the judgment of God
in his word. Therefore, if according to this reason we judge of these men of
whom we now speak, they shall be found to be the grosest and most blockish
beasts that the earth bears. For all science, wisdom, and greatness,
separated from virtue, are not the things themselves indeed, but brutishness
rather, and vile baseness. And if we judge otherwise, what is all the
knowledge, wisdom and greatness, that is in all men, in respect of that
which is in one Devil only? For what want the devils from being Angels like to
those blessed Angels that continue still in their obedience unto God? If there
be any question made for greatness of spirit, they are all spirit. If for
such wisdom and knowledge as the cunning and wise men of this world have, of
whom have worldly wise men learned their skill but of them, in comparison of
whom they are but young scholars? If the question be for greatness, what
King or Prince in the world is so great as they? Ioh. 12. 31.
For who is called the prince of this world by Jesus Christ, 2. cor. 4. 4.
the God of this world by Saint Paul, principalities, Ephe. 6. 12.
powers, worldly governors, and the princes of the darkness of this world?
Are not the devils so called, who rule and govern the great ones of the whole
world, that are great indeed according to men, but not according God? What
then do they want of being celestial Angels, but virtue and goodness? But
because these men of whom we speak now, believe not that there are Angels
or devils, we will beat them with other arguments. For of these men also
there be some that say, we must hue as the most do, but follow the opinion
of the fewest. Now then, when they would have men to be persuaded to virtue,
and to do their duty by lying and error, namely, by intertayning in them an
opinion of religion, and of a second life, although there be no such thing, is
not this, a very proper means to call all truth into question, The
inconveniences which follow the former opinion of persuading men to goodness
by false means.
and to trample all virtue under foot? For if any propounde the immortality
of souls unto men, not as if it were a true matter, but as a feigned and false
thing, which yet they would have them believe as true, to the end that through
the fear of Gods judgment they might be kept back from evil, and lead unto
goodness, every one may guess easily, how men will dispense with
themselves, when they once know, that whatsoever is spoken and propounded unto
them, is but as a scarre-crowe to make them afraid, as we use to deal with
little children and with birds by puppets and strawe-men, and such like
things. And who will first perceive and find out these subtilties, such as are
most ignorant and foolish, or the other that are more skillful and wise? It is
easy to judge, that they who have best wits and are best learned will sooner
perceive the same then the other.

Now what will follow hereupon, but that they being freed from the fear which
held them in before, shall by the same means be let loofe and sundred from the
bond of all religion and virtue, as if it were clean broken: as it has and
daily does happen to them that maintain this opinion, and to those also that
have been taught and instructed in their school. And consequently this also
will follow, that the quicker and sharper wit a man has, and the greater
knowledge and understanding is in him, the more wicked and badde man he will
prove. For if he understand that religion is but religion in name, and indeed
is nothing but foolish superstition, and if he judge as much of the
immortality of the soul: having thus shaken off all religion, he will cast
away all fear of God, and not suffer himself to be brideled in any sort,
either by any terror of the judgment to come, or reverence of the deity, but
only by the fear of men's laws. And if this take place in men, we may well
think what license they will take to themselves to commit the greatest sins
and abominations in the world, especially if they be in darkness, and think
that no man sees them, and that there is no other judge that perceives them,
to whom they must one day give an account. And if they be so great, that by
their power they may violate all laws both divine and humane, as tyrants
commonly use to do, who shall stay them from living like savage beasts among
men? So that as every one by dexterity of spirit, by doctrine and
instruction, shall approach nearer to that perfection for which man was created
of God, the more inclined, ready and armed he will be to commit all kind of
malice and wickedness. For how can he do otherwise, when that secret of the
school shall be disclosed unto him, and when he shall learn, that whatsoever
is here taught concerning religion, virtue and honesty amongst men, is but
fained and invented for the nonce to keep men in fear? Surely this will cause
him to let loose the raines to all licenciousnesse. Now what corruption of the
spirit and mind of man is there comparable to this? or what will sooner turn
it aside from that perfection in which the sovereign and chief good of it
consists? Therefore seeing the case stands thus, this opinion of theirs
cannot be true, but overthrows it self. For whatsoever corrupts the
spirit and turns it from his perfection, is contrary to the nature thereof.

Wherefore we must conclude, That which corrupts the spirit is contrary to
the nature of it.
that it is far otherwise, and that this saying of theirs is as true, as if
one should say, that the perfecter a man is, the more he is imperfect: the
better he is, the worse he is: and the more truly he is man, the further off he
is from the nature of a man, and more like to the nature of savage beasts. Who
then can doubt of the truth of the souls immortality after so great a
multitude of arguments, and of so strong and so mighty witnesses, who fight in
battle array, as it were a strong army, against them that uphold the
contrary? But we have other no less worthy to be considered of, which we
bear within our selves, and which are so common to all, that there is no man
whatsoever, but he feels and perceives them, whether he will or no.
Therefore it shall be good for us to speak somewhat thereof also, to the end
that the matter we have now in hand, may be the better and more perfectly
understood, to the confusion of Epicures and Atheists: and that we may still
acknowledge more and more the testimonies of the image of God in us, and who we
be, and what good or evil things are prepared for us in the immortality of
the second life, according as we shall be conformed and reformed to the will of
God, or else as we shall be removed from that image and give credit to impiety
and lies. Now it belongs to thee, ACHITOB, to discourse of this matter.

Of those internal testimonies, which all men carry within themselves, to
convince them that doubt of the immortality of the soul, and of the judgment
to come, which shall be in eternal happiness for the good, and perpetual torment
for the evil: how the very Heathen acknowledged as much by reasons taken from
the testimonies of nature. Chap. 96.
ACHIT. The manifold miseries and scourges of Gods wrath wherewith men are daily
oppressed, should minister unto the^ just occasion to think, how odious their
sins and wickedness are to God, and that he will not leave them unpunished,
neither in this life nor in the life to come. For as he gives to his children
of his goodness, and of those good things which he has prepared for them in
another life, by the benefits which he communicates unto them in this: so he
sets before our eyes testimonies of his wrath and of his judgment, and of
those evils and torments which he has prepared for the wicked in another life,
by them wherewith he uses to correct and punish them here in this world. But
besides this, every one has within himself testimonies either of eternal
blessings or curses to come: which may easily convince them that will not
receive ye authority of the scriptures, nor any natural reason to prove the
immortality of the soul. For they bear about them all their witnesses and
their own condemnation; and therefore it will be an easy matter to convince
them, The difference betwixt conuincing and con^ounding a man.
although not to confound them. I say to convince the^, because a man is then
convinced, when he is compelled to acknowledge in his conscience, that he has
no reason whereby he is able to gainsay and withstand ye truth declared unto
him, which condemns him. But yet if he be obstinat, headstrong, malicious and
perverse, he never cease for all that to kick against the prick, and to
persevere in his obstinacy, and peevish malice. For when reason fails him, he
armeth himself with impude^cy, like to a bold murderer, and to a shameless
strumpet that cannot be made ashamed. But howsoever wicked men labor to blind
their mind, and to harden their heart against the judgment of God, yet the
same is never declared unto them, but they feel themselves pricked and
priessed therewith will they nill they: not that it fares with them as it
does with Gods children, who are touched therewith unto repentance, but as
Saint Paul speaking of the wicked and obstinate says, that God has given them
a pricking spirit, because they have a bitter heart, which stirs them up to
whet themselves as it were more and more against God, and to despite him, when
they feel themselves pressed and urged by his word and by his judgments.

Now then God having created Angels and men, Internal testimonies of the
immortality of the soul.
that they should know him and follow his will, gave them a nature endued with
understanding, and has set within them rules of judgment, and of certain
knowledge, which are unto them as laws in nature, and has also placed in them
the will with the affections, as ministers and practisers of those rules and
laws. This selfe-fame divine providence has appointed also that the affection
of joy should be naturally in men, which comes unto them by reason of some
good which they receive or look for, when they obey his laws that commands
them to do just things: as contrariwise, he has put in them the affection of
sorrow and heaviness to take vengeance of their rebellion against his laws,
and of the transgression of them. For as God has decreed, that the nature of
man should lead a joyful life, and should by this means of joy be preserved
in the knowledge of God his creator and in his obedience, and so rest in him:
so also he has appointed flames of wrath and grief to destroy this nature,
when it does not conform it self unto the rule of his heavenly wisdom and
will. Therefore we may well say, that we carry about with us, as it were our
paradise and our Hell, and have already in this world true beginnings of them
both. For so long as we conform our selves to God and follow his wisdom and
will, so that we submit our will to his, and desire not to be wise but in him
and by him, nor judge any thing good or evil, but according to his judgment,
neither will any thing but that which he wills, and take no pleasure but in
obeying and pleasing him, we cannot be thus affected toward him, The cause
of true joy in the spirit.
but we shall receive an unspeakable joy by that mutual participation of love
which is between him and us, and by that taste which we receive thereby of
his goodness, bounty, grace, and favor toward us, which is the top of
all happiness. For as the nature of men was created of God, to the end it
might be conformable unto him, so also it was ordained by him that it should
live, not to be extinguished and undone through grief, which is an evil that
corrupts and consumes as well as diseases. Therefore if it were conformable
to God, so that men's hearts agreed unto reason and right judgment, they
should always rejoice in well doing, both before and after the (...) and so
we (...) as it were in Paradise. And although God be every where in regard of
his nature and divine essence, Where God is said to be especially.
which is infinite, nevertheless we mean according to the style of the holy
scriptures, that he is properly and specially there, where he shows
himself good, gracious, and favorable. For this is more proper to his nature
in regard of us, and that which makes him more loving and amiable to us, and
which is most necessary for us, and in regard whereof he calls himself
properly our God and our father. But as he kindles the sparkles of love in
their hearts that are upright and sincere, that love and honor him, which
works in them so great joy and consolation, that all other joy and pleasure
are nothing unto them in respect of that: so contrariwise, if we turn aside
and separate our selves from him, opposing our selves against his wisdom and
will, as rebellious subjects to their Prince, violating all his laws and
statutes, he kindles in us firebrarnds of his wrath and fury, which work in
us extreme griefs, The true cause of grief and torment.
so that we cannot bear them, but are consumed by them. For in this
corruption and perverseness of nature, our heart burns with the flames of
this infernal fire with which it is kindeled, and which strive against reason
and right judgment, even before it has committed the fault: neither does it
fear afterward to commit the same, how great and enormious soever it be.
But forasmuch as it belongs to the justice of God, to destroy that nature
which is disobedient unto him, he has established this order, namely, that
sorrow and grief (as it were the hangman) should punish and destroy them that
are guilty, as criminal persons are punished by the appointment of justice.
Wherefore although wicked men are oftentimes blockish and lulled asleep, and
as it were void of all sense and feeling, so that they feel not this grief
to the quick, nevertheless in the end it is thoroughly felt of them, so that it
utterly destroys them. For it is like to a fire, which having been covered
or smoothered, afterward kindeleth again, and gathers strength, when it is
uncovered and receives air, if it have matter whereupon it may work. For
besides that natural grief which has this office, God adds thereunto
horrible fear and terror, whereby he ouerwhelmeth the wicked, as if he
thundered upon them: so that even here they feel their Hell, and the fire of
Gods wrath taking hold of them, yea they carry about them their infern all
furies, which are unto them insteede of Hangmen.

Thus we may learn, How men carry about them the matter of two fires.
how we carry about with us the matter of two fires, the one celestial and
divine, the other infernal and devilish. Wherefore let us consider well with
our selves, which of them we had rather have kindeled in us, and which we ought
to desire most, either that which gives us both light and heat, and
preserves us in the hope of true life: or else that which burns and
consumes us, and does wholly deprive us of that life. Now surely they are very
wretched, who desire not that which is most agreeable to their own nature, and
utterly detest and abhor the other. For as we delight in the fire, because it
gives us light and warmeth us: so we fear greatly to be burned and consumed
by it. Deuteronomy. 4. 24. heb. 12. 29.
Now both these sorts of fire we find in God. For he is a fire to give light
and warmth to them that approach and draw near unto him, and desire to walk in
his light, but contrariwise, he is a consuming fire, Esaias 66. 24. matthew. 22.
13. and 25. 30.
joined with smoke and obscurity, to them who by rebellion and disobedience
rush against him. For this cause the fire of hell and of Gods wrath, which is
prepared for the devil and for all the reprobate, is called eternal fire in
the holy scriptures, that is never put out: and the pains and torments of the
damned are likewise called darkness without, where shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth. And to the end we might know the nature of this fire the better, God
has put sparkles thereof within us. Wherefore we are only to consider what
matter we bring to kindle and increase either the one or the other: either for
the preservation of our nature and life, appointed unto us by God, or else for
the overthrow and destruction thereof. And by the sense and feeling, which we
may have here of that joy, gladness and contentation, which the knowledge of God
and obedience to his will brings to our heart, we may also judge whether
there be a paradise, and another life and other joy besides this, which we
receive by corporal pleasures, as beasts do. For this joy that comes to us
from such pleasures, is common to us with them, and usually it ends in sorrow
and sadness. But they have no other that comes unto their soul, of which
they may have any appehension as we have. And by the same consideration, we may
also in some sort judge of that happiness in which we shall be in the other
life, when this joy shall be perfect in us whereof we have here but a very small
taste, in respect of that we shall have, when we shall be fully reformed according
to Gods image, so yt both our understanding, reason, and will shall be made
comfortable unto him, because we shall be wholly swallowed up in his love.
Contrariwise, A sure argument in the wicked of their future torment in another
life.
if here we feel a Hell which we carry about us, and which greatly tormenteth us
after we have offended the majesty of God, especially when we have committed
some horrible crimes, this also is another argument whereby we may judge
whether there be not a Hell, and vengeance from God to be executed upon his
enemies in another life. For that sorrow, which our crimes committed do breed
in our hearts, is within us as a brand of this fire of Gods wrath, which is
daily kindled in us more and more. Wherefore if there be in us already such a
vehement heat thereof, when as yet the Lord does kindle but a little the
firebrarnds of his wrath in our hearts, how great shall it then be, when all
his wrath shall be set on fire? Certainly they are very dull that do not well
consider and understand it. Now we have heard heretofore how the heathen
Philosophers concluded the immortality of man's soul by the nature thereof,
Natural reasons to prove the immortality of men's souls.
affirming that it is not created or compounded of corruptible matter, but is
of a celestial and divine nature, by reason of that knowledge which it has,
not only of particular and corporal things, as the soul of beasts has, but
also of universal and spiritual things, and namely, of God, of numbers, of
order, of the difference between virtue and vice, and between honest and
dishonest things. For the knowledge of al these things is so natural to men's
souls, that they are within them, albeit they have not received the^ from
without, either by doctrine or instruction. Whereby a man may easily judge, yea
it follows necessarily, that they are created of a more excellent nature then
is that of the elements, of a nature that is incorruptible and perpetual.
Wherefore it is very evident, that this knowledge, thus natural to men's
souls, is a certain testimony, that they are not borne at all adventure, but
are created by great art, and by a wonderful providence of that divine and
eternal nature by which they have their being, namely God their Creator, for
which cause also the knowledge of him shines in us. So also we may well judge,
that God has not in vain placed in our nature the knowledge of the difference
that is between virtue and vice, between things honest and dishonest, and
that grief which is to take vengeance in us of those vices and crimes of which
we feel our selves guilty. And therefore the Heathen themselves concluded,
that there was not only a divine justice and nature which discerned good men
from evil, but also that there was another life after this, in which this
judgment should be made. For they considered what great torments the wicked
feel in their hearts and conscience, after they have committed horrible
crimes: and that there is none so audacious and obdurate, not the greatest
mocker and contemner of God and of his judgments that can be, who can always
exempt himself from this dolor and pain, notwithstanding he labor with all
his might to the contrary. For there is always a certain secret virtue of
Gods justice, which goes beyond them all, and evermore punishes the wicked.
Now it is certain, that these things come not thus to pass at all adventure.

In like manner, The natural knowledge of good and evil an argument of our
immortality.
it is not possible, that this knowledge which men have to discern virtues
from vices should be a casual thing, and come thus to pass at adventure,
without the certain providence of God. For if it were so, that there were no
punishment appointed for vices, and no more benefit or joy prepared of God
for the good then for the evil, it should follow that all this knowledge
should be given to man in vain. For it should do him no more good then if
he were without it as brute beasts are. Moreover, seeing all the wicked are
not punished in this life, it follows necessarily, that there is another life
wherein they shall be punished, and in which also God will acknowledge the just,
and cause them to enjoy that good which he has prepared for them. For God
cannot be God, but he must be all-good, aliust, and almighty. If he be
good, he cannot hate the good or them that do it, but love them so, as that
he cannot do otherwise. For how should he not love his like? And as he
cannot hate goodness or good men, so he cannot love evil, nor the wicked
that follow after it; but hates them necessarily as contrary to his nature.
Now Love is of that nature, The nature of love and hatred.
that it cannot but desire and procure the good and honor of him whom it
loves: as contrariwise, hatred cannot but desire and procure the hurt and
dishonor of him whom it hates. It follows then necessarily, that God
being good and just, loves good and just men, desiring and procuring their
honor and their good: and contrariwise, that he hates unjust and wicked men,
desiring and procuring their confusion and ruin. And if he have this desire
and this will, no doubt but he can easily and does also execute the same,
seeing he is all-iust and almighty. Truly this conclusion cannot seem to
be ill grounded, and those Heathen Philosophers, who thereupon have concluded
the immortality of souls, and the judgment of God in another life, had good
reason so to do. For it is taken not only from the nature of man and from that
image of God after which he was created, but also from the very nature of God.
So that whosoever gainesayeth the same, has no more reason then if he said,
that there is no God, and that God is not God, and that man is not man, and
that he differed in nothing from a beast, neither God from the devil. And so
not only all nature should be ouer-throwen, but God also, the author and
Creator thereof. For we see almost usually, that the wickedst men have the
greatest honors in this world, and live most at their ease, as we have already
showed. If then there be a God, and any providence and justice in him (now who
can so much as think there is none, but he may also persuade himself withal
that there is no world nor any creature, and that himself is not the same he
is?) The necessity of another life after this.
it must I say, of necessity follow, that if God be, there is also another
life, in which that justice shall be performed, which is not here executed, and
in which both just and unjust shall receive every one the reward of his justice
or injustice. For it is impossible, that God who is so good and so just a
nature, should create mankind in that sort, as if he had created the best and
iustest part thereof, only to misery and wretchedness, and the woorst to joy
and happiness. Now continuing our discourse of those internal testimonies,
which every one of us bears within him of the immortality of the soul, we
will speak to morrow of conscience, which presses men to stand in awe of God
and of his judgments. It is your part, ASER, to entreat of this matter.

The end of the twelft days work.
THE THIRTEENTH days work.
Of the testimonies which every one may take from his conscience: of that fear
unto which all men are naturally subject to prove the immortality of the
soul, and a judgment of God upon the just and unjust: how that which the
Atheists say, that fear causes gods amongst men, serves to overthrow their
damnable opinion. Chap. 97.
ASER. The wicked may flatter themselves, and labor as much as they list to
rock themselves asleep in their impieties and horrible vices, yet they cannot
prevail so much, but they have continually a warning-peece ringing in their
ear, and an Apparitour rapping at their door without ceassing, so that they
cannot always sleep at their ease. For that is ever true, Genesis 4. 6, 7.
which the Lord said to Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance
cast down? If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do
not well, sin lies at the door. Which is as much as if he had said, that
if Cain does as Abel does, he shall be received of GOD with that honor
that he is received, and shall go with his face looking upward: but if he
do otherwise, his sin will awake him well enough, and not suffer him to have
any rest in his conscience, but will so press him, A similitude.
that he shall be as a man that lies always in a portall, or near unto it,
who can take no rest for any long season, by reason of comers and goers that
go in and out by it, or that knock at it every hour to have it opened.
Sorrow ever follows sin.
And therefore it is commonly said, that Repentance ever follows after
sin. For, howesoeuer it may be slow in coming, yet it cannot be without
great heaviness and sorrow: which no unjust person can eschew, but he shall be sure
to feel it very sharp and vehement. For he must needs feel and have
experience in himself, that of evil nothing but evil can befall him in the
end, and that when he feels what evil sin brings unto him, he cannot
but be grieved that he has committed it, and wish that the thing were to do
again. Therefore every wicked man feels himself accused and condemned by
his own conscience, which is a certain testimony unto him, that there is a
God and a Judge, whose judgment he cannot avoid. But before we proceed in
this discourse, it shall be good for us to know what conscience is properly.

We are then to know, that although sin has greatly troubled the mind
which God has given us, by the darkness of error and ignorance wherewith
it is filled, yet it could not so wholly blind it, but still there remained in
it some sparkles of that light of the knowledge of God, and of good and evil,
which is naturally in men, and which is borne with them. This remnant that yet
remains is commonly called by the Divines Synteresis: which is taken from a
Greek word, What conscience is.
that signifies as much as if we should say, Preservation, whereby that
remnant of the light and law of nature that remains in us, is still preserved
and kept in our soul after sin. And so this word Synteresis signifies that
knowledge of the Law which is borne with us: Why it is called Synteresis.
and it is so called, because it always keeps in man, yea in the most wicked
that can be, an advertisement or instruction, which tells him what is right
and just, and that there is a judgment of God. Some distinguish between
Synteresis and Conscience, others take them both for one and the same thing,
calling this Synteresis, the very conscience it self: whereas others say it is
the natural judgment, and some the light of our mind and spirit. The
Philosophers, who had some obscure knowledge, said, that there are certain
Anticipations in our nature, by which they meant the selfsame thing in a
manner. For by these Anticipations they understand those principles of
knowledge and natural informations, which being as it were rules, we have not
learned of any Masters, neither by use or experience, but we have drawn and
received them from nature, whom God has appointed in this respect to be our
mistres. For this cause the Philosophers used this word Anticipation, Of the
Philosophers Anticipations.
or some other of the same signification in the language wherein they wrote,
before we receive these natural rules from nature, as from our mother, before
we receive any other, either by learning of our masters, by use, or by study.
For to Anticipate, signifies as much as to prevent and to take before. It is
true, that these rules of nature are in greater number, and more certain, in
some then in others: and so are polished and increased more by study, by use,
by experience, and by exercise. Now by what name soever this light of our
mind, and this natural censure is called, by which we judge what is right and
just, or otherwise, sure it is, that of it own nature it is always carried to
that which is true and good. And from hence comes the approbation of virtues,
and dislike of vices, from which also the laws and commandments of men
touching manners do afterward flow, and so the conscience that is within every
one, to the end it may argue, reprove, and condemn him for his own faults.
So that there is no man but he has a Judge within himself, except he be
altogether deprived of sense and humane understanding, and so being turned into
a brute beast, commits all uncleanness even with greedines, as S. Paul
speaks to the Ephesians. Ephesians. 4. 19.
And although some men that are most forsaken of God fall sometimes into this
senslesnesse, yet it continues not always with them, but God afterward
rowseth them up well enough, and causes the^ to apprehend and feel the rigor
of his judgments. For although nature were so put out and smothred in them,
that no sparkle of natural light to rectify their judgment, appeared in
them, nor yet any flame of Gods wrath, which burns the heart that is turned
aside from him, yet he has other means to kindle the fame again and to set it
on flaming, even after such a manner, Atheists compared to drunkards and mad
folks.
that it amaseth them, as if it thundered down upon the^. Therefore it fares
with the^ as it does with drunkards and frantik persons, who know not whether
they have any soul or sense, any mind or conscience, so long as they are
drunk and out of their wits, until such time as they have slept their full, and
are restored again to their right wits. So that howsoever this word Conscience
is used, it is properly a judgment that is in our mind, whereby we approve
that which is well done, and reprove the contrary. According then as our
judgment is upright and sound, or weak and corrupted, good or evil, so also
have we our conscience either more right or more crooked. A sit similitude.
But as it cannot otherwise be, but that they who have eyes see the light,
although they will not see it, or say they do not see it: so it cannot be but
that the eyes of the mind beholds the natural light that is in it, and those
things that are discovered unto it thereby, seeing it proceeds from God, who
is the fountain of al light, and who will never suffer it to be so clean
extinguished in man, but that still there remains sufficient to condemn him
withal. The wicked always condemn themselves.
Therefore the very Heathen could say, that a wicked person could never be
absolved by himself, nor yet escape and flee from his own judgment and
condemnation, he being judge of himself. So that although the wicked and
unjust, oftentimes escape the judgment of men, yet they can never save
themselves from their own judgment, which their conscience always executes
after the perfection of their process. For it exercises four offices against
them. Four offices of the conscience.
The first is, the office of an Accuser: the second, of a witness, and so it is
as good as a thousand, as we use to speak: the third, of a Judge, the fourth,
of an executioner and hangman. For seeing the judgment of the conscience is
ordained and established by God from heaven, in that which is well done there
always follows to it, tranquillity, rest, and joy of heart: and in that
which is wickedly done, dolor and torment, which punishes the offense and
takes vengeance of him that has committed it. The more wicked a man is, the
greater is his fear.
Hereof it is that none live in greater fear, then the greatest contemners of
God, that are most given over to all kinds of vice and wickedness, and who
declare most evidently by their works, that no fear of God or of his
judgments holds them in. For they live as if they carried death always in
their bosom, how good a face soever they set upon the matter outwardly. And
because they cast all fear of God far from them, he vouchsafes them not the
honor to give them a heart to fear him as they ought, but he beats down
their pride in such sort, that he causes them to stand in fear not only of
men, of tempests, of thunders and of lightnings, but he terrifieth them also
by dreams, and makes them to tremble at their own fancies, yea they quake
oftentimes at flies, and mice, and such contemptible things: but yet so as this
fear comes from a higher cause. For it is sent of God, who thus derideth his
adversaries, making himself terrible in his creatures to them that know him
not, neither fear him as their Creator and the Creator of those his
creatures. The Deity proved by that fear which is naturally in men.
I say then, that although we had no other testimony in us of any God, or of
any divinity and divine nature, and so consequently of his judgment in a
second life, yet this ought to suffice us, that comes from fear, which is a
natural perturbation in man, as we have heard. For whosoever fears,
declares plainly thereby that there must of necessity be some power above him
that is able to hurt him. For he that is assuredly persuaded that nothing can
hurt him, is void of fear.

Now there is no humane power, or creature whatsoever it be, that is able to
deliver men from all fear, no not the greatest Emperors, Kings, and Princes
themselves, who are most feared and redoubted, and who cause all men to tremble
under them, being as it were terrestrial gods amongst other men. The greatest
persons live in most fear.
Nay these men themselves are so far from being delivered from all fear and
terror, that very seldom any live in greater fear then they do, as they
declare plainly in that they must always have a great guard of men about
them, and yet can not ever avoid those dangers which they fear. For it often
comes to pass, that they are slain, either by poison, or sword, or by some
other kind of violent death, and that by such as should have kept them, or
whom they trusted most, as is to be seen by daily experience. But albeit
there were no other fear then the fear of death, which is commonly greatest
in the wicked, and which they can not finally avoid, yet they can not but live
always in fear. And living so, they must acknowledge will they nill they,
that there is some other power greater then their own, which causes them to
fear, and before which they must one day appear. For if it were otherwise,
why should they fear? Now whilst we seek for this power, we must of
necessity come to one sovereign power, under which all other principalities
are raunged, and which has no other above it self. And being come thereunto,
we must withal conclude, that this power can not be humane, but must needs
be divine, and so consequently eternal and infinite: or at leastwise they
must confess, that they cannot comprehend this power. The Atheists proverb,
that fear made gods, turned against themselves.
This being so, I think we may fight against the Atheists with the same
reason whereby they would persuade themselves, that there is neither God nor
Divinity, but only in the opinion and fantasy of men: and that their fear,
unto which they are always subject, has put this opinion of God into their
heads. Therefore they allege that which a Heathen Poet said, agreeable to
this opinion of the Epicures, namely, that fear was the first that made Gods
in the world. For men being possessed therewith, and not finding such help
amongst all the creatures, as can deliver them from all those dangers which
they fear, they must seek for an other without the creatures, which can not
but be a divine power, if there be any at all, as in truth there is.
Whereunto if Epicures and Atheists will give no credit, I would fain know of
them, what is the cause of this terror and fear, which is of such virtue and
power in the hearts of all, that no creature whatsoever, being partaker of
reason and understanding, can go beyond it, or is able to pluck it wholly out
of his heart, and utterly to extinguish it: as every one feels by experience
in himself, and as these men of whom we speak, confess by their own
sayings. Therefore I can hope for no better from them in defense of their
impiety, but that they should stir maliciously against the testimonies of
their own conscience.

We say then that fear is not without a special providence of GOD given to
men after an other manner then unto beasts, The difference betwixt the fear
in men and in beasts.
who in deed have some fear put in them, to the end to keep themselves from
hurtful things before they take and use them: but this apprehension of theirs
goes not beyond the evils which may befall them in this life, as that does in
men, which reaches a great deal further. For they that have committed some
horrible crime, can not be without fear although they did it so secretly
that no body could come to the knowledge of it, or else were so mighty and
powerful, that they stood not in awe of any humane power whatsoever. Now if
they that have not this authority and assurance should reply upon me, that
they are afraid least men should come to the knowledge of the fact committed by
them and so they should be punished, I demand of them from whence this fear
comes, but from an apprehension which (will they, nill they) is in them, and
proceeds from a certain sense and feeling of nature, which causes them to
fear that their offense shall be discovered by some other means then humane? As
if nature testified unto them, that there is some divine providence and
vengeance, which watches over offenses, and discloseth them how secret soever
they are, and causes them to be punished. As experience teaches in many,
whose secret crimes have bin discovered by wonderful and incredible means,
so that all men are astonished at it, and are constrained to confess, that
there is a divine justice, which will not suffer horrible facts to remain
always hid and unpunished. Therefore how secret and close soever they carry the
matter, this divine justice rappeth continually at the door of their
conscience, as it were an Apparitor or Sergeant, calling them to judgment: so
that whether they will or no, they must always live in fear. And this also
has bin the cause that has always induced men (I speak not of Atheists,
Strong reasons against Atheists.
who are brute beasts and not men) to seek after some power out of their own
nature, and above all creatures, to guard and defend them from the evil which
they fear. For, notwithstanding their diversity of opinions touching the
divine nature, all with one consent from time to time have evermore yielded
public and constant testimony, that there is some divine essence and power,
that can help or hurt them. Whereupon it follows, that they can not be
without fear of it, or else not without some hope, that by the help thereof they
shall be kept from the evil which they fear, and obtain that good which they
desire. Wherefore if Epicures and Atheists say, that fear was the first shop
in which the gods were forged and made in the world, I will take their saying
against themselves. For hereby they are compelled at least to confess, Fear
is a natural testimony of a divine essence.
that fear has constrained men from time to time to seek after some god: and
that the same is a public testimony of nature, which has caused the^ to lift
up the eyes of their mind beyond the reach of brute beasts, and forced them to
think that there is some divine power and nature. And by the same reason also
they may learn, that this is no light fancy and vain opinion entered into the
brain of man, but a natural, firm, and constant notion and knowledge, which
no age of man could ever abolish, nor any thing else in the world. Yea this has
bin daily confirmed in them more and more, and shall be continually,
notwithstanding these swinish Epicures grunt in their sties, and these dogged
Atheists bark against God and his providence, against his judgment and the
immortality of souls, which is the principal foundation of religion, and the
establishment and preservation of humane society.

Now then after so great a multitude of strong arguments and powerful
testimonies, which like a mighty army fight in battle array to maintain the
truth of the souls immortality, who can doubt there of in any wise? Let them
that uphold the contrary bring forth their arguments and testimonies against
ours, and place them in the fro^t of the battle, as it were army against army,
that all may know on which side not only the number, but the strength also is
the greatest. For the greatness of the number would do small good, unless
strength also were joined thereunto. For we must not so much reckon as weigh the
sentences, nor consider so much how many men affirm a thing, as what manner of
persons they are, and of what weight their testimony is, as also what they
affirm, and with what reasons. If we fall into this consideration, I doubt not
but that every way the advantage will be on our side for the truth: namely, in
regard of multitude, authority, nature, reason, and which is more, the
testimony of God, who alone is sufficient. Now to the end that this may be
well known unto us, let us hear, AMANA, the best arguments that our
adversaries can bring for the ground of their error.

Whether Epicures and Atheists be reasonable beasts yea or no, and what reasons
they bring to overthrow the immortality of the soul: of the false opinion of
Pliny touching the same, and of his frivolous and brutish reasons to this
purpose: of the brutish conclusion, unbeseeming the whole race of mankind,
which he makes of this matter, and of the judgment of God upon him. Chap. 98.
AMANA. Many men, by reason of their ignorance in the Latin tongue, What this
word Animal signifies.
think that Animal is a beast, whereas it signifies a living creature, and
comprehends under it as well men as beasts, even every creature endued with a
living soul. And therefore when they would show the difference that is
between men and beasts, they take the contrary species or kind for the whole,
and say that a man is a reasonable beast, not considering that they speak
contraries. For there is as great difference between a beast and reasonable, as
between a man and brutish, or brutishnes. For-seeing it is the natural
property of every beast of what kind soever it be, to be brutish, it cannot be
that any should be reasonable, except peradventure Epicures and Atheists will
say that they be such beasts. And indeed they should have wrong offered them,
to be reckoned among me^, seeing they do voluntarily make themselves brutish.
If then they will not confess, that they are beasts altogether incapable of
reason, Atheists are reasonable beasts.
I demand of them whether they be reasonable beasts, and whether they will
argue this matter whereof we entreat, with reasons or no, seeing they will not
rest in the judgment of humane reason, and of natural Philosophy, and seeing
all the holy Scriptures, holy Doctors, wise Ancients, and most notable
personages, seem unto them to be no better then toys and fables. Let us come
then to the reasons of these unreasonable beasts without reason.

Is there any point in all humane Philosophy that is better grounded and laid
upon so strong, firm, and well concluding reasons, and that has more or so
many reasons as this, whereof we dispute at this present? How many things do
these fellows believe according to natural Philosophy, for which they have
not so many nor so evident reasons? And how many things should be doubted
of, except so many arguments could be brought for their proof and
confirmation, as we have alleged, and as might yet be found out for this
matter? Now what can they allege on the contrary side? For if they believe
nothing but what they see, and whereof they have experience, I demand of them,
how many things there are in humane Philosophy where of they are thoroughly
resolved, and yet have no experience at all in them, neither can have any
certainetie, but only as they give credit to such as have written of them,
who yet are deceived themselves oftentimes, and so have deceived others? And
yet they are not so hardly brought to believe their reasons, as to give credit
to them that maintain the immortality of souls, which is a matter of so
great consequence and weight. Atheists sitly resembled to Spiders.
And as Spiders turn into poison the sweetest liquors they suck, so they
maliciously gather the reasons, testimonies and places, not only of Poets,
Philosophers, and others, but also of the holy Scriptures, which they think
will serve to confirm them daily more and more in their errors, and in their
false and wicked opinions, how little likelihoode soever they seem to have,
and how flenderly soever they make for them. In the mean season they
dissemble and make show that they see not all the other reasons that fight
directly against them, which being in number infinite, are so clear and so
certain, as nothing can be more. There are many of them that have no other
reason but their opinon, who can allege no other thing but this, It is not
so, or, I believe it not, or, I doubt of it, or, Peradventure it is otherwise.
And in truth none of them all in a manner have any reasons of greater show,
or that can urge them that have never so little judgment, as we may easily
judge by the examination of one of their chief Masters and strong Pillars, I
mean Pliny, Plinies brutish opinion touching the immortality of the soul.
by whom we may judge of all the rest. For if he, who is so much esteemed
among them, showed himself to be such a gross and blockish beast, and so
far from reason in that which he wrote touching this matter, a man may soon
guess what can be in the others, who are no body in respect of him, or at
leastwise have not gotten so great credit and authority. But let us hear the
reasons of this venerable Doctor. First, he derideth all that men have spoken
or written of the being of souls after the death of the bodies, accompting
all this to be but toys and dreams: and then he propounds his resolution,
that there remains no more of a man after his corporal death, then there was
of him before he was conceived and borne.

After that he laugheth at the vanity of men in that they are so foolish as at
the very time of their death voluntarily to flatter and beguile themselves, in
promising to themselves life even after life: some by the immortality of the
soul, others by the transfiguration thereof, and a third sort by attributing
sense to the dead and by honoring their souls, and making a god of that, which
having been a man, is now nothing at all. I marvel not if Pliny mocked at
many foolish opinions that were among the Heathen touching this matter, and
namely, the foo^eries of the Pythagoreans and Platonists, which I doubt not but
he meant by the transfiguration of souls. Plato his opinion of the creation
of souls.
whereof he makes mention. For Plato was so far from yielding that the
soul of man was mortal, that he will not confess the soul of beasts to be
so, because according to his opinion of the creation of souls, he thinks
that there is but one kind of soul for all sorts of bodies that have life,
and that souls pass and repasse from one to an other, as we heard, until
that being well purged they come to the place of the blessed. Likewise this
Author of the natural history had reason to deride the folly and vanity of
men in deifying them that died, and in making them immortal gods, that had
been before but mortal men. But from these fond opinions he had no reason to
conclude, that if souls did not pass and repasse from bodies to bodies, and
if men could not become gods after their death, therefore they ceased to be
men any longer, and nothing remained of them but their ashes, so that their
souls also perished as well as their bodies. Plinies reasons against the
immortality of the soul.
But what reasons has he to uphold this conclusion? For the first he
alleges, that men breathe not otherwise then beasts do, Plin. lib. 7. ca.
55.
because he sees nothing of the soul of either of them, and goes no further
then to the external senses, as if the soul of men as well as of beasts were
nothing else but a breath. Whereby we see what a gross beast he shows
himself to be. We may say the same of him, in that he requires both the
internal and external senses after the death of a man, and the same offices
which the soul performed in the body when it dwelled therein, concluding that
without these things there could be no good for man after death. Then he takes
this for an other argument, that there are many other things in the world,
which live a great deal longer then man does, and yet we attribute no
immortality unto them. After, he demands whither man goes after death, what
lodging he has, and what a multitude of souls there should be in the world
from the time it has bin a world, if al they should live that have bin: and so
concludes that they should be but as it were so many shadows. We have
sufficiently answered all these goodly arguments before, when we spoke of
brutish men, who rest only in the witness of their senses, and go no further
then beasts do. Besides, what an argument is that for so great a man, to say
that we attribute not immortality to many things that out-liue men, and
therefore why should we rather believe it of men's souls? There are not only
many beasts, whose life is longer then the life of men, but also many trees,
and therefore we must ask of man, why we should think that he is rather
capable of reason, and more excellent then other creatures are, and that he
has a soul of another nature and more noble then they? But I will further
urge these arguments against himself, according as we made answer to the
complaint of some Philosophers, who accused nature because she had granted
longer life to many beasts then to me^, seeing it was so necessary for them.
For seeing Nature has endued man with so many goodly gifts and so excellent,
wherewith she has not adorned beasts, certainly she should be a stepmother,
and no true mother, or if she were a mother yet she should be a very cruel
mother, if she had given longer life to beasts then to men, and had not
reserved a better and a longer for them. But this reason would not greatly move
Pliny, who is the man himself, that gave these goodly titles to nature, Pliny
blasphemed God under the name of Nature.
under which name, he blasphemed God whom he knew not. Nevertheless this
argument will be of force with them that weigh it aright, considering the
providence and goodness of God toward mankind. He adds further, that this
fantastical opinion is entered into men's brains, because they would never
fail but be eternal. But this pretended reason is so far from confirming his
opinion, that contrariwise it greatly weakneth the same, in that it agrees
with the argument for the immortality of souls, that was taken from this
natural desire which God has not given to men in vain, as has bin showed
unto us by good reasons. Moreover he judges it great folly to keep bodies in
hope that they shall live and rise again, according to the vain promise of
the Philosopher Democritus, Democritus believed the resurrection of bodies.
who did not rise again himself. But I marvel not if Pliny spoke so of the
resurrection of bodies, seeing he held that opinion of the mortality of
souls: and seeing those Philosphers who maintained the immortality of souls,
did not so much as once dream of the resurrection of bodies, except this
Democritus only, at whom I much more wonder, then at all this which Pliny
writes of the mortality of souls. For it seems that Democritus could not
learn this of reason and of natural philosophy, unless it were so that he
builded his doctrine upon the same foundation that he took from his Motes,
concerning the matter of which all things are made. For according to this
opinion he taught, that all the essences that ever were, should in time have
their being again by the meeting together of those matters, of which they had
been compounded. Surely a very fond opinion for a Philosopher, so that Pliny
may well derde it; although the argument he makes against him is not strong
enough to overthrow his imagination. For he would have had Democritus to
have confirmed his opinion by his own resurrection. But his Philosophy did
not insinuate so much that it should have been done so quickly, but after
the revolution of many Ages, which Pliny should have stayed for before he
could have euicted Democritus of his foolish opinion, if he had no better
argument to overthrow it. Now if this Philosopher did not lay this ground for
his opinion which I have mentioned, I would have thought that he might have
understood the same by some speech come to his ears, of the doctrine of the
holy Patriarchs and of the Hebrews touching this matter, by means of the
Egyptians amongst whom those good Fathers long dwelt, because they that
wrote the lives of the Philosophers, What Philosophers went into Egypt to
learn wisdom.
put Democritus in the number of them that descended into Egypt to learn the
wisdom of that people, as Pythagoras, Plato, Orpheus, Socrates and Pherecydes
with others, did the same. But let us return to Pliny and hear his other
reasons such as they be.

He accounts it great folly in men to think, that by death a man may enter
into a second life: and thereupon breaks forth into an exclamation, as if
men were out of their wits so to think. But he would have found it no less
impossible, that generation should come of corruption, and that of seed,
which is but as it were a little slime, a man could be engendered, or a beast,
if experience had not taught the fame. And because he has not seen a soul
live after the death of the body, nor a dead man risen again, therefore he
concludes, that there is neither immortality of the soul nor resurrection of
the body. But we may call to mind that which was uttered to this purpose,
when we spoke of the similitude that is between our first and second birth. I
omit that which he says of the rest and quietness taken away for ever from
men that are borne, if that division of the soul separated from the body which
some Heathen Philosophers made, should take place, namely, when they so
divided it, that the sense of souls remained above, and their shadows beneath
among the dead: for all this is but fopperie. Nevertheless the argument taken
from the common consent of men touching the immortality of souls remains
still, and is confirmed even by Pliny himself in this place, although
peradventure he never thought it.

Let us then come to the final conclusion which he makes of this whole
matter. The conclusion of Pliny touching this matter.
He calls it deceit of words, and foolish credulity, whatsoever men
speak or believe of their immortality, and accompteth it as a poison that
destroys the chief good of Nature, which as he says is death, adding
further that by this means death shall doubled, or (as some read it) the
grief of him that is to die shall be doubled, when he shall think upon that
which is to come. For if it be a sweet and pleasant thing to live, to whom
can it be pleasant to think that he did once live? Therefore he sets
this down for his last resolution, that it is more easy and certain for
every one to believe himself and that whereof he has experience in himself,
then to trust any other: and to fetch his assurance from that which a man was
before he was borne. Thus we see how he labors to persuade, that no man
can be blessed in the life to come, because the chief good thing he can have
in nature is taken from him, except he be wholly like to beasts in his
death, and except he believe that there remains no more of him after death,
then there was before his conception and nativity. And to confirm and assure
himself in this opinion, he would have every one to fetch an argument and
proof hereof from the similitude of that estate in which he was before he
was conceived or borne, to compare it with that which follows his death, that
a man may judge of the one by the other. But what reason is in that? For is
there the same reason from not being to being, that is from being to not
being? We know well how man is come from not being to being, but can we
hereby be so assured, that he shall be no more after he has been, as we
know he has been after a time wherein he was not? And whereas he would
have us give more credit to our own experience in our death, then to all that
can be said by others, I would demand of him what that is of which we have
experience, and whether we ought to conclude, that we die wholly as beasts
do, because to the sense of man we see no difference betwixt their deaths and
the death of man. It seems this is his meaning. But as they of his coat ask
who euercame from the dead, to testify that souls are immortal, so we may
ask of him, who ever returned from thence, to assure us of that which every
one may have experience of in his death, and whether they perceived themselves
to be altogether like to beasts after the same. For they can have no more
certain testimony of this by their senses, then they have of the other point.
Also I would gladly ask of him how he found himself, when he was choked
near to the mountain Vesuuius with smoke, The judgment of God in Plinies
death.
and with the smell of brimstone issuing out of the same: and what consolation
he found in death, which he says is the greatest good of Nature. Whereby he
showed how smally he had profited in the knowledge of God the Creator of
Nature, Plin. Nep* epist. ad O^^. Ta^.
by the contemplation of his works therein. No marvel then if knowing him no
better, he called her stepmother and cruel mother, seeing that according to
his Philosophy, the greatest good which she brings to men, is death: and
seeing she never does them a better turn, then when he brings them back
again to that estate in which they were before they were conceived or borne
into the world. According to which conclusion, a man may well approve of that
desperate sentence of theirs who affirmed resolutely, that it were good for
men, either never to be borne, or to die presently after their birth. So that
the first and cheifest benefit of nature should be, never to be borne: and
the second, to be borne before the time, or to be as soon dead as borne.

Moreover it should follow by Plinies Philosophy, The absurd consequents of
Plinies opinion.
that nature had made men with such a condition, that they can not but be
miserable, if they live after this life, and if death do not wholly destroy
them, and if they be not resolutely persuaded of this, to have no hope at all
of another life. For that which he says imports as much. Is not this then a
goodly resolution and conclusion of so great a searcher of nature, whereof he
has written the history? With what eyes did he look upon all that which he
might have scene? How much differed they from the eyes of beasts? and what
profit reaped he by that knowledge which he had more then they? In truth
we have in this man a wonderful example of Gods judgment upon the learned
and wise men of the world, who so vilely abuse that reason, knowledge, and
understanding which GOD has given them. And forasmuch as this dog was
permitted to vomit out such horrible blasphemies, both against God and against
Nature, and yet received no punishment for the same from man, therefore GOD
himself took vengeance of him by smoke, whereby he was choked to death. For
seeing he esteemed the soul to be no better then a little wind or breath, he
deserved well to loose the same in the midst of smoke and brimstone. But we
have spoken enough of him. Now you may, ARAM, tell us some more lies rather
then reasons, wherewith Atheists fortify themselves against the truth of this
matter we have in hand, and how we ought to consider of the judgments of God
upon them.

Of them who say, that we can not know by the light of nature but that the
soul is mortal: of them that allege a place of Solomon against the
immortality of the soul: how we ought to consider of the judgments of God
upon Epicures and Atheists: how the absurdities, which follow their doctrine,
declare plainly the grosenesse of it: of the force of those arguments that
were produced before for the immortality of the soul. Chap. 99.
ARAM. It is a great matter when men judge of things, not according to reason,
but according to their affections: because then their ears are closed up
against all reasons, as we have the example of the Jews, who were the enemies
of Jesus Christ. For after they had once resolved not to acknowledge him,
neither to receive him for the true Anointed of the Lord, but to reject and
condemn him with all his doctrine and works, no reason was ever sufficient to
remove them from this their purpose. But to confirm them in their obstinacy
there needed no great arguments, no not in show, as it appears in that
difficulty of theirs to believe his resurrection. For neither all these
witnesses of which they had so great a number, nor all their doctrine, nor all
their holiness, nor all their signs and miracles, were of any force with them
in regard of that testimony, which the theeuish and murdering soldiers
corrupted with money gave them to the contrary, Mat. 28. 12, 13.
and that by a loud lie which overthrew it self.

Therefore we may easily judge what the mind of man is, when it is corrupted
and perverted, and when men suffer themselves to be carried away with their
evil and froward affections, so that God does even blindfold and forsake
them. We see many such examples in this matter, which we now handle touching
the immortality of the soul. For on the contrary side, what are the strongest
reasons, which these doggish Epicures and Atheists, enemies to God, to mankind,
and to all nature, against whom we now dispute, can allege for themselves?
What would they do if they had as much against us, as we have against them? How
would they lift up themselves against those that maintain the contrary, and
tread them under their feet? We heard in the former speech the strongest
arguments upon which their error leans, whereby we may know what a badde
foundation it has. Against them who say that the soul can not be known to
be immortal according to nature.
Others there are who say, that in the light of faith the soul is immortal,
but in the light of nature it is mortal: so that whilst they would seem
Philosophers, they show themselves to be ignorant and gross beasts. For there
is but one only truth both of nature and of faith, truth never being double,
but always one. Therefore if the soul be immortal in the light of faith, it
can not be mortal in the light of nature, but only in the darkness thereof.

For we see how this small remnant of natural light, that yet remains in
the corrupt nature of men, sends them with one common and public consent to
this truth of the immortality of men's souls: so that none, besides those in
whom it is as it were utterly put out, and whom God has by his judgment
wholly rejected and cast into a reprobate sense, but acknowledge the same. How
then would this light of nature show it self, if it had still continued in
integrity? Therefore I demand of these men, what it is which they call
natural light, and whether it be not the reason of man: and if it be that
reason whereby men differ from beasts, I ask again of them, whether any
thing that may be known by arguments and reasons, although they were all
gathered together and examined narrowly, has greater and more evident light of
reason then this has. Nevertheless I agree with them herein, that the light
of faith makes us a great deal more certain of all this matter, then any
reason that can be alleged: because that is the light of Gods Spirit, which
illuminateth the eyes of the mind a great deal more clearly then any
natural light can do, as being grounded upon the testimony of God himself.
Of them that allege Solomon against the immortality of the soul.
Some also there are, who persuade themselves, that Solomon puts no
difference between the soul of men and of beasts, and that he does not
affirm, that one of them is more or less mortal or immortal, Eccles. 3. 18,
19, 20, 21.
then the other. I considered in mine heart (says the Wiseman) the state of
the children of men, that God had purged them: yet to see to, they are in
themselves as beasts. For the condition of the children of men, and the
condition of beasts are even as one condition unto them. As the one dies, so
dies the other: for they have all one breath, and there is no excellency of
man above the beast: for all is vanity. All go to one place, and all was of
the dust, and all shall return to the dust. Who knows whether the spirit of
man ascend upward, and the spirit of the beast descend downward to the earth?
But they are greatly deceived that think to defend their impiety by this
saying of Solomon. For it is most certain, that his meaning is not to conclude
that it is so indeed, as he speaks in that place: as it appears
manifestly by his final resolution in the same Book made of the matter he
has in hand, wherein he concludes touching the body of man, that dust
returns to the earth as it was, Eccles 12. 7.
and that the spirit returns to God that gave it. Now we may well think,
that this excellent man, or rather the Spirit of God which spoke by him,
would not contradict himself, especially in the very same Book. Wherefore
we must rest in the conclusion he makes therein, in which he gives us the
meaning of al his former speech. And as for the place alleged by us, which,
as Epicures and Atheists think, makes for them, he would give us to
understand thereby, what a man may judge of the life and soul both of men and
beasts, and of the difference between them, according to that we see and
perceive by our corporal senses, and that may be comprehended by the mind
and reason of man, if we have no other testimony that looks beyond this
life, in which these dogs and hogs, and all carnal and brutish men stay
themselves. For if there remained no more of man after his death then there
does of a beast, both the one and the other would come to one pass. Nay the
life of man should be so far from happiness, that it would be a great
deal more miserable then that of beasts. So that it should seem to be
better for men to pass away the time merrily, and to live like beasts,
according to the Philosophy of Epicures. And although they should take this
course, yet in the end all would be but vanity, according to Salomons
theme, which he handles in his Book of the Preacher. Therefore being to set
down the conclusion of his Book, he says, Chap. 12. 1.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, whiles the evil days
come not, nor the years approach, wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in
them. Now if there were no difference between the soul of men and the soul
of beasts, both which the Prophet calls by the name of Spirit, taking
spirit for soul, what profit should men reap by this instruction and
exhortation? For what greater benefit could he look for, who from his youth
had given over himself to the service of God, and had always remembered him,
then he that forgot him and turned himself away from him? Thus ye see how
Epicures and Atheists fear not to profane the holy Scriptures, by snatching
at some places of them very maliciously, to the end to set some color upon
their damnable opinion against the immortality of the soul. But we see what
a goodly bulwark they are able to make, even all one with the rest of the
arguments, which we have already heard of the same matter. And although they
allege here in defense of their cause, Lucian and Lucretius, two other
Patriarchs and Patrons beside Pliny, whom they account as principal pillars
of their impiety, yet we can hear from them no other arguments worthy to
be so much as once thought upon, besides those which we have already handled.
The judgment of God upon Lucian and Lu^retius two Arch-Atheists.
But we may observe the like judgment of GOD upon them, that was upon Pliny
the great searcher of Nature. For Lucian, according as Suidas testifies, was
torn in pieces and eaten of dogs: and Lucretius being mad and frantic slew
himself. Eusebius. Hier. Crin. de P^^at.
For having abused so vilely that good wit and skill, which God had given him,
did he not worthily deserve to loose it utterly, and to have less of it then
brute beasts? He became so brutish, that he would not acknowledge, that any
either GOD or man had brought so great a benefit to the whole race of
mankind, or that was for this cause more worthy of greater praise then
Epicurus was, The doctrine of Epicurus commended by L^cretius.
because by his Philosophy and Doctrine he abolished all divine providence,
and so consequently all Divinity and immortality of the soul, all hope of an
other life, all religion and conscience, all difference between virtue and
vice, between honest and dishonest things, and reduced all nature both Divine
and Humane, into mere brutishness. This beastly fellow thus admiring
Epicurus concludes, that men can not but be wretched and miserable all their
life time, so long as they have any opinion of all these things, because they
will hold them in continual fear, and so consequently in perpetual torment:
but being dispossessed of all such thoughts, and so of all fear of GOD, it
will follow thereupon, that they shall have no more conscience to resist or
gainsay them, whatsoever they think, speak, or do. And so their conscience
shall not torment them with any fear and terror, especially of any judgment
of GOD, but will suffer them to be in quiet, and not hinder in any respect
their carnal pleasures and brutish affections.

Now when they are come to this point, they account themselves happy.
Epicures think themselves kings and gods.
For then they are all of them, not only as Kings and Princes, but even as it
were gods, fearing no other power above themselves, and having no body to
hinder their pleasure, but that they may freely follow their own hearts
lusts. So that the last and best conclusion of all this Philosophy will be
this, that men can not be happy except they become very beasts, and being
spoiled of all things wherein they excel them, wax altogether brutish and
retain nothing at all of man's nature, but only the outward shape of a man.
Therefore we may judge by the examples of these personages of so great skill,
and so highly esteemed among men, what man can do by his natural light, if it
be not guided by GOD but utterly forsaken of him: seeing those self same men
who have been such great inquisitours and admirers of nature, The blasphemy
of Atheists.
have fallen into such execrable beastliness, and such horrible blasphemies,
as in a manner to say, that God or Nature had brought men into the world,
only to make them more miserable and more wretched then all other creatures:
so that they can find no better happiness and felicity for themselves, then
during their life to become like to beasts, or plants or some other insensible
creatures: or else after their death to be brought to nothing, as they were
before their conception and birth. Is it possible for a man to think of a
stranger thing, more against GOD more unworthy mankind, or more injurious
to all nature? For the Atheists themselves that reject God, do yet confess if
they be Philosophers, that nature does nothing without cause: or if they
confess it not, they have testimonies enough in nature to convince them of it.
And yet if their doctrine were true, The absurdities that follow the opinion of
the Atheists.
God and Nature have done worse in the creation and production of men, then to
do some thing without cause. For this were a cause most unworthy of God and
of Nature, to create and bring forth men into the word only for this cause
and to this end, that they should be more miserable and more wretched then
all other creatures: and to make mankind only to behold in him the
perfection of all misery and unhappiness, as though God and Nature took
pleasure in beholding such cruel pastime, as is the view of man's miseries in
such a cursed estate. Wherefore seeing all the doctrine and Philosophy of
these dogs brings with it so many, so strange, so beastlike, and so
horrible absurdities, even once to think of them, being so unbeseeming God,
all mankind and whole nature, and so contrary to all the testimonies, which the
whole world affords unto us in the behalf of Gods eternal providence over al
his creatures, I think there is no body, except he be as brutish as the
Authors and Teachers of such kind of Philosophy and doctrine, but he can
easily judge, that it is altogether impossible to be true, or to have any
foundation and ground in reason, seeing it confounds and overthrows al
reason and al nature. Which causes me to be so much the more abashed, that
there are men found even among Christians, yea a great number, who rather
follow the false opinion of these masties, and give greater credit to these
sottish and vain arguments which they propound, both against God and all
divinity, and against all nature and truth, then to the true sentence of so
many virtuous, learned, and holy men, as have bin in the world from the
beginning, and to the common and public testimony of all mankind, and of al
people and nations. But if God has not spared the very heathen, who so
shamefully abused that knowledge, which he gave them of his works in nature,
and of the testimonies of his divine nature and providence manifested unto them
therein, but punished them with such a horrible judgment, as to deliver them
up into are probate sense, and into a worse estate then is that of brute
beasts: we are not to marvel if he deal so and more hardly at this day with
them that deserve a great deal more then they did, because he has manifested
him self more clearly without all comparison to these men, if they would see
and know him: yea we ought to think it more strange if he dealt otherwise. For
the more means he affords unto men to know him, the greater judgment they
deserve when they abuse the same, and labor to blind themselves by their own
ingratitude and perverse malice. Of the force of arguments alleged before for
the immortality of the soul.
As for us, we cannot (God be thanked) doubt in any sort of the immortality of
the soul, seeing we see on our side the advantage, every way in defense
thereof: namely, multitude, authority, nature and reason, and which is most of
all, the testimony of God who alone is sufficient. I doubt not but that some,
to whom God has given more knowledge and greater graces then to us, are able
to allege other arguments and reasons for the confirmation of this matter,
which we have omitted. For truth is not unprovided, but has great abundance of
all sorts. But we have alleged the chiefest, taken out of the writings of
learned men that have written best of this matter, especially of them that in
our time have written most Christianly.

And although there are other reasons then those which we have set down, yet
I think there are enough in our discourses to stop the mouths of all Epicures
and Atheists, at leastwise to convince them, if we cannot confound them. For
what can they allege against them, that is of any great show or strength? It
may easily be judged by their best arguments discoursed upon by us. What will
they have more? Do they expect or desire of us, that we should point with ye
finger at souls when they depart out of bodies that dye? Then they should be
no souls and invisible spirits, but bodies that may be seen. And yet unless
they may behold them coming forth, as they do smoke from the fire, they will
not believe that they depart at all from the bodies, or that they have any
being at all. Surely I think that these men who would so feign have souls to
be mortal, and to be extinguished by death with their bodies, would not
believe that they were departed, and that they once lived, their bodies being
dead, no not although they had seen them come forth visibly: but would
persuade themselves that they were some illusions, and that their eyes had some
mist before them: so strong is a lying persuasion in a man, when he will judge
of a thing, not according to reason, The sum of this whole book.
but according to his affection. Now seeing we are come to the end of our
purpose, namely to lay before our eyes as it were a natural history of man, by
the consideration of the matter of his body, of the diversity of that matter,
and of the form that God has given it, together with the profit and use both
of the one and the other: and also by a description of the parts, powers,
virtues and faculties of his soul, thereby to be instructed at large in the
nature and immortality thereof, by causing the soul to behold her self in the
glass of her marvelous actions, and all to this end that we should know our
selves as it becomes us, there remains nothing now but that we should
draw out a general instruction from these aduertisements and lessons, which
God gives us in the admirable composition of our nature: to the end that
hereafter we should become more fit for the contemplation of this divinity,
by the consideration of the wonderful works thereof in the heavens and in the
earth, of which we desire (if God give us grace hereafter) to discourse.
Therefore do thou, ACHITOB, put an end to the cause of our present assembly
and meeting, by some goodly discourse upon all these matters of which we have
entreated.

Of the image of God in the soul of man, and of the image of the world in
man's body: of the conjunction that is between God, the Angels, and men: of the
sundry degrees of Good that are therein: of those lessons and instructions,
which we ought to receive from the wonderful composition and conjunction of
the soul and body. Chap. 100.
ACHITOB. If we could diligently consider of the natural history of man,
which we have prosecuted hitherto, we should find in it a goodly glass,
wherein we might behold God who is invisible, making him after a sort visible
unto us, and come to the knowledge of him by his works, even as the soul is
made as it were visible to us, showing it self unto us by the body wherein it
dwells, and by those works which it effects in the same. The world
compared to man's body, and God to his soul.
Therefore first let us set before our eyes the whole frame of the world, as it
were a great body: then all the parts of it, as the members thereof: and
lastly, let us consider God, as the soul of this great body, woorking in the
same, and doing all his works there according to that order which he has set
therein, even as the soul has his operation in the body of man and in all the
members thereof. Thus doing, as we know that there is a soul in the body, and
another nature besides that which is corporal, which woorketh in the same, as
we perceive by the effects of it: so by the works done in this visible
world, we may judge that there is another nature that does them, which being
invisible, is some other the^ this whole frame which we behold, and far more
excellent, filling the same, and being in all the parts of it, as the soul is
in the body.

But whilst we propound to our selves this glass to look upon, let us beware
we fall not into their fond dreams, Against such as say that God is the soul
of the world.
who both thought and affirmed, that this world was the body of God; and that
he was the soul thereof, dwelling in it as the soul of man does in his body.
For if it were so, then should God be mortal and corruptible in regard of
his body, so that still some part or other of him should perish, as we see that
corporal things daily corrupt. On the other side, God should not be infinite
and incomprehensible as he is: for the world does not comprehend and contain
him, but he comprehends and contains the whole world. Wherefore neither is
the world God, nor God the world, but the Creator of it, by whom it is and
consists. And albeit we behold him not with our eyes in his nature and divine
essence, yet we must not therefore conclude, as Atheists do, that he is not
at all, no more, nay much less, then the soul is, because those works
whereby he manifests himself in the world, are far greater without
comparison, then those which the soul woorketh in man's body. Besides that,
all the works of the soul are the works of God, The image of God in man's
soul.
seeing it receives from him that life and virtue that is in it. Forasmuch
then as the soul is the image of God in man, as his body is the image of all
this great world, in which GOD woorketh as the soul does in man's body, let
us consider diligently, how God has distributed the powers, virtues and
offices of the soul in the body, and in all the parts of it, as he
manifests his glory, virtue and power in this visible world in all the
parts of the same. For the first, there is agreement herein, that as one
only soul is in one body, and is sufficient for all the parts and members
thereof: so there is but one God in the world, who is sufficient for all his
creatures. Again, if we cannot conceive how the soul is lodged in the
body, how it gives life unto it, displaying all her virtues, and doing all
her works therein, but only so far forth as she gives us instructions
and testimonies thereof by those diverse effects which we see in every part
and member of the body: no marvel then if we cannot behold with the eye,
nor comprehend how GOD is every where, filling heaven and earth, and how
he displayeth his power and virtue, woorking in all his creatures, guiding and
governing them, and preserving them by his divine providence and virtue. For if
we cannot comprehend the creature, or the nature thereof, how shall we
comprehend that of the Creator? Jesus Christ said to Nicodemus, John 3. 12.
If when I tell you earthly things, ye believe not, how should ye believe,
if I tell you of heavenly things? We may say the like here, that if it be
impossible for us thoroughly to know the earth, or the body or soul of man, or
the nature and virtue thereof, how shall we know the heavens and spiritual
natures, or God and his works? For if it be beyond our reach to discern
them in our selves no not the works of our soul, how shall we comprehend
his works in the whole world? Of that conjunction which is between God and
his creatures.
Notwithstanding, if we can well consider of that conjunction and agreement
that is between God and his creatures, with the the disposition of those
sundry degrees which every one of them holds in this conjunction, even from
the highest and most celestial things, that approach nearest to the nature of
God, unto those things that are lowest and most terrestrial, then shall we
set God as it were present before the eyes of our spirit, and by the
contemplation of him woonderfully content all the parts of our soul.
Therefore to prosecute this point, let us note, that GOD created and fashioned
in his Angels, images of himself that are altogether spiritual, (as indeed
himself is all spirit) and not enclosed or shut up in any bodies that are of
an earthly and corruptible matter. Besides, it pleased him to make another
kind of his image in the nature of man, which should hold the second degree
next to the Angelical nature, in which he represented himself more
excellently then in any other visible nature and creature, namely in a nature
that came nearest to his own, next to that of Angels, and in which the bodily
and visible nature was joined unto a spiritual and invisible nature. Now for
the better understanding hereof, we will set down a conjunction of three
kinds of good things, which are in diverse degrees. The first is, Of God, the
first and greatest Good.
God the creator, who is the greatest of all, and the soueraign good of all his
creatures, and is a nature without any quality or accident whatsoever. For all
that is in him, is substantial and essential. This Good is such a nature, as
has all his moving of himself, and receives it not from any other then from
himself, but gives moving to all creatures according to their nature and
measure. And yet all the motions in God are without any change, either of time
or place, or howsoever: so that he abides still immovable, Mal. 3. 6.
and may always say, I am the Lord, I change not, as it is in Malachie. For
he is ever one. And seeing he is the Original of all moving, he must of
necessity, be firm and stable: because otherwise he could not give motion to
others, as we have daily experience hereof in our selves. For if we would move
one of our feet, the other must abide steddie and firm, and both the one and
the other must always have some stay whereby to take their motion. Now
because God cannot have stay from any other, he has it in himself, in that
manner which has been declared already. For as he is always one, so all
things are present to him, yea he is every where, by reason that he is
eternal and infinite without beginning and without end, Judge of all and is
judged of none, governor of all, and governed by none. Of spiritual natures,
which are ye second Good.
Secondly, we have those spiritual natures and creatures, which are a great
Good, but not the greatest and chiefest Good, which cannot be found but in the
Creator. This second Good has qualities, because all things in it are not
substantial. It has also motion, but receives the same from the first Good,
of which it depends, and then it gives the same to others. This motion is in
time, but without place: and this Good both judges and is judged, governs
and is governed. The Angels and humane souls are this great Good, and these
spiritual natures, which are spirits having all these things. But there is
between them that difference before spoken off, namely that Angels are
spirits, which were created to live an immortal life, and not to be joined
unto any earthly bodies: and that the spirit of men are created to dwell in
bodies and to give them life. Therefore I let pass Angels for this time, and
purpose to speak only of the spirit of man, which is not immutable as God
is, but may receive change of qualities: as we see in that it being created
good, became bad, and of evil, may also become good by the grace of God. But
no such thing can befall God For he cannot but be good in the highest degree,
and the sovereign good of every creature: because goodness is not accidental to
him, as it is to a creature, but substantial and essential. And as God is the
sovereign mouer, who gives motion to all creatures in this great world: so
the soul and spirit of man gives moving to the whole body of man, who is the
little world, and to all the members thereof: neither has it this motion from
any other creature beside it self, as the body receives the same from it, The
spirit of a man moves not in place.
but only of the Creator. Now although this motion be made in time, yet it
is not made by any change of place. For what motion soever there is in the
spirit, yet it abides always in his place, so long as it dwells in the
body, which it governs under God the great governor, by whom also it is
judged, as it self judges the body, and all that is under the same. Lastly
follows the body, which is another Good, but not so great as the spirit. This
has not only quality but quantity also, whereas the spirit has only
quality without quantity. For to speak properly, no nature has quantity,
except it be corporal. Therefore the soul of a great man is not greater then
the soul of a little man, Of the body which is the (...) Good.
in regard of corpulency, because it has none as the body has. So that when
we say, that a man is of a great spirit, we mean it not in regard of bodily
quantity, as when we speak of a great body: but we consider in him the
experience of gifts agreeable to his nature, wherewith he is endued above
others. And in taking it so, it will often come to pass, that the least bodies
shall have the greatest spirits, and the greatest bodies the least spirits.
And by the same reason we consider in a little infant, even as soon as he has
received moving in his mothers belly, the selfsame soul that is in all the
ages that follow his infancy, until his olde-age, and in death it self. But
according as those instruments whereby it works during life, are fit for
their offices, and as afterward when they wax old, they fail of their
natural force and virtue: so the soul shows her powers and wonderful
effects in them and by them, continuing still one and the same in substance and
nature, as these things have been at large declared unto us. And as for the
motion of the body, it is made both in time and in place, and is governed and
judged, but it self, neither governs nor judges.

Thus we may see, how these two good things, the spirit and the body, of
which the one is greater then the other, are united and joined together in man,
as if he carried heaven and earth linked together. We may learn also how in
this conjunction the spirit occupies the middle betwixt God and the body,
and agrees with them both. We see also the admirable works of the soul
during this conjunction, all which are so many testimonies of the wonderful
works of God, and of his providence over all nature. Moreover, we behold a
very goodly disposition and excellent order in all the powers and faculties
both of soul and body.

Let us then make our profit of all these things, The right end of our creation.
and of these instructions and lessons which God gives us in them, to lead us
to the principal end for which man was created, namely to know and to honor
his Creator. Wherefore we ought chiefly to consider, that seeing God in the
wonderful compositio^ of our nature has placed the heart between the head and
the belly, and the vital virtue of the soul between the animal and the
nutritive virtue, and the will between the understanding and the most sensual
part that is in us, therefore the heart and will must always look upward and
not downward, to the end that they may join themselves to the noblest and
most divine part, and not to the basest, most sensual and earthly part. For
they are in man's body, as if they were placed between heaven and earth: so
that as man holds the middle place between Angels and other living creatures,
by reason of that communication of nature, which he has with them both: so
fares it with the heart and the will, between the head and the belly, and
between reason with that part which is capable thereof, and the sensual part
which is without reason. Man's will must look up to the head, not down to the
belly.
Wherefore if the will of man be joined with reason, which is celestial and
divine, and follows the same, it will become like unto it, and shall be able
easily to govern the sensual part underneath it, to be mistress over it, and
to compel it to obey. But if the Will despise reason and the counsel thereof,
and if instead of mounting upward toward the noblest part, it desecendeth to
the sensual part, and joins it self thereunto, then shall the Will be made
like to that, and shall serve it in place of commanding it. And by this means
the Will shall become altogether brutish, whereas contrariwise it might make the
sensual and earthly part as it were celestial and divine, by drawing it with
it self, if it would obey reason rather then the affections of the flesh, and
if it would look more toward heaven then toward the earth, as men commonly
use to do. For as they are in the midst between Angels and beasts, Man is
a middle creature between Angels and beasts.
if they would look more toward heaven, from whence their souls have their
Original, then toward the earth out of which their bodies are taken, they
should become celestial and divine, like to the Angels, and finally like to
God, who has created them after his own image. But if insteede of beholding
the heavens, unto which their faces are lifted, they look down to the earth
as brute beasts do, having more care of that then of heaven, they shall become
altogether earthie and brutish like beasts. Therefore it stands every one in
hand to bethink himself seriously, which way he aymeth, whither he desires
to come, and whom he had rather resemble, either the angels or beasts. Let us
then consider well of our nature, and of that order which God sets down
therein, and follow the same, and beware that we do not pervert it. Let us
learn to acknowledge the image of God in us, and to behold his great wisdom
therein, as it were in a little world. First let us know by our soul, which is
a spiritual and no corporal nature, that God is a spirit and of a spiritual
nature, A spirit is not shut up in a place.
which is not shut up and enclosed in any place. For neither our spirit has
any abiding in a place as if it were enclosed and shut up therein,
notwithstanding that it remains in a place as it were, in regard of that
conjunction which it has with the body. Nevertheless, it is not so enclosed
therein, but that it is able, not onli^ to raunge through heaven and earth, and
throughout this whole visible world, but even higher and farther, so that the
whole world is not of sufficient bigness to contain the same, or to content
and satisfy it, but that it will go beyond it. What then shall we think of
GOD who has created it? And how forgetful shall man be of himself, if
whereas the whole world is not great enough for his spirit, he content
himself with a little angle of the earth, and do after a sort bury himself
therein? It is invisible.
Likewise, let us know and believe that God is invisible, seeing our soul is
so, and cannot be seen with bodily eyes. For it is not painted with any
color, neither has it any corporal figure, whereby it may be seen and
known, which is done only by the acts and deeds of it.

Let us not seek then to know the essence and nature of God by the eyes, but
only by the spirit. For he cannot be seen by them, but only by the eyes
of faith, neither can he be found or conceived by corporal senses. The
conjunction of our soul and body is a wonderful work of God.
Again, we ought not only to consider, but even to wonder how he has
joined our soul with the body, and distributed the virtue thereof into all
the parts and members of the same: and how he does so excellently knitte
together and conioyne so many members, so distant one from another, even from
the one end unto the other: all which receive life and virtue from the soul
according to their nature and office, and are all governed by one and the same
spirit. Let us consider then how he would have that part of the soul,
which is partaker of reason, to have the principality and dominion over the
part in which he has placed the affections: to the end that the chiefest
should command, and the other obey, as himself has the Lordshippe and
sovereignty over all his creatures, as they that must obey him.

Let us not then suffer the spirit to be brought into bondage by the
perturbations of the affections, neither let us suffer them to be so lifted up
against reason, as to be able to turn the virtue of the soul against it. In
like manner, let us remember, how God works in our minds, in such sort as
that the knowledge of those things which we know first, is not abolished by
the understanding of other things we learn after, but they are all kept
together very surely in the chief part of the soul, and that in good order,
by means of the memory, without confusion one with another, even as if they
were written and engraven in a table, or in a pillar of brass. Wherefore we
should be very ungrateful and brutish, if any thing in the world cause us to
forget God, and if we have not his benefits toward us in perpetual
remembrance.

FINIS.
(...)

