Book plate reflecting previous ownership by John Perceval SUB CRUCE ^AN^
Sr John Percivale Baronet of Burton in the County of Cork in Ireland.



A LETTER:

Whearin, part of the entertainment unto the Queenz Majesty, at Killingwoorth
Castl, in Warwik Sheer in this Soomerz Progress 1575. iz signified: from a
friend officer attendant in the Coourt, unto hiz friend a Citizen, and
Merchaunt of London.

DE REGINA NOSTRA ILLVSTRISSIMA.
Dum laniata rua^t vicina ab Regna tumultu:
Laeta suos inter genialibus ILLA diebus,
(Gratia Dijs) fruitur: Ru^pantur and ilia Codro.
While that oour neighboourz ^^amz (asaid) uproar does rend asunder,
In ^i^th amoong the subjects that her Majesty an Under,
She (thanks too God) leads pleazaunt daiz: let spite and mallis ^un^^^.


Unto my good friend, Master Humfrey Martin Mercer.
AFter my hearty commendacionz, I commend me heartily too yoo. Understand
ye, that sins throogh God and good friends, I am placed at Coourt here (as ye
wot) in a woorwipfull room: whearby, I am not only acquainted with the most,
and well knoen too the best, and every officer glad of my company: but also
have poour, a dayz (while the Council sits not) to go and too see things sight
worthy, and too be prezent at any sheaw or spectacl, only whear this Progress
reprezented unto her highness: And of part of which sportez, having takin sum
notez and obseruationz (for I can not be ^dl at any hand in the world) az well
too put fro me suspicion of sluggardy, az too pluk from yoo doout of any my
forgetfulness of freendship: I have thought it meet too impart them unto yoo,
az frankly, az freendly, and az fully az I can. Well wot ye the blak Prins waz
never stained with disloyaltee of ingratitude toward any, I dare be his
warrant he will not begin with yoo that has at hiz hand so deeply dezerued.

But heerin, the better for conceyuing of my mind and instruction of yoors, ye
must give me leave a littl, az well to preface unto my matter, az to discoors
sumwhat of Killyng worth Castl. A Territory of the right honorabl, my singular
good Lord, my Lord the Earl of Leyceter: of whooz incomparabl cheeryng, and
enterteynment thear unto her Majesty noow, I will show yoo a part here, that
coold not see all, nor had I seen all coold well report the hallf: Whear
things, for the parsons, for the place, time, cost, deuisez, straungnes, and
aboundauns of all that ever I saw (and yet have I been, what under my Master
Bomsted, and what on my oun affairs, while I occupied Merchaundize, both in
Frauns and Flaunders (long and many a day) I saw none any where so memorabl, I
tell you plain.

The Castl has name of Killingwoorth, Killingwoorth Castl.
but of truth grounded upon feythfull story Kenelwoorth. It stonds in
Warwykshyre, a lxxiiii. mile northwest from London, and az it wear in the
Navel of England. four mile sumwhat South from Couentree a proper Cittee,
and a like distauns from Warwyk, a fair Sheere Tonn on the North: In air sweet
and hollsum, raised on an eazy mounted hill, iz set eeuenlie coasted with the
froont straight intoo the East, has the tenaunts and Tooun about it, that
pleasantly shifts from dale too Hill sundry whear with sweet Springs bursting
forth: and iz so plentifully well sorted on every side intooarabl, meado,
pasture, wood, water, and good ayr^ az it appeerz to have need of nothing that
may perteyn too living or pleazure. Too advantage has it, hard on the West,
still nourisht with many lively Springs, a goodly Pool of rare beauty, breadth,
length, deapth, and store of all kind fresh waterfish, delicat, great and fat,
and also of wildfooul byside. By a rare situacion and natural amitee seemz this
Pool conioynd to the Castl^ that on the West layz the head az it wear upon the
Castlz boosom, embraces it on either side Soouth and North with both the armz,
settlz it self az in a reach a flightshoot broad, stretching forth body and
legs a mile or too Westward: between a fair Park on the one side, which by the
Braiz is linked too the castl on the South, sprinkled at ye entrauns with a
feaw Coonyez, that for color and smallnes of number, seem too be suffered
more for pleasure then co^moditee: And on ye oother side, North and West, a
goodly Chase: wast, wide, large, and full of red Deer and oother stately
gamez for hunting: beautified with many delectabl, fresh and vmbragioous
Boowz, Arberz, Seatz, and walks, that with great art, cost, and diligens wear
very pleazauntly appointed: which also the natural grace by the tall and fresh
fragrant treez and soil did so far forth comme^d, az Diana her self might
have deyned thear well enough too raunge for her pastime. The leaft arm of
this pool Northward, had my Lord adoo^urned with a beautiful bracelet of a
fair tymbred bridge, that iz of xiiii. foot wide, and a six hundred foot long:
railed all on both sidez, strongly planked for passage, reaching from the Chase
too the Castl: that thus in the midst has clear prospect over theez pleasurz
on ye backpart: and forward, over all the Town and mooch of the Country
beside. Heertoo, a special commoditee at hand of sundry quarreiz of large
building stone, the goodness whearof may the eazlyar be judged, in the bilding
and auncienty of the Castl, that (az by the name and by storiez, well may be
gathered) waz first reared by Kenulph and hiz young sun and successor Kenelm:
born both indeed within the Ream here, but yet of the race of Saxons: Florileg.
fo. 221. and 225.
and reigned kings of Marchlond from the year of oour Lord. 798. too. 23. yeerz
toogyther, above 770. year ago. Although the Castl has one ancient strong and
large Keep that iz called Ceazarz Tour, rather (az I have good cauz to think)
for that it iz square and hye foormed after the manner of Guil. Malmesb. li. 1.
Cezarz Fortz then that ever he bylt it. Nay noow I am a littl in, Master
Martin i will tell you all.

This Marchlond that Storyerz call Mercia, iz numbered in their books, the
fo^urth of the seven Kingdoms that the Saxons had whilom here divided among
them in the Ream. Began in Anno Domi. 616. 139. year after Hors^^s and Engist,
continued in the race of a 17. kings. a. 249. year together: and ended in Ann.
875. Reyzed from the rest (sayz the book) at first by Pendaz prezumption:
ouerthroun at last by Buthreds Hascardy, and so fell to the kingdoom of the West
Saxons.

And Marchlond had in it, London, Mi^delsex, Mercia.
heerin a Bishoprik. Had more of Shyrez: Gloceter, Woorceter, and Warwik, and
heerin a Bishoprik. Chester (that noow we call Chesshyre) Darby and Staffoord,
whervntoo one Bishop that had also part of Warwik and Shrewsbery and hiz See at
Couentree, that waz then aforetime at Lychfeeld. Heertoo: Hereford, wherein a
Bishoprik that had more too jurisdiction, half Shreusbury, part of warwik and
also of Gloceter, and the Sea at Hereford. Also had Oxford, Buckingham,
Hertford, Huntingdon, and half of Bedford, and too theez, Norhampton, part of
Lecyter and also Lincoln, whearvnto a Bishop: whoz See at Lincoln City that
sumtime before waz at Dorchester. Heertoo, the rest of Leyceter and in
Nottingham that of olld had a special Bishop, whooz See waz at Leyceter, but
after, put to the charge of the Archbishop of York.

Noow touching the name, that of olld Records I understand, and of ancient
writers I find, iz called Kenelvvorth. Syns most of the Worths in England stand
ny unto like lakez, and at either small Ilandz, such one az the seat of this
Castl has been and eazly may be, or is londground by pool or river whearon
willoz, alderz or such like do gro: which Althamerus Upon Taci^ fol. 142. The
Germains call werk that we woork. Worl^-woorld. We^mut: woormwood. So viel
vvor^^ So much worth.
writez precizely that the Germains call Werd: Joining these too together with
the nighness also of the words and sybred of the toongs. I am the bolder to
pronoouns, that az our English Worth, with the rest of oour ancient langage,
waz leaft us from the Germains: eeuen so that their Werd and our Worth iz all
one thing in signifiauns, common too us both even at this day. I take the case
so clear that I say not az mooch as I moought. Thus proface ye with the
Preface. And noow to the matter.

ON Saturday the nyenth of July, at long Ichington, a Tooun and Lordship of my
Lords, within a seven mile of Killingworth, hiz honor made her Majesty great
cheer at Dinner, and pleazaunt pastime in hunting by the wey after, that it was
eight a clock in yt evening ear her highness came too Killingwoorth. Whear in
the Park, about a flight shoot from the Brayz and first gate of the Castl, one
of ye ten Sibills, that (we reed) wear all Fatidicae and Theobulae* Sibyl.
(az partiez and privy too the Gods gracious good wilz (cumly clad in a pall of
white sylk, pronounced a proper poezi in English rhyme and meeter: of effect
hoow great gladness her highness prezenze brought into every steed whear it
pleazed her too cum, and specialli now into that place that had so long longed
after the same: ended with prophecy certain, of mooch and long prosperitee
health and felicitee: this her Majesty beningly acceptying, passed fooorth
unto the next gate of the Brayz, which (for the length, largenes and use (az
well it may so serve) they call noow the Tyltyard, whear a Porter, tall of
person, The Porter
big of lim and stearn of coountinauns, wrapped also all in silk, with a club
and keiz of qua^titee according: had a rough speech full of passions in meeter
aptly made to the purpose: whearby (az her highness was cum within his ward)
he burst out in a great pang of impatiens to see such vncooth trudging too and
fro, such riding in and out, with such din and noiz of talk within the charge
of his offis: whearof he never saw the like nor had any warning before, ne yet
coold make too himself any cauze of the matter, at last upon better vieu and
auisement az he preast too cum neerar: confessing anon that he found him self
pierced at the prezens of a personage so evidently expressing an heroical
Soueraintee over all the whole estates, and hy degreez thear beside: callmd hiz
stomz, proclaims open gates and free passage to all, yields up hiz club, hiz
heyz, hiz office and all, and on hiz kneez humbly prayz pardon of hiz ignorauns
and impaciens: which her highness graciously granting, he cauzd hiz
Trumpetoourz The Trumpetoours.
that stood upon the wall of the gate thear, too soound up a tune of welcum:
which, beside the nobl noyz, was so mooch the more pleazaunt too behold, becauz
theez Trumpetoourz being six in number, wear every one an eight foot hye, in
due proportion of parson beside, all in long garments of sylk sutabl, each
with hiz syluery Trumpet of a five foot long, foormed Taperwyse, and straight
from the upper part unto the nether eend: whear the Diameter was a 16. ynchez
over and yet so tempered by art, that being very eazy too the blast, they cast
forth no greater noyz nor a more vnpleazaunt soound for time and tune, then
any oother common Trumpet be it never so artificially foormed. These
armonious blasterz, from the foreside of the gate at her highness entrauns whear
they began: walking upon the wallz, unto the inner: had this muzik maintained
from them very delectably while her highness all along this tiltyard rode unto
the inner gate next the base coourt of the Castl: where the Lady of the Lake
(famous in king Arthurz book) with Lady of the Lake.
too Nymphs waiting upon her, arrayed all in sylks attending her highness
coming: from the midst of the Pool, whear, upon a moouabl Island, bright
blazing with torches, she floting to land, met her Majesty with a well penned
meter and matter after this sort: first of the auncientee of the Castl, whoo
had been ownerz of the same even till this day, most allweyz in the hands of the
Earls of Leyceter, hoow she had kept this Lake sins king Arthurz dayz, and now
understanding of her highness hither cumming, thought it both office and duty
in humbl wize to discover her and her estate: offering up the same, her Lake
and poour therein, with promise of repair unto the Coourt. It pleazed her
highness too thank this Lady, and too ad withal, we had thought indeed the
Lake had been oours, and do you call it yourz noow? Well we will heerin common
more with yoo hereafter.

This Pageaunt waz clozd up with a delectable harmony of Hautboiz, Shalmz,
Corners, and such oother looud muzik, that held on while her Majesty,
pleazauntly so passed from thence toward the Castl gate: whearunto from the
base Coourt over a dry valley cast into a good foorm, waz thear framed a fair
Bridge of a twenty foot wide, The bridge.
and a seauenty foot long, graueld for treading, railed on either part with
seaue^ posts on a side, that stood a twelve foot a sunder, Seven pair of posts.
thikned between with well proportioned Pillars turned.

Upon the first payr of posts were set, too cumly square wyre cagez, each a
three foot long, too foot wide and hy: in them, live Bitters, Curluz,
Shoouelarz, Hearsheawz, Godwitz, and such like deinty Byrds of the Syluanus
prezents.
prezents of Syluanus the God of foul.

On the second payr, too great Syluerd Bollz, featly apted too the purpoze,
filde with Applz, Pearz, Cherriz, Filberdz, Walnuts fresh upon their brauuchez,
and with Oringes, Poungarnets, Lemmanz, and Pipinz, all for the giftz of
Pomona, Pomona.
Gods of fruiez.

The third pair of posts, in too such syluerd Bollz, had (all in earz, green
and old) Wheat, Barley, Ootz, Beanz and Peaz, az the gifts of Ceres. Ceres. 3.


The fourth Post on the leaft hand, in a like syluered Boll, had Grapes in
Clusters white and red, gracified with their Vine leauez: the match post
against it, had a payr^^ of great white silver lyuery Pots for wine: and before
them two glassez of good capacity filld full: the ton with white Wine, the two
other with claret: so fresh of coolor, and of look so lovely smiling to the
eyz of many, that by my feith me thought by their leering, they could have
foound in their hearts (az the evening was hot) to have kissed them sweetly and
thought it no sin: and theez for the potencial prezents of Bacchus Bacchus. 4.
the God of wine.

The fifth payr had, each a fair large trey streawd a littl with fresh grass,
and in them, Coonger, Burt, Mullet, fresh Herring, Oisters, Samon, Creuis, and
such like from Neptunus, God of the Sea. Neptunus. 5


On the sixth payr of Posts wear set two ragged stauez of silver, as my Lord
giuez them in armz, beautifully glittering of armor thereupon depending, Bowz,
Arroz, Spearz, Sheeld, Head pees, Gorget, Corse lets, Swoords, Targets, and
such like for Mars gifts the God of war. And the aptlyer Mars. 6.
(me thought) waz it that thooz ragged staves supported theez Martial
prezents, as well becauz theez Staves by their tines seem naturally meet for
the bearing of armoour, as also that they chiefly in this place might take upon
them principal protection of her highness Parson, that so benignly pleazed her
to take herbour.

On the seventh Posts, the last and next too the Castl, wear thear pight, too
fair Bay braunchez of a fourfoot hy, adourned on all sides with Lutes, Viollz,
Shallmz, Cornets, Flutes, Recorders and Harpes, as the prezents of Phoebus the
God of Muzik Phoebus. 7.
for rejoicing the mind, and also of Phizik, for health to the body.

Over the Castl gate was there fastened a Tabl beautifully garnisht abooue with
her highness arms, and featlie with Iuy wreathz b^ordred aboout: of a ten foot
square: the ground blak, whearupon in large white Capital Roman fair written:
a Poem mencioning theez Gods and their gifts thus prezented unto her
highness: which, becauz it remained vnremooued, at leyzure and pleaz^ I took it
oout, as foloeth.

AD MAIESTATEM REGIAM.
Jupiter huc certos cernens TE tendere gressus,
Coelicolas PRINCEPS actutum conuocat omnes:
Obseqvium praestare iubet TIBI quenque benignum.
Vnde suas Syluanus aues, Pomonaque fructus,
Alma Ceres fruges, hilarantia vina Liaeus,
Neptunus Pisces, tela and tutantia Mauors,
Suaue melos Phoebus, solidam longamque salutem.
Dij TIBI REGINA haec (cu^ SIS DIGNISSIMA) prebe^t:
Haec TIBI cum Domino dedit se and werda Kenelmi
All the letterz that mention her Majesty, which here I put capital, for
reuerens and honor wear thear made in golld.

But the night well spent, for that theez veriez by Torchlight, coold not
easily be read, by a Poet thearfore in a long ceruleoous garment, with (...)
side and wide sleeuez Venecian wize, drawn up to his elboz, his Dooblet
sleeuez under that, Crimzen, nothing but silk: a Bay garland on hiz head, and
a skro in his hand, making first an humble obeizaunz at her highness cummyng,
and pointing unto every prezent az he spoke: the same wear pronounced.
Pleazauntly thus viewing the gifts az she past, and hoow the postsmight agree
with the speech of the Poet, at ye eend of ye bridge and entree of the gate,
waz her highness received with a fresh delicate armony of Flutz, in perfourmauns
of Phoebus prezents.

So passing intoo the inner Coourt, her Majesty (that never ridez but alone)
thear set down from her Pallfree, waz conveyed up to chamber: when after, did
follo so great a peal of gunz, and such lightning by fire work a long space
toogither: as Jupiter woold sheaw himself too be no further behind with hiz
welcum, then the rest of hiz Gods: and that woold he have all the country to
kno: for indeed the noiz and flame wear h^ard and seen a twenty mile of. Thus
much Master Martin (that I remember me) for the first daiz Bien venu. Be ye
not weary, for I am skant in the midst of my matter.

On sunday: the forenoon occupied (az Sunday.
for the Sabot day) in quiet and vacation from woork, and in divine seruis and
preaching at the parish church: The afternoon in excelent muzik, of sundry swet
instruments and in dancing of Lords and Ladiez, and oother woorshipfull
degrees, uttered with such lively agilitee and commendabl grace: az whither it
moought be more strange too the eye, or pleazunt too the mind, for my part
indeed I coold not discern: but exceedingly well waz it (me thought) in both.

At night late, az though Jupiter the last night, had forgot for biziness, or
forborne for curtezy and quiet, part of hiz wellcoom unto her highness
appointed: noow entering at the first intoo hiz purpoze moderatly (az mortallz
do) with a warning pee^ or too, proceeding on with encres, at last the
Alticonant displ^az me hiz mayn poour: with blaz of burning darts, flying too
and fro, leamz of starz coruscant, streamz and hail of fiery sparks,
lightninges of wildfier a water and land, flight and shoot of thunderboltz: al
with such countinauns, terror and vehemency: that the heauins thundered, the
waters soourged, the earth shook: and in such sort surly, az had we not be
assured of the fulmi^ant deitee waz all hot in amitee, and could not otherwize
witness hiz welcomming unto her highness: it woold have made me for my part,
az hardy az I am, very veangeably afeard. This a do lasted while h^ midnight
waz past, that well waz me soon after when I waz cought in my Cabayn. And thiz
for the secund day.

Monday waz hot, and thearfore her Monday. 3.
highness kept in ^ till a five a clok in the eeuening: what time it pleazzd
her too ride forth into the Chase too hunt the Heart of fors: which foound
anon, and after sore chased, and chafed by the hot The hu^ting of the Hare of
fors.
pursuit of the hooundes, waz fain of fine fors, at last to take soil. Thear to
beholld the swift fleeting of the Deer before with the stately carriage of hiz
head in hiz swimmyng, spread (for the quantitee) like the sail of a ship: the
hoounds harroing after, az they had bin a number of skiphs too the spoil of a
karuell: the ton no less eager in purchaz of hiz pray, then waz the the other
earnest in sauegard of hiz life: so az the earning of the hoounds in
continuauns of their cry, ye swiftnes of the Deer, the running of footmen, the
galloping of horsez, the blasting of hornz, the halloing and hewing of the
huntsmen, with the excellent Echoz between whilez from the woods and waters in
valleiz resonnding, moved pastime delectabl in so hy a degree, az for any
parson to take pleazure by mo^st sensez at onez, in mine opinion thear can be
none any wey comparable to this: And special in this place that of nature iz
foormed so feet for the purpose in feith Master Martin if ye coold with a wish
I woold ye had been at it: Well the Heart waz killed, a goodly Deer, but so ceast
not the game yet.

For aboout nien a clock at the hither part of the Chase, whear torchlight
attended: oout of the woods in her Maiestiez return, rooughly came thear forth
Hombre The savage man.
Saluagio, with an Oken plant pluct up by the roots in hiz hand, himself
forgrone all in moss and Iuy: who, for parsonage, gesture, and veterauns
beside, coountenaunst the matter too very good liking, and had speech to
effect: That continuing so long in theez wild wastes, whearin often had he fared
both far and near, yet hapt he never to see so glorioous an assemble before:
and noow cast intoo great grief of mind, for that neither by himself coold he
gess, nor knew whear else to be taught, what they should be, or whoo bare
estate. Reports sum had he hard of many strange things, but brooyled thearby
so mooch the more in desire of knoledge. Thus in great pangz bethought he and
called he upon all his familiarz and companio^z: the Fawnz, the Satyrs, the
Nymphs, the Drya^des, and the Hamadryades, but none making aunswear, whearby
hiz care the more increasing, in utter grief and extreem refuge called he
allowd at last after hiz olld friend Echo that he wist would hyde nothing from
him, but tell him all if she wear here. Here (quoth Echo.) Here, Echo and Echo.
art thou thear? (sayz he) Ah hoow mooch have thou relieved my careful spirits
with thy curtezy onward. A my good Echo her iz a marueiloouz prezenz of
dignitee, what are they I pray thee, who iz Souerain, tell me I beseech thee,
or elz hoow moought I kno? I kno (quoth she). Knoest thou sayz he; Mary that
iz exceedingly well: why then, I dezire thee heartily to sho me what Majesty
(for no mean degree iz it) have we here: a King or a Queen? A Queen (quoth
Echo.) A Queen sayez he? Pauzing and wis^ly viewing a while, noow full
certeynlie seemez thy tale to be true. And proceeding by this manner of dialog
with an earnest beholding her highness a while, recounts he first hoow justly
that fo^rmer report^ agree with hiz present sight: toouching the beautiful
linaments of coountinauns, the cumly proportion of body, the prinsly grace of
prezenz, ye graciouz giftz of nature with the rare and singular qualities of
both body and mind in her Majesty comoynd, and so apparent a^ ey. Then shortly
rehearsing Saterdaiz acts: of Sibils salutation, of the Porters proposition, of
hiz Trumpetoours muzik, of the Lake ladiez oration, of the seven Gods seven
prezents: he reports the incredibl joy that all estatez in the land have
allweyz of her highness whear so ever it cums: eendeth with presage and prayer
of perpetual felicitee, and with humbl subjection of him and hizzen and all
that they may do. After this sort the matter went with littl differens I guess,
saving only in this point: that the thing which here I report in unpolished
proez, waz thear pronounced in good meeter and matter, very well indighted in
rhyme. Echo finely framed most aptly by answerz thus to utter all. And I shall
tell yoo master Martin by the mass of a mad adventure? az thiz Savage for the
more submissio^ brake hiz tree a sunder, kest the top from him, it had almost
light upon her highness horse he^d: whereat he startld and the gentlman mooch
dismayed, See the benignitee of the Prins, az the foot men looked well too the
horse, and he of Generositee soon callmd of him self, no hurt no hurt quoth her
highness. Which words I promis yoo we wear all glad to here, and cook them too
be the best part of the play.

Tuisday, pleazaunt passing of the time Tuisday. 4.
with muzik and daunsyng: saving that toward night it liked her Majesty too
walk a foot into the Chase over the Bridge: whear it pleased her to stand,
while upon the Pool oout of a Barge fine appointed for the purpoze, too here
sundry kinds of very delectabl Muzik. Thus recreated and after sum wallk her
highness returned.

Wednsday, her Majesty rode intoo the Wedns. 5.
chase a hunting again of the heart of fors. The Deer after hiz property for
refuge took the soil: but so masterd by hot^ pursuit on al parts that he was
taken quik in the pool: the waterme^ held him up hard by the head, while at her
highness commandment The Heart pardoned.
he lost hiz earz for a raundsum and so had pardon of life.

Thursday, the foourteenth of this July Thursday. 6
and the syxth day of her Maiestyez cumming: a great sort of ba^dogs w^ear
thear tied in the utter Coourt, and thyrteen bearz in the inner. Whoosoeuer
made the A queast of Bearz.
^annell, thear wear inoow for a Queast and one for challenge and need we are. A
wight of great wizdoom and grauitee seemed their forman to be, had it cum to a
Jury: But it fell oout that they wear cauzd too appeer thear upon no such
matter, but only too aunswear too an ancient quarrel between them and the
bandogs, in a cause of controversy that has long depended, been obstinatly
full often debated with sharp and biting arguments a both sides, and coold
never be decided: grown noow too so marueyloous a mallys, that with spiteful
obrayds and vncharitabl chaffings alweiz they freat, az far az any whear the
ton can here, see, or smell the toother: and indeed at utter deadly fohod. Many
a maymd member, (God wot) blody face and a torn cote has the quarrel cost
between them, so far likely the less yet noow too be appeazd, az thear wants
not partakerz too bak them a both sidez.

Well sir, the Bearz wear brought forth intoo the Coourt, the Dogs set too
them, too argu the points eeuen face too face, they had learnd coounsell also
a both parts: what may they be coounted parciall that are retaind but a to
side? I ween no. Very feers both ton and toother and eager in argument if the
dog in pleadyng woold pluk the bear by the throat, the bear with trauers woould
claw him again by the skaip, confess and a list, but a void a coold not that
waz bound too the bar: and hiz coounsell tolld him that it coold be too him no
pollecy in pleading.

Thearfore thus with fending and proouing, with plucking and tugging, skratting
and biting, by plain tooth and nayll a to side and toother such exspe^s of
blood and leather waz thear between them, az a moonths licking I ween will not
recoouer: and yet remain az far oout az ever they wear.

It waz a sport very pleazaunt of theez beastz: to see the bear with hiz pink
nyez leering after hiz enmiez approach, the nimblness and wayt of ye dog too
take hiz advantage, and the fors and experiens of the bear again to avoid the
assauts: if he wear bitten in one place, hoow he woold pynch in an oother too
get free: that if he wear taken onez, then what shyft with biting with clawyng,
with roaring tossing and tumbling he woold woork too wind him self from them:
and when he waz lose, to shake hiz earz twyse or thryse with the blud and the
slauer aboout hiz fiznamy, waz a matter of a goodly releef.

Az this sport waz had a day time in the Gunshot and fyrework.
Castl, so waz thear abroad at night very strange and sundry kindez of fire
works, compeld by cunning too fly too and fro and too moount very hy intoo the
ay^ upward, and also too burn vnquenshabl in the water beneath: contrary ye
wot, too fyerz, kind. This intermingld with a great peal of guns: which all
gave, both too the ear and to the ey the greater grace and delight, for that
with such order and art they wear tempered toouching time and continuauns, that
waz about too hours space.

Noow within also in the mean time Tumbling of the Italian.
waz thear sheawed before her highness, by an Italian, such feats of agilitice,
in goinges, turninges, tumblinges, castinges, hops, iumps, leaps, skips,
springs, gamband, soomersauts, caprettiez and flights: forward, backward, side
wize, ^ doownward, upward, and with sundry windings gyrings and circumflexions:
also lightly and with such easines, az by me in feaw words it iz not
expressibl by pen or speech I tell yoo plain. I bleast me by my faith to behold
him, and began to doout whither a waz a man or a sp^rite, and I ween had
doouted me till this day: had it not been that anon I bethought me of men that
can reazon and talk with too toongs, and with too parsons at onez, sing like
burds, curteiz of behavior, of body strong and in joints so nymbl withal,
that their bonez seem az lythie and plyaunt az syneuz. They dwell in a happy
Island (az the book tearmz it) four moonths sailing Southward beyond Ethiop.

Nay Master Martin I tell you no jest: Diodor. Sicul. De anti. Egyptioru^
gest^a. lib. 3.
for both Diodorus Siculus an ancient Greek historiographer in his third book
of the acts of the olld Egypcians: and also from him, Conrad Gesnerus a great
learned man, and a very diligent writer in all good arguments of oour time (but
deceased) in the first Chapter of hiz Mithridates Mithrid. Gesneri.
reports the same. Az for thiz fellow I cannot tell what too make of him,
save that I may guess hiz bak be metalld like a Lamprey that haz no bone but a
line like to a Lute string.

Well sir let him pass and hiz featz, and this dayz pastime withal, for here
iz az mooch az I can remember me for Thursdaiz entertainment.

Friday and Saturday wear thear no open Friday.
sheawz abroad, becauz the weather Saturday. 8.
enclynde too sum moyster and wind: that very seazonably temperd the drought
and the heat, cauzed by the continuans of fair weather and sunshyne before, all
the while syns her Maiestiez thither cumming.

A Sunday opportunely the weather Sunday. 9.
brake up again, and after divine seruis in the parish church for the sabot
day, and a fruitful sermon thear in the forenoon: at after noon in woorship of
this kenelwoorth Castl, and of God and saint kenelm, whooz day forsooth by the
calendar, this waz: a solemn brydeale of a proper coopl Brideale.
waz appointed: set in order in ye tyltyard, too cum and make thear sheaw
before the Castl in the great coourt, whear az waz pight a cumly quintine for
featz at armz which when they had don, too march oout: at the northgate of the
Castl homeward again intoo the tooun.

And thus were they marshalld. First, all the lusty lads and bolld bachelarz
of the parish, sutablie every wight with hiz blu buckeram bridelace upon a
branch of green broom (cauz rozemary iz skant thear) tied on hiz leaft arm
(for a that side lyez the heart) and hiz allder poll for a spear in hiz right
hand, in marciall order raunged on a fore, too and too in a rank: sum with a
hat, sum in a cap, sum a cote sum a ierken, sum for lightness in hiz dooblet and
hiz hoze, clean trust with a point before: sum botes and no spurz, he spurz and
no boots, and he neither another: one a sadel, anoother a pad or a pannell
fastened with a cord, for gyrts wear geazon: and theez too the number of a
sixteen wight riding men and well beseen: but the bridegroom foremost, in hiz
fatherz tawny worsted iacket, (for his friends wear fayn that he shoold be a
brydegroom before the Queen) a fair strawn hat with a capital crooun steepl
wyze on hiz head: a payr of harvest glouez on hiz hands, az a sign of good
husbandry: a pen and inkorn at his bak. for he woold be known to be bookish
lame of a leg that in his yooth was broken at football: well beloved yet of hiz
mother that lent him a nu mufflar for a napkin that was tied too hiz gyrdl for
lozyng: It was no small sport too mark this minio^ in hiz full apointment,
that throogh good ^coolation becam az formal in his action az had he been a
bridegroom indeed: with this special grace by the wey, that ever az he woold
have framed him the better countenauns, with the woors face he look.

Well sir, after theez horsemen, a lively morisoauns, according too the ancient
manner, six daunserz, Mawdmarion, and the fool. Then, three pretty puzels az
bright az a breast of bacon, of a thirty year old a pees, that carried three
special spisecakes of a bushel of wheat, (they had it by meazure oout of my
Lords backhouse,) before the Bryde: Syzely with set countenauns, and lips so
demurely simpring, az it had been a Mare cropping of a thistl. After theez a
loouely loober woorts, freklfaced, red headed, cleen trust in his dooblet and
hiz hoze taken up now in deed by commission, for that he waz so loath to cum
forward, for reuerens belike of hiz nu cut canuas dooblet: and woold by hiz
good will have been but a gazer, but found too be a meet actor for hiz offis:
that waz to bear the bridecup, foormed of a sweet sucket barrel, a fair
turned foot set too it, all seemly be syluerd and parcel gilt, adourned with a
beatiful branch of broom, gayly begilded for rosemary: from which, too broad
brydelaces of red and yelloo buckeram begilded, and galauntly streaming by such
wind az thear waz (for he carried it aloft:) This genet cupbearer, yet had hiz
freckld fiznemy sumwhat unhappily infested az he went by the byzy flyez, that
floct about the bride cup for the sweetness of the sucket that it sauored on:
but he like a tall fello, withstood their mallis stoutly (see what manhood may
do) bet them away, killed them by scores, stood to hiz charge and marched on in
good order.

Then folloed the worshipful Bride, led (after the cuntrie manner) between too
ancient parishionerz, honest toounsmen. But a stale stallion and a well spread,
(hot az the weather waz) God wot, and an il smelling waz she: a thirty year
old, of color brounday, not very beautiful in deed but ugly fooul ill fauord:
yet marueyloous fain of the offis, because she hard say she shoold dauns
before the Queen, in which feat she thought she woold foot it az finely az
the best: Well, after this bride came thear by too and too, a dozen damzels for
bridemaides: that for favor, attire, for facion and cleanlines: were az meet
for such a bride az a treen ladl for a porige pot: mo, but for fear of carring
all clean had been appointed: but theez feaw wear inoow.

Az the cumpany in this order wear cum into yt coourt, marvelous wear the
marciall acts that wear done thear that day.

The Brydegroome for preeminens Running at Quintine.
had the first coors at the Quintyne, brake hiz spear treshardiment: but his
mare in hiz manage did a littl so titubate. that mooch a do had hiz manhod to
sit in his sadl, and too escape the foyl of a fall: with the help of his band
yet he recoouerd himself, and lost not hiz styrops (for he had none too his
saddl): had no hurt as it hapt, but only that hiz gyrt burst, and lost hiz pen
and inkorn that he waz ready to wep for. But hiz handkercher, az good hap waz,
found he safe at his gyrdl: that cheerd him sumwhat, and had good regard it
shoold not be fyeld. For though heat and coolnes upon sundry occazions made him
sumtime too sweat, and sumtime eumatick: yet durst he be bollder too blo hiz
noze and wype hiz face with the flapet of his fatherz iacket, then with hiz
mothers mufflar. tiz a goodly matter, when yooth iz manerly brought up in
fatherly love and motherly aw.

Noow sir, after the Brydegroom had made hiz coors, ran the rest of the band a
while in sum order, but soon after, tag and rag, cut and long tail: whear the
specialty of the sport waz, to see: how sum for hiz slakness had a good bob
with the bag, and sum for his haste too toppl dooun right, and cum tumbling to
the post: sum stryuing so mooch at the first setting oout, that it seemd a
question between the man and the beast, whither the coors shoold be made a
horsback or a foot: and put forth with the spurz, then would run hiz race byas
among the thickest of the throng, that dooun came they toogyther hand over head:
anoother, while he directed hiz coors to the quintyne, hiz iument woold carry
him too a mare amoong the pepl: so hiz horse az amoroos, az him self
aduenturoous. Another, too run and miss the quintyne with hiz staff, and hit
the board with his head.

Many such gay gamez wear thear among theez ryderz: who by and by after, upon a
greater coorage leaft thear quintining, and ran one at anoother. Thear to see
the stearn countenauns, the grym looks, the cooragioous attempts, the desperate
adue^turez, the daungeroous coor^sez, the feers encoounterz, whearby the buff
at the man, and the coounterbuff at the horse, that both sumtime came topling to
the ground. By my tro^th Master Martyn twaz a lively pastime, I believe it
woold have moved sum man too a right meery mood, thoogh had it be toold him
hiz wife lay a dying.

And heertoo folloed az good a sport (me Hok Tuisday by the Couentreemen.
thooght) prezented in an historical ku, by certain good hearted men of
Couentree, my Lords neighboors thear: who understanding amoong them ye thing
that coold not be hidden from any: hoow careful and studious hiz honor waz,
that by all pleazaunt recreasions her highness might best find her self wellcom,
and be made gladsum and merry (the groundworke indeed and foundation of hiz
Lordships mirth and gladness of us all) made petition that they moought renu
noow their olld storiall sheaw: Of argument how the Danez whylom here in a
troubloous seazon Florileg. li. 1. fol. 300.
wear for quietness born withal and suffeard in peace, that anon by outrage
and importabl insolency, abuzing both Ethelred the king then and all estates
every whear byside: at the greuoous complaint and coounsell of Huna the kings
chieftain in warz, on Saint Brices night. Ann. Dom. 1012. (Az the book sayz)
that falls yearly on the thirteenth of November) wear all dispatched and the
Ream rid. And for becauz the matter mencioneth how valiantly our English women
for love of their cuntree behaved themseluez: expresse^ in actionz and rymez
after their manner, they thought it moought move sum mirth to her Majesty the
rather.

The thing said they iz grounded on story, and for pastime wont too be played
in oour City yearly: without ill exampl of mannerz, papistry, or any
superstition: and else did so occupy the heads of a number, that likely inoough
woold have had woorz meditationz: had an ancient beginning and a long
continuauns: till noow of late laid dooun, they knu no cauz why onless it wear
by the zeal of certain their Preacherz: men very commendabl for their behavior
and learning, and sweet in their sermons, but sumwhat too sour in preaching
awey their pastime: wished therefore, that az they shoold continu their good
doctrine in pulpet, so, for matters of policy and gouernauns of the City,
they woold permit them to the Mair and Magistratez: and sey^d by my feyth,
Master Martyn, they ^,(...) I pr^^ (...) by profession a (...) and that right
skillful, very cunning in ^ens, and hardy az Gawin, for hiz tonsword hangs at
his tablz eend: great oversight has he in matters of story: For az for king
Arthurz book, Huo^ of Burdeaus, The foour suns of Aymon, Beuys of Hampton, The
squyre of lo degree, The knight of courtesy, and the Lady Faguell, Frederik of
Gene, Sir Eglamoour, Sir Tryamoour, Sir Lamwell, Sir Isenbras, Sir Gawyn,
Olyuer of the Castl, Lucres and Eurialus, Virgils life, The castl of Ladiez.
The wido Edyth, The King and the Tanner. Friar Rous, Howleglas, Gargantua,
Robinhood, Adambel, Clim of the clough and William a^ cloudesley, The Churl and
the Burd, The seven wise Masters, The wife lapt in a Morels skin. The sak full
of nuez. The seargeaunt that became a Friar, Skogan, Collyn cloout. The Friar
and the boy, Elynor Rumming, and the Nutbrooun maid, with many more then I
rehearz here: I believe he have them all at hiz fingers endz.

Then in Philosophy both moral and natural, I think he be az naturally
ouerseen: beside poetry and Astronomy, and oother hid sciencez, as I may
guess by the omberty of hiz books: whearof part az I remember, the Sheperdz
calendar. The Ship of Foolz, Danielz dreamz, the book of Fortune, Stans puer
ad mensam, the hy wey to the Spitlhouse, Julian of Brainfords testament, the
castle of Love, the booget of Demands, the hundred Merry talez, the book of
Riddels, the Seven sororz of women, the prooud wives Pater noster, the Chapman
of a peniwoorth of Wit: Beside hiz ancient playz. Yooth and charitee,
Hikskorner, Nugize, Impacient poverty, and heerwith doctor Boords breuiary of
health. What shoold I rehearz here, what a bunch of ballets and songs all
ancient: Az Broom broom on hill. So woe iz me begone, troly lo. Over a whinny
Meg. Hey ding a ding. Bony lass upon a green. My bony on gave me a bek. By a
bank az I lay: and a hundred more, he has fair wrapped up in Parchment and bound
with a whipcord.

And az for Allmanaks of antiquitee, (a point for Ephemerides) I ween he can
sheaw from Jasper Laet of An^warp unto Nostradam of Frauns, and thens unto oour
John Securiz of Salsbury. To stay ye no longer heerin I dare say he has az
fair a library for theez sciencez, and az many goodly monuments both in proze
and poetry and at afternoonz can talk az much without book, az any Inholder
betwixt Brainford and Bagshot, what degree soever he be.

Beside thiz in the field a good Marshall at musters: of very great credit and
trust in the town here, for he haz been choze^ Alecu^ner many a year, when hiz
betterz have stond by: and ever quited himself with such estimation, az yet too
the taste of a cup of Nippitate, hiz judgment will be taken above the best in
the parish, be hiz noze near so re^d.

Captain Cox came marching on valiantly before, cleen trust and gartered above
the knee, all fresh in a velvet cap (master Goldinga^ lent it him) floorishing
with hiz tonswoord, and another fensmaster with him: thus in the foreward
making room for the rest. After the^ proudly pricked on foremost, the danish
launsknights on horsbak, and then the English: each with their allder poll
martially in their hand. Eeuen at the The couentree play.
first entree the meeting waxt sumwhat warm: that by and by kindled with courage
a both sidez, gru from a hot skirmish unto a blazing battle: first by spear
and shield, outrageous in their racez az ramz at their rut, with furious
encoounterz that together they tumbl too the dust, sumtime horse and man: and
after fall too it with sword and target, good bangz a both sidez: the fight so
ceassing, but the battle not so ended, folloed the footmen, both the hostez
ton after toother: first marching in ranks: then warlik turning, the^ from
ranks into squadrons, then in too trianglz from that intoo rings, and so
winding oout again: A valiant captain of great prowez az fires az a fox
assauting a gooz, waz so hardy to give the first stroke: then get they grisly
together: that great waz the actiuitee that day too be seen thear a both sidez:
ton very eager for purchaz of pray, toother utterly stoout for redemption of
liberty: thus, quarrel enflamed fury a both sidez. Twice the Danes had ye
better, but at the last conflict, beaten down, ouercom and many led captive for
triumph by our English weemen.

This waz the effect of this sheaw, that (...) and unruliness of the people, waz
cauz that this solemnitee of Brideale, and dancing had not the full muster waz
hoped for: and but a littl of the Couentree ple^ her highness also saw:
commanded thearfore on the Tuisday folloing to have it full oout: az
accordingly it waz prezented, whearat her Majesty laughed well: they wear the
iocunder, and so mooch the more becauz her highness had given them too buckes
and five mark in money to make merry together: they prayed for her Majesty,
long, happily to reign and often to cum thither that often they moought see here:
and what, rejoicing upon their ampl reward, and what, triumphing upon the good
acceptauns: they vaunted their play waz never so dignified, nor ever any
players before so beatified.

Thus though the day took an eend, yet slipped not the night all sleeping awey:
for az neither offis nor obsequy ceased at any time too the full, to perform
the plot hiz honor had appointed: So, after supper waz thear a play prezented
of a very good theme, but so set forth by the Actoourz well handling that
pleazure and mirth made it seem very short, though it lasted too good oourz
and more. But stay master Martyn all iz not done yet.

After the play oout of hand, folloed a most delicioouz and (if I may so term
it) an Ambrosiall Banquet: whearof, whither I might more muze at the
deintynesse, shapez and the cost: or else at the variete and number of the
disshez (that wear a three hundred) for my part I coold littl tell the^, and
noow less I assure yoo. Her majesty eat smally or nothing: which understood,
the coorsez wear not so orderly served and sizely set dooun, but wear by and by
az disorderly wasted and coorsly consumed, more courtly me thought then
courteously. But that was no part of ye matter, moought it pleaz and be liked
and do that it came for, then waz all well enough.

Unto this banquet thear waz appointed a mask: for riches of array, of an
incredibl cost: but the time so far spent and very late in the night noow, waz
cauz that it came not forth to the sheaw. And thus for Sondayz seazon having
stayed yoo the longer (according too the matter) here make I an eend: ye may
breath ye a while.

Monday the eyghteenth of this July, Monday. 10
the weather being hot, her highness kept the Castl for coolness, till aboout
five a clok her Majesty in the Chase, hunted the heart (az before) of fors: that
whyther wear it by the cunning of the huntsmen, or by Psalm. 24.
the natural desire of the Deer, or else by both: anon he gat him too soil
again, which reyzed the accustomed delight: a pastime indeed so intyrely
pleazaunt, az whearof at times whoo may have the full and free fruition, can
find no more sacietee (I ween) for a recreation, then of their good v^aundes at
timez for their sustentation.

Well, the game waz gotten, and her highness returning: came thear upon a
swimming Mermayd (that from top too tail waz an eyghteen foot long) Triton
Neptunes blaster: whoo, with hiz trumpet foormed of a wrinkld wealk az her
Majesty waz in sight, gave soound very shrill and sonoroous, in sign he had an
ambassy too pronoouns: anon her highness waz cummen upon the bridge whearunto he
made hiz fish to swim the swifter, and he then declared: how the supreme
salsipotent Monarch Neptune, the great God of the swelling seaz, Prius of
profunditees, and Soouerain Segnior of al Lakez, freshwaterz, Riuerz, Creekes,
and Goolphs: understanding how a cruel Knight, one sir Bruise sauns pitee, a
mortal enmy unto Ladiez of estate, had long lain about the banks of this
pooll in wayt with his ba^ds here to distress the Lady of ye lake, whearby she
has been restrained not only from having any use of her ancient liberty and
territoriez in theez parts: but also of making repayr and giving atte^dauns
unto yoo nobl Qneen (quoth. he) az she woold, she promised, and also shoold:
does thearfore signify: and heerto, of yoo az of hiz good leag and deer friend
make this request, that ye will deyn but too sheaw yoor parson toward this
pool, whearby yoor only prezens shall be matter sufficient of abandoning this
vucurtess knight, and putting all his bands too flight, and also of deliuerauns
of the lady oout of this thralldom. Moving heerwith from the bridge and
fleeting more intoo the pool, charge he in Neptunes name: both Colus with all
his windez, the waters with hiz springs, hiz fysh and fooul, and all his
clients in the same, that they ne be so hardye in any fors too stur, but keep
them calm and quiet while this Queen be prezent. At which petition her highness
staying, it appeerd straight hoow sir Bruise became unseen, his bands skaled,
and the Lady by and by, with her too Nymphs, floting upon her moouable Islands
(Triton on hiz mermaid skimming by) approached toward her highness on the bridge:
az well too declare that her Maiestiez prezens has so graciouslye thus wrought
her deliuerauns, az also to excuze her not coming to coourt az she promised,
and chiefly to prezent her Majesty (az a token of her duty and good heart) for
her highness recreation with thiz gift, which was Arion that excellent and
famouz Muzicien, in tire and appointment strange well seeming too hiz parson,
ryding alofte upon hiz olld friend the Dolphin, (that from head too tail waz a
foour and twenty foot long) and swymd hard by theez Islands: heerwith Arion for
theez great benefitez, after a feaw well coouched words unto her Majesty of
thanksgyuing, in supplement of the same: beega^ a delectabl ditty of a song well
apted too a melodious noiz, compoounded of six several instruments al coouert,
casting soou^d from yt Dolphins belly within, Arion the seventh sitting thus
singing (az I say) withoout.

Noow sir, the ditty in miter so aptly endighted to the matter, and after by
voys so delicioously deliuerd: ye song by a skilful artist intoo hiz parts so
sweetly sorted: each part in hiz instrument so clean and sharply toouched,
every instrument again in hiz kind so excellently tunabl: and this in the
eeuing of the day, resoounding from the callm waters: whear prezens of her
Majesty and longing too listen had utterly damped all noyz and din: the hole
armony conveyed in time, tune, and temper thus incomparably melodious: with what
pleazure (Master Martin) with what sharpnes of conceyt, with what lively
delighte this moought pears into the heerers hearts: I pray ye imagine yoor self
az ye may, for so God judge me, by all the wit and cunning I have, I cannot
express, I promis yoo. Mais ieo bien vieu cela Monseur, que fort gra^de est la
pouuoyr qu'auoit la tresnoble Science de Music sur les esprites humains.
perceive ye me? I have told ye a great matter noow. As for me surely I was
lulld in such liking and so loath too leave of, yt mooch a do a good while
after, had I, to find me whear I waz. And take ye this by the way, that for
the small skyl in muzik, that God has sent me (ye kno it iz sumwhat) i will set
the more by my self while my name iz Langham, and grace a God. A, muzik iz a
nobl Art.

A, stay a while, see a short wit: by my trooth I had almost forgot. This day
waz a day of grace beside, whearin wear auaunced five Gentlemen of woorshippe
unto the degree of knighthood, Sir Thomas Cecyl, sun and heyr unto the right
honorabl Knights made.
the Lord Treazorer, Sir Henry Cobham, broother unto the Lord Cobha^, Sir
Thomas Stanhop, Sir Arthur Basset, and Sir Thomas Tresham: and also by her
highness accustumed mercy and charitee, nine cured of the peynfull and
dangerous diseaz, called ye kings evil, for that Kings and Queenz of this
Realm, withoout oother medsin (save only by handling and prayerz) only do cure
it: bear with me, though perchauns I place not thoz Gentlmen in my recital
here, after their estatez: for I am neither good heraud of armez, nor yet kno
hoow they are set in the Subsydy bookez. Men of great woorship I understand
they are all.

Tuisday, according to commandment, Tuisday. 11
came oour Couentree men. what their matter waz, of her highness mirth and good
acceptauns, and reward unto them, and of their rejoicing thearat, I sheawd
you before, and so say the less noow.

Wednesday in the forenoon, preparacion Wedns. 12.
was in hand for her Majesty too have supt in Wedgeno^, a three mile west from
the Castl. A goodly park of the Queenz Maiestyez: for that cauz, a fair
Pauilion, and other provision accordingly thither sent and prepared: but by
meanz of weather not so clearly dispozed, ye matter waz countermaunded again.
That had her highness happened this day too have cummen abroad: there was made
reddy a devise of Goddessez and Nymphs: which az well for the ingenious
argument, az for ye well handling of it in rhyme and endighting woold vndooutedly
have gaind great lyking and moved no less delight. Of ye particular iteez,
whearof I ceas to entreat: least like the boongling carpentar, by missorting
the peecez, I mar a good frame in the bad setting up, or by my fond tempring
before hand embleamish the beauty, when it shoold be reard up in deed.

A this day also waz thear such earnest tallk and appoincment of remoouing
that I gave over my noting, and harkened after my horse.

Mary sir I must tell yoo: Az all endeuoour waz too move mirth and pastime (az
I tolld ye): eeuen so a ridiculoous devise of an ancient minstrell, and hiz
song waz prepared to have been profferd, if meet time and place had been
foound for it. Ons in a woorshipfull company, whear full appointed, he
recoounted his matter in sort az it shoould have been vttred, I chaunsed too
be: what I noted, here thus I tell yoo: A parson very meet seemed he for the
purpoze, of a xlv years olld apparelled partly as he woold himself. Hiz cap of:
his head seemly roounded tonster wyze: fair kembd yt with a spoonge deintly dipped
in a littl capons greaz was finely smoothed too make it shine like a Mallards
wing. Hiz bear smugly shaven: and yet hiz shyrt after the nu tri^k, with ruffs
fair starched, sleeked, and glistering like a payr of nu shooz: marshalld in
good order: with a ^fetling stick, and stoout that every ruff stood up like a
wafer: a side gooun of kendall green, after the freshnes of the year noow,
gathered at the neck with a narro gorget, fast^ned before with a white clasp and
a keepar close up to the chin: but easily for heat too undo when he list:
Seemly begyrt in a red caddiz gyrdl: from that a payr of capped Sheffeld kniuez
hanging a to side: Out of hiz bozome drawn forth a lappet of his napkin,
edged with a blu lace, and marked with a trulooue, a heart, and ^^a D. for
Damian: for he was but a bachelar yet.

Hiz gooun had side sleeuez dooun to midlegge, slit from the shooulder too the
hand and lined with white cotton. Hiz doobled sleeuez of blak woorsted, upon
them a a payr of poynets of tawny Chamblet laced a long the wreast with blu
threeden points, a wealt toward the hand of fustian anapes: a payr of red
neatherstocks: a pair of pumps on hiz feet with a cross cut at the toze for
cornz: not nu indeed, yet cleanly blakt with soot, and shining az a shoing
horn.

Aboout hiz nek a red rebon dsutable too hiz girdl: hiz harp in good grace
dependaunt before him: hiz wreast tied to a green lace and hanging by: under
the gorget of hiz gooun a fair flagon cheyn (pewcer, for silver) az a squier
minstrel of Middilsex, that trauaild the cuntree this soommer seazon unto fairz
and worshipful men's hoousez: from hiz chein hoong a Schoochion, with metal
and cooller resplendant upon hiz breast of the ancient armez of Islington:
upon a question whearof: he, az one that waz well schoold, and coold hiz lesson
parfit withoout book too aunswear at full, if question wear asked him,
declared: hoow the woorshipfull village of Istington in Middelsex, well knooen
too be one of the most ancient and best toounz in England next London at thiz
day: for the feythfull freendship of long time sheawed az well at Cookez feast
in Aldersgate street yearly upon holly Rood day, az also at all solemn
bridalez in the city of London all the year after: in well serving them of
furmenty for porage, not ouersod till it be too weak: of mylk for their
flawnez, not pild nor chalked: of cream for their custardes, not frothed nor
thykned with floour: and of butter for their pastiez, and pyepast, not made of
well curds, nor gatherd of whey in soommer: nor mingled in winter with salt
butter watered or washed, did obteyn long ago thez woorshipfull armez in cooler
and foorm az ye see: which are the armz a field argent, as the field and
groound in deed, whearin the milkwiuez of thiz worthy tooun, and every man else
in his faculty does trade for hiz living: on a Fess Tenny three platez between
three milk tankerds proper. The three milk tankerds, az the proper vessel
whearin the substauns, and matter of their trade iz too and fro transported.
The Fess Tenny, which iz a cooler betokening dout and suspision: so az
suspicion and good heed taking, az well to their markets and servants, az to
their customers yt they trust not too far: may bring unto them platez, that
iz coynnd silver: three, that iz sufficient and plenty, for so that number in
Armory may well signify.

For Creast upon a wad of ote straw for a wreath, a boll of furmenty: Wheat
(az ye kno) iz the most precious gift of Ceres, and in the midst of it,
sticking a The hornspoonz.
doozen ^^ hornspoonz in a bunch az the instruments meetest too eat furmenty
porage wythall: a doozen, az a number of plenty complete for full cheer or a
banquet, and of horn, az of a substauns more estimabl then iz made for a great
deel: being nether so churlish in weight az iz metal: nor so froward and
brittl to manure, az stone, nor yet so soily in use nor roough to the lips az
wood iz: but light, plyaunt, and smooth, that with a littl licking wool
allweiz be kept az clen az a die. With yoor paciens Gentlmen (quoth the
minstrel) be it said: wear it not in deed that hornz be so plenty, hornware
I believe woold be more set by than it iz, and yet are thear in our parts that
will not stick too auoow, that many an honest man both in city and cuntree
has had hiz hoous by horning well vphollden, and a daily friend also at need.
And thiz with your fauoour may I further affirm: a very ingenioous parson waz
he, that for dignitee of the stuff, coold thus by spooning devise, to a^uauns
the horn so near too the head.

With great congruens also wear theez hornspoonz put too the wheat: az a token
and portion of Cornucopiae, the horn of Achelous, which the Naiades did fill
with Ovid. met. lib. 9.
all good frutez, corn and grain: and after did consecrate unto abooundauns and
plenty.

This skoochion with beastz very aptly agreeing both to the armz and to the
trade of the bearerz, glorioously supported, Between a gray Mare (a beast
meetest for carrying of mylktankards) her pannell on her bak, az alwayz reddy
for seruis at every feast and brydale at need, her tail splayd at most eaz:
and her filly fool, fallo and a flaxen mane after the sire.

In the skro vndergrauen (quoth he) iz thear a proper word, an hemistichi,
well squaring with all the rest, taken out of Salerns Salern. ca.
chapter, of things that most noorish man's body: Lac, Caseus infans. That iz
good milk and young cheez. And thus mooch Gintlmen, and pleaz you (quoth he).
for the armz of oour woorshipfull tooun. And thearwithal made a manerly leg,
and so held his peace.

Az the cumpany pawzed and the minstrell semde to gape after a praiz for hiz
Beauparlar: and bicauz he had renderd hiz lesson so well: Saiz a good fello of
the cu^pany, I am sorry to see hoow mooch the poor minstrell mistakez the
matter: for indeed the armez are thus.

^ with a (...), ^^king with her (...) for flyez, and her (...) n^ying after
the dam for suk. This word La^, Caseus infans. That is, a fresh cheez and
cream, and the common cry that theez milkwiuez make in London streets yearly,
betwixt Easter and whitsontide: and this iz the very matter I kno it well
enough, and so ended hiz tale, and sat him dooun again.

Heerat every man laughed a good, save the minstrell: that thoogh the fooll wear
made privy, all waz but for sport, yet too see him self thus crossed with a
contrary ku that he looked not for, woold straight have geen over all, waxt
very wayward, eager and soour: hoow be it last by sum entreaty and many fair
words, with sak and sugar, we sweetened him again, and after becam az merry az
a py. Appeerez then a fresh, in hiz full formalitee with a lovely loo^k: after
three loly cooursiez, cleared his vois with a hem and a reach, and spat oout
withal, wiped hiz lips with the hollo of his hand, for fyling hiz napkin,
temperd a string or too with hiz wreast: and after a littl warhling on hiz harp
for a prelude, came forth with a sollem song, warraunted for story oout of
king Aurthurz acts, the first book King Arthurs book.
and 26. chapter, whearof I gate a copy, and that iz this.

SO it befell upon a Penticost day,
When king Arthur at Camelot kept coourt rial,
With hiz cumly Queen dame Gaynoour the gay.
And many bolld Barrons sitting in hall,
Ladies apparaild in purpl and pall,
When herauds in hukes herried full by
Largess Largess cheualiers treshardy.
A doouty Dwarf too the uppermost deas
Right peartly began prik and kneeling on knee,
With steeuen full stoout amids all the preas,
Said hail sir king, God thee save and see,
King Ryens of Northgalez greeteth well thee,
And bids that thy beard anon thou him send,
Or else from thy iawz he will it of rend,
For his robe of state, a rich skarlet mantell,
With a leaven kings beards bordred aboout,
He has made late, and yet in a cantell
^
(...), Lordz began too (...),
(...) stamped, squirez startld az steedz in a stoour.
Yeem^n and pagez yeald ^out in the hall,
Thearwith came in Sir Bay of Seueshall.
Syleus my suffrainz quoth the courteyz Knight,
And in that stoound the chearm becam still,
The Dwarfs dynner full deerly waz dight,
For wine and was^ell he had at hiz will,
And when he had eaten and fed hiz fill.
One hundred pieces of coined gould,
Wear given the Dwarf for hiz message bolld.
Say too Sir Ryens thou Dwarf quoth the king,
That for his proud message I him defy,
And shortly with basinz and panz will him ring,
Oout of Northgalez whearaz he and I
With sweards and no razerz shall utterly try,
Which of us both iz the better Barber:
And thearwith he shook hiz sword Excalaber.
At this, the minstrell made a pauz and a curt^zy, for Primus passus. More of
the song iz thear, but I gat it not, Az for the matter had it cum to the sheaw,
I think the fello would have handled it well ynoough.

Her highness tarryed at Kyllingwoorth till the wednesday after, being the 27 of
this July, and the ninteenth (inclusiue) of her Maiestiez cumming thither.

For which seven daiz, perceiving my notez so slenderly aunswering: I took it
less blame, too ceas and thearof too write yoo nothing at al, the^ in such
matterz to write nothing likely, And so mooch the rather (az I have well
betho^ght me) that if I did but ruminate the dayz I have spoken of, I shall
bring oout yet sumwhat more, meet for yoor appetite, (thoogh a deinty tooth
have ye) which I believe yoor tender stomak will brook well inoogh.

Whearof part iz: first hoow according to her highness name ELIZABETH, The
seauenz.
which I here say oout of the Hebru signifies (amoong oother) the Seventh of
my God: diuerz things here, did so justly in number square with the same. Az
first, her highness hither cumming in this seventh ^ upon her coourt thear too
make her Majesty merry.

Sage Saturn himself in parson (that Saturn and Pallas.
bycauz of hiz lame leg co^ld not so well ^^ur) in chayr thearfore too take
order with the grave officerz of hooushold, helped in deed with the good advise
of his prudent Nees Pallas: That no unruly body or disquiet, disturb the nobl
assemblee, or else be ons so bolld too enter within the Casti gatez. Awey with all rascallz, captiuez, mela^cholik, waiward, froward, Coniurerz, and Usurers,
and to have laborers and vnderwoorkmen for ye beautifying of any place, alwey
at hand az they shoold be commanded.

Jupiter. Sent parsonagez of hy honor and dignitee: Barons, Lords, Ladies,
Iuges Jupiter.
Bishops, Lawyerz, Doctors: with them, virtue, ^obl^ess, equitee, liberalitee
and compassion: due seazo^, and fair weather: saving that at the petition of
hiz deer sister Ceres, he granted a day or too of sum sweet shoourz for
rypening of her corn that waz so well set, and too set forward harvest:
Heerwith, bestoed he such plenty of pleazaunt thunder, lightning, and
thu^derbollts: by hiz halting sun and fyermaster, Vulcan still fresh and fresh
framed: alweyz so frequent, so intellabl, and of such co^tinuauns in the
spe^ding (az I partly tolld ye) consumed: that surely he seemz too be az of
poour inestimabl: so, in store of municion, vnwastabl: For all Ouids censure
that saiz.

Si quoties peccant homines sua fulmina mittat
Jupiter: exig^o tempore inermis erit.
If Jove shoold shoot hiz thu^derbollts az often az me^ offend,
Assure yoo hiz artillary would soon be at an end
What a number of estatez and of nobilitee had Jupiter assembled thear, gess
ye by this: that of sort woorshipfull thear wear in the coourt daily aboode
forty, whearof the meynest, of a thoouza^d mark yearly reuenu, and many of
mooch more. This great gift byside, did hiz deitee cast upon her highness, too
have fair and seazonabl weather at her ooun appointment: ^ (...), made humbl
^ute unto her highness too cum: too such whearof as her majesty coold, it came:
and they seazon acceptabl.

Phoebus, Biside his continual and most Phoebus.
delicious muzik (az I have toold yoo) appointed he Princes too adoourn her
highness coourt, Coounselerz, Herauds, and sanguine yooth, pleazaunt and merry,
costlye garments, learned Phizicianz, and no need of them.

Juno, Golld cheynez, Ouchez, Jewels Juno.
of great price and rich attire, woorn in mooch grace and good beseeming without
pride, or emulacion of any.

Mars. Captainz of good conduct, Men Mars.
skylfull in feats of armz, pollitik in stratagemz, Good coorage in good
quarelz, valiant, and wizehardy: Abandoning pikquarrels and ruffianz:
appoynting also Pursyuaunts, currarz and posts still feeding her highness with
nuze and intelligencez from all parts.

Venus. Unto the Ladyez and Gentlwemen: Venus.
:beauty, good favor, cumlinesse, gala^t attire, dancing with cumly grace
sweet vois in song and pleazaunt tallk with express co^maundment and charge
unto her sunn on her blessing, that he shoot not a shaft in the Coourt all
the while her highness remained at Killingwoorth.

Mercuri. Learned men in Sciencez, Poets, Merchaunts, Painterz, Karuerz, Mercuri
Players, Engyners, Deuyserz and dexteritee in handling of all pleazaunt
attempts.

Luna. Callm nights for quiet rest, and silver moonshine, that nightly in deed
Luna.
shone for most of her Maiestyez being thear.

Blind Plutus. Bags of moony, Custumerz. Plutus.
Exchaungers, Bankers, Store of riches in plate and in coin.

Bacchus. Full Cups every whear, every Bacchus.
oour of al kynds of wine.

Thear waz no deintee that the Sea coold yield, but Neptune (thoough hiz
Neptune.
reign at the neerestly well ny a hundred mile of) did daily send in great
plenty, sweet and freash. As for freashwater fish, the store of all sorts waz
aboundaunt.

And hoow bountiful Ceres in prouizion Cere^.
waz, gess ye by this: that in lyttl more then a three dayz space, 72. tunn of
Ale and Bee^ waz pyept up quite: what that might whilst with it of bread
beside meat, I report me to yoo. And yet master Controller, master Coferar and
diuerz officers of the Coourt, sum honorabl, and sundry right woorshipfull
placed at Warwik for more rooum in the Castl. But here was no ho Master Martin
in deuoout drinking allwey: that brought^ a^ lak unlooked for, which being
knoen too the Woorshipfull my Lords good neighboourz, came thear in a too dayz
space from sundry friendz: a releef of a xl. tunn, till a nu supply was gotten
again: and then too oour drinking a fresh az fast az ever we did.

Flora. Abroad and within the hoous ministered Flora.
of flourz so great a quantitee: of such sweet sauoour, so beautifully hued, so
large and fair of proporcion, and of so strange kindez and shapez, that it waz
great pleasure too see: and so mooch the more, az thear waz great store yet
counterfeit and foormed of featherz by art, like glorioous too the sheaw az wear
the natural.

Protheus. Hiz Tumbler that coold Protheus.
by nimblness cast himself intoo so many foorms and facionz.

Pan. Hiz merry morrys dauns with their Pan.
pype and taber.

Bellona. Her quintine knights and proper Bellona*
bickerings of the Couentree men.

Polyphemus. Neptunez sun and heyr (let Polyphemus.
him I pray and it be but for hiz fathers sake and for his good will, be
allowed for a God, with hiz bearz hiz bear whealps and bandogs.

Aeolus. Hollding up hiz windez while Aeolus.
her highness at any time took pleazure on the water, and staying of te^pests
during abode here.

Syluanus. Beu^de hiz plentiful prouizion Syluanus.
of fooul for deynty viaunds, his pleazau^t and sweet singing byrds: whearof I
will sheaw yoo more anon.

Echo. Her well endighted dialog.

Faunus. Hiz ioly Savage. Echo. Faunus. Genius.


Genius loci. Hiz tempring of al things within and without, with apt time and
place too pleazure and delight.

Then the three Charites: Aglaia, Charites.
with her lightsum gladness. Thalia her floorishing freshnes. Euphrosyne, her
cheerfullnes of spirit, and with theez three in one assent Concordia: with her
amitee and good agreement. That too hoow great effects their poourz wear
pooured oout here among us, let it be judged by this: that by a multitude thus
met of a three or foour thoouzand every day: and diuerz dayz more, of so sundry
degrees, professions, agez, appetytz, dispozicions and affections: such a
drifte of time was thear passed, with such amitee, love, pastime, agreement,
and obediens whear it shoold: and without quarrel, iarring, grudging, or (that
I coold here) of ill word between any. A thing master Martin very rare and
strange, and yet no more strange then true.

The Parcae (az erst I shoold have said) parcae.
the first night of her Maiestiez cumming: they heering and seeing so precioous
ado here at a place unlooked for, in an vplo^dish cuntree so far within the
Ream: preassing intoo every steed whear her highness went, whearby so duddld
with such varietee of delyghts, did fet aside their huswifrye, coold not for
their hearts tend their work a whyt. But after they had seen her Majesty a bed,
gat them a prying into every place olld hags, az fond of nuellries, az young
girls that had never seen Court before: but neither full, with gazing nor weary
with gadding, leaft of yet for that time, and at high midnight, gat^ them
gigling, (but not alooud) into the prezens Chamber: minding indeed with their
prezent diligens, too recompens their former staknes.

So, setting them seluez thus dooun too their woork: alas sayz Atropos I have
lost my sheerz: Lachesis laughed apace and woold not draw a thread: And think
ye damez that i will hoold the distaff while both y^ sit idle? why no by my
mootherz soll quoth. Clotho. Thearwith fair lapt in a fine lawn the spindel and
rok, that waz dizend with pure purpl sylk, laid they safely up toogyther: that
of her Maiestyez distaff for an eighteen dayz, thear waz not a thread spoon I
assure you.

The too systers after that, (I hard say) began their woork again: yt long may
they continu, but Atropos hard no tidings of her sheers, and not a man that
moned her loss. She iz not belooued surely, for this can I tell yoo: that
whither it be for hate too the hag, or love to her highness, or else for both:
every man prayz God she may never find them for that woork, and so pray I daily
(...) apted in all points to the best.

Unto thiz, hiz honorz exquisit appointment The Garden.
of a beautiful Garden, an aker or more of quantitee that lies on the north
thear. Whearin hard all along the Castl wall iz reared a pleazaunt Teries of a
ten foot hy and a twelve broad: eeuen under foot and fresh of fine grass: az iz
also the side thearof toward the gardein, in which by sundry equal
distauncez: with obelisks, sphearz, and white bearz all of stone upon their
curioouz basez, by goodly show wear set: too theez, too fine arbers redolent by
sweet trees and floourz, at each end one, the garden plot under that, with fair
alleyz green by grass, eeuen voided from the borderz a both sydez, and sum (for
change) with sand, not light or to soft, or soilly by dust, but smooth and
fyrme, pleasant too walk on, az a sea shore when the water iz auaild: then,
much gracified by du proporcion of four eeuen quarterz: in ye midst of each,
upon a base a too foot square, and hy, seemly borderd of it self, a square
pilaster rizing pyramidally of a fyfteen foot hy: Simmetrically pe^rced
through from a foot beneath, until a too foot of the top: whear upon, for a
Capitell, an Orb of a ten inches thik: every of theez (with hiz base) from the
groound too the top of one hole pees, heawen oout of hard Porphiry, and with
great art and heed (thinks me) thither conuey^ and thear erected.

Whear further also by great cast and cost the sweetness of sauoour on all
sidez, made so respiraunt from the redolent plants and fragra^t earbs and
floourz, in foorm, cooller and quantitee so delicioously variant: and fruit
Trees bedecked with their Applz, Pears and r^pe Cherryez.

And unto theez in the midst, against ye The Cage
Terres: a square cage, sumptuoous and beautiful, joined hard to the Northwall
(that a that side gards the gardein, as the gardein the Castl) of a rare form
and excellency was reyzed: in heyth a twentye foot, thyrty long, and a
foourteen broad. From the ground strong and close, reared breast hy, whear at a
soil of a fair moolding was coouched all abaout: From that upward, foour great
wyndoz a froont and too at each eend, every one a five foot wide, az many mo
eeuen abooue them, divided on all parts by a transum and Architraue so likewize
raunging aboout ye Cage. Each windo arched in the top, and ^ touched a^ along
upon y^ hole square. Which with a (...), s^nely ^nit, of mashez six square, an
inch wide (az it wear for a flat roof) and likewise the space of every windo
with great cunning and cumlines, ^uen and tight waz al ouerstrained V^der the
Cornish again, every part beautifyed with great Diamons, Emerauds, Rubyes and
Sapphires: poynted, tabld, rok and roo^nd garnisht with their golld, by skillful
head and hand, and by toil and pensill, so lively expressed, az it might be
great marueil and pleasure to consider how near excellency of art could approach
unto perfection of nature.

Bear with me good euntreeman thoogh things be not sheawd here az well az I
woold, or az well as they shoold. For in deed I can better imagine and co^ceyue
that I see, then well utter or duly declare it. Holez wear thear also and
cauerns in orderly distauns and facion, voyded intoo the wall az well for heat,
for coolnes, for roost a nightz and refuge in weather, az also for breeding
when time iz. More, fair eeuen and fresh holly treez for pearching and proining
set within, tooward each eend one. Heereto their diuersitee of meats, their
fine several vessels for their water, and sundry grainz. And a man skilful and
diligent to look too them and tend them.

But (shall I tell yoo) the silver soounded Lute, withoout the sweet toouch of
hand: the glorioous goollden cup, withoout the fresh fragrant wine, or the rich
ring with gem, without the fair feawtered finger: iz nothing indeed in hiz
proper grace and use: Even so his Honor accounted of thiz mansion, till he had
plast thear tenauntes according. Had it thearfore replenishte with lively
Burds, English, French, spanish, Canarian, and (I am deceived if I saw not sum)
African. Whearby, whither it becam more delightsum in change of tunez and
armony too the ear: or else in differens of coolerz, kyndez and propertyez too
the ey, I Will tell yoo if I can when I have better be thought me.

One day (Master Martin) az the Gardin The Gardener.
door waz open, and her highness a hunting by licens of my good friend Adria^, I
came in at a bek, but woold skant oout with a thrust: for sure I waz loath so
soon to depart.

Well may this (Master Martyn) be suinwhat too magnitude of mind, but more
thearof az ye shall kno, more cauz ye shall have so too think: here out what I
tell yoo, and tell me when we meet.

In the center (az it wear) of this goodly The Fountain.
Gardein, was theer placed a very fair Foountain, cast intoo an eight square,
reared a four foot hy, from the midst whearof a Colum up set in shape of too
Athlants joined together a backhalf, the t^^n looking East, toother West, with
their hands vphollding a fair formed boll of a three foot over: from wheans
sundry fine pipez, did lively distill continual streamz intoo the receyt of
the Foountayn: maynteyned still too foot deep by the same fresh falling water:
whearin pleazauntly playing too and fro and round about Carp, Tench, Bream, and
for varietee, Perch and Eel, fysh fayrliking all and large, in the top the
ragged staff: which, with the boll, the pillar, and eight sides beneath, wear
all heawen oout of rich and hard white Marbl. A one side, Neptune with hiz
Tridental Fuskin triumphing in hiz Throne, trayled into the deep by his marine
horsez.

On an other, Thetis in her chariot drawn by her Dollphins. Then Triton by hiz
fyshez. Here Protheus hearding hiz sea bulls. Thear Doris and her dooughterz
solacyng a sea and sandz. The wauez soourging with froth and foam, entermengled
in place, with whalez, whirlpoolz, sturgeonz, Tunneyz, Couchs and wealks: all
engraue^ by exquisit deuize and skill, so az I may think this not much
inferioour unto Phoebus gatez, which (Ovid sayz) and peraduentur a pattern to
thiz, yt Vulcan him Metam. 2
self did cut: whearof such was the excellency of art, that the woork in valu
surmoounted the stuff, and yet were the gatez all of clean massy silver.

Here wear things ye see moought inflame any mind too long after looking: but
whoo so was found so hot in desire, with the wreast of a Cok was sure of a
coolar: water spurting upward with such vehemence, az they shoold by and by be
moystned from top too to. The he is to sum laughing, but the she is to more
sport. Thiz sumtime waz occupied to very good pastime.

A Garden then so appointed, az whearin a loft upon sweet shadoed wallk of
Terres, in heat of Soomer, too feel the pleazaunt (...)tabl (...)ith:
(...)her^^ (...)lks: (...)ourz (...)urz: (...)mu^^ (...),for (...)ing (...),
the waters (for both (...) and chase (...) hard at (...) in ^ight) the deer,
the peepl (that oout of the Gast ^^her in the ^ase coourt, also a^ hand in
view) the fruit trees, the plants, the earbs, the floourz, the change in
coolers, the Burds flyttering, the Foountaine streaming, the Fysh swymming: all
in such delectabl varietee, order dignitee: whearby at one moment in one place,
at hand Paradisus. Giaec. Hortus a^^aeni^s. Aut Hebrac. Par^es id est. Hortus.
without travel too have so full fruition of so many Gods blessings, by
entyer delight unto al sencez (if al ca^ take) at ones: for Etymon of the word
worthy to be called Paradys: and though not so goodly az Paradis for want of
the fair Rivers, yet better a great deel by the lak of so unhappy a tree.
Argument most certain of a right nobl mind, that in this sort coold have thus
all contrived.

But Master Martin, yet one wyndlesse must I featch, too make ye one more fair
coors and I can: and cauz I speak of one: let me tell yoo a littl of the
dignitee of onehod, The number ^
whearin allweyz, al hy Deitee al Soueraintee, Preeminens, Principalitee and
Concord withoout possibilitee of disagreement iz contained. Az one God, one
Dauioour, one Feith, one Prins, one Sun, one Phoenix, and az one of great wizdom
sayz: one heart one wey. Whear onehod reinz: there quiet bears rule, and discord
fliez a pase. Three again may signify cumpany, a meeting, a multitude,
pluralitee: so az all talez and numbrings from too unto three, and so upward,
may well be counted numberz, till they moount unto infinitee, or else too
confusion, which thing the sum of Too can never admit: nor it self can well be
coounted a number, but rather a freendly conjunction of too ones, that keeping
in a synceritee of accord, may purport unto us, Charitee each too other,
mutual love, agreement and integritee of friendship withoout dissimulation.
Az iz in theez. The too Testamentes. The too Tables of the Law. The too great
lights: Duo luminaria (...)t (...)ll (...)k (...)z (...)a^ (...)o^^ (...)r
(...)e^^ (...)a^^^ (...): Az fy^st for pastymez ho^m^^s and hawks: deer, red
and fal^o, hare and for, partrich and fezaunt, fysh and fooul, carp and tench.
For warz, spear and sheeld, horse and harneis, sword and bukler: for
sustenauns, wheat and barley, peaz and beanz, meat and drink, bread and meat,
beer and ale, appis and pearz.

But least by such dualiteez I draw yoo too far: let us here stay, and cum
nearer home. See what a sort of freendly biniteez we oour seluez do consist
and stond upon. First oour too feet, too legs, too kneez, so upward: and
abooue, too shoolderz, too armz and too hands. But chiefly our principll Too,
that iz, body and soll: then in the head whear all oour sensez meet, and almost
all in Tooz: too nozethrills, too earz and too eyz So ar we of freendly Tooz,
from top too to. Well, to this number of biniteez, take ye one mo for an vpshot,
and here an eend. Too Dyallz ny unto the battilments The too Diallz.
ar set aloft upon too of the sidez of Cezarz toour one East, thoother Soouth
for so stond they best to sheaw the oourz too the tooun and cuntree: both fair
large and rich, by vyse for groou^d and goold for letterz whearby they glitter
conspicuous a great wey of. The clokbell that iz good and shrill, waz
commanded too silens at first, and in deed sang not a note all the while her
highness waz thear, the clok stood also still withal. But mark noow, whither
wear it by chauns, by constellation of starz, or by fatal appointment (if
fatez and starz do deal with dialz.) Thus waz it in deed: The handz of both
the tablz stood firm and The Diallz at ii. a clok.
fast, allweyz poynting too just too a clok, still at too a clok. Which thing
beholding by hap at first: but after seriously marking in deed, enprinted intoo
me a deep sign and argument certain. That thiz thing amoong the rest, waz for
full signifiauns of his Lordships, honorabl, fra^k, friendly, and nobl heart
toward al estates. Which, whither cum they to stay and take cheer, or straight
to return: too see, or to be seen: cum they for duty too her Majesty or love
too hiz Lordship, or for both: Cum they early or late: for his Lordships part,
they cum allweyz all at too a clok even iump at too a clok: That iz to say in
good heart, good acceptauns, in amitee and freendlye wellcoom. Who saw else that
I saw, in right must say az I say. For so many things byside, Master Humfrey
wear heerin so consonant unto my construction, that thiz poynting of the clok
(to my self) I took in amitee as an oracle certain. And here iz my windlesse,
like yoor coorse as pleaz ye.

But noow sir too cum to eend. For receiving of her hignes, and entertainment
of all thoother estatez. Syns of delicatez that any wey might serve or
delight: az of wine, spice, deynty viaunds, plate Muzik, ornaments of hoous,
rich arras and sith (too say nothing of yt meaner things) the mass by
prouizion waz heaped so hoouge, which the boounty in spending did after bewray.
The conceit so deep in casting the plat at first. Such a wizdom and cunning in
acquiring things so rich, so rare, and in such abundauns: by so imm^^ens and
profuse a charge of expens, which by so honorabl seruis and exquisit order,
curteizy of officerz and humanitee of al, wear after so boountifully bestoed
and spent, what may this express, what may this set oout unto us, but only a
magnifyk mind, a singular wizdoom, a prinsly prours, and an heroical heart? If
it wear my theme Master Martyn, too speak of hiz Lordships great honor and
magnificens, though it be not in me too say sufficiently, az bad a penclark az
I am, yet coold I say a great deel more.

But being here now in magnificens, and matters of greatness: it falz well too
mind. The greatness of his honors Tent, that The great Tent.
for her Maiestyez dining was pighte at long Ichington, the day her highness came
to Killing worth Castl. A tabernacl indeed for number and shift of large and
goodlye roomz, for fair and eazy offices both inward and ooutward al so likesu^
in order and eysight: that justly for dignitee may be comparabl with a
beautiful Pallais, and for greatness and qua^titee with a proper tooun, or
rather a Cittadell. But to be short, least I keep yoo too long from the Ryall
Exchange noow, and too cauz yoo conceive mooche matter in feawest words. the
Iron bedsted of Og the King of Basan (ye wot) waz foour yards and a half long,
and too Deuteronomy.
yards wide, whearby ye consider a Gyaunt of a great proportion waz he. This
Tent had seven cart lode of pynz perteining too it: noow for the greatness,
gess az ye can.

And great az it waz (too marshall oour matters of greatness together) not
forgetting a Weather at Grafton, brought too the Coort, that for body and wool
was exceeding great, the meazure I took not, let me sheaw you with what great
marueyl a great Child of Leyceter shire, at this long Ichington, by the Parents
waz prezented: great (I say) of limz and proportion, of a foour foot and foour
inches hy: and else lanuginoous az a lad of eyghteen yeerz, being indeed auowd
too be but six year olld: nothing more bewraying hiz age the^ hiz wit: that
waz, az for thooz years simpl and childish.

Az for unto hiz Lordship, having with such greatness of honorabl modestye and
benignitee so passed forth, as Laude^ sine inuidia et an^icos par arit. By
greatness of Terent.
well doing, won with all sorts to be in such reuerens, az: De quo me^tiri
fama venetur. In synceritee of freendship so great, Bias.
az no man more deuooutly woorships. Illud amicitiae sanctu^ et veneral i will
nomen. Ovid.
So great in liberality, az has no wey to heap up the mass of hiz trezure,
but only by liberal gyuing and boounteoous bestoing hiz trezure: foloing (az it
seemez) ye saw of Martial that says.

Extra fortuna^ est, quicquid donatur amicis
Quas dederis, solas semper habebis opes.
Oout of all hazer^d do thou set that to thy friends thoou gyuest:
A surer trezure can thoou not have ever while thoou lyuest.
What may theez greatnesses bode, but only az great honor, fame, and renooum
for theez parts here awey, az ever waz unto thoz too nobl Greatz: the
Macedonian Alexander in Emathia or grees, or to Roma^e Charles in Germanye, or
Italy? which, wear it in me any wey to set oout, no man of all men by God
(Master Martin) had ever more cauz, and yt heerby consider yoo. It pleazed his
honor to bear me good will at first, and so too continu. To have given me
apparail eeuen from hiz bak, to get me allowauns in ye stabl, too aduauns me
unto this worshipful office so near the most honorabl Council, to help me in
my licens of Beanz (though indeed I do not so much vze it, for I thank God I
need not) to permit my good Father to serve the stabl.

^ by your leave while God le^ds me (...) to utter my mind* (...) having az
good cauz of his honor, az Virgil had of Augustus Cezar) will, I poet it a littl
with Virgill, and say.

Namque erit ille mihi seper Deus, illius ara^
Sepe tener nostris ab ouilibus imbuet agnus. Eglog. 1.

For he shall be a god to me, till death my life consumez:
His auters will I sacrifice with incens and parfumez.
A singular patr^n of humanitee may he be well unto us toward all degreez: of
Honor, toward hy Estates, and cheeflye whearby we may learn in what dignitee,
worship and reuerens her highness iz to be esteemed, honored and received, that
waz never indeed more condignly done the^ here so as neither by the bylders at
first, nor by the Edict of pacification after, was ever 1266. An. 50. Hen. 3.
Kenelworth more nobled then by thiz, hiz Lordships receiui^g her highness here
now.

But Jesus Jesus whither am I drawn noow. But tallk I of my Lord onz, even thus
it farez with me: I forget all, my friends, and my self too. And yet yoo, being
a Mercer, a Merchant, az I am: my cuntree man born, and my good friend withal,
whear by I kno ye ar compassiond with me: Me thought it my part su^what to
empart unto yoo, hoow it iz here with me, and hoow I lead my life, which in
deed iz this.

A mornings I rize ordinartly at seven a clok: Then reddy, I go intoo the
Chapel: soon after eight, I get me commonly intoo my Lords Chamber, or intoo
my Lord prezidents. Thear at the cupboord after I have eaten ye manchet,
served over night for livery (for I dare be az bolld, I promis yoo, az any of
my friends the seruau^ts thear: and indeed coold I have fresh if I woold tarry,
but I am of wont jolly and dry a mornings) I drink me up a good bol of Ale:
when in a sweet pot it iz defecated by all nights standing, the drink iz ye
better, take that of me: and a morsel in a morning with a sound draught iz
very wholesome and good for the eysight. The^ I am az fresh all the y^ forenoon
after, az had I eaten a hole pees of beef. Noow sir, if the Council sit. I am
at hand, wait at an inch I warrant yoo If any make babbling, peace (say I) woot
ye whear ye ar? if I take a lystenar, or a priar in at the chinks or at ye
lokhole, I am by and by in the bones of him, but now they keep good order, they
kno me well mough: If a be a friend or such one az I like: I make him sit dooun
by me on a foorm, or a cheast, let the rest walk a Gods name. And here does my
langagez now and than stond me in good sted, my French, my Spanish, my Dutch,
and my Latten: sumtime amoong Ambassadors me^, if their Master be within with
the Counsel, sumtime with the Ambassador himself, if he bid call hiz lacky,
or ask me what is a clok, and I warrant ye I answer him roundly that they
marvel to see such a fello thear: the^ laugh I and say nothing. Dinner and
supper I have twenty placez to go to, and hartly prayed to: And sumtime get I
too Master Pinner by my faith a worshipful Gentlman, and az careful for his
charge az any her highnez has: thear find I always good store of very good
viaunds we eat and be merry thank God and the Queen. Himself in feeding very
temperat and moderat az ye shall see any: and yet by your leave of a dish, az a
colld pigeo^ or so, that has cum to him at meat more then he looked for, I have
seen him even so by and by surfit, az he has pluct of hiz napkin, wyept his
knife, and eat not a morsel more: like ynoough to stik in hiz stomach a too
dayz after: (Sum hardmessage from the higher officers, perceive ye me?) Upon
search, hiz faithful dealing and diligens has found him fautles. In
afternoons and a nights, sumtime am I with the right worshipful Sir George
Howard, az good a Gentlman as any liuez: And sumtime at my good Lady Sidneis
chamber, a Noblwooman that I am az mooch boound unto, as any poor man may be
unto so gracyons a Lady: And sumtime in sum oother place. But alwayez among the
Gentlwemen by my good will (O, ye kno that cum alweyez of a gentle spirit)
and when I see cumpany according than can I be az lively to, sumtyme I foot it
with daunsing: noow with my Gitt^rn, and else with my Cittern, then at the
Virgynalz: Ye kno nothing cums amiss to me: then carroll I up a song withal:
that by and by they com flocking about me like beez too hunny: and ever they
cry, anoother good Langham anoother. Shall I tell yoo? when I see Misterz --
(A, see a mad knave, I had almost tollde all) that she gyuez onz but an ey
or an ear: why then, man, am I b^est, my grace, my courage, my cunning iz
doobled: She sayz sumtime she likez it, and then I like it mooch the better, it
does me good to here hoow well I can do. And too say truth: what, with mine
eyz. az I can amoroously gloit it, with my spanish sospires, my french heigh^s,
mine Italian dulcets, my dutch houez my doobl up syn houe
releas, my hy reachez, my fine feyning, my deep diapason, my wanton warblz, my
running, my tyming, my tuning and my twynkling, I can gracify the matters az
well az the prowdest of them, and waz yet never staynd I thank God. By my troth
cuntreman it iz sumtim hy midnight ear I ca^ get from them. And thus have I
told ye most of my trade, all the leeue long day: what will ye more, God save
the Queen, and my Lord, I am well I thank yoo.

Hee^ with meant I fully to bid ye farewell, had not this doubt cum to my mind,
that here remainz a doout in yoo, which I ought (me thought) in any wyze to
clear. Which, iz, ye marvel perchauns to see me so bookish. Let me tell yoo in,
few words: I went to scool forsooth both at Pollez, and also at saint
Antoniez: in the fifth foorm, past Esop fabls iwys, red Terens. Vos istaec
intro auferte, and began with my Virgill Tytire tu patulae. I coold my rulez
coold conster and pars with the best of them syns, that (az partly ye kno) have
I trades the feat of marchaundize in sundry Cuntreyz, and so gat me Langagez:
which do so littl hinder my Latten, az (I thank God) have mooch encreast it. I
have leizure sumtime, when I tend not upon the coounsell: whearby, now look I
on one book, noow on an other. Stories I delight in the more ancient and
rare, the more likesum unto me: If I tolld ye, I lyked* William a Malmesbery
so well, bicauz of hiz diligenz and antiquitee. Perchauns ye woold conster it
bicauz I love Mamzey so well: but I feith it iz not so: for sipt I no more Sak
and sugar (and yet never but with company) the^ I do Malmzey, I should not
blush so much a dayz as I do, ye kno my mind. Well noow thus fare ye heartily
well: yfeith, if with wishig it coold have been, ye had had a buk or too this
soomer, but we shall cum nearer shortly, and then shall we merely meet and grace
a God, in the mean time comme^d me I besek yo: unto my good friends, almost
most of the^ yoor neighbors. Master Assderman Pullison, a special freend^ of
mine: and in any wise too my good old friend Master Smith Custumer, by that
same token. Set my horse up too the rak, and then lets have a cup of Sak. He
knoez the token well enough, and will laugh, I hold ye a grote. Too Master
Thorogood: And too my merry cumpanion (a Mercer ye wot az we be) Master Denman,
Mio fratello in Christo: he iz wont too summon me by the name of To. La. of
the Coounty Nosingham Gentlman, A good companion I feyth. Well onez again fare
ye heartily well. From the Coourt. At the City of Worceter, the xx of August.
1575.

Yoor countreeman, companion, and freend-assuredly: Mercer, Merchantauenturer,
and Clark of the Counsel chamber door, and also keeper of the same: El Prencipe
negro.

Par me R. L. Gent* Mercer.

DE MAIESTATE REGIA Benigno.
Cedant arma togae, concedat laurea lingu^,
Iactanter Cicero, a^iustius illud habe:
Ceda^t arma togae, vigil et toga cedat honori
Omnia concedant Imperioque suo.
DEO OPT. MAX. GRATIAE

