The mind and judgment of master Frau^ces Lambert of Auenna of the will of
man, declarynge and proving how and after what sort it is captyne and bond,
and not free: taken out of his commentaries upon Osee the Prophet, wherein upon
the.iiii. Chapter of the said prophet, he most Godly, plain lie and learnedly,
entreats and writes of the same, as hereafter evidently shall appear. Newelye
translated into English by N.L. Anno Do. M.D. xlviii. the xviii. day of
Dece^bre.

Philippians.ii. It is God that worcketh both the will and the perfourmaunce.
DIEV ET MON DRO^T royal blazon or coat of arms

To the most gratiouse, and virtuous Lady Anne, douthesse of Somerset. etc.
Her most fayethfull and dayle Oratoure Nicholas Less, desires the sweet
blessing of god, with a joyful and earneste love to read his word and follow
the same.
WHat time my little work, entitled the justification of faith only, was in
the hands of the Printer (most gentyl Lady) it fortuned me to read in a
certain exposition, which Frances Lambert of Auenna did write upon Osee the
Prophet, that the will of man naturally is captyue to sin (as the Apostle
right well witnesses saying. He which does syn is the servant of sin.
There is not one just man, there is not one which seeks after God. All men
have erred and gone forth of the way and are altogether made unprofitable. There
is not one manne which does good, no, not so much as one) and also bond
from doing of any good thing of it self, as witnesses the Apostle James
with these words Every good and perfect gift is from above, discendinge
down from the father of light, which article being very well discussed, and
with the file and touchstone of the scriptures proved and made plain: I
thought it necessary and expediente that it should be brought forth of the
Latin into our vulgar tongue. Partlye because the contrary error (that man
has power to do good of him self) being the doctrine of the Papystes, of the
Anabaptists, and of the Pelagio^s, is so inueterated and roted in the stomakes
of most men, that almost they can skante find in their heart to give to God
any part of the praise of good worckes, but ascribynge the worthynes thereof
to them selves, do make claim and title unto heaven for their own
deservings.

This error has caused them to forsake the works prescribed to us of God,
and to invent new worckes on their own brain This error caused them to
build monasteries, to go on pilgrimages, to set up candels before stocks and
stones, to make holy water and holy bread, to wear this or that disguised
cote, to fast this or that prescribed day, to sing masses for the dead and
quick to make of the blessed supper of the Lord, a sacrifice for the quick
and dead, to make of bread and wine (as they most falselye do affirm) the
natural flesh and blood of our savior Jesus Christ, and to be short to
apply the most fruitful and benefitial fruits of his passion to the
health of brute beasts, as sheep oxen, and swyne, as well as to the soul of
man. Where had they any of this beggary in the scriptuers?

This is a foul and a detestable error which brings man into so many
whyrlepoles of dishonouring of God, that there is almost nothing at all left
unto him but a bare name of God, none otherwise then as they had used in times
paste to make kings and queen's in may games. Into so great and palpable
darckenesse are they fallen for their unthankfulness.

The second cause which moved me to the traunslation of this small work is,
that this error of fre will to do good in man, standing still and not removed
forth of the hertes and consciences of men, the contrary Article for
justification by fayeth only must needs be infringed and broken.

For if we do well of our own propre strength the^ do our own works make us
good and rightuouse, which is directlye contrary to the scriptures, to the
words of Christ saying. No man can come to me, except my father draw him.
These words do declare that all men are always so stubourne and so much
against God that except they be drawn, they can not come to Christ. Christ
does say also. Of those which thou have given me, I have not lost one.

It folowethe therefore that god was the gyuer, and Christ the keeper of the^.
They were not the geuers nor the kepers of the^ selves, no more then they were
the callars of them selves, what time that Peter and his fellows at the
calling of Christ forsook their ship and netes and followed him. But contrary
wise if al men be liars, as witnesses the Apostle Paul. If all the
imaginations of man from his youth be evil, and nothing but sin, as it is
written in the Genese.vi. Chapte. then are we not made good, and rightuouse by
our deeds. Then must this Article (by faith only we are justified) stand
fast, that is to say, for the confidence and sure trust which we have in
the promises of God for his sweet son Jesus Christ's sake, by the which
son we have bouldnes and fre passage to come to god, as teaches us the
Apostle Peter.

For so much therefore as these.ii. Articles. manne can work any goodness of him
self and the justification of man freely, by fayeth only, are so fast and
nighe lincked together that either they must boeth stand together or boeth be
destroyed and broken together: the people being I trust (what with learned
preachers, what with writers) suffitie^tlye instructed and taught the way of
their justification: I took on me to traunslate this into our mother tongue, and
with like audacitie, as I dedicated the work of justification unto your most
dearly beloved husband my Lords Protectours grace: so I have been so bold to
name your grace a most Godly mother and setter forth of this work under
whose name it comes abroad into the hands of the people, to whom next unto
God they shall yield thanks for the fruit thereof. Whose graces boeth
together, I desire the Lord long to preserve with a joyful continuance, to
the shynynge of his glory, and setting forth of his word, with increase of
al Godliness thereto correspo^de^t. Amen.

Q.L. to the gentle reader.
HEre in this work (most gentle reader) thou have set before thine eyes the
will of man so plainly, so lively that no Appelles could with all his craft in
a table with his colors set forth the phisiouomie of any man like. Thou do
perceive and behold him in this book, as he is in his own propernature and
kind, altogether nakid, altogether miserable, wretched, and bound. Not that
there by thou should think thy self more at liberty to offend because thy
will is bound and captive: or else that thou cast not chose but offend: but
that rather thine own wekenes and pouerte being known, thou sholdest
knowledge* praise and glorify the myghtie and infinite power and strength of
the Lord, with the aboundaunt and plentiful fulness of riches in all goodness, to
whom only every good gift, and every perfect gift from heaven above, from the
father of light is to be attributed and ascribed as witnesses Ia.i. Thou must
be also in this case like a man, which through long sickness is so feeble and
week, and brought so low: that he is not able to stand without a staff,
fearing to set his foot to the ground least he should fall down, not able
to rise again of himself without the help of another. This man gets to
him a staff to stand up or to go by: or else he leueth on another ma^s arm
which is stronger than he: and so goth forth by little and little ever fearing to
fall. So doing thou shall not fall, nay though thou do sto^ble, or trippest a
little with thy foot, that is the carnalconcupisce^ce of the flesh, yet shall
thou not fall to the ground: the spirit of the Lord is so strong, that he will
hold the up. But if thy staff be weak or rotten: or that man whom thou do
trust, be not altogether thy frynd: thou can not chose but fall and that
miserably to thine utter confusion, with out another taking compassion and
pity on the of his goodness will come and take the up. Likewise is thy doing
when thou do trust and put thy confidence in thine own merits, in thine
own works, in thine own strength, in thine own wit and power: the^ is thy
fall most greatest, when the trust of thine own power seems most
strongest, and when thou art most inflamed with the love of thy self, that is
of thine own deades and works, which are altogether flesh if they be not
wroughte, by the spirit of the Lord, the which spirit of the Lord being in
the, the Lord does make althy ways godly and straight be fore his eyes, so
that thy sin is not imputed to the, nor thou art not fleshly, yea, though the
flesh has some pryckyng in the. For to the just man the law is not made as
witnesses Paul: that man I say whose justice is Christ's justice, which
already in his heart has done all that thing which the law requires not of
himself but by the power of the spirit of the Lord which works his will in
him. What have thou (says Paull) that thou have not received: if thou have
received, wherefore, art thou proud of it as though thou have not received it
but as it were thine own of thy self: For as much then as al godliness is
received: we must consider and confess, that there is a geuer in whose hand
and power it does rest, whether he will give it yea or nay, so that we must
say, not unto us Lord, not to us. but to thy name be glory and praise. What
work did Paull work to obtain the favor of the Lord, When he was most
strongest in persecution and sheddyng of the christian blood? suddenly he was
taken from him self (that is to say) the Lord alterid him of his own goodness
and mere mercy his cruel affections, and in the stead of the spirit of
persecution: he put in him the spirit of mekenes, the spirit of love, of
preaching his glory, of preaching Jesus Christ crucified, and in the stead of a
persecutour of Christ, he became a sufferer for Christ. When Peter was most
strong to fight with dente of sword as appeared by his bold and manly deades
and great crakes, how suddenly became he in the stead of a defe^der, a denier?
And where as he would dye with Christ, he would not so much as once know him,
nay he denied him utterly. Who did subdue the naughty spirit of Paul when he
was in his most rage and fury against the preachers of Christ's glory? Was it
any other, tha^ the power of the lord under whose fete all things are made
subject: yea, from the reasonable to the unreasonable, as oxen and sheep. At
the which time of persecution, Paull was in durate because he had not in him
the spirit of the Lord, and therefore he could not chose but with all
extremity persecute the lord as far as the flesh would give him leave. The
flesh always as Paul witnesses resystyng and strinyng against the spirit. The
cause then why that Paull had not the spirit of the Lord, was only the
pleasure of the Lord which takes mercy on whom it pleases him self. Paul
myndyng nothing less tha^ to be called, it pleased the Lord to call him from
dishonor to honor, to the setting forth of his glory. Paull for this time of
persecution was indurate none otherwise than was Pharao in the persecution of
the children of Israel. If it had pleased the Lord to have taken Paull as he
did take Pharao, the one should have perished as well as the other. If the Lord
had left Peter in his denial and still to him self, if he had not looked on
him with the eye of favor, it had been evil with him, as it was with Pharao.
But to declare that all men are liars, and God only true as the prophet says
The Lord took the spirit of stedfastnes and knowledgyng of God from him:
leauyng him to himself, to fraylenes, to the very counsel and motion of the
flesh, which flesh had rather live a while and dye for ever, than to suffer a
small temporal death and al way after to live. Therefore, if any manne do fall,
let not him despair, for the Lord is merciful. It is not the fall which
declares induration, it is the contempt of the Lord, when thou do delyght
in thy sin not fearyng the Lords judgment, that is a fearful token of
induration. What can thou tell whether the Lord will take the in this time of
thy wyckednes and unfaithfulness yea or nay? as he did Pharao in the mydest of
his madness? If he so do what shall become of the? Thou caust not deny but
that he may, if it please him so to do. Thou have a good cause therefore always
to fear and mystrust thy ways, for thou art altogether of thy self, flesh,
thou can do nothing of thy self but sin. And likewise as the trust of the
mercy of God promised for Christ's sake, which follows streyghtway the hatred
of vice and sin with full intent and purpose to live after the will of the
father, is a certain token of election and of the favor of God, wherein so long
as thou doste remain and continue thou art sure that thou art of the right
fort Even so the love to live ungodly, to wallow in all kind of vice, and to
lie still in impuritie of life, declares to the that for that same season thou
art nothing else than the child of wrath, curssed of God, indurat as was
Pharao. This is a good cause to make the to be always in fear, to make the
suspect thine own self, and begin to hate sin, the devil, and the flesh
with all concupiscence, then the spirit of God begins to work his work in
the, to crucify thy spiritual enemy in the and to subdue them in the. Then
has the Lord put a new his spirit into the, which before he did pluck from
the, leauyng the to thine own stynckynge affections and carnal co^cupiscences.
What caused the proud heady and obstinate Pharisees that they would not believe
in Christ, for all the miracles that he wrought? They believed not in him, says
Christ in Ihon.xii. that the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled,
which he spoke. Lord, who shall believe our saying, and to who^ is the arm of
the Lord declared. Therefore could not they believe because Esaias says again,
he has blinded their eyes and hardened their hertes that they should not se
with their eyes and least they should understand with their hertes. et c. So
because they were blinded the could not se. What thing can move and stir us
to the love of God, what thing can setfurth the glory of God and his honor:
more tha^ the perfect knowledge of this article which makes him a whole God,
which sets him in his own seat a high which declares him to be authoure
and worker of al goodness, he that does both begin and makes an end? Which
article I say sets man in his own place here in earth, naturally given to
the earth, to al curruption both bodily and gostly disposed to do nothing of
himself that is good. What thing to man is more necessary the^ that doctrine
which teaches him how he shall know when he is the son of God and of the
chosen sort, that he may pray the Lord to preserve his spirit in him, wherbi
he shall know which way he is the son of the devil and of out cast forth of
the favor of God. There is nothing more necessary tha^ this. I would wysh and
desire with all my heart that all men would read this book with a godly desire
and entente, not to contention, and mayntenaunce of their lewd life whose
dampnation is just* but to know God how strong he is, how myghtie a prince he
is how good and merciful he is, on whose mercy all thing depends, and to
know man, how weak and how miserable he is that he can do nothing of
himself, that he is the instrument of God to al goodness and the instrument of
the devil in all vice and sin. The evil and most justly condemned persons
come to this book, to fetch a lycense of sin to make their life more
lycentious, more dissolute, to make them self more bold in all kind of vice
most like to the spider and venomous worm which from the sweet flowers do
draw and suck furthe venym and poison. The virtuous and godly disposed,
mean no thing less, they do gather hence all goodness. Here find they a
bridle to pluck in their vicious affections. Here find they the sweet liberty
of God and bondage of the deuel. Here do they learn their own condemnation,
and their salvation by Christ The flesh takes al thing fleshly and like
itself. But therefore the faithful may not be deprived of their food and
sustenau^ce. Let us therefore pray the Lord to put in us his spirit: that it
may be our guide to al godliness and virtue, that we be none occation of
slander to his word, but that al our acts, deeds and alwrytinges, teaching,
reading and communicatio^s may be to edify, to the setting forth of his
glory, to whom be honor and praise for ever and ever without end. So be it.

IN the declaration and exposition of the holy scriptures both the old and
new: there be many places which can not be well perceived what they do mean,
except the article of the will of man (which troubles men's minds very much)
be made plain and open (that is to say) whether a man can of him self
perform and do any thing which pertains to eternal felicity and life
everlasting yea or nay. Proposicion.
As the keeping and obseruyng of the Lords commandments. The which thing
to be declared and made plain. that it might be perceived of all men, that al
men may know the truth, thereof, many places of the scripture, but a mo^g al
other, these places and texes of this Prophet do most ernestly require, and in
specially this verse followyng of the said Prophet, that is to say, The
spirit has bound him in his wings. Osee.iiij.
For by these words it is euydent, as appears by that which is written before
in the said chapter That by this spirit is me^t a reprobat mind and the
understanding or knoledge of the flesh, which is the spirit of fornication.

First of al therefore, before that I do take on me to interpret and declare my
mind in this matter I desire the gentle readers, that they would not think
and conjecture that in the declaration hereof I do follow the mind and
judgment of many and diverse writers. But only the very mind and sense of the
scripture, as nygh as I might and as it pleased Christ to give me knowledge
and understanding therein, not mynishyng thereby nor improuyng the judgments of
other christian writers and doctors those principally, which do cleave and
stike fast to the true and pure word of God, who^ we also do covet for to
immitate and follow And after whose godly minds and judgments, we can give
and ascribe nothing to the will of man of himself, as we shall hereafter
plentifully God willing declare and show.

Furthermore, in discussyng of this matter, I would be loath that men should
think that I do run hedlong into a thing which is deep, and far from all
men's knowledge (as they say) and therefore not necessary to be known. Which
thing I do for none other cause, but to search forth the truth and also to
satisfy the minds of those which are desireous of the knowledge thereof. For
truly I can by no means allow, nay I cannot but much disalow and discommend
the manifold contentions and reasonynges in darcke and hyd matters, which are
more mete (as some men do wryght) for the excellency and profound depenes
thereof, to be had in a godly reverence, and to be committed to God, rather
than with contentious and brablyng reasonyng of every man to be discussed. But
as for this matter, it is no such thing, How necessary the knowledge of this
article is for all men.
the knowledge whereof (that is whither the will of man be free or bond) does
give us to understand and know, how weak we be of our own selfs how we can
do nothing our selves, and contrary wise how marvelous, how myghtie, and
how strong the Lord is, which is not a void or an unprofitable matter to
be declared and set open to al me^. For this thing being opened, we do learn
to perceive and se, how glorious and triumphant a Lord, the Lord is in us, and
how brickel and miserable we be on every side on our own self.

The objection of the papists against the opening of this article.
Notwithstanding all this, there be many which do affirm that it is not,
expediente either to wryght or teach the people the knoledge of this article,
and that for none other cause, but because the carnal and flesly people (as
they think) do receive hereby great occasion, The declaration of the will of
man: gives not occasion of vice, for the evil persons thereby will not be the
better: nor the good the worse.
and as it were a large wyndowe made open to the^, for to practice and continue
still in the detestable vices and ungodly licencious kind of living. As though
such persons as are naghtie and lewdly disposed, might other do or think any
thing otherwise than fleslye and carnallye, yea, though this article were never
spoken of to them. Or else, as though the declaration and opening of this
article should be the cause that the elected and godly sort should be
plucked and drawn thereby from the hand of the Lord and so through error
sedused to perish for ever, which is nothing so, for they which are gone from
us, were not of us. If they had been of us they would have continued with us. As
witnesses i. Ihon the.ij. The Lord does hold fast the hertes of his elect,
that they be not slaundered by the word of his verity.

Such as these be, do teach, Another objection.
that al manner of men ought not to know as much as we that are learned do know,
and that we ought not to disclose, wherein and in what points the general
counsayls have erred. Because (as they say) men should not regard, Whether the
error of the fathers ought to be hyd yea or nay.
or esteem the authority of the fathers the less in those things which they
have well ordained and made, forasmuch as they have in diverse things erred
also. At whose errors they would that we should wynke, and notse the^, nay
most ernestly, as most certain, verities and truths learn the^. Shall we
neglect the most pure verity, We may not do evil that good may come of it
for to flatter with the errors and ignorance of the fathers: Does God need
any thing of our invention and lies to hide the verity of the Lord, for
errors of the aunciente councels? is it any thing else than to prefer man
before god? and the fathers before verite* God is true, all men are liars.
Psalm. Cxv. Wherefore do we fear, which do profess the verity and truth of
the Lord, considering that he has overcome al thing, as Esd. iij. And he is
permane^t for ever. Psa. Cvi. and.Cxviii. Finally the almyghtie Lord loves
verity and truth, The Lord hates lies, whi shall we lie for counsels, to hyde
their faults as though they were not me^
and hates with great hatred all lies and falshed.

Forsooth to teach after this manner, is an error not to be borne. I cannot say
the contrary but often times the preaching of the truth, may be defferred and
put of till another time, that it may be with the more opportunity declared, but
yet for all that, a man may not teach, Preach no lies.
nor preach lies, and false doctrine. And if thou do perceive or find an
error where as none admonition can help or prevail, you may well make, as
though ye sawe^ it not and so wynke at it: but in any wise beware you do not
excuse and defend the error to be good and true. If so be the matter belong
to your fayeth, or to any thing thereto perteynyng, wherein you be demanded to
answer, Commanded to answer, forsake not the verity.
of the enemies to your faith, then if you do not confess the truth, you have
denied Christ. For thou art ashamed of his words. And who that is ashamed of
my words (says Christ) I will be ashamed to knowledge him before my father
and his Angels. Luke.ix.

It was lawful for Paul to eat of those things that were offered up to
Idolles, who also had in his choice, Things indifferent, how they are to be
used.
if it had pleased him, not for to eat thereof, for it was a thing indifferent.
Therefore some time he did eat thereof, because he thought it expedient: other
while again he would not eat thereof because he thought it more profitable for
his neighbor. So became he to al men after al fashions.i. Corhin.ix. Chap. i.
Cor. ix. Ca.
But to preach any other thing then was received of the Lord at any time:
that was not lawful neither for Paul nor any else of the Apostles. If they
had: they should have erred and become false prophets. Paul did contrary
Peter openly in his fare because he did that thing which was not profitable.
Paul did not co^pel the gentyls to use and observe the Iewishe ceremonies (a
thing most wicked) He did not say (as many do now adays (walking in the
flesh) God forbid that I should speak or say against Peter, Paul did
disclose the offense of Peter, having no regard of his aposto^ship.
lest I should minishe his authority and estimation, which he has among
many: but he said rather let man give rowme and place to God. Therefore where
Peter does err I will speak against him: lest that those men which do know
Peter to be an Apostle should make of Peter's fault or error a law: and so
following him therein at the last should perish. The errors of general
counsels may not be wincked at, for just causes.
Likewise the errors of the counsels are not to be covered and hid: but to be
declared and showed unto the people, lest under the name of the counsels and
title of the church, the people being deceived, should attribute something more
to man then to God, in the stead or place of the verity, embrasyng falshead
and lies. If any godly man or else any counsel do teach that thing which is
verity: thereto men must stand and rest, not for their sakes which did
teach it, but because it is the troth and verity, which is taught.

This is the wholesume of this point, Unlawful things.
that those men which be of God should teach the people nothing which is
unlawful: because they do perfectly know that it is not expedient for their
neighbor nor profitable. Things lawful, and not necessary.
As for those things which are lawful and not necessary: they may at al times
be preached: they may be deferred also for a time: as it shall appear expedient
and profitable for the hearers. An other objection.


There be some men which do deem and judge that this mattier of the will of man
and such other places of the scriptures of God, which are some thing hard and
dark: The papists will not al me^ know the truth.
are not to be spoken of, nor yet once touched: but among those which are
perfect men: and none other, By the which perfect men they do mean and
understand great clerks with the hooded and capt masters of the divinity
schools: Who be perfect men after the popes sort
aledgyng the testimony of Paul: saying to the Corhin. the first Epistle and
the second Chap. That he did teach nothing among them which are carnal men:
although he taught nothing else but only Jesus Christ, and him to be
crucified: and shortly after he said that he taught the wisdom of God among
them which be perfect.

These men do teach and write, that it is not al one thing to preach the
wisdom of God, and to preach Jesus Christ crucified. The knowledge of whom
is the very wisdom of God: and to preach Jesus Christ crucified. The knowledge
of whom I say is the very wisdom: and the preaching of whom is the
declaration of the wisdom of God.

Who be perfect after Christ's law.
To the which objection we answer and say: that al those which do believe are
perfect. Whose perfection is Christ: so that there be a true faith.

Secondly we say that it is often times seen, that the simple and unlearned do
receive and admit the word of God and his wisdom sooner and better, then a
great meany of the divinity schools, and of those which are great clerks
learned after the flesh.

Math. xi. Luke. x. Psalm. xviij.
Our master Christ does render glory and praise to his father: because he
has hid his mysteries from the wise men, and made them open to the little
children, Matthew.xi. Luke.x. and Psalm.Cxviij. He does give understanding to
the little ones. The truth therefore and the secret mysteries of the word of
God: is to be declared and made open, to the simple and plain children of God
which do believe in Christ: and not to a few in number: as the papists would.

Thirdly, the wisdom of God and mysteries of our faith, are to be opened to
the pore co^mu^e people, rather the^ to the proud arrogant lokes of those great
clerckes. For to their proud hertes the Lord will not have those priuities and
secrets of his majesty made open, Proud hertes ca^ not receive the misteryes
of God.
which he voucheth safe to show to the meek and low spirited persons. It
is not the degres of schools, nor the philosophical knowledge which gives
understanding of the heavenly doctrine: nor yet the craft and wisdom of this
world. Degrees of schools.
For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise men, and the
understanding of the witty me^ shall hyde it self. Esai. xxix. i. Cor. i. Cha.
Esai. xxix. and the first Epistle and first Chapter to the Cor. It pleased
the Lord through the opprobry and folishnes of the cross: Belief.
and by preaching thereof to save al them which do believe.

Finally there is not to be found one sparcle of the spirit of God in those
puffed up wise men: which is given plentuously to the simple and meke
children, Esai. lxvi.
as Esai. xxvi. Chap. On whom shall my spirit rest, but on him which is
meek, lowly, and quiet, which fears and trembles at my words. For the
verity of God can not be perceived, but only by the spirit of God, as Paul
to the Corhin. the first Epistle, and second Chap. It is impossible that by
thine own senses humayne, i. Cor. ij. Cha.
and proper industry or labor, thou can perceive and understand the
scriptures of God. Wherefore who that goes about to expound and make open the
scriptures by man's reasons: Man's reason in scriptures bears small rule.
shall never atteyne to the truth.

The Scriptures often times speak much after the manner of the speaking of
men, and of our understanding, which must be for all that, How the speaking of
the scriptures are to be taken in certain places.
taken after the meaning and spirit of the Lord. Thou do read in the^,
that God some time is as it were in a fury, that he is heavy and sorrowful, that
he is angry, that he does hate, and threaten with such other like manner of
affectionat speking. Which words, if thou do understand after the flesh,
and after thine own sense, thou shate fall into foul error. And yet for all
that, to our perceuerance, he seems some time to rage, he is angry, he
repents him of this or that, he does lament and sigh. etc. But not after our
judgment and understanding. The Gospel speaks after our speaking but not
after our understanding.
For likewise as the speech of God has his proper tongue and manner of
speaking: so it has his own propre spirit, sense, and meaning. The which
words how they are to be taken, we have made plain in other places, whereof
we have written.

What it is to build on the rock, and on the sand.
Furthermore how tedious and laborious a thing it is to take this matter in
hand of the declaration of the will of man, how vnthanckful and not pleasant
it shall be to many, to those specially which would build, not on the strong
rock stone, which is Christ, but on the sands, that is to say, the
glosinges of men, as they do in deed in all those things, which they would
make me^ believe to have their foundations on the scriptures, or rather to be
the very scriptures them selves, being as cleave contrary as black is to
white. I am not so ignorant and blind, but I do see and perceive their crafty
iudgelyng, and subtle co^ueiaunce. They do think in them selves, that they
have done and wronghte no small feate, if they do bring forth for the
confirmation of their blind and false doctrine, a great number and heap of
sophistical writers, whose brablyng, scouldyng, and co^tentious reasonyng and
mad disputations, the holy ghost does abhor and detest. The faithful do not
allow the bare judgments of men, The verity for verities sake, not for any
respect of man is commendable.
because they do seem and appear holy, as of the Martyrs and bishops and such
other like. But if the truth of God be in them, yea though they were women,
ploughmen, children, yea what so ever they be, that is the thing which is
acceptable and pleasant to the right faithful. This is the whole sum of those
words which I have spoken, that we have not our eyes open on the authority of
men, Old custom and continu^^ce proves (...) the verity.
but only to give ear to the truth and verity of Gods word, to embrase
that, to follow that with al our heart.

Finally, what certeyneth that to the church of God, which they do allege,
that is to say, the most wicked consent of men, continuing many years in
blyndnes and errors. Are we sworn, or have we taken our oath to be true to
the number of years, and to the doctors, we are sworn (...) Christ, not (...)
tea^^^^ge and (...).
which were then living and taught? Or rather to be true and faithful to the
most pureste word of the most highest Lord. Away with the name and number
of their years, and let us have in our heads, the everlasting time of the
Lord, having neither beginning nor ending. We will not have before our eyes
these later days, (...).
but the old and ancient time, although they do call us in despite the
preachers and teachers of the new Gospel, as who should say that this Gospel
which we do preach, were not the eternal Gospel, which the holy Prophets and
Apostles did teach from the beginning. The Gospel (...).
But where as they do lay and call it the new Gospel, and new learning, they
do not therein speak otherwise then the truth. For the Gospel which is of it
self everlasting and eternal, to the old bottels of their carnal and fleshly
understanding, it is new boylyng wyue and sweet must. Wherefore they are not
able to conteyne and keep it still within the^, except they be renewed with
the spirit of Christ. What thing do we teach contrary to the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles? We may not follow the errors which were more
then.xiij. hundredth years paste. But we must embrase those things which were
taught by the Apostles in their time or there about of necessity, if we do
well, if we will not err and be deceived. For it is a thing very certain that
they declared most purely and syncerely the verity and truth of Gods
word, which they did leave to us in writing, having the spirit of God to
their enterpreter, gyuyng to them the right and perfect meaning.

But now as touching the spirit of God, A most wicked doubt.
some men do doubt whether the gift of the spirit and holy ghost, that is to
say, the gift of prophesy of exposiding the scripturs of healinge diseases and
sickness, of the tongues, is not now among me^ as it was in that time of the
Apostles. Whereunto I answer that the gift of healinge of maladies does not
cease, as I my self have seen and do know of a suertie by experience. But
when faith does fail, then that does no longer abide. And as touching the
gift of tongues, it does remain among us still. The gift of tongues.
For the knowledge of the diversity of to^ges, which many men have, is the
gift of the spirit of God. It is not so openly perceived and seen, as these
now a days externe and outward monstrous miracles, for this cause, that the
power of the word of God may be known, by the which word only, the high
tops of Antichriste his kingdom shall be overthrown and cast down, as I
have written in the book entitled the causes of our great blyndnes.

God forbid that we should say that the spirit of God, and of prophesy, is
extinguised. For what man can deny, but the word of God must be preached.
And to preach is nothing else then to prophesy, To preach is to prophecy.
as Paul witnesses, the first Epistle to the Corhin. and.xiiij. Chap.
Furthermore no man can preach well without the spirit of the holy ghost, Who
preaches well.
for the deep secrets of God, nothing but the spirit of God does or can
search. For likewise as no man knows what is in man, A goodly symilitude.
but the spirit of man which is in him: even so the profounde mysteries of
God, no man does know but the spirit of God, as Paul, i. Corhin. ij.
Chapter.

Also. If there be any of those gifts now in these days, they would know,
In whom are the gifts of the holy ghost
on who^ those gifts of the spirit are bestowed, who has them. Which they
with all their resoning can not find out, nor once perceive their
understanding is so carnal and sleshly. But the truth is that the gift of
the spirit has remained always in the elected people, all that long time of
blyndnes and of error, as well as the gift of fayeth, although in many
things the elected people were deceived. The lord has had his elects and
faithful in the time of most blyndenes.
By the which spirit and puernes of fayeth, they obtained salvation, as in
the book inscribed, the causes of blindness I have declared sufficiently. They
did not al perish which lived in those erroneous times, they were not all
cast away. But likewise as in the time of Helias, when the said Helias
thought, that there were no mo persons but him self, which worshipped the
living Lord. It was answered and said unto him, as in the third book of the
Kings.xix. Chap. I have left and kept for my self seven thousand men,
which never have done so much, as to bend their knees, no not before Baall.
So it was in those times, which they speak of. For what so ever the errors
and blyndnes was, those which were reserved, that is to say, the elected were
saved (as I have said) by the spirit and puernes of faith in the Lord. Who
seems to have the spirit of god in their expositions.
But to our purpose, where as diverse persons do make sundry and diverse
expositions on the scriptures, it is easy to perceive which of those
expositors have in them the holy spirit. The word of God is the witness of the
will of God.
None other verity, but he or they which do fetch their testimonies and
authority out of the word of God. For that word is the certain testimony
and wytnes bearer, The scriptures do open them selves.
of the will of God. Therefore the word of God is called a testimony or wytnes.
Psalm.Cxviij. Beside that one place of the scripture is declared by an other,
the darcker, by that which seems more plain and open. To be short the more
nighe the declaration or exposition comes to the textes of the scripture, the
more pure and perfect it must be of very necessity.

Many of them which do teach and show (I will not say the manners and facions
of gentiles) the authorities of men, the allegations of decrees, this order or
that order, this holiness or that holiness, this or that miracle: they do require
that men should believe them in all their sayings. But our preaching is after
an other manner. For we in the steed of man's authority and so forth, do
declare the most purest and vnchaungable word of God, which bears true
wytnes of his will toward us, wisshynge and desirynge hertely that all those
which do bear the name of Christ, calling them selves Christians, A Christian
life is required to the setting forth of of the Gospel
professynge his most holy word, that they would have a life confourme to
that spirit. It does grieve and pain me (I say) to see many how they do
live, by whose noughtines of life, the Euangel of the kingdom of God is little
regarded or rather sclaundered. Justified by faith only.
For we do know (although by faith we are only justified) yet the inseperable
fruits of faith are the works which are done by faith. Works.
As for the promotions and degrees of schools whereon they do brag with the
authorities of men (as of me^) they be to be abhorred and detested more then
any fylthynes that falls from man. Authorities of men. Degrees of schools.
Religions and ordres of knaves. Holiness. Miracles.
By their religiouse orders we set not a good bean. As for their holiness and
miracles, so that they be confourmable to the truth, we do allow them. And yet
for all that we do not give credit to the verity for that holiness and miracle
sake, but contrary wise, because we do lean and cleave to the verity and
truth, therefore those things are pleasant to us.

Of these things we have spoken more largely, then some men would think
necessary or meet. But to answer to those me^, which with long prefaces set
before their works, do improve and find great fault with our opinion of the
will of man, as erroneous and contrary to al godly doctrine, therefore in this
preface we have been some thing the more prolix and long, to the reader (I
trust) not unprofitable.

Mine intent and purpose is (God wyllyng) to declare unto you these four
points following according to the scriptures.

First. What the will of man is. Second. That the will of man is captyue and
bond. Third. In what thing the will of man is free. Fourth. How these textes
of the scriptures which appear to give liberty and fredom to the will of man,
are to be understand and taken a right.
The first.
IN all the whole scripture, both old and new, you shall not find one place
which makes mention, These words free will, are not found in the Scriptures.
or once names these two words, free will, that thereby it might have some
ground. But it is drawn forth of the dregs of the proud and carnal
Philosophy, which is craftily crepte into the doctrine of Christ, whereby they
had obscured and made dark the bright glisteryng clearnes of the word of God.
Therefore the masters of the high and proud arrogant schools following the
Doctrine and teaching of Aristotle make this diffinition of free will,
saying, Free will after Aristotle.
it is a will joined and annexed to understanding. They do make of man as it
were a certain kingdom, wherein the will is as Lord president and chief
ruler, and the understanding to be the counseler: saying also that
understanding in man, does both judge and counsel, and the will like a Prince
commands either to do, or to leave undone, that thing which the counseler
does say, yea or nay to. What man without the spirit of the Devil would
speak these words?
They do say also that the will is a free power, which no man, no not God him
self (mark their diuelishe doctrine) ca^ compel or constrayne, although
they do grant that he may change the will.

O Lord God what a pestilente doctrine is this in the church of Christ, of
free will, which in deed has no liberty nor fredome? We do not deny, that
the will of man, is a will annexed unto understanding. But we do say, that this
will, which is man's own judgment, choice, or election, is in no wise free,
but contrary wise, bond and captyue, as we will prove by the firm testimonies
of the word of God.

The second part declarynge that the will of man is captyue.
FOr as much as the election of man includes in it both an understanding and
also a will, First we will declare, that both as well the one as the other is
bond, the which bondage shall be strongly proved by the scriptures. But
first we will prove our entente with certain reasons manifest and known of
al men.

The first reason.
What man is he (being not altogether blind) that does not see and perceive
the understanding and knowledge of man to be captyue and bond. Considering
that every man does understand and has knowledge by measure after the
quantity that the Lord, which is the gyuer of things, does distribute and
give to every man. To some knowledge and understanding, to some one thing, to
some an other. Some give their studies to be good Rhetoritia^s. Some setting by
that kind of study nothing at al, apply themselves to be Logicians, some to
be Phisicians, some Lawyers, some to be divines, some would have of every
thing a piece. An other sort covet to be good handy crafts men, to be
excellent in this or that. There be a thousand sorts of men, and as great
(...) of things, whereunto they be addicted and given. Every man lives after
his own facion and mind. Every man in that thing whereunto he applies his
wits has knowledge after a measure? One man more, an other less. He that
has less knowledge, would feign know as much as he which excels
therein, and yet for all the peynes he can take, he can not atteyne thereunto.
Also that man, which knows one thing, would feign have the knowledge of mo
things, as well as of that, which he knows already, and yet he misseth of his
purpose. He that is seen in the arts, and ca^ play the parts of a good
physician, would become feign a good divine. He that has the understanding,
but of one line or verse of the Bible, coueteth in his heart to have the
intelligence and understanding of the whole Bible. But it is not as the
wyssher and as the woulder (according to the proverb) do covet and desire,
Wyshars and woulders are but small householders.
but as it pleases the Lord to show his mercy. An other desires to have a
perfect good memory, that he may keep well those things, which he has
heard and read, and suddenly he does forget altogether. Such is the will of
the Lord often times. The understanding therefore truly, and knoweledge of
all men is bond and captyue. For let him be never so careful, let him take
never so much pain, let him study as much as any man may, it shall profit to
him no more then the Lord has ordained from the beginning, which does weigh
al things in just number, Knowledge is the gift of God.
weyghte and measure. It does depend and hang on his goodness to have
knowledge of this thing or that. For it is not in every man's free election, to
know every thing that he would at his own pleasure. The knowledge,
understanding, and election of God only is free in deed, and of none other
person or persons, whose will (I mean the will of man) what so ever they be, are
in servitude and captyne, limited to and fro, The will, understanding, and
election of God only is free.
as far and as nere, as much and as little as it shall please the Lord. For
there is no learned man be he never so e^nuynge: nor yet none other Artificer,
be he never so much expert: that can tell what to do, more or less, or
otherwise than he has received of the Lord. Then I pray you, what goodly
fredome have we whereof we do bost so much, what is it worth I pray you of it
self, considering that our will understanding, and election is obedient to the
will of the Lord almyghtie, to his ordinances, to do al things, so far as it
is commanded, and no more? What more evident token and ergument can you have
of the captivity and bondage of man's will the^ this? Under this decree all
things created and made, are obedient and subject to the Lord, because they
can do nothing, but after the pleasure and most free will of the Lord, which
wylleth what him lists alone and none but he. Example of bondage in beasts
and in the elements*
The Lions could not devour Daniel. The fire in the furnace could not consume
the.iii. children, because it was not the Lords pleasure which alone of
himself is free, to whom al creatures as well reasonable as contrary, although
they do seem and appear to our reason in things disobediente, yet for all that
they are in very deed in the self same thing to the pleasure of God, most of
al obediente and bond, albeit the judgment of man is to the contrary. For his
godly will and pleasure must always be fulfilled, Our understanding is bond.
Whereby it follows that the understanding of man is captive and bond to the
commandment and unvariable decree of the Lord.

To this Lord, not only the understanding which in man (as they say) is
both judge and counseler, Will and will not are the deeds of the will.
but also the will which they do call the lord president is also captive and
bond. For to will or to not will any manner of thing, are the deeds and the acts
of the will. I marvel wherefore some men do write and hold opinion, that the
acts and deeds of our will are free and at liberty, either to be done or
undone as the will wylleth. There is no freedom verily in them. For if al
things which are made and created, The first reason, prouyng the will bond.
be under the decree and unvariable sentence of the Lord: then it follows
that the will of man, must be under the decree and sentence of the Lord. And
lykwyse as we have written of the understanding of man, that it can nether
know, nor yet seek for any further knowledge then the Lord does permyt and
suffer: Comparison
even so must me^ understand of the will of man. Which is a very easy thing to
perceive, to him that will mark and considre the diversity of affections
wherewyth man is combred and led oftentimes against his will. The second
reason. The affections of men declares bondage.
If the will of man be free, then may he will and nyl what shall please him, at
his own free election But what is that manne that can so do? Let us have
knowledge of such one, Bring him forth that we may extol and praise him. How
often have you seen that a man would with al his heart that he might not covet
and desire, The confirmation of the second reason.
that thing which he cannot chose but wyshe and desire after? Contrarywyse
there be many which would that they could will and love that thing, which
they cannot chose but hate. Where is now the liberty of this man's will A man
oftentimes casts his mind on an evil woman, whose conversation he cannot
hate and abhor because he is bound in most hard bondage and captivity.
Many men done abhor their own filtie conditions and manners and lewd vices,
Wherefore do we follow those vices who came know evil.
and yet they cannot those but love them, follow them, and keep the^ still,
because the affections and desires of the flesh are not subject, but contrary
to the law of God. Romans viii. I my self myse^able man oftentimes do those
things which I do abhor and hate. Truth it is that I do those things in
deed, yet it is not my self which does them (for in my heart I do abhor the^)
It is sin, that is to say, the concupiscences of the flesh which dwells in
my flesh keeping me in bondage and captivity. What thing works evil in us.
Therefore in many things our will is redye and at hand, but how and which way
to bring our will to pass, being led captive of sin and of the devil, with all the wits we have, we cannot think nor deuyse. I desire often times with all my heart that I might have my desire plucked away from this thing or that,
and yet in spyght of my teeth I am violently drawn into the love thereof,
which I would feign have in hatred, and cannot. For although that outwardli I
do seem and appear to hate a thing, The co^cupiscences of the flesh be so roted
naturally in us, that they cannot be plucked out all together, and therefore we
ca^ not do that we would.
which is not good: yet at the rote of my heart I do love it, which I would not
if I might chose. Let every man in himself wey this matter, and so doing he
shall tell me a new tale. He shall find his liberty very pore and bare. As for
my self, I will render glory, praise and thanks, to the Lord: I will in the
presence of his church confess and knowledge mine impiety with feigned and
painted holiness in Hypocrisy: not doubtyng, but to obtain mercy at the
hands of the most merciful Lord. What time (a great while agone) I was of
the sect and church of Antechrist, I did lead my life many years in the
co^cupiscences and naughty desires of the body, burning in unlawful and
stynckyng lusts of the flesh, the which affections truly I did hate and
abhor, and yet I could not resist, nor cast them away forth of my mind.
For to punyshe the body with labor, with watching, with fasting yea, and with
scourging, and such other like hard and sharp punyshmentes of the flesh may
well tame and make weak the power and strength of thy body. But as for the
co^cupiscences of the mind it could not thereby be drideled, Wherefore serves
the chastening of our bodies.
yea those hard chasteninges of the flesh did rather profet to the increase
of hypocrisy and counterfeited holiness in us, causyng the outward man to
appear godly and holy. The concupiscence of the flesh reigning still in our
hertes, which from the eyes of the lord cannot be hyd.

You dose the great servitude and bondage wherein we are knit and tied. How
are we the^ fre and at our own liberty? Truly no man l^uyng can either will
or not will this thing or that, more or less, then the Lord does give
strength. For likewise as fire and all other creatures ar in bondage and
servitude unto the firm decre and ordinance of god: even so is man. Fire does
consume al thing that the fire has power over, Fire.
except the lord does take away the natural strength thereof. Man also cannot
chose but think that thing which is full of all impiety and wickedness, Manne.
and sins in all his doings, except he be brideled with the spirit of
Christ. The bridle of our affections is only the spirit of Christ
Our impi^tie and sinfulnes can go no further than it has pleased the Lord
from the beginnynge to suffer. For he has limited all the thoughts,
cogitations, and wills of men within certain limittes and terms, the which no
man ca^ pass or go beyond. Where is now beco^^e that free election and liberty
to do what we lust? which they affirm to be in us. Is it not altogether
captive and in bondage?

Another diffini^io^ of freewyl.
There be also which do make this diffinicion of free will, saying, that frewil is
a power and strength of man's will, wherewyth he does apply or pluck away
himself, to or from those things which do lead us to eternal felicity, and
everlasting salvation. But I pray you, what strength and power have we when
the understanding and will of man can do nothing of it self, but that which is
carnal and fleshly. What things can man's knowledge of it self perceive and
attayn to.
Our own understanding and knowledge does judge, richesse, health of body,
honors, promotions, and the glory of this world to be good things, and the
contrary to these for to be evil and naughty As for the knowledge of good and
of godly matters, of those I say which partayneth to eternal salvation, it
perceives nothing at al of it self. Yea, though a man would peruse and read
over all the holy scriptures and teach them also to other me^, or else be
taught of other, his own understanding and knowledge of it self, shall never
truly and (as he ought to do) know the Lord and his will, his power, his
justice, his goodness, his mercy, his anger. He shall not believe and rest on the
truth and verity of God, but after a liyng fashion and hypocrisy. The which
thing is nothing l^sse then to believe. For it is written. The folyshe man said
in his heart there is no God. Behold the knowledge of man of himself, does not
only not know god: but also does deem god to be God, saiynge that there is no
God. i. Corin. ii.
The carnal man does not perceive those things which be of the spirit of God,
for the spirit of God and the things thereto pertaining ar folishnes to him. He
ca^ not understand and judge that they ought to be spiritualy demed and taken.
These words ar to be taken not only of the understanding, but also of the
will of man. For likewise as the understanding does se nothing of it self but
that which is carnal, even so the will of man does hate and abhore of it self
al thing which is good, and loves that which is evil carnal, and nothing
durable. The proof of bond will by the scripturs.
It can neither love nor fear God nor his truth It follows then that the will
of man is not free but captive and bond, as now we will prove by the
testimonies of the scriptures of God.

And first of al by this testimony of Ose the Prophet saying. The spirit has
bound him in his wings. The which words are manifest to be spoken of the
carnal people of Israel. The which people, the Prophet declared before to be
deceived by the spirit of fornication: that is to sai, by the judgment and
sens of the flesh, in the wings whereof he affirms them to be bound fast.

First he declares them to be deceived, and afterward to be bound, that now
they cold do nothing else but commyt fornication being separated from God. For all their judgments, knowledge, understanding, and will, al their deeds were
nothing else but fornication from the lord, because they were not of faith.
The carnal are tied with bonds. Who be the bond daughters of Syon To the
captyue and bo^d prisoners, is preached remission of syn
As before in the exposition of this Prophet I have made open to you. Thus it
follows that al those which be carnal and fleshly ar tied and made fast in
bonds. The carnal Sinagoge is called in the scripture, the bond daughter of
Sion. As Esaye. liii. Our savior also preached remission of sin to the
captive and bond, and deliverance to them which were shit fast in prison. Esa.
lxi. Luke. iiii.

The second proof by the scripture.
Genes. vi.
THe Lord said in Genes. vi. My spirit shall never be parmanent in man because he
is flesh, Hierome and other writers do write that these words are in the
Hebrew rog after this translation. My spirit shall never judge in man, because
he or they be flesh. The first tra^slatio^ is good enough by the which words
a certain writer does understand and expound, the clemencye and great mercy of
God toward man: and but his most dreadful austeritie and anger. But the Lord
keep us from that clemency. For the blyndnes of that man (as by his writing
oppereth) did take this word judgment to signify, in this place no thing
else but punishment, as though the lord would say: The judgment is not taken
for a dreadful sentence of God as of a judge, but for the godly and spiritual
knowledge.
my spirit shall not punysh man, which is a very wrong sens. For the unjust
shall be punished and the seed of the wicked shall perish as Psalm. xxxvi. And
the fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels, wherwyth the
reprobates, and ungodly persons, shall be tormented, is everlasting. Therefore
this is not the right sens and meaning of this text as he has expounded, but
contrary wise. My spirit shall not judge always among these men because
they be flesh, that is to say, the judgment of my spirit shall not always be
permanent in them because they be flesh, that is altogether natural, carnal,
The judgment of the spirit of God is not in the wicked.
and deceivable, because I say the wicked judgment of the flesh, which is
repugnaunt to the judgment of the spirit does reign in them.

Is this the clemency and mercy of God to be destitute of the right judgment
of the spirit of God? to be forsaken and left, to the wicked and execreable
judgment of the spirit of Fornication and of lies: that is to say of the
spirit of man which is a lier. Psalm. C.xv. I do believe verily that there is no
punishment of God more bitter, more sharp, then to be forsaken of him, There
is no plage more sharp, the^ to be forsaken of of God, and left to thy self.
to be left to thine own judgment without the judgment of his spirit. I pray
the good Lord keep from me this most fearful and dreadful wrath of the. Let
thy spirit which is true and holy and not my spirit full of fornication and
lies judge and give true knowledge and understanding in me. Whippe me good Lord
and scourge me, rather then to forsake me to my self, if it seems to the
expedient for the setting forth of thy glory. Confyrme and make thy servant
strong with thy spirit, and never take it from me. In the same.vi. of Genesis the
wicked are called flesh, The wicked are called fleh
after the manner of speaking of Paul in many places of his Epistles. For the
wicked with all their cogitations, affections, and works are nothing else but
flesh, because they want and lack the holy spirit. Yea the very spirit of man is flesh, because it cannot behold the spirit of God, but al carnal
things, thereto being given and addicte.

This sens and meaning of this text, which I have declared is not true (says
he) because this text of Genesis does not pertayne to al men (as he says) but
to those me^ only which lived in the time of Noe. What thing can be more
aslycke spoken and said than this? Were not those men also flesh, which lived
after the flood as well as they which were before the flood. Verily so was Came
the son of Noe, which did mock and scorn his father as was Cain and Judas
the traiters: as Lamech, which did slei Cain Peradventure this manne does
think and conjecture in his mind, that there was an other manner of spirit of
fornication in manne before the flood then was after: or else he fantasieth in
his brain, that God has altered and changed the nature of man other wise,
then it was from the beginning making an other nature differente from that
which he has made with his most mighty and strong hand in them which do
believe on him. The nature of man of it self has been always like.
We do read and find that the years and times has been changed and altered,
but we find not that the nature of man was ever altered. I do grant that those
words were spoken at that time of those which lived in the time of Noe. But
not only of them, but also of them which came after the flood. For all men of
them selfs are flesh, all flesh, hay, and the glory of it as the flower of
the field, Esaias. xi. All the children of Ada^ of their self ar of an heavy and
sad heart they do love vanity, they do seek after lies and untruth. Psalm.
iiii. Omnes declinauerunt, and simul^^utiles facti sunt. Non est, qui faciat
bonum non est vsque ad vnum.
All men without exception have gone out of the rightwaye, and are become
unprofitable. There is none that can do any good, no not one in the world. Ps.
xii

If he will not he satisfied with this answer: but will contend that this text
of the judgment spoken and written in Geneses, pertains to the time of Noe.
I will dema^de this question of him. For what cause were those men of Noes time
rather called flesh then they which followed after Noe, and lived after him?
Syns, now a days ar mor grievous and detestable, the^ were in the time of Noe.
Truly of much more grievous vices and offenses have we read of many other
men, yea, and with our eyes have seen in our time, then was written of those
men in those days of whom the words were first written and spoken. Of them we
do read in Genesis the.vi. these words. The sons of God did see and perceive
the daughters of men that they were fair and bewtiful, Compare our small
fautes and daily used vices with this offense of the sons of God, and it shall
be no vice but a singular virtue, For they did take the Maidens to their wives
in Matrimony, and not to make the^ harlotes in whordome.
and they took to the^ wives from among them, those which they had chosen. They
did not seek after those daughters which were good, but for those which were
goodly and fair, the children of whom, became myghtie men and of great
renown. The Lord said then that the malice of man was great in the earth, and
all the imaginations and thoughts of his heart were evil every day The which
words are to be understand, not only of that age and time: but of al me^ in all times of ages as in the.viii. Chapi. in the same book apereth. The
imaginacions of man's heart are evil from his youth. Therefore it is ungodly done
to wrieth and wrest those words to the time of Noe only.

Yet they do go further, saiynge and reasoning on this manner. The propens and
ready inclination and towardnes to evil which is in many men (as though it were
not in all men) does not take away al together the liberty and fredome of ma^s
will, yea, though the said naughty inclination cannot be over come and clean
subdued without the help (as they confess) of the grace of God. Is it not a
great bondage and captivity, not to be able to overcome and subdue that thing
which we would fame have forth of us? By these premises it does follow, that
we are servants to that concupiscence and naughty inclination to evil, till
the time that we be delivered and made fre in deed by Christ

The.iii. proof by the scripture.
It is said in the Proverbs. xvi The Lord does al things for his own sake:
yea, when he reserueth the ungodly for the day of wrath. This place is
manifest and open declaryng to us that the Lord has alredye judged the
reprobate and outcast persons from the beginning to eternal punishment. There
be many which contrary to all ryghteousnes do inquire and busely search, to
know those things which do partain to the only majesty of God in this place
and such other like, A full wicked question
puttyng forth this question. Wherefore did the Lord make the wicked man s^e^h
he has decreed from the beginning that the wicked shall peryshe? Wherefore did
not the Lord revoke and pluck him from his impiety and wickedness after that
he had made him? Wherefore has he not given to al men of his spirit? With these
scrupulous and curious questions more then needs: The great in conuenience and
foul absurdity which follows these questions
they are blinded and deceived, being at the last by such reasonyng brought to
that point, that they do make the Lord not to be a merciful Lord, but a cruel
Lord, and as it were a tiraunt. I will desire and exhort all men, that with al
reverence they have in fear and sted fastly believe the judgments of the
highest that he is in all his works just, faithful and true, and that we be
of our selves miserable, false, unjust and synnefull. The Lord then has made
the wicked man for the evil day, being himself just and full of clemency. The
wicked man of himself, tan do nothing that is pleasant and exceptable to God.
O the profound depnes of the judgments of the Lord, how unsearchable, how
incomprehensible are his ways? For of him, by him, and in him are all things
To him therefore be only glory and empire for ever and ever. Amen.

The.iiii. proof by the scriptures.
IT is written in the Prouer. The kings heart is in the hands of the lord
xxi Like as the rivers of the waters: even so the heart of a king is in the
hand of the lord The Lord may turn his heart which way soever it shall please
him. In this place first thou do see that the riuars, and the division of
waters are the worckes of God and all other things which can be named in
heaven, or in earth or in the waters. The text is so plain that it neadeth no
long declaration, The heart and the will is all on in scripture
by the which we do perceive that the heart or will of a King (for in the
scriptures the heart and will is taken for one thing) is not free and at his
liberty and pleasure, but captive and bond, to the pleasure and will of the
Lord, causynge it to incline and lean to which part it pleases him, to
godliness and to the fulfyllynge of his will or contrary. Yet for all that
(good Reader) be ware you do not mistake and wrong understand me, because I
say that God does turn and incline the heart: What is signyfied by these
words god turnethe god makethe to inclyne
as though he should in so doing work ungodliness. For this word and vocable
to incline or to turn, is as much to say after the speaking of the scripture:
as to indurate or harden: or to let a man run into a reprobate mind, holding
away his hand from him: which is as much to say (to make it more plain) as
the Lord does relinquish and leave him to his own mere natural frailenes:
To harden thy heart, is to leave the to thyn own weakness
as in many places, and specially in that book which I did write entitled the
causes of our blyndnes I have declared. That lesson, which you do read here of
the heart or will of a king: take it as well to be understand of all other men,
for if that one be true, that the kings heart and will is subject to the will
of God, much more all other men's cogitations, thoughts, wylles, and deeds.

They say and obiecte again, that the inclination and mouynge of the hand of
the Lord does not cause or work bondage or necessity in the will of man,
When does the lord move to godlynes
wherein they be foul deceived not geuynge glory to the Lord as they ought
to do. For the Lord does move and stir a man to Godliness as often as he
does pour into him his spirit and true fayeth. Then can not that man sin
by the virtue and strenght which he has received of the Lord, Faith cannot
do evil
whereby he is moved. For fayeth can not work evil.

Again, although the flesh in the fayethful men do sin, yet the spirit of
God whereby the fayethful do live can not sin. The rightwyse man lyuethe by
faith
Peter by the strength of the flesh sinned, being offended and displeased at
the words of his master Christ, saying that he should suffer. Which Peter
did say before to his master by the power and strength of the spirit. The
faithful synneth not
Thou art Christ the son of the living God. Math. vi. Chapter. To be short in all things where the spirit of God does move and stir us, is contained a
necessity and bondage of the spirit being so decreed and ordained from the
beginning. Likewise also of all those things which a man does work,
inclined to ungodliness, that is to say, given to a reprobate mind, being left
to the spirit of fornication, to him self, to his own natural fragilitie and
weakness. For the wicked ca^ not chose but do wickedly, for as much as he is
flesh, The prescience and for knoledge of the lord is infallible
and therefore all his worckes sin. It is also impossible but that wyckednes
must be committed at that time which the Lord by his prescience and fore
knoweledge did know from the beginning would be done. Hereby we do reason
and gather that all these things whereto they do move and stir us, or
otherwise does harden leaving us to our own self, are done or committed of
necessity inevitable.

Take heed once again gentle reader, and beware thou doeste not reason to
far in this matter, least thou doeste fall into inconvenience and wrong
judgment or opinion of the Lord to thine own destruction and death.
Reverence thou always his most blessed judgment to the profound deapnes
whereof no man at any time is able to attain.

The.v. proof and authority
Hieremy. x,
HIeremye says the.x. Chapt. I do know very well good Lord that the will of
man is not in his own hand, nor yet in his own power to rule and govern his
own steps and goinges which words are not to be meant and understand of
sad or pleasant things (as some me^ do interpretate) but of every thought,
will, and deed of man. As appears by that which follows. Chasten us O Lord
but with favor, not with thy wrath. But if this can not satisfy their minds,
nor persuade them suffitientlye that it is spoken of all the ways of man boeth
of his thought, will, and deed: let them answer me by their own experience,
Let every man ask him self this question in that uicious affection whereto he
is most inclyned
whyther their own ways be in their own power yea or nay, to do or to
forsake all that shall please them, to will or nyl that them lusts If he be
an aduonterouse person, an hunter of whores, a couetuouse man, a man full of
Envy and such like: can he him self as he would of his own strength, root
out and put away clean all these lewd affections forth of his heart, that
nothing thereof shall remain behind? If he find that he cannot do it of him
self, how can he say that the way of man is in his own hand and power.
Verily no man has the rule of his own ways as he would.

Therefore let us pray with holy David, Lord do thou direct and make straight
my ways before thy sight, David says in thy syghte, that is as much to say
that it may please the, as though he would say, suffer not my ways to be
inclined and turned against the. Such like saying of him is in the Psa. cxviii.
Turn my eyes (good Lord) that they se no vanity, quycke^ and make me liuelye
in thy ways. Also, Turn and incline my heart to thy testimonies, and not to
Avarice.

The.vi. proof and authority.
Esaias. lxiii.
THe elect and chosen people do confess and grant openly that our will is
captive and bond as Esai lxiii. Thou Lord our father, our redemer, thy name
is and always has been Wherefore have thou made us to err and to declyne from
thy ways? Wherefore have thou hardened our hertes that we should not fear the,
the which place Paul does allege for that same purpose in the.ix. Chapter
to the Romans.

The.vii. proof and authority.
Pharao hardened
This verity is confirmed in Pharao, whose heart the Lord did harden as Exodi.
ix. Chapter. and to the Romans.ix. Chap.

The.viii. proof and Authority.
Exodi. ix. Romans ix.
IT is written in Exodi the.ix. Chap. and to the Romans the.ix. Therefore have
I kept the, says the Lord, to show in the my strength, and that my name
should be spredde and blased through all the erath. This place the flesh will
not have to be understand aryghte as it ought to be in his own natural
meaning. But after the fleshly wisdom reasons on this fashion* It is a foul
inconvenience (say theye) to say that the Lord has hardened any man's
heart, to the intent, that by the wickedness and ungodliness of him which is
hardened, he should set forth and show abroad his mighty power and glory.
This is the reason of the flesh. But I pray you brethren, let us be wise
and sober, not to rash nor more wise then needs or is profitable. Wherefore
do we go about to find fault and to reprehende the word of the Lord. The
miserable and vngratiouse flesh does find fault at that which she does not
understand nor know Let not the flesh any more be in us a judge But let the
spirit of god judge in us by his word. Let us not judge and deem after the
signs and understanding of the flesh
The wicked and forsaken people of God in this place might reason and gather
that the Lord has need of the ungodliness of man, to the setting forth of
his glory to the world. Such kind of gatheringes comes from the devil,
and so let it go again to him from whom it came, God nedethe none of our
help
for God has need of nothing, it pleases him so to do, to use his creatures
after his divine and most Godly pleasure and will. The Lord did leave Pharao in
the spirit of fornication, that is to say in the understanding and judgment
of the flesh. What is to be hardened
This is to be hardened or stirred against God. For the sense of the flesh is
hard and ryseth always against the spirit of God. Wherefore he being so
left and forsaken of God, could not chose but be hardened and so to strive
against the Lord, whose decre and ordinances Pharao went about to stop and
let, the Lord preuaylynge against him overthrowing and casting down the pride
and glory of Pharao, treadyng it under his fete. Whereby the great strength
and mighty power and glory of God was made manifest and open to all the world
thorowout all the earth.

I have kept the: how is it to be taken
Therefore the Lord said unto him these words I have kept the, which is as
much to say, I have left the without my spirit, and therefore of necessity
thou must needs resist me and strive against my will. For the studies and
cogitations of men, work allway against my will, they can not chose but
resist and strive contrary to it. Therefore I have set and left the in thine
own sense and knowledge of the flesh, by the which sense and understanding
of thine own self as of man naked without my spirit, thou shall be stirred
and raised up against me. Thou shall withstand me with all thy power when I
will bring and lead forth my people out of Egypt. Thou shall not rest but
every day, thou shall grow more styffe necked against me. But I shall in
great signs and maruayles bring out of Egypt Israel, treading the and
all thy people which resists me to powder and to dust, whereby all the whole
earth shall know my strength and power. Whether the sufferance of the lord
be a token of induration ye or nay Be thou nothing the bolder to sin for
this but fear the great wrath of god
Some men do think that if a sinner be not straight way punished and
chastened of the Lord, but suffered of the Lord, and born with to the intent
that he should repent his former life, which ame^deth nothing at all, but
rather waxes worsse and worsse, they say that by this token he is straight
way indurate and hardened. The which thing is not always true. For there be many
sinners whom the Lord does not punish as soon as they have offended, and yet
before they be punished by the gift of God, they do amend and correct their
life. Wherefore to understand this point well, you must consider that there be.ii.
kind of me^, that one is of the faithful, Two kinds of men.
the other is of the sort which be indurate and hardened. The faiethfull are
they which have the spirit of Christ, by the which spirit being taught
learned and enstructed they do clean to the commandment of the Lord obeying
his word and voice without long tarying. The faithful
Those which be indurate, are they which have not the spirit of Christ,
without the which spirit, The indurat people.
no man can do any thing that is good. The want and lack whereof causes that
they will not herke^ to the Lord but show the^ selves to be hard herted and
rebelliouse against his most Godly will and commandment.

Therefore they which do make this doubt do hold opinion, that God does harden
and make man go from his ways, what time the Lord does prolonge and differ
his punishment for their sin. The Lord deceyueth him (say they) when he does
not straight way as soon as he has offended pluck and revoke him with sharp
punishment from his lewednes. This is their exposition in diverse places of the
scripture, These worldly simylituds and carnally imagined examples do deceive
and blind the eyes of many men from the syghte of the scripturs which are
spiritual Correction is no token of induration nor of the contrary.
proving their exposition and mind to be true by the exemple of a father
having an unruly and disobedient child, whom for his ungraciousness he has
not corrected. Wherefore men say that he has cast away his son for lack
of due correction in time.

Contrary wise by the self same reason and exemple they do think that if God
do correct and punish a man straight way for his fault, that then he does
not indurate and harde^ him who^ he has chastened for his offense. Al this is
but fantasies and peruers imaginations and interpretations of man's mind, far
from any soundnes of the truth.

For we do se daily that there be many which are with punishments
corrected, being for all that not a whitte the better but the worsse and more
indurate. If that correction should make a man not to be indurate, but to
revoke him from his sin, and to be obediente to the Lord: wherefore was not
Pharao nor the Israellites therefore the better? Pharai Israelites Idolateye
The Israelites in the myddest of their bitter and sharp correction, committed
fornication going from the Lord, in worshyppyng of images, stocks, and
b^ocbes made with man's hand perpetratynge most filthy, stinkynge and
abominable Idolatrye not only not minisshynge, but augmentyng and encreasynge
their detestable and most damnable vices, Every where they were apostatas and
forsaken of the Lord, yea when they were in Egypt as you may se in Ezechiell
the.xxxiii. Chapter.

And again after that Jerusalem was ouerthrown, when they came into Egipte
they did sacrifice to the queen of heaven Hierem. xliiii. You ca^ not therefore
say that God does molifie, make soft and turn the hertes of men, when for
their sins he does chasten and punish the^, When does the lord convert
man to his will: and where with does he it
For the^ Pharao should have been turned and not indurate still as he was But
what time that the Lord does pour forth his spirit into the heart of man,
that the obstinate hardness of an evil false and liynge heart might be broken,
then you may say that God does molifie and turn, that is to say does make
man to incline to his will and commandments. As Ezech.xi. Cha. and in
the.xxxvi. testifies saying. I will take away says the Lord the stony heart
fort he of your flesh. A heart of stone A heart of flesh
I will give you an heart of flesh. I will give you a new heart and put my
spirit in the midst of you. Truly neither infirmities nor syckenes, neither
honger norswerd, nor any other kind of correction, no nor any externe and
outward gift of God, The lack of the spirit is the cause of our reuocation
or induration
nether knoledge and understanding of things, nor any manner of carefulnes and
sorrow ca^ make the heart of man to be either a rebel, or to be pliable and
obediente to the will of the Lord, but only the fruition and lack of the
holy spirit. As for the correction and chastisynge of the Lord, it profits
if the spirit of God be present, otherwise it drives to desperation. The
correction and punishmente of the wicked, may outewardlye cause the^ to
refrain and abstain from doing of evil, What does correction work in us
But the heart is not the better. The correction of the wicked makes the^ to
be hypocrites and not the servants of God as the.iiii. Chap. of Oseas
declares. Because the heart is not the better
The Lord threatened the Israelites because they did forsake him in their
fornication saying that their daughters and wynes should be polluted and
defiled with fornication and adultry The Lord also declared to the^ that he
would not punish their daughters nor their wives, because they should not
amend their lives outwardely from their unchaste living, to the great
ignominy and shame of their husbands and pare^tes, being a just and a mete
correction of the carnal and naughty affections of the me^ which were carnal
in Israel, which detested and abhored the defilinge of their wives and
daughters (a thing which al men may se outwardli) their own hertes being full
of al fylthynes, and fornication from the Lord, Because they feared the
ignominiouse opprobry and shame of man, God is to be feared more then man
more then the rebuke of God, the Lord most justly suffered them to fall into
that which they feared most. Likewise as the Lord does indurate and harden,
so he does also deceive and begile. as Hieremie.xx. Chap. The lord deceyueth
For Hieremie him self being stricke^ of Phassur, and cast into prison for
declarynge of the verity, did make his prayer to the Lord saying. Thou have
deceived me good Lord, and I am deceived. Thou art stronger the^ I, and haste
prevailed, I am made a mockyng stock all the day long This place of Hieremie is
by those me^ which I did speak of before, wrong expounded, as they did the
place and scripture of induration, saying that the Lord deceived, and begiled
him when he did not straight way rebuke him of his error. But it is otherwise
to be taken.

For the prophet being beaton and cast into prison and (as you do there read)
being of all men skorned and made a laughing stock for the verity sake, he
did abhore and despise those which did set light by the word of God, and
yet peradventure other whiles through the weakness of the flesh was in danger
to have fallen from the word of God, and so to have prophesied no more But the
Lord did conforte him, as it is manifest in the said chap. But yet before
that the Lord did conforte him, Hieremi said Thou haste dereyued me. etc. For
the Lord commanded him to go and he went boldly, not knowing that therefore
he should have been so handeled as he was, Therefore he said, thou have
deceived me, As though he would have said. Thou Lord dideste not give me
warning before that I should be scourged, emprisoned, and that thou would
that I whom thou dideste send, should be taken of them to whom I was sent,
who^ thou myghtest have saved and kept forth of their hands. In few words,
this does declare three things to us. What is declared to us by the taking of
hieremy
First the heaviness and sorrow of the Prophet because the word of God was
despised. Second his own grief for the euilles which he suffered which he
thought not on. Thirdelye that his taking and enprisonynge was of God, that is
to say, it was the will of God that he should be taken.

They do obiecte also against our opinion of bond will saying that our will
does nothing of necessity because that al things are in the hand of the
Lord. They confess also that God after his own secret counsel does turn
man's purpose and endeuers often times other ways then man him self intended,
the which intent, purpose, and first endeavor of man, they do ascribe to the
fre will of man saying that the first m^tion and styrryng is in man's liberty
and power.

Whereto I say and answer, that the will of man worcketh of necessity and by
violence because that all things are in the hands of the Lord, and under the
everlasting will of god (which they do confess of their own gentilnes) whose
will what man is able to resist? What is the will of God but his word and the
spirit of the scripture? And the word of the Lord is permanente for ever.
Psalm. Cxviii. and Esai. xl. The scotyst divinity has made darcke the
divinity of Christ before men's eyes


What neade the fayethfull men pass or care how the Dunse scholemaisters
have brawled among them selves of the will and pleasure of the Lord, they can
not tell what their selfs, His purpose, his decre, his ordinances must neades
be perpetual and stand for ever. The Lord purposed from the beginning, yea
and before the beginning, that the king of Egypt should be indurate and
styfnecked against him, that he should live without his spirit in the spirit
of fornication, that is to say in his own natural and fleshly sense and
understanding for the which cause he could not chose but be against the
Lord and his people. The affection of the flesh, The spirit of god and of the
flesh are at continual war
or of the spirit of the flesh being not subject to the law of God which is
always repugnaunte thereto, as to the To. the.viii. chap, The spirit did bind
him in his wings as it did the Israelites, drawing him by his power to al
kind of evil headlynge. Is not his will then bound and constrained of
necessity to this or to that? The which induration is to him as a bridle in
his mouth drawing and pluckynge him from God, and pryckynge, and styrrynge
him against the will of the Lord. And yet justly he perished although it was
not in his power to do well or Godly. If thou wylt now go about to reason and
argue, after the spirit of fornication and of the flesh thou shall straight
way fall into fornication against God. Be content therefore and reason no
further, for to reason otherwise it does dishonor to the Lord, and it
passes thy capacity. Pharao being miserable and unjust, iustlye indurated
and made hard, could not apply him self to the Lords will. Wherefore most
justly at the last he perished.

Many do think, because that God did stir up Pharao against him, therefore
they do say that God wroughte those sins in him which he did. And that
likewise as God does his good worckes in us, which are his good worckes
being good, even so (say they) does he punish his own evil worckes in us,
God forbid I should either speak or think any such thing which I do know
to be far from any Godly doctrine But this I dare be bold to say, that Pharao
was indurated, that is to say forsaken of the Lord and left to him self,
for the which cause in his heart he was against God, by whom afterward he
was styrred up to utter and show openly in the face and sight of all men
this great wickedness which he had by induration to the great and excedyng
glory of god. And yet for all that we do not say that god did work that
wickedness in Pharao because that al wyckednes: and ungodliness procedethe not of
him: but of the lack and want of the spirit of the understanding of the
flesh and spirit of fornication. O most inscrutable and unsearchable depnes of
the judgment of God. What man knowethe these things? They be to thine own
self secret o lord. To the only it perteynethe to conclude and determyn
these things: whereto no man else is able to penetrate and attain. Wherefore who
soever does fear thy most godly and maruailouse name: let him commit those
things unto the.

By this that we have said a man may easily make answer to them which hold
opynion that the entente and endeavor, or to purpose a thing is in the will of
man: contendynge that the will of man shall be fre to entend, The flesh will
knowledge no bondage
endeavor, or to purpose any manner of thing. The which purpose intent or mind
to do a thing either it is wicked and ungodly, and then it spryngethe from
induration which does force a man to all evil (for an indurat person must
needs do that which is evil) is not he then forced thereto?

Induration is the work of the lord
This manner of speaking the flesh can not abide to here which does crake and
bost that she is fre and at her liberty. But what man can wythstande the
eternal decres of the lord. The compulsion is not of god: but of induration.
The which is the work of god most ryghtwyse: and also most terrible and to
be feared. In this matter all sophistical and dialecticall reasonnynge
profetethe nothing at all: but rather doethe much hurt concludynge that god
workethe sin and wyckednes: that god compels a man to work that which is
euel. The lord keep such words from our mouths. But rather let us say
that herein does lie hyd the secrets of god which no man is able to take.

Contrary wise if man's study, To think well is of god.
intent or endeavor or purpose be godly: it commethe from the holy spirit from
who^ no wicked thing can proced. Wherefore then done we give lyberty to our
own will which is altogyther captyue and bond. For either it is captive and
bond to the spirit of fornication: or to the spirit of god. Although this
captivity of this spirit of god is most sweet and plesaunte lybertye, The
captivity and bondage of the lord is liberty
as we shall here after in his own place and time conuenyente declare.

Paul also in the ix chapter to the Roma. confyrmynge the captivity and
bondage of the will of man: concludethe on this wise. It is not in him that
wyllethe nor in him that runs, but in the Lord which has mercy and
compassion. The which place of Paul some expositours do expound on this manner,
saying. The mercy of God prevented our will, the which mercy our will does
accompany and go with it together in our indeuorynge and purposynge, bringing
at the last to some good end and effect. Yet for all that (say they) we do
run, we do will, we do covet, we do attain, and obtain our purpose. But so
that the self same thing which is ours in deed, we do ascribe whollye and
altogyther to God whose handyworcke we be all.

What is that thing, which we call our own, what is in us but sin, impiety
and unrighteousness? If we be just, that is not ours, but it is Gods own. If
our running our willing, our obtaynynge be ours, the^ is it wicked. All our
wais are vanity
For all the ways of man is vanity. Psalm. xxxviii. If we will ascribe to God,
and make to be his, that which is our own propre, Wherefore does the mercy of
god
that is to say, our sins, because he has hardened us, what error can be
more greater?

No boubte the mercy of God did preuente our will to destroy our will. For
with his spirit in us, he does reueage and utterly deny us, he does
crucify us day by day, he wylleth in us his will, he purposes and
endeavors in us his will, he prays, he runs, he obtained, he does al
thing in us, The lord does croune his goodness in us.
and at the last he does crown in us that thing which is his own proper.

For every fayethful man says with Paul I do live now not I, but in me
Christ lives. I do run, I do pray, now not I, Our good runnynge is Christ
his rynnynges
but these things and all other Christ does in me. The which altogyther
must be ascribed to God, which is granted of our adversaries to be true.

Now will I demand and ask them whether they be to be ascribed to him, as
the worckes of him (for so they be in deed) or else as our works proceadynge
from the endeavor and industry of our will. If they say that they be his own
works, they do say truly and Godly, If they say that they be first our
worckes and afterward we make them to be the worckes of God: let them show
me whyther God has any need of us, that we should ascribe to him any thing,
that is not his own already. No verily. Let them give credit, and hearing to
the truth which says. The earth is the Lords, and all that is therein.
Then is his, manne and other things which he works in him. To whom only be
glory and empire world without end. Amen.

If our will be bond how do we merit
They have an other objection, wherein they do demand, when, how, and which
way we do begin to merit. If we do all thing of force, by a continual
urgent necessity, If our will be fre at no time?

Christ does merit for us
To this objection I answer and say that all merits are the merits only of
Christ and that all confidence and trust of the merits of our worckes must
be taken away from us, In what works must we persevere
and yet we must persevere and co^tinewe still in good worckes, those I say
which are of fayeth, For truly we may pype in an iuie bushe for any thing
that we can merit unto our self. As the.iiii. cha. of the revelation. What is
meant by the eldars leying down there crowns before the throne of god. Cornelius
Centurio


The.xxiiii. elders did lay down their crowns before the throne and seat of
the Lamb of God, knowledginge thereby that by the merits of Christ, they did
receive the same crowns of glory at the Lords hand

Cornelius the Centurion did not obtain by his own merits and worckes to be
praised and co^me^ded of the Lord, but by the grace of the Lord and goodness of
Christ.

Paul.
What should I speak of Paul, which did not win the crown, after he had
ended his course by his own deades, but by him, by whose healpe he ended and
finished his course. Finally, neither cornelius obtained the favor of the
Lord, nor Paul the crown of glory, by the merits of their own industry
and travail, but only by the gift of the Lord, by the lyghtenyng of his
spirit, and by the fre election of God.

The ningth proffe,
I Maruayle that men will so steflye contend and strive against so open and
manifest text of the scriptures and testimonies of the Lord, to prove the will
of man which is bond and captive, for to be fre and at liberty, the which
bondage we do find and prove daily by experience in our selves, The similytude
of the potter
every one of us being in the hands of the Lord none otherwise then is the
cleye in the hands of the potter, to be fashioned to what use the potters
mind and pleasure is, as it is written Esai, xiv. Chap.

Woe be to him that strives with his maker, the potshard with the potter.
Esai. xlv.


Will the clay say to the the potter what doeste thou make? Hieremy. xviii.
Thy work serves for nothing? Also Jeremy speaks more plainly the.xviii
Chap. May not I do with you as the potter does. O house of Israel. Ye are in
my hand even as the clay in the potters hand. Romans ix.
Paul to the Romans the.ix. Chap.

Has not the potter power and liberty of one clotte of claye, to make one
vessel to honor, an other to vileness. What so ever did cause the Prophets
and the Apostles to write this, I am sure that this is true, that the potter
has no more power on the piece of claye the^ the Lord has over man. Nay the
power that the Lord has over man, is much more a thousand times. Also it is
certain, that likewise as the potter does make certain vessels to honest
uses and service, as to receive and keep meat and drink, and water, with
such other like: and other to a more vile office: even so the Lord has
created the elect to his glory, the reprobate to perpetual ignominy and
shame.

Furthermore, the potter does break the vessel and makes it anewe, greater
or smaller, as it does like him best, at whose workma^shyp the vessel is
content and resists not, nor grudgeth any thing at al, but that he may make
thereof what so ever shall please him. As long as thou do delight in sin
think and believe that thou art indurat: till thou doeste abhor it.
So truly the Lord worcketh and fashioneth man. The Lord does harden and
make indurate, he does again take away and remove the hardness from the heart
of man And as long as the man is hardened: so long is the vessel full of all
ignominy and filthiness. After that his hardenes of heart is taken away, and
has received a new heart he is then made again the vessel of glory So you
may se, that it is not in the hand of him that wylleth, or that runs but in
the Lord which is full of mercy.

Endeavor of man's. will is when a man purposethe and settethe his mind to do
things and begins to go about it which is called in late^ Conatus
The reasonable shard (say they) being warned and admonished may accommodate
and make mete it self to the will and pleasure of the Lord. The which thing
they do call the endeavor of frewyll. I do hold the contrary opinion,
affirmynge that no man, have he never so fine and quycke a wit, be he never
so much and well learned, though he were every hour in the day admonished
and taught his duty, that he is not able to acco^modate and make mete him
self to the will of the Lord, with out he have received the spirit of
Christ, the which spirit does make him apt and ready to the will of the
Lord.

An other objection they do lay against us, saying. If you do speak this
thing playnlie without any exception, that we are in the hands of the Lord,
as the elaie in the hands of the potter, then must we say (say they) that
likewise as the potter is the cause why the vessel is a vessel of ignominy
serving for a vile office, and so following not the vessel to be blamed
because it was no better: even so it is with the reprobates the cause of their
reprobatio^, whi they be naughty vessels to be imputed to the Lord which might
have made them vessels of honor if it had pleased him, and not the
reprobates worthy to be blamed.

To this objection I answer saying that these arguments and reasons are
altogether of the flesh and carnal making conclusion of the premises which
they understand not aryght, being not able to attain to the^ wherein many
things do lie hyd passinge all men's understanding and power to arise up to
the knowledge thereof. It is good therefore in this casse to stay and search no
further. But rather with all humility to reverence those things which the
Lord keeps for his own knoweledge.

An other objection of our adversaries is this. If they will (say they) that
the similitude of the potter which Paull speakethe of, must be understand
and taken simplye and plainly, as it lies: why should we not (say they)
understand that place of Paul as it lies in the letter, saying. If a man do
pourge him. etc. Whereto I say that we do take it none otherewyse then as it
does lie: so that they do take it and understand it after that manner, as all
such places of the scriptures are used to be taken. For this point you must
mark well, that to keep the commandments which we are commanded to keep,
it is impossible for manne without he have the spirit of the Lord, the
which no sophistical cauillation can deny. By the commaundeme^ts we do know
what is sin and our own weakness.
Nay they grant their selves that it is impossible that any man can keep
the commandments of the Lord, after the mind, intent, and will of the
Lord which does command them without his spirit. It follows that what so
ever the Lord commands us to do, is to us impossible. Yet the Lord wills
us to keep and observe his commandments. Whereby both we have the knowledge
of sin, The law is spiritual and therefore it must be spiritually observed:
or else you work in hypocricie.
and we know also how weak feeble and of no strength we be of our selves For
the law is spiritual which can not be kept without the spirit of God. And
therefore he has given his spirit to the electes to keep his will, which
they were not able else for to do. James has such an other saying as they do
rehearse forth of Paul's saying. Cleanse your hertes, you wavering of mind.
The which thing they ca^ not do without the hertes be purified and made
clean by faith in Jesus Christ. Thus ought these words (purify your hertes)
to be taken and understood, that is. Believe you in Christ, that by his
spirit you may be purified. But no man can believe, but he which is drawn of
the father as witnesses John the syxte Chapter. Which we must needs grant.
Let us desire and pray, that God will keep in us his commandments which of
our selves, We can not call on the lord without the spirit of the lord
in our self, we are not able to do. Let us ask, call, and cry, after that
with great diligence and fayeth, and it shall be granted to us. But se how
captyue and bond our will is, that for to desire and ask any thing of the
lord we are not able of ourselves They will answer to me again: saying that the
sayings which are spoken of the saints and godly faithful people: Man
works good or evil as the spirit drawethe
are fales and not true that is. They have purged and made clean there hertes
they have sanctified the^ selfs. They loved the Lord, they prayed well, they
did good works and so fourth such other like sayenges. The which words are
not false but true so that you do presuppose these things to be done by them
through the spirit of god and faith so that we must confess all things well
done to be the deeds of the spirit of god of whom they be wrought.

There is none of us which deny the that man works: but we do deny that he
workethe at his own frewyl For either he workethe that which is evil being
drawn bye the spirit of fornication: or else he does work that thing which
is good by the spirit of the lord almighty. A similitud by a knyfe
Mark this similitude which folowethe which makethe not small for this
purpose. A man takethe a knyfe and cutteth bread with it. The knyfe also does
cut: but not with out the hand of him which holds the knyfe. This knyfe
cutteth well or ill not of him self but by the cutter
For the knife is not fre of him self either to cut or not to cut. Yet for all
that when a man does cut any thing with a knyfe he says this knyfe cutteth
well or ill although of him self he does cut nothing at all but by the power
and force of the cuttar. So we can do nothing of our self that is good and
ryghe except the spirit of god works it in us, we do no evil except we be
bound with the spirit of fornication and of the^ flesh. To the which spirit
the lord by his most rightwyse justice does leave us: by his judgment I say
which we know not. And so he suffers us to be hardened. In this place must
the fayeth full be taught to take head and be ware of that pestilent opinion,
which sayethe that every man is made the vessel of honor or reproach by our
own merytes going before. What thing is or ever was before the eternal decre
and ordinance of the lord? If thou wylt say that god has decreed and
ordained these things, which is everlasting because of those things which
he knew bye his forsyght and knowledge, that every man would do in times: we
answer seeing that-no thing which is done in time: and is temporal can be the
cause of a thing which is eternal and before all time. We should do great
wrong and injury to the lord to say that he was compelled to ordain and
decre any thing in his everlasting being, The electes
for those things sake which are done with in the lymyt of time By the only
worthynes and grace of God the elect are predestined to be in time vessels to
glory and honor, The reprobates
by whose most just judgment to us unknown, the reprobates are made in time
the vessels of ignominy, to dishonor and shame. The Lord is marueylouse in all his iudgme^tes.

The.x. proof.
THe captivity and bondage of our will is proved by Esaias the.x. chap. Shall
the ax boste it self against him which does hew with it, Esai. x. Example:
by an ax and by a saw
or shall the saw make any bragging against him that rules it? That were
even like as if the rod which a man does bear would exalte him felfe and
rise up against the bearer, An euel king is called an axe: a rode, a saw
or as though the stafe would magnifye it self which is made but of wod and
tree. Behold the Lord does call a wicked king an axe, a saw, a staff, a
rod, which thing men do use to occupy to one thing or an other, to declare
that the Lord does make al men to be his instruments, Man kind is the lord
his instrument
by the which he does fulfill and acco^plyshe his judgments and worcketh all that pleases him. And truly a man is nothing else then an instrument of the
Lord wherwyth he does work.

The.xi. proof
Paul says to the Romans in the.ix. Chapter. Rom, ix.
Yt was said (says he) to the two children Jacob and Esau: before they were
borne before they had done either evil or good (as it is written in the
Genesis the.xxv* Chapter) The elder shall be servant to the younger for this
entente that by election the purpose, Let us pray the lord that we may be
his calling Jacob Esau.
and ordinance of God should be steadfast and certain, not by our worckes
but by God, whose pleasure is to call whom him pleases. It is written also in
Malachy the first Chapt. I have loved Jacob and hated Esau. It is manifest that
before the beginning he hated the wickedness of Esau and his children, that is
to say those that followed his incredulity and vnfayethfulnesse. The lord did
hat the wyckednes of Esau before that Esau was.

Who be the childryn of Esau and of Jacob.


He loved Jacob and his sede that is to say, those which followed and had the
faith of Jacob. These words may not be taken and understand of the children
of their own bodies begotten naturally.

For likewise as all the Israelites, are not counted in the sede of Jacob but
those which have faith, as Paul to the Romans the.ix. chap. So all the
Idumites were not the sons and children of Esau. But those which followed the
vnfaythefulnes and ungodliness of Esau. Every vnfayethfull man be he an Idumite,
Who be Isralytes. Who be Idumytes
or an Israelite, a Greek, or of any other men, is of the sede of Esau.

And contrary wise every fayethfull man if he be an Israelite, an Idumite, an
English man, or a frenchman, is of the sede of Jacob

These things I will refer to the exposition of Abdias and Malachias, where
I will copiouslye declare this matter of the love of Jacob, and of the hatred
of Esau God wyllyng. This which I have spoken is sufficient concerning our
purpose for this time.

The.xii. proffe.
THe words of our Savior do confyrme this same captivity and bondage of
our will in John the vi. Chapter. John.vi. What is to follow Christ
No man can come after me and follow me, that is to say, believe in me, except
my father which did send me do draw him. Is not our will the^ captyue and
bond, when it can not believe in Christ, without it be drawn? John. xv.
And John the xv. Chap. Without me you can do nothing The which place when
that Christ did speak to his disciples although he did speak of the fruit
of his Gospel calling him self the vine, and them the branches, Which is a
good work
yet he did speak it generallye and universally to all men saying, without
me you can do nothing, that is to say, no good fruit at al which is a good
work. And there is no good work but that only which is of faith otherewyse
it is an evil work and sin as to the Romans.xiui. For likewise as by
faith comes the goodness of the work, Romans xiii.
eue^ so by vnfayethfulnes and incredulity is the contrary. But those things
only which be of fayeth do profitte unto salvation and nothing else. The
which, considering that we can not perform of our selves, no not to begin
nor to proceed, nor to endeavor, nor to make an end and finyshe. Wherefore
should we not say that our will is bond and captive and without all
liberty? The objection of the adversaries


They do obiecte against us, saiynge. We do nothing without Christ, but when
he does send his spirit, either we do agree to his spirit, or else we do
refuse it. The consent and agremente to the will of the Lord is of us, say
they, is our own and of our selves. The Lord (say they) does put us in
mind to pray, to repent our naughtye living, to be liberal to the pouertye
and so forth, the which suggession for to follow or to resist is in our
liberty and will. I do say and answer to this objection, saying. If this
objection be true, then are the words of Christ faulse, which does say,
without me you can do nothing. For after your reason you may do some thing
without him, to endeavor and apply your will to his will. And so were the work
of god, which does inwardlye monish and teach you: no greater the^ that which
manne does in preachinge and teaching outwardely. As by exemple. A man does
pronounce and show forth the verity of God, to the which (if their objection
be true may) he apply him self: may go about and endeavor to do it, and also
to perfourm it of his own power and strength.

O error and most execrable heresy. This is the very truth. God does
move and stir that thing which pleases him, Every good work is the work
of Christ in us
no man can apply him self thereto, except he receive the spirit of God,
whereby he does it. No he can begin to do nothing be it never so little,
without Christ do work in him the beginning and the mind to do well, we do
our endeavor, we do apply our selves to the verity and to the Lord not by
the liberty and fredome of our will but by the spirit of God which worcketh
in us mercifully using us as his instruments in all good deeds, in showing
obedience to his will, in prayer, in invocation, to live soberly chastelye, and
so forth to his honor.

thynkyng how and what you should speak. For it is not you (says the Lord)
which speaks, but the spirit of my father which speaks in you. Whereto I
say that who so ever does go about any thing or is careful for things, or
studieth how to set forth the Gospel of Christ: he does it eythere of a
pure fayeth toward God, and then is it the deed of the holy Gooste, or else
without fayeth trustinge in his own virtue and industruouse labor and
diligence and then it is the work of the sense and understanding of the
flesh. That other a man does being bound and drawn by the spirit of the
Lord, as for that which he does by the confidence of his own strength, it
is done by compultio^ of the spirit of fornication, because he is bound in
the wings of fornication, as it is written. Where is become our liberty? For
that one thou canste not do without the spirit of God, the second can not
choose but be done after the spirit of evil which leads the. We do good or
euel as the spirit does draw
It is impossible that thou of thy self canste overcome the spirit of
fornication, in the which he draws the whither it pleases that spirit, by
the which you may perceive that our will is far from al liberty, and fre
workynge being drawn on boeth sides, either by the spirit of God, or else by
the sens of the flesh As towchyng to the ministers of the church if they
preparynge them selves to preach do study and ponder before what they shall say
they do well in so doing, All our studies and labors must be referred to
Christ.
so that they do not put their trust and confidence to their own study and
labor, but to the goodness and promise of the Lord.

Where as we alleged the text of the.vi. Chap. of John, that is. No man can.
etc. some do think, that that drawing wherewyth the father draws, is no
violente drawinge which imports any necessity, Whether the drawinge of the
father do importe any uiolence or necessity in it yea or may.
that thou maiste not choose but go whereto thou art drawn, but that a man
may (as they say) have the will to do or to leave undone, as it pleases him.
Which opinion of theyrs they do prove by an exemple saying. Likewise as a
child when a man does show to him an apple, does run to the man for the
apple And as a sheep does follow the man which has a grene wilowe bow in his
hand: even so, say they, does the Lord move and stir our minds with this
or that, leauyng to our choice whether we will come or not.

I do think this exposition, to be erroniouse, perverse, and heretical the
solution whereof must be made as I have to you before sufcie^tly declared. For
this intent have I showed to you other writynge of the scriptures that you may
se how they do strive and struggle against the verity of the Lord. Such
manner of drawing is this, that a man can not choose but follow him that
draws. For every man that is drawn of the father and taught by him, comes
to Christ, as John the.vi. Chap. When the Lord does draw the, and in the
time of his drawing, the wicked spirit of fornication is bound fast within
the by the spirit of Christ that he ca^ not stir, Where the spirit of god
is in place the spirit of the flesh is made subject of force
that he can do nothing in the, to let the from that whereto the spirit of
God which is in the does draw the: so long as the spirit of God reigns in
the, so long the spirit of fornication can do the no manner scathe, nor bear
any rule in the. It gives place against his will to his better and
superioure. Therefore the spirit of God does use the at his liberty without
any stop or let and keeps the commandments in the of the high Lord. Thou
maiste not choose but run when he draws the after him in those things
whereto the spirit will have the to follow him. For he has put a bridle and a
strong bit into the month of the spirit of fornication which before was all
thy hinderaunce and let, that thou myghteste not be appliant and agreeable to
the will of the Lord. Therefore we are drawn of God, It is an euydent
knoweledge that we are not drawn when we are not folowers.

Who is the drawer


and are forced to run after him which goes before drawing us as his own
will pleases. If there be any man which thinks that he is drawn and yet
runs not, he is foul deceived, for he is not drawn. Christ which suffered
death for us does draw al men after him Which al me^, be the children of
Israel, that is to say the elected, for whom only he was sent. To them
pertayneth the heritage of the world through Christ as appears Paul
the.xiiii. Chap. to the Romans For when the elected be drawn, they do hye them
as fast as they can after Christ, because they can not choose the spirit of
Christ bearyng rule in the^. It is a great token of election: if thou do
feel in thy self the hatred of sin To the elect their sin is not imputed
Although the elected do offend and sin sometime by weakness and infirmity
the concupiscence being not altogether quenched in them, yet they do live by
the virtue of God, by the which virtue they do hate sin, that same virtue
being the cause wherefore their sin is not imputed to them. For the flesh
has her concupiscence against the spirit, yea in them which be elected, but
she does not prevail or bear any great swing in them, being made subject
to the spirit, In the elect is some carnalitie
which is of higher dignity and power kepinge the spirit of the flesh under
and short from ragynge to far.

For the spirit of god has the spirit of the flesh fast bound: As the
hattred of sin is token of election so the reioysynge of sin is toke^ of
induration
causeing that the sin of them in whom some sparkle of the flesh remains
is odyouse and detestable to the^ selves. They which be elected do hatte there
own naughti deeds with all there herts the which hatred does come of the spirit
of god. Therefore the man which is led by the spirit of god can not syn the
which is led by the concupiscence of the flesh: must needs work sin and
wickedness. The doienges of Christ: and the deeds or worckes of man are
contrary. Mark this well: and examyn thy self after this lesson and fear not.
That spirit in the which thou haste thy delyghte whereto thou art addicted and
given in thine heart: that same does reygne in the.

Thou art given: and addicted to one when thou do believe and workest by
faith after the word of the lord. Thou art seruante to that other when thou
art unfaithful, and bring forth deadly fruits of thy infidelity that is
to say works against the word of god which be not of faith. The elect has
the pryckynge of the flesh in them during there life.


The flesh is not all togethere subdued and quelled in the elect, as long as
they be on live. And yet it is daily crucified in them if is mortified by the
prescence of the heavenly spirit: wherein the flesh is bound brydeled and made
subject. The spirit of the lord if it please him may draw the quyckelye
altogyther and whole after him, quenchyng in the power, strength and heat of
the flesh. Wherefore does not the lord take a way clean the pryckyng of the
flesh in his elect
But it pleases him not so for to do, because he knows it to be better as it
is and more to his glory, and to the profit of the elect people how so ever
the spirit of fornication does judge and take it otherwise.

Many men do think in them selves, that they could find the causes of al
these things, why and wherefore the Lord does this thing or that. But
verelie as it is said before, What man does know the cause of the lords
works
the spirit of fornication has received them, and bound them in his wings.
For what so ever they can say, it is much less then the truth in deed.

They do say furthermore that it is permitted to the flesh to bear some rule
in a man, because that man knowelegynge his own frailty, The flesh does
hinder the elect from the perfetnes that they desire and that by the
ordinance of the lord.
should meake and lowly him self. I do know that it is neadfull that we be
meke and lowlye, but for all that it is not well said, that for that cause the
flesh is not extinguished in us, because we should meke and submit our
selves. For the true and perfect mekenes, lowlines and humility comes from
the spirit of God. But the flesh does pluck them somewhat back, making
them less obedient and meke then they should or would be. For if the flesh
were clean abolished and subdued in us, that it should have no manner of
styrring: then should there be in us no pride, nor none other corrupt affection,
but a true humility a perfect justice and ryghtuousnes. No man does know
this mystery but the Lord only, and to whom it pleases him to open it. He
will reueyle and open it to his electes in time, to their glory, and then we
shall know how maruailouse are the judgments of the Lord above man's reason.

Those which do subuerte the right senses of Gods word do suppose that the
words which the spouse in the Gospel did speak saying. Draw me after the
(and those which the young women did speak in the Canty-sayinge. We will
run) do make much for their purpose to confyrme their blind forged liberty
of man's will, saying that the desire of the young man, and to be drawn after
him, and of the young women for to run does come of their own propre,
endeavor, and fre will. But if they do look well on the matter, they shall
find that it is clean contrary, and that these words do prove strongely the
miserable captivity and bondage of man's will, as in that place of the Canti.
and by that which we have declared already does appear.

The.xiii. proof.
Paul writes to the corhinthians the second Epistle and.iii. chapter. The
lord does work in us both to will and to do the ded
Not that we (says he) be suffitiente of our selves, to think any thing
as of our selves. But all our suffitiency is of the Lord This text and such
other the defenders of fre will do expound by this word. Potest that is in
English to say, can, or may, as it may or can be understand thus or thus,
it may be true in this sense. We will not consent and grant that they shall
wryth and wreste the scriptures making diverse senses and understandings,
which are impossible to be true, we will that the scripture be taken in his
own kind and natural meaning. For the more simple and plain the
declaration is made, the more near it is to the truth. Truly of our self we
can think nothing that is pleasant to the Lord. Thou wylt say
peradventure. I do grant that we can think no Godly thing of our selves,
much less perform any such thing. But to apply our selves to his will,
which does put such things in our minds, that is in our own power and
will. As witnesses Paul to the Romans the.vii. chap. saying To will I have in
my power, but to perform my will that I can not by no means. The which
authority of Paul makes nothing against us being taken as it ought for to
be, expoundynge as before I have declared after this manner. To will is in my
power, that is to say, by the spirit of God. But to perform it I can not
because that no man can perform the will which the Lord does give, except the
Lord do give the spirit as well to perform it, as he did to will it. Philip.
ii.
The self fame thing teaches Paul to the Philip. the second Chapt. declarynge
that to will comes of God saying these words. The Lord does work in us,
both for to will and to perform. Forsooth if we can not of our selves will to
do good, how can we say it at our own liberty we may choose to do this or
that at our own pleasure Yet will not they forsake this opinion of fre will.
For if a man would ask the^, how and by what reason they ca^ prove and affirm
their saying to be true, they do answer, that the will of man works with the
spirit of god. You may se how darkely they do teach
Nay they will leave out this word spirit and say. The will works with grace
workinge in us. They think that this vocable grace is an habit or affection
of the mind: as other affections be, being in deed nothing less. For grace is
the favor of God. For there is no man which is endued with grace but he only
which is pleasant to the Lord or who^ the Lord does favor. Grace
I do not regard or pas much for that grace which is a quality of the mind,
for there is no such grace. But I would feign have those gifts which be by the
grace of God, that is to say those gifts which he uses to give to his
elect people, because it pleases him of his goodness first to favor and love
the^, and so through the favor of God they become pleasant and acceptable to
him. To be short, that man has the grace of God who^ the Lord does favor
according to his own pleasure who^ he does accept. Who has the grace of god.
It were better said therefore that the will of man worcketh with the spirit
working in us, the^ to say that it works with grace. For to that our will
worcketh with the spirit, I do agree and consent well thereto, The liberty of
the children of god
consideringe that we do work not freely at our own liberty, but by the
liberty of the holy spirit. And that is called the liberty of the children
of god, to the which liberty we are led by the spirit after that he has
drawn us. But what do we mean when we do say, that the saints have done
many things and the godly me^ the^ selves have said that they have preached,
prayed, and labored. etc. And in other places they do say again that God
has done all thing, as Paul to the Corhin. the.i. Epistle. and.xv. Chap.

I have labored more fruitefully (says Paul) not I but the grace of God
which is present with me. That is to say, the Lord whom it pleases to accept
and favor me has wrought these things in me.

We do answer to their objection and authority saying. First that God
does work all these things him self. Secondly, the Lord does say that
his electes, his fayethfull and Godly do many good deeds, because he does
use them as his instruments to do his worckes. As by exemple. A man which
does cut bread with a knyfe, says the knyfe cutteth well, such is the
speaking of the Lord by us. If the knife could speak it would say. I do
cut bread. Eue^ so the Godly and virtuous me^ do say, we have labored, we
have preached we have prayed. etc. knowing them selves to be nothing else but
the instruments of the Lord which worcketh. The lord calls his works our
works.
And where as the Lord does say that we do work it is of his unspeakable
goodness, which voucheth fate to call his works in us, our worckes, which are
his instruments.

A certain man writes, that in the holy scripture it is often times beaten
into our heads, that every good thing is of God, that he worcketh all
things after the decre ordinance and purpose of his eternal will, that all our
suffitiencie and ablenes is of him that we have nothing, that we have received
nothing, but of him, and such other many things more, for that entente and
purpose that we shall not set and put any trust in our selves, that we
should not presumptuouslie presume and arrogantly boste of our own deeds and
for none other cause. As to the words of the Lord what man ca^ deny but that
they be true, and that they were spoken to take all proud and presumptuouse
lokes from us. But the sayings of the holy scripture as they be infallibly
true so they are playnelye and symplye to be understand that we should in no
wise, in no case, after no manner of fashion ascribe any thing to us, Wherefore
is it sayede that the lord speaks in his elect Matthew. x.
but all things wholly to him and our selves to confess and knowledge truly,
mekely and lowly, that we be the instruments of his majesty and goodness.
After this manner of speaking the holy wytnes bearers in Christ are said not
to speak of them selves, but that the spirit of their father speaks in
them. As Matthew the.x. It is said by them that they do not speak, because
they can speak no truth of themselves. By the mouth of them which are his
creatures as most mete instruments the Lord makes open his will to all men.
For so did the Lord speak in Stepha^, which no man could resist. As Act. vi
Chap.

So did Christ live and work in Paul and Paul by Christ lived and worcked,
as to the Gala. the second Chapter. Likewise Christ does live in the just,
that is to say in the fayethfull, and they by fayeth do live through Christ,
as Abacuch the second cha. and to the Romans the.i. Chap. and to the Hebrews
the.x. Chap.

Just men do live by faith.
I marvel with what spirit they be led when they do speak saying. God will
that we do ascribe nothing to us, although there be some thing in us, which
we might iustlye and rightly call our own. God (say they) seems to command
these things but for a face proving their wicked opinion by the.xvii. Chap.
of Luke, What a dyuelyshe doc^ryne is it to say that god uses disimulation
wherein they would make god a liar.
not ryghtlye taken saying. When you have done all that you can, say you: we
be unprofitable servant. Whereto I answer on this wise. God is not an
enuiouse person. Wherefore if there were any thing in us of our self that
we might be proud of: he would not take the praise thereof from us, for he
does love verity and truth, as Psalm. l. But he wills that we confess us
to be his instruments as we be in deed. He commanded this saying, When you
have done all thing. etc. not for a face or faynynge in any manner of wise, but
all that he speaks is in verity and truth The servants of God workynge
well are nothing else then the instruments of God, What is meant by this saying
we are unprofitable servants
which worcketh all goodness in them. He wills that they shall take no more on
them, then they be in deed. He wylleth the^ to confess, knoweledge, and name
their selves to be the instruments of God, and nothing else. Therefore he
does command them that unfeignedly and with a true heart they should say we
are unprofitable servants, which is as much to say, as we be the
creatures, we are the instruments of thy worckes, we do but serve the, and not
that of our own virtue and power. For that we be thy servants, it is of thy
most tender mercy, which with thy most loving spirit do make us so to
be Wherefore to the only for all things which we do by thy spirit we do render
thanks, and all glory be to the, knowing that of our selves we are
unprofitable servants, and that we can do nothing, be it never so little
that is good, of our selves. If any manne does not think that same in him
self, he makes God a liar. He makes God an enuiouse person, which
commands us to walk in hypocrisy, for to say, as the proud Hypocrites
used for to say, The most blouddy tyraunte of all the world does call him
self the servant of servants of god.

How the popyshe hypocrytes do subscribe there letters.


I am a pore sinner unworthy to hold up mine eyes to heaven, I am one of the
least servants of God, I have sinned much more greuousely the^ al other men.
Such words use they to speak when they be praised, because they would not
appear outewardelye to be praised and called this or that, being in all the
world nothing that they do desire and covet more.

These do subscribe their letters, which they do send to great men, or to
them of whom they do gape after some benifite, after this manner. Your lowely
meke and pore bedma^, the unworthy shepherd of the flock of Christ, and yet
they be nothing else, the^ most raueninge and blougredy wolves.

The holy father of Rome.
The great Antechrist and horned beast, the foul and abominable strumpet and
harlot of Babilonicall Rome calls him self the servant of the servants of
god, which is the most cruel enemy and bloody tyrau^te that ever God had.

In this word (does call) is the cauillation.
those his children which do call them selves unprofitable servants And
therefore the Lord will say to them. Come you my blessed. etc.

We answer and say, that not these which do call them selves unprofitable
with their tongue outwardly, but they which unfeignedly in their hertes do
knoweledge them selves to be no less in deed then they have declared with
their mouths and so to profess it openly, The children of god,
when so ever the glory of God should require, these are the children of god
which in the judgment shall be numbered among the elect sort. The Lord
says, not every man which says to Christ Lord Lord shall enter into his
glory. The heart must speak in the faythefull.
Finallye these words which the Lord did speak saying. Say that you be
unprofitable. etc. are to be understand of the speaking of the heart, and not
of the mouth outward only. As for the outward pronouncynge of such words by
the mouth, To what use serves the outward behavior
it sildome does any profit, but to augmente increase, and norishe hypocrisy.
For there be many which outwardlye do bear so holy a face, so lowelye a
look, so religiouse and friar like countenance, as though al Godliness, all
holiness were included in them, being nothing else then vessels full of all
craft, deceit and gile malice and rancoure the very horde of all myschiefe.
The mother of christ must knowledge her felfe an unprofitable servant.


These words must be spoken inwardelye with the heart, yea of the mother of
god the immaculate virgin. The Angels must confess that they be unprofitable
servants

What a folyshe c^^ilation is of this word say ye
that you be unprofitable servants. First I do answer saying that Christ
is the verity which does hate and abhore al lies, And therefore it can not be
possible that he would preach and teach one thing with his mouth and think an
other thing with his heart, If he had not judged them to be unworthy of his
grace of their selves, and unprofitable servants, he would not have laid as
he did say. For will house doubt what so ever we do, what so ever we do go
about, what so ever we do think of our selves we are unworthy of the grace
of god we are his unprofitable servants. So he did esteem and take all his.
Godly servants, not to be worthy servants, but unworthy of his grace of
their own worthynesse. So he took his blessed mother to be of her own self
an unworthy servant. So he took all the company of the angels, What ca^ our
worckes do to purchaise and wine the grace of the Lord? Christ only did merit
and purchaise favor for his people This knarke is of the deuels divise study.
Grace.
Did not Christ him self only merit and deserve grace and favor for his
elected people, who^ the father did give to him (...) verelye.

The sophistical bablers do grant that Christ only may merit and deserve
for us the first grace (as they do call it) We truly do know none other grace
but one. Grace is the favor of god which Christ first received, by whom of his
most plentiful abundancye we are made partakers of the same grace. Therefore
when the Lord said, when you have done all thing well, etc. it is as much
to say, as if you have done any thing which is good, it comes of me, for you
are my instruments to all good worckes, of your self you can do nothing.
By no work of yours can you win my grace, because you should know your
self to be unprofitable servants, and so with all your heart to knoweledge
it, makeynge no better of your selves then you are in deed.



I answer saying that which pertayneth to our selves, which we may ryghtly
call our own propre, are these following. Sin, error, blindenes, and the
spirit of fornication, which the elect and chosen people would feign were
taken from them, and that clean, never to be rendered and restored again.
What are our own works
The Lord does of his goodness call ours, that and these worckes which are his
own, but under him, wherefore we must give al things to him. As for those
things which may be called ours in deed as sin. etc. they are to be
ascribed unto our selves and not unto God.

They do argue and reason subtillye by the exemple of the prodigale and
riotouse son with these words If we have nothing in our own hand and power,
how can we say that the riotouse and prodigal son did consume, waste, and
riotousely spend his own part, Of this word (his own part) do they make
this cavil
and portion of substance given to him. We do say that the most gentyle
Lord does make those things which be his to be ours, but as I have said
under him, that we should use and order his gifts after the rule and
iudgmente of his spirit and accordeynge to his word. The which thing this
riotuose young man did not. For that thing which the Lord of his goodness called
and named to be his: this young man would not have under the Lord as the gift
of the Lord, but forsaken and going from the house of the church and from
faieth did dissipate and spend wastablye to his own destruction all that he
had received of the Lord, which is called in that place the part or portion
of his substance. i, Corin. xv. Objection This cauilation is made of the word
(uoyde in me) as who says he did me pleasure and I did pleasure again to him.

Out of these words (with him) is the cauyll.


Paul writes in the first Epistle and the.xv. Chap. to the Corhin. By the
grace or through the grace of God. I am that I am, and the grace of god (say
they) was not void in me, that is to say, he did not for naught receive me in
to grace. For after I had received the grace I did work these things which
were acceptable and pleasant unto him. Also it is written the.ix. Chapter of
the book of wisdom. That the wise man did wyshe and desire that the heavenly
wisdom would assiste him, that it might be with him, that it would labor
with him. You may se and perceive (say they) that Paul and the wise manne do
confess and acknoweledge the grace of the Lord, and yet they do not omit and
forget their own labor, thinking that it is in this case as a master
carpinter, instructynge and teachinge his servant in his work what he shall
do, and the servant in doing and fulfyllyng his masters will and
commandment. The which similitude is nothing like nor true. For although the
ma^ster commands his servant to do this or that, yet has he not power
over the will of his servant. But the Lord is ruler and gouernoure boeth of
the will and deed, and of all other things. More over in that same similitude
the servant does not nor can not obey his master as he ought to do, except
the Lord did first incline and apply his will thereto. Doubtless it is that
Paul and other servants of god did work but not of them selves, but by the
spirit of God. For the wisdom and spirit of God was with them, and labored
with them, so that if the spirit of God had not been with them and labored
with them, they might have done no such thing. So is the will of man by the
spirit of fornication captive and bond: that except it be bound by the
spirit of God, the will of man can do nothing that good is, but all contrary.

Yet say they that we do deny that man does work any thing which is not true,
we say not so. Our denial is, that we have of our selves, any liberty to
work. This answer which I have made to this objection, will serve to put away
an other of their cauillations where they say that there is no helper, but where
as is also a worker.

Merit Rewards
To this objection I will in few words make answer. There is place in us to
merit and deserve evil, ergo, then there is place for punishment for our
naughty deseruyng. As for good merits in us we have none, but only the
merits of Christ whose merits, it has pleased him to make our merits if
we do believe in him, and so by Christ also we have our rewards.

By these testimonies of the scripture, and by many more which I might
rehearse it is made evident and plain, that the will of man is all together
captyue and bond being by the scriptures sufficiently proved, and that in no
case it is fre and at liberty to do of him self, what him lysteth.

The third part of this book declares in what thing the will of man is made
fre. But so that it remains bond to eternal felicity and salvation.
John. viii. The fredom of man.
THe Lord says in John the.viii. Chap. If the son has set you fre and at
liberly, the^ are you fre in deed From what thing does the son deliver you,
and from what bondage are you set fre. From the naughtye and corrupt sense,
iudgmente and understanding of man, and from all other proceadinges thereof.
He does deliver none but his servants under that condition, The condition of
man's fredome
that they shall be always subject. To whom? To him self only for his own
sake, and to all other for him. They are set at liberty from all outward
things which may be any let or impedimente, From what things are we made fre
that a man should not give him self to the observation and keeping of his
holy ordinances This is the liberty and fredome of all the children of God
(that is to say) of the faithful, which only are the children of God and
none other.

Man's inventions swaruing from the word of god are to be detested and abhorred
of all men How are the faithful both fre and bond at one time
This chau^g and alteration works the hand of the almighty, that a man shall
deteste and abhor the spirit of fornication with all the filthiness and
impuritie of it, and al other things dependynge thereof, that is to say, all
the inventions of man, and all his traditions or decrees which do never so
little swerve from the word of the Lord. The which hand of God does cause
also that man shall not desire and seek his own pleasure and will, but the will
and pleasure of Jesus Christ, and profit of his neighbor.

Hereby it is manifest, that the fayethful are both servants and also
fremen. They are free and at liberty, being set at liberty from all those
things, which does provoke and pluck a man back from the word of God. Romans
vi.
They be servants to the obedience of the word of God, as to the Romans vi.
Chap. Being made fre from sin, you are made the servants of God. i. Corin.
ii. ii. Corin. iii.
And the first epistle and.vii. Chap. to the Corhin. He that is called a
servant in the Lord, is a fre man of the Lord. And the second epistle, Gala.
iii.
and.iii. Chap. to the Corint. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty. And to the Gala. iii. chap. We are not the children of the bond
maid, but of the fre woman, in the which liberty Christ has delivered and
made us fre his elected. i. Peter. ii.
And the.i. epistle of Peter the ii. Chapter. As those which are fre, and not
making our liberty to be a cloak and color of iniquity, but as the true
and faithful servants of the Lord.

Esechy. xxx. vi. A heart of stone. A heart of flesh.
The seeing of Ezechiell is fulfilled in them, which obtained this most
necessary and profitable lybertye through Christ in the.xxxvi. Chapt. I will
take away the stonye heart, which is indurate, that is as much to say, the
spirit of fornication from them. And I will put in them an heart of flesh,
that is to say a tractable mind which can be content with all his heart to agree
to the commandment and the will of the Lord The which saying of Ezechiel,
they which do deny the bondage and captivity of the will of man, do
understand and take it to be none otherwise, the^ as a master would say to
his scholar speakinge inco^grue and false latin with these words. Well I will
pluck this barbarouse tongue forth of thy head, and put in the stead thereof a
clean latin ^ong, in the which thing is required the industry and diligence
of the scholar and his good will to be ready for to follow and obey his masters
teaching. Mark and learn how thou may answer such like symilitudes and
examples as they do bring for their purpose
To the which and such other like we do answer and say, that these exemples
do halt and fail in.ii. things. First the master can not alter, nor change
nor draw, the will of the scholar after his own pleasure and mind, nor none
othere man any man's will.

Secondlye they are deceived in their similitude, because the master oftymes
teaches his scholars and yet they are nothing the better.

The Lord does never take away the stonye heart of man in vain, putting
into him a new heart of flesh. For it is in his power at his own pleasure and
will, to change the will of man having no need of our industry or labor.

For by our own industry and labor what do we else then daily commit
fornication^ departing and goinge from the Lord we are daily hardened. From
the elect the Lord takes away the industry of the wisdom of the flesh,
pourynge into them the industry and diligence of his spirit.

In these words cast a way and make to you, is there cauell
Cast away from you all your iniquities wherein you have failed and gone
aside, and make your self a new heart and spirit.

You may se (say they) in this place that a man may do some thing of him
self that is good. And yet they are deceyned. For the Lord does require that
we should work not of our own power and diligence, but by the power and
diligence of his spirit.

Bysides that this commandment and all other commandments of the Lord are
impossible to be done if the spirit of God be not in us, which makes all
things to be possible, as in other places we have proved.

Truly the Lord wylleth that his commandments be observed and kept of us
not by our own spirit of fornication, but by his spirit. For that which
the Lord commands can not of any man, but by his own spirit be kept.
What man of his own power can cast of from him self his old accustomed
wickedness and corrupt desires of the flesh? What man can renew, turn, and
alter his own heart to Godwarde and keep his will without his spirit. It is
the Lords own work, and no man's else. Whereunto the words of Jeremy are
respondente and agreynge, which says. Is it possible that an Ethiop can
turn the color of his face, Hieremy xiii. This is a strong and an invincible
bulworke against frewyll.
and put on a new skin? Ca^ the Leopard take from him self the spots which
are in him? Can your selves do and work goodness, which have learned al
naughtines and evil. By the which text it is declared openly, that a man by
his own power can do nothing to the alteration of his heart, nor any other
thing which pertains to eternal felicity.

Yet the defenders of this most false and deceytfull liberty do go about still
to deceive us making us believe that we do expownde the scriptures on this
manner. Make you a new heart, that is to say. Let grace make you a new
heart. And also, Streche forth your hand whereto you will, that is to say Let
grace streach forth your hand whereto you will. Again in an other scripture.
Every man that has this hope. He does sanctify him self in him, that is
to say, grace does sanctify him. Let us cast away the worckes of
darckenes, that is to say. Thus does antichrists disciples sclaunder with
there lyese the true preachers of faith making the people believe that they
would have no good works
Let grace cast away. and.c. What man ever I pray you (as for the rest of
their sclaunderous lies here I will not speak of) did hear me at any times
read and expownde after this manner. What man knowing them to be such shamful
and shamles liars will believe them in any thing they speak? For our
exposition and declaration of those textes has been always after this manner.
Make you a new heart by the spirit of God. What man can make his heart new
without the spirit of God? Considering that by our own deceytfull spirit we
are made worsse and worsse, much less can we be altered of our selves from the
worsse to the better. Streach forth thy hand, that is by the will and deed of
the spirit of God to goodness, or to evil by the spirit of fornication, and
of the flesh. Also, he does sanctify him self by the spirit of Christ, not
by his own deceiuable spirit. Furthermore, let us cast away the worckes of
darckenes, by the spirit of God, which we are not able to do without it.

There is none of us which does say that god commaundethe grace to do any
thing, as though he would say: let grace do this or that. For grace is
nothing else but the favor of the lord, Grace.
by that reason we should say that god does command him self to do this
or that if we did expound the scripturs as they do falslye belie us. For to
say these words following: Let grace extend, let grace do. Let grace cast
away what is it else then a precepte or commandment let them therefore cease
from there blasphemous reports and dyuelyshe lyefe where with they do nothing
else but declare to al men their peruers and froward malice of their hertes.
Wherefore do they go aboughte to make darcke and obscure the grace of god and
the goodness of our fauiour Jesus Christ? Wherefore do they make so much of
man's strenghte, which of him self can do nothing but go and depart from the
Lord, The spirit of god draws to good, the spirit of the flesh to all
evil.
and not that neither of their own free will, but by the spirit of
fornication, which plucketh them that they can not chose but do evil. If
they do make so much by their unhappy and lewd liberty or fredome of their
will (which they have not in deed) let them thense if they can be rich
when them pleases. Let the^ se if they ca^ save the^ selves therbi. And that
is impossible We do esteem and regard their goodlye false liberty, to be
much more vile and stinking then the order of man, then any other stynkynge
donghyll, which is nothing else but the invention and devise of the Devil, Fre
will invented by the deuell to obscure the glory of god
of Satan that, intending nothing else thereby but to minish and hinder the
verity of the Lord obscurynge and hydynge from the eyes of men, the most
merciful gentilnes of his goodness, to make them to be ingrate and
unthankful people.

The dream and phantasye of this frewyl is such a thing, Either God must be
true and the will captive: or else god must be faulse and the will fre
that if it be true as they do say and hold that it is, then the verity of
the word of God can not stand And contrarywyse if the word of God be true,
which the devil and all his disciples can not deny, then of necessity must
this forged will be as it is, false and contrary to al truth. But let the
speech of verity of the high Lord be parmanent and stand still for ever. Let
this false perswation of fre will, with all other inue^tions of man contrary to
scripture perish and fall away. Amen.

Let therefore this false, wicked, and bond liberty, be put forth of the
doers. Let the liberty of the children of God be sought forth by the fayeth in
the Lord Jesus Christ which is our Savior. This liberty the church of God
has looked for many years, it has desiered it of long time, and many days.
From this desire did the words in the ca^ticles spring of most perfect and
unfeigned love, as. Let him kiss me with the sweet kiss of his mouth, as:
Pluck me after the. as. Come hither my beloved, as. Show to me, him whom my
soul does love, with such other like sayings.

The sinagoge of Antichriste, in the day which is dedicated and hallowed to
the nativity of the Lord do grant this, pronou^cynge with their own lyppes,
The prayer of the church on Christmas day
the holy prayer of the church of God saying after this wise. Grant to us
good Lord we pray the, that this new nativity of thy son in flesh may
deliver us, and make us fre whom the old servitude and bondage does hold fast
bownd under the yoke of sin, The yoke of sin
etc. The yoke of sin is the yoke of concupiscence. As Paul in many places
but specially to the Romans communelye uses to speak. By sin
concupiscence (says he) etc. The which concupiscence may well be named a
yoke because it holds manne in most cruel servitude, in so much that
except he be first delivered from that, he can do nothing that can be
pleasant to the Lord. This is the yoke of bondage to the beleuynge people.
This is the rod of his shoulder and the scepter which the little child borne
into this world and given unto us has overcome. The names of god.
Whose empire is above his shoulder which is called by these names The
marueilouse, the counseler. The strong and mighty Lord. The father of the
world to come. The prince of peace, Esai. ix.
As Esaias. ix. O most joyful liberty to the elect which is annexed and
joined vnseperablye with the most blessed servitude and bondage of the Lord.
This liberty is far from the power of Satan and most miserable sinagoge of
Antichrist which is departed and fallen from the Lord and savior, The
sinagog of antichriste has not this liberty
that the faithful may do service to the Lord without impedimente, and
afterward one to an other for Christ's sake This holy and sacrete servitude and
bondage of the Lord is not a bitter, hard, or heavy yoke, Math. xi.
it is light, amiable and sweet, As Christ witnesses. Matthew. xi. Chap. My
yoke is sweet, my burden is light. By this yoke which is to be coueted of
all men, and by this bond al men do keep the commandments of the Lord,
freely, gladly and diligently. For they be never without the spirit of the
Lord and his gifts, which are these. Wisdom, understanding counsel,
strength of the spirit, knowledge Godliness, fear of the Lord, ioyfulnesse,
peace of conscience, a sure and certain hope. etc. After these things
follows the love of the Lord. Confidence in him only, charity and love
toward thy neighbor, poverty and lowlines of the spirit, mournyng and
lamenting thy neighbors hurt and grief, full of compassion, and all other
goodness. With this yoke very necessary for us, with these amiable bonds it
pleases the goodness of the Lord to bind us, so that thereby we should
attain to perfect liberty in him,

The fourth part wherein you are taught how to understand those textes and
places of the scriptures, which do apply to permit and give liberty to the
will of man.
WE have sufficiently taught and proved to you what the will of man is.
Secondelye that it is very captive and bond. Thyrdly, that it is in Christ
boeth fre, and also most joyfully and pleasauntly bond. You have seen and
learned in the same third part how and in what things the will of man is fre,
and how likewise it is bond. Now there remains nothing else behind but to
make plain certain places and textes that you may understand them. The
which textes, the masters and founders of free will do falselye allege, and
as them thinks do sufficiently prove their purpose and intent.

The first text.
IT is written in the book of Jesus Syrach the.xv chap after this wise. The
Lord from the beginning did make man and left him in the hand of his own
counsel and mind, he has given him commandments and precepts saying if
thou will observe my commandments and keep acceptable faythfulnes for ever:
they shall preserve the. He has set water and fire before the reach out thy
hand to which thou will. Before man is life and death good and euel, that
which does like and please him best shall be given to him.

By this authority they do think that they can prove man to have fre will
from his first creation. If they will understand and also grant that the holy
spirit was also at the beginning given to man, we will strive no le^ger with
them there in. But if they do say that god made the nature of man to be
always fre of her own self and at liberty: it is altogether against god and
his honor that they do speak wherefore in few words we will declare and open
to your ears the plain and true understanding of this text. The lord from
the beginning created manne deckyng and adornynge him with his spirit, this
do I grant to them (though we be be not able to prove it) leauinge man before
he did fall in the hand of his own counsel that is to say to his own self,
to his own nature, which is the most greuouse and fearful judgment that can
be. For he which is so left in the hand of his own counsel is forsaken and
made a stranger to the spirit and counsel of the Lord. And so becomes
straight way indurate blinded, and brought into temtatio^. etc. and can not
choose but err from the way of the Lord.

Therefore as soon as our fathers were left to their selves in the hands of
their own counsel, they strayghte way traunsgressed the commandment of
the Lord. Mankind did fall by little and little to sin, Wherefore the law
is given
in so much that sin so increased that they could not deserve and judge good
from evil. For the which cause that men might have the knowledge of sin,
and of that which is evil and naughty, the Lord gave to them a law or
precepts, which law was and is impossible to be kept and observed of us,
but with his spirit it is made not only possible but also easy and light.
The law is spiritual What is the work of the law.
For the law being spiritual can not be kept, but by the strength of the
spirit.

The law teaches what is evil, what is good, what we ought to do, and what
we ought to refuse, But the law does not give to us a spirit to do that
which it commands. It does send us to Christ, that we beleuyng in him
may be made parteners of his spirit: The law sends us to Christ for help.
The keeping of the law without the spirit of god is hypocrisy
by the which spirit we may keep the law. Wherefore if we do keep these
commandments and precepts by the spirit of God, then they shall preserve
us. For to keep them without his spirit is no keeping of them* but plain
hypochrisie and dissimulation. The Lord has set before us both fire and
water, life and death, good and evil, that is as much to say, as he has set
before us the keeping of his divine will and pleasure, and also the
transgression and offendynge of the same will. He has set before us, eternal
health and everlasting perdicion. To whether of these we will, le^ us reach
furthe our hands. If so be that we do choose to apprehend the transgression of
the law: being bound in the wings of the spirit of fornication and
falsheade, we shall have death, and perdition of our souls without remedy.
If we do apply our selves to the will and commandments of the Lord, by
the comfort and drawyng of the holy spirit of God, health and life
everlasting shall follow. By the spirit of the Lord we do apprehende and seek
after the life prepared for the faithful. By the spirit of our flesh and of
falshed, we look after no goodness, but al wickedness and trau^sgression of the
commandments. If we have the spirit of the Lord we shall not fail of
life most happi and blessed. If we be led by the spirit of fornication and of
the flesh, what remains but death and utter destruction?

There is no man which can mislike this exposition, except it be those which
are led with a perverse spirit which hold opinion that the will of man of it
self can will that thing which is good, and also of his own power keep the
commandments. Hereby you may perceive that nether this text of the scripture
nor any such like does make any thing at al for this forged and fained liberty
of our fre will. did choose and take that way which is evil.

An other reason.
If so be, man's will be not fre, and at liberty, wherefore should he be blamed
for sin, for as much as sin is to him no sin, if it be done by coaction and
not voluntary of his own will.

Deuteronomy. xxxii.
as though he would have said they have nether wit nor knowledge. Where fore to
our own destruction are we so busye serchers of the heaue^lye majesty's hidden
secrets, sith that we know that he is in all things just, and true, and our
selves wretched, blind and full of lies He does justly reject and cast from him
the reprobate and blind, who^ he has suffered to be blind and indurate, that
in no wise they can confirm the^ selves and be agreeable to the commandment
and will of the Lord. The profounde and high depenes of his judgment what
manne can understand? I will hold my lyppes therefore together, and keep
scilence worshyppynge the inscrutable judgments and decrees of the Lord.

Romans viii.
It does not follow therefore after their reason that sin should not be
imputed to the reprobate and wicked, which syn is imputed to the^ and that most
justly. To the faithful, and to the^ which do believe: Romans iiii. Psalm. xxxi.
The author does lamente the fall of certain men which are gone from
syn, that is to say, co^cupisce^se, is not imputed for their faith sake, as
Paul teaches to the Romans the.iiii. Chap. and the Psalm. in the.xxxi. Psalm.
bears also wytnes.

But (Alas) there be certain (how they have been deceued the Lord knows)
which sometime as all the world (almost) can testifye, abhorrynge and detesting
the foul and stinkynge synagoge of Antichriste with all the abominable rites,
and crafts, and lies thereof, with all their vain curiouse and pha^tasticall
manner of speaking are now turned to their madness forsakeynge the verity of
the Lord, Christ to Antichrist
in preaching and teachinge of men those things, which by the power of the
word of God has hitherto been rejected and forsaken, because they might
thereby stablishe and confirm their opinion, which is that the will of man is
fre and at liberty. The which men peradventure in their selves shall find true
by experience. Yea, they do find it already, what a pore and small liberty
that is which is in the will of man or rather how certain a bondage and
servitude it is, for as much as by no study, no craft, no knoweledge they are
able to vanquish or to overcome their own propre affections. Yt had been better
for the^, and more profitable for all men, if they had not so indiscreet lie and
unwisely as they did, confirm their blind liberty: brought and leyd forth
before men the folyshe fantasies, dreams, particions, and distinctions of
Duns, It can not be spoken how much hurt these brablyng questionaries do
of Thomas of Aquine, of Capireold: with such other brabling and scoldyng
sophisters: in whom a man can find no substance nor pyth of substanciall
matter: but a few folyshe and idle terms and words (as these be which do
follow) It seems to be so: it may be so: it may be said. etc. Which words
to the godly and faithful sort are nothing else but the strong deadlye and
deceauable poison of the devil spoken and written without good foundation: It a
uidetur fieri potest dici potest
without substance and strength of godly confirmation which do know that to
cleave and stycke only to the eternal word and testimony of the verity of
God: is the only shote anchor of our health.

The second text of the scripture wrongfully taken and alleged.
THey do allege forth of the first book of Moses called the Genesis in the
iiii. Cha. these words following, which the Lord did speak to Cain. Under the
shall thy appetite and desire be, and thou shall govern and rule it.

The which words are nothing else but a precept or commandment, being in the
Hebrew tongue the present time, as to the pertayneth the desire thereof,
Otherwise the Lord had not prophesied that thing which was true For Cain had
not his own will in subjection and at his co^maundeme^te. But co^trarywise he
did follow and obey his own will and desire to his own destruction. He might
not choose but follow that lewd desire and appetite because he did lack the
spirit of the Lord. Therefore it is a precept and commandment co^maundyng
Cain to forsake and not to obey and follow the desires of the flesh, which thing
to him was so impossible as all other commandments to be kept without the
spirit of God. Wherefore this text does no more make, for the proof and
co^firmatio^ of the liberty of man's will the^ al other precepts and
co^mau^deme^ts do.

The third text.
THine ears have heard the preparyng of their hertes. And also it is written
in the Pro. the.xvi. Chap. Psalm. ix. Prou. xvi.
A man may well purpose a thing in his heart, but the answer of the tongue comes
of the Lord. The first text you must understand after this manner. O Lord thine
ear has hard. etc. that is to say, to thine ear the preparation of their
heart is acceptable, I say of the^ which are pore, of who^ the Psalm. speaks.
The which pore men are not to be taken in this place for those, which do axe
the alms and charity of other me^, but for such me^ as do give the^ selves
altogyther to Christ which have renounced the affection and love of al their
substance and riches for Christ's sake, being in a redines to sell, and give
away all that they have to the setting forth of the word of God and to the
succoring of their neighbors necessity if need should require. These men do
always say, my heart is ready Lord, my heart is ready, by whom they are every
day made more apt and ready then they were before.

This is the preparation which is only acceptable to God, it is not the
endeavor or beginning of our own will as the defe^ders of frewyll do call it.
For they do think that by these endeavors and begynnynges they may prepare and
make them selves apt to receive the grace of the Lord, The which can never be.
For through Christ only to them which do believe in him is his grace given,
not for our own preparing or works. As towchyng the Prophets and ministers of
the word of god and of those whose office is to expound and declare to the
people the word of God: may not think that they should neglecte and not
regard to prepare them selves to the doing of their office, that is to say,
to study to ponder, and way with the^ selves, to premeditate what they will
say and declare. It is a thing to be done: and yet they may not ascribe any
thing thereof to their own studyes, diligence and preparation having and
putting their trust and confidence in their own deeds and labors: but only
in the Lord.

For we do know that though a man do speak and preach never so well
preparynge him self with all diligence that may be, yet he can pronounce
nothing well, and to the edifiynge of the audience: except the Lord with his
spirit does govern his tongue. The which thing is proper only to the Lord. The
lord must govern the tongue of the prechar if he shall edify.
It is also conueniente and meet that a man do premeditate and think with him
self before what he will declare with a full trust and confidence in the
Lord: and not in his own work labor or pain.

The fourth text.
IN the fyfthe book of Moses called the Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. xxx.
and xxx. chap. it is written. This commandment which I do command the this
day is not above the, nor separated from the, nor far from the. It is not
in heaven that thou should complain and say: what man shall ascend up to
heaven, and fetch to us the commandment that we may hear it and do it. It
is not beyond the sea that thou should say, who shall go over the sea for us
and fet it us that we may hear it and do it. It is hard by the, yea, it is in
thy mouth and heart that thou may do it. The defylers of the right justice,
which we have by Christ, the patrones of free will do make exposition of this
place as follows. It is not above the, that is to say above thy strength so
that thou may observe it with thy own strength and power. Against whom
Paul speaks, which is more to be believed then they: writing to the Roma.
the.x. Chapter. The justice which is of fayeth speaks thus. Say not in thine
heart who shall ascend to heaven, that is to pluck Christ down from above
to make us partakers of justice, and of the grace of God. Or who shall go down
into the depnesse, that is to call and to revoke again Christ from death,
that we might be justified by him. But what says he, the word is nyghe to
the, not far of, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, Confession Belefe.
that is the word of faith which we do preach. Truly if thou doeste confess
with thy mouth the Lord Jesus Christ and beleuest in thy heart, that God
has raised him up from death, thou shall be saved. For by the belief of the
heart comes our justice and by the confession of our mouth, This is not
auricular confession. Esai. xxviii.
we do obtain our salvation.

The scripture says in Esaie the.xxviii. Chapter. All men which do put their
confidence in him, shall not be confounded. Behold how openly the Apostle
does teach that this text of the scripture is not to be taken and understand
of the strength and worckes of man, What is to do the commandments
but of a pure faieth on and in Christ, and in the professynge of the truth
and verity of the Lord. For the words of the commandments of the Lord
are nigh at hand, in our heart and mouth to do them that is to say to believe
and to profess Christ For the fulfillynge and end of the law is Christ, as
to the Romans x. By whom only the law is fullfilled in us. The law does
require of us those things which to flesh and blood are impossible. And for
that cause sin is multiplied and increased above al measure the co^cupisce^s,
Romans x. The request of the law, are impossible.
strynynge and struglynge against the law, yea although we do seem outwardely
to keep and fulfill the law.

For verily the law does command and require a perfect justice and
ryghtuousnes at our hands, which justice neither the law can give, nor no
man of him self either has or ca^ perform. But where a pure fayeth in
Christ is, there Christ is in them which do believe, a whole justice, Christ
is our perfect justice.
sanctification, and redemption. Hereby may you perceive that the words of
the first book of Moses called the Deutero are clean contrary to free will,
and making nothing at all for their purpose.

The.v* text.
IT is written in Matthew the.xxiii. and Luke the.xiii. Chap. Jerusalem, Math.
xxiii. Luke. xiii.
Jerusalem which killeste the Propheres, and stoneste them which are sent
unto the. How often would I have gathered together thy children, as the hen
does her chickens and thou would not. Behold say they, Christ says. I
would and thou would not. Hereby do they gather that the will of man is
free, the Lord should do wrong else (say they) to threaten and punish them
if they might not have chosen whether they would have been gathered together
yea or nay. Thus and after like manner of fashion does the wicked and
miserable flesh presume to judge of the most ryghtwyse and just judgment of
god, which is far from this matter, as John the.x. Chapt. You do not believe me
because you are not of my sheep, that is to say, of my elect people which
only are the very sheep of Christ, whom no man can take forth of his hand.
Thou man which art nothing else but corruption and worms meat, what art thou
that wilt reason against the Lord. Be thou afraied rather and marvel with al
lowlines and mekenes of the profou^d and impenetrable depenes of his judgment
Learn how thou must take these words of Christ rehearsed out of Matthew and
Luke. I would (says Christ) and thou which art the carnal sinagog, would
not. Wherefore would thou not? For thou art not of my sheep and elect
chosen people. Thou haste not my spirit without the which thou can not find
in thy heart to be agreeable to my commandments, nor yet do any thing else
that should be pleasant before me. All the desires of the flesh, that is to
say, of a man without my spirit, do fight and strive against me, because he
is a liar, as witnesses the Psalm. C.xv. Therefore by those words Christ did
mean, not for to show that it was in their fre choice to do otherwise the^
they did. But to declare to them how much he did hate and abhore all the desires
of the flesh, which labors continuallye to do those things which are
contrary to my will which is all Godliness and virtue.

The syxt proof.
TO make for their purpose they do bring forth Matthew saying.

If thou will enter into life keep the commandments. If thou will be
perfect. etc. And Luke. If any man will come after we. and cetera. He that
will save and keep his life shall lose it. And all other places of boeth the
Testamentes, where as any thing is spoken conditionally: they do bring for
the confirmation of fre will. As this. If you will. If you will not. If you
will hear. If you will not hear. If you do seek. If you do turn. If you do
separate. If he do. If he turn away.

In all the which places they do err because they do not mark what the spirit
did mean in those textes. For to perform those things it is given of the
spirit, wherefore it must be understand after this fashion. If thou will do
this or that with all thy heart, and through my spirit, then shall thou
obtain this or that. If you do otherwise, being fast bound with the spirit
of fornication, you shall peryshe.

The.vii. proof.
TO prove the liberty of man's will they do object the promises, the
commandments, the threateninges, and rebukynges of the Lord, saying that all this had not been worth a straw. Yea and foleishly written, if so be there were
no liberty and fredome of our will.

We answer and say that the sens and understanding of al these places does
hereof depend that the spirit of God should be known several and distinke
from that other spirit, and that we should acknowledge and confess, that
God wylleth his law to be kept and observed, not by our deceyuable spirit
of fornication, and fleshly carnal knowledge, but by his most holy spirit
only. He promises to the^ great rewards which do keep his law by his
spirit. Likewise he does threaten and condemn those which do break his
law by the spirit of fornication and of the flesh.

The.viii. proof.
THey do lay again that often times in the scripture rewards are promised to
the fayethfull servants of God, thinking that there can be no reward but
where as is merit and deserving, and on that other side there can be no merit
or deseruynge where as is not a fre will. Truly there must needs be merit
where a fre will proceadeth or does go before. But there is no merit in us,
Whether man do merit ye or nay
because we are bound of our selves. Therefore all our merits are the merits
of Christ only, which alone and none other is fre and with out all bondage.
Psalm. lxxxvii.

But as to the vocable of reward, Reward
we must marcke and note, that the reward of the elect and chosen is called
therefore a reward, because that Christ has merited and deserved that
reward in us, and because it is promised of God to him which believes in
Christ.

Thus must the words of the Geneses in the.xv. Chapter, be understand and
taken which are these. I am thy reward thy great reward. What was Abraham his
reward for his belefe.
Because that Abraham did stedfastli believe in the promise of the sede (which
is Christ) he received his reward. What reward? God him self which is the
very reward of al them which do believe, as the Lord in his euerlasteynge
being has sworn decreed and ordained. Likewise are the words of Christ
written in Matthew to be taken saying. Rejoice you, for your reward is
plentiful in heaven. Which is as much to say, as. That thing which I have
deserved for them which do believe in me, and is promised of God for their
faith, is much aboundaunt and great. In the wyich sens and understanding must
you take this word (crown) and this word gifts or rewards, as you do read
in many places of the scripture

The.ix. text.
John the first Chap. He gave the^ power to be made the children or sons of
god. That is to say, to them which do believe in his name. Hereby do they
reason, if he has given to them power to be the sons of God, then they are
fre, and not captive or bond. Herein they do not conclude well.

For this text does declare rather that man is captive and bond then the
contrary, which text being opened is as much to say, as this.

So many as have received the faith of Christ beleuynge in his name, at that
time that they believed, they received power to be made the sons of God. Or
rather, they were then made the sons of god.

For as soon as a man believes, straight way he is made the son of God, so
that when they do believe, they do receive the said power to be therbi without
delaie made etc.

Then is the spirit of fornication, and all uncleanness crucified in them and
bound, that he shall not play the tyrante any more nor presume to rule in
the heart of man, where the spirit of God ought to be ruler and governor.

The fayethfull manne is delivered from the wicked and deceyuable spirit and
the sens of the flesh, whereto he was before subject and bond, and now is
gone to serve and follow the commandment of the spirit of God which has
bound man with the sweet and pleasant bonds of charity. This text therefore
of John does make full littel for their purpose to confyrme and stablyshe that
thing which they do go about.

The.x proof.
THe Lord demanded this questian of his Apostles saying. Will ye also depart
and go from me.

By the which words they do reason, that it had been a uery foleish demand of
Christ, if they were not at liberty and at choice, whether they would go
from him or bide and styke by him still.

I answer, that God had bound the^ with his spirit, and therefore they could
not go from him, but rather said. Lord to whom should we go? Thou haste the
words of eternal life. There were other which being also bound with the
evil spirit that wroughte in them, said. These are very hard words: what
man can hear him? So at the last they did forsake him. I doubt not but that
Christ did demand this questian of them, whether they would depart. etc.
Principally because that after it was suffitiently perceived what the wicked
spirit had wrought in the unfaithful, that men (I say) might perceive and se
what the spirit of God had wroughte in the fayethfull, and that it should be
put in writing to the instruction and learning of other men in time to come.
This text makes little or nothing for their liberty, by the which text it
is made open how these.ii. spirits do always work contrary things, one to
the other in the fayethfull, and in the vnfayethfull.

The.xi. text.
HE shall render and give to every man after his work. Psalm. lxi.
Whereby they will co^fyrme and stablishe, not only the fredome of man's will
but also the justice of works, which is light to be answered. Either our
worckes be of our own naughtye and deceyuable spirit and then they are
wicked and damnable worckes, or else they be of the spirit of God and not of
our fleshlye and carnal spirit, where fore they are good worckes, being
impossible to be any otherwise. You se that by this text they do prove
nothing less then that which they do purpose and pretend. The which words do
declare nothing else then that the Lord does give everlasting life to them
which have the worckes of fayeth, and of the spirit of God, and those which
have the worckes of flesh he rewards with everlasting pains and punishment.

The.xii. proof.
IT is written the.i. Epistle and syxt cha. to Timothe. Fayght a good fayght.
Labor as a good soldier of Jesus christ, the second Epistle to Timothe.ii.
Cha.

To him that overcomes I will give. etc. Revelation of John the second and
third. Chapt. We say that this fayght against wyckednes, and this labor in
the war of the Lord, and this Victory can not be but by the spirit of God.
Ergo, not by our own will and industrye. Then can not this liberty be
proved and stablished by this text of the scripture.

The threttenth text,
IN the second Epistle and first Chap. of Peter. Bringing al diligence se
that you do minister in your faith virtue. etc. Wherefore brethren rather
endeavor your selves to make strong and affirm your vocation and election,
If you do this you shall never fall. By this place they do prove that Peter
would our industry and diligence should work with the spirit. If they do
understand by this industry and diligence, that diligence, which the spirit
of God worcketh in us: then they do make a good exposition. For of his great
goodness he calls those deeds our deeds, which he works in us. The which
spirit of him does work and draw our will, making it obedient and agreeable
to the commandments of the Lord. The will of us being so drawn cannot choose
but run straight way after the Lord, not of it self, that is to say, of man's
will, but by the will of God. If they do hold opinion that this place is to be
understand of our propre industrye or natural inclanation and motion (as though
a man of him self might work any thing at al or be coadiutor with god) it is
boeth a wicked and also a pernitiouse opinion. For of him self man is
altogether flesh, and therefore he can not rise up to those things which are of
the spirit of god, wherefore these textes which are rehearsed for frewyl in
this place must be thus taken and understand.

You brethen being adourned and decked with the spirit of God, by God made
partakers of his veritye in that fayeth which you received of the Lord,
minister with al diligence and virtue. etc. And endeavor to make your vocation
and election stable and fyrme, that is to say, do all that you may to declare
with good worckes, that your vocation and election is substanciall and strong.

The.xiiii. text.
OVt of the thyrtye Chapter. of the fyfte book of Moses they do obiecte, Where
as the Lord had laid before Israel, good and bad, life and death. It was
said, Elect and choose to you life. and cete. Which words they do think
very slender and of small effect, if man's will were not fre. We have often
times said, that the law does require of us things impossible to be done for
our own strength, which the spirit of God does make possible. For Christ
is the fulfillynge and perfectnes of the law. Therefore like as it is
impossible to observe and keep the commandments without the spirit of God:
so is it impossible for us, to choose life with out the spirit of god.

For we can not choose life except the spirit of perfect liberty were in us,
that is to say of Christ, and where as often times we do offend and clean
to the evil, our election whereby we be elected of God, is not the cause
thereof, but the workynge of our captyue and bond nature.

To diverse objections which are objected and laid for the defense of free
will, we have answered something briefly, but so: that hereby any man may
dissolve and put a side all manner of obiectio^s, which for this matter the
defe^ders of frewyll can devise. Therefore with few words we will co^clud all the whole matter and so proceed further.

The first conclution. Our opinion and certain belief is that the will of
man is captive and bond, and that of it self it can do thing that is good or
pertaining to eternal felicity.













causyng him to know God and his verity of him self unable to either of them.













with the spirit, worckynge in him not of his own strength and virtue, but
by the strength and virtue of the spirit.











Those which maintain free will, do speak directly contrary to the marrke
and end of the law affirmynge that a man can so guide him self that he can
of him self keep the law, or that he can any thing begin of him self
toward it when he can do nothing less.









which is due to the holy Gooste, that is to say, boeth to think, to will,
and perform that thing which is good, and so they do give to God, not unto
man all virtue, power and glory.











trust nor give confidence to his worckes and therefore not to him self nor to
his own will.











and mercy through Christ, in whom they do believe, the fayethfull do obtain.
And in so doing they do confess the Lord Jesus Christ as they ought to do
geuynge to him only the praise of our justification and redemption, which
thing they can not do but in the holy Ghost.





Finis.
Nicolas Less.

Imprinted at London, by John Day, and William Seres, dwelling in Sepulchers
perish, at the sign of the Resurrection, a little above Holbourne conduite.

Cum gratia and priuelegio ad imprimendum solum.


