A LETTER: Whearin, part of the entertainment unto the Queenz Majesty, at
Killing worth Castl, in warwik Sheer, in this soomerz Progress* 1575. iz
signified: from a friend officer attendant in Coourt, unto hiz friend a
Citizen, and Merchaunt of London.

DE REGINA NOSTRA ILLVSTRISSIMA.

Dum lamita ruant vicina ab Regina tumultu:
Laeta suos inter genialibus ILLA diebus,
(Gratia Dijs) fruitur: Rumpantur et ilia Codro.
Unto my good friend, Master Humfrey Martin Mercer.
AFter my hearty commendacionz, I commend me heartily too yoo. Understand ye,
that syns throogh God and good friends, I am placed at Coourt here (as ye wot)
in a woorshipfull room: Whearby, I am not only acquainted with the most, and
well knoen too the best, and every officer glad of my company: but also have
poour, a dayz (while the Council sits not) to go and too see things sight
worthy, and too be preze^t at any sheaw or spectacl, any whear this Progress
reprezented unto her highness: And of part of which sportez* ^auing takin sum
notez and obseruationz (for I can not be idl at any hand in the world) azwel
too put fro me suspicion of sluggardy, az too pluk from yoo doout of any my
forgetfulness of freendship: I have thought it meet to impart them unto yoo, az
frankly, az freendly* and az fully az I can. Well wot ye the blak Prins waz
never stained with disloyaltee of ingratitude toward any, I dare be his
warrant, he will not begin with yoo, that has at hiz hand so deeply dezerued.

But heerin, the better for conceyuing of my mind and instruction of yoors, ye
must give my leave a littl, az well to preface unto my matter, az too discoors
sumwhat of Kylling worth Castl. A Territory of ye right honorabl, my singular
good Lord, my Lord the Earl of Leyceter: of whooincomparabl cheering, and
enterteynment thear unto her Majesty noow, I will sheaw yoo a part here, that
coold not see all, nor had I seen all coold well report y^ half. Whear things,
for the parsons, for (...) place, time, cost, deuis^z, straungnes, and
aboundauns, of all that ever I saw (and yet have I been, what under my Master
Bumsted, and what on my oun* affayrs, while I occupied Merchaundyze, both in
Frauns and Flaunders (long and many a day) I saw none any whear so memorabl, I
tell you plain.

The Castl-hath name of Kylling worth, Kylling-woorth Castl.
but of truth groounded upon feythfull story Kenelwoorth: It stonds in
Warwykshyre a lxxiiii. mile northwest from London, and az it wear in the Navel
of England, four mile sum what South from Couen^ree a proper Cittee, and a
like distauns from Warwyk, a fair Shyre Tooun on the North: In air sweet and
hollsum, rayzed on an eazy moounted hill, iz set eeuenly coasted with the froont
straight intoo the East, has the tenaunts and Tooun about it, that pleazauntly
shyfts from dale too hill sundry whear with sweet springs bursting forth: and
iz so plentifully well sorted on every side intoo arabl, meado, pasture, wood,
water, and good ayrz az it appeerz to have need of nothing that may perteyn too
living or pleazure. Too auantage has it, hard on the West, still noorisht with
many lively springs, a goodly Pool of rare beuty, breadth, length, deapth, and
store of all kind freshwaterfish, delicat, great and fat, and also of
wyldfooul byside. By a rare situacion and natural amitee seemz this Pool
conioynd to the Castlz that on the West layz the head az it wear upon the Castls
boozom, embraces it on either side Soouth and North with both the armz, settlz
it self az in a reach a flightshoot broad, stretching forth body and legs,
amile or too Westward: between a fair Park on the one side, which by the
Brayz is linked too ye Castl on the South, sprinkled at ye entrauns with a feaw
Coonyez, that for coolur and smallnes of number, seem too be sufferd more for
pleasure then co^moditee: And on ye oother side North and West, a goodly Chase:
wast, wide, large, and full of red Deer and oother stately gamez for hunting:
beautified with many delectabl, fresh and vmbragioous Boowerz, arberz, seatz,
and wallks, that with great art, cost, and diligens wear very pleazauntly
appointed: which also the natural grace by the tall and fresh fragrant treez
and soil did so farfoorth commend, az Diana her self might have deyned thear
well enough too raunge for her pastime. The leaft arm of this Pool Northward,
had my Lord adoourned with a beautiful bracelet of a fair tymberd bridge,
that iz of a.xiiii. foot wide, and a six hunderd foot long: railed al on both
sidez, strongly planked for passage, reaching from the Chase too the Castl:
that thus in the midst has clear prospect over theez pleazurze on y^ bakpart:
and forward, over all the Tooun and mooch of the Cuntree beside. Heertoo, a
special commoditee at hand of sundry quarreiz of large bylding stone, the
goodness whearof may the eazlyer be judged, in the bylding and aunciently of the
Castl, that (az by the name and by storiez, well may be gatherd) waz first
reared by Kenulph and hiz young sun and successor Kenelm: born both indeed
within the Ream here, Florileg. fol. 221. and. 225.
but yet of the race of Saxons: and reigned kings of Marchlond from the year of
oour Lord.798* too. 23* yeerz toogyther, abooue. 770, year ago. Although the
Castl has one ancient strong and large Keep that iz called Cezarz Toour,
rather (az I have good cauz too think) for that it iz square and by foormed
after the manner of Cezarz Fortz then that ever he bylt it. Guil. Mal^ mesb. li.
1.


Nay noow I am a littl in, Master Martin i will tell ye all.

This Marchlond that Storyerz call Mercia, iz numbered in their books, the
foourth of the seven Kyngdoms that the Saxons had whilom here divided among
them in the Ream. Began in Ann. Domi. 616: 139. year after Horsus and Engist,
continued in the race of a 17 kings, a 249. year together: and eended in Ann.
875. Reized from the rest (sayz the book) at first by Pendaz prezumption:
ouerthroun at last by Buthreds Hascardy, and so fell too the kyngdoom of the
West Saxons.

And Marchlond had in it, ^rcia.
London, Mildelsex, heerin a Bishoprik. Had more of Shyrez: Gloceter,
Woorceter, and Warwik, and heerin a Bishoprik. Chester (that noow we call
Chesshyre) Darby and Stafford, whervntoo one Bishop that had also part of
Warwyk and Shreusbery and hiz See at Couentree, that waz then aforetyme at
Lychfeeld. Heertoo: Hereford, wherein a Bishoprik that had more too
jurisdiction, half Shreusbury, part of Warwyk and also of Gloceter, and the Sea
at Hereford. Also had Oxford, Buckingham, Hertford, Huntyngdon, and ^alf of
Bed^ord, and too theez, Norhampton, part of Lecyter and also Lincoln, whear
unto a Bishop: whooz See at Lincoln Cittee that s^mtime before waz at
Dorchester. Heertoo, the rest of Leyceter and in Nottingham that of olld had a
special Bishop, whooz See waz at Leyceter, but after, put too the charge of
the Archbishop of York.

Noow touching the name, that of olld Records I understand, and of ancient
writerz I find, iz called Kenelwoorth. Sins most of the Worths in England
stand ny unto like lakez, and ar either small Ilandz, such one az the seat of
this Castl has been and eazly may be, or is londground by pool or river
whearon willoz, allderz or such like do gro: Upon Taci^ fol. 142. The Germains
call vverck that we woork vverlt: woorld. vvermut: woorm-wood. So viel were:
So mooch worth.
which Althamerus writez precyzly that the Germains call werd: Joining theez too
toogyther with the nyghness also of the words and sybred of the toongs, I am
the boolder too pronoouns, that az oour English VVoorth, with the rest of oour
ancient langage, waz least us from the Germayns: eeuen so, that their Werd and
our Worth iz all one thing in signifiauns, common too us both even at this day.
I take the case so clear that I say not az mooch as I moought. Thus proface ye
with the preface. And now to the matter.

ON Saturday the nyenth of July, at long Ichingham, a Tooun and Lordship of my
lords, within a three mile of Killing-woorth, hiz honor made her Majesty great
cheer at dinner, and pleazaunt pastyme in hu^ting by the wey after, that it was
eight a clock in ye eeuening ear her hyghnes came too Kylling worth. Whear, in
the Park, aboout a flight shot from the Brayz and first gate of the Castl,
Sibyl.
one of the ten Sibills, that (we reed) wear all Fatidicae and Theobulae (az
partyez and privy too the Gods gracious good willz) cumly clad in a pall of
white sylk, pronoounced a proper poezi in English ryme and meter: of effect,
hoow great gladness her gracious prezenz brought into every steed whear it
pleazed her too cum, and specially now intoo that place y^ had so long longed
after the same: eended with prophecy certain, of mooch and long prosperitee
health and felicitee: this her Majesty beningly accepting, passed forth unto
the next gate of the Brayz, which (for the length, largnes and use (az well it
may so serve) they call noow the Tyltyard, The Porter.
whear a Porter, tall of parson, big of lim and stearn of coountinauns, wrapped
also all in sylk, with club and keyz of quantitee according: had a roough
speech full of passions in meter aptly made too the purpose: whea^by (az her
highness was cum within his ward) he burst out in a great pang of impaciens too
see such vncooth trudging too and fro, such ridyng in and oout, with such din
and noyz of talk within the charge of his offis: whearof he never saw the like
nor had any warning before, ne yet coold make too him self any cauz of the
matter, at last upon better vie^ and auisement az he preast too cum neerar:
confessing anon that he foound him self perced at the prezens of a parsonage so
evidently expressing an heroical Soueraintie over all the hole estates, and hy
degreez thear beside: callmd hiz stormz, proclayms open gates and free passage
too all, yeeldes up hiz club, hiz heyz, hiz office and all, and on hiz kneez
humbly praiz pardon of hiz ignorauns and impaciens: which her highness
graciously granting, The Trumpetoours.
he cauzd hiz Trumpetoourz that stood that stood upon the wall of the gate
thear, too soound up a tune of wellcum: which, byside the nobl noyz, waz so
mooch the more pleezaunt too beholld, becauz theez Trumpetoour; being six in
number, wear every one an eight foot hy, in due proportion of parson beside,
all in long garmens of sylk sutabl, each with hiz syluery Trumpet of a five
foot long, foormed taperwyze, and straight from the upper part unto the
nether eend: whear the diameter waz a 16. inchez over and yet so tempred by
art, that being very eazy too the blast, they cast forth no greater noyz nor a
more vnpleazaunt soound for time and tune, then any oother common Trumpet be it
never so artificially foormed. These armonioous blasterz, from y^ foreside of
the gate at her highness entrauns whear they began: walking upon the wallz,
unto the inner: had this muzik maynteyned from them very delectably while her
highness all along this Tiltyard rode unto y^ inner gate next ye baze coourt of
the Castl: whear the Lady of the Lake (famous in king Arthurz book) with too
Nymphs waiting upon her, Lady of the Lake.
arrayed all in sylks attending her highness coming: from the midst of y^ Pool,
whear, upon a moouabl Island, bright blazing with torches, she floting too land,
met her Majesty with a well penned meter and matter after this sort: First of
the auncientee of the Castl, whoo had been ownerz of the same, even till this
day, most allweyz in the hands of the Earls of Leyceyter, hoow she had kept
this Lake syns king Arthurz dayz, and noow understanding of her highness hither
cumming, thought it both offis and duty in humbl wyze too discoouer her and
her estate: offering up the same, her Lake and poour thearin, with promis of
repair unto the Coourt. It pleazed her highness too thank this lady and too ad
withal, we had thought indeed ye Lake had been oours, and do you call it
yourz noow? Well we will heerin common more with yoo hereafter.

This Pageaunt waz clozd up with a delectabl harmony of Hautboiz, Shalmz,
Cornets, and such oother looud Muzik, that held on while her Majesty,
pleazauntly so passed from thens tooward the Castl gate: whearvntoo, from the
baze Coort over a dry valley, The bridge.
cast into a good foorm, waz thear framed a fair Bridge of a twenty foot
wide, and a seauenty foot long, graueld for treading, rayled on either part
with seven posts on a side, that stood a twelve foot a su^der, Seven pair of
Posts.
thikned between with well proporcioned Pillars turned.

Upon the first payr of Posts wear set, too cumly square wyre Cage^, each a
three foot long, too foot wide and hy: in the^, live Bitterz, ^urleuz,
Shoouelarz, Hearnsheawz, Godwytz, Syluanus prezents. 1.
and such like deinty Byrds of the prezents of Syluanus the God of fooul.

On the second payr, too great Syluerd Bollz, featly apted too the purpoze,
fyld with Applz, Pearz, Cherryz, Fylberdz, Walnuts fresh upon their brau^chez,
and with Oringez, Pooungarnets, Lemmanz, and Pypinz, Pomona. 2.
all for the gyfts of Pomona, Gods of fruiez.

The third pair of Posts, in too such syluerd Bollz, had (all in earz, green
and olld) Wheat, Barley, Otez, Beanz and Peaz, az the gyfts of Ceres.

The fourth Post on the leaft hand, Ceres. 3.
in a like syluerd boll, had Grapes in Clusters, white and red, gracified with
their vine leauez: the match Post against it, had a pair of great white silver
lyuery Pots for Wine: and before them, too glassez of good capacitee filld
full: the ton with white Wine, the toother with claret: so fresh of ^oo^or, and
of look so loouely smiling to the eyz of many, that by my feyth me thought by
their leering, they could have foound in their hearts (az the eeuening waz hot)
too have kyst them sweetly and thought it no sin: and theez for the potenciall
prezents of Bacchus the God of wine.

The fifth payr had, (...). 4.
each a fair large trey sireawd a littl with fresh grass, and in the^, Coonger,
Burt, Mullet, fresh Herring, Oyste^s, S^mon, Creuis, and such like from
Neptunus, God of the Sea. Neptuaus 5


On the sixth payr of Posts wear (...) too ragged (...) of silver, as my Lord
giuez them in armz, beautifully gli^tering of armoour thereupon depe^ding, Bowz,
Arroz, Spearz, Sheeld, Head pees, Gorget, Corse lets, Swoords, Targets, and
such like for Mars gifts the God of war. Mars. 6.
And the aptlyer (me thought) waz it that thooz ragged staves supported theez
Martial prezents, as well bicauz theez Staves by their tines seem naturally
meet for the bearing of armoour, as also y^ they chiefly in this place might
take upon them principal protection of her highness Parson, that so benignly
pleazed her to take herboour.

On the seventh Posts, the last and next too the Castl, wear thear pight, too
fair Bay brau^chez of a fourfoot hy, adoourned on all sides with Lutes, Uiollz,
Shallmz, Cornets, Flutes, Recorders and Harps, as the prezents of Phoebus the
God of Muzik, Phoebus.
for rejoicing the mind, and also of Phizik for health to the body.

Over the Castl gate was thear fastened a Tabl beautifully garnisht abooue with
her higness arms, and featly with Iuy wreathz boordred aboout: of a ten foot
square: the ground blak, whearvpon in large white Capital Roman fair written:
a Poem mencioning theez Gods and their gyfts thus prezented unto her highness:
which, becauz it remaynd vnremooued, at leyzure and pleazure I took it oout, as
folloeth.

AD MAY ATVM REGIAM.
Jupiter huc certos cernens TE tendere gressus,
Coelicolas PRINCEPS actutum conuocat omn^^
Obs^quium praestare iubet TIBI qnenque benignu^,
Vnde suas Syluanus aues, Pomonaque fructus,
Alma Ceres fruges, hilarantia vina Lyaus,
Neptumus pisces, tela et tutantia Mauors,
Suaue melos Phoebus, solidam longamque salutem,
Dij TIBI REGINA hac (cu^ SIS DIGNISSIMA) prebe^^:
Haec TIBI cum Domino dedit se et werda Kenelm^.
All the Letterz that mention her Majesty, which here I put capital, for
reuerens and honor wear thear made in golld.

But the night well spent, for that theez versez by torchlyght, coold not eazly
be red, by a Poet thearfore in a long ceruleoous garment, with a side and wide
fleeuez Uenecian wyze, drawn up to his elboz, his dooblet sleeves under that,
crimzen, nothing but sylk: a Bay garland on hiz head, and a skro in hiz hand,
making first an humble obeyzaunz at her highness cumming, and pointing unto
every prezent az he spoke: the same wear pronoounced. Pleazauntly thus viewing
the gyfts az she past, and hoow ye posts might agree with the speech of ye Poet,
at the eend of the bridge and entree of ye gate, waz her highness received with
a fresh delicat armony of Flutez, in perfoormauns of Phoebus prezents.

So passing intoo the inner Coourt, her Majesty (that never rydez but alone)
thear set dooun from her Pallfrey, waz conueid up too chamber: when after, did
follo so great a peal of gunz, and such lyghtning by fire woork a long space
toogyther: as Jupiter woold sheaw him self too be no further behind with hiz
wellcoom, then the rest of hiz Gods: and that woold he have all the Cuntree to
kn^: for indeed the noyz and flame wear hard and seen a twenty mile of. Thus
mooch Master Martin (that I remember me) for ye first dayz Bien venu. Be ye not
weary, for I am skant in the mydst of my matter.

On su^day: Sunday. ^
the fornoon occupied (az for the Sabot day) in quiet and vocation from woork,
and in divine seruis and preaching at the parish church: The afternoon in
excellent Musik, of sundry sweet instruments, and in dancing of Lords and
Ladyez, and oother woorshipfull degreez, vttred with such lively agilitee and
commendabl grace: az whither it moought be more strange too the eye, or
pleazaunt too the mind, for my part indeed I coold not discern: but excedingly
well waz it (me thought) in both.

At night late, az though Jupiter the last night, had forgot for biziness, or
forborne for curtezy and quiet, part of hiz wellcoom unto her highness
appointed: noow entering at first intoo hiz purpoze moderatly (az mortallz do)
with a warning pees or too, proceeding on with encreas, at last the Altitonant
displayz me hiz mayn poour: with blaz of burning darts, flying too and fro,
leamz of starz coruscant, streamz and hayl of fiery sparks, lyghtenings of
wyldefier a water and land, flight and shot of thunderbollts: all with such
continuanuns. terror and vehemence: that the heauins thunderd, the waters
soourged, the eart^ shook: in such sort surely, az had we not been assured the
fulminant deitee waz all but in amitee, and coold not oother wiz witness hiz
wellcooming unto her highness: it woold have made me for my part, az hardy az
I am, very vengeably afeard. This a do lasted while hy midnight waz past, that
well waz me soon after when I waz cooucht in my cabayn. And thiz for the secund
day.

Monday waz hot, Monday. 3
and thearfore her highness kept in till a five a clok in the eeuening: what
time it pleazed her too ride forth intoo the Chase too hunt the Heart of fors:
which foound anon, and after sore chased, and chafed by the hot pursuit of the
^oounds, waz fayn of fine fors, The hu^ting of the Heart of fors.
at last too take soil. Thear to beholld the swyft fleeting of the Deer before
with the stately caryage of hiz head in hiz swimming, spread (for the quantitee)
like the sail of a ship: the hoounds harroing after, az had they been a number
of skyphs too the spoil of a karuell: the to^ no l^ss eager in purchase of hiz
pray, then was the toother earnest in safeguard of hiz life: so az the earning
of the hoounds in continuauns of their cry, the swyftnes of ye Deer, the
running of footmen, the galloping of horsez, the blasting of horns, the
halloing and hewing of the huntsmen, with the excellent Echoz between whilez
from the woods and waters in valleyz resoounding, moved pastime delectabl in
so hy a degree, az for any parson to take pleasuze by most sensez at onez, in
mine opinion thear ca^ be none any wey comparabl too this: And specially in
this place that of nature iz ^oormed so feet for the purpoze. In feyth Master
Martin if ye coold with a wish I woold ye had beer at it: Well the heart waz
kyld, a goodly Deer, but so ceast not the game yet.

For aboout nine a clok at the hither part of the Chase, whear torchlight
attended: ^out of the woods in her Maiestiez return, rooughly came thear
forth Hombre Saluagio, The savage man.
with an Oken plant plu^t up by the roots in hiz hand, him self forgrone all
in moss and Iuy: who, for parsonage, gesture, and vttrauns beside,
coountenaunst the ma^ter too very good lyking, and had speech to effect: That
contynuing so long in ^heez wild wastes, whearin often had he fared both far and
near, yet hapt he never to see so glorioous an assemble before: and noow cast
intoo great greef of mind, for that neither by himself coold he gess, nor knew
whear else to be taught, what they shoold be or whoo bare estate. Reports sum
had he hard of many strange things, but brooyled thearby so mooch the more in
desire of knoledge. Thus in great pangz bethought he and called he upon all his
familiarz and co^panionz: the Fawnz, the Satyrez, the Nymphs, the Dryardes, and
the Hamadriades, but none making answer, whearby hiz care the more encreasyng,
in utter greef and extreem refuge called he aloowd at last after hiz olld friend
Echo Echo that be wist woold hide nothing from him, but tell him all if she
wear here. Here (que Echo.) Here Echo, Echo.
and art thou thear? (sayz he) Ah boow mooch have thoow relieved my careful
spiritez with thy curtezy onward. A my good Echo here iz a marueloouz prezens
of dignitee, what ar they I pray thee, whoo iz soouerain, tell me I beseek the
or else hoow moought I kno? I kno (que she). Knoste thoow sayz he? mary that iz
exceedingly well: why then, I dezyer the heartily sho me what Majesty (for no
mean degree iz i^) have we here: a King or a Queen? A Queen (que Echo.) A Queen
sayz he? pauzing and wysly viewyng a while, noow full certeynly seemz it thy
tale to be true. And proceeding by this manner of dialog withan earnest behollding
her highness a while, recou^ts he first hoow justly that foormer reports agree
with hiz prezent sight: toouching the beautiful liniaments of coou^tenauns,
the cumly proporcion of body, the prinsly grace of preze^s, the gracious gifts
of nature with the rare and singular qualitees of both body and mind in her
Majesty conioynd, and so apparaunt at ey. Then shortly rehersing Saterdaiz
acts: of Sibils salutation, of the Porters propozition, of hiz Trumpetoourz
musik, of the Lake ladyez oration, of the seven Gods seven prezents: he
reports the incredibl joy that all estatez in the land have allweyz of her
highness whear so ever it cums: eendeth with presage and praer of perpetual
felicitee, and with vmbl subjection of him and hizzen and all that they may
do. After this sort the matter went with littl differens I gess, saving only
in this point: y^ the thing which here I report in vnpoolisht proze, waz thear
pronoounced in good miter and matter very well endighted in ryme. Echo fynely
framed most aptly by aunswerz thus too utter all. But shall I tell yoo master
Martyn by the mass of a mad adventure? az this Sa^age for the more submissio^
brake his tree a sunder, kest the top from him, it had almost light upon her
highness ^ors head: whereat he startld and the gentlman mooch dismayed* See the
benignitee of the Prins, az the foot men looked well too the horse, and he of
generozitee soon callmd of him self, no hurt no hurt quod her highness. Which
words I promis yoo we wear all glad too heeer, and took them too be the best
part of the play.

Tuisday, Tuisday. 4.
pleazaunt passing of the time with muzik and daunsyng: saving that toward
night it liked her Majesty too walk a foot intoo the Chase over the Bridge:
whear it pleased her to stand, while upon the Pool oout of a Barge fine
appointed for the purpoze, too here sundry kinds of very delectabl Muzik. Thus
recreated and after sum wallk her highness returned.

Wednsday, Wed^s. 5.
her Majesty rode intoo the Chase a hunting again of the heart of fors. The Deer
after hiz property for refuge took the soil: but so masterd by hot pursuit on
all parts that he waz taken quik in the pool: the waterme^ held him up hard by
the ^ed, while at her highness commandment he lost hiz earz for a raundsum and
so had The Ha^^ pardoned.
pardon of life.

Thursday, Thursday. 6
the foourteenth of this July and the syxth day of her Maiestyez cumming: a
great sort of bandogs whear thear tied in the utter Coourt, and thyrteen bearz
in the inner. A queast of Bearz.
Whoo so ever made the pannell, thear wear inoow for a Queast and one for
challenge and need wear. A wight of great wizdoom and grauitee seemed their
forman too be, had it cum too a Jury: But it fell oout that they wear cauzd too
appeer thear upon no such matter, but only too answer too an ancient
quarrel between the^ and the bandogs, in a cause of controversy that has long
depended, been obstinatly full often debated with sharp and biting arguments
aboth sides, and coold never be decyded: grown noow too so maruayloous a
mallys, that with spiteful obrayds and vncharitabl chaffyngs allweyz they
freat, az far az any whear the ton can here, see, or smell the toother: and
indeed at utter deadly fohod. Many a ma^md member, (God wot) blody face and a
torn cote has the quarrel cost between them, so far likely the less yet noow
too be appeazd, az thear wants not partakerz too bak them aboth sidez.

Well sir, the Bearz wear brought forth intoo the Coourt, the Dogs set too
them, too argu the points eeuen face too face, they had learnd coounsell also
aboth parts: what may they be coounted parciall that are retaynd but a to side?
I ween no* Uery feers both ton and toother and eager in argument: if the dog in
pleadyng woould pluk the bear by the throot, ye bear with trauers woould claw
him again by the skallp, confess and a list, but a void a coold not that waz
bound too the bar: and hiz coounsell tolld him that it coold be too him no
pollecy in pleading.

Thearfore thus with fending and proouing, with pluckyng and tugging, skratting
and biting, by plain tooth and nayl a to side and toother such exspe^s of blood
and leather waz thear between them, az a moonths licking I ween will not
recoouer: and yet remayn az far oout az ever they wear.

It waz a sport very pleazaunt of theez beastz: to see the bear with hiz pink
nyez leering after hiz enmyez approach, the nimblness and wayt of ye dog too
take hiz advantage, and the fors and experiens of the bear again to avoid the
assauts: if he wear bitten in no place, hoow he woold pynch in an oother too
get free: that if be wear taken o^ez, then what shyft with biting with clawyng,
with roaring tossing and tumbling he woold woork too wind him self from them:
and when he waz lose, to shake hiz earz twyse or thryse with the blud and the
slauer aboout hiz fiznamy, waz a matter of a goodly releef.

Az thiz sport waz had a day time in the Castl, Gunshot and firevvork.
so waz thear abroad at night very strange and sundry kindez of ^yer woorks,
compeld by cunnyng too fly too and fro and too mount very hy intoo the air
upward, and also too burn vnquenshabl in the water beneath: contrary ye wot,
too fyerz kind. This intermengld with a great peal of guns: which all gave,
both too the ear and to the ^y the greater grace and delight, for that with
such order and art they wear temperd coouching time and continuauns, that waz
aboout too oours space.

Noow within also in the mean time waz thear sheawed hefore her highness,
Tumbling of the Italia^.
by an Italian, such ^eats of agilitee, in goings, turnings, tumblings,
castings, hops, iumps, leaps, skips, springs, gamba^ds, soomersauts, caprettyez
and flyghts: forward, backward, sydewyze, doownward, upward, and with such
wyndyngs gyrings and circumflexions: al so lightly and wy^h such eazyness, az
by me in feaw words it iz not expressibl by pen or speech I tell yoo plain. I
bleast me by my faith to behold him, and began to doout whither a waz a man or
a spirit: and I ween had doouted me till this time: had it not been that anon
I bethough me of men that can reazon and tallk with too toongs, and with too
parsons at onez, sing like burds, curteiz of behauoour, of body strong and in
joints so nymbl withal, that their bonez seem az lythy and plyaunt az sy^euz.
They dwell in a happy Island (az the book termz it) foour moonths sailing
Soouthward beyond Ethiop.

Nay master Martin I tell you no jest: Diodor. Sicul. De anti. Egyptioru^
gestia. li. 3
for both Diodorus Siculus an ancient Greek historiagrapher in his third book
of the acts of the olld Egipcians: and also from him, Conrad Gesnerus a great
learned man, and a very diligent writer in all good arguments of oour time (but
deceased) in the first Chapter of hiz Mithridates Mithrid. Ges^eri.
reports the same. Az for this fello I cannot tell what too make of him, save
that I may gess hiz bak be metall^ like a lam^rey that haz no bone but a line
like a lute string.

Well sir let him pass and hiz feats, and this dayz pastyme withal, for here
iz az mooch as I can remember me for Thursdayz entertainment.

Friday Friday. 7
and Saturday wear thear no open sheawz abroad, Saturday. 8
becauz the weather enclynde too sum moyster and wind: that very seazonably
temperd the droought and the heat, cauzed by y^ continuauns of fair weather and
sunshyne before, all the while syns her Maiesti^z thither cumming.

A Sunday oportunely the weather brake up again, Sunday. 9
and after divine seruis in the parish church for the Sabot day, and a
fruitful sermon thear in the forenoon: at after noon in woorship of this
Kenelwoorth Castl, and of God and saint Kenelm, whooz day forsooth by the
calendar, this waz: A Brideale*
a solemn brydeale of a proper coopl waz appointed: set in order in ye tylt^ard,
too cum and make thear sheaw before the Castl in the great coourt, whear az waz
pight a cumly quintine for featz at armz: which when they had done, too march
oout at the Northgate of the Cast^ ^om^ward again intoo the tooun.

And thus wear they Marshalld, First, all the lusty lads and bolld bachelarz of
the parish, sutably every wight with hiz blu buckeram brydelace upon a branch
of green broom (cauz rozemary iz skant thear) tied on hiz leaft arm (for a that
side lyez the heart) and hiz allder poll for a spear in hiz right hand, in
marciall order raunged on a fore, too and too in a rank: sum with a hat, sum in
a cap, sum a cote sum a ierkin, sum for lightness in hiz dooblet and hiz hoze,
clean trust with a point before: sum boots and no spurz, he spurz and no boots,
and he neither another: one a sadel, anoother a pad or a pannell fastened with a
cord, for gyrts wear geazon: and theez too the number of a sixteen wight riding
men and well beseen: but the Bridegroom foremost, in hiz fatherz ^awny worsted
iacket, (for his friends wear fayn that he shoold be a bryde groom before the
Queen) a fair strawn hat with a capital crooun steepl wyze on hiz head: a payr
of harvest glou^z on hiz hands, az a sign of good husbanory: a pen and inkorn
at his bakfor he woold be known to be bookish: lame of a leg that in his yooth
was broken at football: wellbelooued yet of hiz moother that lent him a n^
mufflar for a napkin that was tied too hiz gyrdl for lozyng: It was no small
sport too mark this minion in hiz full appointment, that throogh good
schoolation becam az formal in his action az had he been a bridegroom indeed:
with this special grace by ye wey, that ever az he woold have framed him the
better coou^tenauns, with the woors face he looked.

Well sir, after theez horsemen, a lively morrisdauns, according too the
ancient manner, sir daunserz, Mawdmarion, and the fool. Then, three pretty
puzels az bright az a breast of bacon, of a thirty year olld a pees, that carried
three special spisecakes of a bushel of wheat, (they had it by meazure oout
of my Lords bak hoous), before the Bride: syzely with set coountenanns, and
lips so demurely simpring, az it had been a mare cropping of a thistl. After
theez a loouely loober woorts, freklfaced, red hedded, cleen trust in hiz
dooblet and hiz hoze: taken up noowe in deed by commission, for that he was so
loath to cum forward, for reuerens bylike of his nu cut canuas dooblet: and
woold by his good will have been but a gazer, but foound too be a meet actor
for hiz office: that waz too bear the bridecup, foormed of a sweet sucket
barrel, a fair turned foot set too it, all seemly be syluerd and parcel gylt,
adoourned with a beatifull branch of broom, gayly begylded for rozemary: from
which, too broad brydela^ez of red and yelloo buckeram begylded, and galauntly
streaming by such wind az thear waz (for he carried it aloft:) This
gentlcupbearer yet had hiz freckld fiznamy sumwhat unhappily infested az he
went by the byzy flyez, that floct aboout the bridecup for the sweetness of the
sucket that it sauord on: but he like a tall fello, withstood their mallis
stooutly (see what manhod may do) bet them awey, kylld them by skorez, stood
too his charge and marched on in good order.

Then folloed the woorshipfull Bride, led (after the cuntree manner) between too
ancient parishonerz, honest toounsmen. But a stale stallion and a well spreed,
(hot az the weather waz) God wot and an ill smellyng waz she: a xxxv. year old,
of cooler brounbay, not very beautiful indeed but ugly fooul ill fauord: yet
marueloo^s fayn of the offis, bycauz she hard say she shoold dauns before the
Queen, in which feat she thought she woold foot it as finely az the best: Well,
after this bride came thear by too and too, a doozen damzels for bridemayds:
that for tauoor, attire, for facion and cleanlyness: wear az meet for such a
bride. az a treen ladl for a porrige pot: mo, but for fear of carrying all
cleen had been appointed: but theez feaw wear inoow.

Az the cumpany in this order wear cum intoo y^ coourt, marvelous wear the
marciall acts that wear done thear that day.

The Brydegreme for preeminens had the first coors at the first Quintyne,
Running at Quintine.
brake hiz spear treshardiment: but his mare in hiz manage did a littl so
titubate, that mooch a do had hiz manhod too sit in his sadl, and too skape
the foyl of a fall: with the help of his band yet he recoouerd himself, and
lost not hiz styrops (for he had none too his saddl): had no hurt as it ^apt,
but only that hiz gyrt burst, and lost hiz pen and inkorn that he waz ready to
weep for. But hiz handkercher, az good hap waz, found he safe at his gyrdl:
that cheerd him sumwhat, and had good regard it shoold not be fyeld. For though
heat and coolnes upon sundry occazi^ns made him sumtime too sweat, and sumtime
re^matik: yet durst he be bollder too hiz noze and wype hiz face with the
flapet of his fatherz iacket, then with hiz mothers mufflar. Tiz a goodly
matter, when yooth iz manerly brought up in fatherly love and motherly aw.

Noow sir, after the Brydegroom had made hiz coors, ran the rest of the band, a
while in sum order, but soon after, tag and rag, cut and long tail: whear the
specialty of the sport waz, to see: how sum for hiz slakness had a good bob
with the bag, and sum for his haste too toppl dooun right, and cum tumbling to
the post: sum stryuing so mooch at the first setting oout, that it seemd a
question between the man and the beast, whither the coors shoold be made a
horsbak or a foot: and put forth with the spurz, then woold run hiz race byas
among the thickest of the throng, that dooun came they toogyther hand over head:
anoother, while he directed hiz coors to the quintyne, hiz iument woold carry
him too a mare amoong the pepl: so hiz horse az amoroous, az him self
aduenturoous. Anoother, too run and miss the quintyne with hiz staff, and hit
the board with his head.

Many such gay gamez wear thear among theez ryderz: who by and by after, upon a
greater coorage leaft thear quintining, and ran one at a noother. Thear to see
the stearn coountenauns, the grym looks, the cooragioous attempts, the desperate
adue^turez, the daungeroous coorsez, the feers encoounterz, whearby the buff at
the man, and the coounterbuff at the horse, that both sumtime came topling too
the groou^d By my trooth Master Martyn twaz a ly^ely pastyme, I believe it woold
have moved sum man too a right meery mood, thoogh had it be toold him hiz wife
lay a dying.

And heertoo folloed az good a sport (me thooght) prezented in an historical
ku, Hok Tuisday by the Couentree men.
by certain good hearted men of Couentree, my Lords neighboorz thear: whoo
understanding amoong them the thing that coold not be hidden from any: hoow
careful and studidous hiz honor waz. y^ by all pleazaunt recreasions her
highness might best find her self wellcom, and he made gladsum and merry (the
grooundwoork indeed and fooundacion of hiz Lordships mirth and gladness of us
all) made petition that they moought renu noow their olld storiall sheaw: Of
argument how the Danez whylom here in a trooubloous seazon wear for quietness
born withal and suffeard in peace, that anon by ^outrage and importabl
insolency, Floril^g. li. 1. fo. 3000.
abuzing both Ethelred the king then and all estatez every whear byiyde: at the
greuoous complaint and coou^sell of Huna the kings cheeftain in warz, on a
Saint Bricez night. Ann. Dom. 1012. (Az the book sayz) that falls yearly on
the thyrteenth of November) wear all dispatched and the ream rid. And for bicauz
the matter mencioneth how valiau^tly oour english weee men for love of their
cuntree behaved themseluez: expressed in actionz and rymez after their manner,
they thought it moought move sum mirth too her Majesty the rather.

The thing said they iz groounded on story, and for pastime wont too be played
in oour City yearly: withoout ill exampl of mannerz, papistry or any
superstition: and else did so occupy the heds of a number, that likely inoough
woold have had woors meditationz: had an ancient beginning and a long
continuans: till noow of late laid dooun, they knu no cauz why: onless it wear
by the zeal of certain their preacherz: men very commendabl for behauioour and
learning, and sweet in their sermons, but sumwhat too soour in preaching awey
their pastime: wished thearfore, that az they shoold continu their good doctrine
in pulpet, so, for matters of pollecy and goouernauns of the City, they woold
permit them too the Mayr and Magistratez: and said by my feyth, Master Martyn,
they woold make their humbl peticion unto her highness, that they might have
their playz up again.

But aware, keep bak, make room noow, Captain Cox.
here they cum. And first captin Cox, an od man I promiz yoo: by profession a
Mason, and that right skillful: very cunning in fens, and hardy az Gawyn, for
hiz tonsword hangs at his tablz eend: great oversight has he in matters of
story: For az for king Arthurz book, Huo^ of Burdeaus, The foour suns of Aymon,
Beauys of hampton, The squyre of lo degree, The knight of curteyzy, and the
Lady Faguell, Frederik of Gene, Sir Eglamoour, Sir Tryamoour. Sir Lamwell, Sir
Isenoras, Sir Gawyn, Olyuer of the Castl, Lucres and Eurialus, Uirgyls life,
The castl of Ladyez, The wydo Edith, The king and the tanner, Friar Rous,
Howleglas, Gargantua, Robin bood, Adambell Clym of the clough and Wyllia^ a
cl^^udsley, The churl and the Burd, The seven wise Masters, The wife lapt in a
Morrels skyn. The sak full of nuez, The sargeaunt y^ becam a Friar, Sko^an
Collyn cloout. The Friar and the boy, Elynor Running, and the Nutbrooun maid,
with many mo then I rehearz here: I believe he have them all at hiz fingars
ends.

Then in Philosophy both moral and natural, I think he be az naturally
ouerseen: beside poetry and Astronomy, and oother hid sciencez, az I may gess
by the omberty of hiz books: whearof part az I remember, The shepards Calender.
The ship of foolz, Daniels Dreamz, The book of Fortune, Stans puer ad mensam,
The hy wey too the Spittel hoous, Julian of Brainfords testament, The Castle
of Love, The booget of dema^nds, The hundred merry talez, The book of Riddels,
The seven sororz of women, The prooud wives pater noster, The chapman of a
peniwoorth of Wit: Beside hiz ancient playz. Yooth and charitee, Hik^ skorner,
Nugize, Impacient poouerty, and heerwith doctor Boords breuiary of health. What
shoold I rehers here, what a b^nch of ballets and songs all ancient: Az Bro^m
broom on hill. So woe iz me begone, troly lo. Over a whinny Meg. Hey ding a ding.
Bony lass upon a green. My bony on gave me a bek. By a bank az I lay: and a
hunderd more, he has fair wrapped up in Parchment and boound with a whipcord.

And az for Allmanaks of antiquitee, (a point for Ephemerides) I ween he can
sheaw from Jasper Laet of Antwarp, unto Nostradam of Frauns, and thens unto
oour John Securis of Salsbury.

To stay ye no longer heerin I dare say he has az fair a library for theez
Sciencez, and az many goodly Monumens both in proze and poetry, and at
afternoouz can tallk az mooch withoout book, az any Inhollder betwixt Brainford
and Bagshot, what degree so ever he be.

Biside this in the field a good marshall at musterz: of very great credit and
trust in the tooun here, for he haz been choze^ Alecunner many a year, when hiz
betterz have stond by: and ever quited himself with such estimacion, az yettoo
for taste of a cup of Nippitate, hiz judgment will be taken abooue the best in
y^ parish, be hiz noze near so red.

Captain Cox came marching on valiauntly before cleen trust and garterd abooue
the knee, all fresh in a velluet cap (master Golldingam lent it him)
floorishing with hiz tonswoord, and anoother fensmaster with him: thus in the
foreward making room for the rest. And after them prooudly pricked on foremost,
the danish launsknights on horsbak, and then the English: each with their
allder poll martially in their hand. Eeuen at the first enfree the meeting waxt
sum what warm: The couentree play.
that by and by kindled with coorage abothsidez, gru from a hot skirmish unto a
blazing battayl: first by spear and sheeld, ooutragioous in their racez az ramz
at their rut, with furious encoounterz that toogyther they tumbl too the dust,
sumtime horse and man: and after fall too it with sword and target, good bangz a
both sidez: the fight so ceassing, but the battayl not so ended, folloed the
footmen, both the hostez ton after toother: first marching in ranks: then
warlik turning, then from ranks intoo squadrons, then in too trianglz from that
intoo rings, and so wynding oout again: A valiant captayn of great proowes az
fires az a fox assauting a gooz, was so hardy too give the first stroke: then
get they grizly together, that great waz the actiuitee that day too be seen
thear a both sidez: ton very eager for purchase of pray, toother utterly stoout
for redemcion of liberty: thus, quarrel enflamed fury aboth sidez. Twice the
Danes had the better, but at the last conflict, beaten doown, ouercom and many
led captive for triumph by our English weemen.

This waz the effect of this sheaw, that az it waz handled, made mooth matter
of good pastime: brought all indeed intoo the great coourt, even under her
highness windo too have been seen: but (az unhappy it waz for the bryde) that
came thither too soon, (and yet waz it a four a clok). For ^er highness
behollding in the chamber delectabl dancing indeed: and heerwith the great
throng and vnruliness of ye peopl, waz cauz that this solemnitee of Brydeale
and dancing had not the full muster waz hoped for: and but a littl of the
Couentree plea her highness also saw: commanded thearfore on the Tuisday
followyng too have it full oout: az accordingly az waz prezented, whearat her
Majesty laughed well: they wear the iocunder, and so mooch the more becauz her
highness had given them too bucks and five mark in money too make merry together.
They prayed for her Majesty, long happily too reign and off too cum thither that
they might see her: and what, rejoicing upon their ampl rewardand what,
triu^phing upon the good acceptauns: they vaunted their play waz never so
dignified, nor ever any players before so beatified.

Thus though the day took an ^end, yet slipped not the night all sleeping awey:
for az neither offis nor obsequy ceased at any time too the full, to perfoorm
the plot hiz honor had appointed: So, after supper waz thear a play prezented
of a very good theme, but so set forth by the Actoourz well handling, that
pleazure and mirth made it seem very short, though it lasted too good oourz
and more. But stay master Martyn all iz not done yet.

After the play oout of hand, folloed a most delicioouz and (if I may so term
it) an Ambrosiall Banquet: whearof, whither I might more muze at the deintyness,
shapez and the cost: or else at the varietee and number of the disshez (that
wear a three hundred) for my part I coold littl tell them, and noow less, I
assure yoo. Her majesty eat smally or nothing: which understood, the coorsez
wear not so orderly served and sizely set dooun, but wear by and by az
disorderly wasted and coorsly consumed, more courtly me thought then
courteously: But that waz no part of the matter, moought it pleaz and be like
and do that it came for, then waz all well inoough.

Untoo this banquet thear waz appoint^d a mask: for riches of arry, of an
in^redibl cost: but the time so far spent and very late in the night noow^, waz
cauz that it came not forth too the sheaw. And thus for Sondayz seazon having
stayed yoo the longer (according too the matter) hee^ make I an eend: ye may
breath yea while.

Monday the eyghteenth of this July, Monday. 10
the weather being hot, her highness kept the Castl for coolness, till aboout
five a clok her Majesty in the Chase, hunted the heart (az before) of fors: that
whyther wear it by the cunning of the hunsmen, Psalm. 24.
or by the natural desire of the Deer, or else by both: anon he gat him too
soil again, which reyzed the accstumed delight: a pastyme indeed so intyerly
pleazaunt, az whearof at times whoo may have the full and free fruition, can
find no more sacietee (I ween) for a recreation, then of their good viaundes at
timez for their sustentacion.

Well, the game waz gotten, and her highness returning: came thear upon
aswymming Mermayd (that from top too tail waz an eyghteen foot long) Triton,
Triton.
Neptunes blaster: whoo, with hiz trumpet foormed of a wrinkld weald, az her
Majesty waz in sight, gave soound very shrill and sonoroous, in sign he had an
ambassy too pronoouns: anon her highness waz cummen upon the bridge, whearunto
he made hiz fish to swim the swifter, and hy then declared: how the supreme
salsipotent Monarch Neptune, the great God of the swelling Seaz, Prins of
profunditees, and Soouerain Segnior of all Lakez, freshwaterz, Riuerz, Creekes,
and Goolphs: understanding hoow a cruel knight, one Sir Brose sauns pitee, a
mortal enmy unto ladiez of estate, had long lain aboout the banks of this
pooll in wayt with hiz bands here: too distress the lady of the lake, whearby
she has been restrained not only from having any use of her ancient liberty
and territoriez in theez parts: but also of making repayr and giving atte^dauns
unto yoo nobl Queen (quod he) az she woold, she promised, and also shoold:
does thearfore signify: and heerto, of yoo az of his good leag and deer friend
make this request, that ye will deyn but too sheaw yoor parson toward this
pool, whearby yoor only prezens shallbe matter sufficient of abandoning this
vncurtess knight, and putting all his bands too flight, and also of deliuerauns
of the lady oout of this thralldom. Moving here with from the bridge and
fleeting more intoo the pool, charge he in Neptunes name: both Eolus with all
his windez, the waters with hiz springs, hiz fysh and fooul, and all hiz
clients in the same, that they ne be so hardy in any fors too stur, but keep
them callm and quiet while this Queen be prezent. At which peticion her highness
staying* it appeerd straight hoow sir Bruise became unseen, hiz bands skaled,
and the lady by and by, with her too Nymphs, floting upon her moouabl Islands (
Triton on hiz Mermayd skimming by) approached toward her highness on the bridge:
az well too declare that her Maiestiez prezens bath so graciously thus wrought
her deliuerauns, az also to excuze her not coming to coourt az she pomist,
and cha^ly too prezent her Majesty (az a token of her duty and good heart) for
her highness recreation with ^hiz gift, which was Arion that excellent and
famouz Muzicion, in tire and appointment strange well seeming too hiz parson,
ryding aloft upon hiz olld friend the Dolphin, (that from head too tail waz a
foour and twenty foot long) and swymd hard by theez Islands: heerwith Arion for
theez great benefitez, after a feaw well coouched words unto her Majesty of
thanks gyuing, in supplement of the same: beegan a delectabl ditty of a song
well apted too a melodioous noiz, compoounded of six several instruments al
coouert, casting soound from y^ Dolphin^ belly within, Arion the seventh
sittyng thus singing (az I say) withoout.

Noow sir, the ditty in miter so aptly endighted too the matter, and after by
voys so delicioously deliuerd: the song by a skilful artist intoo hiz parts so
sweetly sorted: each part in hiz instrument so clean and sharply ^oouched,
every instrument again in hiz kind so excellently tunabl: and this in the
eeuing of the day, resoounding from the callm waters: whear prezens of her
Majesty and longing too listen had utterly damped all noyz and din* the hole
armony conveyed in time, t^ne, and temper thus incomparably melodioous: with
what pleazure (Master Martin) with what sharpnes of conceyt, with what lively
delight this moought pears into the heerers hearts: I pray ye imagine yoor self
az ye may, for so God judge me, by all the wit and cunning I have, I cannot
express, I promis ye^, Mai^i^^ bien vieu cela Monseur, que forte grande est la
pauuoyr qu' auoit la tresnoble Science de Music sur les esprites humains.
Perceive ye me? I have tolld ye a great matter noow. As for me surely I waz
lulld in such liking and so loath too leave of, y^ mooch a do a good while
after, had I, to find me whear I waz. And take ye this by the way, that for
the small skyl in muzik, that God has sent me (ye kno it iz sumwhat) i will set
y^ more by my self while my name iz Lanham, and grace a God. A, muzik iz a
nobl Art.

A, stay a while, see a short wit: by my frooth I had almost forgot. This day
waz a day of grace beside, whearin wear auaunced five Gentlemen of woorshipp^
unto the degree of knighthood. Sir Thomas Cecyll, Knigh^^ made.
sun and heyr unto the right honorabl the Lord Treazorer, Sir Henry Cobham
broother unto the Lord Cobha^, Sir Thomas Stan^op, Sir Arthur Basset, and Sir
Thomas Tresham; and also by her highness accustumed mercy and charitee, nine
cured of the peynfull and daungeroous diseaz, called y^ kings evil, for that
Kings and Queenz of this Ream, without oother medsin (save only by handling and
prayerz) only do cure it. Bear with me, though perchauns I place not theez
Gentlemen in my recital here, after their estatez: for I am neither good
heraud of armez, nor yet kno hoow they are set in the Subsydy bookez. Men of
great woorship I understand they are all.

Tuisday, Tuisday. (...)
according too commandment. came oour Couentree men: what their matter waz, of
her highness mirth and good acceptauns, and reward unto them, and of their
rejoicing thereat, I sheawd yoo before, and so say the less noow.

Wednesday, Wedns. (...)
in the forenoon, preparacion was in hand for her Majesty too have supt in
Wedgenall, a three mile west from the Castl. A goodly park of the right
honorabl, my very good Lord the Earl of warwyk: for that cauz, a fair pa^ilion,
and oother provision accordingly thither sent and prepared: but by meanz of
weather not to clearly dispozed, the matter waz countermaunded again. That had
her highness happened this day too have cummen abroad: there was made reddy a
devise of Goddessez and Nymphs: which az well for the ingenioous argument, az
for y^ well handling of it in rhyme and endighting woold vndooutedly have gaind
great lyking and moved no less delight. Of y^ particulariteez, whearof I ceas
to entreat: least like the boongling carpentar, by missorting the peecez, I mar
a good frame in the bad setting up, or by my fond tempring before hand
embleamish the beauty, when it shoold be reard up in deed.

A this day also waz thear such earnest tallk and appointment of remoouing
that I gave over my notyng, and harkened after my horse.

Mary sir I must tell yoo: Az all endevoour waz too move mirth and pastime (az
I tolld ye): eeuen so a ridiculoous devise of an ancient minstrell, and hiz
song waz prepared to have been profferd, if meet time and place had been foound
for it. Ons in a woorshipfull company, whear full appoin^ed, he recoounted his
matter in sort az it shoould have been vttred, I chaunsed too be: what I noted,
here thus I tell yoo: A parson very meet seemed he for the purpoze, of a. xlv.
years olld, apparelled partly as he woold him self. Hiz cap of: hiz head seemly
roounded tonster wyze: fair kem^, y^ with a spoonge deintly dipped in a littl
capons greaz, waz finely smoothed too make it shine like a (...). Hiz beard
sm^gly shaven: and yet hiz shyrt after the nu trink, with rufs fair starched,
fleeked and glistering like a payr of nu shooz: marshalld in good order: with a
setting stik, and stroout y^ every ruf stood up like a wafer: a side gooun of
kendall green, after y^ freshn^s of y^ year noow, gatherd at y^ nek with a naro
gorget, fastened before with a white clasp ^a keep^r close up too the chin: but
eazly for heat too undo when he list: See^^ly begyr^ in a red caddis gyrdl:
from y^ a (...) Sheffeld kniuez ha^ging a to side: Oout of hiz boozom drawn
forth a lappet of his napkin, edged with a blu la^e, and marked with a
trulooue, a heart and a D, for Damian: for he waz but a bachelar yet.

Hiz gooun had side sleeuez dooun too midleg* ^lyt from the shooulder too the
hand and lined with white cotton. His dooblet sleeuez of blak woorsted, upon
them a payr of poynets of tawny chamlet laced a long the wreast with blu
threeden points, a wealt toward the ^and of fustia^ anapes: a payr of red
neatherstoks: a payr of pumps on hiz feet with a cross cut at the toze for
cornz: not nu in deed, yet clenly blakt with soot, and shining az a ^hoing
horn.

Aboout his nek a red rebon^ sutabl too hiz gyrdl^ hiz harp in good grace
dependau^t before him, his wrest tied too a green lace and hanging hy: under
the gorget of hiz gooun a fair ^^agon chayn (peawter, for) silver* az a squier
minstrell of Middilsex, that trauayld the cuntree thiz soomer seazon, unto
fayrs and woorshipfull menz hoousez: from hiz cheyn hoong a Schoochion, with
metal and cooller resplendaunt upon his breast of the ancient armez of
Islington: upon a question whearof, he, az one that waz well schoold, and coold
his lesson par^^t withoout book too answer at full, i^ question wear asked him,
declared: hoow the woorshipfull village of Islington in Middelsex, well knooen
too be one of the most ancient and best toouns in England next London at this
day: for the feythfull freendship of long time sheawd, azwell at Cooks feast in
Alldersgatestreet yearly upon holly rood day, az also at all solemn bridealez
in the eitee of London all the year after, in well serving them of furmenty for
porage, not ouersod till it be too weak of mylk for their flawnz, not yet pylld
nor challked: of cream for they custards, not frothed nor thykned with floour,
and of butter for their pastiez, and pyepast, not made of well curds, nor
gathered of whey in soomer, nor mingled in winter with salt butter waterd or
washed: did obteyn long a go theez woorshipfull armez in cooler and foorin az ye
see: which are the armz A feeld argent, az the feeld and groound in deed whearin
the Milk wiuez of this worthy tooun, and every man else in hiz faculty does
trade for hiz living: on a Fess Tenny between three milk tankerds proper. The
three milk tankerds, az the proper vessel whearin the substauns, and matter of
their trade is too and fro transported. The Fess Tenny, which is a cooler
betokening doout and suspicion: so az suspicion and good heed taking, azwell to
their markets and seruau^ts, az too their customerz that they trust not too
far, may bring unto them platez, that iz coined silver: three, that iz
sufficient and plenty, for so that number in Armory may well signify.

For Creast, upon a wad of ote straw for a wreath, a boll of furmenty: what
(az ye k^oo) iz the most precious gift of Ceres: The hornspoonz.
and in the midst of it, stycking a doozen horn spoonz in a bunch, as the
instruments meetest too eat furmenty porage with all: a doozen, az a number of
plenty complete for full cheer or a banquet. and of horn, az of a substauns more
estamabl then iz made for a great deel: being neither so churlish in weight az
iz metal: nor so froward and brytll too manure, az stone: nor yet so soilly
in use, nor roough too the lips az wood iz: but light, plyaunt and smooth, that
with a littl licking wool alweyz be kept az cleen az a die. With yoor paciens
Gentlmen (quod the minstrell) be it said, wear it not in deed that horns be so
plenty, hornware I believe woold be more set by than it iz: and yet are thear in
oour parts that will not styk to auoow, that many an ^onest man both in City
and cu^tree has had hiz hoous by horning well vphollden, and a daily friend
also at need. And this with yoour fauoour may I further affyrm: a very
idgenioous parson was he, that for dignitee of the stuff, coold thus by
spooning deuize, to aduauns the horn so near to the ^ed.

With great congruens also wear theez hornspoonz puttoo the wheat, Guide. Met.
li. 9.
as a token and portion of Cornucopiae, the horn of Achelous, which the Naiades
did fill with all good frutez, corn, and grain, and after did consecrate unto
abooundauns and plenty.

This skoochion with beasts very aptly agreeing both too the armz and too the
trade of the bearerz, glorioously supported: Between a gray Mare (a beast
meetest for carrying of mylktankards) her pannell on her bak, az alwayz reddy
for seruis at every feast and brydeale at n^ed, her tail splayd at most eaz,
and her filly fool, fall^ and a flaxen mane after the sire.

In the skro vndergrauen (quod he) iz thear a proper word, Salern. ca. 9.
an hemistichi, well squaring withal the rest^, taken out of Salerns chapter,
of things that most noorish man's body: Lac, Caseus infans. That is good milk
and young cheez. And thus mooch Gintlmen, and pleaz yoo (quod he) for the armz
of oour woorshipfull tooun. And thear withal made a manerly leg, and so held
his peace.

Az the cumpany pawzed and the minstrell seemd to gape after a prayz for hiz
Beau parler: and bicauz he had renderd hiz lesson so well. Saiz a good fello of
the cumpany* I am sorry to see hoow mooch the poor minstrell mistakez the
matter: for in deed the armz ar thus.

Three milk tankerds proper in a feeld of cloouted cream: three green cheesez
upon a shealf of cakebread. The fyrmenty bool and hornspoonz, cauz thear profit
cumz all by horned beasts. Supported by a mare with a galld bak, and thearfore
still coouerd with a pannell, fysking with her tail for flyez, and her fylly
fool neying after the dam for suk. This word Lac, Caseus infans. That is, a
fresh cheez and cream, and the common cry that theez mylk wiuez make in London
streets yearly, betwixt Easter and Whitsontide: and this iz the very matter I
kno it well inoough, and so eended hiz ^ale, and sat him dooun again.

Heerat every man laughed a good, save the minstrell: that thoogh the fool wear
made privy, all waz but for sport, yet too see him self thus crossed with a
contrary ku that he looked not for, woold straight have geen over all, waxt very
wayward, eager and soour: hoow be it last by sum entreaty and many fair words,
with sak and sugar, we sweetened him again, and after becam az merry az a py.
Appeerz then a fresh, in hiz full formalitee with a loouely look, after three
loly cooursiez, cleerd hiz vo^s with a hem and a reach, and spat oout withal,
wyped hiz lips with the hollo of hiz hand, for fyling hiz napkin, temperd a
string or too with hiz wreast: and after a littl warbling on hiz harp for a
prelude, came forth with a sollem song, King Arthurs book.
warraunted for story oout of king Arthurz acts, the first book and 26.
Chapter, whearof I gat a copy, and that iz thiz.

SO it be^ell upon a Penticost day,
When king Arthur at Camelot kept Coourt riall,
With hiz cumly Queen dame Gaynoour the gay,
And many bolld Barons sittyng in hall,
Ladies apparaild in purpl and pall,
When herauds in hukes herryed full hy
Largess Largess cheualiers treshardy.
A douty dwarf too the uppermost deas
Right peartly began prik and kneeling on knee,
With steeuen full stoout amids all the preas,
Said hail sir king, God thee save and see:
King Ryens of Northgalez greeteth well thee,
And bids that thy beard anon thoou him send,
Or else from thy iawez he will it of rend.
For hiz robe of state, a rich skarlet mantell,
With a leaven kings beards bordred about,
He has made late, and yet in a cantell
Iz left a place the twelth to make (...):
Whear thin must stand, be thoou never so stoout*
This must be done I tell the no fabl,
Mawgre the poour of all thy round tabl.
When this mortal message from hiz moouth waz pa^^
Great waz the brute in hall and in boour:
The king fumed, y^ queen shriked, ladiz wear aghast,
Princes puffed, Barns blustrd, Lords began too loour,
Knights stamped, Squiers startl daz steeds in a stoour
Yeemen and Pagez yeald oout in the hall,
Thearwith came in sir Kay the Seneshall.
Sylens my suffrainz quod the curtize Knight,
And in that stoound the chearme becam still,
The dwarfs dynner full deerly waz dight,
For wine and wastl he had hiz will,
And when he had e^ten and fed hiz fill,
One hunderd pieces of coined golld,
Wear given the dwarf for hiz message bolld.
Say too sir Ryens thoou dwarf quod the king,
That for hiz prooud message I him defy,
And shortly with basinz and panz will him ring
Oout of Northgalez whear az he and I
With sweards and no rayzerz shall utterly ^ry
Which of us both iz the best barber*
And thearwith he shook hiz sword Excalaber.
At this, the minstrell made a pa^z and a ^urtezy, for Primus passus. More of
the song iz thear, but I gat it not. Az for the matter had it cum to the sheaw,
I think the fello woold have handled it well inoough.

Her highness tarryed at Kylling worth till the wednesday after, being the.27.
of this July, and the nienteenth ( inclusiue) of her Maiestiez cumming thither.

For which seven daiz, perceiving my notez so slenderly aunswering: I took it
less blame, too ceas and thearof too write yoo nothing at al, the^ in such
matterz too write nothing likely. And so mooch the rather (az I have well
bethoought me) that if I did but ruminate the dayz I have spoken of, I shall
bring oout yet sumwhat more, meet for yoor appetite, (thoogh a deinty tooth
have ye) which I believe yoor tender stomak will brook well inoogh.

Whearof part iz: first hoow according to her highness name ELIZABETH* The
seauenz.
which I here say oout of the Hebru signifies, (amoong oother) the Seventh of
my God: diuerz things here, did so justly in number square with the same. Az
first, her highness hither cumming in this seventh moonth: then, prezented with
the seven prezents of the seven Gods: and after, with the melody of the
seven sorted Muzik in the dollphin, the Lakeladyez gift.

Then too consider, hoow fully the Gods (az it seemed) had conspyred most
magnificently in aboundauns too bestow their influen^ez and gyfts upon her
coourt thear, too make her Majesty merry.

Sage Saturn Saturn and Pallas.
himself in parson (that bicauz of hiz lame leg coold not so well s^ur) in
chayr thearfore too take order with the grave officerz of hoousholld, helped
indeed with the good advise of hiz prudent Nees Pallas: That no unruly body or
disquiet, disturb the nobl assemblee, or else be ons so bolld too enter within
the Castl gatez. Awey with all rascallz, capti^ez, melancholik, wayward,
froward, coniurerz, and vzurers, and too have laborers and vnderwoorkmen for y^
beautifying of any place, alwey at hand az they shoold be commanded.

Jupiter. Jupiter.
Sent parsenagez of hy honor and dignitee: Barons, Lords, Ladiez, Iugez,
Bishops, Lawyerz, Doctors: with them, virtue, noblness, equitee, liberalitee and
co^pason: due seazo^, and fair weather: Saving that at the peticion of hiz deer
sister Ceres, (...) granted a day or too of sum sweet shoourz for rypening of
her corn that waz so well set, and too set forward ^aruest: Heerwith. bestoed
he such plenty of pleazaunt thunder, lightning, and thund^rbollts: by hiz
halting sun and fyermaster, Vulcan, Vulcan.
still fresh and fresh framed: alweyz so frequent, so intellabl, and of such
continuauns in the spending (az I partly tolld ye) consumed: that surely he
seemz too be az of poour inestimabl: so, in store of municion, vnwastabl: For
all Ouids censure that saiz.

Si, quoties peccant homines sua fulmina mittat Jupiter: exigu^ tempore inermis
erit. If Jove shoold shoot hiz thu^derbollts az often az me^ offend,
Assure yoo hiz artillary woold soon be at an end.
What a number of estatez and of nobilitee had Jupiter assembled thear, gess ye
by this: that of the sort woorshipfull thear wear in the coourt daily abooue
forty, whearof the meynest, of a thoouzand mark yearly reuenu, and many of
mooch more. This great gift biside, did hiz deitee cast upon her highness, too
have fair and seazonabl weather at her ooun appointment: According whearvnto,
her Majesty so had. For her gracious prezens thearfore with this great gift
endewed, Lichfeeld, Worceter, and Middelton, with many placez mo, made humbl
suit unto her highness too cum: too such whearof as her majesty coold, it came:
and they seazon acceptabl.

Phoebus, Phoebus.
Biside hiz continual and most delicious muzik (az I have tolld yoo) appointed
he Princes too adoourn her highnez coourt, Coounselerz, Herauds, and sanguine
yooth, pleazaunt and merry, costly garments, learned Phizicianz, and no need of
them.

Juno. Juno.
Golld cheynez, Ouchez, Jewels of great price and rich attire, woorn in mooch
grace and good beseeming withoout pride, or emulacion of any.

Mars. (...)
Captainz of good conduct, Men skylfull in feats of armz, pollitik in
stratagemz, Good coorage in good quarelz, valiant, and wizehardy: Abandoning
pikquarrels and ruffianz: appointing also pursynaunts, currarz and posts still
feeding her highness with nuze and intelligencez from all parts.

Venus. Ven^s.
Untoo the Ladyez and Gentlwemen: beauty, good fauoor, cumliness, gala^t
attire, dancing with cumly grace, sweet vois in song and pleasant tallk: with
express commaundment and charg unto her sunn on her blessing, that he shoot
not a shaft in the Coourt all the while her highness remained at Killing worth.

Mercuri. Mercuri.
Learned men in Sciencez, Poets, Merchaunts, Painterz, Karuerz, Playerz,
Engynerz, Deuiserz and dexteritee in handling of al pleazaunt attempts.

Luna. Luna.
Callm nights for quiet rest, and silver moonshine, that nightly in deed shone
for most of her Maiestyez being thear.

Blind Plutus. Plutus.
Bags of moony, Custumerz, Exchaungerz, Bankers, Store of riches in plate and
in coin.

Bacchus. Bacch^^
Full Cups every whear, every oour, of all kynds of wine.

Thear waz no deintee that the Sea coold yield, but Neptune Neptune.
(thoough hiz reign at the neerestly well ny a hundred mile of) did daily send
in great plenty, sweet and freash. As for freash water fish, the store of all
sorts waz aboundaunt.

And hoow bountiful Ceres C^res.
in prouizion waz, gess ye by this: that in lyttl more then a three dayz
space.72. tunn of Ale and Beer waz pyept up quite: what that might whilst with
it of bread beside meat, I report me too yoo. And yet master Controller, Master
Co^erar and diverse officerz of the Coourt, sum honorabl, and sundry right
woorshipfull: placed at Warwik for more rooum in the Castl. But here waz no ho
Master Martin in deuoout drinkyng allwey: that brought a l^k unlooked for: which
being knoen too the woorshipfull, my Lords good neyghboourz, came thear in a
too dayz ^pace, from sundry freendz: a releef of a.xl. tunn, till a nu supply
waz gotten again: and then too oour drinking a fresh, az fast az ever we did.

Flora. Flora.
Abroad and within the hoous ministered of flourz so great a quantitee: of such
sweet sauoour, so beautifully hued, so large and fair of proporcion, and of so
strange kindez and shapez, that it waz great pleasure too see. and so mooch
the moore, az thear waz great store yet coounterfet and foormed of featherz by
art, like glorioous too the sheaw az wear the natural.

Protheus. Protheus.
Hiz Tumbler that coold by nymblness cast him self intoo so many foorms and
facionz.

Pan. Pan.
Hiz merry morrys dauns with their pype and taber.

Bellona. Bellona.
Her quintine knights and proper bickerings of the Couentree men.

Polyphemus. Polyphemus.
Neptunez sun and heyr (let him I pray and it be but for hiz fatherz sake, and
for his good will, be allowed for a God, with hiz bearz hiz bear whealps and
bandogs.

Aeolus. Aeolus.
Hollding up hiz wyndez, while ^er highness at any time took pleazure on the
water, and staying of tempests during abode here.

Syluanus. Syluanus.
Beside hiz plentiful prouizion of fooul for deynty viaunds, hiz pleazaunt and
sweet synging byrds: whearof I will sheaw yoo more anon.

Echo. Echo.
Her well endighted dial^g.

Faunus. Faunus.
Hiz ioly Savage.

Genius loci. Genius.
Hiz tempring of all things within and withoout, with apt time and place too
pleazure and delight.

Then the three Charites: Aglaia, Charites.
with her lyghtsum gladness. Thalia her floorishing freshnes. Euphrosyne, her
cheerfullnes of spirit, and with theez three in one assent Concordia: with her
amitee and good agreement. Tha^ too hoow great effects their poourz wear
pooured oout here among us, let it be judged by this: that by a multitude thus
met of a three or foour thoouzand every day: and diuerz dayz more, of so sundry
degrees, professions, agez, appetytz, dispozicions and affections: such a drift
of time was thear passed, with such amitee* love, pastime, agr^ement, and
obediens whear it shoold: and without quarrel, iarring, grudging, or (that I
coold beer) of ill word between any. A thing master Martin very rare and
strange, and yet no more strange then true.

The Parcae Par^ae.
(az erst I shoold have said) the first night of her Maiestiez cumming: they
heering and seeing so precioous adoo here, at a place unlooked for, in an
vplo^dish Cuntree, (...) far within the Ream: preassing intoo every steed whear
her highness went, whearby soduddld with such varietee of delyghts, did set a
side their huswifry, coold not for their hearts tend their work a whyt. But
after they ^ad seen her Majesty a bed, gat them a prying intoo every place:
olld hags, az fond of nuellries, az young girls that had never seen Coourt
before: but neither full, with gazing nor weary with gadding, leaft of yet for
that time, and at high midnight, gate them gigling, (but not alooud) into the
prezens Chamber: minding in deed with their prezent diligens, too recompens
their former slaknes.

So, setting themseluez thus dooun too their woork: alas sayz Atropos I have
lost my sheerz: Lachesis laughed apace and woold not draw a thread: And think
ye damez that i will hoold the distaff while both ye sit idle? why no by my
mootherz soll quod Clotho. Thearwith fair lapt in a fine lawn the spindell and
rok, that waz dyzend with pure purpl sylk, (...) they safely up toogyther: that
of her Maiestyez distaff for an eighteen dayz, thear waz not a thread spoon I
assure yoo.

The too systers after that, (I hard say) began their woork again: y^ long may
they continu, but Atropos hard no tidings of her sheers, and not a man that
mone^ her loss She iz not belooued surely, for this can I tell yoo: that
whither it be for hate too the hag, or love too her highness, or else for both:
every man prayz God she may never find them for that woork, and so pray I daily
and duly with the (...)

Thus partly ye perceive noow, hoow greatly the Gods can do for mortals, and
hoow mooch allwey they love whear they like: that what a gentl Jove waz this,
thus curteoously too contriue here such a treyn of Gods? Nay then rather,
master Martin (too cum oout of oour poeticaliteez, and too talk no more
serioous terms) what a magnificent lord may we iusty accoount him, that coold
so highli cast order for such a Jupiter and al hiz Gods beside: that none, with
hiz influens, good property or preze^t wear wanting: but all alweis ready at
hand in such order and abooundans for the honoring and delight of so hy a
Prins, oour most gracioous Queen and Souerain. A Prins (I say) so singular in
preeminens and worthiness abooue all oother Princez and digniteez of oour time:
thoogh I make no comparison too yeerz past. Too him that in this point, either
of ignorauns (if any such can be) or else of maleuolens woold make any doout:
Sit liber iudex (az they say) let him look on the matter. and answer himfelf,
he haz not far too travel.

Az for the amplitude of hiz Lordships mind: all be it that I poor sooll can
i^ conceit no more attein unto, then judge of a gem whearof I have no skill:
ye, thoogh daily worn and resplendau^t in mine ey: Yet sum of the vertuze and
propertiez thearof, in quantitee or qualitee so apparaunt az cannot be hidden
but seen of all men, moought I be the boolder too reaport her unto yoo: but az
for the valu, yoor iewellers by their carrets let them cast and they can.

And first: who that considerz, unto the stately seat of Kenelwoorth Castl,
the rare beauty of bylding that hiz honor has auaunced: all of the hard quarry
stone: every room so spacioous, so well belighted, and so by roofed within. So
seemly too sight by du proportion withoout: a day time on every side so
glyttering by glass: a nights, by continual brightness of candell fire and
torchlight transparent throogh the lyghtsom wyndz, az it wear the Egiptian
Pharos relucent unto all the Alexandrian coast: or else (too tallk merrily with
my merry friend) thus radiaunt, az thoogh Phoebus for hiz eaz woold reast him in
the Castl, and not every night so too travel dooun unto the Antipodes.
Heertoo so fully furnished of rich apparel and vtensilez apted in all points to
the best.

Untoo thiz, The Garden.
hiz honorz exquisit appointment of a beautiful Garden, an aker or more of
quantitee that lies on the north thear. Whearin hard all along the Castl wall
iz reared a pleazaunt Terres of a ten foot hy and a twelve broad: eeuen under
foot and fresh of fine grass: az iz also the side thearof toward the gardein,
in which by sundry equal distauncez: with obelisks, sphearz, and white bearz
all of stone upon their curioouz basez, by goodly sheaw wear set: too theez,
too fine arberz redolent by sweet trees and floourz, at each end one. The
garden plot under that, with fair alleyz green by grass, eeuen voided from the
borderz a both sydez, and sum (for change) with sand, not light or to soft, or
soilly by dust, but smooth and fyrm, pleasant too walk on, az a sea shore when
the water iz auaild: then, mooch gracified by du proporcion of foour eeuen
quarterz: in y^ midst of each, upon a base a too foot square and hy, seemly
borderd of it self, a square pilaster rizing pyramidally of a fyfteen foot hy:
Simmetrically peerced throogh from a foot beneath, until a too foot of the
top: whearvpon, for a Capitell, an Orb of a ten inches thik: every of theez
(with hiz base) from the groound too the top of one hole pees, heawen oout of
hard Porphiry, and with great art and heed (thinks me) thither conveyed and
thear erected.

Whear further also by great cast and cost the sweetness of sauoour on all
sidez, made so respiraunt from the redolent plants and fragrant earbs and
floourz, in foorm, cooller and quantitee so delicioously variaunt: and fruit
Trees bedecked with their Applz, Pears and ripe Cherryez.

And unto theez in the midst, against the Terres: a square Cage, The Cage.
sumptuoous and beautiful, joined hard too the Northwall (that a that side
gards the gardein, az the gardein the Castl) of a rare foorm and excellency waz
reyzed: in heyth a twenty foot, thyrty long, and a foourteen broad.

From the ground strong and close, reared breast hy, whearat a Soil of a fair
moolding waz coouched all aboout: From that upward, foour great wyndoz a
froont, and too at each eend, every one a five foot wide, az many mo eeuen
abooue them: divided on all parts by a Transum and Architraue so lykewize
raunging aboout the Cage. Each wyndo arched in the top and parted from oother,
in eeuen distauns by ^^at fair bolteld Columns, all in foorm and beauty like,
that supported a cumly Cornish ^oouched all along upon y^ hole square. Which,
with a wyre net, finely knit, of mashez six square, an inch wide (az it wear
for a flat roof) and likewise the space of every wyndo: with great cunning and
cumlynes, eeuen and tight waz all over strained. Under the Cornish again, every
part beautified with great Diamonds, Emerauds, Rubyes and Sapphires: poynted,
tabld, rok and roound: garnisht with their golld, by skyllfull head and hand,
and by toil and pensyl, so lively expressed, az it moought be great marueyl, and
pleazure too consider hoow near excellensy of art coold approach unto
perfection of nature.

Bear with me good cuntreeman, thoogh things be not sheawd here az well az I
woold, or az well az they shoold. For in deed I can better imagine and co^ceyue
that I see, the^ well utter or duly declare it. Holez wear thear also and
cauerns in orderly distauns and facion, voyded intoo the wall: az well for
heat, for coolnez, for roost a nightz and refuge in weather, az also for
breeding when time iz. More, fair eeuen and fresh holly treez for pearching and
proyning set within, tooward each eend one. Heerto, their diuersitee of meats,
their fine seauerall vessels for their water, and sundry grainz. And a man
skyllfull and diligent too look too them and tend them.

But (shall I tell yoo) the silver soounded Lute, withoout the sweet toouch of
hand: the glorioous goollden Cup, withoout the fresh fragrant wine: or the rich
ring with gem, withoout the fair feawterd finger: iz nothing in deed in hiz
proper grace and use: Eeuen so hiz honor accounted of thiz mansion, till he had
plaste thear tenaunts according. Had it thearfore replenisht with lively burds,
English, French, Spanish, Canarian, and (I am deceived if I saw not sum)
African. Whearby, whither it becam more delightsum in chaung^ of tunez and
armony too the ear: or else in differens of coollerz, kyndz, and propertyez too
the ey, I Will tell yoo if I can when I have better bethought me.

One day (Master Martin) az the Gardin door waz open, The Gardener.
and her highness a hunting, by licens of my good friend Adria^, I came in at a
bek, but woold skant oout with a thrust: for sure I waz looth so soon too
depart.

Well may this (Master Martyn) be sumwhat too magnitude of mind, but more
thearof az ye shall kno, more cauz ye shall have so too think: here oout what I
tell yoo, and tell me when we meet.

In the center (az it wear) of this goodly Gardein, The Fountain.
was theer placed, a very fair Foountain, cast intoo an eight square, reared a
four foot hy: from the midst whearof a Colum up set in shape of too Athlants
joined together a backhallf, the toon looking East, toother west: with their
hands, vphollding a fair foormed boll of a three foot over: from wheans sundry
fine pipez, did lively distyll continual streamz intoo the receyt of the
Foountayn: maynteyned still too foot deep by the same fresh falling water:
whearin pleazauntly playing too and fro and roound aboout: Carp, Tench, Bream,
and for varietee, Perch and Eel, fysh fayrlyking all and large, In the top,
the ragged Staff. which, with the boll, the pillar, and eight sydez beneath,
wear all heawen oout of rich and hard white Marbl. A one side, Neptune with hiz
Tridental Fuskin triumphing in hiz Throne, trayled intoo the deep by hiz marine
horsez.

On an oother, Thetis in her chartot drawn by her dollphins. Then Triton by hiz
fyshez. Here Protheus hearding hiz sea bulz. Thear Doris and her dooughterz
solacyng a sea and sandz. The waves soourging with froth and foam, entermengled
in place, with whales, whirpoolz, Sturgeonz, Tunneyz, Conchs and wealks: all
engraven by exquisit deuize and skyll, so az I may think this not mooch
inferioour unto Phoebus gatez, Metam. ^
which ( Ovid sayz) and peradne^tur a pattern to this) y^ Vulcane himself did
cut: whearof such waz the excellency of art, that the woork in valu surmoounted
the stuff, and yet wear the gatez all of clean massy silver.

Here wear things ye see, moought inflame any mind too long after looking:
but whoo so waz foound so hot in desire, with the wreast of a Cok waz sure of a
coolar: water spurting upward with such vehemence, az they shoold by and by be
moystned from top too to. The heez to sum laughing, but the sheez to more sport.

This sumtime waz occupied too very good pastime.

A Garden then so appointed, as whearin a loft upon sweet shadoed wallk of
Terres, in heat of Soomer, to feel the pleazau^t whysking wind abooue, or
delectabl coolnes of the foountain spring beneath: Too taste of delicioous
strawberiez, cherryez and oother frutez eeue^ from their stalks: To smell such
fragrancy of sweet odoourz: breathing from the plants earbs and floourz: Too
here such natural meloodioous muzik and tunez of burds: Too have in ey, for
mirth sumtyme theez vnderspringing streamz: then, the woods, the waterz (for
both pool and chase wear hard at hand in sight) the deer, the peepl (that oout
of the East arber, in the base coourt. also at hand in view) the fruit trees,
the plants, the earbs, the floourz, the change in coollerz, the Burds
flittering, the Fount^in streaming, the Fysh swymming: all in such delectabl
varietee, order and dignitee: whereby at one moment, in one place, at hand
without travel too have so full fruicion of so many Gods blessings, Paradisus.
Graec. Horrus amoeniss. Aur Hebrai^. Pardes id est. Hortus.
by entyer delight unto all sensez (if all can take) at onez: for Etymon of
the word worthy too he called Paradis: and though not so goodly az Paradis for
want of the fair ryuerz, yet better a great deel by the lak of so unhappy a
tree. Argument most cert^in of a right nobl mind, that in this ^ort coold have
thus all contrived.

But Master Martin, yet one wyndless must I featch, too make ye one more fair
coors and I can. And cauz I speak of one: let me tell yoo a littl of the
dignitee of onehod: The number. 1
whearin allweyz, all by Deitee, all Sooueraintee, Preeminens, Principalitee
and Concord withoout possibilitee of disagreement iz contained. Az one God, one
Sauioour, one Feyth, one Prins* one Su^, one Phoenix, and az one of great wizdom
sayz: One heart, one wey. Whear onehod remz: thear quiet bearz rule, and discort
fliez a pa^e. Three again, may signify, cumpany, 3
a meeting, a multitude, pluralitee: so az all talez and numbrings from too
unto three, and so upward may well be coounted numberz, till they moount unto
infinitee, or else too confuzion: which thing, the sum of Too ca^ never admit: ^
nor it self can well be coounted a number, but rather a freendle conjunction
of too onez: that keeping in a sinceritee of accord, may purport unto us,
Charitee each too oother, mutual love, agreement and integritee of friendship
withoout dissimulation. Az iz in theez. The too Testaments. The too Tabls of
the Law. The too great lights: Duo lumina^ia magna: The Sun and Moon. And but
mark a lyttl I pray, and see hoow of all things in the woorld, oour toongs in
tallk do allweyz so redily trip upon tooz, payrz and cooplz: sumtymez az of
things in equalitee, sumtime of differens, sumtyme of contraryez, or for
comparizon: but chiefly for the most part, of things that between them seluez
do well agree and ar fast linked in amitee: Az first for pastymez: hoounds and
hawks: deer, red and fall^, hare and fox, partrich and fezaunt, fysh and fooul,
carp and tench. For warz, spear and sheeld, horse and harneys, sword and
bukler: for sustenauns, wheat and barley, peaz and beanz, meat and drink, bread
and meat, beer and ale, appls and pearz.

But least by such dualiteez I draw yoo too far: let us here stay, and cum
nearer home. See what a sort of freendly biniteez we oour seluez do consist
and stond upon. First oour too feet, too legs, too kneez, so upward: and
abooue, too shoolderz, too armz and too hands. But chiefly oour principal Too,
that iz, body and soll: then in the head whear all oour sensez meet, and almost
all in Tooz: too nozethrills, too earz and too eyz. So ar we of freendly Tooz,
from ^op too to. Well, to this number of biniteez, take ye one mo for an
vpshot, and here an eend. Too dyallz The too diallz.
ny unto the batilments ar set aloft upon too of the sydez of Cezars toour:
one East, thoother Soouth: for so stond they best to sheaw the oourz too the
t^oun and cuntree: both, fair, large ^ rich* by byse for groou^d and golld for
letterz: whearby they glitter co^spicuoous a great wey of. The clokbell that iz
good and shrill, waz commanded too silens at first, and in deed sang not a
note all the while her highness waz thear, the clok stood also still withal.
But mark noow: whither wear it by chauns, by constellacion of starz, or by
fatal appointment (if fatez and starz do deal with dyallz). The diallz at.ii.
a clok
Thus waz it in deed: The hands of both the tablz stood fyrm and fast allweyz
pooynting to just too a clok, still at too a clok. Which thing behollding by
hap at first: but after, serioously marking in deed: emprinted unto me a deep
sign and argument certain. That this thing amoong the rest waz for full
signifiauns of hiz Lordships honorabl, frank, freendly and nobl heart toward all
estatez. Which, whither cum they too stay and take cheer, or straight too
return: too see or too be seen: cum they for duty too her Majesty or love too
hiz Lordship, or for both: Cum they early or late: For hiz Lordships part, they
cum allweyz all at too a clok, even iump at too a clock: That iz too say, in
good heart, good acceptauns, in amitee, and freendly wellcoom. Who saw else that
I saw, in right must say az I say. For so many things byside, Master Humfrey,
wear heerin so consonant unto my constructio^, that thiz poynting of the clok,
(too my self) I took in amitee az an Oracl certain. And here iz my wyndless,
like yoor coors az pleaz ye.

But noow sir too cum to eend. For receiving of her highness, and entertainment
of all thoother estatez: Syns of delicatz that any wey moought serve or
delight: az of wine, spyce, deinty viaunds, plate* muzik, ornaments of hoous,
rich arras and silk, (too say nothing of the meaner things) the mass by
prouizion waz heaped so hoouge, which the boounty in spending did after bewray.
The conceyt so deep in casting the plat at first. Such a wizdome and cunning in
acquiring things so rich, so rare, and in such aboundauns: by so immens and
profuse a charge of expens. Which by so honorabl seruis and exquisit order,
curteizy of officerz and humanitee of al, wear after so boountifully bestoed
and spent: what may this express, what may this set oout unto us, but only a
magnifyk mind, a singular wizdoom, a prinsly purs, and an heroical heart? If
it wear my theme Master Martyn, too speak of his Lordships great honor and
magnificens, though it be not in me to say sufficiently, az bad a penclark az I
am, yet coold I say a great deel more.

But being here noow in magnificens and matters of greatness: it fallz well too
mind. The greatness of hiz honorz Tent, The great Tent.
that for her Maiestiez dyning waz pight at long Ichingto^, the day her highness
came to Kyllingwoorth Castl. A Tabernacl indeed for number and shyft of large
and goodly roomz, for fair and eazy officez: both inward, and ooutward all so
likesu^ in order and eysight: that justly for dignitee may be comparabl with a
beautiful Pallais, and for greatness and qua^titee with a proper Tooun, or
rather a Cittadell. But too be short, least I keep yoo too long from the Ryall
exchange noow, and too cauz yoo conceive mooch matter in feawest words: The
Iron bedsteed of Og the king of Basan, Deuteronomy. 3
(ye wot) waz foour yards and a half long, and too yards wide, whearby ye
consider a Giaunt of a great proportion waz he. This Tent had seven cart lode
of pynz perteining too it: noow for the greatness, gess az ye can.

And great az it waz (too marshall oour matters of greatness together) not
forgetting a Weather at Grafton, brought too the coourt, that for body and
wool waz exceeding great: the meazure I took not. Let me sheaw yoo with what
great marueyl a great Child of Leyceter shyre, at this long Ichington, by the
parents waz prezented: great (I say) of limz and proportion, of a foour foot
and foour inches hy: and else lanuginoous az a Lad of eyghteen yeerz, being in
deed a voowd too be but six year olld: nothing more bewraying hiz age the^ hiz
wit: that waz, az for thooz yeerz, simpl and childish.

Az for unto hiz Lorship, having with such greatness of honorabl modesty and
benignitee so passed forth, az: Laudem sine inuidia et amicos pararit. Terent.
By greatness of well doing, won with all sorts too be in such reuerens, az:
De quo mentiri fama veretur. In synceritee of freendship so great, (...)
az no man more deuooutly woorships. Illud amicitiae sanctum et venerabile
nomen. So great in liberalitee, Ovid.
az has no wey too heap up the mass of hiz treazure, but only by liberal
giving and boounteoous bestoing hiz treazure, folloing (az it seemez) the law
of Martial that says.

Extra fortunam est, quicquid donatur amicis: Q^^s dederis, solas semper
habehis opes. Oout of all hazerd do thou set that too thy freend^ thou
gyuest:
A surer treazure can thoou not have ever while thoou lyuest.
What may theez greatnesses bode, but only az great honor, fame, and renooum
for theez parts heerawey, az ever waz unto thoz too nobl Greatz: the
Macedonia^ Alexander in Emathia or Grees, or too Roman Charlez in Germany, or
Italy? which, wear it in me any wey too set oout, no man of all men by God
(Master Martin) had ever more cauz: and y^ ^eerby consider yoo. It pleazed hiz
honor too bear me goodwil at first, and so to continu. To have given me
apparail eeuen from hiz bak, to get me allowauns in y^ stabl, too aduauns me
unto thiz woorshipfull office so near y^ most honorabl Coou^cell, too help me
in my licens of Beanz (though indeed I do not so much vze it, for I thank God
I need not) too permit my good Father to serve the stabl.

Whearby I go noow in my sylks, y^ else might ruffl in my cut canuas: I ride
noow a horse bak, that else many timez might manage it a foot: am knoen too
their honorz and taken forth with the best, that else might be ^idden to stand
back my self: My good Father a good releef, that he farez mooch the better by:
and none of theez for my dezert, either at first or syns, God he kneez. What
say ye my good friend Humfrey, shoold I not for ever honor, extol him all the
we^z I can? Yes by yoor leave while God lends me poour to utter my mind. And
(having az good cauz of hiz honor, az Virgill ^ad of Augustus Cezar) will I
poet it a littl with Virgill, Eglog. 1.
and say.

Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus, illius ara^:
Saepe tener nostris ab ouilibus imbuet ag^us.
For he shallbe a God to me, till death my life co^sumez:
Hiz auterz will I sacrifice with incens and perfumez.
A singular Patron of humanitee may he be well unto us tooward all degreez: of
honor, toward hy Estates: and chiefly, whearby we may learn in what dignitee,
woorship and reuerens her highness iz to be esteemed, honored, and received.
That waz never indeed more condignly done the^ here: so az neither by the
bylderz at first, nor by the Edict of pacificacion after, 1266. An. 50 Hear. 3.
waz ever Kenelwoorth more nobl^d the^ by thiz, hiz lordships receiui^g her
highness here noow.

But Jesus Jesus whither am I draw^n noow. But tallk I of my Lord onz, even thus
it farez with me: I forget all, my friends, and my self too. And yet yoo, being
a Mercer, a Merchant, az I am: my cuntree man born, and my good friend withal,
whearby I kno ye ar compassiond with me: Me thought it my part su^what to
empart unto yoo, hoow it iz here with me, and hoow I lead my life, which in
deed iz this.

A mornings I rize ordinarily at seven a clok: Then reddy, I go intoo the
Chapel: soon after eight, I get me commonly intoo my Lords Chamber, or intoo
my Lords prezidents. Thear at the cupboord after I have eaten y^ manchet,
served over night for lyuery (for I dare be az bolld, I promis yoo, az any of
my friends the servant thear: and indeed coold I have fresh if I woold tarry,
but I am of wont jolly and dry a mornings) I drink me up a good bol of Ale:
when in a sweet pot it iz defecated by all nights standing, the drink iz y^
better take that of me: and a morsel in a morning with a soound draught iz
very hollsom and good for the eysight. The^ I am az fresh al y^ fornoon after,
az had I eaten a hole pee^ of beef. Noow sir, if the Counsel sit, I am at
hand, wait at an inch I warrant yoo. If any make babbling, peace (say I) woot ye
whear ye ar? If I take a lystenar, or a priar in at y^ chinks, or at the
lokhole, I am by and by in the bonez of him: but noow they keep good order,
they kno me well enough: If a be a friend, or such one az I like: I make him
sit down by me on a foorm, or a cheast, Let the rest wallk a Gods name.

And here does my Langagez noow and than stond me in good steed, my French, my
Spanish, my Duch and my Latten: sumtime amoong Ambassadors me^, if their
Master be within with ye Council: sumtime with the Ambassador himself, if he
bid call hiz lacky, or ask me what is a clok. And I warrant ye I answer him
rooundly, that they marvel to see such a fello thear: the^ laugh I and say
nothing. Diner and supper I have twenty placez too go too, and hartly praid
too: And sumtime get I too Master Pinner, by my feyth a worshipful Gentlman,
and az careful for hiz charge az any her highness has: thear find I allway
good store of very good viaunds: we eat and be merry, than^ God and the Queen.
Him self in feeding very temperat and moderat az ye shall see ony^ and yet by
yoor leave of a dish, az a colld Pigeo^ or so, that has cum to him at meat
more then he looked for, I have seen him even so by and by surfyt, az he has
pluct of hiz napkin, wyept hiz knife, and eat not a morsel more: like inoough
too stik in hiz stomak a too dayz after: (Sum hard message from the higher
officerz, perceive ye me?) Upon search, hiz faithful dealing and diligens has
foound him fautles. In afternoons and a nights, sumtime am I with the right
woorshipfull Sir George Howard, az good a Gentlman az any lyuez: And sumtime at
my good Lady Sydneys chamber, a Noblwooman, that I am az mooch boound unto, az
any poor man may be unto so gracioous a Lady: And sumtyme in sum oother place:
But allweyz amoong the Gentlwemen by my good will (O, ye kno that cumz allweyz
of a gentle spirit) and when I see cumpany according, than can I be az lively
too: sumtime I foot it with daunsyng: noow with my Gyttern, and else with my
Cyttern, then at the Uirginallz: Ye kno nothing cums amiss to me: then carroll
I up a song withal, that by and by they cum flocking aboout me like beez too
hunny: and ever they cry, anoother good Langham anoother. Shall I tell yoo?
when I see Misterz -- (A, see a mad knave, I had almost tolld all) that she
gyuez onz but an ey or an ear: why then, man, am I best: my grace, my coorage,
my cunning iz doobled: She sayz sumtime she likez it, and then I like it mooch
the better, it does me good to here hoow well I can to. And too say truth:
what, with mine eyz, az I can amoroously gloit it, with my spanish sospires, my
french heighes, mine Italian dulcets, my dutch houez my doobl releas, up syn
houe.
my hy reachez, my fine feyning, my deep diapason, my wanton warblz, my
running, my tyming, my tuning and my twynkling, I can gracify the matter az
well az the prowdest of them, and waz yet never staynd I thank God. By my troth
cuntreman it iz sumtime by midnight ear I ca^ get from them. And thus have I
tolld ye most of my trade, all the leeue long day: what will ye more, God save
the Queen, and my Lord, I am well I thank yoo.

Heerwith meant I fully to bid ye farewell, had not this doout cum to my mind,
that here remainz a doout in yoo, which I ought (me thought) in any wyze to
clear. Which iz, ye marvel perchauns to see me so bookish, Let me tell yoo in
few words: I went too school forsooth both at Pollz, and also at saint
Antoniez: in the fifth foorm, past Esop fabls twys, red Terens. Vos islaec
introauferte, and began with my Uirgill Tytire tu patulae. I coold my rulez,
coold conster and pars with the best of them. Syns that, az partly ye kno, have
I traded the feat of merchaundize in sundry Cuntreyz, and so gat me Langagez:
which do so littl hinder my Latten, az (I thank God) have mooch encreast it. I
have leazure su^time, when I tend not upon the Council: whearby noow look I on
one book, noow on an oother. Storyez I delight in, y^ more ancient and rare,
the more lykesum unto me: If I tolld ye. I lyked Wylliam a Malmesbery so well
bicauz of hiz diligens and antiquitee. Perchauns ye woold conster it bicauz I
love Malmzey so well, but I feyth it iz not so: for sipt I no more Sak and
sugar (and yet never but with cu^pany) then I do Malmzey, I shoold not blush
so mooch a dayz az I do, ye kno my mind. Well noow thus fare ye heartily well.
I feith, if with wishi^g it coold have been, ye had had a buk or too this
soomer: but we shall cum nearer shortly, and the^ shall we merely meet and
grace a God. In the mean time commend me I beseek yoo: unto my good friends,
almost most of the^ yoor neighboours, Master Allderman Pullison, aspeciall
friend of mine: and in any wise too my good olld friend Master smith Custumer,
by that same token: Set my horse up to the rak and then lets have a cup of Sak.
He knoez the token well enough, and will laugh, I holld ye a grote. Too Master
thorogood: And too my merry companion (a Mercer ye wot az we be) Master Denman,
Mio fratello in Christo: he iz wont too summon me by the name of To. La. of
the coounty of Nosingham Gentlmam A good companion I feyth. Well onez agein
fare ye heartily well. From the Coourt. At the City of Worceter, the xx. of
August. 1575.

Yoor countreeman, companion, and friend assuredly: Mercer, Merchauntauenturer;
and Clark of the Council chamber door, and also kepar of the same: El
prencipe negro. Parme. R. L. Gent. Mercer.

DE MAY ATE REGIA. Benigno.
Cedant armatogae, concedat laurea lingu^^,
Iactanter Cicero, aciustius illud habe:
Cedant arma togae, vigil et togacedit honori,
Omnia concedant Imperioque suo,
DEO OPT. MAX. GRATIAE.

