A REVELATION OF THE SECRET SPIRIT. Declaring the most concealed secret of
ALCHYMIE. Written first in Latin by an unknown Author, but explained in
Italian, by JOHN BAPTISTA LAMBYE, Venetian.

Lately translated into English, by R. N. E. Gentleman.

Unto so high a secret who shall approach?
six-pointed star MERCVRIUS. Saturn Jupiter Mars Sol Luna Venus




He brought water out of the rock.

Psalm. 77. v. 13. And oil out of the hardest stone.

Deuteronomy. chap. 32. v. 19. LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Henry Skeleton,
and are to be sold at his shop a little within All-gate. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, my honorable Lord, John Thornburgh, Lord
Bishop of Worcester, health and happiness.
THe Fowlers of the Hermeticall Bird (Right reverend Prelate) being of so
different quality, that some live in extreme poverty to the very last point of
their age, others in plenty; as I have observed these eight years, in my
travels through France, Italy, and Germany, makes me to think that the Poets
have described Atalanta for a type of Alchymie. She being a maid of most
admirable swiftnes, in which gift she ouerpassed all mankind, did covenant with
her suitors to run for life and death, under condition of marriage; that
whosoever of them were ouerrunne, should be put to death, but who did ouerrunne
her, should live and marry her. Many did run, many were ouerrunne, many
killed. Until that Hippomanes running with her, and almost overcome, threw
down three golden Apples one after another, the gifts of Venus. Which,
Atalanta stooping to take up, hindered her course, was won and obtained in
marriage. Whereby the dangerous course of Alchymie in many is manifestly seen,
that who does not overcome it, perishes; and whosoever is to overcome it, must
first receive three golden Apples from Venus. The Philosophical Mythologie
thereof, none that I have known or heard of, can better explain than your
Lordship, whose singular learning, not in shadow or superficial, but solid and
in substance, from time to time under two glorious Princes, Queen Elizabeth and
King James, has exalted you to higher and higher degrees of Ecclesiastical
dignity, and whose courteous, generous, grave, and comely hauiour in speech and
actions, does declare your Lordship to bear so noble a mind, that it dwells
rather in an heavenly Palace, than an earthly body. Your divine studies
requiring healthful intermission, has admitted no other relaxation of Spirit,
than the most worthy sight of philosophical trialls. Wherein God has so
blessed your Lordship, that albeit you have largely bestowed charges therein,
yet without decay of any part of your estate, or loss of time, or failing in
expectation, you have found out most rare secrets, as well for profit as for
the health of man, approved with great admiration of many, both the noblest
Patients, and best Physicians of the Kingdom: neither is that all, but
imitating the bounty of GOD, whose glory is most eminent in the communication
of goodness unto others; your Lordship to benefit the whole world, and to save
the painful searchers of nature from dangerous and chargeable courses, has
most learnedly, most perfectly, and most curiously penned and published your
late Treatise, LITHOTHEORICOS, of nihil, aliquid, omnia.

These considerations have moved me to esteem none worthier than your
Lordship, unto whose honor should be consecrated, this Philosophical
Apocalypsis with the exposition thereof, much esteemed amongst the learned in
Italy, but in England regrated to be heretofore so put in print, that it
seemed to be a Leopard spotted with diverse colors; so that one part thereof
was Italian, and another Latin. Whereby they who understood the one part,
could not understand the other, unless they were skillful in both the
Languages. I have now reduced it all to one language so near as could be
done, word by word, without addition or diminishing in any thing, that your
Lordship may the better judge thereof. Which I do heartily offer unto your
Lordship, as a testimony not only of that respect, which generally all men of
learning do owe unto your Lordship (your house being unto them for an
Apollinian retreat, as a living Library, a flourishing Academy, or a religious
Abbey) but specially for the whole Scottish Nations sake, which has always
found your Lordship a constant and effectual friend, a loving Father, a royal
Maecaenas, and a virtuous pattern of all goodness. In this Dedication may be
found my intention honest, the gift small, your honor great, the event happy;
if your Lordship accepting thereof, do according to your accustomed
providence, carefully proceed in the practical search of that Chrystalline
central Salt, whereof this Treatise wittily handles, which all that know your
Lordships most worthy disposition, do earnestly wish unto your Lordship, with
all felicity both corporal and spiritual, temporal and perpetual, and in
that wish I rest

Your Lordships most dutiful Seruitour, R. N. E.

To the discreet and true searchers of the secrets of Nature, leading a
solitary life.
John Baptista Lambye, Venetian, wishes health.
Having spent many years, and inestimable labors, about that Science, which
by all the wisest Philosophers is called divine and secret; according to the
experience which I have had in my self, I cannot choose but have compassion of
those noble Spirits, who are turmoiled in the difficulty thereof; and therefore
as it has been a great comfort unto me, to find him who in any thing could
have helped my study; even so will I freely (so far as I can) help others;
insomuch as by long travel and experience I could attain: Nevertheless
without departing any ways from the custom of our wisest Masters, who in
writing never addressed themselves to the vulgar, but to the only children of
truth. Wherefore having in my hands a little Treatise of an uncertain Author,
entitled, A Revelation of the secret Spirit, short in number of leaves, but
according to my judgment, in sentences and learning most grave: and to my
knowledge no more Copies seen in light, I thought good to set it forth unto
the benefit of you all, who are inamoured of this divine Science. And that it
might become so much the more profitable and acceptable, I have purposed yet to
adorn the same with a short Exposition and allegation of sentences of the best
Philosophers. Not perhaps in such manner as you could have wished, or the
matter has required, but at least as my weakness could, and the custom of
our Masters does permit to do. Therefore I pray you accept cheerfully this so
much as a courteous mind desirous to help and to further, could for the
present give; praying our Lord God, without whose favor so excellent a science
cannot be obtained, that he would both give unto me the grace to be able to
show some thing profitable, and unto you to understand and to prevail, no
otherwise than to the honor and glory of his glorious and blessed name.

THE REVELAtion of the secret SPIRIT.
HErmes, Plato, Aristotle, and other Philosophers in former times flourishing,
the original Springs of Sciences, and the inuentors of liberal Arts,
earnestly approving the virtues of things under the Heavens, did inquire with
great desire, if any thing was amongst the creatures that might save man's body
from all corruption, and preserve it alive for ever.

Unto whom it was answered, that there was nothing that could deliver our
corruptible body from death, but that there was one thing that could remove all
corruptions, renew youth and prolong short life, as in the first Patriarchs;
because unto the first Parents Adam and Eve, for penance of sin death was
given, which will never be separated from the whole posterity.

Wherefore the said Philosophers, and many others most painfully seeking that
one thing amongst all things, have found that it which should preserve man's
body from corruption, and prolong life, is such amongst qualities as the Heaven
amongst Elements.

They understood the Heaven to be above the Essence of the four Elements, and
so that to be above the Essence of the four qualities.

The Heaven in comparison of Elements, is called Quintessence; because it is
incorruptible, unchangeable, not receiving strange impressions; so also that
thing, in respect of the qualities of our body, is in corruptible, expelling al
superfluities from the body.

It is called of the Philosophers by the foresaid name, neither hot and dry
with the fire, nor cold and moist with the water, nor hot and moist with the
air, nor cold and dry with the earth, but of all the elementary qualities a
perfect proportion, a true conjunction of natural power, a special addition
of spiritual virtue, and an inseparable union of body and soul: a substance
most pure, most precious, artificially extracted from an incorruptible body,
which no ways can be destroyed, nor in any thing be defiled with the Elements.

Whereof Aristotle did make an Apple, with whose smell he did prolong his
life, when through length of age, he could not eat nor drink, fifteen days
before his death.

This spiritual substance is that only thing, which from above was showed
unto Adam, and most desired by the holy fathers, which Hermes and Aristotle do
call the truth without lie, the certain most certain, and the secret of all
secrets, hid (...) in nature, and the marvelous final conclusion of all
philosophical works.

In the which is found the dew of the Heaven, the fat of the earth, and what
the power of man cannot express, in this spirit is found; because as Morien
says, who has it, possesses all things, and shall need the help of no body
in any thing, because in it is all temporal felicity, corporal health, and
earthly prosperity.

This is the Spirit of the Quintessence, the Spring of sublunary health,
vpholder of Heaven, retainer of Earth, mouer of Sea, stirrer of wind, sender
of Rain, container of all things and virtues, and spiritual and chosen above
all subcelestiall Spirits, giving health and prosperity, joy and peace; it
yields love, dissolueth hatred, chaseth away sadness, brings in mirth, and
generally remoueth all evils, most speedily cures all diseases; finally,
destroys misery and poverty, makes and brings all good, cannot speak or
think evil, gives unto man what his heart desires, unto the good temporal
glory and long life, but perpetual pain unto the evil that use it.

This is the spirit of truth which the world cannot apprehend, but by the grace
of inspiration, or the teaching of them that know it; it is of an unknown
nature, wonderful virtue, and infinite power; this the Saints from the
beginning of the world have wished to see.

This Spirit, by Auicen, is called the soul of the world, because as the soul
moves the members, so this Spirit moves all bodies; and as the soul is in
every part of the body, so in every elementary thing this Spirit is found:
which is sought by many, but found by few, it is thought to be far of, and
found near at hand, because in every thing, place, and time, it is found,
having the virtues and effects of all things, and being equal in all the
Elements, and whatsoever is proper to every thing, in this only thing is found
most effectually. By whose virtues Adam and the Patriarchs had health of body,
and length of life, and many others have flourished in riches.

Which being laboriously sought and carefully found, the Philosophers have hid
in aenigmaticke terms, that they should not show so worthy a thing to the
unworthy, nor throw so precious a pearl amongst Hogs, which if it were known
to all, the study and labor of all men would cease, and man would desire no
other thing but only it, and so men would live unworthily, and it would be the
cause of the ruin of the whole world, as well through health as through
abundance, men would much more offend God: Because the eye has not seen, nor
the ear has not heard, nor it has not hitherto entered into the heart of
man, what the Heaven has naturally placed into this Spirit.

Therefore I have briefly compiled certain properties of the said Spirit,
approved by Philosophers, unto the praise of God and the profit of good men,
that they might most devoutly magnify God in his gifts, at least they who
hereafter shall receive such a gift, because these gifts are not belonging to
every one, but to them whose minds shall be good. Now what properties and
virtues that Spirit has in every essence, and how it appears corporally,
that it may the sooner be found and known, hearken with the understanding of
the heart.

In its first essence, it appears in an earthly body foul and full of
infirmities, in which it has a property and virtue of curing wounds and
corruptions in the entrails of men, it purges putrefaction and stink abiding
in any place whatsoever, it cures all things inwardly and outwardly.

In the second Essence, it appears unto the sight in a watery body, somewhat
fairer than the first, containing corruptions, but more plentifully working his
virtue, nearer unto the truth, and in every work more powerful, in which
generally it gives aid to all sicknesses both hot and cold, because it is of
an hid nature, chiefly it helps them that suffer venom in the breathing
parts, for it chaseth venom from the heart, dissolueth without violence things
contained in the lungs, and (notwithstanding the commotion) it does consolid
the same vlcerated, it cleanses blood, it purifieth corruption contained in
the breathing parts, and it preserves them cleansed from corruption, being
thrice a day drunk by any that languisheth, it makes good hope, etc.

But in the third Essence, it appears in an airy body, oily, almost freed
from all diseases, in which it shows wonderful works; for it helps young
men to last in body, state, strength, and beauty, if they use it by little and
little, and in a small quantity in their meat, because it suffers no ways
melancholy to exceed, nor choler to burn. Moreover, above measure it
increases blood and feed, and therefore it behooves them who use it, often to
be let blood. Also this oil does open the Nerves and Veins; and if any
member be fading, it reduces it to his due measure; and if a young man before
the state of age, has an eye burst, if one drop be put therein every day, and
that he be quiet for a month, without doubt his sight shall be restored. And
if any thing be putrified in any member, or superfluous, it dissolueth it
speedily, and separateth it. And if it find it diminished, it restores it, etc.

But in the fourth Essence, it appears in a fiery body not fully cured from
all diseases; containing water, and not fully dried: in the which it produces
many virtues. The old it makes young, and if in the hour of the hickocke of
death, there be given of this fire, so much as the weight of one grain of
wheat tempered with Wine, so that it go down the throat, it reuiueth, and
enters, and warmeth, and pierces even to the heart, and suddenly annihilateth
all superfluous humors, and expels poison, and viuifieth the nature of heat
unto the Liver. And if old folk use this fire in a moderate quantity, and
join thereto the water of gold, it remoueth the infirmity of age; So that they
may enjoy young hearts and bodies: and for this it is called the Elixir of life.

In the fifth and last Essence, it appears in a body equally glorified,
wanting all faults, shining like the Sun and Moon. In which it has all the
foresaid virtues and properties, which it possesses in other essences, both
fairer, and more wonderful. For his natural works are esteemed the miracles
of GOD, because if it be put to the roots, the bodies of trees long dead and
dried, are made living, flourishing and fruitful; and if the lights of a Lamp
be mixed with the self Spirit, they are not extinguished, but are burning
eternally without diminishing. And it makes the precious stones of Crystal
most costly with diverse colors; they that are of the Mine shall never be
better, and it does many other things, which are not lawful to be revealed
unto the unjust, which are esteemed impossible unto man, because it cures all
bodies both dead and quick, without any other medicine.

By Christ Jesus witness I do not lie in any thing, because the influences of
all heavenly bodies, which in all and every thing are infused, are found in it.

In this Essence it shows the treasures drowned in the Sea, and hid in the
earth, and it makes all the bodies of metals most pure gold and silver, and
nothing like to it is contained under the Heaven.

This Spirit is the mystery which was hid from ages revealed to some Saints, to
whom it pleased God to make known the riches of glory, which remains fiery
in water, and carries with it earth in the air, and out of his belly flows
floods of living water and life.

This Spirit flies through the midst of the Heaven, as a morning cloud,
containing burning fire in water, and earth clarified in air. It expels the
malice of Saturn and Mars, joining Jupiter with the Moon and Mercury, and in
the light of the Sun, giving unto his sister Venus honey of the rock, and
lives with her for ever.

And albeit these works appear erroneous and false unto the Readers, yet to
the skillful and those that prove them actually, they are true and possible, if
the figurative speech be faithfully understood, and therefore unless thou
understand sufficiently, do not intrude thy self any ways into this Spirit,
because God is marvelous in his works, and there is no number of his wisdom.

This Spirit in a fiery nature is called Sandaracha, in airy Alkebrit, in watery
Azoch, in earthly Aliochaph; by which means they who seek him are deceived,
thinking the Spirit of life to be in such things, which to our knowledge be
of no value.

And albeit this Spirit whom we seek, by reason of his property is called by
these names; yet in these bodies, he is not, nor cannot be; for the glorified
Spirit cannot appear but in a body agreeing to his kind, albeit he is named
by these and many other names.

Neither should any man think, that there be diverse spirits, but howsoever it
is called, it is one and the self same spirit, that works all in all things.

This is the spirit whom in ascending the cleernesse of the Heaven has
ouershined, and in descending the purity of the earth has incorporated, and
flying about the wideness of the Sea has received. It is not of the lower
Hierarchy, where is Raphael called the Angel of God, most subtle, most
precious and most pure, unto whom as unto a King all the rest obey.

This spiritual substance is not celestial, nor infernal, but a certain
airy body gloriously purified betwixt the highest and lowest, placed in the
midst, spiritually animated, wanting reason, but fruitfully profiting; above
all things under the Heavens choised and adorned.

This divine work is made too profound, that the fool may not understand it,
because it is the last of the secrets of nature.

This is the Spirit of the truth of the Lord, who has replenished the Globe of
the earth; and in the beginning was carried upon the waters, whom the world
cannot conceive, but by the grace of inspiration, or the teaching by those that
know it; and whom the whole world has desired, for his virtues that appear
inestimable.

For it enters the Planets, chaseth away the Clouds, gives cleernesse to
every one, and conuerteth all unto Sun and Moon: it gives all health and
abundance of treasure, it cleanses the leprosy, clears the sight,
comfort the sad, heals the sick, renders hid treasures, and generally
cures all diseased.

By this Spirit the Philosophers have found out the seven Sciences, and had
abundance of riches. By this Moses made the Vessels of pure gold in the temple,
and King Solomon many and precious ornaments to the worshipping of God. And
many others have made wonderful and great works. Noe built the Arc, Moses
the Tabernacle, Solomon the Temple, Esdras recovered the Law, Mary the sister
of Moses kept hospitality, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and other godly personages
obtained length of days with abundance of riches, and flourished, and the
godly knowing it glorified God.

Therefore the obtaining thereof is better than the traffic of gold or
silver, because it is more precious than any works: and all things that are
desired in this age cannot be compared unto it, because it is proved and found
perfect and infallible.

For in it only consists the truth, wherefore it is called the stone, or
spirit of truth, and in his works there is no vanity, whose praises I cannot
express because I am not sufficient to tell his virtues.

For his goodness, property and virtue, is greater than the mind of man can
conceive, or the tongue express by words; because the properties of all things
are hid in it, and all that nature has given to other things, in it being
true, is truly found. What shall I say more? there is not, was, or ever shall
be, any who shall search nature deeper.

O the height of the wisdom of God, because what all bodies have, thou have
enclosed in the power of one Spirit! O ineffable glory! O inestimable joy,
shown unto mortal men! because the corruptible things of nature by virtue of
the Spirit are made better. O secret of all Secrets, health and remedy of all,
the last search of nature under the Heaven, and the wonderful conclusion of
the ancient fathers, and of the latter wise men, and of all Philosophers, the
which the world and all the earth desires. O most wonderful and much
praiseworthy Spirit* It is the purity in which all delights and riches are
contained, and also the fruitfulness of life, Science the strength of
Sciences, giving temporal joy to those that know it.

O knowledge worthy to be desired and beloved above all things under the Moon!
by which nature is strengthened, the hearts with the members rejoiced,
flourishing youth preserved, age removed, infirmity destroyed, and most
pleasant health kept, abundance of goods had, and all that delights man
plentifully purchased.

O spiritual substance commendable above all things! O wonderful power
comfortable unto all! O superior virtue in things invincible! Which albeit it
has appeared contemptible unto the unwise, yet to those that know it, it is to
be beloved, for praise, glory, and honor; because it expels naturally all
manner, of death caused by humors: O Treasure of Treasures! O Secret of Secrets!

This is the infallible substance called and named of Auicen the soul of the
world, most pure, most perfect, and most powerful. Nothing under the Heavens
so precious, of hid nature and of wonderful virtue, operation, and (...)
power. Unto which nothing is like amongst creatures, which has all the virtues
of the bodies under the Heaven, for out of it flows waters of life, honey and
oil of everlasting health, and so with the rock, and honey he has filled
them. Therefore says Morien, who has it possesses all things, and needs no
ways the help of others.

Blessed art thou, O Lord God our father, who gave this knowledge and
understanding to the Prophets and Philosophers, that so they have hid it, that
the blind filled with worldly lust might not find it, and the well disposed by
this have praised thee.

Grant that it may be discovered to none, but to the lover of thee, and to the
desirer to do good things by it. Because who unworthily discovers or
reuealeth the secret of this thing, he is the breaker of the heavenly seal,
and the hid revelation, so far as in him lies he diminishes the Majesty of
God, and he is near unto many mischiefs to follow him.

And therefore with a godly heart I ^^seech all you faithful in Christ, having
this knowledge, that you would not speak thereof nor communicate to any but to
the godly livers, and disposers of themselves virtuously, long known and
proved, and that you praise God who has given such a treasure unto men.

This many do seek, but few do find it, for the defiled with vices or
polluted, are unworthy to know such things. Therefore it is not shown but to
the devout, because it is incomparable to all prices.

God being my witness, I do not lie in any thing, albeit it appear
impossible unto the foolish. For none is, was, nor shall be, who has so much
searched the depth of nature. Blessed be the most high and Almighty God, who
has created this Science, and has been pleased to show unto the faithful
the knowledge thereof. Amen. So ends this most worthy, and most excellent
work, the work called the Revelation of the secret Spirit, in which all the
secrets and mysteries of this world are hid, etc.

But the Spirit a power, is one marvelous and holy, having for a gift the
whole world, for it contains it in it self, is, shall be, and was also a
fifth substance.

An Abridgement of the Preamble to the Exposition.
The parts of this Exposition teach First, the matter whereof the Spirit of the
Philosophers stone is extracted, where is teached First the unity of that thing
in which this Spirit is found, Chap. 1. Secondly, the discerning of this one
thing, Cha. 2.4.8 Thirdly, the preparation of the matter for the separation of
the Elements, Chap. 3.
Secondly, the four apparitions of the forms, or the manner of the separation
of the four Elements, Chap. 7 Thirdly, the conjunction and union of the
Elements, for to obtain the fifth apparition, Chap. 6.

The Preamble to the Exposition of the secret SPIRIT.
IN the name of God then to begin this business, I say, that this Philosopher
would have showed and declared the wonderful virtues and properties of that
secret Spirit; saying, that it is such a thing, that remoueth all corruption,
in these words: But that there was one thing that could remove all corruptions.
And after he says, that the said Philosophers painfully seeking that one thing
amongst all things, etc. the which a little after he says, to be a glorious
Spirit, called Quintessence.

But he tells not, out of what thing it may be taken; unless that he says,
It is a substance most pure, most precious, and most subtle, from an
incorruptible body artificially extracted, that no ways can be destroyed, nor
in any thing defiled with the Elements.

Agreeing with John de Rupescissa, who speaks thus; And I said that the most
High created the quintessence, which is extracted out of the body of nature
created by God, with humane Artifice, etc.

Much less does he show the manner nor the mastry of being able to have it,
except that in some place he touches a little, and that under Metaphores and
Figures; therefore to declare this Text, I will ground my self upon three
principal parts, to the end that this most noble Spirit may be found.

The first part shall be upon that body whereout of the said Spirit may be
taken.

The second shall be, where he says, How that Spirit corporally appears that
it may be the sooner found and known, etc.

And because the Author follows five apparitions, continuing without making
other distinction, yet because the matter does require it, I will divide it
into two parts, and for the second part shall be taken the four apparitions.

And for the third part, that fifth apparition where he says, in the fifth and
last Essence it appears in a glorified body, etc.

In the first part shall be showed, that so as the Text says, this Spirit is
one thing amongst all things, that as yet the said Spirit or Quintessence is
not found, but in one only thing created by God; according to the authority of
all the Philosophers, who have written of this divine Science; who all do
affirm, that there is nothing but one only thing, of the which, and by the
which, and with the which, the desired end is obtained.

And in the second shall be seen, that the apparition of the said Spirit in
four corporal forms, is no other thing, but the separation of the four
Elements.

And in the third and last part shall be showed, what is to be understood by
the conjunction, and union of the said elements, after their perfect
rectification, reducing the^ in a glorious fifth being, called Quintessence or
Elixir, and in many other diverse names nominated by diverse Philosophers, and it
shall be that, which this Philosopher understands, when he says, but there is
one thing, etc.

Where to follow this order, for the better declaration of the Text before
alleged, the first part shall be divided into three parts.

In the first shall be showed (as is above said) that there is one only thing,
in which the said Spirit is found.

In the second shall be seen (by the means of many authorities, and
sentences of diverse Philosophers) if it may be judged, what thing is this
only thing.

And because there is no coming to the separation of the Elements, if first
that body, or truly one thing (as they say) be not disposed, that it be fit
for the said separation, which is nothing else, but the reducing it to his
first matter, and this shall be taken for the third part, in which shall be
seen the necessity of the said separation.

Thereafter in the second part of the Text, shall be showed the manner of the
separation of the Elements described by an uncertain Author, inserting therein
some fair glosses of other Philosophers, for the more declaration of the
mystery.

And in the third and last part shall be seen the conjunction of the said
Elements, of which shall grow a Crystalline and glorious stone, called Elixir,
or Quintessence, (as some would have it) and it shall be (as is said before)
the secret Spirit of our Philosopher, etc.

The first Chapter; Wherein it is proved that there is only one thing, out of
the which the secret Spirit, or the Philosophers Stone, may be taken.
HErmes, Father of all the Philosophers says, that our stone is made of one
thing, because all our Science and mystery is made of our water, that is
copper: And Aristotle, In one thing only consists truth, and in multitude
vanity.

And Pythagoras in the book of his documents speaks, And I say unto you that
the foundation of this Art, for which many have perished, is one thing, that to
the Philosophers is stronger and higher then the natures, and to the foolish is
baser then any thing we esteem.

And Geber; It is one thing, one medicine, to which we add nothing, we
diminish nothing, except that in separation we remove the superfluous.

And Rasis; Know my son that it is one disposition, and one nature, and one
work, and one vessel to make the white and red.

And Morienus; This mystery is wont to be made of one only thing, therefore put
this in thy mind, for thou need not many things, but one only thing.

And Lucas in turba; For our verity is one, in which is the Spirit that we
search.

And another uncertain Philosopher says, For our matter is one, containing in
it self the essence of all the seven metals, and in that substance is the
dei^g Spirit which we seek.

And in the book entitled, The secret of Auicen, it is written thus; And know
for certain, that the Philosophers cared not for the names, but one name, and
one action; to wit, to sees the stone, and bring forth his soul, because
their stone is always one.

And John of Damascus, in his Rosary of Phoebus says, Therefore it is doubted
of the stone, which is called the Philosophers, which is it, and what; Seeing
it was never named openly by any Philosopher: Therefore in this many judged
diverse things, when in one only consists truth. We do hold him dearly,
teaching to avoid all others, and surely it is manifest by the Philosophers
Writs, that it is one thing, and that no strange thing should be joined
thereto, because nothing agrees to a thing, but what is nearer to his own
nature.

And Arnoldus de villa noua, in his Rosary says, Therefore it behooves the
searcher of this Science to be of a constant will in work, that he presume not
to try sometime this, sometime that, because our Art is not perfected in the
multitude of things, for it is one.

And Raymund Lullius in the 49. Chapter of the Theoricke of his Testament
says, Thou must no ways be ignorant hereof, seeing it is necessary, that our
Medicine of one only kind, and one sole nature be made.

And in the seventy five Chapter, Moreover we say recapitulating, that seeing
this thing is of one sole nature, and of that only this is made which mighty
men desire to have and search, and in many other places he mentions, which
for shortness sake shall be left out.

And George Ripply the English, in his Ladder of twelve degrees, says, yet the
matter of this work according to all the authentical Philosophers, is one
only thing, containing in it self all necessaries to the accomplishing of its
own perfection.

And Henricus Cornelius Agrippa, in the second Book of hid Philosophy, in the
fourth Chapter says, There is one thing by God created, the subject of all
wonderfulnesse, which is in earth and in heaven, it is actually animal,
vegetable, and mineral, found every where, known by few, by none expressed in
his proper name, but covered in numbers, figures, and riddles, without which
neither Alchymy nor natural magic can attain their perfect end.

And in the Rosary of the Philosophers it is written, But I advise, that no man
intrude himself into this Science to search, except he know the beginning of
true nature and her government, which being known, he needs not many
things, but one thing; nor requires great charges, because the stone is one,
the medicine one, the vesselbone, the government one, and the disposition one,
etc.

Many other authorities and sentences of diverse Philosophers (for the
confirmation of this passage) I could produce, but for shortness sake, as also
because I think that the foresaid sentences of so many worthy Authors, are
sufficient enough for confirmation of this matter, we let them alone.

The second Chapter; In which shall be seen, (by means of many sentences of
diverse Philosophers) if it can be judged, what thing is this only thing.
THis is the passage which abaseth the wings of the ignorant searchers of this
glorious and divine Science. Ignorant call I all those (to wit of this Science)
who are ignorant of the true matter, of which the Philosophers stone is made,
albeit that in other Sciences they were most excellent and most learned.

But before I proceed further, two causes do make me stand somewhat doubtful
of the manner which I should hold in my writing: the one is two sentences, one
of Aristotle, and another of Geber.

The first of Aristotle in his light of light, says that the ancient
Philosophers have therefore so carefully hid this mystery, that few might
understand it; because if it were vulgarly known, there were no further place
for prudence: seeing the foolish would be equal to the wise.

And the other of Geber, Wherefore the Science is not delivered without
interruption, because the wicked as well as the good, would usurp it
unworthily.

The other cause is for the difficulty of the matter, or subject: but
considering that this secret is the gift of the most high God, as all the
Philosophers say, and chiefly Morien with these words, And know you that this
Mastrie is no other thing but the mystery and secret of secrets of the most
high and great God.

Therefore I hope that our Lord Jesus will put such form to my speech, that
without offending his most high Majesty, I may help the children of the
truth. And if about the difficulty, and depth of the matter, my forces be not
sufficient, the mind nevertheless is most ready, and most desirous, to make
the virtuous spirits professors of this noble Science, participant of a part
of my long trouble and study made therein, not yet as one that would persuade
my self to be such, that I understood the secret hereof, but as a loving
professor of the search of it, wherein I have wearied my self for the time of
twenty five years.

Now to return to our first purpose: I say then for to begin this second
part, that in the beginning of the book called the blast of the trumpet, it is
written thus, Of the first essence, the first Philosopher Thales the Milesian
says, God is the most ancient of things unbegotten, eternal; and therefore
Pythagoras says, I say that God was before all things, nothing was with him
when he was, and understand that God when he was alone in the beginning
created one substance, which he called the first matter; and of that substance
he created other four, fire, air, water, and earth; of which now being
created, he created all things, as well high as low, and so before all other
things, except the first matter, he created the four elements; out of which
he created afterward what he would, to wit, diverse natures, etc.

And Raymund Lully, in the third chapter of the Theoricke of his Testament
says, God created that nature of nothing into one pure substance, which we
call quintessence, in which whole nature is comprehended, etc.

And in many other places he says the like; because he considers, that
this Science proceeds from God, as all the Philosophers do affirm,
therefore Mireris says, that this stone proceeds from the most glorious high
place, and of the greatest Creator, which has put to death many wise men,
which is like unto every thing, whose name cannot be spoken.

Where I considering the height and difficulty of this matter, as I have above
said; seeing that out of the Philosophers the construction concerning this
thing cannot be had: I purpose to see if out of the holy new or old Testament
some juice may be extracted, studying the which in my judgment, many most
excellent sentences may be taken to the purpose of this matter, and of the
whole science, the which shall be left out, and only I will serve my self
with that which seems unto me most to the purpose of this passage.

I find the first thing that our Lord God created was the light, as it
appears in the first of Genesis: there after he made that wonderful
separation of the elements, whereby there comes in my mind some sentences of
Vincentius in his Natural mirror, in the second book the three and thirtieth
chapter: where he says, Therefore his Spheres, which is true light, are begun
from light, and in light all things are accomplished, etc. And furthermore,
from the light he begun, that he might show his works to be the works of
light, not of darkness, etc. And after he says, So also by his example, he
has taught man to work in the light.

And in the thirty fifth he says, Therefore the first substance is light, etc.
and after following he says, Every thing therefore, how much it has of light,
so much it holds of divinity: because God is light, and every thing having
more of light than another, is called more noble than it; for in all things,
nobility is remarked according to the greater neerenesse, and partaking of
divine essence. And this also is manifest by induction in the first bodies,
when they are compared together, the water is nobler than the earth, because it
has more light than the earth: Likewise the air than the water, and the fire
than the air, and the fifth body than all other: therefore it is called
amongst them the first and most noble; therefore the perfection of all these
things which are in every order of the world, is light.

And in the thirty eight chapter he says, Therefore worthily amongst all
bodies, the light holds the first place. For as S. Augustine says, Every
substance common to two substances, according to nature is before them both;
but light is a substance common to fire, and stars, which precede all other
bodies. Wherefore the first of all bodies is light. After in the thirty nine
chapter he says, But light is caused in the air, not from the air it self,
or the form of the air, but from the Sun, etc. And he speaks many other
notable sentences, which shall be left to be studied by studious men.

Now seeing the light is the first thing which God created, I may say unto you
that the self nature is derived from that light, as all Philosophers do
affirm, saying, use venerable nature: And for confirmation hereof, I will see
if we can agree, many pretty sentences of diverse Philosophers, who speak of
this Science in favor of this opinion.

But before that we come thus far, I would know by what occasion, many and
diverse wise Philosophers, have entitled many of their books belonging to this
Science, under the name of Light; As Aristotle called one, the light of light.
Rasis five, to wit, the light of lights, the book of the Sun, the book of
the Moon, the book of cleerenesse, and the book of Light. John of Damascus,
the Rosary of the Sun. John of Vien, the mirror of the elements. Arnold de
Villa noua, the new light. Roger Bacon the mirror of Alchymy. John de
Rupescissa, the book of light; and many and diverse others the like, which
truly I cannot think that they would do it, but because this divine Science
is the work of light.

But perhaps some may say, the Philosophers use to say, when they will declare
any thing obscure, that they give light, or illuminate. But I my self do not
find that they have entitled their books of other Sciences under the title of
Light, as they have done this. Let every one believe as most pleases him.

Now let us come to the foresaid sentence, and first, Aristotle in his first
book of the Secret of Secrets says, For with thee is the Light of Lights, and
for this all darkness shall fly from thee.

And Mireris, in his book of documents, speaking of that secret spirit, under
the name of water, he says, And know that the Philosophers declare, that the
permanent water is taken out of Light; but the light makes fire, and the light
shining, and transparent, becomes like one straying seeking lodging: but when
light is conjoined unto light, it rejoices; because it came out of it, and is
converted unto it, etc.

And Albertus Magnus, in the preface of his right path, inuocating the Lord
God, prays and beseeches him in this manner: Thence in the beginning of my
speech, I call for his help, who is the fountain aad spring of all good, that
he through his pity and bounty, would vouchsafe to supply the smalnesse of my
Science, that by the grace of the Holy Spirit, I may make manifest in my
doctrine, the light, which shines in darkness.

And Raymund Lully in the seventh chapter, in the Theoricke of his Testament
says, Therefore son I say unto thee, Take a Mine of the kind spoken of, in
which are the two starred lights, which cease not to shine upon the earth, and
they are the Sun and Moon, who by their beams darken the fire.

And in the 20. Chapter, We choose therefore two bodies, the lights, which do
fix all that is not fixed.

And in the 48. Chapter, Son, when thou will work and begin our Mastry,
beware that thou work not but upon natures, or matters lightsome, and not upon
others, whereof the lesser world is created.

And in the tenth Chapter of the Practice he says, Son it behooves thee now to
dissolve the light of the world, or a part of it, by the first regiment, etc.
And in many other places he speaks, which shall be omitted, that I be not
too long.

And George Ripply in the Chapter of the sixth degree of his Gates says,
Therefore our stone is that starred Sun, budding like the flowers of the
Spring, from whom proceeds by alteration every color, etc.

And for shortness sake, I will put an end to this second Chapter, with a
conclusion of an uncertain English Author, saying, For indeed to speak
without fiction, there is no other to be sought but a body of the body, and a
light of the light. Which is as much worth as it were to say, Separate the
shadow from the beam, that is, from the Sun his earthlinesse.

The third Chapter; Wherein is proved, that of necessity it behooves to reduce
the body to the first matter, that it may be disposed for the separation of the
Elements.
HItherto it is seen with the confirmation of all the Philosophers, that it is
one thing only, out of the which is taken the secret Spirit, and with the which
is made the Philosophers stone: and furthermore are showed many pretty
sentences of diverse Authors, by the means whereof, it shall be left to be
judged by the children of the truth, what thing can be this sole thing, or one
thing.

Now in this Chapter shall be showed (by authority of many authors) that it is
necessary to dispose this thing or body, that it may be fit for the separation
of the Elements which could not be done, if first it were not reduced to the
first matter: for any body standing in his being hard, solid, and compact, is
not fit for the separation of the Elements, much less for the metallicke
transmutation.

Therefore it is need (as is above said) to reduce it to the first matter,
according to the speech of Aristotle, in the fourth of the Meteors, who says,
Let the Artificers of Alchymy know, that the kinds of metals cannot be
transmuted, unless they be reduced to the first matter, but the reduction to
the first matter is easy, as Arnoldus de villa noua says, and John of Vien,
in his mirror of the Elements, and so affirm all the other Philosophers.

And in the practice of Philosophers it is written, In the name of God, Amen,
and with his help, let us reduce first the bodies into no bodies, until the
natures be made thin, because in the beginning, the body is made a thin water,
that is Mercury, etc.

And in the Rosary of the Sun it is written, Therefore every body is an
Element, or composed of Elements, but the generation of any compound of the
four Elements, consists of simples. Wherefore necessarily it behooves that
our stone be reduced to the first matter, or spring of his sulphur and
Mercury, that it might be divided in the Elements, otherwise it cannot be
purified nor conjoined, etc.

And Villa noua so says, For the first work of the Philosophers, is to
dissolve the stone into his Mercury, that it may be reduced to his first
matter.

And Raymund Lully, in the seventy five Chapter of the Theoricke of his
Testament says, But this division cannot be made by the change of nature,
without loss of the property, and the loss of the property cannot be made
except that nature which is in an hard mass, and dry, with all her parts be
turned in the likeness of that first nature, in which the age was first
ordered by divine power, like unto a confused form, in which all middle things
were confused, without the which nature could not accomplish her actions, etc.

Agreeing with Hermes, who says; All things were from one confused clod, or
mass confused, by the meditation of one; that is, the creation of one
omnipotent God, and so all things were sprung from this thing, that is, al
metals are engendered of our stone, that is quicksilver, as all things were
sprung from this confused mass, and purged with one fitting, that is, only by
the command of God and his miracle. So our stone is sprung, and comes out of
a clayish mass, that is, Quicksilver changed, containing in it self the
four Elements, which are Fire, Air, Water, and Earth; that is, heat,
moisture, coldness, and dryness, etc.

And in the Rosary of the Philosophers; The reduction of the bodies to the
first matter Quicksilver, is no other than the resolution of the congealed
matter, by which the lock is opened, by the entering of one nature into
another. Whereupon the Philosophers said, that the Sun is no other thing but
ripe Quicksilver.

And this proposition or sentence of Aristotle, of the necessity of the
reduction to the first matter, being so famous, I will not enlarge my self
otherwise in alleging other Authors; but only I will labor in the next
Chapter, to see if it be possible to know (by the means of many authorities of
diverse Philosophers) what thing is this first matter.

The fourth Chapter; Where it shall be seen if it be possible, to know what
thing is this first matter.
Having seen that the reduction to the first matter, is necessary, that the
matter may be fit for the separation of the Elements, now it is to be seen
what thing is this first matter.

And it is above said, that all Philosophers agreeing, do affirm this
sentence, use venerable nature. Therefore in confirmation of this passage, I
will serve my self only with some of their sentences, which shall seem unto
me most to the purpose for the declaration of this matter.

Arnold de Villa noua, in the first Chapter of his Rosary says, It is
therefore manifest, that the operation of the Medicine is the operation of
nature, and that the Medicine it self is the same nature; for the Medicine it
self only is composed of nature, etc.

And Raymund Lully in the 72. chapter of the Theoricke of his Testament says,
Our Mastry is by nature, and with nature, and of nature, and is made by the
means of nature.

And in the 76. Chapter, Wherefore who will make any thing, let him make it by
nature, and let him know the concordance of nature: because without that, never
any thing can be done. Seeing that nothing of the world which is facible, is
beyond the limited bounds or ways of nature, because by it and with it, it is
made, and is to be made.

And in the 14. Chapter of the Practicke he says, Son, if thou understand
this, thou shall understand and know how all things of the world are made by
nature, and how thou may make them to the respect of nature, if thou can have
the air which is caused by nature, etc.

And in many other places he makes mention, and the Rosary of the
Philosophers says, Whereby first we make known, that all workers beyond nature
are deceivers, and that they work in a thing unfit.

And thereafter he says, In the Art of our mastry, nothing is hid by the
Philosophers, except the secret of the Art, which is not lawful for any man to
reveal: which if it were done, he should be cursed, and should incur the
indignation of the Lord, and should die of an Apoplexy. Wherefore all error
in the Art arises of that, that they take not the due matter: therefore use
venerable nature, because of it, by it, and in it, our Art is engendered, and in
no other. And therefore our mastry is a work of nature, and not of the
workman, and so who knows not the beginning, does not obtain the end, and
who knows not what he seeks, shall not know what he shall find.

But because upon this authority some may say, that this Philosopher intends
and speaks of the true matter, on which we must lay the foundation: I say
that it is true, but out of what matter it behooves us to take the same nature
as yet he makes no mention, which is enclosed in the center of the same
matter, witnessing Raymund in his 7. Chap. of the Theoricke of the Testament.

Where he says, And we have said above, that in the center of the earth is
the virgin earth, and the true Element, and that it is created by nature,
therefore nature is in the center of every thing, etc. As yet also more
manifestly shall be showed, when it shall be declared, which follows, what
thing is this nature.

Now having above showed the necessity to reduce the body unto the first
matter, and in this chapter proved that it behooves to work with nature, so
that it appears almost that this first matter is the self same nature, by
the means of the authorities above alleged of the Philosophers; therefore for
better declaration it is good to proceed from degree to degree.

First it is said the matter to be one sole thing, there after we have spoken
of the reduction unto the first matter; and now it appears that this first
matter is (as said is) the same nature. It remains then to be seen, what
thing is this nature, and it shall be the last conclusion about this passage.

I say that of diverse Philosophers, it has been named with diverse and
infinite names, some do call it Chaos, some Hyle, others the first Matter,
others a confused Mass, Matter without Form, Confused Clodde, others
Mercury; alleging that speech of Hermes, who says, In Mercury is all which
the Philosophers seek, etc. and with many other infinite names, as I have
above said, the which would be too much to desire to remember all.

But I my self am disposed, leaving all other names, to name it under the name
of Salt in this my little treatise, alleging for confirmation of my opinion, a
number of sentences of diverse Philosophers.

And first we shall begin with Geber, who in his Testament speaks of no
other, but of the salt of metals, and shows that therewith is made the
Elixir, as he may see who would study it.

And the Rosary of the Philosophers says, The salt of metals is the
Philosophers stone.

And a little further, The ancient wise men, because they spoke many things,
did conclude upon salt which they call the soap of the wise, and the little key
which closes and opens, and again shuts, and no man opens; without
which little key, they say none in this age, can attain to the perfection of
this science, that is, unless he know to calcine salt after his preparation,
etc.

And after he says, Who has not tasted the taste of salts shall never obtain
his wish.

And Gratianus says, Of every thing may be made ashes, and of that ashes may
be made salt, and of that salt is made water, and of that is made Mercury, and
of that Mercury through diverse operations is made Sol.

And Auicen says, Son if thou will be rich, prepare salts until they be a
pure water, because salts are converted into a spirit by fire.

And Raymund in the seventy two chapter of the practicke of his Testament
says, And we say unto thee that the said natures are nothing but sharp salts,
etc.

And there after, But son we speak to thee with revelation, that thou
remember of the salt, which we have told thee above, with one part of his
property; because at no time must you understand here of other salt; unless
it be of metals, which are resolved unto it, as by artifice you may see to the
eye. If therefore thou know how to sweeten this salt, it will enter in the
bodies, as the true nature which will stand inwardly, and can transform them
from one kind to another; because seeing salts are the first nature of metals,
of a metallicke property, by the friendship of that thing, they are conjoined
together. Seeing salt is nothing but fire, nor fire is but sulphur, nor
sulphur is but quicksiluer reduced into a stone; after that it is the matter
of a nature altered and changed from baseness to nobility.

Here clearly is verified and confirmed that passage above said, That in the
center of the earth is the virgin earth, etc. and that nature is in the center
of every thing, etc. And in many other places mention is made, which for
shortness sake shall be left out: O what labors, what sweats, what troubles,
must be done! What most thick and most hard walls must be broken and passed!
and what ports and locks must be opened, before it can be penetrated and
entered into that center, where that blessed virgin earth is found, otherways
by the said Raymund called the earth of labor.

And truly the earth of labor it may be called, because it is purchased with
great trouble and watching.

The which was well understood by Chrysogonus Polydorus, in his preface of
Geber, when he said, The golden fleece is not given unto Jason, unless first
he undergo the sure and dangerous labors. And so much the more, because it is
to be known, that where the glorious God has put great virtue, there yet
has he left greatest difficulty for custody: but let us leave this, and
return to our first discourse. I say then that I have gathered together many
sentences of diverse Philosophers, all which have treated of salt: whose names
to be shorter I will conceal, as also because some of these sentences are
taken out of books of uncertain Authors: and I will repeat only their sayings
with a continual order one after another.

And first the first says, Our stone is no other thing but salt; who works
in this Art without salt, is like unto him who will shoot not having a string.
If the omnipotent God had created no salt, the Art of Alchymie had not been.
Salt is Coprose, and Coprose is salt: all lesser and greater minerals truly are
nothing else but salt: nothing is more fluxible than salt: nothing more
piercing than salt, and his nature: nothing cleaner, purer, more spiritual,
and more subtle, than salt and his nature. Nothing stronger than salt and his
nature; nothing more incombustible than salt and his nature; nothing more
volatile than salt and his nature; nothing sweeter than salt and his nature;
nothing sowrer than salt and his nature.

These two passages do seem to be repugnant, saying sweet and sour, which
is understood, sour before the preparation, and sweet after.

And following they say, nothing is nearer to the fire than salt and his
nature, nothing more lastying and fit to preserve things from putrefaction,
than salt and his nature.

Then seeing the salt even so as he is, without other preparations, is of such
virtue, that it preserves things from putrefaction, as is seen by experience;
what will it do, when from it the elements shall be separated and reduced
into a fifth Essence? I think with my self that it shall be that, which our
Philosopher understands of the secret Spirit.

Now let us follow. The salt is the life of all things: I cannot fail when any
brave place of importance comes to my hand, but I must speak my opinion
agreeing the Philosophers together.

This Philosopher says, Salt is the life of all things. And Morienus says,
But this stone is not a vulgar stone, because it is more precious, without
which nature works nothing at any time, whose name is one.

By the which I say that seeing salt is the life of all things, it is necessary
to say and affirm with Morien, that without it nature works nothing at any
time.

And Raymund in the Chapter before alleged, speaking of Salt under the name of
nature, says, Seeing this is, because nothing can be engendered without it,
etc, and I may bring hither many other Philosophers for confirmation of this
wonderful sentence, the which I will omit, for to follow the rest.

Salt is nothing else but a pure dry water; nothing more transparent, nothing
more shining, nothing more lightsome than salt and his nature. If I would tell
my opinion upon all these sentences worthy to be written in letters of gold, I
should enlarge my self too much.

But this I cannot let pass with silence, for confirmation of so many
excellent sentences above spoken in the 2. Chapter concerning the light. And
here is seen this Author to confirm the same, saying, Nothing more
transparent, etc.

Now let us follow; Nothing is nearer unto met all than salt and his nature.
How is it possible to be silent with this sentence worthy to be graven in plate
of Gold, and not written in Paper? O how open a field is here to discourse! but
let us follow, Nothing more excellent, created by nature, than Salt and his
nature. Nothing more simple than Salt and his nature. Nothing more stinketh
than Salt and his nature. Nothing more odoriferous than salt and his nature.

Seeing these two passages do appear to be disagreeing, it behooves to
understand them as these others above, of sweet and sour; to wit, before and
after the preparation.

Nothing better in nature created by God than Salt and his nature. Nothing is
in the world that contains so diverse colors in it, as Salt and his nature.
Nothing heavier and weightier than Salt and his nature. Salt is of a nature
animal, vegetable, and mineral, and has in his nature the actiues and
passiues.

And here is verified the speech of Aristotle, saying, It is a Stone and no
Stone, and it is mineral, animal, and vegetable, which is found in every
place, in every time, and beside every man, etc. Our oil, our water, our
sulphur, our Mercury, is no other thing in his virtue than Salt. There are
three stones of white things, which three are found in Salt. Salt is a virtue
mixed with all the Elements. There is nothing that so strongly contains in it
the four Elements as Salt.

I will say nothing upon this place, because who will study well all this which
is above said, shall find to be here the last conclusion and Key of all.

Therefore let the mockers of Alchymy hold their peace, seeing without true
dissolution they can do nothing, and true dissolution can they not have,
without they reduce the things dissoluable into the nature of Salt, and make
them resolved that they may the sooner be resolved.

And to put an end to this Chapter, I will with the help of all the
Philosophers conclude, who say, Therefore who knows Salt and his dissolution,
he knows the secret of the ancient wise men. Therefore set thy mind upon
Salt. Think not upon other things. For in it only is hid the science and the
chief mystery, and the greatest secret of all the ancient Philosophers.

The fifth Chapter; In which is handled the separation of the four Elements,
which the apparitions of that secret Spirit do signify.
THe body now being reduced into the first matter, and made fit, and disposed
for the separation of the Elements, the rest is now to show the manner of the
said separation. Albeit many and diverse Philosophers have at large handled it,
nevertheless I will show one way clear enough, written by an uncertain
author, and ancient, very pretty for the purpose of that secret Spirit, with
some addition or gloss of other Philosophers, for better declaration of the
mastry.

Now let us return to the Text, which tells how that Spirit corporally
appears, that it may be found the sooner and known, etc. For declaration
then of this second part, we will speak with the above named Author in this
manner that follows.

Take the blessed stone which is no stone, nor has the nature of stone, and
separate the Elements. And note that the Philosopher calls stone all that
from which the Elements may be separated by Art: For by conjunction of them in
the work of Alchymy is raised a substance like unto a stone.

And he calls it blessed, because beyond the four Elements there rests a
fifth Essence, called the Spirit, because the Spirit cannot be seen by us,
nor felt, without a body assumed in some Element etc.

This Spirit for the nobleness of his nature, takes a body in a nobler and
superior Sphere, to wit, of the Elements; namely, of the fiery Sphere of the
noble fire, but yet his spiritual nature remaining: therefore neither is it
fire, nor has it the nature of fire, so much as is of it self.

And again, Because that body of the Spirit is fiery, for his subtilty and
purity, and this cannot be seen by us: therefore with fit instruments, by
means of the workemans industry, thickning its subtle substance, it is
converted in the form of water and flows.

Therefore separate the said Spirit, and conioyne it with the Elements.

But the operation in the conjunction is twofold; to wit, one that the Elixir
may be made to congeale Quickesiluer, another that the Elixir may be made for
to preserve the life of man, and to throw away all superfluity of bad humors,
and to eschew all corruption of the body: Therefore if thou will make the
Philosophers Stone to congeale Quickesiluer, do in this manner.

Separate first the Spirit, and the soonest that thou can, because thou shall
never separate him so warily, but that he will retain some part of the former
substance of Phlegm.

This Spirit once separated is called the burning water: whose sign is, that
if thou dip a linen cloth in it, the cloth will be inflamed and not burn.

But if you separate oftener, it is called the burning water rectified, whose
Sign is because a cloth dipped is altogether burned.

So have you one Element made spiritual, with the Spirit of the Quintessence.
And so the first apparition of that secret Spirit becomes manifest in form
of water.

The which is that water whereof the Philosophers say, The secret of the Art is
to know the celestial water, divine, and glorious, etc.

It follows; And so it behooves the other three Elements, to be made
spiritual with the said Spirit, retaining the corporal virtue, in this manner.

Separate the whole superfluous Phlegm from the said stone, until the oil
come to fume out, and nothing at all remain of the Phlegm, and it shall be
turned like unto pitch.

And then mix the first burning water rectified with this substance made like
pitch, well stirring till it be incorporated.

And then again distill twice or thrice, and then it is called man's blood
rectified, and of this says the Philosopher, the wind has carried him in his
belly.

And so have you two Elements exalted in the virtue of the fifth Essence, to
wit, water and air.

And this is the second apparition of that secret Spirit in the form of air;
of which another Philosopher says, This is truly humane blood, the true
Celandine, in which the secrets of nature are hid, etc.

It follows; Thereafter take the foresaid substance, which remains like
pitch, and separate all the superfluous oil by a glass Alembicke, until that
no oil remain.

And then it will be a black dry substance, which powder well, and grind well
with humane blood rectified, and let it so stand for the space of three hours.

Thereafter distill, and then it is called the fiery water; and do in the same
manner the second time, and then it is called the fiery water rectified.

And so have you three Elements in the virtue of the Quintessence, to wit,
air, fire and water.

And so appears the third apparition of that secret Spirit in form of fire.

But because this Philosopher makes no mention of the separation of one
Element from another, and this I think is, because the separation of the airy
Element is not necessary to desire to follow the whole work. But who will
separate it, to use it for the virtue described by the Author of the secret
Spirit, many Philosophers have told the manner.

But if you read the manner of the separation of the four Elements of
Celandine, described by many Authors, and chiefly by Philip Vlstadius in his
Heaven of Philosophers, there you shall find the manner of the said
separation, therefore I will not enlarge my self otherwise to write it.

And more I will say, that the Philosopher who has written the separation of
the Elements of Celandine, is that same of the secret Spirit, who would serve
himself under the name of Celandine, that is, the gift of the Heaven; and that
this is true, you shall find described the virtues of these Elements word by
word, as those of the secret Spirit in the fifth apparition outward. And the
like did another under the name of humane blood. And as it is above spoken at
full, it is no matter of the names otherwise, because all do understand one
only thing.

Now follows here a most pretty gloss, worthy to be noted upon this passage
of 3. hours, the which will give great light to the children of the truth, and
it says thus:

And in that space is melted all the white volatill Salt, which is in the
black earth with the foresaid water; and the water becomes more sharp and
burning: which whiles it is distilled, it carries with it all this Salt
volatill and spiritual, and flies out in the stilling.

The which Salt is called fire, and therefore this water is called fiery; of
the which Salt the names are these, the Salt of the yolks of eggs, the Star
Diana, the morning Star, the flying Eagle, the Secret of Nature, and infinite
other names. Therefore Mercury is sublimed and made Salt: and so when you hear
in the books of Philosophers any thing of these names, know that it is no
other thing but the honored Salt, and in it there are more than fifty names.

And so often rectify until that it destroy all things by burning.

Follows, After take the said black substance, and calcine it in a furnace
of reuerberation, until it become like lime, and with this lime mix the fiery
water rectified, and distill it, and then it will be a water of life rectified.

And so have you the four Elements rectified, and purified with the fifth
Essence, and with the Spirit of the fifth Essence, and this is the water of
life, which is sought in the work.

And here ends the separation of the four Elements, with the fourth
apparition of the secret Spirit in an earthly form; as more clearly appears
in this gloss, which follows upon that place (until it become like lime)
which says;

And this shall be when all superfluities and foul humidities shall fly out,
and be separated by the flame of fire, and no otherwise: and the lime shall not
be white, but black, rusty.

And this is the true earth of the Philosophers, which is called the secret of
the Stone: in this lurketh the hid gold, and this hid gold cleansed from his
earthlinesse and filth, I have touched with mine own fingers, and seen with
mine own eyes. For this earth excels all other earths of Alchymists:
neither any does hold in it self naturally the hid gold, but this alone. And
therefore the medicine which is made by this is called one and sole, etc.

And so an end is given unto the second part of the apparition of the secret
Spirit in four corporal forms.

The sixth Chapter; In which shall be declared the fifth apparition of the
secret Spirit in a glorified body.
Follows yet in the same Author, and he says;

And this water fixes all spirits, and makes them enter; for this water has
her superior and spiritual strength that is not fixed, and has her inferior
and corporal fixed, and yet is not fixed, but has power to fix.

And this is it that the Philosopher says, That which is above is like to that
which is beneath, for the working of the miracles of one thing; that is, it
behooves that this fifth essence, that is the spirit, have or retain her
spiritual power, and have all the corporal power of the four elements, if
miracles should be done thereby: because if it have such power, many miracles
are done upon the work of Alchymie.

Also the Philosopher says, it ascends from the earth unto heaven, that is,
these four elements have ascended from the earth unto heaven; that is to say
in the spirit of the stone.

There after says the Philosopher, And again it has descended into earth;
that is to say, these four elements have ascended into heaven, and again
descended into earth; So that they be fixed in virtue of the spirit of the fifth
essence, and remain one Crystalline stone: and it shall be Elixir retaining
perfectly Mercury or the fugitive slave.

And so is manifest the fifth apparition of the secret Spirit, under the form
of a Crystalline and glorious body.

But here is to be noted, that this Philosopher shows not the manner
particularly, how this conjunction of the spirit with the body ought to be
done; but only metaphorically says, they have ascended into heaven, and
again descended into earth, so that they be fixed, etc. Wherefore if I would
produce the manner written by diverse Philosophers, I should be too tedious.

It suffices unto me only to say, that Raymund in the threescore and second
chapter of his Codicill does declare at large, and ends in the threescore and
fourth chapter of the said place. And in his repertory shows very well and
clearly.

And here is verified the speech of Hermes, who says, The earth is the mother
of all the elements, and out of the earth they proceed, and to the earth they
are reduced.

And Raymund in the third chapter of the theoricke of his Testament says, And
by this thy consideration may be cleared, that in the end every thing shall go
to his own proper place, from whence it first came, etc.

And here ends the third and last part of the secret Spirit, where he says,
In the fifth and last essence it appears in a glorified body. And it is the
desired end and true intention of the Philosopher, when he says, But there is
one thing, which remoueth all corruptions.

Now this author (as I have above said) shows not the manner of the
conjunction of the elements, but under figures: and the like does the Author of
the secret spirit, but under other figures and another manner of speech,
according to the letter; but as for the sense, it is the same.

And therefore to give matter to the diligent to study, and to accord one
Philosopher with another, I think good to set down here the metaphors of the
said secret Spirit, the which are these following.

Which remains fiery in the water, and carries with it the earth in the
air, etc.

There after he says, containing fire burning in water, and earth clarified in
air, etc.

After, The glorified spirit cannot appear but in a body agreeing to his
kind, etc.

Furthermore, Let not any man think, that the spirits are diverse; but
howsoever it is called it is one and the self same spirit, who works all in
all. This is the spirit which in ascending the cleerenesse of the heaven has
ouershined, and in descending, the purity of the earth has incorporated, etc.

Albeit there be some others, yet they are not for this purpose, therefore they
shall not be set down otherwise.

I say then, if you interpret well these sentences, with the others above
alleged in the mastrie of the separation and conjunction of the elements, you
shall find them meet together, and agree very well.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that the foresaid author of the separation of the
elements, makes distinction of the aforesaid Elixir, for to congeale Mercury,
from the other for medicine to man's body; which the Author of the secret spirit
does not. Also he says, that it is a medicine fitted not only for both, but
also has many other virtues as in him you may see; and the like many other
Philosophers do affirm.

Nevertheless, for to satisfy every man, as also because there are many very
fine sentences, very necessary, appertaining to the foresaid Elixir to congeale
Mercury, yet another manner shall be showed for the health of man, as this
Philosopher would, the which is this that follows.

The seventh Chapter; Wherein is showed the manner to make the Elixir, or
medicine to conserve the life of man.
But if thou will make the water of life, to conserve the life of man, and to
cure all diseases, proceed thus.

Make a burning water very well rectified. But make not of it man's blood, for
if it were humane blood, it would lose his force attractiue of the virtues of
herbs, by reason of his too much vnctuousnesse; and would defile all the
taste: and so would be unfit to be received by man's nature.

Also make not of it the fiery water, because then it would be of so great
force and sharpness, that it would destroy all by burning, and so it should
be dangerous to be taken and received.

But, because the perfection of every stone, consists in the virtue of his
earth; because it is called the nurse, or leaven unto it: witnessing the
Philosopher and consenting, who says, The nurse of it is the earth: without
the which leaven, the spirit of the stone can no ways be retained or detained
perfectly, or possess the accomplishment of his virtue: Therefore, give unto
this water the virtue of her earth, and then it shall obtain completely and
entirely its own virtue.

And this is it which the Philosopher says, His virtue is whole, if it be
turned into earth: and then it is called the water of life, but if you distill
it from that earth, it shall be the water of life, rectified and perfited.

Know therefore, that in this stone the earth is small and of great virtue. And
care you not if there be little of the earth; because as a little leaven
leaueneth the greatest quantity of the paste; so this little of earth which
this stone contains, suffices to fulfill the nourishment of the whole stone.

Therefore seek not a strange earth, as some do, who take the tartar of wine
and say that it is the earth of the stone, some the dreggs of wine calcined,
others the ashes of the vine: and these do err, so the blind leads the
blind, and both fall in the pit, believing to make the water of life, and make
the water of death. Because the earth must not be strange, witnessing the
Philosopher Geber, saying, one stone, and one medicine, to which no strange
thing is added, but all superfluities removed.

So it is in this water of life, No strange thing is added, but all superfluous
things are removed. Therefore this is the blessed stone rectified.

Or the foresaid water if it be thrice sublimed through his dreggs, that when
a drop thereof is put into a spoone, and kindled with a candle, it is all
burned, so that nothing remain in the spoone; and then, it is rightly
rectified, and this may be perceived in the preperation thereof, for this end
that it may be profitable to cure diseases, and to conserve the life of man.

And because the earth is necessary before, that the rectified water should be
distilled from it, then it is necessary that the oil be drawn out, and
separated from the earth.

Know that the foresaid earth is all burned, and stinketh as burnt things. And
unless the foresaid earth be washed with the water of the Phlegm, so that it
lose altogether his stink, the rectified water would retain something of the
stink, which must pass through the earth, and be distilled from it.

And therefore before you make the water of life now rectified pass through
the earth, first wash the earth well with the water of the Phlegm; so that it
lose well the stink of his burning. Which done, from the said earth, that is
to say, through the said earth, make the water of life rectified pass. And
this you shall do at least seven times, and then shall you have the water of
life medicinal as I have abouesaid.

And note that scarce can you have a pint of the foresaid water of life well
rectified, out of thirty pints of wine.

Let it pass through his earth many times, and it will be more effectual, and
his virtue will be multiplied and increased, because the oftener it is distilled
through his earth, so much the more effectual and powerful shall be the said
water.

Item, Note that in the said water are dissolved the leaves of most thin gold,
and so of gold is made aqua potabilis, and it is wonderful to conserve the
life of man, and to take away all diseases. And which is more, it makes old
men young again. Therefore regard warily the foresaid water.

The water of life above written, is sometime made to be Elixir or Medicine,
to congeale Mercury. Sometime a part to be medicine for to conserve man's life:
the virtues which are communicated to every one, we will briefly set down in
this Chapter.

Know therefore that the water of life, which is made to be Elixir to congeale
Mercury, not only congealeth Mercury, but also blancheth Venus, and dissolueth
Spirits, and calcineth bodies, etc.

But where it is made to be medicine for the conseruing the life of man, you
have his virtues and praises in other books: For it breaks the impostumes,
and cures wounds from rottenness, etc.

The simple water of life is drawn out of wine, and is called the soul of
wine, whose glory inestimable, is the Mother and Lady of all simple Medicines
and Compound, whose effects are wonderful, and especially against all causes
and passions of man's body.

There are many ways to rectify it, but in the above written Chapter I have
put the best inventions.

When the foresaid water of life is distilled at least four times, there is no
means to distill it from its earth, as I have set down in the chapter above
written. But it suffices that it be distilled as commonly it uses to be
distilled, that the health of man's body may be conserved, and lost health
restored.

This water is so strong, and of so great virtue, and of the greatest natural
heat, that by it self and without commixion, it cannot be drunken without
hurt.

Item, If the eyes be weakened through a web, or for want of spirit, let there
be put in wine the leaves of eyebright, Rue, and Veruene, of each one
handful, of Celandine a little, and all being bruised amongst the hands, let
them be put in wine, and stand there over night, and thereafter the forefaid
water of life be distilled.

Item, If the herb Baulme-mint be put in wine, and afterward the water be
distilled, then one spoonful be taken with a fasting stomach, it makes a man
well remembering things passed, and retaining things heard.

Item, If Sage and Mint be put in wine, and thereafter the water of life be
distilled; the water drunk, kills wonderfully all kind of worms.

Item, The water of life made with Terpentine, cares the quartane Ague, if it
be taken before the sit, and musk water also with it.

Item, Note that whatsoever odoriferous Powders, or whatsoever green or dry
herbs shall be distilled in the foresaid water, it shall retain the smell,
and shall be powerful and smelling according to their quality. And the vser
of such water shall feel the power and virtue of these spices, and if guests
chance to come, wine being mixed with the foresaid water, incontinent shall
retain the taste and smell of the Spices and herbs put into it, and so it shall
appear to be Cloue wine or Sage wine, etc. And so every discreet, wise and
understanding man may seek out the virtues of the water.

And note that al which are written, to wit medicines, you understand of the
water of life, which is called the burning water, and is the greatest subtilty
of wine or spirit to the soul. And the second water which is extracted or
sublimed from wine by the same manner, is the Element of air and burns not,
but some call it the water of Phlegm, because it is of a cold nature,
wherefore I will describe some things after this sort.

If you will make hairs yellow, make ashes of Iuy wood, and make a Lee of the
foresaid second water. Thereafter often wash thy head with the foresaid Lee,
and know that in two months the effect follows, and it will kill all kind of
worms that is in the hairs.

Item, The washing cleanses the face, for if the face be washed therewith, the
rose gut (or sauce Phlegm) is taken away.

And if oil be made of the inward kernels of pine Apples mixed with the
foresaid water, it shall heal and cure it quickly, chiefly if the said oil be
applied in hot milk, and that this be done with the fat swimming above.

The eight Chapter; Where are handled the diverse workers in this Science.
SEeing that hitherto by the grace of the Lord God an end is put unto the
Exposition of the secret spirit; and it is showed by many sentences of diverse
wise Philosophers, the great difficulty and deepest depth of so high a secret,
not only in knowledge of the matter, but also in preparation thereof:
wherefore the Philosophers say that it is very difficult, and they do speak
in this manner.

The Philosophers have hid the preparation of the stone, because it is the Key
of the Art, and difficultest of things.

Some others say, The working and government thereof cannot be known but by
the gift of God or instruction of a master who should teach it. The same says
our Philosopher of the secret Spirit.

Therefore that would I know, what we should think and say, of so great a
multitude of men (which otherwise I know not how to name) that when they have
seen a simple and sophisticate receipt, say and affirm with an oath, that they
can make the precious and most beloved stone of the Philosophers; the which
they have purchased with so long studies, troubles, tears and sweats.

Which is altogether against the use and order of all the Philosophers, as
Villa Noua says, The Alchymists of latter time, are for the most part mockers,
and whiles by sophistications they seek rather to seem wise then to be, they
deceive the yeelders to them, but the ancients not profiting according to their
own covetousness, have wrapped up this Art in riddles, showing rather their
own ignorance then science, etc.

I say then what should we say of these? truly it cannot be otherwise answered
but with the conference of Ianus Lacinius, and Petrus bonus ferrariensis, in
his precious new pearl, to exclaim and say, And no wonder because it falls
out in this desperate age, that men of every sort, and some the most ignorant,
dare search the hid causes of the Art and Science of this most happy and most
high Philosophy, thinking to wrest and steal that blessed stone out of paper
tricks, and deceits of some Idiots: For they are Smithes, and Weauers,
Carpenters, and such kind of men, desiring to be enriched without labor. An
answer certainly to the purpose, worthy of such kind of people.

But moreover, what shall we say of an infinite number of lettered and learned
men? of whom I know enough, who are searchers of this Science, and nevertheless
understand not the most obscure books of the Philosophers, to be written under
Metaphors, but as the letter sounds; and consider not, or else will not
consider what the Philosophers say, We have not written our Books but unto our
children, and our children are they who understand our sayings.

And Plato says, Who knows our purpose, and our intention is now a
Philosopher, and is enriched; and who knows not our sayings, he is in the
snares of nature, etc.

And Geber: For wheresoever we have spoken plainly, there we have said nothing,
but where under riddles and figures we have put something, there have we hid
the truth.

And Arnoldus: But the foolish understanding the sayings of the Philosophers
according to the letter, are become blind, and have found naught but a lie; and
then they say the Science is false, because we have tried, and find nothing,
and then they are like desperate men, and do despise the books and the
Science, and therefore the Science despises them, for our Science of the hid
things of nature, has no enemy but the ignorant.

Therefore this divine Science is not purchased by being lettered and learned
only, seeing it is the secret of God, as all men do affirm, for the which it
is written.

Because all wisdom is from the Lord God, and therefore sometimes these things
are given to the simple which the most studious cannot know.

Now let us leave this. I could in particular tell some manners of working of
many, which I have seen in my iournies of diverse workers, which I will leave,
that I be not too long and tedious.

But I will tell two ridiculous, which I have seen in this noble City of
London, where I was present my self, of two of my best friends searchers of
this Science.

The one of which having diverse ways tried fortune, and being one day by
chance in a very ancient Palace, where he saw a glass window, in the which
was painted the history or fable of Jason, when he went to Colchos, to purchase
the golden fleece. Where reading something written, a fantasy entered his head,
so that he would not understand that the Philosophers stone was made of other
then of glass, alleging a sentence of a Philosopher saying, in salt, and
glass is all the secret.

And again he said that Alsidius speaks, break the glass and extract the
stone, and put it in a glass vessel, or bolts head, and extract the oil from
it, and you shall find this which the Philosophers delivered unto us, in this
glass is the quick silver which overcomes the fire, and is not overcome by
it.

And Raymund confirms the like in the eighty six chapter of the Theoricke of
his Testament, where he says, draw the quicksilver out of the caves of
glass, etc. but what more?

He alleges two passages of the Revelation of S. John the Evangelist, chapter
21. where he says, And the building of the wall thereof was of Jasper stone,
but the city it self, pure gold like to pure glass* And furthermore after,
And the street of the city pure gold, like transparent glass.

Where I remaining a little wondering, at this his fantastic fantasy, asked
him what affinity and friendship, and what to do had glass with metal? He
answered me that I understood not, and that it was understood the glass made
of metals, alleging the speech of the Philosophers saying, That the glass of
metal changes every metal to better, etc.

And John Bracescus understood the same in his dialogue of demogorgon: and
Geber, when it is said, that glass made of iron is the Philosophers stone. And
so likewise may be made glass of gold, and silver, and of all other metals.

Wherefore leaving him with this his Chimera: I will speak of the opinion of
the other no less fabulous than this.

I say that this my other friend said and affirmed, that he had the knowledge
of the true Lunaria, so much mentioned by the Philosophers, and that in it did
consist all the secret of this Art.

Out of the which (as he said by a Philosophical way) he did take the juice,
and of which he made a salt, which was green, saying that this was the true
salt which the Philosophers understood, alleging a sentence of Hermes, that
says, All salts of what kind soever are contrary to our Art, except the salt
of our Lunaria.

Of which salt he said, by diverse operations he took the Mercury, the which
was the Mercury vegetable; of which afterward he separated, not only the four
elements, but also he took a water, which he called the spirit of the stone
or fifth essence, alleging an infinite number of sentences of diverse
Philosophers for his purpose.

And chiefly Raymund Lully, and principally, in his apertory, where he says,
Take of the best juice of Lunary which thou can find, etc. And the Rosary of
the Philosophers, where it says, The juice of Lunaria, the water of life, the
fifth essence, the burning wine, the Mercury vegetable, are all one, the juice
of Lunary is made of our wine, which is known to few of our children. And with
it, by the means of it, is made our potable gold, and without it no ways.

And more he said, that after he had taken his Mercury out of the same dregs or
earth, he could take as much of the same Mercury as he pleased, without end,
the same earth remaining nevertheless ever in his proper weight and quantity,
as at first: Which appeared wonderful unto me.

And I asking the reason thereof, he answered me with Vincentius in his
natural, The light has the property of the fountain, the cause of
multiplication.

And more he said, that this his earth was like a well of such water, as never
could be dried, and it was the body understood by John Augustine Pantheus, in
his Voarcha dumia, where he says, That the vegetable body is full of juice,
etc.

And moreover he said, that this was that true Salamander, that was engendered,
and nourished in the fire, alleging many authorities of Philosophers, amongst
which he made use of a book entitled, The water of life perpetual, which
said, it is fire of fire, and is engendered of fire, and is nourished in the
fire, and it is the daughter of the fire, etc.

And that more he said, that it was also that thing, and the spirit of the
world, which Henricus Cornelius Agrippa speaks of, in the foureteenth chapter
of the first book of his Philosophy, where he says, But it is more infused
into those things which have taken most of this Spirit. For it is taken by the
beams of the stars, according as things render themselves conform unto
them. Therefore by this Spirit every hid property is propagated in herbs,
stones, and metals, and beasts, by the Sun, by the Moon, by the Planets, and
by the Stars higher than the Planets, yea this Spirit may be more profitable
unto us, if any man know how to separate him well from other elements, or at
least use those things which abound most in this spirit.

So that he made me remain so confused, that I knew not what to answer.
Whereby I am disposed to stay no more with these melancholicke and fantastic
humors, that I make not my self fall into some Heresy to no purpose.

For the which I will exhort the true searchers of this noble science, that
they suffer not themselves to be fooled with vain opinions, nor to set a work
in the day that which they dreamed in the night, as these two my foresaid
friends have done. But to be constant and follow the documents of the foresaid
good Philosophers. And so shall be made an end of this my shore discourse,
which is dedicated and presented to the children of the truth, who delight in a
solitary life.

Now my dear and rude book, thou have endeavored to set forth all thy will in
speaking, and declaring by a method, and continued order. Gathering together so
many fine sentences, described by so many worthy and wise Philosophers, and
scattered not only in many chapters, but in diverse books, against their
precept. Who do command, that this noble Science should be written obscurely,
and not with a clear and continuated style, to the end it be not usurped by
the ignorant and unworthy people.

But seeing that so it has pleased thee to do; at least fly from the
multitude of men, and learn the solitary life: and converse only with those
noble and solitary spirits, to which thou art dedicated: because in the
solitary life is found this most noble secret spirit: secret it is called
because also it truly shunneth the conversation of the vulgar, and goes to
hide it self in solitary and secret places. And moreover, because that in the
solitary life is learned to know God; In a solitary life, is learned to love
God; In a solitary life (I say) is learned to give glory and praise to the most
high, and most glorious creator of all, to whom be praises through infinite
ages of ages. Amen.

FINIS.

