A PLAIN REFVTATION OF M. G. GIFFARDES reprochful book, entitled a short
treatise against the Donatists of England. Wherein is discovered the forgery of
the whole Ministry, the confusion, false worship, and antichristian disorder
of these Parish assemblies, called the Church of England.

Here also is prefixed a sum of the causes of our separation, and of our
purposes in practice, which M. GIFFARD has twice sought to confute, and has
now twice received answer, by HENRY BARROVVE.

Here is further annexed a brief refutation of M. Giff. supposed consimilituda
betwixt the Donatists and us. Wherein is showed how his Arguments have been and
may be by the Papists more justly retorted against himself and the present
estate of their Church, by I. GREN.

Here are also inserted a few observations of M. Giff. his cauils about read
prayer and devised Leitourgies.

1591.

To the right honorable Pere and grave Counselor Sr. WILIAM CECILL, Knight of
the most noble order, Baron of Burleigh, Lord high Treasurer of England, etc.
grace and wisdom be multiplied from God our Father and from our Lord JESUS
CHRIST.
Pro. 18. 17. Iustus qui primus in lite su^, donec aduenit proximus eius and
peruestiget illum.
HItherto (Right Honorable) have our malignant adversaries had their full scope
against us with the law in their own hands, and have made no spare or
conscience to accuse, blaspheame, condemn and punish us, yea to pronounce and
publish us as damnable heretics, schismatikes, sectaries, seditious,
disobedient to Princes, deniers and abridgers of their sacred power etc, to
the ears and eyes of all men openly in their pulpits, and in their printed
books, published by the consent and approbation of their Church. No trial all
this while upon any suit or complaint granted us: Either civil, that we
might know for what cause and by what law we thus suffer, which yet is not
denied the most horrible malefactors and offenders: Or ecclesiastical by the
word of God, where place and freedom might be given us to declare and plead
our own cause in sobriety and order: that so the means appoincted of God
for our recovery might be used, and we (wherein we should be found to err or
transgress) might be co^uinced to our faces by the scriptures, and left
inexcuseable. But in stead of this christian course, they have shut us up now
more then three years in miserable and close prisons from the air, from all
exercise, from all company or conversation with any person, from all means
so much as to write, yncke and paper being taken and kept from us, and a
diligent watch both by our keapers held over us, and also continual searches
upon one pretense or other made, where we were rifled from time to time of all
our papers and writings they could find. And being thus straightly kept and
watched from speaking or writing, their conscience yet giving them no rest in
all their prosperity and pleasures, whilst we the Lords poor witnesses
against their sins breathed (Not to speak of their secret and indirect
means whereby they sought to take away our lives) they suborned (amongst
sondrie others) two special instruments, M. Some and M. Giffard to accuse and
blaspheme us publicly to the view of the world, etch of them in two
books, the one laboring to prove us Anabaptists, the other Donatists in the
same. Which Books they have preferred especially to your Honor, as the chief
obstacle that hindered them from their violent and bloody course, of the same
intent (no doubt) that their predicessors the chief Priests and Pharasies
accused our Savior unto Pilat, and the Apostle Paul unto the Roman
governors. Yet even all this, we hope, the Lord has disposed to the further
manifestation of his truth, by directing our adversaries to bring our
criminations before your Honor. Of whose wisdom and equity we have so great
experience and assurance, as we can not from henceforth doubt to be condemned
unheard, or to find therein worse usage, then our Savior and the Apostles
found at those heathen Rulers. Wherefore we addressed our selves (by such means
as the Lord administered, and as the incomomodities of the place, and the
infirmities of our decayed bodies and memories would permit) to our defense, or
rather to the defense of that truth, whereof God has made and set us his
unworthy witnesses, though as signs to be spoken against, and as monstrous
persons in this sinful generation* And have hereunto undertaken Mr. Giffards
two reproachful blasphemous Books: Shevving the true causes of our separation
from the parish assemblies, confirming and approving the same to be both true
and sufficient by sondrie weighty reasons and express scriptures: Refelling
by the like all the frivolous cauills and injurious sclanders which M. G. has
there brought to hide their sins, deface the truth, and to defame us. As also
shevving such apparent dissimilitude betwixt the Donatists and us, both in the
causes of our and their separation, and in the manner of our and their
proceedings, and in sondrie errors they held, as no man of any knowledge or
judgment before attempted, or shall hereafter be able (with any truth or
conscience) to compare us unto them herein, or to excuse M. G. for this his
unchristian dealing with us. All whose unsanctified reproaches whervvith his
books through every sentence are seasoned in stead of better grace, hereupon
fall to the ground, and remain upon his own, and not upon our account. This
defense when when had through the merciful hand of our God finished, though not
with any show of humane wisdom or art, so much as in simplicity of the
truth and innocence of our hearts, we held it our duty to present in like
manner in alreuerence and humility unto your honorable view and grave
consideration. That both sides being heard according to equity, and our
answers as well as their criminatio^s duly expended, your sentence, or at the
lest approbation, might proceed according to the truth. Craving herein no
further favor, then according to the equity of our cause and innocence of our
doings: Nor yet shunning any further trial of the one or the other, that your
Honor shall appoinct or thinck meet; whether with these our adversaries, or
any other that shall be contrary minded, whosoever. Beseaching your Honors
perdo^ for this our bold presumption, the rather because such necessity was
laid upon us by the hand of God, through the importunate chalenges and
insolent prouocatio^s of these our accusors: whose mouths must either be
stopped, or else through our defalt ye holy truth of God, which we believe and
profess, yea and our innoce^cie be betrayed to the perpetual infamy of these
our reproachful adversaries, to our own peril and future judgment, to the
scandal of all that profess the same truth with us, but chiefly to the
offense and torning back of many, even of the whole land, from the straight
ways of the Lord, even the ways of life and peace. All which mischiefs (we
trust) shall be prevented by these our simple endeavors, the Lord giving
testimony and blessing to his own word: The truth whereof shall shine forth
in our simplicity, the power thereof be made manifest in our weakness, to the
discovery and reformation of these public enormities in the false worship,
open sacrilege, antichristian ministry and heinous disorder exercised and
soffred in this land, and to the discipation of all the delusions and vain
promises and persuasions of these false Prophetts, whervvith they have a long
time (for their own fleshly pomp and filthy lucre) seduced the whole land,
drawn them into, and held them in the wrath and heavy judgments of God. That
so the mighty hand of God working in the heart of our Sovereign Prince and
Nobles, especially through your Honors faithful counsel and furtherance; and
also in the hearts of all the Commons, when the truth of these things shall be
shevved unto them, a general and sincere conversion to the Lord may be made,
even from all things that now are, or hereafter shall be found contrary to
his holy will, whither in the public estate of all, or in the private estate
of any. For sure, as every particular person goes forvvard from faith to
faith as knowledge is increaced, every day teaching other unto eternal life:
So in the public estate of the Church no change that is made according unto
the truth, as the public error is espied, ought to be held strange or
dangerous. But most heavenly is that harmony, where all the members kint
together in the same faith, both in general and particular, with one accord go
forward in their callings and duties, still amending what is found amiss, and
daily indeuouring to do better. Then should there not be found any such
unchristian contention abought the truth, pleading and spurning against the
truth, or persecution for the truth. Then should the Lords dreadful judgments,
which now hang over the whole land for these sins, be avoided, and his
blessings in stead thereof be multiplied. But sure in the mean time until these
sins be removed out of Gods sight and redressed, there is no peace to be
looked for or asked of the Lord, there is no pleading with or against him,
howsoever the false Prophet may go abought to heal the hurt of this people
as a light evil, saijng peace peace when there is no peace, and to repair the
breaches that are as the sea, with untempered stuff and vain visions tending
unto abdication. Wherefore, to the torning away of so great evils, and the
procuring of so great and inestimable benefits to our Souereign Queen and
Contrie, as we have not withheld our utmost endeavors to the discovery of
the public enormities and sins of these times, in all truth and freedom,
being ready yet further to witness and approve the same, if such neade be, to
the face of our greatest adversaries and gainsayers, by the evidence of Gods
word: So now it remains that we instantly beseach your Honor, even in the
name of God, before whom we shall all of us shortly appear to our account and
judgment, by whom this chardge is laid upon you (the cause being now
brought, and by both sides, asvvell our adversaries as us, laid open before
your Honor) that you would now be a means to her right excellent Majesty
that these weighty and dangerous matters may be no longer wrapped up or put
off in security and silence (lest these our soffrings and testimonies rise in
judgment with this generation) but may rather be further inquired and discussed,
and order and redress taken according to the will of God. Which shall no doubt
torn to the high glory and most acceptable service of God and of your Prince,
to the unspeakable benefit of this whole land, and to the happy discharge of
your duty and conscience to your eternal praise in this life and in the life
to come.

Your Lordships most humble and addict in the Lord. HENRY BARROVVE and JOHN
GRENVVOOD for the testimony of the gospel in close prison.

Wisdom to the Reader from the Father of lights, to disce^ne of these times,
and to judge of themselves what is right.
Seeing the scripture speaks evidently of the general defection and apostasy
under Antichrist, Math, 2 4.
and of the abominable desolation and hauock yt he should make in these
dangerous and latter times: Mar. 13. Psa. 74. Dan. 7. 9. and 11
where ye sun should be made black as a sackcloth of hair, the Moon be
made as blood, Cap. 2 These. 2. 2 Timothy 3.
the Stars cast to the earth, the Heaven depart away as a book wrapped up,
every mountain and Isle be moved out of their place. Revel. 6.
And all these things are most perticularly and most lively described in the
book of the Revelation: Of Antichrists beginning, Revel. 8.
increace, exaltation, abolishing. How a great part of the trees and all green
grass should be blasted, a great part of the sea become blood, and of the
creatures that lived therein dye, and a great part of the ships thereof be
destroyed; the third part of the rivers and of the fountains of waters be
turned into worm wood, and many men die of the bitterness thereof. Revel. 9.
How that fallen apostatat Star should open the bottomless pit, the sun
and air^ be darkened with the smoke thereof, the earth pestered with the swarm
of poisoned stinging Scorpions, and crowned armed Locustes that came out of the
smoke of the pit: and of those innumerable warriors upon those strange
horses that destroyed such multitudes of men. How the Beast should get unto him
many heads and mo horns, Revel. 13.
and upon his horns Crowns: how he should be inthronised, receive the Dragon
his large power and high Commission: how he should war with the Saints, and
open his mouth into blasphemy against God: how he should erect his Image, and
give his mark: how he should kill as many as will not worship his image, and
suffer none to buy or sell, but such as receive his marcke. How that great
harlot that sat upon many waters, so gorgiously araied and adorned, the
mother of all the whoredoms and abhominatio^s of the earth, with that goulden
cup full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication in her hand,
Revel. 17.
wherewith she made droncke^ all the inhabitants of the earth, should sit upon
the Beast, and be made droncke^ with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of
JESUS. And yet further: How the vials of Gods wrathful judgments should by his
faithful messengers and witnesses be powered forth upon the earth, upon the
sea, upon the rivers and fountains of waters, Revel. 16.
upon the Sun, upon the throne of the Beast, upon the great river Euphrates,
and into the air with the peculiar and fearful plagues denounsed and to be
executed hereupon. As also how the great Babylon should be discovered, Revel.
18.
forsaken, pleaded against, condemned, consumed, fire cast upon her and all
her wares, the great millstone upon her and al her children and inhabitants to
press her down to hell. Revel. 19.
To conclude: How Christ himself and his holy army mounted upon the white
horse of his word, should war against the Beast, and against the Kings and
nations that were gathered together by the false Prophet into battle against
Christ and his army, how he should smite the heathen with the sharp sword
that issues out of his mouth, rule them with a rod of iron, and tread the^ in
the wine press of his fierce wrath: how he should give the flesh of all this
people with their Kings, Capitanes and mighty men as a pray to the fowls
the unclean spirits: and how he should take the Beast, and with him the false
Prophet that wrought signs before him, wherein he deceived them that received
the Beasts marck and worshipped his Image, and cast these both alive into that
lake of fire burning in brimstone. Who now (if not such to whom the scriptures
are hidden, ^^uel. 12. 14
and this Book sealed) could in this general falling away from the gospel,
this general departure of the true established Churches out of the inhabited,
this universal corruption and confusion of all estates, degrees, persons,
callings, actions, both in the Church and commune wealth, in this estate, in
this defection, seek for or plead for a true visible established Church, the
true ministry of the gospel, true worship, ministration, sacraments,
government, order? Or who (that were not droncke and had all their senses bound
and intoxicate with the whores cup) could affirm this co^fuse Babel, these
cages of unclean birds, Revel. 18.
these prisons of foul and hateful spirits, to be the Spouse of Christ, the
co^gregatio^s of the Saints, the true established and rightly ordered
Churches of Christ? Is it likely that these men have as yet read the whores
mystery written in her forehead, or as yet know what belongs to the true
established Church, worship, administration, sacraments, ordinances, government
of Christ? though they have in his Testament which is daily read amongst them,
an exact and absolute parterne of al these things before their eyes: And have
not in their Churches any one thing in their practice and proceedings, not one
pin, nail, or hook according to the true pattern: Yea, though they hear
the trompets of the Lord blown against them, though they see the viallz of the
Lords wrath powered upon them, and all their doings, yet stop they their ears
and wincke with their eyes, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear
with their ears and understand with their hearts, and be converted and
healed: And therefore are so far from finding place to repentance, Revel. 16. 2.
that they open their mouths into blasphemy and railings; especially these
men that have the marcke of the Beast, upon whom that evil and malignant
sore is fallen, as you daily see and hear in their books and pulpets. And how
well these governors, mariners, merchantmen, and all that trafique on this sea
can endure the borning of these their pleasant gainefull wares, how they wail,
howl, and cry out when this heavenly fire is cast out into their ships: Let
the behavior of these Bishopps their hierarchy and Priests toward the
servants of God, that speak against their Antichristian proceadings, show, and
how they bestir them to quench the burning of the harlot, smiting and rending
Christ's poor witnesses with tongue, tooth, and nail, casting out of their
mouths a flood of raylings, Revel. 12. 15
reproaches, sclanders, criminations against the^ of poisoned bitters waters,
corrupt doctrines, blasphemous opinions, insufferable perverting and abusing
the scriptures to hide tollerat or defend the antichristian forgeries,
abominations, disorder and enormities of their Church and ministry, that are
discovered and condemned by the word of God in the mouths of us his simple
witnesses.

Of this sort (amongst many other such like) are two books notoriously
infamous, lately published by one George, Giffard, a Priest of their orders,
against certain christians, whom he calls Brownists, Donatiste. In the one
of these Books he labors to defend and clear the parish assemblies of the
Church of England, of such heinous crimes as the said christians object against
them, and forsake them for, witnessing and suffering in bands and persecution
against the same under the hands of those popish Prelates and Romish Priests.
In the other Book he indeuoreth to recover the blame he justly suffered in the
first for reproching, sclandering, blaspheming, accusing these faithful and
innocent christians, applijng himself to prove them Donatists by comparing
together them from poinct to poinct. Both which Books are here answered, and
now at length published to the pervsing and judgment of al men. Where they shall
see how well he has delivered and acquitted their Church, in the first: As
also how justly he has proved his charges, accusations, and blasphemies in the
first and second.

The ^ower principal transgressions wherewith we charge, and for which we
forsake these parish assemblies: Namely, the prophanenes, wickedness, confusion
of the people which are here received, retained and nourished as members. The
vnlawfullnes of their whole ministry which is imposed upon them, retained and
maintained by them. The superstition and idolatry of their public worship in
that devised Leitourgie which is imposed upon them. And the forgerie of their
antichristian ecclesiastical government, to which al their Churches stand
subject, are such and so apparent, as not only prove these parish assemblies
not to be true established Churches of Christ: But if it were admitted (which
can never be proved) that they sometimes had been true established Churches; yet
these transgressions obstinatly stood in and defended, are sufficient causes of
our separation from them in this degenerate estate. For where such profane
co^fuse multit^des without any exception, seperatio^, or choice, were all of
them immediately from public idolatry at one instant received, or rather
compelled to be members of this Church in some Parish or other, where they
inhabited, without any due calling to the faith by the preaching of the gospel
going before, or orderly joining together in the faith, there being no
voluntary or particular confession of their own faith and duties made or
required of any; and last of all, no holy walking in the faith found amongst
them. Who can say that these Churches, consisting of this people, were ever
rightly gathered or built according to the rules of Christ's Testament? Or who
can say that this people in this estate are the communion of Saints? Or who
(without sacrilege) in this estate can administer the holy things of God unto,
or in the same communicate with this people? Likewise, where these parishes
have a false and antichristian ministry imposed upon them, who can say that
they are the true established Churches of Christ? to the building and
ministry whereof Christ has ordained, instituted, and prescribed a certain
ministry unto the worlds end: Or who (without sacrilege) may join unto, or
communicate with a false and antichristian ministry? Christ also has given
unto his Church perpetual and alsufficient rules in his holy word for the
whole administration and government of his established churches, to which they
are bound, whereby they ought to buyld, proceed and walk. Those Churches then
that receive an other Leitourgie, an other foundation, other rules for their
administration and government, cannot be said the right and true established
Churches of Christ. Neither may any faithful man join unto them in this
administration and government, without heinous impiety and denying the faith.
The more particular proof as well of these Arguments as of these
transgressions, ensue hereafter in this treatise. These reasons all men may see
prove directly these Parish assemblies not to be the true established Churches
of Christ to which any faithful christian may join himself in this estate;
especially, when all reformation unto the rules of Christ's Testament is not
only denied, but resisted, blasphemed, persecuted.

How then are M. Giffardes eyes bound and covered with the spirit of slumber,
that still dreameth of a true Church, ministry, sacraments, worship,
government in this estate; and will not be wakened by these reasons, or any
thing that can be said or aledged against their ungodly doings; though he can
neither approve these his strong conceived imaginations by the rules of Gods
word, nor disprove these evident charges in the four principal transgressio^s
by us aledged against their parish assemblies. Which yet he indeuoreth to put
away and shift off by shameless sclanders and open untruths; gyuing out: That
we condemn a Church, for that wicked men come with the godly to the public
exercises of religion: For that there are some ungodly men of the church: For
that there are some wantes in the calling of the Ministers, and in the outward
discipline: As also, some imperfections or corruptions in the worship, which
are not fundamental. The untruth whereof, our very Propositions (though we
should no further answer) shows to his face: Where we charge, and the word of
God condempneth their assemblies, for that they consist of profane multitudes
never orderly gathered unto, or walking in the faith. There shall whilst the
Church consists of mortal men always be wicked in the Church. But Christ
has his fan in his hand to make clean his barn flore: And has given power
and commandment to his Church to cast out the wicked from amongst them. We
acknowledge that the Prince ought to compel al her subjects to the hearing
Gods word in the public exercises of the Church: yet cannot the Prince
compel any to be a member of the Church, or the Church to receive any
without assurance by the public profession of their own faith, or to retain
any longer, then they continue and walk orderly in the faith. Again, we
condemn not their assemblies for some faltes in the calling of the ministry;
but for having and reteining a false and antichristian ministry imposed upon
them: Such we here prove their whole ministry to be in Office, Entrance, and
Administration. In like manner, we forsake not their assemblies for some faltes
in their government or Discipline; but for standing subject to a popish and
antichristian government. And such we here prove theirs to be in the officers,
Courts, proceadings. Neither refreigne we their worship for some light
imperfections (as he says) but because their worship is superstitious, devised
by men, idolatrous, according to that patched popish portesse their service
book; according unto which their sacraments and whole administration is
performed, and not by the rules of Christ's Testament. Such we here prove their
book, worship and ministration to be?

We also before set down unto him sundry popish, idolatrous, and blasphemous
abuses in their worship and ministration: As their Idol Lent, Ember and Eaue
Fastes; their Idol Feasts, popish and Jewish Easter, Pentecost, Christmasse
etc; their Idol Lady days, Saints days, Innocents days, Angels days,
Soul days: Their false manner of administ^ing their Sacraments with such
idolatrous and Popish ceremonies and trinckets, the Font, sign of the Cross,
Gossips etc: Their midwiues baptism, Confirmation: Their hous^ing the sick
with the other sacrament: Their Iuish and Popish ceremonies, vestures etc:
Their Purificatio^, Offertories, Crismes etc: Their marijng, burijng, limiting
or coniuring the fields, made a part of the public worship, and of ye
Pastors office etc. These abhominatio^s M. Giff. will at no hand have called
popish, idolatrous or blasphemous: We impudently lie, and vnsufferably sclander
in so faijng. He therefore indeuoreth to pourge them of all popish and
superstitious opinions and abuses, showing how clear the Church of England is
of the same. Yet will not M. Giff. be thought to plead for or justify any
public abuse of the Church, but only to plead against the Brownists that
speak worse of these things then they are: For these are no fundamental
errors, such as polute the worship, but only light imperfections etc. Well, we
will refer the discussing of the nature of them how heinous they are, unto
their due place. Only here we would know of M. Giff. what foundation these
things themselves have in the word of God, and what warrant he can there show
for them. If he can justify them by the word of God, then verily our offenses
are no less then he has said, that blame them to be idolatrous, popish,
blasphemous. But if these trumperies have no foundation or commandment in Gods
word, but are the devises of men; then we would know whither, God requires or
accepts such worship at their hands? And whither, being made the public
worship of God and administration of their Church, they be not idolatry? And
then how they may offer, or the faithful be constrained to such idolatry, to
such worship, as God neither requires non accepts. And with what conscience
he can, or how he dare stand a minister of that Leitourgie and worship, which
the cannot approve by the word of God, and which he would not be thought to
allow of, the abuses thereof being so manifest and odious in his own eyes.
Especially now with what conscience he can thus blaspheme and condemn us for
refreining that worship which he cannot approve, and does not allow: Or how he
can so earnes^ly inueigh against those most forward and zealous hearers, who
though they will hear their sermons, yet withdraw from the book service, for
the errors and evils they see therein. This M. Giff. in the Epistle to his
second book, says, is a more grievous sin then they suppose. In deed, if
the poor souls knew what they did or ought to do in refreining the public
false worship of the Church, they would and could have no spiritual communion
with those ministers or people that still exercise and will not be withdrawn
from the same false worship, which they condemn and forsake; nor yet would or
might they hear their learned sermons that are joined and conformed to the
same idolatries and abuses. But to the matter; until M. Giff. can prove by the
word of God this public worship and administration according to their service
book in those poinctes wherein we blame them, there is no cause he should
exercise it himself, allure others thereunto, or condemn us for refreigning
the same as we are commanded of God in as many places as true worship is
enjoined, and false worship forbidden. In all this then he but bewraieth his
own shame and hypocrisy in condempning and blaspheming us for doing the will
of God, in aluring others to false worship and idolatry; and in doing that
himself for filthy lucre and fear of the world, which he for shame of the
world dare not allow, neither can justify. Yea, and whatsoever he colourably
pretends and aledgeth in his second Book to cover and excuse the shame and
infamy of his former; yet is he become an earnest pleader for all the
corruptions and abuses of his Church, not granting unto us any one of the
abuses we reprove to be unlawful and ungodly, lest we should thereupon urge him
to have ye same left and refreined (though not publicly put down and
reformed as he accuses) by the faithful: and so they should be condemned for
the practice, and we justified for the refreining these things. Therefore he is
driven to plead for, mitigat, excuse, to tolerate with his uttermost shifts
and cauills all these abhominatio^s whatsoever. Which yet are so heinous and of
so high a nature, as no pretexts of the Princes or churches power, of
ceremonies of things indifferent, no distinctions of substance and form, of
fundamental and not fundamental errors and corruptions etc: can hide, but the
are found heinous transgressions of the law of God, detestable abuses of the
worship of God. And he in practicing and pleading for them is found but as the
Dog reto^ned to his own vomit; as ye false Prophet that teaches ye Prince
to set a scandal before the people, and that seduc^th the people to eat their
Idolothites.

Yea, he is yet further driven, openly to justify the ministry and regiment of
these Arch and Lord Bishops and their hierarchy to be of Christ against which
he erewhile also amongst the rest of that faction was an earnest ^utor to the
Parliament to have them utterly removed out of the Church and abolished, their
Offices, Ministry, Courts, Government, which could not be done without most
heinous impiety, open barbaritie and violence to the Church and unto Christ
himself, if they had been of Christ, as he now pretends. Again if they were
not of Christ but of Antichrist (as they all of that sect then upon certain
knowledge and assurance affirmed) how, and with what conscience could the
Reformists themselves submit unto their decrees, power and government, receive
their ministry of them, exercise their ministry under them, swear and
perform their canonical obedience unto them? Let M. Giff. with all his co^ning
reconcile this in truth and good conscience; howsoever he has reconciled
himself to that apostatical throne, from which he was revolted: And in
testimony of his unfeigned fidelity and in hope of some promotion, has
written these blasphemous books in ^his gracious Lords defense, against the
Brownists; yea and rebuked in the Epistle to his second Book al such as speak
against the Bishopps etc. which yet shall never be able to hide or excuse his
open co^trarietie, perfidie, apostasy, yea that which yet is more fearful,
his open restreint, blasphemy, and despite of that truth which he sometimes
gladly acknowledged and professed. Unto all which he is driven, by opposing
himself against these Brow^ists in the defense of their worship, Leitourgie and
ministry, which al should fall to be the ground with their Lords the Bishops
throne. For if they fall out to be antichristian and no true ministers
according to the rules of Christ's Testament, the^ must that ministry which is
made by them, stands subject unto them etc: need^ be antichristian also: Then
have they and their ministry not to intermedle with the government and
administration of Christ's church; much less to make them laws a Leitourgie
and worship.

Neither staieth M. Giff. himself here in the defense of this present worship,
Leitourgie, Hierarchy, Courts and their procedings, ministry, and their
administration, but yet is driven for the defense of all these, to justify the
Church of Rome (even in their greatest and deepest aposta^ie) to be the true
visible established Church of Christ, to have the true seal of the Covenant
etc. And in deed this it stands him upon to prove, seeing their whole
ministry were immediately derived and received from their mother of Rome, as
also their whole government, Courts etc: and no small part of their worship
and ministration together with the whole people, Parishes and Synagogs as they
now stand. He wants not learned proves to bring this abought: As that the
Apostasy should arise, and Antichrist sit in the Church of God. Yea he proves
both the Church of Rome and of England at once by the schism of Israel, the
apostasy of Judah etc: which yet in those estates were pronounced Churches by
the Prophetts. He proves them within the Covenant by the second Commandment,
where the promise is made to the thousand generation. As also by the greatest
corruptions and faltes that he can any where read, of the primative Churches.
These miserable reasons and examples are the maine pillars and ground-worckes
of al their buildings, and his writings; which being pulled down, their whole
frame falls to the ground at once, and is irreparable. For this I refer the
Reader to their due place in the second Transgression, where they are largely
refuted and answered.

An other pitiful reason he bringe^h in his Proeme to the Reader, of an humane
body consisting of maimed or deformed members: Which yet so long as life
remains in it, is said an humane body. So the Church, though it consist of
mained and deformed members, yet whilst it has the life, viz. true faith in
CHRIST in it, yt is to be held a true Church. I will not here stand to show how
untowardly he has drawn this comparison beyond the Apostles scope and
proportion Romans 12. Nor yet how many errors and inconveniences would ensue of
such racking of Allegories. Only to his reason we answer; that if in his first
Proposition he mean by deformed members, such as have not their right and true
shape yt God has appoincted to humane members, but a strange and diverse
form; Revel. 13.
as the feet of a Bear, the mouth and teeth of a Lion, though it have the face
of a man, Revel. 9.
the hair o^ a woman etc: then hold we it not a natural, Revel. 17.
but a monstrous body. So we say, that to the heavenly body of Christ may no
monstrous deformed strange members be joined, but only such members unto the
public ministry as are described Romans 12. Neither may that heavenly edifice
be built of any other the living, holy, precious stones 1 Pet. 2. or be built
in any other form, then that Christ has prescribed, and the master builders
left unto us in his Testament 1 Cor. 3. They that misbuild the Temple of God,
destroy yt: And they that destroy the Temple of God, them shall God destroy.
Now then to his inference of instance. We deny this body of their Church to
consist of these true members spoken of Romans 12. Neither of those living
precious stones 1 Peter. 2. Neither to be built according to the true
Apostolic pattern 1 Cor. 3. But to consist of those monstrous members Revel.
9. and Revel. 13. and of those profane multitudes Revel. 17. 18. Remaining in
confusion and disorder Revel. 18. 2. And therefore not to be held the heavenly
body of Christ, but that monstrous body of that Beast: Not that holy Spouse of
Christ, but that adulterous harlot: Not that compact City, that heavenly
Jerusalem, but that confuse Babilo^. Further, to that faith and life of the
Church he speaks of; we confess indeed, to the stopping of his sclanderous
mouth that so untruly charge us, that no sin or sins in any Church or
Christian can disanull the Covenant, where this true faith is found. But this
we say, that true faith may not be s^uered from true repentance, even of all
things ^hey see to be contrary to Gods word. Romans 2.
True faith may never be severed from true obedience of whatsoever is showed to
be the will of God in his word: (...). 2.
Faith without works is dead. Now then to the faith of the Church of England,
we find yt without works, we find yt without repentance. Tit. 1. 16.
In their worckes (as the Apostle says) they deny God, howsoever in words
they confess him; 2 Timothy 3. 5.
in their deeds they are abominable and vnperswaded to every good work;
howsoever they make a show of godlynes, they deny the power thereof. Yea so far
are they from suffering their works to burn, 1 Cor. 3.
being showed and reproved unto them by the word of God, as they smite,
persecute and blaspheme with all hostility and reproach those that but show and
reprove their sins. How then should they be thought to have this true faith,
this true life in them? But the faith of their Church remains to be further
examined and discussed in this Book, whither I refer for further trial.

And now if this verbal faith and confession of justification by CHRIST, only
make a Church and a Christian (though they err and transgress in many, yea
in any other thing) as the life does make a man etc, how may we, that profess
this faith and make this confession, be by M. Giffard accused, pronounced,
condemned, divulged as damnable Heretics, Brownists, Se^ismaticks etc? Shall
this faith give life unto them, and not unto us? Or will he slay them that
Christ gives life unto? And that before any due conviction of any one error
or transgression deserving these hard censures and sentences. May he not evil
accuse us of rash, furious, disorderly dealing, that thus uncharitably
accuses, condempneth, smites, before any trial? Yea, that thus
presumptuously runs before, and forestalleth the judgment of their own
Church, pronouncing and divulging us damnable heretics and schismatickes,
before their Church had detected, convinced and rejected us for any one errot.
As to the heresies he accuses us of, Namely, to hold an (...) perfection in
this life and immunitie from sin and from the superior powers yt God has set
over us. When he shall be able to show by any one sentence in our writings, or
but necessarily to infer from the same, that we hold these heresies: Let us
then be held such, and M. Gi^^ard no accuser and sclanderer. But if the
contrary appear in all our writings and doings, then is it evident that he
has most maliciously sclandered us, to bring us in hatred with our sovereign
Queen and the whole Land. We may evil be accused to hold the error of
perfection, for blaming their Church for such heinous transgressions. Or of
Anabaptisticall freedo^, for not being subject to their antichristian yoke. Or
for using the 4 and 5 Chap. of the Epistle to the Ga^^at. against their
burdenous and ungodly traditions. These causes and scriptures will not bear up
M. G. his malicious suspicions and chardges. Neither if we held these
detestable heresies, could our sins or errors either excuse or lessen these
tra^sgressions of theirs. It is a bad foundation to build his credit upon the
ruins of other men's; especially by such detraction and sclander.

The Schism he charge us with, has as little ground or color of truth. We
willed him long since to prove these Parish Assemblies in this estate true and
established Churches, and then we would show him how free we are of schism. We
depart not from any part of the truth, or from any that will walk holily and
orderly in the same. The cause^ of our separation from these Parish assemblies
we have showed to be such as prove them no true established Churches of Christ,
or such where the faithful may abide with any promise or comfort. In
seperating from them then we have not rent our selves from the Church or body
of Christ, but rather separated the Church from them: and obeyed the
commandment of God that calls us out from emongst them. Again whilst M.
GIFF. stands so much upon the name of a Church, and gives the same to the
Romish Sy^^gog in their deepest apostasy, how will he escape himself, or
clear the Church of England from the blot of Schism, for seperating and
withdrawing from the Church of Rome? Any excuse that he can make or devise,
will clear us as well as themselves. Let him look therefore to ye measure he
meateth, lest it be measured unto him again with the same, not only in this
matter of Schisine, but even in that especial poinct of Donatis^rie, which he
of a singular judgment above all others of this time has espied out, and taken
no small pains to compare and liken us unto them from poinct to poinct.
Forgetting in this heat of zeal and acu^^inat pregnacie of his, how the
Papists have continually battred them with the ^ame ordinance, with much
greater advantage then he has us: In as much as he confesses the Church of
Rome the true established Church of Christ, with the true ministri and true
seal of the Covenant etc: And in that they still retain the same ministry,
Government, Courts, Officers, Canons, Orders, Parishes People, Synagogs etc,
that the Papi^tes used and left in this Land, as the Douatists, did. Whereas we
on the contrary do not separate for the same causes, neither do justify or
retain the same ministry, worship, Leitourgie, Officers, Ordinances,
Government, Parishes, Synagogs, that they use etc, as the Donatists did.
Neither do we hold such errors concerning the Magistrates or ministry etc, as
the Donatists did, as is here more perticularly showed in a peculiar treatise,
whither I refer. Only here observing, how the malicious man still (by the just
judgment of God) falls into the same pit, which he dug for the innocent.

For whilst he would accuse us to derogate from the Princes authority, in not
allowing her to make laws for the Church: And greatly to blemish her ^ame and
diminish her love amongst her subjects, whilst we deny these Parishes to be
true established Churches of Christ: He himself lays upon her al these popish
trumperies, idolatrous relics, antichristian enormities and abuses of their
church; and distaineth her name and honor therewith (for the reformation whereof,
this hipocrit sometimes stood a zealous suitor to the Parliament:) Yea, he now
makes his Prince an opposite adversary unto Christ, one that will not be
admonished, or be obedient to Gods word. If these abuses he then complained of
were just or tolerable, how could he sue to have them abolished; and that by a
positive law? If they be contrary to the word of God, how then can he now
obey them, or blame us for refusing to obey them? The Lord deliver our
Souereign Que^ne from such Sycophants, such impostors as these false Prophers
are, that are faithful neither to God nor her, but most dangerously seduce and
highly abuse her gracious disposition, which has ever been inclinable to any
truth of God that has been sincerely showed unto her. It is no shame, neither
any new thing, but a most high honor and praise for godly Princes to redress
things that are amiss, when they are showed by Gods word: Neither it is any
injury to the Prince, when the faithful witness against and refreigne any
thing that is contrary to Gods word: Or dishonor to the Prince to amend the
same, how long soever the abuse has continued as this Accuser and Flatterer
suggesteth. The rest of whose criminations and accusations against us, our
endeavors and proceadings, I deferr to answer until we come to the Articles.
Yet now, that the groundworke and true causes of all his bitter invectiues and
grievous charges against us may appear to all men; we have here set down in
print the original and whole former passage betwixt us and him concerning
these poinctes in controversy: That the Reader may the better discern and
judge of these our present writings: And also see what cause there was given him
thus to accuse, reproach, and blaspheme us as heretics, Schismatickes,
disobedient and injurious to Princes, Anabap^ists, Don^^ists, Brownists, with
infinite vile and reproachful obiectiues, wherewith his treasury is stored. If
in those writings appear no such matter, the^ we protest, that (to our
knowledge) we never gave him cause thus to accuse and blaspheme us, he being a
man altogether unknown by person unto us, and never so much as seen, spoken
unto, or meddled with by us the writers of these things, otherwise, then by
those writings here ensuing; whereunto also we were provoked by himself, who
would needs take upon him this quarrel. Which how christianly and soberly he
has handled and performed, let him of his own mouth be judged, even by every
sentence of his Books, which are referced with most grievous and inaudible
raylings; not so much as speaking of us in any place thereof without some hard,
cruel, and dispightfull words and bitter reuilings and cursings. All which in
our innocence, as the sparow and swallow by flying, we shall escape: And having
thereby discovered his spirit, easily pass over without regarding or answering
the same: Turning also from his person as much as may be, as from a most
unreasonable and dishonest man, with whom we would be loath to have further to
do: Fixing our eyes wholye upon the matter set before us: Indeuoring to make
proof and evident demonstration of these charges, for which we forsake their
assemblies, and have all this time suffered under their tyrannous hands: As
also, to clear our profession and proceadings herein of such calumniations and
reproaches, as this our malignant adversary defameth them with. And this in all
brevity, truth, and good conscience, as so variable and infinite a matter will
permit. Wherein if in any poinct we deal obs^urely and insufficiently (for as
the man is such is his strength) we desire that the truth may not suffer
prejudice thereby: But that the learned and wise Reader will rather confirm and
repair our weak or loose reasons: yea, by our insufficiency be provoked even
in zeal and love of the truth to handle it more exactly: Wherein we shall
gladly give place, and much rejoice. But if in any thing we be found to depart
from the truth, we desire to be lovingly reduced, yet condingly reproved and
censured, vowing (through Gods grace) never to resist any truth that shall at
any time be showed us, neither to resfuse to be reformed. The less faltes, as
the errors in the writing or print, we shall desire the Reader charitably to
construe and correct. And if there be found or rather abound any imperfect or
redundant sentences, let those be imputed chiefly to the want of better skill
in the writers, and partly to their decayed memories, to the inconveniencie of
the place, the continual tossings and turmoiles, searches and riflings, and no
peace or means given us either to write, or reuise that we had written. To
conclude, we beseach and admonish the Reader, not to be withdrawn from the
truth by any foreconceived opinion either of our tenuitie of gifts and base
estate, or of the excellency and multitude of our adversaries, for that were
dangerous to themselves: But rather diligently to ponder their own ways and
the issues thereof, and where they find themselves to err, speedely to return
to the truth without cunctation or excuse; that so they may find peace and
assurance to their own souls. Which grace we even wish to our greatest
enemies, and shall not cease to pray, that God may thus bless our indeuoures.

A BRIEF SVMME OF the causes of our separation, and of our purposes in
practice, withstood by G. G. defended by H. B. as follows.
WE seek above all things the peace and protection of the most high, and the
kingdom of CHRIST JESUS our Lord. 2 WE seek and fully purpose to worship God
aright, according as he has commaded in his most holy word. 3 WE seek the
fellowship of his faithful and obedient servants, and together with them to
enter Covenant with the Lord, and by the direction of his holy Spirit, to
proceed to a godly, free, and right choice of Ministers and other Officers by
him ordained to the service of his Church. 4 WE seek to establish and obey the
ordinances and laws of our Savior Christ left by his last will and Testament
to the governing and guyding of his Church, without altering, changing,
innouating, wresting, or leaving out any of them that the Lord shall give us
sight of. 5 WE purpose (by the assistance of the holy Ghost) in this faith and
order to lead our lives, and for this faith and order to leave our lives, if
such be the good will of our heavenly Father, to whom be honor and glory Amen.

6 AND now that our forsaking and utter abandoning of these disordered
assemblies as they generally stand in England, may not seem strange nor
offensive to any man that will judge or be judged by the word of God, we
allege and affirm them heinously guilty in these 4 principal Transgressions.

1 THEY worship the true God after a false manner, their worship being made of
the invention of man, even of that man of sin, erroneous and imposed upon
them. 2 FOR that the profane ungodly multitudes, without exception any one
person, are with them received into, and retained in the bozome of the Church.
3 FOR that they have a false and Antichristian Ministry imposed upon them,
retained with them, and maintained by them. 4 FOR that these Churches are ruled
by, and remain in subjection unto an Antichristian and ungodly government,
clean contrary to the institution of our Savior CHRIST.
When these things stand thus, let him that reads consider.

THE first Article is that which all Christians do seek in dead; G. G. to the
first Article.
but the kingdom of CHRIST, or the kingdom of God (as CHRIST says) is within
men: Yt consists in righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost. For
the preservation of this, CHRIST has ordained a Church government. They sin
against God which do not covet, and according to their calling labor to have
so great a help. But to transport the name of Christ's kingdom which is
spiritual, which is in the heart, unto this which is but a part, and as though
the kingdom of God could not be in any unless they have this (so they do not
wilfully despise yt) I say is false, and the contrary to be proved by the
Scriptures.

OUR Article being by you confessed to be the bounden duty of al true
Christians, ^. B. his reply.
we see not with what equity you can in this manner cauil at our words, or
with what conscience you can misconstrue and constreine them as you do;
seeking thereby to retract by sleight, what you cannot gainesay in truth. And
taking occasion to contend about words: Namely [the kingdom of CHRIST] You
make yt only inward, and use CHRIST as one of the Physicians planitarie signs,
assigning to him in hipoctisie your heart and soul to rule, whilst in ye mean
time you yield your bodies and whole assemblies to the obedience and rule of
Antichrist; making no conscience to obey his laws openly, and to transgress
Christ's; thinking belyke Christ's kingdom so inward and spiritual, as that he
requires no bodily or outward obedience; or, because yt consists of
righteousness, and peace, and joy of the holy Ghost, (...)
that there may be peace without righteousness, or joy without peace, They have
no (...) to excuse themselves, but to accuse the estate, which (...) they obey
(...). A kin^ome no^ (...) against (...).
or inward righteousness where is such outward disobedience and wilful
transgression. But all this is covered and cured at once [if so be you covet and
labor in your calling to have CHRIST'S outward government, etc.] To discuss
here how far every Christians duty and calling extends herein, were to
dismiss all your answers at once, and to pluck away the mantle of shame
wherewith you cover your nakedness, your negligence, and all your abominations.
In this place therefore we will only ask you these 2 questions. First; whither
any which have their calling of Antichrist, or be his marked Ministers, or
waged servants, can truly and uprightly covet and labor for the sincere
government of CHRIST, which is his whipp wherewith he ^kourgeth out all thieues,
intruders and idle-bellies out of his house. The next question is: Whither to
remain wittingly and seruilely in the bondage and yoke of Antichrist 29
years, be to seek and labor for the government of Christ faithfully in your
callings, or to uphold and vndershore the kingdom of Antichrist rather?

But to transport the name of Christ's kingdom which is chiefly spiritual and
in the heart, unto that which is but a part etc.

How diversely the kingdom of God is read in the Scriptures, we will not
contend with you (although it were not hard to show either your ignorance or
forgetfulness herein) Only this we say; our words can carry no such
construction, muchlesse such an erroneous opinion, as you (abounding in your
own sense) have not only collect, but confuted. In the first our words being,
That we seek the kingdom of Christ Jesus our Lord, cannot be thus restreined
to Christ's outward orders and government in his Church; especially, if you had
pondered that which followed, where in the ^ Article (after your division) we
have expressed this point in particular. Neither (if we should admit you y^
interpretation) could you collect from thence [that the kingdom of God could
not be in any, unless they have this] But as we usually read in the old and
new Testament Christ's kingdom to be taken for his true visible Church here in
earth; so we acknowledge his universal Church and kingdom to extend to all
such as by a true faith apprehend and confess Christ, howsoever they be
scattered, or whersoeuer dispersed upon the face of the earth: Yet both with
this interim, without true faith and obedience can be no true Church, no true
Christian.

THE 2 Article ought all men that will please God to approve. G. G. to the 2
Article.


THIS Article you say [ought all that will please God to approue] How then seek
you to please God, H. B. his reply.
which continue in Idolatry and are a Minister thereof, which prophecy in
Baall and plead for Baall? Or how approve you yt, when you condemn us of
schism and heresy because we forsake your false and antichristian worship,
and seek to worship Christ according to his word?

THE 3 Article if it be taken in this sense, G. G. to the 3 Article.
that ye dare set up a society separated from all others within this land
which make public profession; then I see not, when you have gone by your
selves and set up your Officers, how you will clear your selves from
Donatisme. If theirs were a damnable fact which God did accurse, then take heed
to yours; for if it can be showed that their heresies are not holden, I will
chang my mind.

THE words of our Article being [That we seek the fellowship and communion of
Christ's faithful and obedient seruants] clear us of all schism and heresy:
H. B. his reply,
So that if you would convince us of these crimes, it had been expedient you
had first proved your assemblies, as they generally stand, by the evidence of
Gods word, to be true churches of Christ, rightly entered and keeping covenant
with the Lord, continuing in the order and obedience of his word etc, and that
we preposterously have departed from you, and uncharitably have forsaken your
fellowship. But as soon as you shall show us such a church among you, by the
grace of God we will show you how free we are of schism: As likewise, when you
shall lay open our errors unto us, how far we will be from heresy. In the
mean time we will not cease to pray unto God for you, that he will not lay
these sins unto your charge, which in your ignorant zeal you commyt, but in
mercy show you the fearful estate you stand in, and give you an heart
unfeignedly to repent, and speedely to turn unto him.

THE 4 Article ought all men to practice so far forth as the limitts of their
calling do extend. G. G. to the 4. Art.
But let it be showed that ever private men did take upon them to reform when
things were amiss in the Church; or that any of the Prophetts did will them to
take the matter in hand; or show your warrant that you be not private men.

THIS Article you first allow, H. B. his reply.
and after restreyne to we wot not what limits of calling: But if you grant it
the duty of every true Christian to seek to establish and obey the ordinances
and laws of Christ, left in his Testament to the governing of his Church,
without altering etc: it is as much as we endeavor: or purpose. Otherwise we
allow not that, which the law of God condempneth, either intrusion without
lawful calling, either transgression in calling, or presumption above calling.
Our purpose is not to meddle with the reformation of the state, otherwise then
by our prayers unto God, and refreining from al things that are contrary to
Gods law. Sodom and Babylon (...) by (...).
Neither endeavor we to reform your Babilonish deformities, or to repair the
ruins of Hierico, or dawbe the wall of A^tichrist with you. This trash we know
to be deuote to execratio^ by the Lords own irreuocable sentence; and therefore
we leave the reformation of them to the Lords visitation in judgment: The best
way to (...) others is (...) to (...) our selves.
holding it our duty without al delay to obey the voice of God which calls
us out of all places where he is not truly worshipped according to his word,
where his laws are wilfully broken and Antichrists laws obeyed: And this to
be the commandment of God in the law by his Prophets, Christ himself and his
Apostles, is every where in the scripture manifest (without exception of
person or restreint of calling) even unto every one that will be saved. In the
rest (whatsoever you surmise of us) we arrogat no swelling titles, we are as we
profess to be, simple hearted Christians, which seek to worship and obey
Christ as our only King, Priest, and Prophet: And to our Prince we are humble
and obedient subjects in all things which are not repugnant to Gods laws.

IF a man has the truth, G. G. to the 5 Article.
it is good to stand unto yt to the death rather then deny yt; as our Church
in the same estate it is in now, yielded many blessed constant Martirs. But if
a man has not the truth, it is a great obstinacy to die for yt; as sondrie
Anabaptists and other heretics have showed. Every true Christian will rather
die then deny the discipline which Christ has left: But you must show that
God commands private men to set yt up.

THE word of God and your own mouth having approved our desires in these
Articles, H. B. his reply.
we cannot be moved with Satan's old tentation, to doubt of the Lords undoubted
truth, or call his commandments into question, with [if it be true etc.]
Neither can we be removed by that old popish reason which you bring, of
certain blessed Martires that died in this estate your Church is now in. This
is not to approve the estate of your Church by Christ's Testament: Which until
you do, though all the men in the world should die both in yt and for yt, yet
could they not justify that God condempneth. But in deed the holy Martirs you
speak of, neither died in yt, nor for yt. Not in yt, being by Gods great mercy
deprived and discharged by their enemies: Not for yt, but for the truth of
CHRIST they most constantly gave their lives. Neither can it be showed where
ever they resisted the truth, being showed them; or denied to hear yt at ye
most simple ma^s mouth; or ever yielded to any corruption or yoke that God
gave them sight of, contrary to their own consciences, as you do in these
days. Therefore so far are they from iustifi^ng you in this your general
apostasy, as that they being found faithful in that little in the twilight,
shall rise in judgment with this generation in this great light with all the
gifts they boast of.

Every true Christian (you say) will die rather then deny the discipline that
Christ has left. With what conscience then can you esteem among the wicked
Anabaptists and condemned and dampened heretics that suffer in their
obstinacy, us, that cast off the yoke of Antichrist, and seek and suffer for
the true worship and holy government of Christ? Or how can you flatter your
selves in the fearful estate you stand in, drawing so even by long custom in
Antichrists yoke, not only in deed and practice denijng the government of
CHRIST, but (to your utmost endeavor) by contumelious reproaches, unjust
sclanders, and open persecution, seek to resist and suppress yt. But we must
show [that God commands private men to set yt vp]. First God commands in his
law every one to seek the place where he puts his name: CHRIST in the
Gospel, to seek the kingdom of God, to take his yoke upon them, etc. Again,
CHRIST has left but one form of government in his last Will and Testament
unto his Church, which he has fealed with his blood; and therefore not left yt
arbitrable at ye pleasures of Princes, or policies of times to be done or
undone, but made yt by a double right inviolable, (...).
both by his word and his Testament; so that the Church of God ca^ neither be
governed by any other laws or government, neither ought yt to be without
this; for God holds them all in the estate of enemies, which have not his
Son to reign over them. Now then the faithful are commanded to gather
together in CHRIST his name, with promise of direction and protection, and with
authority not only to establish his laws and ordinances emongst them, but
faithfully to govern his Church thereby. For the kingdom of God consists not
in word but in power. Now this assembly of the faithful before they be
planted and established in this order, consists hitherto but of particular
private persons, none as yet being called to office or function. Therefore we may
well conclude, that God commands his faithful servants, being as yet private
me^, together to build his church, according to the true pattern of Christ's
Testament (without altering, changing, innouating etc.) And for this we have
the example of the primative Churches for our patterns and warrant, which sued
not to Courts and Parliaments, nor waited upon Princes pleasures, when the
stones were in a redines, but presently having received ye faith of Christ,
received likewise the ordinances of Christ, and continued in the same. Again,
if they should tarry Princes leisuers, where were the persecution you speak
of? Princes never punish them that obey their hestes. And thus because you
cannot endure the fiery trial of persecution, you utterly (by your perfidous
tolleration) abrogate at once the cross of Christ. And (that you might enjoy
this worldly peace and fleshly pleasure for a season) you care not to make
Christ attend upon Princes, and to be subject to their laws and government.
But (alas) it were fitter with a loud voice to call you out of Babylon, the^
thus to sing you hebrew songs in Babylon.

THIS Article mentions 4 principal Transgressions, G. G. to the 6 Article.
wherein the assemblies in England are judged and affirmed to be heinouslie
faulty, and wilfully obstinate. Elias did see outward idolatry practiced, and
did see none that did mislike, and therefore complained of all, yt was but an
error. But whereas Gods word is embraced, and multitudes abhor idolatry, and
labor with sorrowful tears to be purged from their sins, it is intolerable
pride and presumption of men to set themselves in Gods judgment seat, and to
condemn all of wilfulnes and obsti^acie. Let it be showed that any (led by
Gods Spirit) have dealt in this sort, and especially in chardging them whom
they condemn most falsely, as shall appear.

HERE you very vehemently chardge us with intolerable pride, H. B. his reply.
presumption, intrusion into Gods judgment seat, to be void of Gods Spirit,
to chardge and condemn you most falsely, as you say shall appear. How justly
you chardge us with these crimes, and dischardge your self and these assemblies
of these present transgressions, upon the scanne of your answer shall appear.
In the mean time the holy Ghost shows us what spirit you are led by at the
writing thereof; and has foretold how well you shall endure and reform at the
manifestation of your sins, and at the pouring out of the cup of the Lords
indignation, where he says: They shall drink, and be moved, and be madd,
because of the sword that shall come upon them. And in another place: And the
fifth Angel powered forth his vial upon the Throne of the Beast, and his
kingdom waxed dark, and they gnawed their tongues for sorrow and blasphemed
the God of heaven for their pains and their sores, but repented them not of
their works. It suffised you not to cavil and spurn against the manifest
truth of our former Articles; but you must in this not only leave out our words
at your pleasure, but abuse them that remain after your own lust. Our Article
speaks of the assemblies as they generally stand in England: You retort our
words to Gods secret election, which we acknowledge and daily see, and praise
Gods name for it: Yet no multitudes, but a little poor remnant, as the beries
of a beaten Olive tree, the grapes after the grape-gathering, one of a City,
two of a Tribe in respect. And it is to be doubted, those multitudes you speak
of will shrink when they come to his ass^ye whose furnace is in Sion, and fire
in Jerusalem. But if it should be so as you say, the heavy wrath of God
ha^geth over your heads, that have a people so ready and fit for the kingdom
of CHRIST, and suffer them to continue in this confusion, false worship,
antichristian bondage, even the snare of the Devil; and not only not lead them
out of it, but not suffer the^ that would to depart, and thus slay them that
should not dye. Yea you smite the Phisitia^ that seeks to heal you, and are
enemies to them that show you your tra^sgressio^s, judging them void of the
spirit of God. But if you had but considered that Prophets zeal, as you
remembered his error, you should have found him zealous and ^eruent against
Baalls Priests in Gods quarrel. It were long to recite the number of Gods
faithful servants which are every where commended in the scriptures for their
zeal and diligence herein: Or again the Lords judgments not only upon
particular men, but whole Contries and nations for the contempt and neglect
thereof. So then, if it fall out that the law and word of God condemn you of
these transgressions, what are we that we should justify you in your
iniquities; nay rather proud, hawtie, and scornful is his name that works
in his arrogancy wrath etc.

To blazon your transgressions as they deserve, requires rather a quire then a
shead of paper: And (to say the truth) it is an yrksomnes unto any godly
conscience, either to hear or recite them. Yet because there is no cause so bad
which shall not find as bad a patron, we will only examine your answers, and
briefly show their insufficiency.

THE first fault is; G. GIF. his answer to the first principal Transgression.
That we worship the Lord after a false manner, because our worship is said to
be made of the invention of man, yea of the man of sin, erroneous and imposed
upon us. I answer, that our worship is the embracing of the holy Bible; by the
doctrine thereof we seek to believe in God, to call upon him, and to do all
good works. Many Ministers there be in England which have not approved the
book of common prayer further, then they are persuaded it is consonant to Gods
word, hor used any thing therein which they judge corrupt. But you say all read
prayer is idolatry: But you must bring better stuff to prove yt then your
spiritual fantasies so directly overthrown by the holy scriptures, howsoever
they may be cauilled against with fond distinctions, as the heretics have done
in other matters.

THE first Transgression we chardge your assemblies with, H. BAR, his reply.
is: That you worship God after a false manner, your worship being made of the
invention of man, even of the man of sin, erroneous, and imposed upon you.
You answer, your worship is the embracing the holy Bible: Thus begging the
question, you neither prove your worship by the Bible, nor answer one of these
4 apparent reasons which we bring in our Articles, why yt is false and
contrary to the Bible. For the further manifestation of your worship in
particular, let that great Idol, the book of your common prayer (which is so
full of errors, blasphemies, and abominations) be examined by the word of God.
See if you can find in the new Testament your Romish Fastes, your Ember days,
Saints Eaues, Lent, or your Idol Feasts, your Alhallowes, Candlemasse, your
several Lady days, Saints days, the dedicating of your Churches to Saints,
your Comminations, Rogations, Purifications, Tithe^, Offerings, Mortuaries, your
manner of visiting the sick and housling them with the Sacrament, your
Absolution, your blasphemous Diriges and funeral sermons over and for the
dead, your corrupt manner of administering the Sacraments, your Font, crossing in
baptism, your Baptising by women, Gossippings, the blasphemous Collects you
use in this Sacrament, your Bishoppings, with all your heretical Collects in
that Book, which is a wearines to us to repeat, though not in you to use, The
Church-vvarde^s svv^^ue to see the book used.
tolerate, and defend. But all this gear must be swallowed up: This candle
may not be lighted, lest the people look into the abominable ingredients
which you their antichristian Ministers give them, or rather sell them in the
whore of Babilons Cupp to the destruction of their souls. But you know some
Ministers in the land, which neither use nor approve the Book further, then
they are persuaded in conscience it is consonaut to Gods word. But you know
none that use not the Book: You know never a Minister in this land which
either is authorized by the state, or stands in puplique place, which
stands nor under this Idol, or that has thrown yt out by the power of the
word, or withdrawn the people from yt with all their preaching these 29 years;
but join their Gospel to yt, The Gospel of Christ cannot be joined to this
stuff.
minister to that people that use yt, etc. Neither can the conningest of you
make the best part of yt other, then a piece of swynes flesh, an abomination
to the Lord. Neither can the persuasion of your conscience either justify your
worship, clear you, or satisfy others; especially when we see your
confciences to tollerat and submit unto the whole; to use part in respect of
your homage, and to refuse part for shame of the world. Hitherto appears no
sclander in our Article, your worship being altogether as ill, and worse then
we speak of; and such indeed as you neither can nor dare abide by: And
therefore to get ridd of this Article which presses you so ^ore, you chardge us
with matter which you find not in our Article: That we say all read prayer is
idolatry, terming it our stuff, spiritual fantasies directly overthrown by
the holy scriptures, howsoever we may cauil with fond distinctions, as the
heretics have done in other matters. From what spirit proceeds all this? found
you this in our Article? If not, all these blasphemous reproaches must return
to you again with shame: You want a covert when you fly into this bush to
hide you. When you shall be better instructed of the holy Ghost, and have
learned what prayer is, you will not call spiritual prayers spiritual
fantasies, neither thrust your Apochripha prayers to be read in the church of
God, where only Gods word ought to be read. But this being beside our Article,
in nothing disprouing it, not justifying your idolatrous worship used in your
assemblies, we leave the further clearing of this to him, to whom it more
perticularly (belongs. And we, for every thing you have as yet brought) must
remain cleared of all the sclanders and reproaches you have cast out against
us; your assemblies still charged and obstinatly guyltie of a popish,
erroneous, and idolatrous worship thrust upon them according to our Article;
and you not a Minister, but a defendor of this trumperie, resisting the truth,
and blaspheming us for defending the truth.

THE 2 fault is: G. G. his answer to the 2 principal Tra^sgressio^.
That all the profane multitude (without exception of any person) are
admitted and retained into the bozome of the Church. The most Churches in
England want godly Pasoors, and there all are admitted, it may be he that
admits is the worst in the company. But there be many greater and smaler
Congregations where the Pastor does keep back some for ignorance, and some for
spotted life, until they amend; as I my ^elf have known (...) repelled from
the Sacrament in one stock, and not admitted at all. But you will say; by what
right does the (...) this? I say, that the Book of common prayer does expreslie
command, that all such as live ungodly shall not be admitted. But then you will
say, they be admitted to come unto prayers with the rest. Not, if they be
excommunicated justly, as sondrie are. Again, this will hardly be retained of
all that know the truth, that the prayer or worship of the faithful is poluted
if there be profane men in company, especially we that cannot remedy the
matter. There were but a few true worshippers frequented the Temple among
multitudes of profane and ungodly men. But what can you aledge more the the
Anabaptists did at the first, why they separated themselves? would you have
private men reform the Temple, or not come there?

HERE you confess that the most Churches in England want godly Pastors; H. B.
his reply.
and that there all are admitted; and that he that admits them is the worst
of the company. (...)*
Thus you make the most Churches in England in a very bad estate, and so far
forth you affirm our Article. But yet you know some Churches, where the Pastor
has repelled for ignorance and spotted life to the number of 20. or 30. from
the Sacrament etc. This very rare thing being granted you, what insueth
thereof? Does this disprove, that eue^ there, and in the best of your Churches,
the profane multitudes are not received into and retained in the bozome and
body of your Churches? Were there no more profane ^ow ye but these 20. or
30. you speak of in Ye Parish? or were not they elsewhere received to the
Sacrament? But to take a more direct course with you, and to prove our Article
at once. Know you any in those Parishes you speak of, or in the Realm of
England unbaptized? And is not Baptism a Sacrament belonging to the church,
whereby all the faithful and their ^eede enter into yt? Then all being baptized,
it follows, that all are received into the body of your Church. Now being
once received in, they can no way be cast out, but by excommunication. And it
is manifest that the Parson with all his Parish have not the power which Christ
has left unto his Church to excommunicate any offender, be he never so
obstinate or notorious; no nor to redress any enormitie that is laid upon
them by the times. And thus the other part of our Article is confirmed; That
all are retained in the bozome of your Church. And now to your suspension or
prohibition from the Sacrament: You will have us ask you by what right the
Minister does this. In deed this would be known; for if it be in the nature of
excommunication, it were no small presumption in the Minister to arrogate such
absolute authority to himself. But all this your answer clears. The Book
of common prayer (you say) does command etc. Here may not be let pass that
even your own mouth confesses; that eue^ the best of your Churches and
Ministers stand under, observe and uphold this Idol. Why, is ye Book^ of
common prayer Christ's new Testament, that you must fetch your war^ant and
direction from that Idol? In deed yt is a fit Portesse for such a Priest; and
the suspension you vaunt of, a fit tool for such workmen, even the instrument
of that foolish Shepherd. If the judgment of God were not upon your right eye
and your right arm, you might see how your Lords the Bishopps dress you; and
perceive how this weapon they allow you, wants both edge and poinct; yt is so
rebuted by them, that never a one in the Parish sets a fly by yt. Again,
one word of M. Co^missaries mouth can heal the greatest wound you ca^ make
with yt. The next thing that you will have us to say, is [That they be admitted
to come to prayer with the rest]. For this you have a cunning solution ready:
Not (you say) if they be justly exco^m^nicat* as sondrie are. See how God
ensnareth you in your own words, and how hard a bad cause is to defend, though
you make both our Questions and your own Answers as it pleases you.

First here is to be observed, That you subscribe not in secret, but openly
justify the Comissaries exco^municatio^, for other means have your Sinagogs
none, the Parson, Churchwardens, Sidemen, Quest-men being sworn servants,
and the whole Parish standing in subjection to his Antichristian Court.

The is to be observed, what good Sheepherds you be, that yield your sheep to
this ravening wolf to make hauock of them, and excommunicate at his pleasure.
But al these transgressions and enormities whatsoever, you think to heal, or
hide (at the least) with these 2 dry wythered fig-leaues: The one; That you
cannot remedy the matter: The Other; Private me^ may not reform. In the first
you confess your selves deprived of that power which Christ unto the worlds
end has left unto his Church to reform and redress things amiss. In
tho'ther, deprived of al christia liberty and will, so much as to save your
own soul, and to come forth of this Babilonish bondage you stand in, Private
men may refrain ^dolatrie though they cannot reform^
still dreaming of the reformation of your idolatrous Sinagogs, and seeking to
heal the wound of the Beast, comparing them to the Temple of God, and still
begging the question, frame your Arguments as though your people were faithful,
and your prayer holy. Alas, it were better you took example by the fearful
judgments of God upon ye Temples, and learned of the faithful servants of God
which in the idolatrous days of Achas, (...) etc* ref^eined from that they
could not amend; rather then in this ^rantick manner to blaspheme the name of
Christ whereupon we are called, by comparing us to Anabaptists and Heretics for
obeying the voice of God that calls us from among you, and for telling you
the truth.

THE 3 fault is; G. G. his answer to the 3 principal Transgressio^
A false and Antichristian ministry imposed and maintained. Here is no reason
rendered why it is a false and Antichristian ministry which is imposed. If
ye be Prophetts raised up of God we must believe that which you say; but they
did not lie in any matter: but every man may see, that you have in the former
Article lied. We may not therefore give credit to your imaginations. We have
more to prove that there be many faithful Ministers of Christ in the land,
then that any shall be able to overthrow. This I would wi^h, that simple men
would have thus much wisdom, as to suspend their judgment if they be in doubt,
and so enquire if there be any churches of Christ under heaven, what they do
judge of the Minist^rie and churches of England. For if there be no Church of
Christ nor ministry, and all the famous men in all the Churches say we be
(knowing our estate as they do right well) then be they all guyltie, then
where shall we find the Church? Shall we seek yt emongst a few uncharitable
men, which cannot show any Church which agrees with them so nerely as the
Anabaptists and Donatists? Let it be set down what makes a true Minister of
Christ, and then if that be not found in many Ministers in England, let them
be condemned Antichristian. It is the part of every godly and christian man to
have the matter thoroughly tried, before he pronounce sentence; if it were but
against one man, he should sin grieuouslie to do otherwise, much more when
the sentence is against the whole Church.

HERE you say is no reason rendered by us why yt is a false and Antichristian
Ministry which is imposed. H. B his reply.
But if you had better weighed these two former Transgressions vvherwith we
charge you; or duly considered of your own answer before you had put pen
to paper, you might have gained this labor you have taken, and the shame you
are like to suffer by these your frivolous and indirect answers. Or if you had
consulted with your learned brethren upon the matter (to whom this promise
which you have intercepted, They promise^ us before the (...) of the e Articles
to ans^^ere or (...).
more nerely by many rightes apperteined) they would have cou^selled you to
have used your discretion rather in the pulpit as they do, where you may say
what you list without controlement, the^ thus bewray your folly in writing,
which lies subject to the censure of all men in all ages. They consider that
an evil and corrupt matter ought rather to be covered then raked in, lest yt
become more odious.

Christ could not be a Minister of idolatrous and false worship. Such in our
first cause of our coming out from among you, we proved the stand in your
Parishes, to be. And now in this third cause your self, by but repeating part
of our words, do give a strong and sufficient reason. Namely; that your
Ministry is thrust and imposed upon your Churches, and not freely chosen by
the Lords faithful people according to Christ his ordinance in his Testament.
You know our Savior Christ his judgment of such as come into the shepefolde by
in^rusion, or ascend up any other way. So then we seek not that you should
credit us, or hold us for Prophetts: But if this we speak be that which God
by them has uttered, then you deride not us so much as them, nor them so much
as the Spirit of God that spoke in them. [But the Prophetts of God lied not in
any thing; but every man may see that we have in the former Article lied.]
The Devil is the author of lies, sclaunders, false accusations against the
Saints etc, and thereof has his name: All that make or love lies are his
children, and shall be shut off the City of God. This chardge we have repelled
in the 2. Transgression; where we proved all received into your Church by
Baptism, and are retained in your Churches, because you have not the power of
Christ to excommunicat any. Thus still you fall into the pit you make for
us, by Gods just judgments, and shall by the same receive the reward of a liar,
a false witness, a false Prophet, if God give you not grace to repent, which
we shall more joy in then in your confusion.

Of the great store of reasons you have to prove your Ministry to be of
Christ, and your selves faithful, you might have bestowed one of your store,
either for pity or for love upon us, who you see are fully persuaded, that
there is not one such Minister among you all; at least for saving your self from
the blame you laid upon us, one reason would have done well: But chiefly for
confirming your Ministry to be of Christ, one (at the least) had been more
then necessary: For otherwise we may not believe your bare affirmation before
Christ's negative: In whose Testament we find neither the names you carry, the
Offices you bear, the manner of your entrance, of your administration, neither
of your support and maintenance. The same ^easons that o^erthrov^ the Pope
overthrow their (...).
Your descent and pedigree is within few degrees derived from the Pope, you
being the children of your Antichristian Bishops which are the creatures of the
Pope, who is the eldest son of Satan, and his Vicar gennerall in earth,
whose image, mark, power and life you ^eare, and together with him grow, live,
reign, stand and fall, as the branches with the tree. Now we knowing the
plant cannot easilye be deceived in the grafts, especially knowing them from
their cradles, nourished with the milk of superstition, instructed in the
schole of heathen vanity, brought up in the Colleges of more then monkish
idleness and disorder, exercised in vain and curious arts, whose divinity is
by tradition, and according to their progress and degrees therein commended to
the Ordinary, who making probation of them accordingly, does either initiate
or train them in this idolatrons office, or else give them their full orders,
with his paper license and popish seal thereat. Thus are they either presented
to a Benifice, instituted, inducted, where they ringe their bells, pay the
first fruictes, taxes, proxes, and are sworn to their canonical obedience, to
his Scenes, Courts, Synods etc: Or else (as they term them) they are become
Preachers, (...).
either waged Chaplens, mercenarie Curats, or hireling teachers, gaping for
promotion: Which being obtained, they change, remove, e^terchange, according to
their best advantage. In this manner being entered by intrusion, they cannot but
live by theft, spoil and rapine, as their popish tithes, the goods of the
poor, and offerings of the profane indifferently; and govern by tyranny and
perfidie: Tyranny, in exe^uting the popish Injunctions, even the statutes of
Omry: Perfidie, in betraijng all into the hands of their Lords the Bishops.
Thus fulfill they scriptures, by which who so examineth their infinite
transgressions in particular, can want no store of Argument^ against this
Ministry; our purpose being here rather to show some, the^ to set down all,
or to confute any of their odious enormities: Which are so gross, that as soon as they are but manifested by the light, they are reproved. And it could
not be (if the Lord had not laid a veil over their hearts) that where the
scriptures are read, these deformities could be hid, tolerated, or defended.

But in stead of an Argument to us, you turn your speech to the simple people,
and give them counsel if they doubt of your Ministry [to supend their
judgments, and to inquire if there be any Churches of God under heaven, and
what they do judge of the Ministry, and Church of England] etc. Is this the
best counsel you can give them? use you thus to appeaze unquiet consciences,
and to resolve their doubts? With what conscience can they which remain
doubtful of the truth, and lawfulnes of your ministry, frequent your prayers
and preaching in the mean time until they may send over sea and be resolved
from thence; You know that what is not of faith, is sin. But with what
conscience can you use poor souls thus that inquire the truth at your mouth,
to send them over sea you wot not whether to be resolved of your Ministry and
Churches? Is your Church built upon the words of men, or upon the word of God?
Is this to prove your Church and Ministry by the word of God? Or to use the
old worn Arguments of your mother Church of Rome, who was wont to defend her
self by universality and consent? What if all the Churches and learned me^ in
the world should say you are a Church (which we must tell you by the way they
all never did, neither caanie which knows the word of God and your estate
aright) but if they should, could they, or all the world justify, that God
condempneth? Should not a people inquire at their God from the living to the
dead? Remember ye not that it is written To the law^ and the testimonies if
they speak not, it is because there is no light in them. But ye are gone out
of the way, ye have caused many to fall by the Law, ye have broken the
Covenant of Le^ie says the Lord of hosts, therefore have I made you also to be
despised and vile before all the people, because you kept not my Ways but have
been partial in the Law. Yea the judgments of God are alredie fallen upon
you; you all (as he speaks by his Prophet) being covered with a spirit of
slumber, If the light (...) is in you be darkne^, o how great is that darkness.
even stricke^ with the blindness of Elimas, groping the way in the noone light,
because you have perverted the straight ways of the Lord; and being thus
miserable and blind out of the way, not only perceive it not, but love darkness
more then light, refusing the light when yt is brought you, yea despising yt,
because of the fewenes and baseness of them that bring yt you. And in this
Pharisaicall pride proceed, after your accustomed manner of blaspheming, terming
us few, uncharitable, Anabaptists, Donatists etc. Thus fulfill you the measure
of your forefathers; thus dealt they with all Gods faithful servants that were
sent unto them, yea even with CHRIST himself, refusing him for his simplicity,
reputing him among thieues, deceivers, etc: We look for no better usage at
your hands; the servant is neither greater nor better then his Master; if they
have done thus to the green tree, what shall not you do to the dry? Yet so
far are we from all danger or harm by these curses, God (...) your bless^^gs:
therefore he blesses your cu^sings.
that God turns them forthwith unto us as a blessing, and to a comfortable
assurance both of the fellowship of the faith, and of the sufferings of CHRIST:
Blessed are you when men revile you, and say all manner of evil against you for
my names sake etc. Again, through the mercies of our God, all the ini^ries you
can offer unto us cannot overcome our charity, or break our patience. In the
one we possess our souls; in the other we will not cease to pray for you,
even as for our selves, and be ready to do you any good we can. Now to those
poor souls whom you like miserable physicians thus cure, we give this
advise; (yet not we, but the Load) That they beware of Wolves in sheep
clothing: That they ^ollow not blind guides too far: That they mark
diligently and avoid such as transgress and abide not in the doctrine of
CHRIST, not walk after the rule of the Gospel: That they turn away from such
as make a show of godliness, but deny the power and practice thereof, deceiving
with fair words the hearts of the simple, talking of CHRIST but denijng him
in deeds. Further we send them not to man's word, nor over sea, but to Gods
word, which is near them, even in their mouths and in their hearts: Let them
thereby try the spirits before they believe them: Let them thereby measure their
Temple, their Altar and their Worshippers, and especially their own hearts;
that they may be wise to that which is good, and simple concerning evil. If the
latter part of your answer had been put in the beginning, (to have (...) down
what makes a true Minister of Christ) and you approved your Ministry
accordingly, we had suffered less injury, and you less blame,
Notwithstanding, because it is never to late to repent, if this your offer be
according to your heart, we most willingly and gladly accept of it, and will
refuse no indifferent and godly conference, which we yet this time expected,
and to that end wrote (at certain of your chief Ministers requests) these
Articles, which you have taken upon you to answer. In the rest though you have
most rashly and most vnchariblie reproched and condemned us alredie,
contrary to all truth, order or equity, even for telling you the truth; Yet
if hereafter you can beware of rash judgment, we shall rejoice. Likewise, if
you can escape Gods judgments for these your heinous transgressions; or make
any better plea for them then as yet we have heard or can perceive, we shall
not be sorry, but much glad, if you would prevent the wrath that hangs over
your heads for them by unfeigned repentance and spedie amendment.

THE 4 fault is in the subjection to Antichristian government. G. G. his
answer to the 4 principal Transgressio^
Let it be admitted that there is some yoke of Antichristian government, under
which the poor Church does groan, (as it is her lot to be oppressed with
outward bondage, to be made to keep the vineyard which is not her own, to be
beaten of the watchmen, to have her veil taken from her) is she therefore no
longer the Spouse of Christ?

BUT o how far are you from this; which wink with your eyes, H. B. his reply.
stop your ears, harde^ your hearts; which cannot endure so much as to hear
of your fearful esta^e which you see not, no nor suffer your sores which you
see, to be touched; but seek rather to cloak and hide them both from God and
men; yea to mitigate, tolerate and justify them. Seek you not here to
mitigate that heavy apparent Antichristian yoke your Churches stand under,
whereof heretofore you have complained in Parliaments? tearming yt [some yoake],
being now peradventure through long custom grown lighter unto you, and more
easy then Christ's yoke, at the least, the^ Christ's Cross. And yet this [some
yoake] is yielded but by way of admition, to be retracted at your pleasure, if
either advantage arise to us, or danger grow to you thereby. Further, you have
added to this your hypocrisy, Blasphemy; tearming the yoke of Antichrist the
lot of the Church, which she must bear by the will of God; whereof in due
place. Now to show this [some yoake] you speak of according to the indignity
thereof in every particular, would make a volume: Yea only to recite ye
several enormities thereof, would require a discourse; which is neither our
purpose at this time, neither have we skill or experience therein. Only this we
see and testify, that your churches stand wholly under the yoke of
Antichrist, you still reteining his Worship, his Laws, his Ordinances, his
Officers, his Courts, even the whole government that the Pope sometime
committed to his faithful servants your Bishops, which now have taken his
power into their own hands. What a sort of stagelike Antichristian Courts
have you? As first, that great Court of your high Commission* the Court ( ex
officio) in every Bishops house; the Court of Arches; the Court of Delegates;
the Court of Faculties: Not to speak of your inferior Courts in the Contrie;
as your Commissaries and Officialls Courts; your Scenes, and such like. What a
rabble of Officers and attendants are unto the^e belonging? Advocates, Doctors,
Proctors, Registers, Scribes, Pursiuants. Who can number all their
Antichristian Cannons, Laws, Rites, Ceremonies, Privileges, Dispensations,
Licenses of all sorts, Probations, Inhibitions etc? which require but the
whole age of a man to read. But now who can recount the particular mischiefs
and enormities that ensue and flow from them, even over the whole land? Or who
yeildeth not to this Antichristian jurisdiction? Do not you and your whole
Parishes, without exception of one, bow down to this Beast, and take the
mark of his subjection, or the print of his laws upon you, eue^ in your
foreheads and in your hands? What liberty have you to refreine from these
abominations, without present persecution? Or what power have you to execute
and practice Christ's laws? Call you this but some yoke? The true Church never
without christian liberty and christian power. Christ divides not with
A^tichrist.
The holy Ghost has taught us to call you his ^eruants to whom you obey: So
we finding you under the obedience of Antichrist, cannot count you the servants
of Christ; unless you can prove that you can serve two contrary Masters
faithfully at once. Christ and Antichrist are at perpetual war, there is no
communion between them: So that it is impossible that the Church of Christ can
carry the yoke of Antichrist, without breach of wedlock, even of the Covenant,
as appears plentifully in all the Prophets, Christ's love being not bound to
her any longer, then she keeps faith to him. Again, there is continual war
between the true Church, and Antichrist; which were at an end, if she should
yield unto him, or carry his yoke, as you suppose. But if you had learned to
put difference between persecution and bondage, you could not in this matter
have run into this blasphemous error, as to say [it is the lot of the Church
to be oppressed with outward bondage, and to be made to keep the vineyard
which is not her owne] Persecution in deed is the lot of the Church here is
this world; as he that was borne after the flesh persecuted him that was borne
after the Spirit. But bondage is the badge of Antichrist, the mark of the
Beast, whereby his soldiers are discerned from the soldiers of Christ; and
the children of mount Sina from the children of Jerusalem which is above and
free, eue^ the mother of us all, for whom our Captain Christ has purchased
a full and a perfect liberty at a dear and precious price; which liberty
once lost, there remains no more ransoms to make us free. It behooves
therefore all the children of the free woman to stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made the^ free, and not to be entangled again with the
yoke of bondage.

Neither can these places of the Song (which you have falsified and perverted)
any way carry this doctrine you would build upon them, or co^struction you
make. Song. (...)
In the first place though the Church confesses her own unworthiness and
deformity, borne in original sin, which conceived and brought out in her
many actual sins, which being kinled in her and against her, often enticed
her and provoked her to keep their vines, whereby she neglected to dress and
keep her own vine: Yet from hence it follows not, The Church da^ly prays
(...) forgiveness of (...).
that because she was sinful and negligent, that therefore she was obstinate
and incortigible (the contrary appears, in that she thus humbly and
modestly confesses her faults): Or because she kept not her own vine, as
she ought to do, that therefore she kept Antichrists vine, which she ought not
to do. What a bold falsifijng of this place is this, to all edge, y^ the
Church was made to keep the vineyard which is not her own, in stead of this,
that she kept not her own vine? If you had looked upon the two next verses
following, you could never thus groslie have mistaken the matter. In ye 6 ^erse
the Church prays unto Christ that he would show her where he feeds, and
where he lies at noone; For (says she) why should I be as she that turns
aside to the flocks of thie companions. This is not to groan under Antichrists
yoke, nor to remain with the flocks of these presumptuous Sheepheards which
will be Christ's companions, which set their own laws over the Church, reign in
men's consciences, imposing their heaps of burdenous traditions etc. But here
all the faithful are taught to fly unto Christ by fervent and faithful
prayer, and not to cease until he show them the place where he feeds his
flock, and where he rests at noone: There shall they find a comfortable
shadow in the greatest heat of persecution, and a safe refuge in the greatest
storm and tempest that Satan can raise. Again, If you had considered Christ's
answer in the 7 verse, where he instructs her, yea and commands her and
all his faithful servants with her to come forth, not to stay in the stepps of
that flock, but to feed her kyddes above the tents of other shepherds; you
would never have used this place to prove that it is the lot of the Church to
be oppressed with outward bondage, and to be made to keep the vineyard which
is not her own, Christ here as you see commanding the express contrary.
Neither have you applied that other place of the 5 of the So^ge with better
success: For if it be duly weighed and truly applied, yt will to the life
show forth what Church you are, and your behauiours and dealings with the
Church of God.

First therefore among diverse and sondrie notes set down here by the holy
Ghost whereby to discern the true Church from the false, we observe especially
these. Notes of the true Church.
The true Church though she daily fall into sondrie sins, yet lies not she
still in them, nor despises the voice and calling of Christ: But (as you see
here) awaketh, repe^teth and arises, opens, soroweth, seeks, gives not
over for griuous wounds, persecutions and blasphemies, neither by them is
turned back to the easy bed of wordlie peace and fleshly quiet from whence
she arose etc, but continues sorowing and seeking until she have found the
daughters of Jerusalem, the children of the free woman, to whom she
communicates her sorrows and her desires; to them she preaches and praises
Christ; to them she reco^mendeth her estate, chardging them to show it her
beloved by prayers etc. The false Ch^rc^.
On the contrary, we find here the malignant Church fast asleep in worldly
peace and fleshly ease, frozen in the dreggs of their sins; such as will not
be wakened, One bed cannot hold Christ and An^^christ.
and so far f^o^ opening the doors unto Christ* that they bar the doors
against him, yea persecute him from their doors, cast him out of their City,
yea out of the world if they could, and with him all such as seek to serve him
with an upright heart according to his word, and will not continue with them in
their sins and security. Now let your Church be examined by these works
without partiality, and it shall easelie appear of what sort it is (though we
say nothing) whither yt be the Church persecuting, or the Church persecuted,
and so in the rest.

Likewise if you and your learned Brethren be found in all poinctes like these
wretched. Watchme^ by the description of the holy Ghost in this place, we
doubt not but the most simple by the evidence thereof shall be taught both to
discern and judge you: And the greatest Clearke among you be taught hereafter,
how to abuse the Scripture for a cloak to cover your sins. First therefore
these Watchmen were appointed Christ themselves, Christ, but sought with one
consent to turn the^ back again etc, by persecution. Whilst the church The
Watchme^ punished not sin which before the^ suffered in the Church, but
Christ whom they cannot suffer*
and we read of no violence or force offered unto her. But after she was called
and awaked by Christ: After she had risen, opened, sought and called him, but
found him not: After she perceived that he was departed thence, and had fully
resolved to give her self no rest, until she had found him: Then these
Watchmen thought it hie time to bestir the^, and to stop this gap. And therefore
what they could not persuade, they sought by force, persecuted, wounded her,
rent away her veil by railings and reproaches, even the name of Christ by which
she is called etc. Stands it not thus in all these poincts with our Watchmen?
Let the times declare whither they agree not to them in their entrance and
administration, and in their persecutions and s^landers exceed them. Our
purpose is not to make particular application, the matter being so evident:
Only this little is said, to redeem the places from such violence and
corruption as is offered unto them; and by the same places to give a glymse to
such, as the Lord has opened the eyes of their understanding, to discover and
search out the false dealing of their Watchmen, whom they too long and too far
have credited, and to warn all that tender their own salvation to open their
ears and their hearts to Christ's voice in his word, that calls them out of
this sinful easy couch, wherein their Watchmen have held them all too long;
and that forsaking the tents of these presumptuous shepeherds, they seek
Christ whilst and where he may be found; and together with the Daughters of
Jerusalem, the children of the free woman, the heirs of the promises, seek,
preach, and praise CHRIST. Then no doubt they shall find him, to their
unspeakable comfort: Then will he be as a Roe from the mountain of Bether,
ready to help, succer and sustain them with his Flagons: Then will he come to
his Palm tree, and take hold of her boughs: Then will he come into his
Garden, and blow upon yt, and water yt, that the spices thereof may flow
forth, and that he may eat the pleasant fruictes thereof: Then shall he descend
into the Orchard of sweet fruictes and Pomegranats, and see whither the
Fig Tree put forth, and the Vine flourish and bud her small grapes: Then will he
prepare and make al things in a readiness for that great solemn day of the
consummation of his marriage.

The Lord grant we may likewise prepare and be in redines, trimmed and prepared,
that we may meet him with joy to our everlasting comfort, Amen. And the Lord
shorten that day, and hasten his coming, Amen. Even so come Lord JESUS, come
quickly, Amen: So be it.

A PLAIN REFVTATION OF Mr. Giffard his reprochful Book, entitled, a short
treatise against the Donatistes of England etc.
YOU were before showed, that we judged none otherwise and no further, the^ the
express word of God teaches us to judge of you. That is, to know the tree
by the fruicte, and the fruicte by Gods word. You were there showed, That we
judged not of Gods secret election which he has in all places amongst all
sorts of men, but of the apparent odious sins of your Congregations; from
which whilst you will not be purged, we may have no spiritual fellowship or
communion with you in this estate. We showed you, that notwithstanding all your
wicked^es, we never doubted, but the foundation of God stood firm, the Lord
having many thowsandes of his elect amongst you known to himself, though not
apparent to to our eyes, whom he in his good time will call more near unto
him. And therefore we with extreme longing and love toward you, sought and
desired your conuertion, that we might see that seal of Gods grace upon your
foreheades, wherewith all that name the name of Christ are sealed, 2 Timothy 2 ^. 9.
vzt. To depart from iniquity. To this end we did, and still do reprove in the
name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST these heinous transgressions in your public
assemblies, lying in your miserable Prisons, the Lords witnesses against the
same. To this end we exhort al me^ by all means, and admonished you of your
present evil estate, as also blamed you for your former ungodly and false
^urmises, collectio^s and chardges, wresting and deprauing our words contrary
to al sense, equity, and conscience. We hoped that this thus far forth had
sufficed, especially, seeing you rested in silence more then two years without
any reply or contradiction: Until now at length upon your submissio^ made*
and consultatio^ had with your Ordinary, you disclosed this Coca^rice egg,
which you had so long sit upon, and all to sprinkled us with the viperous
poison thereof. Terming us at the first dash Donatists, Brownists, Anabastites,
Heretics, Schismatics, with infinite reproachful and horrible adjectives
joined to the same, Math. 12. 34. 35.
which you have abundantly drawn out of the evil treasury of your own
wicked heart, without cause given by us, or showed by you. Continuing still, and
more and more abounding in the gall of bitterness, still chardging us with
intolerable pride, presumption, intrusion into Gods judgment feate, in
falselie chardging, accusing, condemning your Christian assemblies, that
profess the Gospel etc, notwitstanding al we have said to clear our selves of
those crimes, and to prove in particular the things we chardged you with; the
truth whereof remains now to be skanned. In which blasphemous vain of writing
you but fulfill the measure of your sin, and those prophecies you were
foretold of. They shall drink and be moved and be madd etc. They shall gnawe
their tongues for grief, and blaspheme the God of Heaven for their pains and
for their soars, and not repent of their worckes:

FIRST then to this word [ Principal] whereat you so stomble, and from which
you draw such heretical conclusions: We give you to understand, that we used yt
only to signify and express unto you the four chief heads, from whence
flow, and whether may be reduced all these several and infinite enormities and
abuses, which abou^de in your church. As to the nature and quality of these 4.
how far they extend, let the word of God judge: Yea let any by the same word
judge. 1. Whether such assemblies as were never duly gath^red unto CHRIST, but
all the profane and open wicked of the land received by constrainte into the
body of your Church as members of the same, immediately from open idolatry
and apostasy, without the preaching of the Gospel going before to call them to
the faith, or any voluntary profession made by themselves in particular of
their own faith; whether such Congregations as these may in this confusion be
held and esteamed the true and rightly planted Churches of CHRIST. 2. Also, let
any by the word of God judge, whether those Congregations which have not that
ministry of the Gospel that CHRIST has in his Testament instituted to his
Church, but have and retain an other strange and Antichristian ministry,
even that the Pope used and left in the Land, may be held the true and rightly
planted Churches of CHRIST. 3. Moreover, let any judge, whether those
Congregations which have not those orders and government which our Savior
CHRIST has ordained and commanded unto his Church unto the worlds end, but
(rejecting that) have and retain an other strange Antichristian government,
even that Antichristian Hierarchy the Pope used and left in the Land, may be
held the true and rightly established Churches of Christ. 4. Finally, let any
(in whom is any spark of light) judge, Whether those Congregations that
retain and use an other Leitourgie, that is, an other form of public
administration and worship then Christ's Testament, especially such a patched,
erroneous, idolatrouse, blasphemouse thing as theirs is, and will not be
reformed or withdrawn from the same, may be esteamed the true and rightly
established Churches of Christ, such as Christ's faithful servants may have
communion and fellowship with in their administration of prayers and
Sacramen^s. But now where all these faults concur, and have not only
obstinacy, but tyranny and persecution joined to the same, who can doubt of
the matter? Whether also your Churches can remain in these transgressions, or
you maintain the same, and not depart from the grounds and principles of
Christian religion and faith, (which you boast to keep) let any which is any
thing exercised in the word of God, judge. And thus by these few words are
not only your. 3. inevitable dangers (into one of which you would needs
shoue us) but eue^ your whole blasphemous Book, avoided at once. For why
should we now either maintain this heresy. 1. That where the true faith is,
there can break forth no great faults, errors, and abuses. Or this absurd
manner of speech. 2. That all errors and deformities in Religion, be heresies,
blasphemies, and abominations. Or else confess. 3. That with intolerable
pride, presumption, and intrusion into Gods judgment seat, we have taken upon
us to judge and condemn whole assemblies which profess the faith of CHRIST
sincearelie in all fundamental poinctes. For holding that yt cannot be held
the true church of CHRIST rightly planted and established, where the people
were received into the body of the Church before they were duly caled unto
the faith, or had made profession thereof: where they have not the true
ministry of CHRIST, but a strange antichristian ministry imposed upon them:
where they have not the government of CHRIST, but of Antichrist over them:
where their administration and worship is not after the Gospel of CHRIST, but
after their popish idolatrous Leitourgie: All this may safely be defended,
without falling into any such inconvenience as Mr. Giffard threatens.

AS to the heresy he speaks of, we doubt not, nether ever thought, but the
best Church that consists of mortal men, may fall either of negligence or of
ignorance, into greiuous offenses, and dangerous errors: Yea we doubt not but
that some famous Churches and Christians may fall into such errors, as he
terms fundamental; the holding whereof should utterly subvert the faith. 1
Cor. 15.
As in the Church of Corinth, Galatia, Asia there where that denied the
resurrection; Gal. 3. and 4 Chap.
That revived the Ceremonial ^awes; Revel. 2. 14. 15.
That held the doctrines of Balaam and Nicholas. But this we hold withal, that
no true Church or Christian will maintain any sin or error, when yt is
evidently showed and co^vinced unto them by the word of God, much less
persecute such as reprove and admonished them, as you do. Or if they do,
whilst they remain in that estate, they are not of us to be held the true
Churches of CHRIST.

TO your second chardge we answer; That we have learned to put difference
betwixt error and heresy. All good men (as is said) do and may err, but no
good man will defend, or persist in his error, when yt is showed and convinced
unto him. Obstinacy joined unto error, after yt is duly convinced, makes
heresy. Further we say, That any error being obstinatly holden and taught,
after it is duly convinced and reproved unto him, Titus 3. 10. 11.
makes an heretic, and heresy in that party or in that Congregation that
so holds and teaches it, and does separate from the faith and communion of
Christ. Ro^. 16. 17.
Wherefore we can but wonder at your ignorance, 1 Timothy 6. 3. etc.
who stand for a Teacher in your church, and yet hold some errors obstinatlie
held and taught against the truth of God, Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
not to be heresies, or (at the least) not to be fundamental; though you see by
express rule every heretic after one and the second admonition, to be
shunned. Yet say we not, that though every error thus obstinatlie held, be
heresy, and every transgressio^ against the law, be sin; that therefore all
sins are equal, or all errors of like indignity. The law and judgments of
God teach us to put difference:

NEther is there cause why you should chardge us or we confess our selves
guilty of pride, presumption, intrusion into Gods judgment seat, for
condemning those assemblies which the whole word of God condemns in all
their doings. Greater is your pride, presumption, etc, that in this manner
condemn and blaspheme the truth and servants of God for reproving your
sins, that thus plead for and coulor these filthy abominations of your
Church, which are most odious to every good conscience. But this know for
certain, howsoever the Shipmasters, Reave. 18.
Maryners, and Marchantmen of these wares howl and cry out; howsoever the
false Prophet labor to gilde and adorn the false Church with the jewels,
ornaments and titles that belong to the true Church; how much soever the
Harlot do glorify her self, and say in her heart that she sits as a
Queen, and is no widow, and shall see no sorrow; Yet shall her plagues come
in one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire,
because the God that condemns her is a strong Lord:

IN that you chardge us with the breach of the rule Math. 18. unto you, this
still proceeds of your former vain conceit, arrogating unto your Churches
such names, titles, prerogatives, duties, as belong and are only given to the
true Churches of CHRIST. Not being able no^ endeavoring to approve your
Churches by the Testament of Christ, although you were often required and urged
by us so to do* whereby all contention should soon have ceased, you been
cleared and justified, we justly convict and chardged. In the mean while we
affirm unto you, That these golden rules only belong unto the true Church of
CHRIST, Reave. 11.
and that the Court without the Temple which is given to the Gentiles, is to
be cast out, and not to be measured. The Cannons of the POPE which your Church
imbraceth, more fitly agree unto you, then the rules of Christ's Gospel, which
your Church rejects and blasphemeth. But that we may the sooner see our
fault, show us we pray you) how we might execute this rule unto you, how we
might tell yt to your Church, how we might be heard and have redress. For if by
your Church you mean the Convocatio^ house, you see how they have often openly
rejected this suit: If you mean by your Church the Bishops (whom you call the
chief governors of your Church) you see they blaspheme this truth, caling the
order of Christ's government intolerable, dangerous to the subuertion of Prince
and state etc; they hate, persecute, imprison all that speak for, or seek the
same. But if now you mean by Churches your Parish Churches, alas you see they
want power; they can mend nothing, be yt never so heinous or heretical; they
must receive what their Lords the Bisshops impose, and endure til they
redress. How then, to whom, or to what end would you have us complain unto
your Church in this estate; Or with what equity and conscience can you thus
revile and condemn us for breaking Christ's order toward your Church, when
you see your Church will not be subject unto Christ's order; but persecuteth us
and al such as reprove their faults and seek to do Christ's will, because
their worckes are evil and will not endure the light, when they are never so
little examined therbye: As shall further appear but by a cursorie touching of
these principal transgressions following.

THE FIRST PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION VVHERVVITH YOUR CHVRCHES ARE CHARDGED, IS.
THAT they worship GOD after a false manner: Their worship being made of the
invention of man, even of that man of sin, erroneous, and imposed upon them:
We leave your first answer unto this Transgression, and our reply upon your
said answer, to be perused and compared by the indifferent Reader, and now
address our selves unto this your second defense:

FIrst to make our a^cusatio^ and his answer more clear, Mr. GIF. tra^slateth
our Proposition into a Sylogisme, thus, Whatsoever assemblies worship the true
GOD after a false manner, their worship being made of the inve^tion of man,
even of the man of sin etc, the same are not the true Churches of GOD. But
the assemblies as they generally stand in England do worship the true GOD
after a false manner, their worship being made of the inventio^ of man etc,
Therefore the assemblies of England be not the true Churches of GOD. We find
Mr. Giffard so full of legier du main, that we had need look narrowly to his
fingers, lest by his sophistry and diepe schole learning he beguile us, as the
Serpent by his craftines deceived Euah, and turn us not only from the ture
state of our controversy, but from the simplicity that in CHRIST. M. Giffard
as yt should seem finding these Propositions (as they were delivered him) al
to hard and heavy for him, has sought to lighten his burden by leaving out
such matter and words as pressed him most sore, and then would run away with
the rest as you see. The words he has left out and ought to have joined to
every Transgression, are these: wilfully obstinate, as appears in the very
next words immediately going before these 4. Propositions. Further, in repeating
and vrdging the Transgression, he has purposely left out these words, and
imposed upon them, and in their places has set etc. which serves not the
turn half so well. These words we can at no hand spare him, and therefore must
entreat him to add them to both his first and second Proposition; which if he
do, he shall then find the fearful conclusion to follow faster, then he with all his logique ca^ avoid. For if they remain obstinate and incorrigible, yea
incurable in their sins, disobedient to the voice of CHRIST, skorning his
reprof, despising his grace, refusing to repent, having nether will nor power to
amend, be their sin as small in their own eyes as they can imagine, as little
as by their learned distinctions of Fundamental etc. they can any way make it;
yet it being a transgression of Gods most holy law, Hebru. 2. 2
brings death; and being holden after this manner abouesaide, 1 Sa^. 15. 23
brings everlasting death; and does in this estate separate them from the
love, favor, and mercy of God, so far as we can judge. There can be no
remission without repentance; nether can any be said to repent, Romans 6. 23
whilst they obstinatlie persist in wilful tra^sgression; Ezech. 18
nor the Lord in that estate to accept any offering at their hands, Esai. 57. 21
be their offerings otherwise never so perfect and according to the law, Prou.
21. 27
as the scriptures plentifully witness. So then, if M. Giffard had taken the
matter with him, he should not thus have altered the whole state of our
Proposition, in stead of clearing it; nether should have had any cause thus
to chardge yt with heresy after his accustomed manner, or to have produced his
scholastical or (as he uses it) we might more rightly say, papistical
distinctions of fundamental errors and transgressio^s: Wherbie what else should
he infer, or does he labor to prove, if not, That some errors and sins are
(as the Papists say) mortal, others not deadly? Or else that which is more
gross, That some error or transgression might be built upon the foundation.
Because some errors and sins are of higher nature and offense then other, or
because that the best men and Churches may fall into greiuous errors and sins
(which as we never denied, so we still to the stopping of our adversaries
ungodly mouths, affirm:) Yet hence it follows not, that because the best
men and Churches that hold the foundation may err and sin, therefore any
error or sin is of the foundation, or is not a transgression from the
foundation. Ephe. 2. 20.
The written word of God, delivered by the Prophets and Apostels is the
foundation, 1 Corin. 3. 11
CHRIST JESUS himself being the chief corner stone. ^ Tim. 3. 16
Every part of the scripture is a like true, inspired of God, 2 Pet. 1. 19
given to our direction and instruction in all things. No error or
transgression can be joined unto or built upon this foundation, no more then
light and darkness can be mingled. The least departure from Gods word is an
error; Mat. 5. 19.
the least transgression of Gods law is a sin; Iam. 2. 10
the reward of the least error or sin is eternal death, if the mercy of God
and merits of CHRIST come not betwixt; which mercy and merits belong not unto
the impenitent and obstinate. 1 Ioh. 1. 6
Therefore they that obstinatlie hold any error or transgression, and will not
by repentance be purged from the same, lose CHRIST, and so hold not the
foundation. Now then seeing Mr. Giffard has a special fantasy to draw this
Transgression more then any of the.3. Prinsipal Transgressions following, into
form of argument (because in his bad conscience he did foresee they would
press too sore) let the first Proposition be drawn into form of Argument,
thus.

Whatsoever assemblies worship GOD and administer according to an idolatrous
Leitourgie imposed upon the^, and continue wilfully obstinate in the said
sins, are not in that estate to be esteamed or communicated with as the true
Churches of God.

But your public assemblies in England do worship God and administer
according to such an idolatrous Leitourgie imposed upon them, and continue
wilfully obstinate in the said sins.

Therefore the public assemblies of England are not in this estate to be held
or communicated with as the true Churches of God.

But let us now return again unto that Argument which you have taken such
pains to draw, and to confute in our names. The second or minor Proposition
thereof you deny. vzt. That the Church of England does worship God after a
false manner, their worship ^eing made of etc; affirming your worship to be the
embracing of the holy Bible, and by the doctrine thereof etc. Well let the holy
Bible be judge betwixt us in all our controversies; and let your writing show
how well you have approved your worship in those particular points which were
recited and reproved unto you. But in our judgment you flee from this issue
before you begin, in that you make so lardge an exception of imperfections,
wa^tes, spots, blemishes, faults, which destroy not the worship of God;
otherwise (you say) your Church does worship God aright without heresy,
blasphemy, or idolatry. Now surely this is the odd and only exception that
ever we heard of. Why if al imperfections, wa^tes, spots, blemishes and
faults were taken away, we durst join in the rest of your worship to you or
the Pope either: The rest that remains must then needs be free and pure from
heresy, blasphemy, or idolatry. It were a wonderful apostasy or heresy,
where were no truth, especially when al corruption should be purged away. But
if you mean that these faults thus reproved by us, and holden by you, do not
corrupt Gods worship amongst you; for the trial of this, let the nature and
qualitye of them be duly examined by the word of God, and we doubt not but a
little of such leaven shall be fownd to make sour the whole lump: Gal. 5. 9
Yea that these spots and bleamishes you speak of (being looked in that pure
glass) will appear the old running issues, Ec^l. 10. 1
and incurable botches of Egypt, which they have derived from their mother of
Rome: Even of those malignant ulcers that are found upon the men which have
the marcke of the Beast, Reave. 16. 2
and upon them which worship his image, for any defense that you have or can
make for them.

YEt unto the 4. apparent reasons in our general positio^ of this transgression
to prove your worship false and idolatrous, your peremptory answer is; That
they but make apparent our vanity and Anabaptistical error. Our vanity, in
that the 3. first 1. of the invention of man, 2. of that man of sin, 3.
erroneous, are al but one. Our Anabaptistical error is in the 4. in these
words imposed; wherein we chalendge such a freedom to the Church, as that
nothing may be imposed upon the flocks, that the Church-gouernours shall decree
by the word. The 3. first of these reasons whereby his worship was proved to
be idolatrous, he quietly suffering to pass and carry their conclusion,
labors to prove al but one. Because says he, whatsoever man inventeth in
the worship of GOD is erroneous; And whatsoever is erroneous therein was
invented by man; For all false worship is man's invention, whether it be the
invention of the man of sin or any other, it is al one before God, who
respects not persons, but the wickedness of the sin. Well, howsoever we
might insist and show difference between that man of sin that Antichrist,
and others that have not such cursed marckes upon them; howsoever also we might
show differences betwixt the devises of other more godly men (which devises
peradventure in themselves contain no errors, until they be abused, set up,
enjoined and read in the church etc) and the Popes Portesse, from which
execrable pla^t al these idolatrous graftes are fetched: Yet will we not stand
upon lighter matters with you contending whether the reasons may be said three
or one. It suffices us, and we content our selves to have proved and obtained,
That the worship of your Church is erroneous, yt being made of the invention of
man: And your self has confessed, That whatsoever man inventeth in the
worship of God, is erroneous. Now we may further conclude from the second
Commandment, That whatsoever worship is devised by man, and whatsoever devise
of man is put into the worship of God, is idolatry. But a great part, if not
the whole worship of your Church, is devised by man, even by the man (...) etc.
Therefore the worship of your Church is idolatry. Let y^^r Seruice-booke prove
our ^i^or Proposition, or your answers to the perticulars, disprove it. And we
in the mean time will proceed unto your answer unto the.4. part of our
Proposition imposed upon them. Wherein you chardge us with this Anabaptisticall
error, That we should chalendg such a freedom, as nothing might be imposed
upon the Church which the Church governors should decree by the word. It
should seem certainly you know not what truth or error means: Or else are
so possessed with malice, as you make no conscience what truth you call heresy,
or heresy you call truth, as appears by your unjust chardging of us, and your
ungodly defending all the abominations of the times. Who but you could draw
this heretical collection from our words? we in the same sentence, and in the
very next word immediately going before, having protested your worship to be
erroneous? How may it follow, that because we deny errors to be imposed upon
the Church, Therefore we deny that such things as the Elders shall determine of
by ye word of God, may be imposed upon the Church? Why what the Elders decree
by the word of God, cannot be said to be the invention or the commandment of
man, but of God, by whose direction they but pronounce and perform the will of
God. But no error can be said to be of the word of God, and every invention
of man (by your own confession) is erroneous; Therefore we may still and again
here conclude, that seeing the worship of your church of England is made of the
invention of man, even of the man of sin, erroneous, and imposed upon them,
yt is false and idolatrous, and such as no true Elders may impose, or the true
Church of Christ receive. Further we say, that no true Elders of the Church, nor
ye whole Church yt self may decree or impose any thing by way of law, which
Christ has not decreed and imposed in his word. And if you hold otherwise (as
your popish phrases Decree, impose upon the flocks seem to import) then we
affirm, that you both hold a Papistical and Anabaptistical error, and utterly
not only corrupt the worship and government of Christ, but bring in a new
worship and government by bringing in and setting up your own decrees and
devises as the Papists and Anabaptists do.

NOw comes their Leitourgie or Seruice-Booke which contains the public
worship and administration of their Church, to be examined by the word of God.
The defense whereof Mr. GIFFARD though he be a sworn Priest after and unto the
orders thereof, yet he very loathly and doubtfullie undertakes at the first
entrance, as one that carries a witness and a judge, that could tell an other
tale in his own conscience. He confesses that as no man's works are per^ect,
so there are many and great faults in this Book, though (as yt should seem)
none of those perticulars which we recited unto him (only the baptism by
weomen excepted) seeing the labors to defend all the rest. But we which for
some errors and spots hold it to be an idolatrous book, and the worship
thereof idolatry, fall into that foul and detestable heresy of perfection? And
in that we affirm yt to be a pregnant Idol, full of errors, blasphemies, and
abominations, we do falsely accuse, and impudentlie sclander. These great
words nether convince us, nor clear you; let them therefore remain upon your
account. The truth of our chardges, and the quality of your transgressions,
shall by and by appear by the discussing the perticulars. And for all your
great threats of heresy, we still for the faults we have alleged (though
there were no more, (as by your own confession there are both many more and
greater) dare affirm your worship to be false, idolatrous, and abominable.
The word of God caleth him an heretic that obstinately holds any one
error after due conviction, though be hold much truth besides. There is no
heretic that does not hold some, yea much truth. The word of God pronounces
them idolatours, that obstinately continue in any idolatrous and false
worship, though they do many other things according to the rules of the
word; else were not the Papists to be judged Idolatours or Heretics. Shall
all they now that judge according to the word of God, be guilty of that
detestable heresy of perfection? What is this but to accuse God of heresy,
whose judgments these are? Because we cannot be perfect here, therefore we ought
not to contend toward perfection, by leaving that which is evil, Romans 12. 9,
as yt is showed unto us, and endeavoring to do that which is good? Might not
the Masse-booke, and the most vile heresies be thus defended and justified;
Because they are not perfect, therefore they not evil? Because they cannot be
perfect, therefore they will leave none evil? This is Mr. GIFFARDS best
divinity he has, to defend the worship of his Church: But let us now come to
the particular defaults in their worship by us objected, and by him defended.

Mr. GIFFARD being demanded where he found in the new Testament the Romish
Fastes of his Church, As their Embers, Saints Eaues, and Lent; first
confesses, that in the whole Bible he can find no vvarrant for any Romish
fastes. But afterward (lest he should be unlike himself) says, that we
injuriously sclander and belie their Church in matching them with the
blasphemouse Synagogue of ROME: Seeing they place not in abstinence from meats
either the worship of God, remission of sins, nor merit: Seeing they condemn
the doctrine of Devils etc. Why should we by his railing and subtle cauils be
withdrawe^ from our present question, which because he dare not answer, and
cannot approve his Embers, Saints Eaues, and Lent Fastes by scripture, he
seeks to turn away, and to cauile about other doctrines, as the putting
holiness, merit etc, in the abstine^ce and the restraint of meats, vvherwith he
was not chardged by us; yet whereof happily (if he were narrowly sought and
followed) he could not so well clear his Church, as he supposes. We only made
question of things done, and of the present practice of their Church* Namely,
how he could approve their Embers, Saints Eaues, and Lents, which we caled
Romish fastes, by the word of God; At which words he picketh a quarrle, that
he might not be urged to prove his Embers, Saints Eaues, Len^ fastes by the
Scripture. But let him cauil as much as he list at this word Romish;
Whersoeuer and whenever they were invented, yt is certain they were brought
into and left in the Church by the POPE, and are still used (though not
altogether after so idolatrous a manner) at the same holy tides as they were
and are in the Romish Church; and therefore are still to be caled upon his,
name, what Prince soever after command them, or what Church soever use them.
And evil provide they for their Princes honor, that make her the author of
such abominable idolatrous stuff, as these Romish fastes, your Embers,
Saints Eaues, Lents are, which he can no way color or excuse by any
politic laws, or transfer the blame from their Church therbie. No politic
laws can make that lawful, which the word of God condemns. No politic
laws can excuse the Church from breaking the Commandments of God. Nether may
these fastes be esteemed civil actions, because the Princes law commands
them: For so might all their worship of God be held civil actions, because
the Princes laws in like manner commands them. But these fastes are commanded
and solemnly proclaimed in their Church and that by the Priest, as he is
directed by his Rubric, orderly as they arise in their Calendare. The people
are sommoned to the Sinagogue unto public prayer, al commanded to fast etc:
shall we call this a civil action? Nay sure yt must be as much and as well
ecclesiastical as any other part of the worship and administration of your
Church. Well, and besides that you have received and derived these fastes from
the Church of ROME, let your special Collects, upon your Saints Eaues, your
bitter commination and special communion upon your Ash wednesday, with your
Epistle out of Joel 2. 12. Turn you unto me with all your hearts, with
fasting, weeping, and mourning etc, your Gospel out of Matthew 6. 16. When
you fast be not sad as the Hipocrites etc* Likewise your Collect and Gospel
upon the first Sundaye of your Lent, making mention of CHRIST'S 40. days fast
in the wilderness, desiring that your 40. days fast may subdue the flesh etc.
Let this your apish, or rather popish counterfeighting. Let your special
communions in your Passion week, your Maundy Thurs-daye, your Good friday etc,
show how popishlie you keep these your fastes. Further, let your general
inhibition of flesh and of marriage at these Pope-holie tides, and your Bisshops
special dispensation for both, by their licenses for money, show, how
popishlie your Church of England keeps these idolatrous execrable fastes; and
whether herein your Church maintayneth not the doctrines of Devils. To
conclude, let any man by the Testament of CHRIST judge, whether these annuarie
prescribed fastes by way of law unto all Congregations from year to year,
at set times and ceasons, without any present occasion so urging, be any
thing like those holy Christian fastes which the primative Churches used,
either according to their general or particular occasions:

NExt ensue your idol feasts, your Al-Hallowes, Candlemas, several Lady
days, Saints days, and dedicating your Churches unto Saints. Here you say
we thunder out terror, as if the Church of England did worship Idolles and
celebrate feasts in the honor of false Gods: and yet all is but a starck lie,
and a wicked sclaunder. Here your evil conscience fearing the blow before yt
come, can provide no ward but your accustomed railing, which is the way to
make it more heavy and soar. If you had according to our requests approved
your feasts and holy days of your Church etc, by the Testament of Christ,
we had yielded thereunto; or howsoever, you had thereby been freed from these
fears and judgments that pursue your evil conscience. Then had you not upon
this occasion needed or used these vain protestations, how you hold but one
only God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Jesus Christ, That God
only is to be worshipped through the mediation of Christ, That Saints are
not to be worshipped, no days to be celebrated in their honor, nor Churches
dedicated unto them: How bitterly then do you scla^der? That you keep no such
Feasts, dedicate Eaues, Days, and Churches in their name, you ca^ with no
shame deny; for the present practice of your church through every month in
ye year, shows this true. Only now yt remains in question, whether these
Feasts etc, be consonant to Christ's Testament, or idolatrous. And you being
requested, ought to have proved this keeping these Feasts, these holy
Cessations by way of law, this dedicating Eaues, Days and Churches in
Saints names, by the evident testimony of Gods word, before you had thus
reviled us. But surely as you are more the^ loath to be drawn to the trial
and proof of this stuff, so take we no delight to rake in this most noisome
dounge of your solemn Feasts and vain worship, Math. 15. 8.
which you (as sweet odoures) offer up unto God in the name and mediation of
his Son Christ Jesus. What will you answer unto God (though you will
vouchsalf us none answer) when he shall ask you who has required these
things at your hands? What will you then plead for your Jewish feasts of
E^ster and P^nticoste? Gala. 4. 9.
If you say you keep them not after the manner of the Jews, yet can you not be
said to keep them according to Christ's Testament; for there you have no
warrant for such feasts. What will you plead for your popish feasts of
Christmas, Al-Hallowes, Candlemass, etc. For your dividing and devising
Christ's life into a stage-playe, celebrating his birth upon one day, his
Circumcision upon an other, his Epiphanie (as you call yt) upon an other etc,
yea any of these upon one special day more then an other? But where have you
learned to keep them after your heathen and profane manner, with garnishing
your earthly houses, decking your bodies with gaye clothes, great cheer in
glottonie, excess, riot, idle games, dicing, dau^sing, mumming, masking,
wassaling; what president can you show of such worshipping and feasting, except
it be that holy day which the Israelites kept before the Calf unto the Lord
in the wilderness Exodus 32. 5. 6. where have you thus learned CHRIST? Is this to
keep the feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth? to
crucify the old man? to be planted to the similitude of his death and of his
resurrection etc? What ca^ you there plead for your superstitious deuotio^s
toward your Lady, keeping a Day, an Eaue, a Fast, a Feast, a cessation from
al labors, an especial worship to her Annunciation, an other to her
Purification yearly in your Church? It were good you would consider of these
things what you can answer: for certis we poor ignorant Christians can see
no other mystery in the matter, but that yt is detestable idolatrye, eue^ that
very pouring out your drinck offringes and burning incense to the Queen of
heaven. Iere. 44.
Further what will you then say to your celebration of dead Saints, keeping one
solemn day unto them al at once? And again severally to John Baptist, and
to the Apostles as they are allotted in their Pageant: George also your St.
Patron must not be forgotten: A day also is kept to the martyr Stephen, an
other day to the Innocents, with their day, eaue, fast, feast, cessa^ion,
special worship to every one perticularlie. What warrant can you show for this
out of the Bible? The Patriarcks, Prophets, godly Kings were never so
celebrated^ neither have you any commandment or president in all the new
Testament thus to celebrate them. Paul and Peter whilst they were alive
desired to be remembered and prayed for of the Church, but never required any
such duty being dead. Further, what will you answer for your keeping a day,
cessation etc to St. Michael and al Angels? how will you excuse your self of
most high idolatry, Collos. 2. 18. 19.
advancing your self in things you never saw, rashly puffed up of your
fleshly mind, and not holding the head, depriving others of their Crown? It
will not then stand, to say, you worship the Lord by these devises; for so
said your Fathers in the wilderness. Exodus 32. 5*
To morrow the holy day of the Lord. The Lord he will be worshipped according
to his own will revealed to us in his word; and not by our devises, how holy
soever they seem. If then God be not worshipped with this kind of worship,
their Idols are; or (to speak rather as the Prophets and the Apostles do)
the devil is worshipped therbie. Leuit. 17. 7. De^t. 32. 17. 2 Chronicles. 11.
15. 1 Corint. 10. 20. And thus your own conclusion which you took so
heynously, falls apace upon you; and you have not brought one reason to save
or clear your self. As to your doctrines by you verbally alleged concerning
God and his worship, the idolatrous Israelites and Jews in their greatest
schism and diepest apostasy could have alleged many true doctrines also.
But nothing is more sure then this; Christ is not a Priest for such sacrifices
as his Eather is not pleased with. Nether is he a Mediator of any other
Testament then his own. As to the Dedication of your Churches unto dead
Saints, and the caling them by their own names, the first you say was the
fault of the Papists, but you in caling them after the same names do not
sin. Was it a fault in your predecessors so to dedicate and call them, and
shall it be no fault in you so to call them as they had dedicated and left them
unto you? But you so call them only to distinguish them. Why this excuse they
also had. But they had further superstition in these places and Saints. And
do not you nourish the same superstition in the weak, and animate the
Papists in their sins, by ratifying these their doings and calling your
Churches by the same names they baptized them in? But might we ask you where
you thus learned to call and distinguish christian Congregatio^s in the
Scriptures? your answer and place is ready, Luke. Acts. 17. caleth a streate
in Athens, Mars streate, and ask us if he therefore dedicated it to that heath^
God. We answer you, that if Luke should so give the name and call it speaking
in his own person for himself, he should sin and commit idolatry, in naming
the Creature of God after an Idol, as you do in caling the Da^es and your
Churches after the names of such Saints. Psalm. 16. 4.
David says he will not take the names of their Idols in his lips. But Luke
here records the history of such things as came unto PAVLE in Athens, and
the vulgar name of the place whether the Athenian Philosophers ledd Paul,
naming yt after their manner not that himself so caled yt willingly, or to give
us boldness to do the like, but rather to manifest their fault and superstitious
fear they stood in of their Idols as Paul verse* 22. shows, by ye
reproof of their fault, teaching us to avoid the like. And ca^ you collect yt
because Luke writes that they of Athens named a streate after Mars, they of
Alexandria signed a ship unto Castor and Pollu^, that christians may by those
places name or call any thing in their possession after Idols or dead
Saints? Is this the best doctrine you can draw, and use you ca^ make of this
Scripture? yet is it the only place of Scripture you have used to approve any
part of your public worship, which we had blamed unto you. We will not stand
to urge the Popery and superstition of some of the Saints names of your
Churches, how some of them are caled after Christ's sepulcher, others after all the rabble of Saints both men and weomen, Saints in the POPES Calendare; but
proceade to the rest of your tromperie.

AS your Co^^inations, Rogations, Purifi^ations. Your Comminations you say are
a part of Canonical Scripture, which is to be read in the Church Parts of
Canonical Scripture, indeed they are, by you miserably dismembered and bownd up
together, and wickedly used and perverted to such superstition and idolatry,
being used in the place and upon the day of popish shrift: Or rather (as your
Portesse says) in the place of the Discipline of the church, and of the
Penance, used in the beginning of Lent. Thus in the best use of it by your own
confession yt is an execrable Idol, in that it is brought into your Church,
and supplieth the place of Christ's discipline in his Church, and is used in
stead thereof until Christ's discipline may be restored again (which you
there say is much to be wished) yt being nothing less then that which it
stands for by your own confessions in the preample before your Comminations:
^^^har. 11.
Yt remains then the instrument of those Idol shepheardes to feed the sheep
of distructio^ with the curse of God, being sealed unto your whole Church by
your own mouths, All your Church being generallye found, and wilfully
remaining guilty in some sins there condemned: As these public idolatries,
others, and each one in sundry perticulars: as deceit, wrong, whoredom etc.
We will not here stand to discuss the follye and Popery of this solemn piece
of your worship and administration. Penance and your Lent fast are gross to
every one, in whom is any light.

YOur Rogations you say are but limiting the bounds of every Parish, to
avoid contention. But we would then know of you how it became an act of your
Church, a part of your Pastors office, to be do^ne by the Parson and the
parrish Clarcke with the rest of the parishners, certain Psalms the Letanie
and Collects being said over the Grass, Corn, and Cattayle, in place of the
popish procession. Yea there are of your Priests that will not fail to read a
Gospel when they come at a cross way orderly. This is somewhat more the^
visiting the bowndes. Nether ever thought we that such civil actions had
belo^ged to the Church and Ministry. Luke 12. 14
Christ would not be made a diuider here on earth, there are Civil judgment
seats appoincted thereunto. And howsoever this public sollemne worship be
commanded by other injunctions of your Church, and not by your seruice-booke,
yet according to that book is this solemn action performed.

PVrifications you say are a^nexed to make up our ryming figure: For nether
your Book nor doctrine of your Church allows any other purification, then
in the blood of the Lamb etc. nether yet did the Jews (from whom the Pope
(as yt should seem) derived this worship) hold any other purificatio^ the^ in
the blood of that Lamb, although they figured that blood by sundry rites
and ceremonies, of which sort this manner of bringing weome^ to the Priest in
the Church after childbirth, and a certain number of days expired, was. Yet
seeing you will at no hand be said to imitate the Jews herein, you must then
take it from the Pope of necessity, for other au^thor you can find none for
yt, nether any president or warrant in the Testament of Christ: The woemans
monethlie restraint and separation from your Church, her coming after that
just time wympeled, vealed, with her Gosips and Neighbors following her, her
kneeling down before and offering unto the Priest, The Priests Churching,
praying over her, blessing her from Son and Moon, delivering her in the end
to her former vocation, show somewhat besides giving of thanks. But if yt
should be admitted only a thanksgiving, We would then know of Mr. Giffard or
his Ordinary, how this particular and ordinary (though miraculous) matter,
more the^ al other strange acts, wonderful and extraordinary deliverances
both by sea and by land, many and great benefits of the Lord both to men and
women, should be made a public action of the Church, an especial part of the
public worship and administration thereof; And what warrant they have in
Christ's Testament for this. But if they there have none, why other particular
and private benefits may not as well be brought into the Church also, and be
enjoined by law, as this; and then what end would there be of these devises,
and what place to the public ministry of Gods word in the Church? Further we
would know of them why these women should by law be constrained to defer
their thanksgiving until the month be expired, Or if they have given God
thanks before privately, why they should for his private and peculiar benefit
be compelled to give thanks publicly again for the same, or rather to hire
the Priest to give thanks for her again. Of these points touching this
matter, we would crave Mr. Giffards learned and direct answer in his
nextbooke.

NExt come your Tithes, Offringes, Mortuaries. These you say are but for
maintenance of your Ministry, and not as a matter tied of necessity unto a
Priesthode, as in the time of the law; and if they were, the error were not
fundamental. We never doubted but that they were the maintenance of your
Ministry; but whether the Ministry of Christ now under the Gospel may be so
maintained, is the question. We read in the Testament, that the Ministry of
the Gospel ought to be maintained by the flocks unto which they atte^d, 1 Cor.
9.
and that by the free and loving contribution of the faithful, Gal. 6. 6
according to the Ministers necessity, and the peoples habilitye from time to
time. 1 Timothy 6. 8
We read not in the Testament that this contribution ought to be imposed by
way of 1. law, Mat. 10.
or 2. bargain upon the people; 2 Cor. 11. 20
As by paying tenthes, thirdes, 40. or 50. pownds a year. 1 These. 2. 5
We find not in the Testament that the Ministers of CHRIST ought to sell their
administration, 2 Pet. 2. 15
as the Sacraments etc. ^^d. 11. 12. 13
Now let the Tithes, Offerings, set wages of your Ministry (we mean the
inferior common ministry of Parsons, Vickars, roving Curates, or hireling
Preachers, and not of the Lordly sort which live as Princes in Palaces, nor
of your Collegiate Priests in their dens) be examined by these rules, and
tried, whether they have any foundation in the word of God or no. As to their
accursed covetousness and odious portsale not only of their own tougues, but
of that Gospel and ministration (which they pretend) of your Sacraments,
Baptism, Supper, Ch^rching, Marrijng, Burijng etc. and that to the most
profane and ungodly for their tithes, offerings, wage etc, Mr. Giffard shall
never be able to hide from God, or excuse before men. It would require a lardge
discourse to set down how these their tithes accord in every particular unto
the Leuitical decimations; N^m. 18
And how dangerous now it were to reviue, and impossible to join these laws
unto CHRIST'S Ministry and Gospel. If that priesthode be removed, Hebr. 7. 12
there must be of necessity a removing of the law. They that reviue any part
of the Ceremonial law, Gal. 5. 3. 4
are bownde to the whole law, Phil. 3. 2
and abolished from CHRIST. Let Mr. Giffard then look whether this error be
fundamental as he caleth yt, being obstinately held. The Princes commandment
will no more change the nature of this law, then the commandment of Ezekia and
other godly Kings did before time, For so might all the laws of God which
Princes should co^mande be transferred from God to men. If it be said they use
these Tithes etc otherwise, so also might the Galatians and Corinthians have
said of such Seremonies as they would have joined to the Gospel.

Now are we to take a view of your manner of visiting the sick and hous^ling
them with the Sacrament. Your Absolution, Dirges, and funeral Sermons over and
for the dead. You confess a manner of visiting the sick prescribed, but you
demand of us where we have seen it practiced by, or urged at their hands
which are able and diligent Pastors, by these that have the government of your
Church. We answer, that it suffices to be commanded and prescribed by your
seruice-booke unto all your Ministers and Churches, to the diligent observation
whereof all full Priests are sworn. Further your Churchwardens and Sidemen are
sworn to present all defaultes therein at the Archdeacons or Co^missaries
Courts. So that no marueyle though this book be found in the hands of the
most diligent and able Priests, reading yt over weome^ at their Churching,
over the married, over the sick, over ye dead, and where not. And for Mr.
Giffards satisfying, we give him to weite, that as learned Priests as he, have
used this book to the visitation of the sick. And now we would know of him
why these able Priests should have more liberty to pray by the the direction
of the spirit for and with the sick, according to their present estate, the^
they are allowed by those that have the government of your Church in the
public prayers of the whole Church, according to the present estate thereof.
To conclude, we would know of him by what warrant in Gods word the Church can
prescribe and enjoin such a form of visiting etc.

As to their Absolution which Mr. Giffard so slilye would pass over without
speakinh any word thereof, Let the Reader understand that nothing can be more
popish or blasphemous then yt is: where a sacrilegious Priest takes upon him
by the authority committed unto him, to absolve the sick from all his sins.
Has any mortal man power to forgive sins? Or is it not the office of God
alone? Has the Priest power to forgive al sins, such as are not made unto
him? What horrible blasphemy is this? To him that has power to forgive all
sins, to him we may make our prayers and supplications, him only may we
worship. Has the greatest Minister of the Church any more power to retain or
loose the sin of the least member, then the said member has to bind or loose
his sin* Does not this rule of our Savior as well extend unto him as to the
least in the Church, Luke 17. 3.
If thie brother sin against thee rebuke him, and if he repent forgive him?
Romans 16. 17.
Has not the Church power to reprove and cast out their Pastor if he so
deserve? 1 Timothy 5. 20
Is not all this binding and loosing done by the word of God, Psalm. 149.
and not by any power or excellencye of man? Has not the word of God the
like power and effect against sin in the mouth of the least of Gods servants,
as in ye mouth of the greatest? Let this Collect then (wherbie the Priest in
their Leitourgie by the power committed unto him absolueth the sick of al his
sins) remain one witness (amongst many other) of their Popery, and until
more come, of most high blasphemy.

Mr. GIFFARD takes very heinouslie at our hands this phrase of hous^ing,
with the Sacrament terming yt a false packing in us, and goes about to purge
his Church thereof, by showing how yt denies al ye wicked blasphemous corrupt
doctrines of the Papists touching the Lords Supper: And also denies, that a
man is of necessity to receive yt at his death. Thus ever with his impertinent
matters he vvith-draweth and shrinketh from the present question. We must
therefore still call him back to the point, and demand of him what warrant in
CHRIST'S Testament their Church has to institute a private Communion, or to
administer the Supper of the Lord in any other place the^ where ye church is
assembled. This if he can do, then indeed we have faulted in caling yt an
Housel. 1 Cor. 11. 20
But if he can show no warrant for this private domestical Communion, then we
must still blame this action as popish, superstitious, and irregular, what
doctrines soever they hold of the Lords Supper besides. Again, though they
exhort and persuade the sick person that this Sacrament is not then of
necessity; Yet if he be so superstitious to require it, the Priest then is
bownde of necessity to deliver yt him, though there be no more to receive then
they two. And what is this but to nourish superstition, or to make the
Sacrament so delivered of great value and proffit unto them. Thus iugleth and
toyeth your Church with the holy things of God at her pleasure:

THe Papists you say that invented the Purgatory, had also their blasphemous
diriges and prayers for the dead: But we are more then impudent in lying, to
term the prayers which you use at burials, such: seeing your Church denies the
Purga^orie, prayers for the dead etc. We will not requite you with evil words,
but let the proof of these matters declare who is a liar and impudent. We
would therefore first know of you where you have learned to make the burial of
your dead an ecclesiastical action, part of the Pastors office, and to make
it an especial part of your worship, if not of the POPE? Then where you learned
to bury in your Hallowed Churches and Church-yardes (as though you had not
fields and ground to bury in) with a special Dirige and leitourgie, with
prayers, Singers, Ringers, Mourners, Beades-me^ etc, if not of the POPE? It
were too long to show the original and process of this superstition, with
the great advantage that comes to the Priests therbie. It were needles also
to show, how this your Leitourgie, Dirige and prayers, are fetched and peiced
out of the POPES Portesse. It were curious to relate the watching, preparing,
arraying, crossing, dressing the corpse to the grave, also the array of the
Mourners with all the superstition of the Heraldes, the attire of the Priests
and Clarckes, with their times and place when and where to receive, when to
rest, when to singe, to read, to pray, when and with what words to cast on
the first shouel of earth by the hand of the Priest, the grave being made east
and west etc. Only this in general we say, that all these devises (seeing God
no where commands them in his word) are vain, superstitious, and fond, as
whereby Gods name is highly taken in vain, profaned, and abused; yea his holy
spirit most impiouslie blasphemed and despighted. For whilst the whole land is
of their Church, and they bury all that dye in their Church of their natural
death after this manner with this Leitourgie (but such as dye of any violent
death, how christianly soever, they vouchsalf not thus to burye) pronouncing in
the Collect they use whilst earth is casting on, that God in his mercy has
taken to himself the Soul of that their dear Brother or Sister departed, they
therbie justify the most wicked, graceless, impenitent vvretches, Atheistes,
blasphemers, Idolarours, Papists, Anabaptists, Heretics, Coniurers that dye
in their sins, as though such could have any benefit by the death of
CHRIST, or the mercy of God belonged unto such as dye in their sins
impenitent, except peradventure the Priests prayers now, the holiness of the
grownd, and this christen buryal etc, may help him; thus openl^e contradicting
th'expresse word of God, and hardening all the rest of your profane Atheists,
Idolators, whore-masters, blasphemers in their sins. Likewise in an other
Collect, where they desire God, that they with that their departed brother may
have a perfect consummation and bliss both in body and soul, what do they
but pray for the Soul of the dead, seeing they burye all with this Collect,
and some must needs dye apparently wicked, and impenitent. Yea what do they
hereby but establish a Purgatory, or some such mean place, for in* Hell there
is no redemption. Thus whither does not man wander whilst he follows his
own inventions, and forsakes the straight paths of the Lord.

AS to their venal funeral Sermons, they have as little grownde or vvarrant in
the Scriptures, as their Dirige and funeral Collects have. Well may they derive
them from the funeral Orations of the Heathen Orators, but no president they
have of the godly in any age so to bury their dead. We read of no such
matter at any of the Patriarchs, Prophets, or godly Kings burial. No nor at
the burial of our Savior CHRIST, of the Martyr Stephen, of the Apostle James,
or any of the faithful in those times; yet were there as godly, religious,
learned, and able men to do yt then alive and remaining, as they that thinck
the best of themselves now, if the holy Ghost had seen it so needful.

NExt fellow your corrupt manner of administering the Sacraments, the Font, the
Cross in baptism, your Gossips, and blasphemous Collects used to this
Sacrament, your Baptism by weomen, Bishoping, with other heretical Collects of
this book etc; when we show (you say) why the Font is an abomination, you
shall know what to say. How idolatrously the Font was inve^ted, brought into ye
church, hallowed, and the POPE, is evident to all men. Whether they fetched
this from the Jews Lauar, Sea, or Base, we will not here dispute. Suffices it
us that yt is an idolatrous, popish, enchau^ted, hallowed relic, wherein they
put and kept their enchaunted hallowed water, and used yt to many execrable
idolatries. Deuteronomy. 7.
Therefore yt is an abhominatio^ to the Lord, a detestable Idol that ought to
be utterly abolished by the law of God, and ought not to be used in his Church
and worship. 2 king. 18. 4
Further seeing yt nourishes the Papists, Romans 14.
the weak and ignorant in their fore-conceaued superstition, 1 Cor. 8.
and is an offense unto the godly, if yt were a thing in liberty, yet ought is
not to be thus used, much less thus enjoined and retained by virtue of law
upon all Congregations. And seeing in the best imagination of yt, it is not an
instrument of any more necessity or use unto this Sacrament then any other
clean and decent vessel, seeing also our Savior CHRIST has not separated any
vessel or water to this use; 1 Cor. 6. 12.
We cannot see how a few men may be thus bold to command this vessel upon all
Churches by way of law, and to forbid all other unto this use. For what is
this but to restrain that which God has left in liberty, to co^trole God,
Gal. 5. 1.
and to make new laws for his Church. And why might they not by the same
usurped power bring in what unnecessary Ceremonies they list, eue^ al their
Forefathers ye Jews and Popes infinite traditions, as well as these popish
devises and Jewish ordinances aboue-said; as well as these popish idolatrous
relics of Font, Bells, Organs, Music, Surplices, Coapes, Vestimentes,
Habites, Hoodes, Cappes, Tippetts, Tires etc.

But if these least little things, which they call matters indifferent, wherein
al men ought to obey, prove so heinous in Gods eyes, so pernicious to the whole
Church, what shall we thinck of their Simbolical Ceremonies, tryflings,
iocolings that they have added to their Sacracraments? As unto their Baptism a
Dialogue betwixt the Priest, the Clarcke, the Godfathers, Godmothers, and the
Infant; the sign of the Cross, the sanctifying or making holy their water
etc. Their four sorts of Baptismes. Namely, 1. Their public Baptism by the
Priest etc. 2. Their hasty Baptism by weomen. 3. Their Baptism by
supposition. N. if thou be not baptized I baptize thee etc. 4. And their Lord
the Bishop his Baptism, or Confirmation of CHRIST'S baptism. Likewise in their
Sacrament of the Supper their frivolous Leitourgie stinting the Priest when and
how to stand at the North end of the Table, what and when to say and pray,
when to kneel, when to turn, when to glory God etc. Also the vain Dialogue
betwixt the Priest, Clarcke, and People. Their altering the words of CHRIST'S
institution, and delivering yt after a popish manner. The body of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST which was given for thee preserve thie Body and Soul unto
everlasting Life etc, and that kneeling, that they might adore the bread, or at
least retain a taste of their former superstition in time of high popery etc.
Of this Sacrament they have also diverse kinds, with diverse Leitourgies. As
public, or ordinary; Sollemne, upon certain of their Festiuals; And
private, or domestical. Not here to speak of their other half Sacraments, As
their Penance or Commination upon Ash Wednesday, with their special Leitourgie
thereunto. Their Sollemnization of Marriage in the body of their Church upon
the Lords day or otherwise by the Priest, with his book and special
Leitourgie, with a Ring (as the element) to be laid* upon the Seruice-booke,
which does hallowe yt in stead of holy Water: with which ring the man must be
taught of the Priest to wedd his wief etc, And the married offer unto the
Priest and Clarck.

TOuching the Cross, Mr. Giffard confesses yt to be most blasphemously and
horribly abused in Poperye, they ascribing unto yt power to drive out devils,
and worshipping yt with divine honor. We looked that after his accustomed manner
he should have said, But our Church does not so thinck of or worship the
Cross, Therefore you Brownists most impudent lie sclander etc. But in stead of
this he says never a word to the mattter in particular: Save unto Symbolical
ceremonies in general he is of judgment, That the ancient Churches immediately
after the apostles time did offend, in taking over much liberty to ordeine
ceremonies Symbolical: Yet he doubts not, but very reverend godly learned
men, ledd by the example of those holy Fathers, have judged it lawful for the
Churches to ordeyne such Ceremonies. We would first therefore know of those
reverend godly learned, and not of Mr. Giffard why they (now that al are
Christian and no heathen amongst them) retain and enjoin this superstitious
sign of the cross in th'administration of their baptism. Also whether they
are not persuaded, That our Savior Christ's institution which the Apostles
taught and delivered unto the Churches touching th'administration of the
Sacraments, was perfect and fully sufficient. If they so think of yt,
Whether they judge it lawful for any mortal men, or the whole Church,
willingly and wittingly to alter or add any thing to, or pluck any thing
from the said institution of our Savior in the Sacraments: Or if they so add,
Whether our Savior does accept and bless yt, as his own institution. And if
God do not accept or bless such Sacraments, where his institution is thus
wilfully violated and changed, How such ^dulterate Sacraments may be said the
true seals of Gods Covenant; especially where such a blasphemous horrible,
popish, idolatrous ceremony is used, as Mr. Giffard confesses this sign of
the cross to be, except yt be better with them then it was with the Papists:
Or how may the faithful in this estate join unto them. And now yt would be
known of Mr. Giffard (seeing he in his own judgment conde^neth these
Symbolical Seremonies) how he dare thus presumtuously break CHRIST'S
institution in delivering them after the manner prescribed, and join unto those
men that enjoin those ceremonies, against such of CHRIST'S faithful servants
as reprove them, stand, and suffer againgst them. Is not this most fearfully
and presumptuously to tempt God, to sin against his own conscience? It is no
excuse unto him to say, the best reformed Churches do use witnesses (he
means Godfathers, and Godmothers) in baptism. For his own conscience
knows and judges, that the best Churches do err in so doing.

Further, Baptism being public, to be delivered openly in th'assemblie when
the whole Church is met together, what need more witnesses of the matter
then the whole Congregation. But how wicked and impious is that law of their
Church, which forbids the Parents to answer and undertake for the bringing
up their own children in the true faith and fear of God, and drives them to
bring Popish Gossips or sureties, who must both undertake, vow, and answer
for their child, That he does forsake the Devil and his works etc. What can
be more vain, folish, and ridiculous?

TO the Baptism by weomen you answer, M. Giff. here confesses both some
members of their Church to be popish, superstitious, and ignorant; And also
this baptism of their Church to be such.
That it is both condemned by the chief Governors of your Church, and is not
practiced, except it be among the popish and superstitious ignorant sort. First
we must oppose the public law of your Church against those your governors,
who we suppose (as confidentlie as you speak) will not prove in the plural
number, when the point comes to scanning. Your law in 3. places of your
Portesse does not only allow the baptism by weome^, but publicly justify
it, and makes a kind of necessity of such private baptism: Saijng, that if
the child be in danger, they may baptize yt at home without a Minister, and
that in this case they have done well and according to due order, concerning
the baptisinge of this child, which being borne in original sin and in the
wrath of God, is now by the lauer of regeneration in baptism received into
the number of the children of God, and heirs of life everlasting. Wherein,
besides that they most highly break and profane th'institutio^ and
ordinances of Christ concerning the public seal of this holy Covenant, in
delivering yt without a lawful Minister privately in a house, rashly, and
irreverently without due order etc, they also consequently maintain and teach
these popish blasphemous errors therbye. That if the child had dyed
unbaptized, yt had been damned; And that baptism is of necessity to
salvation: For else what needed so great fear and haste, that they would not
stay to bring the child to the public Congregation, no no^ so much as for
the Minister to baptize yt? Or how could there he so great cause and so great
necessity in the matter as their book mentions, if they thought that the
salvation of the child honge not upon the Baptism? Wherbie is manifestly
co^uinced, as also by their words not secretly employed, That they hold
Baptism the cause, and not the seal of salvation. For else to the infant now
dying what good could baptism do? Or which way could yt be a Laver of
regeneration unto yt, or receive yt into the number of Gods children? We had
thought that the salvation of the child had only honge upon the eternal
election and predestination of God: And that the seal of the Covenant had
belonged ynto yt, by reason of the Parents faith, and is administered not as
any help or present benefit to the new borne infant, so much as when yt
comes to ryper age to be a contynual comfort and help unto yt.

BIsshopping Mr. Giffard says is little used or urged in the Church of England,
being loath belike to make any defense thereof. Yet it is certain that the
Priest is in his Portesse enjoined to command, That the children be brought to
the Bishop to be confirmed, so soon as they can say in the vulgar tongue,
the articles of their faith etc. Also in an other place of their said
seruice-booke there is an express law. That none shall be admitted to the holy
Communion, until such time as he can say the Catechism, and be confirmed. How
accord these laws to Mr. Giffards saying, that yt is little used? But what a
monstrous matter is this confirmation of their Church, where the Baptism of
CHRIST is to be confirmed of a wretched man, if he were (as he is nothing
less) a servant of CHRIST? Yea that Christ's faithful servants (whom CHRIST
has alredie publicly baptized, received, and engrafted unto himself) should
be kept from the comfortable table of the Lord, until they have a popish
Bishop his confirmation? Not here to mention the binding of the faith of the
whole Church to an Apocrypha Catechism. Yet to make this their confirmation
either of greater estimation, or more execrable with all men, they add in the
second cause many special virtues thereof. Namely, that by their imposition of
hands and prayer, such as are so confirmed by them, may receive strength and
defense against all temptations to sin, and the assaults of the World and
the Devil. Surely if this be true, great is the Bisshops fault to neglect the
practice the^of; but how great then our sin, to blame and condemn such a
wonderful and excellent ordinance. But doubtless this is either too good or too
bad to be true. If al they upon whom these Bisshops shall lay their hands and
pray over, shall receive strength and defense against al temptations to sin,
and the assaults of the world and the devil, then shall al they that receive
this Confirmation be undoubtedly saved. Yea if any of them whom the Bishop
shall thus confirm, shall receive this strength and defense etc, then have the
Bisshops greater power, and their prayers more virtue, then eue^ God g^ue to
any mortal man, yea then ever he gave to our Savior CHRIST himself; with whom
though Judas were contynuallie conversant his most Heavenly doctrines and holy
prayers, yet the Devil entered into him and prevailed against him. Though Peter
were a right dear and faithful servant of CHRIST, yet Satan sifted him, and
he fell. Yea we had thought that our Savior only had received this strength
and defense against al temptations to sin, assaults etc. And that al mortal
men had been dailye subject to sin, temptation, etc, that our rejoicing might
be of God, and not of our selves, and Gods glory be showed and perfected
through our weakness. If these vanuties of the Bissops were true, then might it
indeed rightly be called a Confirmation, for then such as had that were sure
and sure, there then to those should be no more use of CHRIST'S merits,
sufferings, or mediation, or of Gods mercy. But because al men are co^tinuallie
prone unto, and even enclosed and compassed about with sin, whilst they dwell
in this mortal flesh, and have continual need of Gods mercy, and use of
CHRIST'S merits, sufferings, and mediation: Yea because we see well nigh al those
whom the Bisshops have thus confirmed, to be confirmed in all sin and
wickedness, and even the Bisshops themselves the aucthors of this devise (from
whom all this virtue and holiness should flow fourth unto others) to be
themselves the very synkes and draynes of al abomination, corruption,
idolatry, superstition, blasphemy, and open transgression of al Gods laws;
We are confident in the truth and power of our Lord IES^S CHRIST to witness
against these abominable ordinances of Antichrist and against the Church of
England for receiving the same, and maintayning the most impious blasphemous
doctrines that ensue thereof, as is above proved:

TO the blasphemous Collects in your Sacraments and Book you wish we were as
weary in lying and sclandering, as we should be to seek and find out one
such. You have in remem^rance the Collects wherein the Priest by th'aucthoritie
committed unto him, does absolve the sick of al his sins. You must not
forget your two Cellects said over your dead brother. The one wherein you
praise God for receiving to mercy his soul, lived he or died he never so
profane, blasphemouse, and impenitent a wretch. The other wherein you pray for
him, that you with him may have a perfect consummatio^ and bliss both in body
and soul. Now to help your memory a little further, we would desire you to
consider better of that glorious Antheame you singe or say in your public
Communion, wherein with Angels and Arch-Angells and all the company of heaven
you laud and magnify etc: Wherein we will not demand of you how whilst you
remain in the flesh, you can have such familiar conversation with those
heavenly soldiers and elect spirits of the faithful deceased, that you
together with them can praise and laud God. Nether will we press you with the
papistical and curious speculations in making digrees of Angels, Arch-Angells
etc. But we would here know of you how many Arch-Angells you read of and
find in the Scriptures, And whether you know any more heads of Angels then
Christ himself. Exept peradve^ture your Church have some especial prerogative
from the Apostatical Sea, to make Arch-Bisshops and Arch-Angells. Your Collect
also in baptism of Sanctifijng the flood Jordan and al other waters to the
mistical washing away of sin, some say sauoreth greatly of Poperye, and
retayneth the people in a superstitious opinion, That the water used in
baptism has holiness and some especial virtue in yt ab^^e common water,
especially when yt is thus blessed by the Priest, and (...) out of the hallowed
Font etc. But we will not press you herewit^ nether yet stand to examine your
Collect upon your St. Michael and all Angells-Day, how you make Michael a
creature, and Canonize him among the Popes Saints, and worship him amongst
and together with all Angels: This shall be no blasphemy, no Popery in your
Church Nether will we stand to unrip your popish patched Letanie, Or show by
what POPE, and why every part thereof was devised and added, And wherefore yt is
good: As for the quick and the dead, For all that travail by sea or by land,
For all weomen laboring with child, For all sick persons and young
children, all prisoners and captives, For Bishops and Curates, For lightnings
and tempests, For plague, pestilence, and famine, For battle and murder, and
for sodeyne death etc. All which things and what else that you will request at
his hands, CHRIST cannot but grant you, when you so beconiure him By the
mystery of his holy incarnation, by his holy nativity and circumcision, by
his baptism, fasting, and temptation, by his agony and bloody sweat, by his
Cross and passion, by his precious death and burial, by his glorious
resurrection and assention, and by the coming of the Holy Ghost. And sweetly
you entreat him by them all severally and ioyntely to deliver you from the
evils aboue-said, and also from fornication and al other deadly sins. In
which Sofrage we will not observe yt you hold some sins deadly, and others
not deserving death, because you peradventure can shift it off with learning,
howsoever yt stands in the Popes book, or they that made it thought of it.
Only we observe that this your holy Letanie is a most rare and especial
confection, sovereign good for all things at all times, but especially in the
morning, and therefore it is so often enjoined to be song or said in your
Church every week at their mattens. Yet was there (by what adventure we know
not) an unsavory and unhappy Sofrage stolen into your Letanie in King
EDWARD'S time Against the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome and all his
detestable enormities. Which Sofrage because it was nether so Canonical or
holy, nether agreed unto the rest, and could not be song with the^ in tune;
Or because it was over rough doctrine for sondrie of their weak brethere^ that
then loved and yet love the POPE and any thing that comes from him, with all
their heart; Or else (that which is more likely) over plain doctrine to make
the people abhor all their Romish wares and marchantmen; The worthy Bishops,
most vigilant Pastors and Governors of your Church, to avoid these
inconveniences, of their pontifical authority dismissed yt, thrust it quite
out of their L^tanie, and utterly abrogated and razed it out of their
Authentical Leitourgie. Wherein (now it has been by these learned men
corrected, and this perrilous Sofrage thrust out) it is impossible to find
either heresy or blasphemy. But ca^ there be more horrible and execrable
blasphemy then thus to conjure and exercise Christ by his nativity,
circumcision, baptism, fasting, by his agony, his sweat, his cross, his
death, his buryal etc: what Coniurers or Enchaunters can exceed this? where
have they learned thus to pray? thus to dismember and distort Christ, or thus
idolatrouslie to apply and abuse these outward things which he did or were
done unto him in the flesh? Why might they not as well beseech him by his
growing in age, his walking, fleeping, weeping etc, by his crown of thorns,
the spondge, nails, spear? No marvel they fetched this gear from the POPES
Portesse. Again, where have they learned to pray for their Forefathers
offenses, if not of the POPE? Where have they learned to pray for all that
err, for all that travail by land or water, for all that are sick, in
captivity, tribulation etc, when there is a sin for which we are forbidden
to pray, when there are many most ungodly and wicked persons going about and
suffering for much mischief thus traueyling, emprisoned etc? Pray they not for
Gods open enemies, for the breach of all Gods laws, for the overthrow of all
maiestracie, public peace and order, and for the destruction both of the
Church and common wealth thereby? Also where learned they to pray against
lightning, tempest, plague, famine, battle etc, when they have no present
need, or have no present fear or danger thereof? Is not this to trifle, to
abuse Gods name? Can this prayer be of faith to pray against lightning in the
midst of Winter etc? Is not this to forbid God to use his own Creatures to
his own will and glory? Yea to forbid him to restrain his Creatures, or to
punish his enemies by dearth, plague, war? Finally where learned they to
pray against sodeyne death, that God should not call any of this land, yea of
the whole world, suddenly? Is not this to appointe God when and how to call?
Has not God reserved these secret things in his own hand only, forbidden
men to be curious or inquisitiue after them, and commanded them continually to
watch and be ready, for in an hour that we think not, will our Master come
as a theife in the night etc:

These are the public prayers, doctrines, worship, and administration of the
Church of England, which it not only tollerateth, but with an high hand
commands, maintayneth, enforces upon all men. Of all these execrable wares
stands Mr. GIFFARD a marchantman, retayling them to the miserale people,
being with none more or so much offended as with those who refuse and speak
against this tromperie; whom how he rewards or refuteth, let this his
blasphemous popish book show. What defense he has made for this worship and
ministration, Let the readers by this time judge, and how smoothly he has
passed by and coulored, yea swallowed up all these abominations, transferring
all the blame and reproach upon the poor servants of CHRIST, that condemn
this trash, and admonish him. Evil signs either of a true Minister, or true
christian. None speaking by the spirit of God justifies error or blasphemeth
the truth at any time. How far he has sought to justify these antichristian
devises and popish enormities, and blasphemed us for speaking the truth, Let
his book show. Yet brings he against us a certain Sect in their Church
which condemn certain things as corruptions and such as need reformation,
and therefore would know how we could abandon al th'assemblies for this Book,
seeing many disalowe many things therein:

TO this he says we make a double answer: First that using a part, they do
homage to the whole. Then, that the best part of this Book is an abomination
to the Lord etc. This dubblenes is of your own heart, who dissembling with
God and your own conscience to avoid open shame, care not what wrong you do
others, or what judgments you heap upon your self against the day of wrath.
Our answer was but one, and this. That you knew never a Minister that uses
not the Book, that stands not under this Idol. Or that had thrown it out
by the power of Gods word, or with-drawen the people from yt with all their
preaching these 29. years: But that they all administer by yt, join their
gospel to yt, minister to that people that use yt etc. That the conningest of
you that use the best and leave the rest, connot make that best part you use
other then a piece of swynes-flesh, an abomination to the Lord. And that the
perswation of your consciences could neither justify your worship, clear your
selves, or satisfy others: Especially when we see your consciences to
tolerate and to submit unto the whole, to use part in respect of your homage,
and to refuse part for shame of the world. This you were ashamed to inserte,
because you were not able to answer. Therefore in all this they but
counterfeite, and you cauil. What folly can you find in this saying, That in
using part they do homage for the whole? Stand not all your Ministers bownd to
this Book, sworn in their canonical obedience to administer according to the
order prescribed therein, and not to preach against any thing by public
authority established? Stand not the Churchwardens and Sidem^ bownde to
present the defaults, And the Archdeacon and Commissarie, to censure the same?
How then (seeing all your Ministers stand in this subjection unto yt) would you
have us think that the part they use is not in respect of their homage to the
whole? Or how would you have us think that they condemn any part thereof,
when they speak not against yt and cast yt not out by the power of the word,
nether with-drawe themselves, nor the people from yt, but join in prayers and
sacraments with them that use yt? Is this to condemn yt, or to condemn
themselves rather in the things they do? Ca^ you with your fleshly reason put
this away? Might they not by your reason stand sworn to ye Masse-Booke, join
to such idolatrous priests and people as use yt, yet if in their own
conscience or secretly they dislike some faults thereof, be as clear as these
Ministers you speak of are of the corruptions they condemn? There are some
truths and some good things in the Masse-Booke also. You use no good reason to
persuade us by your Schisms and divisions in your Church, unto your Church. We
know that Christ is not divided, and yt there is but one Spirit, one Baptism.
CHRIST is not yea and nay; yea in one place, nay in an other. Though
christians may through ye ignorance and darcknes that is in them, dissent in
some things, yet ar they to walk by one rule, and not to teach diverse
doctrines. Who so teach otherwise, or causes any dissentio^ or offenses
besides the doctrine with we have learned, Romans 16. 17.
is to be avoided, to be cast out. If either of these factions you speak of
had been of CHRIST, Gal. 1. 8.
they would ye^ this have proceeded according to the rule of CHRIST against the
offenders, and not have remained in this contention and division:

TO your next vehement exclamation of frenzy, In that we term the best part
of your Portesse but a piece of swynes-fleshe etc, wherein you say we strike at
God and blaspheame that which is most holy, because therein are sondrie portions
of Scripture: As the Lords prayer, the ten commandments, the articles of
your faith etc. We beseech you (when you shall be a little come to your self)
are not all these with your Pist^es and Gospells in the Masse-Booke also? yet
you will hold no part of that execrable Idol, good. The Papists hang the
first words of the Gospel after John about their neck for many purposes;
shall we not say that this or their Agnus Dei are abominable Idols therefore?
Coniurers use diverse Psalms and scriptures in their magical incantations and
diverse Collects, with as little evil as most of yours, shall we now allow
any part of their Coniurations? are they not altogether accursed? The
Scriptures then we see may be abused, yet no way justify any part of the
wicked action or naughty thing to which they are applied. The Scriptures are
holy and good of themselves, yet when they are thus violently rent, dismembered,
constrained, perverted, abused, joined to these idolatries, they no way
justify any part of the worship, but make the whole more execrable. We can
say then that those Scriptures which you thus profane and abuse to your
idolatries aboue-said (as your idol feasts and all your idol worship and
ministration) are in their due place and true use, holy, reverend, gracious;
But when they are abused, perverted, and joined to patch up this idolatry,
they make the whole the more execrable. All the Scriptures then of God are holy
and pure, and all the whole Masse-Booke, and English seruice-Booke and every
part thereof are detestable Idols. All which Idol and every part thereof we
can condemn, and yet preserve the sacred majesty and authority of the
Scriptures. All this your festered conscience and blasphemous mouth could to
your further judgment confess in our name, though Satan that speaks in you,
by and by sought to quench it, by deriding our holy sufferings. Our ba^des unto
us are comfortable, glorious unto God, and shall rise up and be produced in
judgment with this idolatrous murderous generation of your horned clergy. But
now to the Scriptures be you alleged. If you were demanded where you learned
to mumble over that Scripture (by you falsely caled the Lords prayer) five
times in your Morowe-Masse, and to use yt at all assaies, to to say yt over
the sick, over the dead, over the weomen in Churching, over the married etc,
should not your holy Father the POPE be found the aucthor of all this? Also
if we should ask you where you read, and how you could prove that blasphemous
Article of your faith That CHRIST descended into Hell, what scripture could you
show or allege for yt? Thus are even those things whereof you glory, turned
to your shame, if so be that you could be ashamed of any thing. Yet howsoever
you may harden your heart and your face against the manifest truth, by this
slight discussing of your worship, doctrines and administration, even by this
little which is already said, all men may discern what kind of ministers and
blind guides you be. Also any that had but once seen the Church of Rome,
might easily by the ^^ea-spotts and freakes you speak of, Ezech. 16, 44
know her daughter of England at the first blush. For as the Mother such the
Daughter is in all her limbs, features, and proportions:

Hitherto we have spoken of some odious foul faults and errors in particular
found in this their worship or Leitourgie: the further examination whereof and
search of the rest that remain, we leave to the further diligence of others,
And now touching this their seruice-booke and Leitourgie in general, this we
say.

1. IN that they presume to give and enjoin their prescript words in prayer,
they take the office of the Holy Ghost away, quench the spirit of the
ministry, and of the whole Church, stop and keep out the graces of God,
thrust their own idle devises upon the whole Church, yea upon GOD himself
whether he will or no:

2. IN that bie their Leitourgie they prescribe what and how much to read, at
Morn to their Mattens, at Eauen etc, teachinge the Church and ministry to
pray by number, stint, and proportion, it is not only popish, but most
frivolous and vain, disgracing and not instructing the Church and ministry:

3. IN that by this their Leitourgie they prescribe unto the Church what
Scriptures publicly to read and when to read them, as these Chapters and
Psalms at their mattens before noone, those at after noone etc, On all the
days that they have public meetings and service through the year, and so
from year to year. They therebie take from the Church the holy and free use
both of the Scriptures and spirit of GOD. They therbie conceal and shut out of
the Church a great part of GODS holy word which they read not. As also abuse
without order those scriptures they enjoin to be read:

4. IN that they shread, rend, and dismember the Scriptures from the holy
Order and natural sense of their context, to make them Epistles, Gospels,
Lessons, select Psalms, to their festivals and Idol worship aboue-said, They
most heinouslie pervert and abuse the Scriptures to the high dishonor of GOD
and their own fearful judgment.

5. IN that they bring in and command the Apochrypha writings to be
publicly read in the Church: They both mainetaine and publicly teach the
dangerous errors therein contained, to the poisoning and subverting of the faith
of the Church. They thrust these devises of men into the place of GODS word,
causing the people therebie to reverence and esteem them as the holy Oracles
of GOD, of like authority, dignity, and truth, and to resort unto them to
build their faith thereupon, and therbie they bring in an other foundation into
the Church: besides the high injury done unto GOD therbie:

6. Finally in that by this their Leitourgie they bring in, erect, and enjoin
a new and strange kind of administration, as is above proved in the
perticulars: They make and erect a new Gospel, and so must needs also erect
unto yt a new ministry. For the ministry of Christ is only bound unto, and
will only administer by Christ's Testament wherein they have a most perfect
Leitourgie for the whole administration of his Church. Therefore this present
Leitourgie and ministry of ENGLAND: are by all these reasons in general and
particular found and proved at once to be counterfeite, ungodly, and
Antichristian:

His wide frivolous Parenthesis from the 17. page of his book unto the 47.
touching read prayer and prescript Leitourgies, we leave to be discussed and
refuted by an other, to whose writings we referr the Reader. Leaving Mr.
Giffard and the whole Church of ENGLAND touching this first point of their
worship, to be compassed about with the sparckes, and to walk on in the light
of the fire that they have kindled: Yet this to them of our hand, Esaias. 50. 11
they shall lie in sorrow.

THE SECOND PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION, IS THAT the profane ungodly multitudes
without the exception of any one person, are with them received into, and
retained in the bozome and body of their Church:
IN Mr. Giffard his former answer unto this Transgression he then not being
past al shame confessed That the most Churches in England want godly Past^rs
and there al are admitted, he that admits them being the worst in the
company. These assemblies as openly guilty of this confusion, sacrilege,
and wilful prophanatio^ of the holy things of God, he would not then defend.
But now upon better advise (the world being greatly changed with the reforming
Priests since that time, and no hope left for that sect to prevail aganst the
Bisshops) he has changed his copy quite, building again those Romish
abhominatio^s he had before destroyed, as in the Transgression above handled
appears. And now in this Transgression, as one greatly greiued that such
large words had escaped him, he seeks to retract them in the best manner he
may, and to salve al again by saying, That the Church of England does neither
approve such admission of profane men to the Sacrament, nor yet suffer it in
practice wholly, howsoever they are admitted through the negligence of the
Ministers etc. Where this high sacrilege is wittingly and wilfully committed
by the most of the Ministers, seen and suffered by all the Governors of the
Church who have made, and do maineteine such wicked Ministers, where most of
the people of the land consent and join in this sin, where that lesser part
of Ministers and people (he speaks of) that do not the like have made no
separation from these wicked Governors, Ministers, and People, that thus
wilfully continue in this pres^mptuous sin and sacrilege, but join unto
them in the communion of their prayers and Sacramens etc; Here we would know
whether the Church of England may not justly be reproved for suffering and
approving this sin. 1 Corinthians. 5
Else The Apostle faulted for reproving the whole Church of Corinth for suffering
and not casting out th'incestuous person, although no doubt there were in the
Church of Corinth that utterly disliked and condemned the offense. That all the
Governors of your Church thus approve and mainetaine these wicked Ministers
who^ they have made, is manifest, in that they do not censure the^ for their
heinous offenses. That these Ministers commit this sacrilege, your self has
in your former answer confessed, terming them ungodly, and judging them the
worst of the company. Where by the way (not to hinder the matter in hand) we
must advertise you that you have highly broken the rules of christian order and
charity toward these your brethren and fellow Ministers, thus to publish
and condemn them (and that to such as you hold heretics and schismatics from
your Church) before your Church had censured them, or you for the Churches
wilful default had forsaken either the Church or the^. If they be to be
esteamed the true Ministers of CHRIST (which office they profess to bear in
your Church) then great is your sin thus disorderly to blaspheme, judge, and
publish them. If they be not to be esteamed the true Ministers of CHRIST, the^
as great is your sin in joining unto them in communion of prayers and
Sacraments etc, and in not separating from them and from that Church which thus
presumptuouslie does make, impose, and mainetaine such an antichristian ungodly
Ministry. Thus your disorderly and unchristian behavior toward your
brethren, yea the Ministers of your Church, (whereof your self by profession
stands as yet a Minister and member) might be greatly agrauate and more
justly charged with those faults you lay upon us of accusing, condemning whole
assemblies of Christ, of rending and tearing up the tender plants in most
desperate and savage manner. And all this before the Church of England has
censured these Ministers and assemblies. If we would be so frivolous, we could
thoroughly wound you with your own weapons: But we remitt you to the judgment
and vengeance of the Lord for all your blasphemy and cursed speaking: still
witnessing against the sins of your Church, proving if God at any time will
give you repentance.

FVrder in your former answer you affirmed, that you knew many
Congregations in England where the Pastor repelled th'vnworthie from the
Sacraments etc. We replied, That even in those special Congregations all the
profane and their seed were at the first received, as in all your other
Congregations. And that this Suspention of the Pastor wherbie he repelled, was
popish and Antichristian, even the instrument of that idol shephearde, rebated,
without edge or point, of no value, or power etc, and therefore this could be
no separation, seeing the suspended still remained of and in your Church. That al
without exception were received in these Congregations we proved, because all
without exception of any were baptized. That none were or could be there put
out we proved, because the Parson and his whole flock, or al these special
Pastors or flocks together, have not that power which our Lord JESUS CHRIST
has given unto his Church unto the worlds end, to cast out the wicked by
exco^municatio^; and the other Congregations by his own confession did not
cast them out. All this notwithstanding, Mr. Giffard (before he has either
proved the orderly gathering and communion of these Congregations at the
restoring from apostasy, or that they now had the power of Christ amongst them
to excommunicate the wicked) will needs by this idol popish Suspension justify
these Congregations, and convince us of fall accusation: And thus every where
he administreth weapons unto us to wound and beat himself with his own
words, Prou. 14. ^.
according to the proverb in the mouth of the fool the staff of pride.

But at length to reconcile himself again with those most part of
Co^gregations and Ministers which he before condemned, he has changed,
perverted and subtilely sullected our reason which we brought against those
special assemblies which he endenoured to justify, and turned yt against the
whole Church of England, thus.

Where all are received in by Baptism, and no power to cast forth any by
excommunication, there all the profane multitudes are without exception of
any one person received into and retained in the bozome and body of the
Church:

But in the Church of ENGLAND all are received in by baptism, and there is no
power to ^ast forth any by excommunication:

Therefore in the Church of ENGLAND all the profane multitudes without the
exception of any one person are received into and retained in the bozome and
body of the Church:

THus after he has manifestly falsified our words and changed our whole
reason, framing yt in his own co^ceipt as he might best deal withal, he then
proceeds with all might and main to refute this Argument, and to convince us.
Which being done, he follows the chase so whotely, spending and opening his
mouth freely into all manner blasphemy, as he drives us into sondrie heresies
etc. But now if we might be so bold to awaken the man out of his choleric
dream, and to call him back again to our former reason after all this
conflicte, pursuit, and triumph, he shall be found to have skirmished all this
while but with his own shadow, and never to have comen near our Argument,
and so all his reproaches and heresies must be feign to return back again into
his own heart, where they were forged and whence they proceeded. Our former
Argument being reduced into form, was to this effect. Into what Congregations
all are received as members, and the said Congregations have not the power of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST to cast out any by excommunication, there all the
profane multitudes without th'exceptio^ of any one person, are received into
and retained in the bozome and body of that Church, or of those Churches. But
in those special Congregations he spoke of, where the Pastor does repel from
the Sacrament, al are received as members, and the Parson and whole parish, Or
all those Pastors and their flock^s have not the power of our Lord JESUS CHRIST
to cast forth any by excommunication. Therefore even in those special parishes
where the Priest by their seruice-booke repelleth from their Sacrament, are all
the profane multitudes without th'exceptio^ of any one person received into
and retained in the bozome and body etc. Here Mr. GIFFARD finding the Mayor or
first Proposition irrefragable, The Minor thus proved unto him, because al in
these parishes are baptized, and the Parsons suspention is not CHRIST'S
excommunication, has sought to escape by changing and falsifijng our reason,
which otherwise he was never able to answer, He has quite changed yt by
putting in a new Minor Proposition. Namely, for these peculiar Congregatio^s
whereof he made instance, he has put the whole Church of England as they stand
one body altogether. And is now driven to mingle these his select
Co^gregations with the other Most part of Churches and Ministers whom erewhile
he condemned and granted guilty of this transgression, and also to pray in
aid and appeal unto the popish excommunication of that antichristian
Hierarchy of their Church Governors. And this by further falsifijng our words
in both his propositions; vizt. Where we said have not CHRIST'S power to cast
forth any by excommunication, he says have no power to cast forth any by
excommunication. We never doubted but the Church of England, as also her mother
of ROME has a false kind of excommunication exercised in the power of the
Dragon and of the Beast; but we still deny that they have that true
Excommunication which is exercised in the name and power of CHRIST, which only
belongs to the Church of CHRIST. Thus if the man had taken his work before
him, and proved as he had gonne, happily his triumphant conclusions would not
so sast have followed; Then should he have had less to fear, and more to
rejoice of his doings, whereas now his reckonyng and judgment are yet behind.
But if Mr. GIFFARD would vouchsalf to take his adversaries into the field with
him before the fight, and give them leave to bring and use their own weapons,
then (seeing he will needs have the question now general of the whole Church
of England, and our argument after a scholastical manner) let yt be thus
touching this Second Transgression:

Where all the profane and ungodly are received into and retained in the
Church as members thereof, there cannot be said the true established Church of
CHRIST.

But in the Church of ENGLAND all the profane multitudes and ungodly of the
land were received into and are retained in their Church as members thereof.

Therefore the Church of ENGLAND in this estate cannot be said the true
established Church of CHRIST.

THe first Proposition is confirmed through the whole Bible from the beginning
to the end; Exodus 2. 5. 6.
The Church of God having always consisted of a select peculiar people, 1 Pet.
2. 9.
caled and separated from the profane of the world; Ioh. 15. 19.
None entering into CHRIST'S Church but by a voluntary profession of their true
faith and obedience; Act 2. (...)
Or standing longer there, then they keep the same faith and obedience. The
second Proposition may be proved by way of argument thus. Where all were
received into the Church without any separation at the first gathering thereof,
and they have not the power of CHRIST to cast forth any by orderly
excommunication, there all the profane multitudes may justly be said to be
received into and retained in the bozome and body of the Church. But in the
Church of England all the profane multitudes of the land were together without
difference or separation received into the Church, neither have they the power
of CHRIST orderly to cast forth any by true excommunication. Therefore all the
profane multitudes are truly said to be received into, and to be retained in
the bozome and body of their Church. This aucthor his two exceptions to the
first Proposition of the repelled from the Sacraments, and such is depart of
themselves, no way diminish the truth, or hinder the course thereof. For the
suspended, they still remain members of their Church. For such Papists,
Heretics, and Schismatics as depart of themselves, though they ought also to
be cast out by orderly Excommunication, yet are they not nor can be in this
their Church so cast out, how infectious and wicked soever they be, because
they have not the power and excommunication of CHRIST amongst them. So that
now all the controversy will be about the second Proposition, whether the
Church of England have received in all the profane, and whether yt have the
power of our Lord JESUS CHRIST to cast forth any by true excommunication. Thus
far forth it is manifest and cannot be denied, That the whole land, eue^ all the
Queens subjects at the beginning of over Queen ELISABETHES reign, were all
at one instant received as members into this Church, this Ministry, Worship,
Sacraments, Ordinance etc set over them indifferently. Since, al their seed
without exception of any, whether Papiste, Heretic, Atheist, Witch, Coniurer
etc, are baptized in this their Church: What then should let us to affirm and
conclude, That all the profane of the land are received into the body of
bozome of this Church, if so be that there then were at the beginning of her
Majesty's reign, or now are, any profane in the land? Wherefore he must
either mainetayne that there have not been since this our Queens reign, and
now presently are not any profane and open ungodly in the land; Or else
confess his Church guilty of this Transgression, for receiving in all the
wicked and propha^e into their Church. Neither will all the Devils sophistry,
his ra^ling, accusing, blaspheming of Christ's faithful servants and witnesses
of heresy, intrusion into Gods judgment seat, sauadge and desperate rending
up the Lords tender plants, yea of whole christian assemblies help the
matter, excuse him, or chardge us.

We hold al such profane, as either are not yet come to the true faith and
obedience of Christ by outward profession, or are departed from the true faith
and obedience of CHRIST, remaining obstinate and hardened in transgression or
error. And this second sort although the Church should neglect or refuse, to
cast them out by excommunication. We hold, that only such as voluntarily make a
true profession of faith, and vow of their obedience, Math. 3. 6.
and as in the same faith and obedience seek the communion and fellowship of
the faithful, Acts. 2. 41.
are to be received as members into the Church: And that only the child^en of
such by the one Parent are to be baptized. 1 Cor. 7. 14.
We hold further, that howsoever the dearest children of God do and may fall,
yet are they still ^enued by repentance: And that all such as continue
obstinate in their sin after due admonition, are not by us to be esteemed
faithful, but to be held wicked and profane, although the Church should
refuse to cast them out. This we hope in any christian or sober judgment will
not be found, To call all such profane and to condemn them as infidells
which profess the faith truly, and continue outwardly obedient, although in
some weakness and infirmities, as this malicious accuser falsely sclandereth us.
Nether shall we be found to intrude into Gods judgment seat, to rend and
tear up the weak plants in desperate and sauadge manner, vvhilest we affirm
those rowtes and multitudes of Atheistes; Papists, Idolatros, 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10.
11.
heretics, blasphemers, extortioners, wronge-doers, covetous, proud, vain,
and light persons, glottons, dronckardes, adulterers, bawdes, whores, and
whoremasters, theiues, murderers, and other such like flagitious ungodly
persons, which were received into and are retained in their Church as members,
to be esteamed amongst the wicked and profane of the world, and not as the
right plants and true members of the Church in this estate. We are taught to
know and judge the tree by the fruictes, and easily can discern these Vines
of SODOM from the Lords Vines, these stinking weeds, these nettles,
thorns, thistles, from the Lords pleasant plants, the sweet incense trees,
Cant. 4. 13. 14.
olive, pome-granate, fig trees of the Lords walled Orcharde of his Church:
E^ay. 60. 21.
We cannot mistake the mountains of these Leopardes and Wolves, for CHRIST'S
sheepfold; the cages of these unclean and hateful birds, Cant. 4. 8.
for the holy assembly of Saints: Neither may we now flatter and
dissemble contrary to the evident truth of God, Revel. 18. 2.
and our own conscience, to iu^tifie and bless the wicked, to call the churl
liberal, to say to the wicked they are righteous, Esaias. 32. 5.
and to them that despise the Lord they shall have peace, as this vvretched
man does for his bellye. Prou. 24. 24.
Who being in league with his Ordinary, and in couenante with Hell, is not
ashamed to stand a Priest of all these abominations to the most abominable,
Ezech. 13. 18.
seeking to plead for and justify both; Ierem. 18.
terming these rowtes of all sorts of wicked ungodly persons, the Saints;
the assemblies of them, the Church and sheepfold of CHRIST; calling the most
hateful and horrible sins they daily commit, but their infirmities and
weakness; the most execrable blasphemies and idolatries, but the spotts and
bleamishes of their Church. What then shall we judge of their sinners and
sins if these be their Saints, infirmities, bleamishes? But there are none
so bad as we that speak against these holy assemblies of these Saints, and
that for these their bleamishes, infirmities etc. All that fear God may tremble
at our intolerable wickedness (Mr. Giffard says) That tear up these weak
pla^tes, yea whole assemblies that unfeignedly sorrow and mourn for their
sins, and study to please God. We are they that take upon us to pluck up all the darnel, though we be commanded the contrary, lest we pluck up the wheat
Math. 13. What spirit leads us, and possesses him and his Church, as also
how they sorrow and mourn for their sins, Let th'ocasions of these
controversies betwixt us, their tyranny, our sufferings, and this his present
writing declare. We blame, and witness against many most heinous and
horrible sins. So far are they from acknowledging the same, that they will not
be confessed amongst the bleamishes of his Church. Yea insteade of repentance
they persecute, he blasphemeth, and in every sentence of his book casts at
us in his fury these his fire-brandes, poisoned arrows, and deadly darts,
wherewith his whole Book is seasoned insteade of better grace, and al for
showing and admonishing them of their sins. Unto this place. Mat. 13. which
he brings against us for plucking up the tares, he must acknowledge these his
weak pla^tes even all the profane multitudes and deluge of people, to be those
tares, or else he cannot use yt against us, or blame us for plucking them up.
This if he confess, then can they not be held in this estate the children of
the kingdom, that tender wheat, that blossomed and made fruit. Then has he
granted us as much concerning this point as we require, yea and judged them as
far as we judge; which is not concerning their future, but their present
estate. Their election or reprobation we leave to that great hous-holder the
maker and judge of all, containing our selves within the rules of his revealed
word, whose judgments we cannot lighten, or pronownce the wicked innocent;
against whose judgments who so spurn or resist, but stomble at that rock
which will grind them to powder. If Mr. Giffard understand the field in this
place to be the Church, he choseth rather to insist in the error of others,
then in th'exposition of our Savior himself; who says, verse. 38. That the
field is the world, the good seed are those Children of the kingdom, but the
tares are the Children of the wicked one If yt should be understood of the
planted Church, then were all the rules, ordinances, censures, and government of
the Church utterly abolished. The^ might al be received in, and none at any
time for any offense cast out of the Church etc. Then also could not the
civil Maiestrate put any offender to death, for that were to root out the
Tares. Neither can these Tares be understood of those hypocrites whose sins
appear not; for then could not the Disciples discern, judge, and seek to
root them up. Or being so understood, be compared to those multitudes of
profane, whose heinous sins are manifest. Let the Tares then be the children
of the wicked one, and not the Saints of CHRIST: Let the tares be in the
world, and not in the Church, seeing our Savior himself so pronounces them,
and instructs his disciples so to thinck of them. Yet let not his disciples
in any inordinate zeal seek to root them up, seeing they have nothing to do
to judge them that are without. 1. Cor. 5. 12. 13.
But let them rather by all means seek their ingrafting, in instructing them
inal gentleness, if so be that God at any time will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of 2. Tim. 2* 25
the truth, that they also may be partakers of the like mercy and grace with
them.

WHat then has Mr. Giffard gained by this place? That the open profane and
such as never made true voluntary profession of their own faith (other then
that prescript verbal confession which is enjoined to them al in their
Seruice-booke, which a child of 4. years old may say after the Priest as well
as they) may be received into the Church. Or that al sorts of open wicked
gross impenitent offenders may be retained in the Church as members. This he
must prove, or else all that he says is nothing to the purpose, seeing we
chardge their Church as heynously guilty of, and wilfully obstinate in these
transgressions. But insteade of proving, he slilie seeks to change the
question, by turning yt from these open profane and wicked, to Hypocrites and
wicked persons which remain in the Church, whose children he says ought to be
baptized. Wherein, besides that he beggeth the question, assuming in a strong
imagination that which he shall never be able to prove, That these parish
assemblies are the true planted and established Churches of CHRIST, and these
ungodly multitudes true members thereof, he further so doubleth and windeth
betwixt these two starting holes, the hypocrites, and the profane, as one
cannot know whereto find him, or whereof he affirms. It being granted that
the children of hypocrites ought to be baptized, he will ^hervpon conclude, that
the children of the profane also. Which if yt be denied, then he will make no
conscience to give out, that we deny baptism to the seed of Hypocrites in
the Church. Thus standing upon no grownde, he flitcheth and fleeteth up and
down, seeking in an evil conscience to shifte off the truth wherewith he is
pressed. First presupposing that al these multitudes of profane and wicked are
within the Church: Then endeavoring to prove that all the children of such
profane and wicked as he terms within the Church and to profess Christ,
ought to be baptized. Wherein, before we come to the consideration of his
reasons, we must note unto the reader in his Proposition express contrariety,
error, and sacrilege: Contrariety, in that he with the same mouth in the same
sentence pronounces them as profane and wicked, and also as faithful and
members of the Churh, such to whom the Covenante and the seals thereof belong.
Error, in that he thus judges and blasphemeth them, if they be faithful and
members of the Church: As on the contrary if they be profane and wicked, to
justify their profession whilst they are obstinate in such sins; Yea further
to harden them therein, to give the seal of the Couenante unto their children
in respect of their profession, which cannot be done without open and wilful
sacrilege; for if they be to be judged profane and wicked, then are their
children also (until they make profession of their own faith) to be held of us
as profane; the devised written profession of their Church cannot sanctify or
justify either the one or the other unto us. Moreover, the Church cannot deny
to receive those Parents or that Parent unto the communion of the Supper, whose
infantes they baptize in that estate. And thus by Mr. Giffards divinity may
the body and blood of Christ be prostitute to the open profane and wicked,
whom he thus proves within the Covenant.

THe interest of Gods Covenant (says he) does not depend upon their next
Parents, but upon the ancient christians their Forefathers. For when God
says, I will be thie God and the God of thie seed, the promise is made to a
thousand generations. Exodus 20* So Leui paid tithes unto Melchi-sedec because
he was the loins of Abraham: Yea all the whole nation of the Jews were in the
loins of Abraham, and therefore holy and within the Covenant: For if the first
fruictes be holy, so is the lump; if the root be holy, so are the boughs
Romans 11. Yea though many of them were wicked, idolatros, reprobates, yet even
in the worst times were they Circumcised, and yt was not disalowed. But the
Lord caleth the children of those wicked idolators his children. Thou have
taken thie Sons and thie Daughters which thou broughtest fourth unto me* and
sacrificed unto them to be consumed: thou have slain my Sons and given them,
by causing them to pass through unto them. Ezech. 16. 21.

BEhold into how many errors, mischieues, and blasphemies they fall, which in
this manner spurn and strive against the truth, every word becoming a snare
unto them to hold and draw them unto their greater judgments. If th'interest
in Gods Covenant (as being the seed of the faithful unto the sight of the
Church) depend not upon the faith of the next parents, but upon the ancient
christians their Forefathers within a thow^and generations etc, Then ought al
to be received, and none to be kept or cast out of the Church; Then is the
whole world within the Covenant, of the Church, holy* al being ^pronge within
far less then a thousand generations of many faithful, and lineallie come
from the Patriarck Noah, Then ought by this rule the Israelites under the law
to have circumcised all their captive Can^^nites and heathen that came into
their power, Then ought the Church now also to baptize all the seed even of
the most wicked and ungodly, whether Turcks, Papists, Idolators etc, because
they are all ^pronge of faithful Parents within less then a thousand
generations. But because we read in the Scriptures that Gods Covenant only
belongs unto the faithful, and the seals of his covenant are now only
committed to his true established Church; Seinglawes and rules are given by God
unto the Church, to whom, and how to administer the faid seals; Seeing none can
enter into this Church, but by this true outward profession of faith and
obedience, neither any remain longer there, the^ they keep the said faith
and obedience outwardly; Seeing baptism only belongs and is given to the
members of this Church and unto their ^eede, and can to none other be given
without heynouse sin and sacrilege, We doubt not to pronownce and reject
these doctrines of this false Prophet, as most blasphemous and devilish. As
^ending to the open breach of al Gods laws and ordinances, to th'vtter
abolishing of the truth and fear of Gods judgments, to the taking away of al
faith and godliness out of the earth, to the bringing in of al Atheism and
confusion, to the prostituting and profaning of the holy things of God. And
therefore al true Christians by the commandment of God are to avoid and hold
accursed the aucthor and bringer of such doctrines, Gal. 1. 8
and so much the rather, ^ Ihon. 10
in that he so wretchedly and bouldly falsifieth, dismembreth, peruerteth, and
abuses the holy Scriptures thereunto.

AS to prove that the Covenant depends not upon the outward faith of the
parents, but upon the faith of their godly ancestors, he voucheth. Exodus 20. I
will be thy God and the God of thy Seed, the promise is made (says he) to a
thousand generations: But he wittingly suppresseth the next words of the
sentence [ of them that love me and Keep mie Commandements] which show to
whom this Covenant is made and belongs, and the condition on our part. As the
former part of this sentence verse. 5. shows how we may forfeite this
Covenant, Namely, by breaking and co^temning the law of God, in whose love we
cannot remain, except we remain in his obedience. John. 14. 21. and 15. 10.
So that the Lord most plainly in this Exodus, 20. 5. and 6. verses declares
who and whose seed are within his Covenant of love and protection. Namely, the
faithful and their offspring to the thousand generation, so long as they
continue in his faith and obedience. But if they break his law and will not be
reduced to his obedience, then are they and their children cast out of his
favor, then as a jealous God will he visit their sins upon their children
upon the thirdes and fourthes etc. How boldly and presumptuously then has this
wicked man without al conscience and fear, falsified this Scripture in
suppressing what parts thereof he list, dismembring and rending what he
alleges from the natural co^text, perverting and abusing these words [ to a
thousand generations] quite against th'expresse sense of God himself,
receiving the children of the open wicked and ungodly (which the Lord rejects
together with their rebellious Parents) into the outward Covenant of his grace,
and delivering the seal thereof unto them by virtue of this place, because some
of their Forefathers have been faithful, and the Covenant is made to a
thousand generations. As though the Lord plighteth his love to us, and
requires not again our faith and obedience unto him in the same Covenant. Let
Mr. Giffard show one place of Scripture through the whole Bible where the
Lord his Covenant is made unto us without this condition, and then
peradventure he may clear himself and his Ordinary for the publishing of this
wicked and devilish heresy, so directly contrary to the whole Scriptures in
more then a thousand places. For to what end should the Lord have given unto
us his holy word, if he had not required of us our hearty obedience unto the
same? But because the Lord is never found contrary unto himself, neither
any contradiction in his word, we may by the direct warrant hereof hold Mr.
GIFFARD and his Ordinary most heynouse falsifiers and corrupters of the whole
law and word of God, most blasphemous and pernicious false Prophets, That
receive into the covenant and justify all sorts of profane, wicked, and
ungodly persons: And so open the doors to all Atheism and impiety. His
starting hole and subterfuge of undiscovered hypocrites will not hide or help
him herein, seeing we complain That the open profane and all sorts of the
most wicked and their seed without exception of any are received amongct
them as members of their Church, And seeing he endeavors to approve the same
by many other Scriptures.

AL Israel (says he) was in the loins of Abraham, all in the Covenant, and
holy with him as the boughs with the root, all within the Church by outward
profession, and esteemed members thereof, because the seeds of Abraham. Yea
though multitudes of them were infidells and idolators, yet even of them sprang
the right holy seed, And therefore, as also because of their outward
profession, were all of them held members, al holy; And all their children (in
the times when idolatry was openly mainetayned) were circumcised, and that was
not disalowed etc.

WE doubt not, speaking of al Israel in general without any particular
reference unto this or that time or estate, but that Nation was a peculiar,
chosen, Exodus 19. 5. 6.
adopted people above all other Nations unto the Lord, Romans 9.
that they might be an holy Nation unto him, a kingdom of Priests etc, of
whom the adoption, the glory, the Couenantes, the giving of the law, the
service, and the promises. We ackowledge also that the Israel of God according
to th'election of grace are all of them holy with their Forefathers Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, as the lump with the first fruictes, the boughs with the
root. But yet we acknowledge not all to be that Israel which are of Israel,
neither all the children of the Covenant which are the seed of Abraham. John.
8.
But they are the children of Abraham and of his covenant which do the
worckes, Romans 4.
and remain in the faith of Abraham. Romans 2. 25.
Otherwise their circumcision is made unto them uncircumcision; neither do
their literal titles and prerogatives any whit avail them, but rather
agrauate their judgments whilst they are found transgressers of the law. The
Covenant doubtless was not otherwise made unto them then it was unto their
Father Abraham. To whom yt was said be thou upright and walk straight before
me. Genes. 17.
How often does the Lord at the giving of his law, and the entering covenant
with the whole people stipulate and require their faith and obedience, when he
promises to be their God and the God of their seed? How often does he pronownce
the Covenant broken and disanulled on their parts, when they transgress and
reject his law, and denownce of his part all plagues and fearful judgments
for the same every where through the law and Prophets, but most plentifully
in the book of Deutronomie? Deuteronomy. 29. 19
Protesting plagues against such as when they hear the words of this oath,
bless themselves in their heart saying they shall have peace, although they
walk according to the stobbornnes of their own heart. How then should these
frivolous reasons of this ignorant cauiller stand? That because the Lord
speaking generally and indefinitely of his first chosing and receiving that
people, sometimes caleth all Israel his people, a holy Nation etc, Therefore all
Israel in all times and estates of that kingdom should always be his true
visible Church, within the Covenant etc. This we see were directly contrary to
the whole law and Prophetts. Should it follow that because the Lord
reserueth in and draws out of the loins of the wicked his right holy seed,
that therefore the Parents are within God his Covenant? Thus might the Turckes,
Jews, and most wicked of the world be justified, because the Lord his secret
election is not restreyned toward them. Should it follow that because all
the Israelites were always circumcised, that therefore they were within the
Covenant, or were not blamed, or did not amiss in profaning God his holy
ordinance? So might the Is^^elites, Ammoni^es, Edomites, and Moabites be said
within the Covenant, because their ancestors and they were circumcised. We see
outward circumcision avails not, when the condition of the covenant is
broken. And how could this bold blind guide say, that it was not disalowed
when all their children were circumcised in the times when idolatry was
generally and publicly maineteyned? Are such idolators within the Covenant of
the Lord, or does the seal of his covenant belong to them? Are not the
children of the wicked excepted and rejected out of the covenant by the
commandment of God Exodus 20. 5. as the seed of the faithful are received
into the couenante? Then must it needs be high presumption and sacrilege thus
to abuse circumcision, and therefore yt could not be allowed in those times to
such persons. Moreover, when these wicked are forbidden so much as to name the
name of God, Psalm. ^0. 16.
to bring any offerings or worship unto him, Esaias. 1. and 66.
or to meddle with any of his holy Ordinances, are they not forbidden
circumcision?

Should we also collect and conclude, because the Lord Ezech. 16. 20. 21.
caleth the children of those Idolators whom they offered to M^lech, his Sons
and Daughters, That therefore the kingdoms of Israel and Judah whilst they
remained in these horrible sins, were outwardly in that estate the true
Church of God? Or is this great Prophet so inconversant in the Scripture, that
he yet understands not this usual kind of phrase and manner of speaking,
where the Lord in sondrie places caleth them his sons, daughters, and people
in respect of their first caling, whom in regard of their present evil life he
pronownceth not to be his. As Deutronomie. 32. the 19. and 5 verse. Micha. 2.
7. 8, 9. Amos. 8. 2. and no where more plainly then in this Ezech. 16. as were
easy to demonstrate by the least touching of the argument of that chapter; The
Lord there setting before their face by sundry Allegories their estate, even
from their original unto that present time. Of what parents the^ by nature
sprange, in what plight he found them at the first, all embrued in their
mothers and their own guiltines, their navel uncut, unwashed, unsalted,
vnswaded, cast out into the open field, no hand to help, no eye to pity,
unable to help themselves until the Lord showed mercy, took them up,
chearished, nourished them, entered into covenant and swear unto them, so that
they grew up into riper years, then he spredd his garment over them, washed
and anointed them, clothed them with broydred garments, fine lynnen, silck,
skarlet, adorned them with gold, silver, precious stones* fed them with meal,
wine, oil, set a beautiful Crown upon their head, and married them openly
unto himself, and spredd their name amongst the heathen. But now Israel waxed
proud of her own beauty, played the Harlot, built high places, and decked
them with her garments, and played the whore upon them, made images of
th'instruments and of the Lords gold and silver which he gave them, and
committed fornication with them, offering the Lords meat, flower, oil unto
them as a sweet savor, yea sacrificed their own Sons and Daughters unto
them, committed fornication with the Egiptians, Assi^ians, Caldeans, and that
in most shameful sort, and vilely hyring them with the Lords gold and silver
of his Temple etc. Wherefore the Lord does pronownce and repudiate them as an
Harlot, as a most filthy, poisonous, monstrous whore, Genes. 9.
and denownceth judgments against them as against murderers and adulterers,
Deuteronomy. 22. 22
and these judgments to be executed by these their lovers, who should break
down their Cities and high places, and slay them with the sword, the Lord
not only comparing them, but shewinge them to excede SODOM and SAMARIA in
sin and iniquity etc. Who then but this perverse fellow could thus stomble
and cavil at these words My Sons and my Daughters, and wrest them not
only against the whole scope of that Chapter, but even of the whole Bible?
Whether these words be to be understood of all their seed which were at the
first together with them received into the Lords Covenant* or of their first
borne only, which by a peculiar right and law were reserved unto the Lord
Exodus 13. 2. (which first borne they are blamed in the 20. Chapter of the same
prophecy verse. the 26. and 31. to have offered unto Idols) may be some
question. Yet with no sense or truth they may be understood as of the Lords
elect and adopted childeren, or pronownced that holy seed, being the children
of such rebellious obstinate idolators. How often does the Lord call them by
his Prophets rebellious children, an adulterous Nation? should we therefore
conclude, that they were the Lords children, the Lords spouse? Or rather
pronownce from the just laws of the Lord, That rebellious children, and
th'adulterous wife ought to be produced, repudiat, and put to death. Deuteronomy. 21.
18. Leu. 20. 10. Further we read the Lord to denownce extraordinary and
speedy judgments not only against them that offer of their ^eede unto Moleth,
but against that whole Nation that dissembleth or suffers that sin amongst
them. Leuit. 20. How then could this ignorant Priest collect and conclude from
these words My Sons and my Daughters (which were spoken but to convince and
agrauate their sin and judgment, to stimulate and wound their conscience)
that these children of these idolators, thus offered to Molech, were of us to be
judged the holy seed of the Lord within his covenant, Or these idolators in
this estate to be judged the true Church of God? Can they together serve God
and Idols? together break and keep the Covenant? If Mr. GIFFARD can by his
learning prove this true, then peradve^ture we shall beliue him that y^ kingdom
of Israel in their schism and defection having erected new Temples, Priests,
Altars, Laws, were defiled with all the abominations of the heathen, despised
and persequ^ted the Lord his Prophets which were sent to them etc, were to be
held of us the true Church of God. Then peradventure he might persuade us that
the kingdom of Iud^ in this apostasye, having as this Prophet Ezech. shows
in his 8. Chapter brought al manner abomination into the Temple and defiled the
whole land as we read in the rest of his prophecy, was also by us to be
esteemed the true Church of God. Is it a good reason for Mr. Giffard to say,
because the whole land was so thoroughly defiled, that it could neither by
ecclesiastical censures, nor by civil judgments be purged, that therefore yt
remained still the Church in that estate? Is not this to say they had not thus
sinned, because their sins were incuriable? That they had not committed
adultery, murder, idolatry, because they were not presently stoned, slain by
the sword, burned? But howsoever they and their false Prophets blessed
themselves in these sins boasting of vain titles of The Temple and People of
the Lord etc; Ier. 9. 13. 14. 15.
yet the Lord for those sins did in his due times execute these judgments
upon the whole Land; Ier. 7. 4.
and in the mean time his law and Prophets spoke plainly, Ier. 28. 8. 9
That these judgments were due unto them in this estate. And as well might this
false Prophet justify the Jews now to be the true Church of God in this time
of their Apostasy (whereof he speaks) because the Lord now amongst and in
the loins of these wicked ones reserueth to himself an holy seed, a remnant.
It will not help him to say That the vyrie-yarde was not then utterly take from
the Jews, as it is now. For though the Lords time to abolish that material
Jerusalem that he might bring in and erect the Spiritual, was not as then
accomplished, Though y^ Lord in his wisdom, mercy, and patience, and for
causes known to himself, do often deferr his judgments; yet may not we thereby
flatter our selves, or justify our estate whilst we remain under the
condemnation of his written law, and in open wilful breach of his Covenant.
Yea howsoever the Lord now has utterly broken off the Jews for their sins
and infidelity, Romans 11.
that the Gentiles might be gathered and grafted in by faith, Yet is the Lord
in his greatest wrath always mindeful of his mercy, and has set a time when
to call and ingraff again the Jews, that al Israel might be saved, and brought
into one shepefold, as yt is written. But in the mean time it is no reason to
say, That because the Lord even in the worst times always reserueth a remna^t
in his mercy, Therefore these wicked people in those evil times are his visible
Church. Or because the Lord in the Loins af the most wicked has a holy
seed according to his secret election, That therefore these wicked parents are
in the visible Church, or their offspring under the outward covenant. Yet are
these Mr. Giffards best Arguments to prove Israel in their open schism and
idolatrye, and Judah in their open Apostasy and idolatry to be the true outward
Church, whereunto the Seals of the outward covenant belonged and were given
even to the seed of the greatest Idolator. Yea the schism, apostasy,
idolatry, profanation of the holy things of God amongst these Jews and
Israelites, are the best and only grounds he has, or brings to approve and
justify the corrupt estate of the Church of ENGLAND, and that the seed of
their profane Idolators ought to be baptized:

Save that at length he has found out a merueylous knot in a rush, and of the
same made such a share for his Br^wnistes, as they must needs either confess
the baptism of their Church to be a sign of the covenant, And so they all
from their ancestors and their whole Church are within the covenant, Or else if
they deny it, fall into the heresy of the Catabaptistes, and make themselves
also without the covenant, or else to have a covenant without seals. But now
if he will give us leave to unloose this knot, we must desire him to learn to
put a difference betwixt false Sacraments and true Sacraments, and again
betwixt false Sacraments and no Sacraments. The false Church has her hyd bread
and stolen waters her false Sacraments. Prou. 9.
The Israelites in their schism, and the Jews in their apostasy still had and
used Circumci^ion. This Circumcision was no true Sacrament unto them, neither
sealed the Lords covenant unto them in that estate. Yet was this circumcision
true circumcision concerning the outward cutting, and was upon their repentance
and return neither defaced nor reiterat, but they were restored again to the
Temple and received to the Passover, 2 Cr^^. 30
As we read in Ezechias and Iosiahs times, as also after the return out of
Babylon. In like manner in this general apostasy and defection from the Gospel
(so much foretold in CHRIST'S Testament) the baptism continued and used in
these Apostatical and false Churches cannot in this estate thus administered
etc be said a true Sacrament, or seal of Gods covenant unto them: Yet
concerning the outward washing yt is true baptism, and upon their repentance
and restoring to the Church the outward actio^ need not and ought not to be
again repeated after the abuse thereof in the false Church is purged away by
true repentance. Yet justify we not hereby any thing done in the false
Church, but call all men by all means from the same, willing their whole
worship to be repented of and left, and forbidding al men upon incurring the
Lords heavy indignation to offer and bring their children unto the false
Church to be baptized, exhorting them rather patiently to expect, and
diligently to seek out and repair unto the true Church of CHRIST, where at
the hands of Christ's true Ministers they may receive the true seals of his
covenant unto their comfortes. Yea assuring them, that whilst they refreyne
from that which they know to be evil, and with true hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience, diligently seek to do the will of God as he offreth means,
they and their seed are within the covenant of God, (...). 5,
although through the iniquity of the times they be still restreyned for a
ceason from having outward baptism, so that they neither neglect or contemn,
much less abuse and profane of heavenly an ordinance.

THus this learned Divine having (as you have heard) bestowed all his labor
and long study to prove the kingdoms of Israel and of Judah in their schism
and apostasy to be the true Church, yet to make the matter more clea^e and the
more easy for the Church of England, he will also prove her mother of Rome to
be the true Church of CHRIST, Because the Brownis^es hold that this land in the
time of Popery was not the true Church of CHRIST* and that now they are but
confuse multitudes not rightly ^ntred into covenant with God. This that he may
do, he holds it not enough to affirm with other learned Divines, That the
invisible Church of GOD is in the Papacye, as in all other places of the world;
because God has his elect there and in all other places: But he (to be
singular) inverteth the Proposition and says, That the Papacy with the whole
apostasy, and all their abominations, and all that receive the Beasts marcke
and worship his image, are in the Church, because Antichrist does sit in the
Temple of God. Thus whilst he without al understanding or fear (after his
accustomed presumption) peruerteth and wresteth the Scriptures from their holy
sense according to his own lust, no merueile though GOD give him up into a
reprobate sense, and suffer him to draw these heretical doctrines and damnable
conclusions from the same, to the destruction of himself and of as many as
receive his doctrines, If Antichrist may be said to sit, reign, and remain
in the Church of God, Hebr. 1.
Then CHRIST is not made heir and Lord of all, and set as King upon Mount
Sion. Psalm. 2.
Then CHRIST is either cast out of his house, 1. Cor. 6. 15
or made subject unto ANTICHRIST, or divides with him. Then the Church of
CHRIST may remain subject unto, and be governed by Antichrist. Then the
Church of Christ may stand under and be subject unto two heads, Ephesians. 1. 21
CHRIST and Antichrist. Then CHRIST is not the only head of the Church. If
Antichrists Ministers and marcked servants may be brought into and set over
the Church of God, Ephesians. 4.
then is not CHRIST'S Ministry which he has instituted to his Gospel and his
Romans 12.
Church, Hebr. 12. 28
permanent unto the worlds end, but variable at the will of man. Then may the
Church of God cast out Christ's Ministry, and receive Antichrists. If
Antichrists doctrines and laws may be brought, set up, and remain in the
Church, Deuteronomy. 18.
The^ Christ is not the only Prophet and Lawegiuer, Ephesians. 2. 20
Then may the Church be builte upon an other foundation then upon Gods word.
If al Antichrists abominations, heresies, idolatries may be brought into and
remain in the Church of God, Then no blasphemy, heresy, Esa. 57. 21
apostasy or any thing that man ca^ commit or devise, ca^ break the
covenant, 1 Cor. 10. 20
The^ may the Church of God and Idols be placed together. Reu. 14. 9 10.
If they that worship the Beast and his Image may be said to be in the Church
of God, and their seed outwardly within the covenant, The^ the most
abominable and execrable may be said in this Reave. 21. 8
estate members of Christ, Reu. 22. 15
washed and purged with Christ his blood, sanctified and led by his Sprit in
assurance of salvation. Romans 8.
For none can be said to be within the Church, but the members of the Church.
And whomsoever we may affirm to be within the Church, those (so long as they
continue in that estate) we are also to judge assuredly saved, for any thing
to us revealed or known to the contrary. But if al these be most devilish
heresies directly contrary to the whole truth of God, if they be most
execrable blasphemies, such as christians abhor but to hear, The^ let the
aucthors and spreaders of these doctrines tremble, for fearful judgments
remain them.

HIs sly distinction or evasion rather whereby he divides the Church of Rome
into two parts, the Pope and his adherents, And the nations under the tyranny
of the Pope, does rather bewray the thick darcknes of his heart (wherein he is
held with chains unto judgment) and his giddye amazednes, then any way clea^e
him of these heresies and blasphemies aforesaid. His first understanding of the
Church of Rome is the Pope, his laws, his worship which has been devised by
himself, his adherents and all that worship him or receive his marcke. These (he
says) are the Apostasy seduced to damnation, and not the Church of CHRIST,
otherwise then thus, that the Pope, the Cardinals, and all that worship the
Bea^t be false christians by profession, bredd in the Church and contynuing in
yt, their seed not excluded from the Covenant. What a delphick Orakle is this?
What strange repugnancie and contradiction is here betwixt every word of this
his clear Proposition? How can the Pope and his adhere^ts be said to be that
Apostasy seduced to damnation, not the Church of CHRIST, and yet by the same
mouth in the same sentence at one and the same instant be pronownced to
continue in the Church, and their seed not be excluded from the outward
covenant? Can they be said to be utterly departed from the faith, from Christ,
from his Church (which is meant by this word Apostasy) and yet to remain in
the Church? How hangs this together? May they be pronounced seduced to
damnation, and not the Church of Christ, and yet both they remain in the
Church, and their seed not to be excluded from the seal of the covenant?
There ought none to remain in the Church, but such as are by outward
profession and obedience members of the Church. 1 Cor. 7. 14
Neither ought the children of any be baptized in their infancy, except one
of their Parents be a member of the Church. The Pope then, his Cardinals and
adherents remaining in the Church, their seed thus baptized as members, seeing
none else may either remain in the Church or be baptized, How may they thus be
pronounced seduced to damnation and not to be the Church, seeing they are
confessed to be outward members of the Church?

THe second understanding of the Church of Rome, is, of al those compaines of
people over whom the tyra^nie of the Pope has hertofore extended, and does at
this day: Or those things which were given by CHRIST which remain in the
same; this (he says) is not the Church of Rome but the Church of God. If by
the people and tyranny he here mean such persons, as though their bodies were
under the cruel hands of the Pope, his Bishops, or Prelates, yet they kept
their bodies and souls undefiled with their idolatries and abominations, and
free from their antichristian yoke, counterfeite Ministry, and ministration,
and have on the other side faithfully kept and practiced the things which are
given by our Savior CHRIST in his Testament, these people indeed can at no
hand be said the Church of Rome, these are the true Church and servants of
Christ, witnessing and fighting through the faith of the Gospel against the
Pope, the Church of Rome and al their antichristian clergy and religion. But
what is this to prove the kingedome of ENGLAND, or other nations which have
been and are defiled with the idolatries and abominations of the Church of
Rome, in that estate to be the true Church of God, but rather the quite
contrary; seeing these faithful witness against them, and have no fellowship
or communion with them. The Church of Rome we read Revel. 17. to be caled that
great whore that sits upon many waters: That great Babylon the mother of
whoredoms and abominations of the earth, with whom the Kings of the earth
have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been droncke
with the wine of her fornications mingled unto them in her golden cup. Reu. 13.
We read there, verse. 15. that the waters where the whore sits are people
and multitudes and nations and tongues. We read also that the Beast and the
false Prophet shall deceive ye people of the earth, and cause the^ to set up and
worship the image of the Beast, and to slaye all that will not so do; And cause
al both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a marcke
in their right hands or in their fore-heades; And that no man might buy or
sell, save he that had the marcke of the Beast. We read further more That all
that receive the Beasts marcke that worship him or his image, Reu. 14
shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God. With what shame then ca^ this
marcked Priest go about to prove the Church of Rome to be y^ true Church of
God? Or those nations which have committed fornication with her, received her
Ministry, wares, abominations, that have received the marcke and erected the
image of the Beast, and worshipped the Beast and his image, in this time of
their poperi^, to be esteemed the true Church of CHRIST. His 3 stowte reasons
will not al prove this point. Though they held many points of true and sound
doctrine, yet the many heresies they held, and those (as this man himself in an
other place of his book confesses) Fundamental, do poison and leaven the
whole lump. There is no heretic that holds not some truth. As to their holy
Sacrament of Baptism, yt being delivered by a false ministry, after a false
manner, with new adulterate elements of salt, oil, chreame etc, with their
magical incantations and signs etc, and that to open idolators, can no way
give them christendom, as this Popish Priest supposes. Or if this Baptism in
the Popish Church be an holy Sacrament and true seal of the covenant, then
would we know of Mr. GIFFARD or his learned abettors, why their other
Sacrament of the Supper or Altar should not also be held in the same account?
Or how the Church may be said to have one true, holy, and available Sacrament
to be received, an other so blasphemous and execrable as is to be abhorred, at
the same instant? Or what kind of Covenant this is that has one true
authenticke seal, an other forged and adulterate annexed unto yt? Further also
we would know, if the baptism of the Church of ROME be a true and holy
Sacrament, why they should inhibit any from fetching the same there, and how
they dare schism from that Church that has the Covenant sealed and confirmed
unto them. His second reason of some in all kingdoms that hold the faith, is
above showed not to justify, but to condemn the Church of ROME: But all those
that had any communion with them in their worship etc in the time of Popery,
cannot in this estate be said to hold the true faith, or to be members of the
Church of CHRIST. His third reason concerning the infantes is yet as false and
fond as the rest: For neither are the infants of these idolators by us to be
judged holy, or to receive baptism, as he himself Page 49. confesses; Neither
can these infantes any way justify their wicked Parents, or the open
idolatries etc of the Romish Church.

Again, although it be most true that the truth was before error and
apostasy, yet hereupon it follows not that error and apostasy are of in the
truth, as this man would conclude of Antichrist; That because he is said to
rise in the Church of God, and to sit in the Temple of God, Therefore the place
where he now reigns and rages is the Church of God. But by all these rules
of the word of God we find the Sinagogues that Antichrist has erected to be
of the false and malignant Church, and the Church of ROME pronownced by God
himself to be that great Whore. Howsoever then Antichrist might have his
original and work in his 2 These. 2. 7.
mystery in the visible Church, yet as soon as his wickedness brake out and
was apparent, Revel. 9. 1.
he forfeited his place and was to be cast fourth, as the Angels that sinned
were precipitate out of heaven, Reu. 12. 10. 11. 12.
and cast headlong into Hell. Yea those Churches that neglected thus to do, and
spared him, in the just judgment of God lost their happy estate, became
guilty of his sin, Revel. 12. 4.
and partakers of his judgment, and fell away with him. So then this phrase of
Antichrist his sitting in The Temple of God might be much better understood,
then thus grossly to affirm thereupon that A^tichrist now sits in the Church
of God. Whether we understand this his sitting in the Temple of God, as in
regard of his original before he was reveled; Or in that he should sit where
sometimes the true Churches of CHRIST had been, Revel. 18. 7.
which he should so destroy and waste, as there should be no shape or steps
of any of them left upon the earth, as it was foretold Math. 24. 29. Revel. 6*
14. Or else of those counterfeight names and titles of the Temple and Church of
God which the false Church should arrogate and take unto her self; Howsoever,
nothing is more sure then that all these abominations cannot remain in the
Church of God. And in that it is in the same verse said that Antichrist shall be
lifted up above all caled God or that has veneration, This cannot be done by
any Minister in the Church, seeing every soul must be subject. Further also
that he should show himself that he is God. Romans 13.
If this also should be lite^ally understood, what blasphemy will not ensue.
And as well might it from the same verse be enforced, that Antichrist is God, as
that the place where he reigns is the Temple of God:

THus having finished his^ cardinal reasons of Israel in their schism, Judah in
their apostasy, and this universal falling away and corruption in the time of
Popery, to prove the Church of England as well as these the true Church of
God, he at length adds a conclusion in this authentical assertion of his
own. The Church of England in the time of Popery was a member of the
universal Church, and had not the being of a Church of CHRIST from ROME, nor
took not her beginning of being a Church by separating herself from the Romish
Sinagogue etc. If he here mean that the Lord had his secret ones chosen and
known unto himself in England in the time of Popery which were members of the
universal Church, we grant well. But what were this to approve the general
estate of England in the time of Popery when they were thoroughly infected with
the apostasy and idolatry of the Church of ROME, to be a visible member of
the universal church? So that albeit they had not their being a Church from
ROME, yet they had their not being a Church from ROME, when they were defiled
with their apostasy and idolatry. Wherefore to have this conclusion pass, yt
had been needful that Mr. GIFFARD had approved and made evident demonstration
by the Scriptures that the Church of ENGLAND was rightly gathered unto and
established in that holy faith and order which CHRIST has left unto his Church
in universal and particular according to the rules and examples in his
Testament: Then, that in time of Popery they fell not away from this holy faith
and order: And that now they continue and faithfully walk in the same faith
and order. This if he had done, then had he proved that which now he beggeth
and assumeth. Then had he powerfully convinced and stopped the mouths of al
Schismatics and gaynesayers for ever. But with all his learning and labor he
has not enterprised, neither ever is able to prove this by Christ's Testament.
The time past and estate present of their Church of England witness the
contrary unto his face, and show unto all men how dieplie yt has been and
still is infected with the Romish idolatries and apostasy from the Testament
of Christ and in what sort they have at this day cast forth the tyranny and
yoke of Antichrist with his abominations, idolatries, heresies, false Worship,
false Ministry, and false government etc. He therefore in stead of approving
his Church by the rules of Christ's Testament, strives to prove yt a true
Church though yt consist of profane multitudes never as yet rightly gathered
unto, or established in the fait^ and order of Christ, though yt have not
Christ's Ministry and Officers which he has appointed unto the Church, but
that false and ant^christian M^n^strie which the POPE erected, used, and left,
Though yt be governed not by the rules of Christ's Testament, but by the POPES
Courts, Cannons etc, and such laws as these Romish Bishopps do devise,
Though yt worship God after a Popish and most idolatrous manner, though yt
reject the truth of God and persecute all such as call them unto or stand for
the same. And this most barbarous and devilish assertion he strives to
confirm by the schism of Israel, the apostasy of Judah, and the universal
defection and corruption of Popery. Unto which our final answer is, that if
any of these 3. be justified and find mercy before the Lord, then has
their Church of England also occasion to rejoice. But if the Prophets every
where have denownced the fearful judgments of God against them, then will not
their false Prophets untempered plasters, and lying diuinations of peace, help
them in that day.

But now Mr. GIFFARD proceeds to the second part of th'assumption which he
first forged, and now refuteth in our name. Wherein he will needs make us to say
(though it never entered into our thought) That their Church of England has no
power to cast forth any by excommunication: and herein he says we speak
very falsely: For the Church of England has some power to excommunicate. We
have already showed how he has changed and falsified our reason, leaving out
and altering what he list, and taking no more of yt then he thought himself
able to deal withal. But if he had made his answer to our words as he
received them, then he should have proved that the Church of England
(especially those select congregations whose Pastors used to repel the unworthy
from the Sacraments) had the power of our Lord Jesus Christ to cast forth by
true excommunication, before he had chardged us with lies or absurdities:

FOr us we never doubted or denied that their Church of England had power to
excommunicate, eue^ that power, throne, and great authority which the Dragon
gave the Beast. Revel. 13. 2.
We take their excommunication to be the self same which was vsualy exercised
in this land in the time of Popery, do^ne by the same Officers and Courts as
the Bishop, the Archdeacon, or Commissarie, In latin in manner of a write, in
the Bishops sole name, and that not for any offense, transgression of Gods
law, or heresy, how pernicious, damnable, and detestable soever; but only for
contumacye or contempt of their Courts: As for not appearing, or not paying
such mulctes and exactions as those Birds with ^ingers enjoin and exact. Unto
all this business is neither the Parish Priest, Questmen, Sideme^, or any of the
parish caled, yt nothing concerns them. The Priest he must of force pronownce
yt, and the parish allow of yt how unjust soever yt be or disorderly done.
This is the only excommunication of the Church of England, other then this they
have not.

THis Popish thunderbolt cannot be defended or mistake^ for that holy reverend
Excommunication given by God unto and used in the Church of CHRIST against
every obstinate offender impartially and orderly, according to the rules
thereunto prescribed, the whole Church with one consent in the name and power of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST giving up such a one unto SATAN for the destruction of
the flesh, 1 Cor. 5.
that the spirit might be saved in ye day of the Lord; and this publicly in
the open church when the whole Congregation is gathered together. Neither may
such excommunicat be received again but of the whole Congregation upon his
public repentance in the assembly.

IT were needles to demonstrate the monstrous abuses of this their popish
excommunication in particular, and how contrary yt is in every point unto the
ordinance of CHRIST, seeing this may readily be done of the reader by comparing
their descriptions together: especially seeing this adversary himself dare not
undertake the defense thereof. But says, that though their excommunication does
not bind in heaven, yet yt is of force to remove from the society of their
assemblies: which proves our accusation false, because we reason about this
outward remouinge. Very good, but may this outward removing or casting out of
the Church be without the power of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, or by any other
power? Or are not such as are cast out by the power of CHRIST, bownde in
heaven? Can any other power in heaven or in hell separate any of God his
childeren from the love of CHRIST, and cut off any of CHRIST'S members from his
body? Or may the Church be subject touching these spiritual judgments and
censures to any other power or voice, then unto the power and voice of CHRIST,
execute or confirm any other judgments then the indgmentes of Christ? Or may
any mortal man thus presume into the very throne and office of CHRIST? Do not
all the Elders in the Church of God cast down their crowns before the throne
of the Lamb? Revel. 4. 10
Do not all the Saints execute and ratify all the judgments of God that are
written? Psalm. 149.
How then dare these Lucifers, these POPES rather then popish Bishopps, thus
presume to bring in this popish excommunication in place of Christ's, and
thereby in their own romish courts, name, and power, without due order or
cause, without the consent or priuity of the Congregation or any of the
Congregation, to cut off and cast out of the Church at their pleasure? Or how
dare these wicked priests pronownce these accursed antichristian
excommunications, and expel from their public exercises, prayers, and
sacraments such excommunicate? Or the parrish thus receive and ratify this
devilish proceeding? Is it to be thought that that man which either takes this
for Christ's or christian excommunication, knows what christian
excommunication is? and what it is to cut off any member of Christ? Or
thincketh he to hide the horrible tyranny and blasphemy of the Bishops, or
his own fellow Priests perfid^e and treason, in yiedling his flock unto
these greiuous wolves, or the miserable servitude and spiritual bondage of
their whole Church, that thus are held and wittingly stand under Antichrists
yoke, by caling yt an outward removing? Is it not all the exommunicatio^ their
Church has? Does it not remove from the public exercises, prayers, and
Sacraments of their Church etc? And would he make us believe that this is but
an outward removing? has the Church of Christ any other or further power the^
outwardly to remove from their fellow^hip and communion? Or may their Church
outwardly remove any by public censure from their prayers, sacraments etc,
and yet the party excommunicate be in this estate esteemed a member of Christ,
or they have any communion with him? Then, this excommunication of theirs
being found a mere popish forgerie, and presumptuous blasphemy, directly
contrary in every point to the rules and institution of Christ, cannot be
said to bind in heaven, because God ratifieth nothing there, whether it be
done by man or Angel, but what he here commands, and we do according to
the rules of his word. This then being so contrary to the word of God,
cannot be ratified in heaven, and so it is apparent not to be done in the
power of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, but in the power of Antichrist and Satan.
Their Church therefore having none other excommunication then this, cannot be
said to have the power of Christ to cast out any by true and orderly
excommunication. And seeing they do exercise this popish blasphemous
excommunication, which is not done in the power of Christ, we may justly
conclude, that their Church does cast forth Satan in the power of Satan, to
which power their whole Ministry and people stand and continue in subjection.

ANd now this aucthor not being able to justify the public excommunication
of their Church of England, seeks to withdraw us from the present question,
by moving two new questions: And from those (after his accustomed manner)
labors to confute us. Because the Assumption even as he himself with long
study had changed, contrived, and framed yt, could not yet serve his turn,
His first question is this. If the Bishop with sondrie other Ministers of the
Gospel do duly excommunicate an obstinate wicked man, is he not excommunicate
before God? We first answer, That the Bishop or the Church of England does
not excommunicat for any wickedness or crime whatsoever, be yt never so
heinous, though obstinacy be joined thereunto, as for Adultery, murder,
witchcraft etc, but only for contempt of their Courts, for not appearing, or
not paying their exactio^s. The we answer, that the Bishop never caleth any
other Ministers to this actio^ of excommunication. Further we answer, that
this Lord Bishop is no Minister of the Gospel or Church of Christ, and
therefore he has nothing to do with the excommunication of any member of the
visible Church; Neither may or will any true Ministers of the Gospel join unto
the Bishop in this business. But if they should, we say that such
excommunication is not allowed before God, because it is found contrary unto
his word. Yet this we say, (...). 9. 31
that the obstinate wicked are bound and excommunicate before God, Esa. 57. 21
whilst they continue in yt estate, albeit the Church here should neglect or
refuse to cast them out. Deuteronomy. 29. 19* 20. 21.
For the judgments of God do neither take effect by man, neither depend upon
man, or stay of man, Esa. 34. 16
but the judgments decreed are accomplished, Romans 1. 18
and the wrath of God is reveled from heaven against al impiety and
unrighteousness of men that are contentious and disobey the truth. Romans 2. 8. 9


Finally, though it were admitted (which can never be proved) that the Bishop
and these Priests were true Ministers of the Gospel, yet we say, that this
excommunication done by them in their private assembly or consistory (as
they call yt) is contrary to the rules of Christ's Testament, and unlawful. For
there we find this power committed and given unto the whole Church by our
Savior Christ, who sends al me^ to tell the Church Math. 18. 17. There we
find the execution and publishing of this, performed in and by the Church 1
Cor. 5. We find also the remitting and receiving in again of such
excommunicate to belong and to be referred unto the whole Church 2 Cor. 2. 6.
7. 8. Further we there find the judgments of God denownced against ye whole
Church, and every member of that Church, where this censure of excommunicating
the wicked is neglected and rejected 1 Cor. 5. 2. 6. To these if we add the
peculiar interest that every member has in the word, doctrine, and faith of
Christ, 1 These. 5. 14
and in all the public actions of the Church, As also the particular duties
that every member owes unto the whole Church, Mar. 13. 34 37.
together with the sondrie charges and exhortatio^s every where in the
Scriptures given them to watch, Hebr. 10. 24. 25.
to admonish, to exhort, and that not only the private members, but eue^ the
greatest officers of the Church; To marcke them diligently that cause divisions
and offenses contrary to the doctrine that they have learned, ^ Pet. 4. 10
(...).
and to avoid them. Romans 16. 17. 2 John. 10 To take heed what and whom they
hear. To hold such accursed (be they men or Angels) that preach unto the^
besides that they have received. Gal. 1. 9. To admonish Archippus. Col 4. 17.
To withdraw themselves from every brother that walks inordinately, and not
according to the tradition they have received. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. To note such as
abey not the word, and not to be co^mingled with them that they may be
ashamed. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. If their brethren sin, to rebuke them; if they
repent, to forgive them; if not, to retain their sin. Luke. 17. 3. 4. And to
proceed according to the rule Math. 18. 15. 16. 17. These particular duties
and chardges duly considered, there can be no doubt but every christian is a
King^ and Priest unto God to spy out, Reu 1. 6.
censure, and cut down sin as yt arises, Psalm. 149^
with that two edged sword that proceeds out of Christ's mouth. As also that
th'excommunication of any member belongs to the whole Congregation, the
whole body together, seeing all the members have like interest each in other
etc, Albeit the Church thus assembled be to use the help or Ministry of the
most fit member for the pronowncing of this excommunication etc.

HEre then fall to the ground those 4. false interpretations of Math. 18. 17.
Tell the Church. 1. Some understanding by the Church the Pope, who they say is
Christ's Vicare general and supreme head of the Church. 2. Others would
understand it of the Lord Archbishops grace, or of the Lord Bishops, who apart
may excommunicate and absolve for the whole church. 3. Some others there are
that understand by this word [Church] the company of Elders aparte, from, and
without the people, which company they call the Consistory, and this ought to
excommunicate etc. 4. The last sort are in a quite contrary extremity, and
these would have the people without the Elders to excommunicate, elect etc, and
that by plurality of voices.

THe two first sorts depend of one line, and build their prehemine^ce upon
the promise made to the Apostle Peter. Mat. 16. 18. 19. where the keys of the
kingdom of Heaven are given him. And upon the Apostle Paul his example, who
delivered Himeneus and Alexander unto Satan. 1 Ti^oth. 1. 20. They bring also
the commandment of Paul unto Timo^hy, To rebuke the Elders that sin openly
1. Tim. 5. ^0. and the comma^deme^t unto Titus to reject an heretic Titus 3.
10. Touching the power of the keys, we have above in the handling of the
Priests absolution showed yt, not to depend upon the dignity of men's persons
or offices, but upon the virtue and truth of God his word: from which when
Peter or the Pope himself departs, his word not only binds not, but is
liable unto reprofe, and bownd by the word: Which word is given not to Peter
only, but to the whole Church that is builte upon that rock and to every
member thereof, and has like power to bind or to loose in the mouth of the
least, as in the mouth of the greatest: For it is impossible that the word of
God should be made of none effect. As to Paul's example we suppose they can
evil show any such authenticke warrant for their Apostolic aucthority over al
Churches and persons, or such measure of grace as Paul had: and therefore we
thinck they ought quietly to remain within such laws and limits in their
calings as Paul has left order. For the commaundments given to Timothy and
Titus, they can neither prove that they executed them in such po^tifical manner
as they do, or in their own names alone. The contrary appears in the very
words of the commandments. Neither if this were so, can they show themselves
to have an E^angelistes office as they had.

THe other two sorts, the one whereof gives this power of excommunication unto
the Consistory of Elders without the people, the other unto the people by
plurality of voices without the Elders, fall into these errors and confusion in
that they know not, or at the least do not duly consider what either the
communion of Saints, or the holy order of Christ is in his Church. For if
they did they would never thus unnaturally separate the members from the
body, or divide the body into parts. The first sort of these interpret
these words Eipe^te ^cclesia. Tell the Con^is^ory, building it upon the Jews
San hedrin or Sunedrion That as the Jews in those times complained unto their
Elders in this council, and the council cast out of the Sy^^gogue such as they
judged offenders, as John. 9. 22. and 12. 42. So our Savior Math. 18. 17.
sends to this new Co^sistory, who have like power to cast out of the
Church. We may here as in a mir^our behold how far the wisest whilst they
follow their own devises, do err from the truth. Is it likely or possible
that our Savior Christ would fetch his pattern for the Elders of his Church
and th'excuting these high judgments from that corrupt degenerat Sunedrion of
the Jews, which by th'institutio^ of God was merely civil, and not or deined
for causes ecclesiastical, as appears Exodus 18* Numb 11. Deutr. 1. the
Priests bearing the chardge and having the deciding of al ecclesiastical
causes Numb. 18. Deuteronomy. 17. But this council of theirs was now mixed of the
Elders, of the People, and the Priests, and handled al causes both civil and
ecclesiastical indifferently, Mat. 26. 3. Actt. 4. 5. How unjustly and
ungodly they dealt, may appear by their handling our Savior and his Apostles
from time to time. Now as there is no likeness to collect these surmises from
that place, so is there no one circumstance in that scripture to lead thereunto,
There being taught how al Christians ought to reprove and prosecute offenses
one toward an other, al being generally comprised within this rule, to
admonish and be admonished, as well Elders as others. There is no mention of any
sending unto such Consistory of Elders as they ^eigne unto themselves, and
would erect. The Heathen and Publicane there spoken of have no reference unto,
neither give any occasion to speak of the Jewish Sunedrion. The heathen al
men know were not excommunicate or cast out, but kept out of the Temple: they
might not enter Deuteronomy. 23. The Publicanes though in civil conversation they
were abhorred of the precise Pharasies, yet were they not cast out of the
Temple being Jews or Proselites Luke 18. 10. So that our Savior there rather
teaches his Disciples by the present estate and estimation of the Heathen and
the Publicane how to walk toward th'excommunicate, by the example of the one
to avoid al spiritual communion with them as with heathens, as also by the
example of the Publicane al civil conversation as much as may be, the^ any
way there sends to this Consistory, whereof through the whole Testament of
Christ they can show no warrant. But directly contrary it were to the order,
power, and liberty of the whole Church, to the duties of every member, and to
the duties of these Elders in their offices, That they should in this manner
draw all the actions and affairs of the whole Church into their private
Consistory before themselves only. Elders were appointed for the preservation
of the order of the Church, 1 Timothy 3.
and not for the subuertion thereof: Tit. 1. 5.
for the defense of the liberty of the least, 3 Ioh. 9.
and not to pluck away the liberty of all. Elders were appointed to instruct
and to guide the Church in the word and ways of God, 2 Cor. 11. 20
and not to pluck the word of God from them into their own hands only, and
to debar them from walking in the ways that God has prescribed and
commanded. Though Elders be governors and overseers of the Church, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
yet are they servants of the Church, and not Lords over Gods heretage. 1
Cor. 12. 19
They are members of the whole body, and not the whole body. Ephesians. 4. 7. 16.
If al were one or some few members, where were the body? The body is not
one member but many, And as yt consists of many members so has yt use of
al, and may be separate from none. How unnatural then are those members which
thus separate and seclude themselves from the whole, yea rather sequester and
seclude the whole from them, and arrogate and assume the public duties and
power of the whole into their own hands, as though God had given al gifts
unto them, and they had no need of others. And thus puffed up with preeminence
of their own place and excellency of their own gifts, despise all the rest
as base, ignorant, unworthy to be in their Consistory, to have any voice of
consent or dissent there, alleging them to be tumultuous, contentious,
factious, ungoverned, ignorant, inclined to the worst etc: thus abuse they
their own gifts and deprave others. These are evil speeches and hard
reports to be given out upon the people of God, the chosen of CHRIST,
partakers of the same precious faith and glorious inheritance with themselves,
members of the same body even members of CHRIST with them, sanctified with the
same spirit and abhorring these evils wherewith they are chardged, humble and
easy to be ledd, ordered, and governed by the word of God in all things: Not
presuming to speak beyond the proportion of their faith and knowledge, Romans
12. 3.
or without necessity, or due order; which who so transgresses is publicly
reproved; So that these fitlier agree to these tumultuous assemblies where all
the profane are received as members, then unto the holy Churches of Christ
where none but the faithful are admitted or remain. Wherefore these
accsuations which are cast upon the people are rather cast upon the Church,
yea upon Christ himself, who is the aucthor of this law and commandment; who
sends to the whole Church, and commands the whole Church and not the
Consistory to excommunicate: 1 Cor. 14. 33
yet is not Christ the aucthor of disorder but of peace, 1 Cor. 11. 16.
neither have the Churches of God custom to be contentious. For the avoiding
of which disorder and contention are Elders appointed of God to instruct and
guide the Church in doing the will of God, And not to withdraw those actions
which God has commanded to be done in and by his Church publickely, into a
private Consistory, into the hands of a few: Wherein they make themselves
transgressors of the will of God, disturbers, and violaters of that holy order
which CHRIST has established in his Church, 1 Cor. 14. 24. 25.
and of that heavenly Sy^phony wherein CHRIST has contempered the whole body
together.

And now as the fault and pride of these Elders is great and intolerable of
the one side, so were it again a most monstrous confusion and high rebellion
on the other side, if the people should thus expulse and shut out their
governors and guides, those most fit members that God has given them to these
actions, from amongst them, and then decide and determine causes by pluralitye
of voices. What can be devised more barbarous and unworthy the Church of
CHRIST then this? Were not this as if the body should offer violence unto or
lay aside the eyes, and then divide yt self into factions and parts for the
business yt has to do? This balloting by suffrage or plurality of voices might
well be a custom amongst the heathen in their popular gouernmentes, but yt is
unheard of and insufferable in the Church of CHRIST, whatsoever some dream
unto themselves thereof. There all from the highest to the lowest in all actions
enquire the will of God: (...) 8. 19.
which being known, they all then walk by the same rule, Phil. 3* 16.
and with one consent do the will of God accordingly. There is no division in
that body, Phil. 2. 2. 3.
neither any thing done according to the will of man, but according to the
will of God only, all having received of and being guided by one and the same
spirit, even as God is one, and CHRIST not yea and nay. Now though all the
members have received of this spirit of God, yet have not all received in like
measure, ^ C^rinth. 12
Though all the body be light, yet is not all the body an eye. Romans 1^. 4. 5.
6.
But God that has made the body to consist of diverse members, has
distributed diverse gifts in diverse measure unto them. Some he has given
Pastors, some Teachers etc, for the help and service of the whole, which
members the whole body uses according to their gifts, office, and function.
The whole body asks instruction of their Teachers, council of their Elders
etc. The people are commanded to obey their leaders, 1 Th^s. 5. 12. 1^.
and to submit, to acknowledge, to hono^ them, and to have them in
super-aboundant love. These are of God set over the flock, Hebr. 13. 17.
to watch, to instruct, admonish, exhort, rebuke etc: 2 Timothy ^. 1. 2
yet not to pluck away the power and liberty of the whole Church, Acts. 20. 28
or to translate and assume the public actions of the whole Church into their
own hands alone, 3 John. 9.
They are men and may err: They themselves even for all their doctrines* Romans
16. 17.
and actions are subject to the censure of the Church, ^al. 1. 8. 9.
or of the least members of the Church, if in any thing they be found to err
or transgress. Col. 4. 17.
Yea if they remain obstinate, Tit 3. 10.
that Congregation whereof they remain Ministers and members is to proceed
against them and to excommunicate them as any other 2 These. 3. 14
member. For (as it has been said) the judgments of the Church are not the
judgments of men but of God, to which all the members of the Church must alike
be subject. Which judgments, as they are committed to the whole Church with
perfect rules for their manner of proceeding in every circumstance, so is the
Church hereunto to use such members as God has given and made most fit. 1 Cor.
3. 22. 23.
For Paul, Apollo, and Cephas are theirs. And this does no way diminish the
power and interest of the Church in this action, Or translate these public
affairs from the whole unto these Elders, whose counsel, direction, and
service the Church uses herein, no more then a Prince or State may be said not
to do those things whereunto they use the advice and service of their Council.

By the Church then here we understand every particular Congregation
subsisting of all the members. Every of which Congregations has equal
interest in the word, promises, judgments, and power of Christ. CHRIST has
given unto al Churches the same testament, ministry, laws, and ordinances,
with like chardge and authority to observe the same. He has given them the
same order and communion in all places, one and the same rule to walk by
toward them within the faith, as also to avoid and cast out such as depart
from the faith or walk inordina^ly. Neither has CHRIST given unto any one
Church more power or prerogative then unto al other, Or set one Church above
and over an other, otherwise then to wish and seek the good each of other and
of al, to admonish, exhort, stir up each other as occasion requires. And unto
this every member of Christ is also bound in his caling, but not to intrude
and encroach upon the public actions and duties of the whole Church, or the
particular functions and offices of others. As to Pastors and Elders, Acts. 20.
2^
their office extends but unto those flocks whereof the holy Ghost has set
the^ Overseers, 1 P^t. 5. 2.
and not unto all Churches in this manner, to which their ministry neither does
nor can extend. Again, Excommunication is no part of their ministry. Neither
has God tied it unto the office of any, but left it a public duty of the
whole Congregation to be done of al with one consent. How presumptuous then is
he yt usurps this power over, yea of other Congregatio^s to excommunicate,
absolve, elect, depose etc for them, yea that thus plucketh from them that
power and chardge which Christ has given unto them? But how monstrous and
intolerable were the pride of that Consistory which consisting but of a few
particular members, shall assume the power and duties of so many Churches into
their own hands? We are of mind that the best and learned of them shall
find their own particular offices in their own particular flocks as much as
they can well perform and dischardge, though they should not thus encroach
upon and assume the public duties of the whole Church, much less of m^nie
Churches. And sure if this Consistory should duly intend all the several
occasions, complaints, and matters of offense that howrely arise in so many
sondrie Congregations, especially where all the multitudes are received in as
members, they should do nothing else through their whole life but sit in this
Consistory, yea their whole lives would not suffice to a little part of this
chardge, where al th'offences of these multitudes both public and private were
duly admonished and prosecuted according to the commandment of God. And so
should these Pastors and Elders never be able to exercise their own ministri
and officers in those peculiar Congregatio^s where they are chosen to serve.
Again, if every Congregation should be thus posted over and sent to this
Consistory for the censuring of every pe^ticular offense and offender how
manifest soever etc, manifold inconveniences and mischieues would thereupon
ensue. As that they must be driven oft-tymes to receive and join unto the most
wicked and abominable in their prayers and sacraments; yea if the Pastor
himself should fall into some sin and heresy, they must of force suffer him
to administer until this Consistory had cast him out. Many were the reasons
and more the inconveniences that might be alleged against this presumptious
irregular Consistory* which has no grownde in the word of God, but utterly
subuerteth, destroys, and corrupts the whole order and communion of the
Churches, opens a wide gap to al licentiousnes and prophanenes of manners and
conversation, wherein if the thousand part of the heynouse faults of these
wicked multitudes, these Sodomitical christians of these times should be noted,
prosecuted, censured, they should then in one week have as few christians as
now they have many; but now by this rejecting Gods ordinance and erecting
their own devises, al sin abounds and ouer-floweth, and no sin (though
obstinatly held and persisted an) is judged to deserve this censure, Especially
here in England where they excommunicate for no sin; but as the faults above
alleged are held but bleamishes in their worship, so the greatest sins and
wickedness are held but infirmities in their life by the Prophets of these
days. But unto this their Consistory again. They that thus shall erect and
advance one particular Congregation as a Judge and a Mother over others their
Sisters, must also erect in the same Congregation or Consistory, one
particular Pastor yt must be a Judge and a Father over other Pastors his
brethren. And then let them duly consider how far this differs from, Or at
least how then they can condemn that Apostatical Sea of ROME, and that unholy
Father y^ sits therein. And let Mr. GIF. that is so well skilled in discipline
and so derideth our ignorance, now at length consider better of this reason,
Seeing every particular Congregation of Christ has the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ against all sin and transgressio^ to censure the sin, and to
excommunicate the obstinate offenders etc. And seeing these Parishes have not
this power of Christ, neither in themselves in particular, nor yet in their
Consistories as has been proved, whether this conclusion which he terms so
absurd will not follow, That they are not therefore the true churches of
Christ. And let him ye next time frame a better answer then the Geneua
Consistory, which though for the reasons abouesaid yt can yield him no help,
yet may it not be compared with the popish courts of these antichristian
Bishops:

Neither will his other kinds of excommunication in their English Romish
Synodes prove better. Our answer then unto his second question is, That the
excommuncication of an heretic after he is duly convinced and found
obstinate, belongs not to any Bishops or Elders of other Churches, but unto
that Congregation whereof this heretic stood a joined member. Although we
grant that for the discussing of matters in doubt, Acts. 15.
and the convincing of some notorious subtle heretic, the aid of other
Churches is very necessary. But the bloody procedings of these popish
Bishops that in their Consistory not only convince the heretitke after their
scholastical and vnchristia^ manner, but deliver him to the secular powers to be
burned with fire (whether the quality of the heresy deserve death or no by
the law of God, wherbie they make the magistrates together with themselves
guilty of murder) declare unto al men how unlike their popish Consistories are
to the holy, free, well ordered Synodes of christian Churches. But blessed be
God that has somewhat restrained their cruelty and hewe^ their antichristian
horns by statute here in t^is land that they cannot in that manner proceed
unto blood: howsoever, their tongues are not restrained therbie from
pronowncing that truth of Christ's Gospel (which they cannot and dare not
v^dertake to convince) heresy: and those Christians which yield not to their
antichristian yoke and enormities, Heretics.

Unto the Convocation also of these Romish Priests and horned Clergy, we
answer, That it carries no show of a christian Synod or Council; and so
their excommunication of as little value as their Sire the Popes is. Further we
answer, That Synodes and Councels were not instituted to pluck away the
power or ^o execute the public duties of the Church, but to instruct, stir
up, and confirm them in their duties, to help them to decide controversies, to
show them the rules of Gods word, and not to break them or to make new.
Moreover we say, That in a christian Synod no christian ought to be shut out,
Acts. 15.
but has equal power and freedom to speak in assent or dissent of any thing
there handled, as occasion requires. Yet ought every christian to use this
power and liberty aright, not disturbing the holy order of the Church,
presuming to speak before their auntients, or against any thing by them said,
without showing just cause etc, always keeping themselves within the compass
of faith and sobriety: Who so does otherwise is reproved of al, and judged of
al as a disturber.

NExt comes the Suspension or half communication of the Church of ENGLAND,
namely, the Priests repelling notorious offenders and the open Wicked from the
Sacrament. Mr. Siffard being demanded of us simple christians what warrant he
could show for this strange censure in the Testament of CHRIST, and what
authority the Priest there has to excommunitate any member of the Church,
if so be this Suspension were in nature of excommunication, Answeareth; that it
is in nature of excommunication to such as have been before admitted, yet not
to be compared or any thing near so great as excommunication; And for the
Minister, that he is to take heed to himself that he give not holy things to
dogs; To beware of that which may give public offense, and bring the holy
mysteries into contempt. Because these his answers do no way show or prove
that we demand, it is needful that we make a little ^urder search to seek out
the nature of this Suspension, and how near yt comes to excommunication. We
find that such as before were partakers of, are now openly repelled from the
Table of the Lord for notorious sin and wickedness by the Priest alone. Now
touching this Sacrament does not the Apostle say The Cup of blessing which we
blessed, is yt not the communion of the blood of CHRIST? The bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of CHRIST? Because we many are
one bread, one Body; for we all partake of one bread 1 Cor. 10. 16. 17. We
see here this Sacrament of the Supper to denote that communion which all that
partake thereof have with Christ as his members: And again that communion which
they have one with an other in CHRIST as one an others members. This their
suspensio^ then being a public ^emouing of notorious offenders from the
communion of Christ, and from al benefit of his death: From the communion of
the Church, and from al interest of the Saints, We would know of him what it
lacks of excommunication, and what excommunication is more? If he say that
the suspended are not repelled from the ministry of the word, and prayers of
the Church as th'excommunicate are; We would then know of him where he has
learned to receive such to the communion of the ministry or any actions of
the Church, that are repelled from al communion and fellowship with Christ and
his Church. Or how dare he undertake to offer up their prayers in this estate
unto God, whom for their notorious sin and impenitencie he has repelled from
the communion of Christ's body and blood? Thincketh he that Christ ca^ be a
Priest for any at the golden Altar to offer or receive the ince^se and
odoures of their prayers, unto whom he refuses to be a sacrifice at the brazen
Altar? Or has he not some Popish conceit of more holiness in the outward
elements of the bread and wine in this Sacrament, then there is in the
fellowship of the holy prayers and administration of Gods word in the Church?
else why should he more repel for notorious sin and wickedness from this
Sacrament, then from the communion of the prayers and ministry of the Church?
Our Savior Christ does command that when the sin is public and brought
Math 18. 17
unto the Church, ^ Cor. 5.
the^ if the offender hear not the Church but remain impenitent, ^ Timo. 5. 21
he should without delay or partiality be cut off and cast out as a withered
branche, John. 15. 6.
and be delivered unto Satan for the humbling of his flesh, that the spirit
might be saved in the day of the Lord. The parish Priest in the Church of
England insteade of excommunication does suspend such notorious wicked and
impenitent from the Table of the Lord, yet admits he them still to the
prayers and ministry of the Church in this estate, and holds them still
members as before. The Lord says that excommunication when the sin is
public and the offender obstinate, is the only remedy that we can administer
for the salvation of the party, and the preservation of the whole Church. The
Church of England says that Excommunication is to rough and severe to cut him
quite off, and cast him quite out at once, and therefore has devised this
temperate and middle course to cut him half off, and cast him half out. Is not
this to judge their own ways equal and the Lords ways unequal? Is it not to
esteem themselves more merciful, just, and wise then the Lord himself? Else
would they not say that Excommunication were to rough when the sin is
notorious, and the offender obstinate: Else would they not in place of
excommunication bring in their own devised Popish Suspension. Whereby, besides
that they control God and break his commandment in sparing, Leu 20. 4. 5
where they should smite and cut off, Nomb. 35. ^3* 34.
and in suffering, when they should cast out, they further bring the whole
Church into the co^tagion of these sins, and into the judgment and wrath of
God for the same; Ier. 3. 1
if so be it be true that is written, that a little of such leaven makes sower
the whole iumpe, 1 Corin. 5. 6
or that the wrath of God for such offenses burneth-against the whole Church.
Moreover it would be known of this discipliner this suspender, in what estate
we might esteem and hold this notorious wicked person thus suspended, whether
as a brother, or as an heathen. If a brother, how may he then be repelled from
the communion with Christ and his Church? Why should he being a member, having
made profession of his faith, and not yet excommunicate, be denied those
heavenly comforts and helpers of his faith? If he be not to be held a member,
why is he not then according to the commandment of God publickely cast out,
that al men might know how to esteem of him, and how to walk toward him? For
surely except it were the Popes purgatory we never heard of such a middle
mean estate as this* Neither ever in Christ's Testament have we read of such a
sensure as this idol suspe^sion they use. Neither, for any thing by him
alleged, can we perceive any warrant that the Priest may in this manner by
his sole authority reject any from the communion table. It follows not,
because he is to look that he give not holy things to dogs, to beware of
public offense, and that he bring not the holy mysteries into contempt, that
therefore of his sole authority he may repela^ie from the Sacrament, that has
before received yt. 1 Corin. 4. ^
The means for him to avoid offenses, to preserve his ministeri^ from
contempt, Hebr. 3. 2
is to keep the commandments of God. The Lord has commanded that when any,
that is caled a b^other, faleth into open sin, and remains obstinate and
hardened therein, so that he refuses to hear the Church, that such an offender
in open Congregation by the whole Church be cast out, delivered to Satan in
the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. No where is there in all Christ's Testament
any commandment that the Minister of his sol^ authority should reject any
from the communion of Christ and of the Church, especially in this conterfeite
manner. The way then for the ministry to avoid offense, to preserve the holy
mysteries from contempt, is to cause the Church according to the commandment
of God to reject and cast out such offenders and wicked persons: so shall he be
sure not to deliver the holy things of God unto dogs. Yea if the Church should
refuse to cast them out, then ought he to stay his ministry, and not to
communicate with other mes sins, or in this estate to execute the ministry
of Christ unto them whilst they refuse to obey Christ's voice. But instead
hereof this sacrilegious Priest and his compaignions are not afraid to
prostitute and sell the body and blood of Christ to the open profane,
notoriously wicked, skorners, and contemners, for their wage, offerings, tithes
etc; thus trampling the Son of God under their feet, and compting the blood
of the Testament a common thing. What flourish soever they may seem to make
with this their wooden dagger of suspension (which rather manifests their
folly and presumption, the^ any way clears them of this sacrilege) great
is their presumption in that they take upon the^ this absolute power over the
whole Church and over the Table of the Lord, to repel whom they list of their
own sole authority from the communion of CHRIST and of his Church, whereof
they are but Ministers and particular members in the best account, and not
Lords and sole rulers. And yet greater is their presumption in that they dare
thrust out the holy ordinance of God (namely public Excommunication) and in
place thereof set up their own devised idol suspension; which what kind of
censure it is, may appear by that which has been said. Yt has no foundation
or warrant in CHRIST'S Testament, but possesses the place of that yt is not,
namely, of ture excommunication, therefore yt must needs be that idol
instrument of that foolish shephearde, ^ach. 11.
which the Lord sets over those sheep with whom he has disanulled the
covenant.

The authority of their Portesse their seruice-booke, will no way justify
either them or yt. The abhominatio^s of that book have been a little touched,
yet is not this wretched man ashamed to stand under that monstrous idol, and
to profess that all the Ministry of England use that book in the public
prayers, and administration of and prohibition from the Sacraments. The vanity
and folly of this idol suspension most plainly appears unto al men by the
little good it does in any of these Parrishes where al prophanenes and
iniquity still abounds. The Bishop, his Chauncelor, or Commissary may with
one word of their mouth heal the greatest wound the Parrish-Priest can make
with this Suspension, whatsoever Mr. Parson say. They have power to absolve
any that he binds; and how cheap their absolutions are, is not unknown to
any whore master in all the Parrish. The Bishop has power to make and to
depose Ministers at his pleasure; he has power over the whole ministration; he
prescribes how, when, to whom they shall administer. What truth then is in
these words that the Bishop cannot take away that power which their
seruice-booke gives them, when he may absolve the party, disanul the
suspension, depose the Minister etc. In that he says the Bishop is but a
Minister and no Lord over their faith and conscience, The same will every
Popish Priest say of their sovereign Lord the POPE, to preserve the dignity
of their ministry: The POPE writes himself but the servant of the servants
of God. What Lordly authority the Bishop has and exercises, and in what
servile subjection the Priests and all the Parishes stand unto their Courts
and jurisdiction, shall hereafter more appear when we come to the discussing of
those points. In the mean while we willingly assent unto Mr. GIFFARD, that
the christian reader shall judge whether their seruice-booke be not a fit
Portesse for such Priests, and this suspension a fit tool for such worckmen.
Still affirming even with wonder that if the judgments of God were not upon
their right eye and upon their right arm, they might perceive how their Lords
the Bishops dress them, and how this weapon they allow them wants both edge
and point etc.

Thus having finished his answer to our assumption, he proceeds to a former
answer where he denied the Consequence. That where wicked profane men are
received into and retained in the bozome of the Church, there the covenant is
disanulled with them, and they are no longer Gods people, but a false
antichristian Sinagogue. To disprove this, he alleged that there were but
few true worshippers that frequented the Temple amongst multitudes of profane
and ungodly men. To this he now adds the examples of the Church at Corinth
and of the seven Churches in Asia etc. We before answered and still answer,
that there is no comparison betwixt, or Argument to be drawn from those
Churches which were rightly gathered and established, and these confused
Bibilonish Synagogues of theirs. The Israelites were a peculiar separated
people unto the Lord from the world. The people of these other Churches were
won, caled, and gathered unto CHRIST by the preaching of the Gospel, every
one entered into the Church by the voluntary profession of his own faith. No
uncircumcised or Gentile might enter into the Temple to offer any gift there.
All, nor yet the greater part of the City of Corinth, nor of these other parts
of Asia were not received into the Church as members; But here in their Church
of England all the whole land is received in, and that immediately from open
idolatry without any voluntary profession of their own faith by the people
in particular, yea without the preaching of the Gospel going before to call
them unto the faith. Therefore in these reasons he but beggeth the question, and
assumeth that which he ought to prove, Namely, That these multitudes of all the
profane and al sorts of wicked persons, were sometimes rightly gathered unto
and entered covenant with the Lord, having the true ministry and government
of CHRIST set over them, and now being fallen into some sins are not cast
out but still retained in their Church. This if he had done, then had there
been some cause y^ he might have brought against us the examples of these
Churches. Then should not we have needed to have showed him his folly twice.
Yet this if he had done (the contrary whereof is manifest to all that remember
the beginning of her Majesty's reign, or but behold the present estate in the
same, or rather in more confusion, sin being more increased) Yet then we
should easily have put difference betwixt those Churhes that amended at the
Apostles admonition, and these which reject all the rules and ordinances
ecclesiastical of CHRIST'S Testament as pernicious and intolerable to the estate
of this land, and persecute al such as admonish them of, and will not partake
with them in their idolatry and sacrilege.

WE also in our former writing showed him how the faithful servants of God in
the idolatrous days of King ACHAS, MENASSE, AMON, IEHOIAKIM etc: refrayned
from the Temple, being so polluted and defiled, and mixed not themselves with
the wicked in idolatrous worship. This Mr. GIFFARD confesses to be true, and
that it was their duty so to do. But he says we do not argue whether the
godly did join with the wicked in idolatry, but whether the wicked were
suffered and did join with the godly in true worship. To the question we have
above spoken: Only this by the way we draw from his own confession, That if
the godly in those days did well in separating from and not communicating with
the wicked in those times of public idolatry, then cannot we be blamed which
separate and withdraw our selves from these profane assemblies, where such
abominable idolatry and sacrilege is publicly used and enforced, as we have
above proved; and thus are we by him cleared and justified, Again we convince
him of his own mouth thus, If the faithful did well in those times to
withdraw* and separate themselves from the wicked in their idolatry which then
was publicly set up, Then was not the public estate of the Jews in those
times of us to be held the true Church of God. For the godly may at no time
separate from the true Church of God, nor repair unto the false Church. And
thus by himself is an end put at once to all his cauils wherbie he has
endeavored to prove the Jews in these most corrupt times to be the true
outward church of God, and to accuse us of heresy that affirm, where such
heinous transgressions are obstinatly defended and persisted in by the whole
Church, there the Covenant (unto the judgment of the faithful) is disanulled,
there the faithful may not communicate. And very ignorant is Mr. Giffard if he
thinck that the wicked and profane may either be received into the Church, or
retained in the Church as members. The wicked and profane which were never
entered into the Church, may and ought to be caled to hear the ministry of the
word of God in the Church, as the means wherbie they may be caled unto the
faith, and so upon their profession be received as members into the fellowship
and communion of the Church. But until they make open and voluntary profession
of their own faith and obedience, they cannot be received as members, or have
communion with the Church. Then until Mr. Giffard prove that the profane
multitudes and open wicked which never made any voluntary profession of their
own faith and obedience, may be received as members into the Church, he cannot
justify these Parish assemblies of England, or convince us. Further we grant,
that wicked men, such as fall away from their profession and obedience, shall
daily arise in the church, else there should be no cause of Excommunication.
But when their sin is public, then ought the Church to ce^sure it, and if
they be found obstinate, to cast them out; else were there no use of
Excommunication. We grant also, that the Church sometimes of negligence,
delaying in due time to cast out such wicked, is notwithstanding (if they
amend upon admonition) to be held the true Church of God. And this our
aduersarye himself Page 56. acknowledges that we confess, although now
forgetting himself (his heart being fraught with malice) he bursteth forth in
the gall thereof, accusing and sclandering us to hold these heresies. That where
any wicked and open sinners worship together with the Church as members of the
Church / there the Covenant is disanulled with the whole Church. Again / that
where corrupt manners break forth in those that profess the Gospel / they be
not only utterly void of faith which offend / but also all they that worship
together with them (though never so much grieved at their sins) are fallen
from the Covenant. Thirdly that we make the stablenes of Gods Covenant to
depend upon the worckes of men / and not of the free grace and mercy of God.
How could this accuser draw these heresies from this assertion? It is the
Church of CHRIST which has the power to Excommunicate though it fault much by
negligence in executing the same. Does not the express contrary herein
appear? How can he then reconcile these chardges of his unto this proposition
of ours? Or can he produce any one sentence that ever we wrote or spoke
containing such odious doctrines as these? If not, these heresies must still
return to his own throat, as to the sepulcher from whence the sprange;
these chardges must remain upon his reckoning and not upon ours.

WE hold that the open profane and wicked, such as were never caled unto the
faith, cannot be received into the Church as members, before they make open and
voluntary profession of their own faith and obedience. He that has from the
beginning distinguished light from darcknes, has always made difference and
separation betwixt the world and the Church, caling the one the Sons of God,
the other the daughters of men; preserving the one in his Arcke, drowning the
other in the floode: he chose and separated to himself out of the whole world
one peculiar Nation and people to be his visible Church, to whom no profane
which made not profession of the same faith might be admitted or joined in
their worship. The word Ecclesia, or Church, we know to be a company caled
forth from the world, as were CHRIST'S Disciples, and the faithful in all
places at the first gathering of the Church. Again we hold that such as are
duly entered into the Church falling from their profession, and after due
admonition remain obstinate and hardened in their sin, ought by the Church
to be excommunicate: And if the Church being admonished and stirred up unto
their duty refuse to obey and execute the commandment of God, that then unto
the faithful it cease to be the true Church of God, and ought to be avoided
until they repent. The Church of CHRIST must ever be obedient unto CHRIST'S
voice, which voice when they openly despise and wilfully resist, they are a
company of rebels and not a company of Saints. When they fall away from the
faith, they fall away from the Covenant of God; when they obstina^lie persist in
sin and wilfully despise Gods voice, they fall away from the faith. Faith
belieueth, reuerenceth, and obeys Gods word so far as yt is reveled unto
them, and never wilfully despises or rejects any any part of the same. God
can never be severed from his word; they that despise and reject Gods word,
despise and reject God himself. Christ rules and reigns by the scepter of
his own word, they that are not subject unto, but wilfully disobey that word,
are not subject unto Christ, have not him a King, but a Judge over them.
Severe laws and judgments are set down in God his word against presumptuous
sin, yea against al sin whereof they deny to repent. God has executed
these judgments upon the Angels that sinned, upon the original world, upon the
Nation of the Jews: Neither will any vain titles of Church, Covenant etc.
excuse or deliver them (being found in the like transgressions) from the like
judgments. God is just, and his judgments are alike pronounced and executed
against al, as against one, being found and wilfully remaining in the
transgression of his law. Now then vvhilest we conclude, that where the
people were never rightly caled unto the faith or gathered unto CHRIST, and
orderly joined together in Christ, But multitudes of profane and al sorts of
wicked persons, idolators, Atheists etc, even the whole land without any
choice, any separation, received into their Church as members, without any
voluntary profession of their own faith, that in this estate they cannot be
esteemed the true planted Churches of CHRIST, With what conscience or truth can
this ungodly man herevpo^ defame and divulge us to hold this heresy, that
where corrupt manners break forth in those that profess the gospel / they be
not only void of faith which offend / but all they also which worship together
with them (though never so much grieved at their sins) are falen from the
Covenant. How can he liken these rowtes of profane Atheists and wicked persons
of the world to the faithful servants of CHRIST in his Church, or compare
their open wickedness (which they commit even with greedines) to the faults and
eskapes of frailety or negligence in ye Saints? Again whilst we affirm,
That where open obstinacy is joined unto public sin, whether yt be in the
whole Congregation or in any particular member, there that Congregation or that
member cannot by us be judged faithful or within the outward Covenant until
they repent, with what fear of God or shame of men ca^ this man publish us to
hold, that where any open gross sin is committed by any / and they still
through ignorance or negligence are suffered in the Church / there the Covenant
to be disanulled with the whole Church: And so we to fall into this heresy. To
make the stablenes of God his Covenant not to depend upon mercy and free grace
promised and bownde with an oathe / but upon our worckes / yea upon the worckes
of other whom we must judge.

THis heresy after he himself has devised in our name, he proceeds to
confute yt with many words, showing the stability of Gods promises, the
greatness of Gods mercy, that remembers his Covenant in his greatest
indignation and wrath, as also the small beginnings and daily growth and
proceadings of our sanctification in this life. As though we ever doubt or
denied that the Lord our God his covenant was made, established, and preserved
unto us in his CHRIST only without any worckes or merit in us, present or to
come, to deserve or to retain his favor the least minute. Alas our miserable
and forlorn estate even from our Mothers womb before we know the Lord, yea
our contynual transgressions and defections ever since we knew the Lord (when
we behold our lives in that sparckling glass of his law) do show us that we
are not saved be worckes, but by the free grace and mercy of God through faith
in CHRIST, and that not of our selves, but by the gift of God whose work we
are, created in CHRIST JESUS unto good worckes which God has fore-ordayned yt
we should walk in them. But now whilst we acknowledge the whole work of our
salvation from the beginning to the end, to be of God and not of our selves,
to proceed from and to be established upon his free grace, mere mercy, and
love, and not from or upon any goodness in us foreseen or subsequent: Yet make
we not thereby the grace of God and his holy spirit which he has given to al
his elect, to be idle, vain, or fruictlesse in any of them, but to regenerate,
change, enlighten and sanctify them, to bring all their affections into, and
to keep them in the love and obedience of the truth. By the profession of
which truth they are known and received as members of the visible Church, made
partakers of the commune comfortes and covenant of the Saints. From which
profession when they fall away, and will not be reduced by the voice of the
Church or renewed by repentance, but remain obstinate and hardened in their
sins, then are they by the commandment and power of CHRIST to be cut off as
withered branches, to be cast out from the fellowship of the saints, and all
interest in CHRIST, to be delivered unto Satan etc. The same rules, faith,
salvation, judgments we have above showed to belong unto al and unto every
one, unto al as unto one being found in the same faith, or in the same
transgressions. Now then whilst the whole Congregation or any member thereof
shall remain hardened in sin, deni^ng to obey Christ's voice, refusing to
repent, who can say that this Church or man in this estate, can by us (which
judge and see but according to the rules of the word) be affirmed and held the
true Church of Christ within the outward Covenant, when Christ himself
commands us to deliver them up to Satan in his name, to have no fellowship
with them? This cannot be do^ne of us unto any, whom we may affirm within the
outward covenant. God his secret election and councels wherein he has
determined from before al worlds who shall be saved, how far the faithful shall be
tried and fall, and when he will raise them again, belo^ge not unto us to judge
of. Deu. 29. 29
Onley this is most sure, they yt thus fall away and are hardened, are not of us
to be held and esteemed within the outward Covenant, or received, until they
as publicly repent. How the^ can this wicked scla^de^er draw this graceless
collection and damnable co^clusio^ from this holy doctrine, That where
obstinacy is joined unto public sin, there the outward Covenant is broken,
no communion to be held until repentance, be made, Therefore we hold that the
stablenes of Gods Covenant with his Church depends upon the worcked of me^.
Because we say that God sanctifies all that he saves, Therefore we hold
salvation by works. Because we hold that faith which is without fruictes to be
dead and worthles, Therefore we hold salvation by works. Because God
requires obedience of al his servants that enter into or remain in his house,
and commands them to have no ^ellowship with any, longer then they co^tynue
in the same faith and obedience, Therefore we make the stablenes of Gods
Covenant to depe^de upon our works, yea upon the works of others whom we must
judge. What heretic or perverted spirit could more highly abuse and deface
the holy doctrines of Christ? Is Mr. Giffard a teacher of the Church of
England, and cannot yet put difference betwixt the work of our salvation by
Christ for us, and the work of Gods holy spirit, the fruicts of Gods grace in
us? That cannot put difference betwixt obedience and mercy, but that he will
make ye worck of Gods grace to abrogate Gods grace? That cannot discern
betwixt the secret election of God and Christ's visible Church? betwixt the
temporary judgments of Christ's Church according to the rule of Gods word, and
the final doom of God in his determinate council? Thus not knowing what either
Gods Covenant, Christ's Church, the communion, or excommunio^ thereof means,
this impious man upon these dotages seeks to convince us of his surmized
heresies, because we blame and forsake these Babilonish confuse assemblies,
where al sorts of profane and wicked are gathered together without faith or
order, bownde, sed, and suffered together in all impiety, mischief, and
licentiousnes, without censure or controlement, unto whom he for the wage of
Balaam is powered forth, and most sacrilegiously sells them his pretended
Sacraments for their two penny shot or offering.

HE labors to defend this sacrilege and confusion by the examples of other
Churches under the Law and under the Gospel. He begins with the estate of
the Church under Moses, where the rebellious Israelites whose carkases fell in
the wilderness, of whom the Lord swear that they should not see his rest; yet
were not cast out of the assembly nor separated, so long as they lived, nor
their seed rejected. So that he still bear in mind that he but beggeth the
question so often as he compares these confuse profane assemblies (that were
never rightly gathered unto nor established in the faith) unto true Churches,
unto this place we answer. That he most ignorantly and boldly affirms an
untruth. We read Exodus 33. after the Israelites had made their Calf and
committed idolatry, that Moses both did execution upon the chief Idolators,
and with-drewe his tent, and separated from the rest until they were reconciled
unto the Lord. Further we read that upon public notorious transgressions the
Lord executed public judgments sondrie times, whereby the chief were taken
away, the rest brought to repentance Numb. 12. and 14. 39. and 25. and 21. 6.
7. We read of separation from those of Corathes conspiracy etc Numb. 16. 21.
24. 26. verses. We read also Numb. 12. that Miriam was separated out of the
host until she was healed. Likewise we read of sondrie particular judgments
for particular transgressions. As for breaking the Sabbath, for blaspheming etc
Number. 15. Whereby his impudency is convinced. But now if it were granted him
(then which nothing can be more untrue) that these multitudes of profane
rebels were not separated out of the host, yet except he can prove that they
were received during these sins unto the Tabernacle of the Congregation
(which he can never show, because it were so directly against those laws
prescribed unto and by Moses) yt can help him nothing. The wicked may remain
in the common wealth, which yet ought to be cast out of the Church. In that he
alleges the seed of the wicked were not rejected; we first answer, that we
find an outward repentance made by the offenders in the places above recited.
Further we find that circumcision ceased all the time they traveyled in the
wilderness until they came to Gilgal. 40. years. Josh. 5. Wherefore this
example nothing helps their wilful sacrilege in the Church of England. As to
the other times when idolatry was publicly set up by the kings of Judah;
Ahas, Manasses, Amon, Iehoiachim, Zedechiab we have already proved that they
were not in that estate the true visible Church of God, Isa. 59.
and that those faithful amongst whom the Lord preserved his Church; Ezekiel. 8.
neither might neither did communicate with them in their public worship and
idolatry: Ier. 7.
Which those places of Isay, Ieremias, and Ezechiel do evidently prove both in
manifesting the sins of those times, and taking away all vain titles and
pretextes; showing that the name of Temple, Covenant, Jerusalem etc could no
more aualye them, then the Arck at Shilo and the like titles did them in the
time of the Judges. The Prophet Jeremiah in his lamentations does no where
justify their public estate so much as every where lament the desolation of
Sion, which name may much rather be understood of the former prerogatives and
dignity of that nation, place, and people which were chosen and separated to
the Lords service and worship, then of that most corrupt estate of that sinful
generation. As to the times after their return out of captivity when they
mixed themselves with the heathen and brake the Sabbath, we read they made
notable repentance when they were admonished Ezra. 10. Nohem. 9. and 13. So
that these times very evil fit Mr. Giffard.

Fvrder if we come to the time that our Savior was exhibited in the flesh,
^uk. 1. 6. and 2. 25.
we read at the time of his birth of sundry just and holy men both Priests
and others, and how al things were performed by them according to the law of
the Lord. But afterward when they would not be instructed nor reformed by
our Savior Christ, but with one consent despised, blasphemed, rejected, and
persecuted him, and all that believed on him; Then were they not the true
Church of God, but the persecuting and malignant Synagogue; Except Mr. GIFFARD
hold not our Savior Christ and his Disciples the true Church: Or that there
may be two true Churches one opposite unto an other, ledd by two diverse and
contrary spirits: Or that God may be divided from Christ: Or the Church in
Covenant with him without Christ. Also in that he affirms, That our Savior
Christ commanded his Disciples to worship together with them in this estate, to
hear the Scribes and Pharasies teach and expound the law, although they
taught corruptly and leauened the doctrines thereof, though they were
hypocrites, blind guides, covetous, and ambitious, and very reprobates, yea
though some of them were not of the tribe of LEVI, only because they were
Ministers and sat in MOSES chair. What execrable heresies and horrible
blasphemies does this wretched man run into, whilst he seeks to justify
their heinous sacrilege, open idolatry, and confusion by our Savior Christ's
example? Does he not hereby make our Savior Christ guilty of the open breach
of Gods laws, and the destruction of all the people? Does not God in as many
places as he commands to hear true Prophets, forbid to hear false Prophets,
as he commands to obey his law and commandments, forbid all humane devises
and traditions? Is there not a prescript law Deuteronomy. 13. That they ought not to
hearken to the words of that Prophet that teaches other doctrine and seeks
to seduce, though he had the power to do miracles and work wonders? Does not
SOLOMON by the holy Ghost command all the children of the truth not to hearken
to the instruction that causes to err from the words of knowledge. Prou. 19.
27? And again in the first Chap. of his Song, is not the Church councelled by
Christ himself not to stay in the steps of that flock, but to feed her
kiddes above the tents of those Shepheardes? How plentiful are all the
Prophets in this argument Jeremy 23. Ezech. 13. zecha. 13. To which concord
all the Doctrines of the new Testament. Math. 7. 15. and 15 14. and 16. 6.
John. 10. 5. Romans 16. 17. Gal. 1. 8. 1 Timothy 6. 3. 2. John. 10. 2 Peter. 2.
(...).
Was there not also express laws that the Priests which draw near unto the
Lord should be holy, and not such open reprobates as he now acknowledges
these to be? And also that the Lord had only separated and chosen to himself
the tribe of Leui to serve and administer before him in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, N^mb 3. and 18.
and that no stranger might presume into that office? yet is not this blind
guide afraid to affirm, That the Pharasies not being of the tribe of Leui
were Ministers, and sat in the chair of MOSES, and therefore our Savior
commands his Disciples to hear them, were they never so wicked of life or
corrupt teachers. Math. 23. In which place our Savior having to deal with the
persons of the corrupt teachers, first seeks to reserve the dignity of his
Fathers law and ministry; then shows these present teachers to be
degenerate from both, being fallen into all manner of vice, pride, vayne-glorie,
hypocricie, sects, schisms, calling them false teachers and corruptours of
the law, blind guides, such as shut up the kingdom of heaven before men,
neither entering in themselves, nor suffering them that would; deuowring widows
houses, cunning seducers, making their proselytes the children of Hell like
themselves; Killers and murderers of the servants of God that are sent unto
them; so that in conclusion he there leaves sondrie woes, all the blood of
the righteous, and eue^ the Maranatha upon them. Now, is yt likely, or may it
without blasphemy be thought that our blessed Savior CHRIST would commit his
Fathers Law and Ministry unto these wretches, or the souls of his dear
Disciples to be instructed and kept by these murderous blind guides? yet these
blasphemies does this wicked man publish, his Ordinary and all the Clergy of
England allow and suffer to pass in print. Again if the Disciples in that
place be commanded to hear the Ministry of the Pharasies, then are they
there commanded to observe all the humane devises and traditions so contrary
to the law of God, which they most zealouslie taught and enjoined, which our
Savior himself openly brake and rejected; and gave often warning unto his
Disciples or them and such like false Prophets, commanding them to take heed
of them, teaching them how to know them by their fruictes. Math. 7. 15. 16
willing them to let them alone as the blind l^aders of the blind, using an
argument of the inevitable peril. If the blind lead the blind both shall fall
into the ditch. Math. 15. 12. 13. 14. chardging them to beware of the leaven of
the Pharasies Math. 16. 6. which leaven verse 12. they found to be the doctrine
of the Pharasies. To these if sondrie other places of his conflictes with these
Scribes and Pharasies be added, it will evidently appear that he withdrewe his
Disciples from their doctrines, pronouncing every where woes and judgments
against them.

That he made also a separation and especial choice of his Disciples from the
wicked people of the Jews, evidently appears by the office and ministry of
John the Baptist. whom he sent as an Heralde before him to prepare his way,
to proclaim his kingdom, to call the people to repentance, and to make ready
a people to receive him, lest when he came he should smite the earth with
cursing. Mightily did John refute all these vain arguments and allagations
that Giffard alleges of the seed of Abraham, the outward Covenant, Nation,
Temple etc. Showing them that God was able of stones to raise up children unto
Abraham; calling those boasting Pharasies the generation of vipers, showing
them that only those trees that bring forth good fruicte are the plants that
shall stand and grow in the Lords Orchard, that the other shall be hewn down
and cast into the fire, and that the Lords axe is now laid to the root:
Showing them that the Messiah of whom they boasted and whom they looked for,
should come with his fan in his hand to cle^se his barn floor, to preserve
his wheat in his granarie, and to burn the chafe with unquenchable fire,
baptising none but such as confessed their sins. The same course took our
Savior CHRIST, sending forth his disciples to preach the gospel of the
kingdom, who received and baptized none but such as repented of their evil
life, and gave obedience to their doctrine: these our Savior acknowledged,
received, taught, instructed, guided as his own peculiar flock. zech. 11.
But all the other (as the sheep of destruction) he gave over to be spoiled and
devoured of their own rulers, and one of an other, to be guided by those
wicked and idol sheepheardes whose soul abhorred him, and his soul loathed
them. Yea how full a separation there was betwixt these sheepheardes and these
flocks, the hostility they showed unto our Savior and his Disciples by
excommunicating, persecuting, blaspheming him, and his round reproving them,
every where in the history of his life does appear. Further that he
communicated not with them in their feasts, offerings, and worship in this
their sin and obstinacy, appears as plentifully. He a long season when
the Jews laid wait to kill him refrayned Judea and Jerusalem. At other times
when he came thither, it was not to keep the feasts together with them, so
much as to take occasion upon such concurse of people to instruct them, and to
call them unto himself. He sometimes went not at all, sometimes went at the
mid-feast, And when he was there he kept not the Paschal together with them
before the Temple according to the law Deutronomie. 12. 5. Leuit. 17. But he
kept yt apart with his Disciples in a private chamber: As when there was no
public assemblies, as in Egypt, or when the Temple was shut or polluted, and
the worship corrupted Exodus 12. 2 Chronicles. 35. yea he kept yt upon an other
day, namely upon the 14. of the first month according to the law, and not
upon that day the Jews kept theirs, which was a day after, as appears
evidently by the history. Math. 26. For the Jews solemn feast or cessation
ought by the law to have been upon the 15. day, the next day after the
Paschal, upon which day they crucified our Savior, and kept their feast upon
the Sabbath, deferring the Paschal by their tradition one day longer then the
law commanded: Leuit. 2. 4. 5. 6. Numb. 28. 17. by all which reasons,
circumstances, and places, it is evident that our Savior and his Disciples did
not communicate with, but withdrewe from the Jews and their worship in this
their sin and obstinacy. By whose example this great Clearke Mr. GIFFARD
has endeavored to confute the Brownistes of heresy, and to prove that the
open wicked and profane may be kept in the Church and communicated with, and
yet neither the Church therefore cease to be a true Church, nor the faithful
which together with these profane join in the worship of God and the
Sacraments, be defiled therbie.

Yet to make the matter more sure, he brings certain Churches planted by the
Apostles, As the Church at Corinth, and the Churches of Asia. In the Church of
Corinth were factions and schisms, corruption in the teachers, negligence in
the Governors, the incestuous person suffered, contentions among the people and
that under heathen Judges; They feasted in idol temple, they profaned the
Supper of the Lord, they abused spiritual gifts, some denied the
resurrection of the dead; yet the holy Ghost vouchsaueth them the name of the
Church of God. Well, what of all this? Therefore the wicked profane multitudes
which were never rightly gathered to the faith, may be received as members into
the Church. We see no such consequent. The Church of Corinth was orderly
gathered by the Apostle unto the faith, none received but such as believed and
made open profession of their faith and obedience, Saints by calling. Again
the Church of Corinth was rightly established into that order, and had such
Ministers, Officers, and ordinances, as CHRIST in his Testament had assigned
and the Appostle instituted: so has not the Church of England, but popish and
antichristian, Therefore no comparison thus far forth betwixt the Church of
Corinth and the Church of England. Neither can these faults wherein he
compares the Church of England to the church of Corinth, and wherein it is
found like unto, or rather far without all comparison to exceed them, make
the Church of England the true Church of God. What is yt then this learned man
would conclude from thence? That the open profane and obstinate wicked may be
retained in and by the Church, wittingly and willingly after admonition, and
yet that Congregation not cease to be the true Church of CHRIST. This he
strives to prove; And therefore where it is alleged that the Church of
Corinth repented at the Apostle his admonition, and is by the Apostle himself
said to have showed them selves pure in that business. 2. Corinthians. 7. he makes
unto this a double answer. One, that they were Gods true Church before they
repented; The other, that all did not show repentance as appears. 2. Corinthians. 12. 20. 21. To the first we answer and never denied, That they being
rightly gathered unto the faith and orderly established in the faith
(notwithstanding that grievous sins brake out amongst them) so long as they
despised not admonition and refused not to repent, were to be still held and
esteemed as the true Church of CHRIST, who if we confess our sins is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
iniquity. But as we have often said, this makes against Mr. GIFFARD, because
the Church of ENGLAND was no such true Church before that and wherein these
faults were and are committed. Unto his second allegation, that all showed not
repentance for the uncleanness, fornication, and vvantonnes which they had
committed; We acknowledge it as the Apostle records it to be a great fault in
the whole Church, That they did not more diligently search out the sin, and
speedely cast out the sinners that remained impenitent. Yet was this in the
Church but a fault of negligence, and not of any obstinacye; they neither
contemnded admonition, neither spurned against their admoni^hers. Yet even this
slacknes and negligence the Apostle thus sharply and severely reproves,
threatening (if they amend not) to come with a rod, and with the power of
CHRIST against them. He neither justified nor flattered them in their sins,
as this false Prophet does, who has no better arguments to plead for o^
justify this apostasy and obstinacy of the Church of England, then the
greatest sins and odious faults of other Churches. But to such a height and
measure is their wickedness increased, as all the sins of all Churches in all
ages are too narrow to cover the bed of their fornication etc; Neither can
those fearful breaches and lamentable ruins in the Churches of Asia heal
the wound of the Church of England. If God so threatened or menaced those
Churches to come and feight against them, to remove their candle-sticke etc,
what shall be the judgments of the Church of England? what can she expect,
whose sins so far exceed, which takes boldness to continue in sin, and
plead for the same from these examples which the Lord has left as monumentes
of terror to all posterities. Yet in all these desolations of these Churches
can there be no comparison betwixt these barbarous confuse assemblies, and
those Churches which sometimes were rightly gathered and established unto the
faith, and into the order of CHRIST: and so all Mr. GIFFARDS labor and pains
herein is lost. Neither will this conclusion follow, That because yt cease
not to be a Church by and by where the open wicked are not separated (because
the Church sometimes may fall into such sins of ignorance or of negligence)
Therefore the godly are not defiled which communicate with these open wicked in
prayers, sacraments, and other spiritual exercises. Might he not as well
conclude, that because yt cease not to be a Church hereupon, therefore yt is
no sin. But if yt be a sin in the whole Church, then is the whole Church
guilty of and defiled with that sin.

Now as Mr. GIFFARD labors to draw this conclusion, so strives he to
prove this proposition, That the admission of the open wicked and impenitent
to the table of the Lord does not defile either the Sacrament or the faithful
receivers. Hereunto he has gathered a few stale reasons. 1. As that the
wickedness of the Minister does not difile the holy things of God: Judas, Ely
his Sons, the Scribes and Pharasies were wicked me^, yet were the things
they administered holy. 2. Then that the godly communicant touches not the
sins of others, but the holy things of God; because there cannot be a
separation from the wicked in body or bodily things always: but they which
touch not their sins obey the commandment Come out from among them,
separate your selves and touch none unclean thing. That the blame of
receiving such wicked rests only upon such as have the power of the
discipline in their hands, and not upon private members which mourn and
lament to see such foul matters wincked at, which mourners are cleared Ezech.
9.

TO discuse these points in particular would make this discourse over long,
breiflie therefore this we say. To the first, that difference must be put
betwixt hypocrites (whose wickedness is only known unto the Lord) and such
wicked, whose sin is known unto the Church. The public ministry of secret
hypocrites that are rightly caled to a lawful office, and execute their office
without fault or blame, is holy, blessed, and profitable to the whole Church
(which can but look upon and judge the outward action and estate, and not the
heart and conscience of any) yet this their ministry is vnavayleable to
themselves, and makes to their own greater condemnation. But where the
Minister is detected of, and remains obstinate in any transgression, his
ministration is not acceptable to the Lord, neither ought to be suffered or
joined unto of the Church. The Lord willbe sanctified of all that come near
unto him. Under the law he required an holy ministry to serve in the
priests office without outward main or bleamish, lest he defiled the holy
things of the Lord; The offerings of any other were not acceptable to the
Lord. It is also written that the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination
to the Lord, as if they cut off a dogs head, or offered swynes blood. They
have naught to do to declare the Lords ordinances that hate to be reformed,
and cast his word behind them. The Church ought not only to forbid such to
administer, but to cast them out of the fellowship, which if the Church neglect
and refuse to do, them are they guilty of the open or wilful breach of Gods
holy ordinances in suffering his holy name and ministry to be profaned, yea
in joining thereunto and rejoicing therein. The examples by him alleged no way
help him. Judas whilst he remained with our Savior was an hypocrite, his
sins vndiscoured, yea vncommitted, so long in that estate his public
ministry was lawful, holy, and acceptable unto others. The ministry of the
Sons of Eli (after their wickedness was public) wea abominable unto God, to
be detested of all the faithful: yet was the sin of the people very great,
who upon and for the sins of these wicked prestes abhorred the offringes of
the Lord, which were ever to be esteemed most holy, being lawfully
administered, otherwise they are not the offerings of the Lord. The people then
(as now) grew into Atheism and all impiety, abhorring all Gods worship, and
refusing to be at any chardge, loving the creatures better then the Creator by
seeing the great insolency and inreverence of the prestes. Touching the Scribes
and Pharasies we have already said enoughe.

TO his other allegations, that the faithful are not defiled by communicating
with the open and obstinate wicked in the Supper of the Lord and other
spiritual exercises, because they touch not the sin of the wicked but the
holy things of God etc Surely this is very odd divinity, contrary to all the grounds of scripture that we have read of. We had thought that all the
communicantes at the Lords Table had been joined and commingled together into
one spiritual body even into CHRIST, as many grapes are there bruzed into one
cup, many graynes into one loaf. Further we had thought yt no obstinate
offender whose sin is publicly known, might have been admitted to that
holy Table without wilful sacrilege and high profanation of those holy
mysteries, both in all the Communicantes and in the Minister. Leu. 11. 12. 13.
14. 15. 21. 22
We read in the law plentifully* That the leprous or polluted person
defiled whatsoever touched him, whether person, vessel, holy or civil etc,
and that such person on vessel etc remained unholy therebie, Chapters.
until they were cleansed according to the law. The Prophet Haggai confirms
the same and says, Hag. 2. 12. 13. 14. 15 verse.
that whatsoever holy thing, bread, wine, or oil, a polluted person touches,
yt is made therbie unclean. The Apostle also shows in express words, That
as a little leaven leaueneth the whole lump, so one open unworthy received to
the supper of the Lord makes all the communicantes ^. Corinth. 5. 6. 7. 8.
guilty, and their rejoicing or feast not good before the Lord, likening the
whole Church to the lump, the wicked person and sins kept amongst them to
the leaven, their rejoicing to the eating of the Paschal etc: Which most direct
place this ignorant sacrilegious Priest would put away and falsify by likening
this rejoicing here spoken of to a glorying in the sin of the incestuous, as
though the Church of Corinth had ever been so beastly. And by endeavoring to
separate the elements of the bread and wine in this Sacrament from their
mystical sense, the communicantes that receive the same together, from their
spiritual communion they have one with an other, the whole Church from the
preparation and care they ought to have both generally and perticularly in
administering and receiving the Sacraments, And having thus royled the pure
fountaynes, he confowndeth the sense and distinct doctrines of the Apostle, by
bringing in certain instances where the wife, servant, passenger, upon some
especial duties and necessities, may be occasion eat ordinary bread with the
excommunicate. Whereupon he concludes, that the faithful also may upon
necessity (as if the Church will not cast out the open wicked and impenitent)
communicate with them in the supper of the Lord. And if so be these faithful
mourn and are grieved for this wilful sacrilege of the Minister and the rest
of the Church, then they touch not their sin, but the holy things of God,
and are clear Ezechell. 9. because the separation from the wicked cannot
always be in body, as in the cases by him alleged of eating common bread
with them. But let this cauiller know that there is no comparison, much-lesse
any consequence, betwixt the eating common bread, and the eating of the
Supper of the Lord with the open wicked and impenitent. There is no such
spiritual mystery, communion, or commixture in the first, as in the second.
Common bread is not forbidden the wicked, but these holy pledges utterly are,
they ought not to be cast to hogs and dogs. Neither are we forbidden al
civil conversation so absolutely with them, as we are all spiritual
communion. In the one we see provision and exception made for duty and
necessity. In the other there is no such duty or necessity, neither any
such provision and exception mentioned in the Scripture, until these Priests
to defend their port-sale and open sacrilege devised these shifts. The
scripture utterly forbids and repulseth the open wicked and impenitent from
this holy banquet by more then the Cherubins shaking the edge of a sword. So
far are the open wicked from being admitted to this feast, as they are to be
cast out, to be delivered unto Satan, so far are they to be kept from all
communion with CHRIST and with his Church. But none are to be admitted to this
Sacrament, but such as outwardly stand in the faith, and thereby (unto the
judgment of the Church) have fellowship with CHRIST and his members. The very
action or Symbol yt self shows this communion with CHRIST, and one with an
other. 1. Corinthians* 10. 16. and 12. 13. No sophistry can disioyne the mystery
or signification from the outward elements and action, neither the communion
from the participation in this action, so far as we may judge. 1. Cor. 11.
As the unworthy receivers are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord,
so the Church in admitting, administering unto, and communicating with them, is
guilty of most high sacrilege and profanation of the holy things of God,
especially they doing it wilfully and wittinglie. Now then if they all
communicate in this action, and this action delivered in this manner be
sacrilege, how should they not all be guilty? Can any man here say that any
of the Communicantes in this case touches not the sin, but the holy things
of God, when first in this action they are all spirituallie commingled and
joined together, then the very action which they all do (as they do it) is
most high sacrilege not a touching but an open, (if not a vvilfull)
profanation of the holy things of God? Can the authority of the Church
excuse them before God? Or vvil it here excuse them to say they cannot do
with it, because the power of the discipline is not in their hands? We have
above showed that every member has interest in the power of the Church* And
that the power to receive in and to cast out belongs to the whole Church,
and not to the Presbiterie or any particular member of the Church only:
Neither yet these matters referred to the will or choice of the Church, but
rules prescribed the^ whom and when to receive, whom and when to cast out.
As upon public profession of faith and obedience with desire of joining, the
Church cannot refuse but must receive, so upon public sin and obstinacy
joined to the same, the Church must then cast out, and cannot retain without
sin: Which sin becomes so much the more heinous when they do it
wittinglie and willingly, but most of al when obstinacy is added, when the
Church will not be admonished, neither amend. Though every private member
cannot excommunicate or reform the public actions of the Church, which are
done contrary to the word, yet every private member may and ought to
refrain such public actions, as they see to be contrary to the word, and to
admonish the Church etc. And in so doing they depart not from the Church,
neither withdraw from the Communion, so much as preserve the Church and the
communion: Our fellowship must always be in the faith, out of the faith we
may have no communion with man or Angel in known sin. They that depart from
the faith depart from the Church, and break the communion. We may not follow
a multitude or the mighty in evil. It behooves every christian that receives
to know what the action is he does, to know what he receives and how he
receives, to know by whom and with whom he receives. We say not now (as some
in the idleness of their conceit conjecture) that we ought to examine and judge
every one that communicates: No it suffices us if they by outward profession
stand still members, and remain not convict and impenitent in any open sin
known to them and to the congr^gation. They must know that the Minister that
delivers is according to the outward rules (so far as they may judge) a
lawful Minister of the Gospel, and that the communicantes by outward profession
(so far as they can judge) stand in the faith; Else can they not discern what
the communion of the Church or the action they do, is. It will not suffice or
excuse them to say they mourn and are grieved for the sins of the wicked
with whom they communicate, and for the sin of them that should put them from
the Sacrament, yea cast them out of the Church, and deliver them over unto
Satan, for the humbling their flesh, and the preservation of others from the
contagion of their sin, yea of the whole Church from the wrath of God. How
should they be said to mourn for the sin of these wicked, with whom they
feast and rejoice in this heavenly banquet? From whence al sorrow, and grief,
and fear, and despair or doubt are banished, al tears wiped from their eyes,
they being by this Symbol received to the communion of Christ's body and of
all the joys which he possesses, has prepared and reserved for all those for
whom he died etc, against whom lays no accusation, no condemnation, no
imputation of sin. Again, the mourners he speaks of which were marcked by
the Angel Ezech. 9. did not only mourn but cry out against the sin of the
time, yea they refrayned the public worship and the Temple which was so wholly
polluted and profaned, as is described in the 8. Chapter of the same
proph^cie, the fierce wrath of God powered forth upon the whole City and
Sanctuary Chap. 9. The glory of God utterly departed from the Temple and
City Chap. 11. But how should these that communicate and are commingled with
these open wicked and unworthy, and participate and join in the sin and
sacrilege of the ministry which they see and acknowledge, be said of those
marcked mou^ners which refrayned and cried out against the abominations of the
time? Or how should these e^kape the vengeance of the destroyer? The seal of
God wherewith al CHRIST'S servants are marcked and known, is, That they that
name the name GOD depart from iniquity. 2. Timoth. 2. 19. Revel. 14. They may
not communicate with the sins of others, nor be drawn into the transgression
of any of GODS commandments by an Angel from heaven. Gal. 1. No traditional
writings of any man whosoever, can defend these errors which tend to the open
and wilful prophanatio^ of the holy things of God, to the most dangerous
contagion and infection of the whole Church, and to the high provocation of
Gods wrath against them all. What then has this great clarck gained by this
traditional divinity, save bewrayed his corrupt judgment and great ignorance
of the truth of God, yea even of those principal actions whereof he professes
himself a Minister? What has he obtained or endeavored by all this discourse to
prove, if not that all these profane multitudes and rowtes of all sorts of
wicked may be received into and nourished in the Church as members, even with
the holy pledges of CHRIST'S body and blood by this idolatrous and
sacrilegious ministry (for so having already proved them we may pronownce
them) made by themselves, laboring to justify and approve their Church,
ministry, and ministration in this estate, and most severely to censure,
blaspheme, and condemn all such as by the word of God reprove them, and for
their obstinacy forsake them for the same, thus opening a wide door to all
Athe^sme, wickedness, impiety, sacrilege, and bloody persecution, as by his
next argument which he brings for a conclusion of this discourse appears;
Which before we come unto, this for conclusion we insert and rest upon, That
our Savior CHRIST has instituted, that of necessity there must be at the
celebration of his last Supper a lawful Minister of the gospel according to the
rules of CHRIST'S Testament to deliver, a faithful people by outward profession
to receive, the pure elements commanded used, and that form of administration
which he and his Apostles prescribed: That except al these concur, there is not
the sacrament rightly delivered, neither may any christian communicate where
he sees any of these rules broken. So then if Mr. GIFFARD had thus approved
his Ministry, people, ministration by the rules of CHRIST'S Testament, and by
the evidence, of Gods word, he should more have persuaded and convinced us,
Reu. 16. 13.
then by all this opprobrie, blasphemy, and rage which he breaths forth out
of the mouth of that DRAGON, Prou. 26. 2.
al which now add unto his own, Deuteronomy. 18. 22
and not unto our judgments that fear not the curse causeles; Pro. 24. 24
neither yet the false Prophets threats* whose custom it is to curse them
that God blesses, and to bless them that God curses, to justify the wicked,
and to condemn the just, Therefore shall he be an abomination both to God an
men, as the Lord himself has spoken. As to his bloody Argument drawn from
th'executio^ of certain of SAVL his progeny, because King SAVL in his
hypocritish and bloody zeal murdered the Gibeonites, which were yielded and
made slaves unto them, Josh. 4.
contrary to the will and commandment of God. Ihosh. 8. Deutronomie 20. 10. 1
King. 9. 20. 21.
Our innocence shall be our defense, and his refutation. If we have committed or
when we shall commit or consent unto any such crime, we refuse not the like
judgment. In the mean time let all men judge with what equity or conscience
this Caini^e could thus apply and enforce this example against us; And for
conclusion, let any man by the word of God judge, whether we that reprove
these their confuse parish assemblies consisting of all sorts of ignorant,
profane, ungodly* people, worshipping God after an idolatrous manner, and
living in all disorder and ungodliness etc, Or this mercenarie sacrilegious
Priest, that stands a Minister to all these wicked, delivering the sacraments
unto them and blessing them with the peace of God etc do destroy and murder
their souls. The scripture is plentiful in this poinct.

THE THIRD PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION OR CAUSE OF OUR SEPARATION FROM their
assemblies, is.
FOR that they have a false antichristian ministry imposed upon them, retained
with them, and maintained by them.
AS we have already showed yt the house of God which is his church, cannot be
built or consiste of any other then such chosen, precious living stones as God
has thereunto caled, separated, appointed, namely such faithful obedient
willing people as come under CHRIST'S conduct, and willingly submit to his
government, and cannot consiste of profane, wicked, ungodly, headstrong,
disobedient multitudes, whereon the Whore is said to sit as upon many waters:
So in like manner can this house, Hebr. 3.
this church, this people of CHRIST be built into none other order, Ephesians. 4.
receive none other ministry and ordinances, then CHRIST the owner and builder
of the house has instituted and prescribed in his last will and testament. We
may boldly affirm and conclude that flock which consists of all sorts of
wild and unclean beasts, not to be the flock or shepe-folde of CHRIST, in
as much as these in this estate cannot of us be judged to be the sheep of
CHRIST. We may also by the same undoubted reason affirm, that they which stand
hierdes to these wild and unclean beasts, cannot be said the Lords
shepeherdes of his sheep and lambs. Of what sorts of people these their
parish assemblies generally consiste, how they have been gathered, builte,
stand, and walk in the faith and order of CHRIST, by that which is above
written may partly appear, but much more shall to every single eye and heart
(wherein is any light) upon the further examination of their present estate and
life. That this Aucthor and all the Priests of the time stand hierdes,
administering the Sacraments etc, to these profane multitudes in this
ignorance, confusion, and sin, after that idolatrous superstitious manner
aboue-said for their hire or tithes, cannot be denied. What defense this
Champion has made for their public administration and worship, and how by
never a word of God he has justified any one of those manifold enormities and
idolatries reckoned up unto him; As also how he has approved the gathering and
present estate of their Church, by the greatest apostasies, defectio^s and
sins of other Churches in other ages, and with what blasphemous doctrines
tending to all Atheism and impiety, we are content to refer to the judgment
of the godly readers. And now being come to the proof and defense of his own
Ministry which he exercises, and of the whole Ministry of their Church,
instead of CHRIST'S Testament he brings us forth a fable out of ESOPE of the
ass in the Lions skin, and at the first entrance into this discourse in the
first page within the space of 24 lines he convinces us with these arguments.
That we are prompt and plentiful in false accusations and heretical opinions
which must be admitted for reasons against their Church, worship, ministry.
That we are desirous of glory, presumptuous, bold, rash, ignorant, not to be
encountered with great learning: Sophisters, nay poor artificers and
husbandmen are the eauenest matches to dispute with us: We have put on the
Lions skin and imagine that all learned men tremble at us, but they have
espied our long cares. That we impudently sclander and belie the learned, who
disdain to deal with mad frenzy: That we are without all care what we
speak. etc. Is yt likely that this man has either care or conscience what he
says, that through his whole book from the first to the last word thus
rayleth, inver^th, accuses, blasphemeth? Are these the sweetest waters in his
fountain, the best salt he can season us with? Or do the Ministers of the
Church of England thus use to improve, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering
and doctrine? Is this Mr. GIFFARDS country divinity or university learning,
or Courtly Chaplen-like behauioure? He has a president what a goodly view Mr.
SOME makes in his colors. If he lighted into some men's hands that would take
pleasure to lay open his shame, Mr. SOME and his paynter might give place in all railing and vituperie where this man should appear. But our purpose is not
to meddle with his raylinges so much as his reasons, leaving him to answer
for the one, and endeavoring our selves to answer the other. Yet this we
say, that if this be the course of those great learned the speaks of, we had
much rather be matched with such poor artificers and husbandmen as fear God
(whom he despises) their with these great Clerks. Yea we had much rather
that they should in disdain of our ignorance break their promise in denijng
and refusing to confer with us, then in this manner grieve the spirit of God
in us by such hellish writings as this book of GIFFARD, perverting the
Scriptures, pleading for, defending, and iustifijng the throne of iniquity,
together with all the enormities, idolatry, and abominations which flow from
the same, railing, blaspheming, and accusing the truth, and the poor
persecuted professors thereof, as he does. Yet to satisfy the reader in this
matter which he so confidently denies, and urges us so vehemently to make
some colorable show of, That if he had consulted with his learned brethren
the forewarde Preachers, they would have councelled him rather to have used his
discretion in the pulpit (where he might feign what error he lift, and then
with the same breath confute yt in our names) then by conference, but
especially thus by writing to meddle with the defense of these defaults and
exceptions taken against their Church, Ministry, Worship, etc, knowing that
the more they are discussed and raued in, the more apparent and odious they will
appear unto all men; especially when they are brought unto and examined by the
light, These two were Mr. FLOVD and Mr. CHATTERTON.
which will foorth-with show of what sort they are. These two were Mr. FENNE
and Mr. EGERTON.
That these Preachers had taken this course amongst themselves we know
certainly by a letter that two of the chief of them sent unto us, deni^ng that
conference which they had before promised, because we denied their Church and
Ministry. After that, two of them being procured to our prison denied to deal
with us concerning those exceptions we made against their Church and Ministry,
alleging that they were forbidden by their brethere^ to deal with us in
those matters. To be short, what ^lls can with any probalitie be coniectured
to be the hindrance of the first company of Preachers that at the first sent
unto us to know the causes of our dislike, promising either to assent, or to
show unto us the causes why they could not, that they upon the sight of that
little paper, (wherein we set down unto them the causes of our separation from
these parish assemblies, as also what we purposed in our own assemblies) never
as yet could be drawn to make any answer in writing or conference, if not
that they perceived that they were neither able to defend their estate, neither
yet had faith to leave it for fear of persecution and danger. And whatsoever
this bold champion may pretend, we cannot be persuaded that ever the forewarde
sort of Preachers (that sometime labored reformation) ever gave their
consentes to this blasphemous book of his, except also together with the
aucthor thereof, they have made shipwreck of faith and good conscience, and be
wholly apostatate and fallen from that small measure of grace and light they
sometimes made show of* Neither shall those pontifical Prelates his Lords,
their horned Clergy, or Romish associates the Ciuilianes and Canonistes to
whom he is yielded and joined, give him any thanckes in the end for all the
pains he has taken to defend their apostatical throne and procedings: which
these his writings are so far from defending and iustifijng as they manifest
unto al men that they cannot be defended or justified:

TO our present purpose in this 3. PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION, yt remains that
we now prove this Ministry of the Church of England to be false and
antichristian. Which that it may the sooner be done we are to enquire what
kind of ministry CHRIST has instituted and left unto his Church? Of which
sort if we find not these, then may we with assurance from Gods own word
pronownce them false and antichristian. For as there is but one God, one
CHRIST, one Spirit, so is there but one true Church, ministry ministration.
CHRIST being ascended gave unto his Church Apostels, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, De^cons, widows. Ephesians. 4.
The 3. first, Apostes, Prophets, Evangelists, being instituted but for a
time, Romans 12.
having finished their ministry, ceased. For the foundation being now fully
laid, the word perfectly exhibited, the gospel thoroughly and sufficiently
confirmed and ratified, 1 Corinthians. 3
the whole frame of the building set up and erect, Hebr. 2.
and now a most perfect and absolute pattern left unto all Churches, 2 Pet. 1.
to what purpose should there now be Apostles to lay the foundation, 2 Timoth.
3
to give the word again, Prophets to ratify and confirm the same, Acts. 20.
33*
Evangelists to deliver and show the Apostles rules unto the Church? Besides
that, the Lord has evidently showed (by the ceasing of th'extraordinarie
calings and gifts unto these offices) that they are now perimplished and
ceased, as might also by sondrie other testimonies and direct scriptures be
proved, if yt were needful in so plain a point. Now then there remain by a
perpetual decree these Offices to the ministry, government, and service of
the Church. Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, Relieuers. 1 Corinthians. 12
Unto these distinct offices, Acts. 14. 23
are fit and distinct members duly chosen and ordained by each several
Congregation, 1 Timoth. 3
upon due proof according to the manifestatio^ of the spirit in each member so
elect, Tit. 3.
according unto the rules prescribed in Christ's Testament; in which offices is
required of them that they diligently and faithfully administer, 1 Corin. 4. 2
which whilst they do, they are honored, obeyed, 1 These. 5. 12. 13.
provided for of the flock with all reverence, care, and love. Now let the
ministry of the Church of England be compared unto and examined by these rules
of Christ's Testament, 1 Timo. 5. 17
in their office, entrance, administration, maintenance. In all which we before
affirmed them to vary from the Testament of Christ, and to have no place or
mention there, requiring of this Aucthor some proof of his ministry in these
points by the word of God. In stead whereof we have his bare affirmations to
approve their ministry, and his most bitter raylings to convince and persuade
us after his accustomed manner, which evil either satisfy us or approve
themselves to all men's consciences such as they would be thought to be. We had
thought our demand herein had been so just and reasonable, as no true Church
or Minister could or would have denied. And wonder that in this flourishing
estate of their Church which ouer-floweth with so great learning, abounds
with so many writers, that not one of them should undertake to approve the
ministry of their Church directly, by the rules of Gods word in their Office,
Entrance, Administration, Maintenance. Wherbie they might justify themselves
of such crimes whereof they are chardged* convince their adversaries and al
gaine-sayers, and put an end to these controversies and debates after a most
christian and peaceable manner, much better beseeming the Gospel and the
ministers thereof, then prisons, judgment seats, sclaunders, accusations,
blasphemy, which hitherto have been their only Arguments. But now howsoever
they be loath and will by no means be entreated or urged to this sober course
and direct proof by writing, or unto any christian free conference where these
matters might be discussed and decided by the word of God peaceably, Let us
yet (seeing occasion is here administered, and as our present purpose will permit)
show some causes of our dislike why we judge them not the true Ministry of
the Gospel, by showing such apparnt discrepance, as may declare unto all men
that they were never cast in that moulde. And this but by a cursorie and brief
examination, leaving the more exact discussing and perfect demonstration of the
forgerie, abuses, and enormities of this Antichristian ministry, to the further
diligence of others endued with greater measure of gifts and judgment.

WE find the permanent offices which CHRIST has instituted for the ministry
of his Church few in number, easily recited, divided, and distinguished. The
offices (as has been said) are these, of the Pastor, Teacher, Elder, Deacon,
Relieuer. These are divided into Overseers (whom we call Bishops Episcopoi)
and into Deacons. Phil. 1. 1
The Overseers are again divided into teaching and governing Elders: A^ts. 20.
and into such Elders as only by office attend unto Government. R^m. 12. 8
Of the first sort are the Pastor and Teacher. 1 T^^o. 5. 17
Of the second such Elders as are elect to the oversight and government of the
Church. These offices are distinguished one from an other in their several
functions by the Apostle Roma. 12. and in sondrie other places of scripture.
The Pastor to attend to exhortation. The Teacher to doctrine. Act. 6.
The Elder to government. The Deacon to collect and distribute the benevolence
and contribution of the Saints. ^ Timoth. 5
The Relieuers to attend to the sick, impotent etc. But the offices of the
Ministry of the Church of England we find so many and intricate, as are
hard to be recited, divided, or distinguished, and require greater skill then I
have thereunto. Yet (so my simple conceit preiudize not others of better
judgment) for memory sake and to avoid prolixitie, they may thus be divided
and recited at once. First more generally into Reigning governing. 2.
Collegiate or idle, and 3. Servile or mercenary. The Reigning or governing may
be divided into 1. Bishops their assistants and substitutes. 2. Certain
Commissioners and certain. 3. delegate Doctors etc. These Bishops may be
divided in 1. Archbishops. 2. Palatine Bishops, and. 3. ordinary Lord
Bishops. Now the Archbishops may be divided again into the.1. Primate
Metropolitan of al England, and the 2. Metropolitan of the North. parts. The
Raining ministry the^ of the Church of England as I suppose under correction
and better information, may be summed into these offices of Archbishops, Lord
Bishops, Chauncelors, Commissaries, Archdeacons, High Commissioners, Civil
Doctors with their Courts and attendants, Advocates, Proctors, Registers,
Notaries, Purseuants, Somoners. The idle or Collegiat Ministry as I take it
are partly in the Colleges of the Universities As Masters of houses,
Presidents, Bowsers, Fellows: Or more generally according to their degrees
Doctors of divinity, Bachelors of divinity, Masters of Art, Bachelors of art,
Clerks. These hitherto without certain office, place, or chardge in the
Church. And partly in their Cathedral Churches. As L. Bishop, Deane,
Sub-deane, Prebendaries, Cannons, Peticannons, Gospellers, Pistelers, Singing
men, Singing boys, Vergiers, Sextines. The servile Ministry is divided into
these several offices. Of Parson, Vicar^, Curai^, Deacon, or half-Priest,
Churchwarden, Sideemen, Quest-men, Parrish Clarck. But now to distinguish or
describe all these offices according to their several orders and cannons, to
show their original, process, and contynuance in their several times,
occasions, and circumstances, were not only a labor to me intricate and
vnachiueable, but to the reader tedious and unprofitable, as withdrawing them
from the certain and vnvariable rules of Gods word, to the uncertain and
variable reports of me^. Suffices it therefore that we find not in all the
book of God any such titles, names, dignities, offices, given or to be given
to the Ministry of Christ's Gospel: Reu. 13. 1. and 17. 3.
but we find them rather those names of blasphemy written upon those heads
of the Beast. For if it be blasphemy for any mortal man to receive, assume, or
challenge those names, titles, dignities, or offices which are peculier and
proper to CHRIST'S sacred person alone, Then are these chief Ministers of the
Church of England, these Archbishops, and Lord Bishops highly guilty of
blasphemy, that chale^dge and assume unto themselves, some one of them to be
the Prima^e of all the Bishops in England and Ireland, an other to be an
Archbishop, a Metropolitan, others to be Lord Bishops, the least of these
Anakims to reign over I know not how many hundredth Churches and Bishops.
That Christ is the only Primate and Arch-chiefe Bishop and Prince of Pastors
the Apostle Peter gives evident testimony 1 Epist. 5. Cap. 4. vers^ as also
the holy Ghost Hebr. 13. 20. That Christ is the only Lord Bishop every where
appears in the scriptures, and that al other christian Bishops are but
servants and fellows, is fownd John. 13. Luke 22. Mat. 20. Mar. 10. where
Christ himself in express words with vehement chardges forbids even his
Apostles, I say not such blasphemous titles only, but all other wordlie titles
of honor, all civil jurisdiction and secular power over others, and such
arrogancy and presumption one over an other as these pontifical Prelates and
Lordly Bishops usurp, most directly, wittingly and willingly against the
commandme^t of Christ. Which they think to put away and abrogate by a second
law of the Prince and Parlame^t, who (they say) have cast these honors and
titles upon them, and therefore neither ca^ they refuse, neither may others
blame them for this, except they show themselves disobedient to her Matie. and
enemies to ye State. We will answer these their criminatio^s of state matters
at any time before compete^t judges. In the mean while let them answer us in
good conscience whether they judge it lawful for Princes to give, or at any
hand for themselves to receive such titles, dignities etc, as Christ has so
expressly and often forbidden them. And whether their holy Father the Pope might
not so justify his exa^tation and supremacy by the Emperors donatio^, ye
confirmation of many Nations, States and Councels through many ages. If it be
here alleged that these titles which we so stand upon, are but civil
accompleme^ts given them by the Prince, but trifles, no matters of substance to
prejudice their ministry, they being preachers of the word; Yet must they
acknowledge them inhibited very severely and often by Christ's own mouth. And
therefore they by this allegation lay the blame upon Christ that forbad them,
and not upon us that hold the^ unlawful and intolerable in the ministry.
Further, if they be merely Civil, let them the^ answer why they are and how
they may be thus joined to ecclesiastical persons and offices. And if they be
such trifles, why then these grave Fathers these holy men so violently contend
with, and bloodely persecute their brethren for them. And this also let them
consider and acknowledge, that these triffles or titles they usurp are proved
most execrable blasphemies, names written upon the heads of the Beast, and
not upon the members or Minister of Christ. And in their best allegatio^, that
they are directly contrary to the commandment of Christ, who prohibiteth his
Ministers all such titles, howsoever Mr. Giffard allege against al conscience
and truth that they exercise no Lordship over the faith and consciences of men:
the untruth whereof shall hereafter appear; yet this Lordship they receive and
exercise, even in the best consideration, is expressly contrary to the
commandment of Christ, and such as no true Minister of the Gospel, either will
or may receive, plead for, or justify.

ANd now that we may come a little nearer their Ministry, it would be known
what office these Lordly Prelates, these Primates, Metropalitanes, Arch and
Lord Bishops exercise in the Church of Christ. For every Minister must be of
necessity in some particular office. I speak not now of the offices they
bear in the commo^wealth: as to be Peers of the Realm, Lords of the
Parliament, Judges of civil causes in Courts, Justices of the peace etc, but
of their ecclesiastical offices, as being Bishops, whither they have any of
the ord^narie and permanent offices, as Pastors, Teachers, Elders. Or of those
extraordinary temporary offices which are now ceased of Apostles, Prophets,
Euangelis^es. And sure by their magnificent style, glorious titles,
extraordinary power, irregular authority, and inordinate rule, I should
rather judge the^ of these extraordinary offices, save that I find those
wholly now ceased, not expedient or to be looked for, and also that the estate,
behauioure, and doings of those Bishops accord not to those offices. First
Apostles these Bishops are not in that they have no immediate caling from God,
or confirmed by God unto that office: Mat. 28. 19
Neither do they execute yt as Christ's Apostles did, Acts. 1.
they go not from place to place, from country to country, John. 20. 21 22.
to preach the Gospel, to call the people to the faith, to gather and plant
Churches; Neither have they received such measure of grace, or can ratify and
approve by such evident testimony, Math. 10.
power, and wonders the doctrines, Acts. 4. 30 and 5. 12.
rules, and ordinances which they deliver unto and impose upon their Churches,
to be of God: 1 Cor. 3. 11
Yet seeing they lay a new and an other foundation then the Apostles have
laid, 2 Cor. 11. 13.
deliver other doctrines, rules, and ordinances as appears by the whole
ministry, worship, ministration, ordinances and government of their Church,
then the Apostles have taught and left; seeing also they usurp a greater power
and preeminence one over an other, One being a Primate, an other an
Arch-Bishope etc, then the Apostles did; We never reading of any Primate,
Arch, or Lord Apostle: (Peter's chair now not standing in England) They had
need to confirm their offices, calings, doings, power by no les^e miracles
and testimonies the^ the Apostles did; if they will have their ministry and
doings allowed and received: 2 T^es. 2. 9. 10.
which if they should do and draw fire from heaven, yet ought we to believe
and hold fast that perfect ^oundation which CHRIST'S Apostles have laid, Reu.
13. 14.
that authenticke alsufficient word which they have left, as an absolute
pattern for all actions of the Church unto the worlds end; and to hold them
accursed, men or Angels that teach any thing besides that, or to vary from the
same. Gal. 1.
Neither what signs or miracles soever they shall do, may we hold them
Prophe^s, seeing they persuade yea enforce to idolatry and apostasy, as by
their public worship appears. Deuteronomy. 13.
And as to Evangelists that office is too mean and base for these fellows. 1 Timothy 1. 2.
The Evangelists took their caling, Tit. 1. 4.
sending, and whole direction from the Apostles, neither swarued from the same
in any thing, 1 Cor. 4. 17.
but faithfully delivered to the Churches those rules they received, and
assisted the^ in the practice thereof. Phil. 2. 22.
These men in that they have no such caling to their office, neither do so
execute yt, not caling the Church unto or helping them in, 2 Timothy 4. 5.
but drawing them from and utterly forbidding them the practice of those rules
and ordinances the Apostles left; teaching, bringing in, setting up, and
enforcing their own or other humane devises and ordinances upon ye church in
stead thereof; and that in such high and weighty matters as the bringing in a
new and strange Ministry, Ministration, Worship, and Government. For all
which causes and reasons and many other which might be drawn from the rules of
CHRIST'S Testament, and their whole work and doings which in nothing accords
to the true pattern, we must hold them false Apostles and Prophets,
counterfeite Evangelists, deceiptful worckmen and builders.

Neither yet, if we but as fleightly examine them by and compare them unto the
rules of Christ's Testament, shall we find them to execute any of the
ordinary permanent offices of the Bishops belonging unto Christ's Church, as
the Pastors, Teachers, Elders office. Act. 14. 23
A true christian Pastor ought to be chosen of some one peculiar flock, Tit.
1. 5.
where after due proof he is to be publicly ordained and received. Acts. 20.
21
Unto which peculiar flock he is bownde by covenant to administer and attend.
Neither does his Pastoral duty, ministry, and chardge extend to more flocks
or Churches at one time then that one, whereof he is chosen Pastor: Neither may
a true Pastor advance himself either in titles or power above or over other
christian Pastors his fellow brethren; howsoever he have received a greater
measure of gifts, by so much he ought to behave himself the more lowly, and to
apply himself the more carefully and diligently to serve the Lord with the
same, according to his pleasure and appoinctment within the limits of his
caling; wherein if he behave himself faithfully he receives praise, if not,
reproof and censure of the whole flock accordingly. But now these Arch and
Lord Bishops neither have any certain ministry over or in any one peculiar
flock, neither any such (...) by or in any one Congregation, but are elected
either by the (...) and College of the Deane and Chapter, or else by the
Prince, consecrate, invested, inthronised, or instawled, with I know not how
many popish rites, trincketes, ceremonies belonging thereunto; whose very
ordinary attire is so popish, ridiculous, and f^nde, as they pass not in the
streates without the wonderment and skorne of young and old. Their ministry
also is not limited and tied to one certain office, or to one certain flock,
but as they exercise sondrie offices, so do they it over and in sondrie
Churches, preaching, administering the Sacraments, where and when they list of
their pontifical authority, and ceasing again from preaching etc. at their
own pleasures when and how long they list. Again some of them exercises
absolute authority over al, no one of them but over many hinders Churches
and Ministers, over all causes and doctrines, to cite, sommon, suspend,
silence, excommunicate, absolve, emprison, ^equester, con^iscate at their
pleasure whom and wherefore they list without account or controlement, no not
by the Princes royal Writts and Courts to which every soul ought to be
subject. They impose upon all Churches and Ministers their own devises for the
public worship and administration, stinting and limiting the Pastor what
words to read and say, what scriptures to read on this and that day through
the year. They limite and restrain the doctrine of the Pastor from speaking
against any thing by public authority commanded. They determine and dispose
of all the doctrines and causes of all Churches at their own will, no man so
hardy to gai^e say or to call in question any thing they affirm, or to deny
any thing they command or forbid. There is nothing judged error in the Church
of ENGLAND, but what they judge to be error, be yt never so gross, popish,
blasphemouse, nor any thing compted truth which they pronounce error, be yt
never so holy, sound, and warranted by Gods word. The whole ministry,
doctrine, public administration, causes and censures of the Church of ENGLAND,
are wholly in their hands, to command, restrain or execute upon al persons,
and they themselves subject to no reproof, liable to no censure. Now let any
judge that knows what belongs to the office, entrance, and administration
of the Pastors office, whether these Bishops possess this office, be rightly
caled and entered to the same, and faithfully administer and execute the same.
The teachers office for the reasons aboue-said they cannot hold or chalendge,
both in regard of the fastuous titles and inordinate power and authority
which they usurp and exercise over all the ministry, even such as they call
Pastors, and over all Churches, causes, censures etc, which can at no hand be
joined or agree unto the christian Teachers office. As also for that they,
their ministry, and office belongs not to any one peculiar Congregation. The
like reasons may be drawn from their Popish entrance and administration,
seeing they take upon them to deliver the Sacraments, and attend not unto
doctrine only or diligently, giving over and ceasing to preach when they list,
neither submit the doctrines they teach to the ce^sure and trial of other
Prophets by the Scriptures. For all which reasons and sondrie other, they cannot
be said to have or exercise the christian Teachers office. Last of al, the
office of governing Elders they have not, for all the same reasons; In that
they are not chosen of and belong not unto any particular Congregation to which
they should be bownde by duty to attend. Neither ever did we read in all
Christ's Testament of any Bishops or Ministers (setting aside those temporary
offices of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists that where chosen, did attend, or
minister unto diverse or more then one Congregation or office at one time.
Certain rules being there given for their election, ordination, and
administration of and in one Congregation, with manifold admonitions and
exhortatio^s to sture them up unto diligence, labor, and watchfulnes in that
office and place they are caled unto, as a work enough for him that thinks
himself most able to dischardge it. And sure most monstrous and impossible it
were for one man faithfully to attend diverse Congregations, Except they can
also show that one shepherd at one and the same time can diligently feed and
guide two or many flocks far distant in place, Or that one candle may be put
into two candlesticks, and give light unto two several houses far distant
asunder at one and the same instant. If the one be impossible, so is the other.
Yet stand these men Bishops or Overseers not only to many Churches each one of
them, But their Primate gives, or rather sells lice^ces to other inferior
Priests, some one of them to stand a Minister to two, yea peradventure to
three several flocks. This is an usual matter and passes by way of sta^ute
law amongst the Chapleins and Doctors of the Church of England, who may have
and be Non Resident some of them from two, some from three Congregations or
benefices, especially all his Graceless Chaplains, by a singular prerogative.
But to return again to our purpose, these Arch and Lord Bishops cannot be
said to have this office of governing Elders, for that they profess to be
Ministers of the word and Sacraments, which duty belongs to the Pastors
office. And because they exercise absolute power over Pastors, Churches, and
causes* to depose, excommunicate, absolve, and determine in their own sole
name and power, which no true Elder Minister or member of Christ may do.
Reasons also might be drawn from their sitting, chandging, aspiring to the
richer and higher rooms. From their Princely Lordly flate, pomp, train,
revenues, palaces wherein they live in all wordly excess, pleasure, idleness,
to which things whilst they attend, it is impossible they should faithfully
execute and dischardge any ministry in the Church. From ye apparent and odious
sins of their persons and lives, that appear and break out in their
conversatio^, which is most unchristian, fleshly, and unholy. As coueteousnes,
oppression, extortion, open wrong doing, v^u^ie, ambition, pride, idleness,
lovers of pleasure, such as cannot govern their wives, children, and families
in the fear of God, sobriety, or common honesty, but nourish and bring them
up in pride, vanity, idleness, superfluity, voluptuousnes, gaining,
chambering, and w^ntonnes, yea peradventure vnchasti^g and that not unknown to
the inselues, who also themselves are not all of them of the most chaste and
temperate life, 1 Timothy 3.
some of them being given to wine, strikers, ^orcerers, blasphemers, (...)*
skorners, and deriders of the most holy exercise of the preaching of Gods
word, causing their counterfeight and natural fools openly in their own
house at (...) feasts to make a ^ermon o^ (...) or fallie in the most high
despite of God, and of his blessed ordinance. Not here to perticulate the
sondrie heresies contrary to the truth and blasphemies of the truth holde^
amongst them; the least of which faults publicly known, are enough to
di^able the best of them from exercising any public ministry to the Lord in
his Church, if we may believe the Apostle. To conclude, Math. 20. 25. 26.
this one reason (if there were no more) might show and prove them to be no
christian Bishopps, in that they exercise some civil office or offices
together with this their pretended ministry. Luke 12. 14.
Which is not only expressly forbidden and utterly unlawful by the word of God,
but also impossible for any man to perform both, or either of both faithfully
whilst he keeps both. God himself has made two distinct and several
offices, and appoincted unto them two distinct and several persons for
Ministers: It being no more lawful for a Bishop to execute the civil
Magistrates office, then for the civil Magistrate to administer the
Sacraments. What mo^struous parsons then are they which thus confound and
commingle in their own persons these two diverse and distinct offices and
powers? Might not they that assume both the swords into their hands, carry
them acrosse also in their cote armor, as well as their holy Father the POPE?
What a monstrous confusion and perturbation make they both in Church and common
wealth herebie? disturbing the holy order that God himself has set for the
government both of the Church and common wealth in this world, removing yea
utterly breaking down therbie all the limits and bowndes which God has set
and established for all estates, degrees, offices, callinges, actions, so that
no man by this means either knows his duty, or orderly walks within the
bowndes of his calling, wherbie it is come to pass that the whole land
ouer-floweth with all impiety, violence, cruelitie and iniquity, as in the
days of NOE,

Thus by all these reasons have we proved, and all that have not utterly made
shipwreck of faith and good conscience, or that stand not vowed bond servants
to their apostaticall throne, must confess, That these Arch and Lord Bishops
are no true christian Bishops according to the Gospel of CHRIST, neither have
or exercise any lawful office or ministri of or in the Church of CHRIST. If
then they be not members of that body belonging to that head CHRIST JESUS, it
must needs follow that they, their offices, and ministry are false and
antichristian, belonging to an other head, an other body, eue^ Antichrist, and
that whore the false Church his spouse. If their inordinate power and
irregular ministry be found contrary to all the rules and ordinances of
Christ's Testament, then can yt not be of God, belong unto, or used in Christ's
Church, or be blessed to the government or salvation of his people: Then must
it needs be the power and throne of Satan given to the Beast, accursed, given
to seduce, and to draw all the children of wrath to destruction. Neither shall
Mr. Giffard or all the false Prophets belonging to their throne, be able to
turn away or withstand those judgments and plagues which are powered out of
the Lords vial upon the throne of the Beast, or with their soft tongues to
lick whole the wounds of the Beast, that are given with that two edged sword
that proceeds out of CHRIST'S mouth. It shall not help them though they rail
and blaspheme and gnawe their tongues for grief. For their kingdom shall wax
dark, and Antichrist shall consume and be abolished as he is reueiled, 2 These.
2. 8.
eue^ by ye same light: the Lord himself has spoken yt. How weak now and
sclender are Mr. Giffards defenses for these his Lords the Bishops. That the
Bishops have not their caling, consecration, or power from the Pope, but from
their Church. That they have by oath renownced the Popes usurped power and
tyranny. That they do not maintain or defend the religion and laws of
Antichrist, but profess and advance the gospel of Christ, and by the lively
word cut down all idolaitre, heresies, abominations. That they usurp not a
Lordship over the faith and consciences of men, but their peculiar power is
only in the administration of external discipline. Therefore we with manifest
and wicked sclander call the Bishops Antichristian. If you demand the proof
of all this, we refer you to Mr. Giffards bare affirmation without any one
reason in his learned answer to the Brownistes, Page. 75. If he were himself
sometime of an other mind, you must think it was before he had so near
friendship with, or was employed in such trusty services by his Lord of
London. Who, as also his Lords grace, must not be driven to prove every thing
they affirm, that were enough to put young divines unto, their pontifical
mouth is sufficient warrant to all the Churches in England. Yet I would of
their courtesy they would give us their Schismatiks that cannot be so
satisfied, leave to doubt (though we will not conte^d) whether their Caling,
Consecration, and this their Power first came not from the Pope. For albeit we
have heard that the offices of Prouincial Bishops, Arch Bishops, Metropolitanes
where almost when this general defection from the gospel so much foretold of
began to break out and appear, long before the Pope obtained his Supremacy
over al other Churches and Ministers: Yet might it be that this manner of their
caling, solemn consecration, and lardge irregular power of his Lords Grace and
Lord Bishops sprung from their unholy Father the Pope. Who when he was
inthronized by Satan, had received the Dragons high commission, to be his
Vicare general in earth, could not of his fatherhoode but provide for these his
natural children, and bestow them in his garrison Cities, as his Tetrarches,
Lieutenants and Tribunes, with magnificent titles, privileges, power, and
authority to rule in his name and absence, even as his own engraven image
over all Realms, Countries, and Territories within their Fathers dominions.
For (as we have also credibly heard) there was never a Lord Archbishop or
Lord Bishop with such titles, privileges, power, heard of before the Pope
created them. Notwithstanding because we have these things but bie hearesay,
and would be loathe to affirm of things so unsure, we will content our selves to
have proved and showed the Arch Lord Bisshops to be no true Ministers of the
gospel and Church of CHRIST, and therefore of themselves antichristian, from
whom or howsoever they rise it skilleth us not. Neither shall it avail them
though they have broken their faith and schismed from the Pope, cast off his
yoke, renownced his usurped power and tyranny, when they themselves are round
to usurp, retain and exercise, if not the same, yet as antichristian and
enormous a power as the Pope, retayning the same Courts* Officers, Cannons,
constitutions, privileges over all Churches, Ministers, causes, doctrines,
censures, they themselves not being subject to the censure of any Church,
exercising their authority and commandementes contrary unto and above all
laws both of God and of their Prince; whose Royal Courts and writts are not
of power to bail any one committed by the least of their hierarchy,
assuming unto themselves both the swords, exercising together and at once both
civil and ecclesiastical offices etc. How well they advance the Gospel of
CHRIST, that blaspheme the same, and pronounce the rules, ordinances, and
ministry thereof intolerable, and persecute all such as either speak against
them, or for yt, Let the tyrannous havoc they make in the common wealth of
poor christians in the prisons of the land, show. How well by the lively
word they cut down all idolatry, heresies, and popish abominations, let the
seruice-booke and public worship of their Church, show. Which whilst with a
strong hand they obtrude upon every conscience, as also impose upon the
Church, is not this to tyrannize and exercise a Lordship over the faith and
conscience? Or (to speak as he does) is this nothing but to execute the
external discipline, to make and impose a new Leitourgie for the whole
administration of the Church? Or is it likely that this marcked Minister of
ANTICHRIST knew what the outward government of CHRIST in his Church means,
that says yt concerns not the conscience? Is there any more dreadful or
reverend action on earth amongst men, then the judgments of CHRIST in his
Church, which are al most holy and true? Or do not these concern the
conscience? Does not every action of which there are such certain laws set
by CHRIST himself, nearelie concern the conscience to do it according to the
same? when the least abuse, neglect, or swaruing from the rule even in the
least circumstance that is enjoined in the least censure does so deface the
action, is so offensive and prejudicial, do not those actions which are done
for the salvation of souls, M^th. 18.
that are said to bind in heaven, not concern the conscience? Or do not
those rules which are given for the direction and preservation of the public
communion of the whole Church, 1. Corinthians* 5.
and private conversation of every member thereof (without the observation of
which rules there can be no order, no duty either public or private, no holy
walking in any caling kept) concern the conscience? Except Mr. Giffard can
imagine such a Congregation and such members thereof, as either never sin, and
so need no watching over, admonition, reproof, Or else such a Church and
members thereof as make no conscience of any thing, as when they sin will not
amend, will not hear admonition, or suffer reproof, which is the means given
of God to bring them to amendment. Yet Mr. Giffard makes this holy outward
government of CHRIST over and in his Church not to concern the conscience; the
miserable divines of this age, not to be of necessity to the being and
preservation of a Church; the blasphemous Bisshops of this land, not to be a
thing tolerable, with many other reproachful blasphemies of the same, which
are not of any christian almost to be heard or repeated, much less
pronounced and defended. Math. 21.
These husbandmen are they that cast the Son and heir out of the vineyarde,
Luke 19. 14*
that will not have him reign over them, but take the regiment into their own
hands, devising and erecting a new form of government unto the Church, as
these their popish Courts, Cannons, Customs, Officers declare, and
persecuting with all hostility and tyranny all such as plead for Christ's
government, and will not subject their bodies and souls unto their
antichristian yoke. But yet for all this they exercise no Lordship over the
faith and conscience, though they usurp, exercise, and impose this strange
ministry, ministration, and government in and over the Church. All this says
Mr. Giffard is but th'administration of exernall discipline, and concerns not
the conscience, (especially if it be seared with a whote Iron as Mr. Giffard
is.) Wherefore we do impudentlie and wickedlie sclander when we therefore
conclude that the Bishops be antichristian, and whosoever is ordained by them,
has his ministry from Antichrist and from the Devil. What kind of ministry
your Lord Bishops exercise, and authority they usurp, by that which is
already written the reader may judge, or at least has a direct way showed
further to examine: What kind of rule they keep or (as you call it) discipline
they execute, remains to be tried in the fourth principal transgression:
Where if you make not a better defense for it then you have done for their
Ministry and ministration, they are all like to prove (as we have affirmed
them) strange, false, forged, antichristian, such as belong not unto and cannot
be exercised in any christian Church: and then let Mr. Giffard see whether
that grievous conclusion will follow and fall upon the men upon whom the marcke
of the Beast is ^ownde, that ministry which is ordained by, proceeded from, and
stands under the throne of these antichristian Bishops. In the mean while
let us in a very few words consider of the rest of the ministry in the
Church of England in their order.

WE would gladly learn of him what office in the Church of God, Chancelors and
Commissaries, may be said to exercise, for we confess that in Christ's
Testament we never read of their names or offices: they are strangers there,
and we in all the world know not from whence they came or who brought them
into the Church, if not their Father the Pope, or durst there retain them,
but these his children and successors the Bishopps. A lardge power they have
and exercise over all parrish Churches their Ministers and Members, to keep a
judicial Court, to cite, co^uent, try, punish by mu^ ct, judge, imprison
absolve, purge, not only for ecclesiastical causes as the neglect of their
ceremonies and trinckets, and for not duly reading and observing their
injunctions and seruice-booke, but also for civil causes, yea criminatory and
judicial causes, such as by the law of God deserve death, and only belong to
the Princes royal authority, to whom therefore God has committed his sword:
Whose judgment seat and authority for any private person to usurp, is
judged rebellion both by the law of God and of this land. For all that take
the sword shall dye in the sword Math. 26. 52. Again these Chauncelors and
Commissaries are Ciuilians (lay men as they call them) and not Priests,
therefore we marvel how they came to exercise such an high ministry over and
in the Church.

The same we say of their other delegate civil Doctors of their Courts and
train of Advocates, Proctors, Registers etc. We find in the Testament of
Christ no mention, in the Church of Christ no use of such Offices, Officers,
Courts, to decide their controversies, to execute their censures and
judgments. These handle both ecclesiastical and civil causes mixtlie, after a
most corrupt and litigious manner, amongst whom al things are venal in their
Courts etc, whereof in due place: suffices it here to find them in name,
office, and use counterfeit, forged, false, without mention or warrant in Gods
word, such as not Christ but Antichrist devised and brought in.

As to the persons in their high commission they are of two sorts, chiefly
ecclesiastical, and partly (for countenance and fashion sake) civil; Of the
ecclesiastical we have above entreated. Neither find we that any civil
person may exercise any ecclesiastical office or function: as to ouer-see so
many Churches, to decide and determine ecclesiastical causes, or to execute
the censures of the Church, as by way of office or by virtue of any humane
commission, especially after that ungodly manner, which is in all things so
contrary to the order Christ has instituted, so contrary to the faith, power,
and liberty of Christ's Church, as were not hard to show if we should examine
their procedings by the rules of Gods word. And great ruth it is that so noble
and honorable personages should be so highly abused by these wicked Bishops.
The Lord in mercy show them their deceipts, the error and danger of their
ways.

Yet of this governing ministry remains the Arch head Deacon of the Church
of England to be considered of, who is no small officer of this Church, having
and keeping his solemn judicial Court, Synod, and procedings in such
ecclesiastical causes as fall within his consideration, with absolute power in
his own name also to cite, sommon, judge, and punish all such parish Churches
with their Parsons and Ministers as fall within his limits. To impose taskes
upon Pastors, what scriptures to read privately every day, what to conne by
heart, and to take account of them at his Synodes accordingly. This Archdeacon
also (if such be his learning that he can) may administer the word and
Sacraments, and have a benefice or two for need. Howsoever, he may plead and
boaste of his antiquity as well as the Archbishop, and of the great cause of
his erection and necessary use of his office etc. Yet seeing we find no
mention of his name, or use of his office, in all the Testament of CHRIST,
seeing we find there no such Head Archdeacons with such stately Courts and
absolute iutisdiction, and that not over many Deacons but many of their
Pastors, yea many whole Churches, we must, or rather the Lord has given the
same sentence of them, that is given of their fellows aboue-said, That they
are not the ordinance or ministry of CHRIST, but of Antichrist, even the
heads and limbs of that Beast, that will be held within no limits or bounds,
in no order or callings, but break, corrupt, and confound all laws, bounds
order, Colloss. 18. ^
and offices as they lust. CHRIST himself is the only head of all his
Ministers, 1 Cor. 12. 27
whether Pastors, Teachers, Deacons etc, and they again his members of their
part. Acts. 6.
The christian Deacon is to attend to the faithful collection and distribution
of the ben^uolence of the Saints, Romans 12. 8.
and not to such Court-keeping over the Church, 1 Timothy 3.
ministry, and Saints: He is to attend in his function to that peculiar
flock whereof he is chosen a Deacon, and not in this manner to intrude and
incroach upon many Churches. A christian Deacon is to keep himself within the
bounds of his own office in sobriety, and not to intermeddle with the
Pastors office also, with the ministration of the word and sacraments: yea to
exalt himself and usurp power and jurisdiction over his superiors, not only
over many Pastors, but over many whole Churches. Thus have we taken a
superficial veiwe, or rather as yt were a sudden blush of the reigning
Ministry of the Church of England, leaving the further inuestigation and
demonstration of the manifold deformities thereof to their further diligence, to
whom God has given greater knowledge and opportunity, leaving place also unto
Mr. GIFFARD or any of that false hierarchy to make defense and justification
of these points wherein they are here chardged by the word of God. Which if
they can do, then let them be held excused, and us justly chardged with
impudent and wicked sclander. In the mean while I haste to the second sort of
their Ministry.

THe next sort of the ministry of the Church of England is the Collegiat or
idle Ministry, which may be divided, or rather distinguished (because
sometimes they are mixed and joined, one man being a master of a College and a
Deane, a fellow of a house and a Prebend, and each of them have a Parsonage or
two for a need) into these two kinds, Academical and Cathedral, The third
sort, the Monastical, being by the hand of God and the Magistrates sword cut
off and suppressed. These Academical Divines live, have their education and
degrees in the Colleges, Halles, and Celles of the two Universities, The
original corrupt customs and use of which places, it is not mie purpose here
to discourse; Neither indeed have I skill aright to discuss whither and how
they sprange from the Heathens, or from the Papists. Only this I dare affirm,
that from the Book of God they never diriued these their Colleges, Schools,
Hales, Orders, Degrees, Vows, Customs, Ceremonies, Attires, that I say not
their Arts, Aucthors, exercise, and use of their learnings, disputations,
commencements etc. But as they have received them else where, so have they ever
belonged to an other head and kingdom, and can by no means (in this estate
they now stand and have time out of mind continued) be made to accord to the
Gospel and kingdom of CHRIST, whereof these University Divines have ever been
the professed and most bitter enemies, furnishing Antichrists host in all the
rooms and places, even from the POPES chair, to the parish Priests pulpit or
pue, with fresh seruitors continually, corrupting the pure fountains, and
perverting the text it self with their gloses, paraphrases, notes, figures etc,
fighting with their schole learning, vain arts, philosophy, rethoricke, and
logique against the truth and servants of God, striving herebie to uphold
Antichrists ruynous kingdom and abominable wares, which these marchantmen
set to sale for gains, as we by present experience see (now their portion and
idle monastical life, begins but even a little to be reproved by the light
and power of the Gospel) how these crastes-men these University Clerks rage
and take on, and with their schole learning seek to turn away the evident
truth of God, to color and plead for all the abomination and sin of the
times, to heal the wound and uphold the throne of the Beast, to rend,
reproach, and blaspheme such as speak and witness against it, as their
vituperious, unchristian, and erroneous Books which they daily publish,
declare. Neither is their education and learning (if they be duly examined)
such as is required in the holy Ministry of CHRIST. All of them (as is said)
being nourished even from their Cradles with the milk of superstition,
instructed in the Schools of heathen vanity, brought up in the Colleges of
more the monkish idleness, and disorder, exercised in vain and curious arts,
whose divinity is by tradition etc. The truth of these things Mr. GIFFARD not
being able to gainesay, seeks to shoffle off with a bold boasting chalendg
against men unto himself unknown, upon the dispense of bearing the shame, if
he find not in the universities many Bachelo^rs of Art far exceeding in the
knowledge of the liberal arts, the 3. tongues Hebreaw, Greek and Latin, or
in sound judgment of divinity eue^ the principal Masters of Brownisme; which
if it could in so few years be obtained with more then monkish idleness, then
may the Brownistes in some thing be believed. First we give him to weite that
there are of those he calls Brownistes, sond^ie of greater contynuance, and
that have as high degree in those schools with as high commendation as himself,
although they boaste not of such things whereof they ought to be ashamed. Then
that there are as many of his brethren the Monckes, that thinck themselves as
skillful as himself, or the greatest Clarke in the university. But now in all
this what will our ignorance help him, or their store of learning show, that
they have not been and are not thus imitiate and brought up. In their grammar
schools it cannot be denied, but they learned and learn the latin tongue from
the most heathenish and profane aucthors, lascivious Poets etc, which are
allowed with the privilege of the Church of ENGLAND as most christian
rudiments to be taught the youth in the public schools. When they have passed
all those forms, and can both say much of those aucthors by heart and use
their phrase, then are they sent to the University to learn the arts, and to
be instructed in philosophy etc* hitherto it cannot be denied but heathenisme
and such execrable idolatry as is found in those aucthors, is written and
engraven upon the tables of their hearre, and filed upon their tongue even from
their infancy. Well, and when they are come to the University, there are they
first salted as they call it in their College, and matriculate in the public
schools, solemnly sworn upon the Proctors book to keep their mothers
statutes and secrets, and not to reueile her mysteries or teach her arts any
where but in the University. Then are they instructed both publicly and
privately in Logique and Rethorick in the Elenches and Topickes, in the tropes
and figures of all kinds; wherein they must be perfect, for these arts are of
special use unto them, and to serve at all assaies. Then proceed they to
philosophy, and there Aristotele is Autos eipe amongst them, out of whose
mouth and writings they fetch their positions and axio^es, definitions,
aphorisms, distinctions etc. out of his Ethickes, Econonickes, and pollitickes
they feth the order and government of their manners, private estates, and
common wealth. He yet further instructs them of the Soul and of the world in
lardge and special books, Of the heaven of natural and supernatural things,
of Nature, Fortune, the eternity of the world, and perpetuity of all the
creatures in their kind in Specie, of the regions of the air and several
things in them contained, the Meteores etc; there learn they the causes of
the rainebowe, the making of the winds, clouds, and of the whole sky, far
otherwise then is set down in the Genesis. Yet leads he them higher and
shows them the celestial spheres, planets, stars, quintessences even from
the Moon to their Caelum crystallinum empiraeum and their Primum Mobile, with
their several places, dimensurations, motions, and Motors: yea yet learn they
more secret things with their constellations, radiations, influence and
predominatio^ according to their signs, houses, oppositions, aspects,
ecclipses etc. wherbie most strange and wonderful things are prognosticate
and foretold concerning the weather and ceasons of the year, the estate of
kingdoms, the diseases and dangers to come etc: concerning natiuities and
times of death (commonly caled fortunes) concerning things to come or things
past, stolen, lost, found etc. These things it were frenzy if not
blasphemy to call vain and curious arts. Mr. GIFFARD would never bear it at
the hands of such blind schismatickes (whose bane such deipe learning is)
seeing these sciences are vulgarely taught, studied, practiced, allowed, and
maintained not only in the universities but of the whole Church of ENGLAND, as
by their yearly prognosticatio^s every where to be sold, is to be seen.
These studies and arts we may not call perierga Curious, because Mr. GIFFARD
says Luke speaks only of coniuration Act. 19. But let him approve these
lawful by the scriptures, and surely I will gladly confess mine ignorance and
sin in caling these studies and arts profane, curious, unfit for a
christian, much more for a Minister of the Church. Otherwise let not any
through mine unskillfulness (who peradventure repeat not aright or in due place
the terms of these arts, as having either forgotten them through long
discontynuance, or may be, never learned them aright) take occasion either to
carpe at me therefore, or especially to think the better of these vain and
curious, yea unlawful and unchristian arts and studies, which have not only
no warrant in Gods word, but are directly contrary unto and expressly
forbidden in the same, as were not hard to show and prove, if the subject
were not to lardge, and should not make to wide a Parenthesis in this treatise,
and draw it out to a greater length then I would. I will not therefore stand
here to discuss their philosophical probleames, paradoxes, axioms, or
several sentences and opinions, which are authentical and current amongst
them, how evil they agree to the word of God: Or to show how far these
curious inquisitors, these starr-gazers, astrologians, calcars, wisardes,
deuines exceed the bounds of faith and sobriety, and pass the limits of
Gods reueiled will: Or whether they may wander by these heathenish or devilish
opinions of the heavens, stars, and their reuolutions, influence etc. Motors,
Demones, or Spirits, and how near this approaches to coniuration: Or to show
how far they are suffered to proceed, yea profess and practice in these
devilish arts: Let the books (that I chardge no persons) which are commonly
bought and studied in the Universities, and in all other parts of the realm
without controlement, show. Neither will I here proceed to repeat their
other vain, curious, fond, triffling and vile arts, and studies, which were
endless. Only in this place I must here add unto those public professed
arts above recited, the study of all heathen and profane histories, of all
ages, nations, persons, wherein they must of necessity be prompt and expert;
as from those fountains to draw their examples and platformes of manners and
the government of sta^es; as from whence to fetch the chief ornaments of
their style, orations, sermons, Books, to exemplify, illustrate, prove or
improve: yea as whereby to open and expound the Scriptures both of the old and
new Testament, chiefly the old Prophets, without which they cannot be
understood, but especialy Esai and Daniel. As to Rethorcik and Logi^ue they
are so necessary, as without which it is impossible to understand or divide
any part of the scripture aright; as without which they cannot understand or
declare to the people by what trope or figure, by what form of argument or
Syllogism the holy Ghost speaks. In these arts and studies are these
Academical divines or rather Peripateticke Philosophers trained and exercised.
In these they must needs spend 7. of their first years at the least, else
should they be unfit to take those degrees of Bachelour and Mr. of Art, or to
make that public profession they do of the arts at their Commencements. In
these arts and studies when they are once a little exercised and instructed
that they begin to perceive the grounds and method thereof, then are they
trained both publicly and priuatlie to defend or oppose against some of these
axioms or positions, both by way of oration and argument in their Sophismes
and disputations, and therein being approved (or at the least allowed) they then
take the first degree of the schools, and commence Bachelours of Art, and have
as ensigns of their degree and knowledge, special attire and furniture
assigned them to be known from other common scholars; as the square Cap, the
tronke gown, the hoode of one shoulder, the habit etc, which they must wear.
Afterward having spent more then thee years in study on these arts, and
having done their public acts progradu, the^ they comme^ce Masters of the
said Arts; and are again solemnly sworn and made Regents and Lectorers of
their schools, and sit, read, and dispute of the same arts publicly in a
solemn high seat, pulpit, or chair for orations, as also read private
lectures thereof in their Colleges. Now I would here by the way know of Mr.
Giff. what time and leisure a Bachelour of art that contynueth in the
University and proceeds in those orders and degrees can have, to study
Diui^itie, or to grow so prompt in the knowledge, judgment, and exercise
thereof, as he dare engage his credit he shall be fownde far to pass therein such
as in their University have been allowed publicly to preach, and of the
Bishops been made full Ministers. But to our purpose; when these clerks are
thus instituted and furnished with these liberal sciences, and this ground
wor^k thoroughly laid, the^ may they in good time proceed to the study of
Divinity (as they call it) which is set out unto them in great volumes and
infinite books of men's writings both old and new, where they have such
variety of Paraphrases, Comme^taries, Common places, Catachises etc. (Not to
trouble them at the first with the primative histories, Doctors, Councels) as
they may in short space (if they study hard) become pretty divines, and be
able to show their aucthors judgment, yea (through the help of rethoricke and
a good memory) to make a Sermon an hour long: Always carefully provided
that they utter no more, then that they have read in some allowed aucthor,
having the privilege of the Church of England, and presume not either to
understand the text otherwise then their aucthors interpret yt, or to add one
note of their own observation, for that (how consonant soever to the truth)
were great presumption and rash^es. Neither may they over* far apply or
enforce the judgment of their Aucthors against any present enormitie
established by authority in the Church of England, for that were intolerable
against the peace of the Church, yea seditious against the Magistrates
authority etc. Thus whilst these Divines are held within these limits of
modesty and sobriety, and continue with their Mother the University, they
ma^e in due time set up their bills of challenge upon the schole doors, that
they mean to dispute upon such and such questions of Divinity, and to do
their Acts progradu. Which being dispatched either in taenebris or in Luce,
then are they fit for the Commencement to be made Bachelours of Divinity. In
like manner against that day must such of them as have before passed all these
degrees, and now are fit to proceed Doctors of Divinity do their acts in the
public schools accordingly in these Divinity disputations s^rmons ad clarum
etc. And against this sollemne Commencement must especial choice be made of
those that are to commence Bachelours and Doctors of Divinity to keep the
public acts that day. And these for their further credites often times will
undertake to defend against all comme^s such Propositions as are most ^dious to
all men in whom is any light, conscience, knowledge, or fear of God. As that
it is lawful for one man to have more benefices and flocks to attend then one
at one time. That it is lawful to be a non resident, to hue from his flock
whereof he takes chardge. That the unpreaching Ministers are true and lawful
Pastors, and the Sacraments by them delivered true and holy Sacraments. That
Christ's outward government in his Church, practiced and set down by his
Apostles, is not of necessity or perpetual, but variable and arbitrable at
the will of men, according to times, estates etc. These and such like, these
Graduates publish and defend, the Vice-Chancelour and whole senate of the
University conclude and confirm, as catholic orthodoxe and most sound,
rejecting whatsoever Scriptures or reasons shall by these comical disputers
either University Doctors and Divines, be brought against them. Well, unto this
famous Act are these Commencers solemnly brought in their several attyres and
arrayes, in their skal^t gowns, hoodes, habites, caps, tippitts etc, with the
Bedells proclayminge and carrying staves and maces before them, with a great
troop of Gradua^es and Clerks following them. And thus they martch through
the streates to the place appoincted and prepared for these prizes, where they
have their sticklers and moderators ready to rescue, when they are in any
distress, and where their adversaries fight boo^ie, being of their own
confederacy. Where it is not lawefull for any that will to oppose, or to
speak for the truth of God. Neither are these questions discussed in the
english tongue before those multitudes of people and strangers, but in the
latin tongue after their syllogistical and romish manner, lest the folly of
these Prophets should be laid open unto all men, and these gamsters be hissed
off the Stage by the people. Thus, though with many other triffling ceremonies
and circumstances then I either can, or care to recite, are these academical
divines advanced to their degrees. Which Degrees, (...), ceremonies, orders,
oaths, vo^^s, manner of disputations etc, how consonant they are to the
ministry of Christ by the Apostles rules, let Mr. Giffard or those learned
Divines approve by Christ's Testament, as it stands them upon, that bring
them in and exercise them in the Church. For our selves we protest we never
there read or heard of any such: and therefore cannot but think them fond,
strange, and antichristian, such as no way belong to, or beseem the
Ministry of CHRIST, neither are necessary or tolerable in Christ's Church.
Thus even by this very brief and insufficient recital of but some of their
arts, studies, orders, deg^ees etc. I hope this assertion will not prove so
false or incredible. That the learned ministry of the Church of England is
nourished even from their cradles with the milk of superstition, instructed in
the s^holes of heathen vanity, brought up in the colleges of more then
monckish idleness and disorder.

For of such kind of societies and Colleges of Ministers and clarks, to live
together after this monastical manner, we never read in the whole Book of God.
How like they are to the schools of the Prophets at Naioth, Rama, Jericho let
their arts, studies, vows, customs, orders, ceremonies, degrees,
disputations, exercises etc, declare. And as to the holy exercise of prophecy
spoken of in the new Testament; yt belonged unto and always was exercised in
some christian Congregation, in a more holy, reverent, and free manner, and not
after those heathenish popi^h customs abouesaid. We in CHRIST'S Testament
never read of such a monacticall ministry so withdrawn and sequestered from
any particular Congregation, office, chardge, and function, as these
University divines and Ministers are in their Colleges, Halles, Ce^les: Where
they must needs live in idleness and disorder, that are thus licentiate and
dissolute, that will be held within no christian bonds or order. We never read
in CHRIST'S Testament of any such societies or Ministers, that lived in no
particular Congregation, that were caled to no particular office, or flock,
that live idlelie, professing to be Misters and yet execute no certain
ministry or function. When Mr. Giff. shall directly prove by the scriptures
these things to be lawful, then so far forth we shall allow of these
University Divines these Collegiat Ministers: And the rather if he also
approve by Gods word their worship in their Seruice-booke: And last of all
(not to comber him with their manifold other superstitious customs,
Commemorations etc,) if he can show it to be lawful for any Minister or
christian to join unto and live in any such College, society, or fellowship,
where Gods holy ordinance of honest marriage is by express law forbidden all
the fellows and scholars of these Colleges, they being no longer to remain
in that society the^ they live unmarried, I say not now chastely: For how
possible or likely that is, for so many young men in the flower of their
youth and prime of their strength, especialy being noseled in such heathen
vanity, prophannes, vainglory, curiosity, superstition, disorder,
dissolutenes, and (as is said) contempt of Gods ordinances, let any judge; yea
let the scripture yt self judge: where God shows the reward of these sins,
how he therefore gives them up to the lusts of their own hearts, unto
uncleanness, to shameful lusts contrary to nature to work filthiness, Romans 1.
24
and to dishonor their own bodies amongst themselves etc. And so until some of
them ca^ justify this their life, orders, customs, vows, and procedings of
these Academical divines in their schools and Colleges, we must number and
leave them with their brethren and sisters the Monks, Friars, Nuns etc,
under Gods fearful judgments, utterly in this estate unfit for the ministry
or Church of Christ.

Yet would I not here, that any should deem or suppose that we condemn any
lawful arts or necessary sciences, any holy exercises, or schools of
institution: And so do labor to bring in barbarism, as Mr. Giffard Mr. Some
and others have given out. No we are so far from it, as we blame these
Universities, Colleges, and Schools for their heathen, profane, superstitious,
unchristian societies, disorders, customs, ceremonies, for their vain,
curious, unlawful arts and studies, and their manner of teaching and exercising
them etc. We desire with our whole hearts, that the tongues and other godly
arts were taught, not in the Universities or a few places only, but in all
places where an established Church is, at the least in every City of the
land. Yet this indeed we hold, That every christian man ought to have his
abiding and dwelling, and to bring up his children in some such place where a
christian Congregation is, and that all schools of learning ought to be kept in
such places where both teachers and scholars may be under the holy government
and censures of Christ in his Church, and may live and be kept in holy order.
Then, that the arts and sciences which are thus taught or studied, be not
vain, curious, or unlawful, but necessary and godly. Thirdly, that they be
not taught, exercised, or practiced after any profane, vaineglorious, or
superstitious manner, but in all sobriety, modesty, and in the fear of God. To
these few rules if their Universities, Colleges, Schools were reformed, then
should they not be as they now are the seminaries of Antichrist, the bane of
the Church, the corruption of all the youth in the land: But then should they
be (that which they now pretend) the schools of all godly learning to garnish
the Church, to furnish the common wealth with fit and virtuous men for every
place, office, and estate.

LEt us now proceed to the other sort of this Collegia^e idle ministry of
the Church of England, Which are these Cathedral Abbay lubbers, These L.
Bishops, Deanes, Subdeanes, Prebendes, Cannons etc, as in their cataloge: who
live together like Monks in their Cloisters and celles, adjoined and annexed
unto some Cathedral Church, within which precincts they are ^edd and stalled up
to inte^d the divine service of the said Cathedral, ^at certain hours of the
day limited, every one in his several array, ministerial vestures, surplices,
copes, vestimentes, hoodes, tippets, cappes, rochets etc, according to their
several office, place, and degree, some singing, some piping, some reading,
some praijng, some pisteling, some gospeling, some preaching, some administering
the sacraments etc, Of whose offices, ceremonies, rites orders, customs,
severally to entreat, is not mie purpose; It suffices me that I find not any
such Cathedrals, Cloisters, Societies, Offices; Orders, Ceremonies, Worship
etc, in all the book of God, and therefore I dare pronounce them Antichristian,
such as God will not be pleased or served with in his Church.

Let not Mr. Deane under the visarde of a christian name and office think to
escape, for when we bring him to the light, we find him but a counterfeight,
having neither the office nor ministration of a christian Deacon. The christian
Deacons office is faithfully to collect and distribute the alms and
contribution of the Church. But these Cathedral Deanes feed themselves and
their troops, I say not of the weekly alms of their Church (for that they
neither gather, neither would it suffice the tenth part of their pomp) but of
the Lordships, lands, and fees of their Church; lying loytering in their
stately palaces, and not distributing to the poor of that Congregation
according to th'appointment of the Elders and the Church. A christian Deacon
keeps himself within the limits of the office he is called unto, and does
not intermeddle with the execution of their offices which belong not unto him,
as the administration of the word and sacraments etc: But these Cathedral
Deacons take upon them the ministry of the word and sacraments, many of them
having personages beside their Deanerie; And having been Pastors before, yet
for living and promotions sake, are not ashamed to go back to the Deacons
Office, or to retain both offices. Neither does the christian Deacon usurp
such place, preeminence, and dignity in the Church to sit in one of the chief
rooms with his velvet quishon, clo^h of estate, or be brought to his place
with a silver mace before him. To conclude, these Cathedral Popish Deanes have
nothing common or like to a christian Deacon, either in office, caling to their
office, administration of their office, or place where they administer.
Therefore what titles soever they carry, or pretextes they make, we may affirm
them to be impes of Antichrist, to belong to his spouse and throne, the false
Church: And not to be those holy Ministers, those christian Deacons, which
CHP^IST has instituted to his Church.

Of Subdeanes or their office we read not in CHRIST'S Testament. And as to
those idle bellies those Prebendes, we know not what to make of them:
Ministers of this Church, yea full Priests they should be, in that they are
bownde to make. 4. sermons in the year in their Cathedral: yet are some of
them Ciuilians (as they term them) lay Persons. But yt is no novelty in the
Church of ENGLAND, For Ecclesiastical Ministers to exercise civil offices, and
likewise for civil persons to usurp and possess offices in the Church, both
of government, as in their Courts abouesaid, and of the ministry of the
word and sacraments, as Prebe^des, Parsonages, and those not impropriate etc.
Of such Monkish secluding and gathering the Ministers of their Church into
these Colleges, Halles, Cloisters we have already spoken. As also of their
idolatrous and false worship which they exercise: Of the several rites and
ceremonies that these stalled bulls use therein, here to discourse, were long
and tedious: Or to stand to refute the unlawfulness of these Mother Cathedral
Churches, where Satan's throne is, wherein sit his lieutenants these Arch and
Lord Bishops, wherein are the Colleges of these idolatrous Priests and
loyterers, whose very names being but recited, and the light of the gospel
being but brought to their College and Cloister doors, is enough to discover
them of what stamp and brood they are. Yea let this light of the Gospel be
brought to the trial of their ministry and ministratio^, though nothing be
said to them, but they only put to approve themselves by Gods word, you shall
see them discover themselves of what kingdom and spirit they are, defending
themselves with their nails and tongues, smiting al such as thus call their
doings into this question with the fist of wickedness, and with the tongue of
reproach, as by their prisons and books is to be seen; The one being full of
poor persecuted christians in great distress and misery, without any
judgment or help by law, without any equity, mercy, or compassion showed;
The other being full even in every leaf, yea almost in every line of wicked
sclanders, accusations, suggestio^s, blasphemies against these faithful
servants of CHRIST their adversaries. Not approving their ministry, worship,
and procedings directly by any one place of scripture, though they be never so
much urged thereunto. But if they have no better defense, their kingdom shall be
left unto them desolate, as their brethere^ the L. Abbots, Monckes, Friars, and
Nonnes are. Al which might as well (for any thing I can fee, or they can say)
have been reserved, reformed, and tied to the saijng over this service book as
these, all being alike without warrant in Gods word, and therefore detestable
and accursed.

IT now remains that we take like sudden view of the third sort, the
servile ministry of the Church of England; namely these Parsons, Vicares,
Curates, Hirelings, Preachers, Deacons. These were blamed to Mr. Giffard to
carye strange and antichristian Names and Offices, also to have as strange and
antichristian an entrance unto their office and administration in their office,
as also that their support and maintenance is not such, as belongs to the
ministry of the Gospel. In these poinctes we desired Mr. G. to approve the
ministry of Eng^and, or his own ministry by the rules of CHRIST'S Testament.
This if he had done, al controversy had ceased, and we yielded. All this by
his own bare word of affirmatio^ and never a place of scripture, he proves
in less then one page of his book. He affirms their names to be Ministers
of the Gospel, Pastors, and Teachers. That the names of Parsons and Vicares
are not to make any distinction of the ministry, but of the maintenance
annexed to the same. That the Offices they bear, are to teach and instruct
their flocks by the wholesome word of God, to administer the sacraments, and
to make public prayers. These he is sure are prescribed in CHRIST'S Testament,
and if our eye were not malignant we might epsy them there.

THAT these names and offices of Pastor and Teacher, with this administration
spoken of, are in CHRIST'S Testament, we never doubted or made question, but now
whether these Parsons, Vicares, Cura^es, Hired Preachers, carry, truly have,
and execute the names, offfices, and functions of these christian Pastors and
Teachers, all the doubt is. And more then Mr. GIFFARD his bare word, we as yet
have not to assure us thereof: although we have even with importunity begged
and urged him, or any of his fellows, either directly to approve their
ministry by the rules of CHRIST'S Testament in their Office Entrance and
Administration: Or else to prove unto us by the word of God that such
Offices, Entrance unto and Administration in their offices, is not now
necessary and of necessity in the Church of CHRIST: but that the Prince
(whose honorable name they over much abuse to the patronizing of all their
abominations) or rather the POPE (to whose kingdom this antichristian
ministry served) has power to erect a new and other ministry in office,
entrance, and administration unto the Church, then that of Christ's Testament.
In all which if this ministry of England cannot by th'expresse rules of the
word be justified, all the powers in earth or Hell cannot make them the true
Ministers of the Gospel. For other ministry and offices of ye gospel is not
given or to be given unto the Church, then those CHRIST has instituted in his
Testament. Neither may any other Entrance or Administration be joined to that
Ministry and those offices, then is in CHRIST'S Testament appointed. If
therefore we show that these Ministers have not those offices, that entrance, or
administration mentioned in Christ's Testament, it shall be enough to show them
conterfeite, strange, and antichristian.

First then by Mr. Giff^ his leave, we must a little insiste even upon these
strange names of Parson and Vicare, which were given by their first founders
and creators at the erection of their ministry and offices, and are not read
of in all the book of God: Neither are any of those names which our Savior
Christ has given and knyt unto his ministry, for ye distinguishing and
expressing of their several offices, and therefore ca^ at no hand belong unto
the ministri of the Gospel. Neither may any mortal man be so presumptions to
give other names and denominations unto his reverend ministry and holy
offices, then the Lord of the house himself has given. Neither may or will the
true Ministers of Christ carye any other names or titles (as in regard of
their ministri or office) then Christ has given to their ministry and office.
But Mr. Giff. denies these names to make any distinction of their ministri,
but only of ye state of maintenance annexed unto the same. Let us the^ ask him
one question; what difference is there betwixt the Arch and Lord Bishops, and
the parish Parsons and Vicares of the Church of ENGLAND in respect of their
ministry, if these names be not given to put difference betwixt, and
distinction of the^ office and ministry? I trust he will not say these Lord
Bishops and Parsons have al one office and ministry in their Church. I believe
his Ordinary will hardly agree to him in this point. Let him find therefore a
new distinction to help this matter. Again, we could say to M. Giffard, that
these names of Parsons and Vicares do not only distinguish their ministry from
their Lord Bishops Archdeacons, Deanes etc, but yet makes a distinction even
amongst themselves, betwixt them and such of their other rouing Ministers,
which have no certain flock or chardge, but as soon as they are made
Ministers unto and of any one certain flock, then take they forthwith their
denominatio^ of that flock or town, as the Bishops do of the great Cities,
and are then and not before called Parsons or Vicares of such a Town. To
conclude, these names of Parson and Vicare being distinct names, and having
distinct livings appropriate unto them, belonging also to one and the same
church or Town, and being given to two diverse men and so possessed at one and
the same time, cannot but belong to two diverse offices of their Church, Except
two me^ may also have and execute one and the same office at the same instant,
as well as one man may execute two or more diverse offices of their Church at one
instant. But sure these Paradoxes are so inaudible and incredible, yea so
impossible in the Church of CHRIST, as I see not how all Mr. Giffard his
logique and learning can reconcile them to the Testament of CHRIST.

But to come to the offices of these Parsons and Vicares, Mr. Giff* says (if
we may believe him) they are Pastors and Teachers, yet sets us not down who
be the Pastors, and who be the Teachers of their Church. It should seem by his
speech that these two, the Parson and Vicare, are one office, namely, Pastors,
and that such hireling Predicantes as himself are the Teachers of this Church
of England. Let us first consider of their Pastors, by comparing them to the
Pastors office. The true christian Pastor is placed of God in his house his
church, Tit. 1. 7.
as a Steward both to divide the portion, Math. 24. 45.
and to ouersee, take chardge and look to the order and government of that
Church, Marc. 13. 34
whereof he is chosen and made a Minister, and of all the public actions
thereof, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
together with the other Elders. But these Parsons by virtue of their office
and ministry, Heb. 13. 17.
are not bound to labor in the word, otherwi^e, then to preach. 4. sermons
in the year, either by himself or by his substitute, and that not by law,
except his benefice exceed a certain annual sum in the Queens book.
Otherwise they are but bound to read the service pre^cribed in the common
book, at such times and tides as is there enjoined, to wear the Priests
attire, to read injunctions and homelies etc. Neither are they permitted, or
by virtue of their office may intermeddle, with the oversight, order, and
government of that flock whereof they are Parsons. CHRIST now in his Church
has instituted no ecclesiastical office above the Pastors office. Romans 12.
Neither may any true christian Pastor stand, or exercise his office under
any such false ecclesiastical office, Gal. 2. 4. 5.
as CHRIST has not instituted; John. 10. 12
But there are sondrie offices in the Church of England above the Parsons
office. Acts. 20. 29
Unto which superior offices al these Parsons stand subject, 3 John. 9. 10
having sworn their Canonical obedience to their Courts, Cannons,
comma^dements, to their sommance, censure, controlement, for all their actions,
ministry, conversation, to be made Ministers, deposed from their ministry,
silenced, sequestered, suspended by them. 2 Timothy 2. 4
The true christian Pastor (as by virtue of his office) intangleth not himself,
Acts. 6. 2
neither intermedleth with ^iuile actions and affairs, But these parrish
Parsons (especialie these of the Country) are busied, 1 Pet. 4. 15
and almost wholly entangled with renting, 1 Timothy 3. 3
tithing, prowling their Parrishners, whether faithful or unfaithful, Ezekiel.
13.
rich or poor, Widows or O^phanes, they marry, Mat. 23. 14.
they bury etc, by virtue of their office, and are ^o all outward seeming and
judgment rather Rieues and Bayliffes, Phil. 3. 18. 19.
then Ministers of the Gospel. Yea if it be true which some writers of no small
account both old and new have written of them, these parrish Parsons were at
the first devised and brought in to serve the Metropolitanes in the offices of
Rieues and Bailiffs to gather up their rents, etc. Again the true christian
Pastors office cannot be possessed by any ciui^e person. But the parrish
Parsons office may be, and often is, bestowed upon Ci^ilians, Phis^^ons, who,
if they wear the Priests weeds enjoined. It suffices. Not here meaning or
speaking of impropriatio^s which have no office and chardge of any Ministry,
yt being transferred to a Vicare endo^ed: Moreover the christian Pastors office
cannot be kept or executed by a man absent, or by any other in that
Congregation whereof he is chosen, then by the elect of that Congregation. But
the Parrish Parsons office may be kept by a man absent, executed by an
Attorney or Curaeie. Finnaly, Acts. 20.
every true christian Pastor is by that his officie, 1 Timothy 3.
a Bishop. But no Parrish Parson is by virtue of that his office a Bishop. T^t.
1.
Therefore and for all these reasons abouesayd the parrish Parsons office can in
no just intendement be held the true christian Pastors office.

Now let us proceed to their entrance, this being first a position perpetual,
H^b. 5. 4
That every true Minister of the Church must not only be caled to a true
office, John. 10
but must have a true and right caling unto that his office: Nomb. 16. 5. 40.
otherwise he is no true Minister, but an usurper, an intruder, a theife, a
murderer. Every true Minister then, by the rules of the word ought to be thus
caled. Every particular Congregation being a faithful flock, destitute of
some Minister (for example of a Pastor) ought to make choice of some one
faithful christian, of whose virtues, knowledge, judgment, 1 Timothy 3.
fitnes, and conversation (according to the rules in that behalf prescribed)
they have assured proof and experience in Tit. 1.
some christian Congregation or other, Acts. 14.
where he has lived. Such a one, the whole Congregation being gathered
together in the name of God with fasting and prayer for the especial assistance
of his holy spirit, to be directed to that person whom the Lord has made
meet and appointed unto them for that high chardge and Ministry. In which
Election every particular member of the said Congregation has his peculiar
interest of assent or dissent, showing his reasons of dissent in reverent
manner, not disturbing the holy and peaceable order of the Church. Whose
exceptions and reasons are to be considered of, and compared to the rules of
the word, if they be found peremptory and true. As the party to be of no
found judgment in the faith, of no sufficient knowledge in the scriptures, a
drunckarde, a smiter, coveteous, one that rules not well his own house, wife,
children etc; the^ yeildeth the whole Church to their reasons, or rather to the
word of God. But if their exceptions be insufficient or untrue, then proceeds
and stand^th their Election, and the persons that take them are publicly
reprou^d, according to their offense. This choice thus made, accepted, and
determined, the elect is to be publicly ordained and received in and of the
same Congregation, whereof and whereunto he is chosen. If there be an Eldership
in that Congregation, by them, as the most meet instruments, with fasting,
prayer, exhortations etc, if not, then by the help of the Elders of some other
faithful Congregation, one Church being to help and assist an other in these
affairs. But if the defection and apostasy be so general as there be not
any where any true Elders to be found, or conveniently to be had, yet then
has the Church that has power and commandment to choose and to use Ministers,
yea that only has that most high and great spiritual power of our Lord Jesus
Christ upon earth committed unto their hands, power also to ordain their
Ministers by the most fit members and means they have. For the Eldership does
not add more power, but more help and service to the Church in this action.
Neither does this action (which is but a publishing of that former contract and
agreement betwixt the whole Church and these elect, the Church giving and the
elect receiving these offices as by the commandment of God with mutual
covenant and vow each to other in all duties) belong to the Elders only as
separate from the Church, but to the Elders as the most fit members and
instruments of the Church, to do yt for and in the Church. Otherwise, when
the true ministry ceased, as in the general apostasy, they could never
again be recovered in the Church: because they cannot have this ordination of
true christian Elders, and so must the ministry, sacraments, and ordinances of
Christ's Testament cease for ever, and the true established Church never be
seen again upon earth: Unless with the Papists they ^il make a personal
succession of Ministers in some place ever since the Apostles time. Or with Mr.
Giffard make a true public ministry, sacraments etc, in the Church of Rome in
the diepest apostasy. Which yet of al other is the most absurd Proposition
that ever I suppose was uttered by any man, or published and allowed by any
Church, contrary to all the rules of Gods word, and eue^ to it self. For how
can there be by any reasonable man immagined or seen public apostasy, and
public faith in the same estate, at one and the same instant? Likewise if of
necessity the ordinatio^ must always be done by a christian Presbutrie or
Eldership, we would then know of them by what Elders Mr. Luther, Mr. Ca^uine,
or our English Bishopps in K. EDVVARDES days were ordained. Other Elders then
of the Popish Church there were not then to be found. Now these are sure
grounds that cannot be doubted of. The true ministry of Christ does not
belong unto, and may execute no ministry in the false Church. Neither yet
has the execrable ministry of the false Church any thing to do to ordain
the true ministry of CHRIST'S Church, neither is their Ordination available.
If then the Church of Rome and the ministry thereof were false and
antichristian, then cannot the ministry of these men which was then in that
estate given and received, be esteamed the true ministry of CHRIST belonging
to his Church. But now if they hold the Church of Rome the true Church, and
her Elders true Ministers of Christ, then is it utterly unlawful to
with-drawe, depart, or separate from the true Church at any time: And then
were al these, and are al they in a most deadly schism: Mr. Caluins
distinction, that he separated from the corruptions of the Church of Rome, and
not from the Church of Rome, will not here stand. For thereby they confess the
Church of Rome the true Church, and that they for the corruptions of the
Church depart. Which corruptions if they be not such and so incurable as to
make the Church of Rome no Church, then is it not lawful for any such
corruptions to depart from, and to forsake the true Church, and then are they
all still in schism* by their own doctrine, and so no true Ministers. This I
have thus lardglie written of the true Election and Ordination of Ministers,
because I find so great ignorance and error amongst the Divines of the Church
of ENGLAND therein. Some of them (as the most reformed) that seem to seek
CHRIST'S Discipline (as they call yt) hold, that Elections and Ordinations
ought to be done by the Presbutrie, at the least the ordination allwaies of
necessity. Others of them, the more gross of the common sort, that hold
with the time, give the Election to the Patron, the Ordination to the Bishop
only.

LEt us now come to the election, probation, ordination of this part of the
ministry of the Church of England, which exactly to set down in every
perticularlie circumstance, I cannot, not having their book of Consecration.
Election of their Ministry (for any thing that ever I could hear) they have
none, only the Bi^hop appoynteth a certain day and place when he will give (or
rather sell) Orders. Thither then repair unto him all such as want other means
to geate their living, poor, idle, inordinate walkers, to whom the ministry
is an vl^^um refugiam: None here staying for the caling of God in his Church,
but running before they be sent: Hither to this market these hungry foxes
flock. There they are by certain of the Bi^hopps substitutes, examined, if so
be that they be under the degree of Masters of their Arts, for all double
graduates need no probation, their hoodes of both shoulders show that they
have learning and divinity enough: And as for proof of their honesty and
virtue, that is not material, that is not required or looked after in this
business, except they be so evil beloved as some come to cry shame of them at
that very time: Which if they do, yet must the matters be too badd and
broad, that will be received there. And as to this probation that is there made,
it is but to know whether they have the latin tongue, and how they can
construe some sentence of some aucthor. If they be not prompt they shall be
helped, or have more easy questions, or time given them, if so be they have
any favor with Mr. Examiners, they are very mean clerks which are there
refused or sent away if they bring money in their purse, without which there is
no ministry to be had in the Church of England. Such other as yet cannot
endure this severe trial, having only their mother tongue, are to resort to
their Lord Bishop at his house more secretly; where if they can make any
friend unto him, they shall not miss of their desire; for the Bishop may, or
at least does make Ministers, as well privatlie in his own house, as publicly
at this sollemne time and place. But these approved, they are brought arrayed in
their white Ministerial vesture, unto the Bishops chair, where he solemnly
sits in his pontificalibus. At whose feet these Ministers that would be,
are caused to kneel down; where having certain articles read unto them, unto
which they are sworn and subscribe, then are they by the Bishops own mouth
made and pronounced Ministers, vzt. Deacons, certain chapters of the Bible
enjoined them as a task to read every day, as also certain books to
study diligently: his orders also with the Bishops great seal at them in a
Box, are delivered them; for which they must pay full sweetly. Thus is he
made half Priest, to read the book and serve a Cure, but not to enterprise to
preach without the Bishops special license written, sealed, and well paid for,
thereunto: neither may he administer the sacraments, until he have his full
orders, and be made full Priest. Yet now is he a fit Curate for any parish, a
fit Clarke for any benefice, come by yt where he can, For here is he made
Minister of the Church of England in general, without certain flock or
chardge, and is sent into the wide world with his license to geat him a living
where he may. Wherbie sondrie of them (by reason of the multitudes that are
daily made) are driven to make very hard shifte, to teach young children, or
to become house-Priests (I mean not now Chaplains, for they are rufflers) for
very mean wage. Yet must I needs say, the Bishop takes an especial care
to prevent this, for he has certain of their sufficient friends to be bound
I think, or else to testify, that they have 5. pounds by year to live
upon; lest indeed the Bishop himself should be after chardged to find them,
by an especial Cannon made in the behalf of poor Priests and Ministers.

Well, being now stepped into the ministry, it is not long for the most part
(especially if any benefice befall them) before they be made full Priests
either by the Bishop privately, or publicly at such day and place aboue-said.
Where they are again examined how they have performed their task enjoined,
and how they have profited in the study of divinity. Wherein being approved,
they are in manner and attire abouesaid, placed at the Bishops feet; who now
lays his hands upon them, delivers them the Bible, and breathing his
unholy spirit upon them gives them the holy Ghost (as he blasphemously says)
and sends them forth unto all people to preach and deliver the sacraments,
These men by this office ordination and sending should be Apostles. Mat^. 28.
18. 19. Io^. 20. 21. 22.
for as yet there is no certain chardge of flock mentioned. Where these
Priests having sworn their Canonical obedience, and again Subscribed, paying
for his Orders and al other fees, are now made full Priests in any ground in
England.

This common sort thus Priestified, either serve Cures, or by some means or
other geat a benefice by Presentation or Resignation etc. And here must the
Patron that owes the Advowson present him to the Bishop, And what high office
then exercises the Bishop that ^aketh and sends forth Apostles and gives
them the Holy Ghost.
as his Clarke; To whom this Priest must yet again subscribe, and then
receives the Bishopps institution in writing, with his seal thereat, which
must be well paid for also. This Priest thus instituted, comes with his
letters and seals to his parish, and takes possession of his parsonage: where
he must be inducted, an other Priest delivering him the keye of the Church
door, which he must open, and enter; where he has a bell-rope put into his
hand, and must knole a Bell: After which a peale is ronge, and he carried to
some feaste-house or other, insteade of fasting and prayer. And thus have you
heard the manner of the Election, Prob^tion, and Ordination of these Pastors
and Teachers of the Church of England. Which if it can by any learning or
conning be proved that holy caling which is prescribed in CHRIST'S Testament,
and which may not be severed from the ministry of the Gospel, then have they
the more to rejoice, and we to repent, before the Lord.

And now whether we have lied (as Mr. GIF. very boldly chardgeth us) in saying
that their ministry is imposed upon these Churches, let the indifferent reader
judge. Yea let him also consider, what kind of interest, freedom, and power
these parishes have to choose and ordain their own Ministers, The people never
seeing or knowing their Minister, until he come with his letters of
institution, or having any thing to do at his ordination; he being made full
Priest, yea and their Priest, and that whether they will or no, before he come
at them. And let Mr. GIFFARD himself look what power any parish in England
has to disanull the Patrones Presentation, the Bishops ordination and
institution. The Bishop he ordayneth them Ministers, though he or his examiners
never saw or knew the men before that present hour: He makes them Ministers
to no certain flock or chardge, therefore can no peculiar flock have interest
in their election and ordination. The Patron whatsoever he be, whether Woman,
child, Fool, wicked Person, Papist, (yea worse, if worse may be) he
presents his Clarke to that benefice, though he be an hundred miles off from
the Bishop; and the Bi^hop, though he know neither parish nor Minister, must
admit, or else lies a Q^are impedit to compel him. The Priest thus instituted,
he comes to the parish, takes possession of the Parsonage, and their
Minister he will be, whether the people will or not; they must receive him, and
may not keep him out, how bad soever he be. And whereas Mr. GIFF. brings
instance to prove that the ministry is not imposed, because that sondrie
flocks have those Pastors and Ministers of the Gospel that they have desired
and made choice of by suit unto the Patrones, and to the parties whom they
desire to have. This yet more shows their bondage, in that they are driven to
make suit unto their Patrones, and to receive from him their ministry; which I
believe Mr. Giff. shall never be able to show that any christian Congregation
did or might do. And to the choice he speaks of, I ween they were
Ministers, yea Pastors, before they chose them; And being so, they then by the
rules of CHRIST'S Testament ought to belong unto some certain and peculiar
flocks; which if they do, how then may they choose the Pastor of an other
flock to make him their Pastor? what kind of choice will M. Giff. make his?
whilst he goes about to stop the gap, he makes it wider. But now to their
chopping, changing, and leaving of their benefices at their own pleasures as
more gaynful are offered, without the peoples priuitie or consent (which is an
usual trade amongst them all, not one amongst a thousand that does not thus
flitt up and down, and Mr. Giff* none of those odd ones) for this he had not
one excuse coined, we must stay until the minte go the third time. And then let
him also consider, how these parish Parsons may without the peoples consent or
liking be absent and live away from the flock as long as they list, even all the days of their life if they will, finding them a Cura^e a journey man, to
read them their service, marry, bury etc, and 4. sermons in the year, which
they may also do by their attorney. These things if Mr. GIFF. can show that a
christian Pastor may lawfully do, then at length shall he show them like a
christian Pastor in some thing.

NOw to the Teachers office of their Church of ENGLAND; except they make their
Bishopps and Parsons to be both Pastors and Teachers, and to execute both
offices, we know not what he should mean; For we find no such office in their
Church. Their University Doctors have this title rather in ostentation of
their learning, then by virtue of any office ecclesiastical. This title is
given as well to other sciences, as Physic, Civil law etc, as to Divinity.
Their Civil Doctors execute other offices of their Church, as to be Judges of
Courts, Commissaries, Chaunsclours, Commissioners, neither are busied in
teaching, therefore they cannot be said to have a Teachers office. Their Doctors
of Divinity are either Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicares, or full
Priests, al which meddle with the administration of the Sacraments, and are
distinct offices from the Teachers office, and therefore not the same. Neither
may two distinct or diverse offices of the Church be possessed or executed by
one and the same person at once, except they can prove it possible for one
member to be both an eye and an ear or hand, Romans 12. 5.
and to execute their functions at once. These officers are caled members of
CHRIST'S body his Church, 1 Cor. 12.
these offices are distinct and several: Men with several gifts and graces by
the distribution of God himself are appointed thereunto: whose holy order they
break, besides all other inconveniences and impossibilities that ensue thereof,
which thus presume in their own persons to execute sondrie offices of the
Church at one time. Further, the churches of England have allowed them by law
but one Priest each of them (which room possessed, they are said to be full)
except some few which have Parson and Vicare, or two Parsons in a town, both
which meddle with th'administratio^ of their Sacraments, and therefore cannot be
said to have the T^achers office. As to these Curates and stipendarie
Preachers, they are either full Priests, or but half priests or Deacons. The
full Priests all of them by office may administer the Sacraments. The half
Priests none of them by office may preach or expou^de the word, without
especial license, Therefore neither the one or the other of these have ye
christian Teachers office.

And now to the stipendarie Preachers let us for example insiste upon Mr.
Giffardes own ministry; he writes himself Minister of Gods holy word in
MALDON. We would know of him in what office he does administ^r unto this
Church. We read in CHRIST'S Testament but of two Ministers of the word now
belonging to his Church. The Pastor and the Teacher* Pastor of that Church he
is not; because they have an other allowed by law, which is also his Pastor,
(and that to his further shame a double beneficed man.) Teacher there he is not;
because that Church has no such office, and is full; as also because this man
is full Priest, and (as ^haue heard) was sometime a Vicare (a Pastor he says)
from which his ministry and place he is now deprived, departed, and
apostatate, as also from all grace and feeling. Neither has he in MALDON the
credit or room so much as of a Curate, the Pastor there supplying his own
office, but is brought in by such of the Parish as having itching ears, 2 Timothy
4. 3.
geate unto themselves an heap of new fangled teachers after their own
lusts, disliking and lothing the ministry that is set over them, to which
not-withstanding in hypocrisy and for fear of the world they join in prayers
and sacraments, pay tithes and maintenance, as to their proper Minister.

To such people being rich and able to pay them well, Romans 16. 18
these sectorie precise Preachers run for their hire and wages, Phil. 31. 19.
but chiefly for vaineglorie and wordlie estimation. And there teach and
preach this people for the most part, under some dumb or plurified Pastor:
from whom as from insufficient and blind guides they withdraw not the people,
showing them the will of God in that or in any other poyncte, Acts. 20. 27
be it never so odious and abominable, Gal. 5. 11.
that might bring peril. Yet for their own estimation, Gal. 4. 17.
advantage, and entertainment, they will by all subtle means under hand seek
to abalienate the hearts and minds of this forewarde and best inclyned people
from these their Pastors, 1 These. ^. 3. 4. 5. 6.
and slily to draw them unto themselves. Ezekiel. 13. 18.
Long it were to relate their arts and engines, Ier. 23. 30.
wherbie they hunte and entangle poor souls: their cou^terfeit shows of
holiness, Math. 23.
gravity, austerenes of manners, precisenes in triffles, lardge conscience in
matters of greatest weight, especially of any danger; strayning a gnat and
swallowing a Camel; hatred and thundering against some sin, tollerating yea
coloring some other in some special persons; cunning insinuating into, and
never offending the rich, nor regarding the poor; holding and withholding
the known truth of God in respect of times, places, and persons; dissembling,
hiding, withholding yt in their public ministry and doctrines, where yt may
draw them into any trouble or trial; yea balking, if not perverting, the
evident scriptures as they arise against any public enormitie of the time,
under the color of peace, christian policy, and wisdom. Wherebie these
Scorpions so poison and stinge every good conscience, so leaven them with
hypocrisy, and teach them to halt with the times, dissembling with God and
their own conscience, that such proselytes as are won unto them, become
twofold more the children of Hell then they were before. ^ Tim. 3.
Yea so is their whole auditorie entangled with their snares, as skarce any of
them (without the especial mercy of God) are ever recovered, brought to any
soundnes, stability, or upright walking, to any conscience, true faith, or
fear of God. Herehence arises these schisms and sects in the Church of
ENGLAND, 1 Cor. 3.
some holding with these Preachers, which make show as though they sought a
sinceare reformation of all things according to the Gospel of CHRIST, and yet
both execute a false ministry themselves, and they, together with all their
hearers and followers, stand under that throne of Antichrist, G^l. 6. 12.
the Bishops their Courts, and accomplices, and all those detestable
enormities which they would have utterly removed and not reformed: And these
are hereupon called Precitians, or Purit^nes, and now lately Martinistes. The
other opposite ^ide are the Pontificales, that in all things hold and iumpe
with the time, and are ready to justify whatsoever is or shall be by public
authority established. And with these hold all the rabble of Atheists,
dissembling Papists, old and lukewarm Protestants, Libertines, dissolute
and facinorous persons, and such as have no knowledge or fear of God. Even
that ancient sect of the Pharasies and Saduces. the one in precisenes, outward
show of holiness, hypocrisy, vainglory, coueteousnes, resembling or rather
exceading the Pharasies: the other in their whole religion, and dissolute
conversation like unto the Saduces, loking for no resurrection, judgment, or
life to come, confessing God with their lips, and serving him after their
careless manner, but denying him in their heart, yea openly in their deeds, as
their whole life and all their worckes declare. Long it were, and not my
purpose in this place, to show how these Pharasie, Sectorie Teachers, these
stipendarie rouing predicantes, that have no certain office or place assigned
them in their Church, I^de 11. 13 verse.
but like wandering stars remove from place to place for their greatest
advantage and best intertainement, in the error of Bala^m powered out for wage,
seduce and distracte the people of the land, drawing them from their own
Churches and Ministers, some to this, some to that Preacher by heaps, each one
as he stands affected to him that best fitteth his humore. Mie desire rather
here is to show the forgerie of this whole Ministry of the Church of England
in their false office and entrance, as well these precise esteemed Preachers, as
the parrish Parsons and Curates: which I hope by this which is said either is
or may be done: Now yt remains that we proceed to their administration and
mainetenance.

OF their Administration we have above in ye discovery of their public
worship more perticularlie entreated, finding yt wholly according to that
erroneous apochripha popish Leitourgie, that idolatrous abominable book of
their service, whereunto they are bound, whereby they are stinted and nourrered
in all things, upon what days, eaues and hours through the year to come to
Church, what garments to wear in the Church, where and when to fit, stand,
and kneel, what and how much to read at this and that time, at this and that
lesson, Pistle, Gospel. When to read, when to singe, when to pray, where to
verse, when to Collect: with all other circumstances, ceremonies, trinckets in
their Sacraments, Marriages, Purifications, Visitations, Burialls etc, as is in
that part of the treatise (though sommarily, yet more plainly) declared,
whereunto I refer the reader. Here only affirming, that this their devised,
abominable, idolatrous worship, miserable abuse and high profanation of
scriptures, open port-sale, and wilful sacrilege of their Ministry and
Sacramens, to the most profane and ungodly, do sufficiently declare what
kind of Ministry they execute, and Ministers they are. How possible yt is
to join or to make the holy Gospel and Ministry of Christ accord unto this
people in this confusion, ignorance, and sin, or to these devises and
tromperiers, Iere. 23. 2^*
let any in whom is any light judge, when light and darcknes can be mingled
together, or the stubble and straw remain in the flambing-fire unconsumed,
then shall this be.

Yet further to manifest what kind of Preachers of the Gospel they are, and
preaching of the Gospel they make, let their most heinous and open professed
perfidie in betraying their whole Ministry, Gospel, Church, Christ and al into
the hands of their Lords these antichristian Bishops, show, from whose
apostatical Chair they have received their ministry, to whose orders and
injunctions they have subscribed, to whose Courts and power they have sworn
their Canonical obedience: from whom they have received their license and
aucthority to preach, Gal. 1. 10. (...)
with condition not to preach against any thing by public aucthority
established, how ungodly and enormous soever they be: And also have submitted
their whole doctrines and persons to these their Ordinances not to teach any
truth, or against any error that they inhibite, to preach, or cease to preach,
to administer or cease to administer, at their direction and inhibition: And
for their private estate, by them to be enjoined what kind of apparel to wear
when they ride, walk abroad, or administer: Not to marry without their
knowledge, Gal. 2. 4. 5
consent, or license even to this or that particular woman etc. Must not this
needs be an excellent ministry and ministration of the Gospel that is thus
mancipate to and by these slaves, that is thus bought and sold, limited,
prescribed, restrained? when they can prove that the Gospel may be in this
manner used in the true Church of CHRIST, or preached by the true Ministry of
Christ, we will then yield to their whole ministration, and acknowledge them the
true Ministers of Christ. But in the mean while because this is impossible,
and cannot without blasphemy be enterprised, without sin be thought; because
also we find upon this present Ministry of theirs, even all the marks of the
false Prophet, that are written in the book, and all the marks of the Beast,
we must hold them as they are, except we will with them condemn the truth of
God, and call CHRIST execrable.

Neither yet is this their preaching (considered even in yt self) set apart
from all the abuses and enormities above recited, such, as they glory of,
abounding with such great learning, excellent gifts, and rare graces of the
spirit, or answearable to that heavenly exercise of prophecy in Christ's
Church. Of their education and learning even from the grammar schole to the
pulpit, you have already heard: as also their Divinity to be traditional,
wholly derived from other men's writings and books, both for the understanding,
dividing, and interpretation of al scriptures, as also for all doctrines,
questions, and doubts that arise, and not springing from the fountain of Gods
spirit in themselves, according to the measure of knowledge, faith, and grace
given them. So that these dumb blind guides and watchmen do but see with
other men's eyes, but speak with other men's mouths, and (as one of their chief
aucthors says of them) without these books they as are blind as molles, as
mute as fishes, not able of themselves to decide, open, and interpret almost
any scripture, Or to discuss, judge, or decide any doubt, or controversy
with assurance. And therefore when any new question unwritten of before
arises, they are either al at a full poyncte not knowing what to say to the
matter, Or else when they speak, so many opinions and sentences, as speakers.
Yea even in the things they read and teach (there being so great diversity
and contrariety amongst these Writers their aucthors) there also ensues great
difference and contrariety in their doctrines which they publicly deliver,
One teaching one thing in one place, an other the quite contrary in an other.
And this not only in interpretation and understanding of sondrie, yea almost
all places of scripture, but even in most weighty (and as they call them)
fundamental poynctes of doctrine. As whether the Church of Rome be to be
esteemed a true Church or no* The Sacraments there delivered, and the
Ministry there ordained, be ^o be held true sacraments, and a true Ministry
or no. Also if the ordinances, order, and outward government of Christ's Church
left in Christ's Testament be perpetual and of necessity to be observed etc.
And all this diversity and co^trarietie of judgment publicly taught in their
Church, must be colored and passed over with this sweet sentence of Mr. Giff.
That they are but brotherly dissentio^s, they agree in all fundamental
doctrines. A happy turn it were, that those fundamental doctrines were once
agreed upon and set down, that we might then know which part of CHRIST'S
Testament is fundamental and of necessity, and which is accidental and not
necessary, but variable and at man's will. In the mean while we must still
believe that CHRIST is not yea and nay, 2 Cor. 1. 1^
of one mind in one place, of an other else where. Neither that the spirit of
God can rule in both places, where such contrary doctrines are taught and
maintained. We also are taught, that howsoever brethren through ignorance may
doubt and differ in judgment for a ceason, yet are they no there upon to teach
such things as they are not assured of, lest they publish and sow errors:
Which who so does, be he man or Angel that teaches any other thing or
otherwise then Christ. Gal* 1. 8
and his Apostles have taught and delivered, Romans 16. 17.
or causes division and dissension contrary to their doctrine, 1 Timothy 6. 3
or comes not to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ etc, we are to
hold them accursed, to watch, and avoid them.

Likewise, 1 Corin. 14. 29. 30. 31. 32.
the manner of their pulpit preaching nothing (...) to the order of Christ's
Church, where the Prophets I mean such as are known to have the gift of
interpretation of scriptures) have al of them liberty to speak, Romans 12. 6
what God reueileth unto them besides that which has been delivered, 1 Pet. 4.
10. 11.
so that they neither hinder, disturb, or interrupte the public ministry of
the Church, but use their liberty opportunely and holily to edification. They
have liberty also, yea their especial duty it is, to observe and publicly to
reprove any false interpretation, or false Doctrine delivered publicly in
the Church, by whom soever; Yea this power has the least member of the Church
in due order and place, if the Prophets and Elders should ouersee, omit,
neglect, or refuse. The whole Church also, even every peculiar Christian
Congregation, has power in yt self to censure not only any doctrine
delivered, but the person of any member or Minister of the same congregation.
But here in these Babilonish Synagogues one Priest climbeth up into their
pulpits for orations, and possesses the place alone, where he declameth,
delivers his studied tale to the howre-glasse, which being run out, he must
make an end for troubling his auditory, and leave no place or time of addition,
assent or dissent to any other, all the people hasting away. In his pulpit,
after he has read his text, he may divide, teach, or hadle yt, leave or take
yt, corrupt, falsify, wrest, or pervert yt at his pleasure. In that his
priuileged tubbe he may deliver what doctrines he list, be they never so
currupt, false, blasphemous. None of his auditore, whatsoever they be, has
power to call them into question, cerrect, or refute the same presently and
publicly, for that is by law forbidden: But the Church is driven to their
Lord Ordinary to complain, and except or until he redress, they must hold
and use him still as their Minister. In that priuileged tubbe he may inve^ghe,
accuse, sclander, deuounce against any truth or person that witnesses against
their kingedome, or against any public sin or enormitie of the time,
without censure or controlement. Nay these men are praised, incited, and
commended for this, as the most faithful and godly; which makes both the
sects, as well Reformis^es as Po^^ificall yearne praise by this vain, and
fight with one accord for their kingdom against Christ's faithful servants,
whom they call Brownistes, as against a common enemy; yea more bitterly then
they do against any other enemy, heretic, or wicked person. Only here in
this tubbe if they can keep their tongues from speaking against their Lords
the Bishops and their procedings, or against any public ^normitie in the
Church or common wealth, they may then ease their stomachs against any mean
person, or one Priest against an other, and rail their fill. These particular
Congregations have neither power to reprove their doctrines, or to censure
their persons, be the one never so heretical, the other never so obstinate;
and needs then must here be a clean Church I trow.

And now how sincerely and purely these learned Priests and Divines all the
rabble of them preach Gods Law and Christ's Gospel, to set down their several
defaultes, ignora^ces, corruptions, and unfaithfulness, were infinite. Let the
high open wilful breach of al Gods laws by all degrees, suffered, and
unreproved, declare and witness to their faces. Let their execrable Idols,
and idolatries, their abominable worship and innumerable devises, their taking
the Lords name in vain, their common swearing in every matter, and trial
for every cause and triffle, yea without any cause, their common and open
blaspheming, and cursing, yea transfiging the holy and dreadful name of God in
their anger and mi^th; Their impiety, prophannes, pride, vanity, glottonie,
excess, idleness, riote, playing, sporting, dancing etc, on the Lords day
openly seen, suffered, unpunished, show how well they keep and teach the first
Table of Gods law in the Church of England. And for the second, let the evil
nourture and bringing up of their youth, their dissoluteness, irreuerence,
head strong and incorrigible nature, yea their open disobedience and contempt
of parents and superiors, the inordinate walking of all degrees held within
the compass of no laws, limits, callings, in the fear and obedience of no
person Magistrate, Parent, Master; Let the common quarles, frayes, foodes,
tumults, bloodshed, murder, manslaughter, the iarres, hatreds, contentions,
debates, wrath, anger, envying, cursing, reuiling, nicknaming etc, Let the
common and open whoredoms, adulteries, fornications, chambering, wantonness,
daliance, lightness, delicacie and softnes of apparle, diet, manners, to deck,
provoke, allure, their courting intertainement, open and secret lust (otherwise
caled love) most rife as in Sodom; Let their open robberies, their secret
theftes, pickings, pilferinges, their open oppression, violence, wrong,
extortion, usury, their usual deceit and couen in all bargayning, buying,
selling; Let their common and customable open and secret lving, blaspheming,
sclandering, accusing, reproching, defaming, bringing up, carrying, and
receiving evil reports one of an other, their false swearing in testimony,
their swearing and foreswearing to deceive even in every triffle: And as for
covering of wife, virgin, servant, house, land, cattle, goods, insatiable
coueteousnes and greedines, heaping and hourding up treasures, contynual
purchasing and adding field unto field, yea town unto town, till they have
gotten whole countries into their possession, never satiate till their mouth
be full of moulde. these are the best and only esteemed Christians of the
Church of England; where coueteousnes is no sin. They that should speak
against yt, pride, intemperance etc. should judge the heart, and enter into
Gods judgment seat; Let these capital sins and transgressions against the
law of God, which are committed without shame or fear, either not punished or
wrongfully punished (murder only excepted, which how also yt is wincked at or
perdoned I will not stand upon) let these I say stand up to the faces of these
Priests and Prophets, being thus commonly and openly committed in their
Church, and witness how faithfully and sincerely they expound and declare the
laws and judgments of God, how carefully they watch over the souls of men,
and govern the Church, that have not against all or any one of these sins,
any spiritual weapons, or ecclesiastical censure in a readiness; So that if
the Magistrates sword (which yet wants an eye to guide it) did not repress
some sins, there should be no humane peace, as there now is no christian
order in their Church. And now if I should here stand to diriue the several and
special kinds of sins (which as rivers are divided and flow forth from all
these general heads, and as a deluge cover the face of this whole land) yt
were infinite; but what then to divide those rivers again into their
particular drops? namely, such particular persons as commit the same, yea
such and so many particular times as they commit the same, who then should
number them? All these sinners and sins are in this Church by these Leaches
these Prophets healed with the plaster of peace, with the blood and merits
of CHRIST, though there be neither faith nor repentance, they are all good
christians.

Likewise if I should here stand to relate and recite the falshode, deceit,
and hypocrisy of these Priests (let me here be understood even of those best
esteamed forewarde learned Preachers, commonly called Good men) how conningly
and craftily they teach the law, never touching or offending their auditorie
(at least the mighty or rich of them) be their sins never so heinous and
manifest; especially if they will countenance, esteem, feast, and hear these
Preachers, they are in them but infirmities, and imperfections, be they never
so deiplie set and incurable. And again how sharply they will inveigh against
others which think not so well of them, especially if they be not of power to
do them hur^e, nor of will to do them good; how they will speak against such
sins of the second Table, as their rich auditorie are not at al, or least
addict unto, and beat them down as with thunder from heaven, though they
suffer as great in them and their houses before their face uncontrolled. Yea
what fine shifts, excuses, and veales they will find out to extenuate,
excuse, or hide the sins of these great rich persons, in whose houses all
excess, glo^onie, riot, pride, idleness, gaming, shall be but good hospitality
answearable to their estates, honest recreation. And this veale of recreation
must cover al their heathen sportes within doors and without, though it be all
the day yea al their life long, though they draw never so many idle
beholders, or idle assistantes to keep them company, to follow their dogs,
hawks etc as their only caling and profession. Yea go these Esawites, their
wives, and children never so disguisedly in their strange prodigious shapes,
new fangled a^tires, with their infinite devises and curiosities, it is but
according to their degree, sex, age, calling, with infinite such like. Also,
if I should stand to relate the sondrie shifts of these Reformist Preachers,
these sighers for reformation, these conscience botchers, these Preachers of
the Gospel to win and keep credit with the world; How zealous in some
place, time, auditorie, where they may be well backed they will seem against
some triffles, as though they were of most precise and unstained conscience;
And again how lukewarm, cold, and backward they will be in the same points
at an other time, place, and auditorie, How strange to the poor that shall
desire their judgment of some poynctes, especially of these, But cheiflie if
any have espied more light then they would they should, and do but make
question of their ministry, worship, Church etc, with what exquisite sleights
they will seek to draw them back, as running too far and too fast before
their guides, with what poisoned cauills to quench their zeal and spirit, to
plead for and defend their sin and apostasy, These things to dicusse, or
but to show in particular, with their due circumstances, would require a long
and lardge discourse, yea no book were able to contain all their devilish
devises and delusions, which even fill that flying volume the Prophet speaks
of, Satan having his fordge of all mischeife continually going amongst them.
Al which their dealings evidently show what kind of ministers and preachers of
the Gospel they are, Which draw the people unto, and with their preaching
keep them in, this defection and apostasy from the Gospel, which keep the
people from, and will not lead them to the sinceare practice of the Gospel:
but with their schole learning draw a veale before CHRIST'S face, that the
people might not see to the end of his ministry, neither discern what
CHRIST'S will is for any action of the Church, or to examine by the rules of
CHRIST'S Testament any thing by public au^thoritie established. Yea we see and
have showed, how they draw the people unto, and themselves administer by an
other Lei^ourgie then Christ^ Testament, which prescribes an other kind of
administration both to themselves and to the whole Church in all things, then
CHRIST has prescribed. We see and have showed, how they hold all the people
under this more then Babilonish yoke of these antichristian Prelates, their
Courts etc, and stand themselves the marcked Ministers, sworn subjects, and
bond servants of these their Lords, have fetched their ministry, license to
preach, and their whole administration from them, how they are prescribed,
stinted, limited, censured, silenced, deposed by them, how they have submitted
and betrayed themselves, Church, Gospel, Christ to these enemies: Also what
merchandise they make of their prayers, Gospel, preaching, sacraments, selling
all and themselves to, for money: What trafique they make of their benefices,
how they come by them and part from them, how they have in all things gonne
astray, forsaking the right way, having followed the way of Balaam of B^sor
that loved the hire of unrighteousness, and are in all things so thoroughly
corrupted, as they are the most bitter and pestilent enemies of the kingdom of
CHRIST, and of the sinceare practice of the Gospel; Devising to themselves and
their miserable followers daily new errors and bye paths, as fast as the old
(wherein they have walked) are discovered, as any that will take the pains to
examine by the rules of the Scriptures their books of discipline and new
forms of reformation, or rather those ancient primative defections which they
seek again to revive, shall perceive. For mie part I am even ir^ked to rave
in this bottomless abysme of their iniquities, which the more they are looked
into still offer more matter of reproof, even without end. Wherefore I eue^
with wearines here cease further to speak of their corrupt administration,
hoping that by this already said, at the least upon due examination thereof, it
may appear to al men, that this their whole administration and preaching of
the word is altogether as corrupt, and in all poynctes rightly fitteth unto
their antich^istian office and entrance. It now remains that we have to and
over their maintenance.

THE maintenance of the ministri of the Church of ENGLAND is of these four
sorts 1. Either by lordly revenues, with their royal rightes, civil
jurisdiction, Courts baron, tenancies etc, belonging thereunto. 2. Or by fees
and pollages taysed and rauened in their spiritual Courts, for judging
pleading, soliciting, writing, fetching up, sommoning. 3. Or by gleabes and
tithes. 4. Or else by annual set stipendes.

The first forte of these we have already showed to belong to Princes, to
civil Lords and persons, and to be utterly unlawful and forbidden to the
ministry of CHRIST. Mr. G^F. his liberal maintenance, or the ordinance of the
Church, cannot maintain them. Neither will that word Philoxenos, which they
so lardgly stretch and interpreat, carry half this pomp.

To the second sort we affirm these Courts, Officers, Judges, Advocates,
Proctors, Registers, Purseuantes, Sommoners, together with all their functions,
the orders of their Courts, manner of jurisdiction, pleading etc, where all
things are pleadable if not vendible for money, where al causes even the most
foul, find their advocates, colors, defense, delays for money etc, Al these
spiritual Courts, officers, judgments, pleadings, customs, we find devilish
and antichristian, and not to appertain to the Church and kingdom of CHRIST,
but to belong to the kingdom and throne of Antichrist, and of the Beast. And
therefore may conclude that they are the revenues of sin, not to belong to the
ministry of CHRIST.

The third kind, these tithes, we find merely ceremonial, to have been
ordained for, Nomb. 18.
and belonged unto the Leuiticall ministry under the law. We find them an
inheritance of the Levites: An offering of the people: Therefore they cannot in
this manner by law by tied to the ministry of CHRIST, be made an inheritance
unto them, an offering of the people unto them. For if there be a chandge of the
Priest-hoode, the^ of necessity must there be a chandge of the Law. Heb. 7.
12.
No part of the ceremonial law or of those shadows can be joined unto the
Gospel and ministry of CHRIST, Gal. 4. and 5. Chapter.
they or any part of them cannot now be revived or retained without the denial
and loss of CHRIST. Collos. 2. 20
And how is the ceremonial law abrogate whilst these tithes are in this
manner allotted by law unto the ministry of the Gospel, as an inheritance to
them, as an oblation of the people, eue^ as in former time unto the Levites?
The Princes commandment, or the Churches decree cannot alter the nature of
these tithes, to make them either civil or lawful. God was the aucthor of
this law, he made it ecclesiastical: Man can neither chandge the property or
ye end thereof, to make that civil that God has make ecclesiastical. ^ Chr^n.
31.
King EZECHIA commanded and revived this law; it became not therbie civil. A
godly Prince commands all the laws of the first Table, all the ordinances of
Christ's Testament, shall they therbie be made civil, and no longer
ecclesiastical or Gods laws? The decree of the Church also (alleged by Mr.
G.) shows it ecclesiastical, for the Church makes no civil decrees, yt
medleth not with the execution of civil government. Touching the power of the
Church to make laws and decrees, we have in the first part of this book
spoken. The Church is bound to the laws of God, and may make or receive none
other laws then God has made. Christ is the only Lawgiver and King of his
Church. Again, this decree of the Church to ordain y^ the ministry of the
Gospel should be maintained by tithes, you see is directly contrary to the
will, yea to ye being of Christ, in receiving that law and maintenance which
Christ has abolished together with the Leuitical ministry. And as well might
they revive the Leuitical ministry, or any other Jewish ceremony with as
great pretext and warrant, as this; except the Church of ENGLAND have some
special warrant from or together with her Mother of ROME to revive and erect
whatsoever CHRIST has abolished, be yt never so contrary unto him; yea and to
abrogate whatsoever Christ has instituted, be it never so necessary. How bold
the Church of England is in these things, in their tithes, offerings,
purification, suspensio^, their holy cimiteries, and cells, the shape of their
Church, with the porche, batlementes, i^les, Folding doors, lights,
ministerial vessels, ministerial garments, days, feasts etc, As on the other
side to abrogate Christ's Ministry and the ordinances of his new Testament, 1
Cor. 9.
is above declared, and in this appears. For Christ having instituted an
other mainetenance for his ministry, Gal. 6. 6
namely the free contribution and benevolence of his Saints in these
Congregations whereunto they belong and administer; 1 Cor. 16. 1. 2.
The Church of England judging this al to base for her Ministry, has
instituted or rather received of her mother of Rome Lordly yea Princely
livings, Courtly judicial fees, Gleabes and tithes, set and certain
stipe^des. She will not have the lowest of her Ministry to live thus beggarly,
to depend upon the benevolence of the people, as our Savior himself, his
Apostles, and Ministers did: (which a certain Doctor of hers in di^daine caled
the almouse basket) But she will have al her ministry sure of their maintenance
before hand, they shall neither depend upon God nor the Church; But she gives
them their lines and portion in the land amongst the people, and also gives
them a law over the people, wherbie they may exact their duty, Mich. 3.
if the fleese or flesh be worth so much. The Priest here thrusts his
flesh-hooke into every poor bodies kettle, Ezekiel. 34.
his ^ithe and sick^e into every field, 1 Samuel 2.
prying and prowling in every place and corner, skratching and gathering up
his tithes eue^ to the chicken and egg, to the mynte and anise without regard
to whom they belo^ge, Math. 23. 23
whether to the faithful or profane, Leu. 22. 25.
papist, atheist, witch, or heretic, to the poor or fatherless, Hab. 1.
catching up al with the angle, they cetch it in their net and gather it in
their yarne and burn incense to their yarne, because this their portion is fa^
and their meat plenteous, Math. 23. 14.
deuowring widows houses under color of long prayer. Now how this tithing
prowling extortion, may be made the Christian Ministers maintenance, I would
feign learn, Esa. 30. 24
Who as the Prophet says should be fed with clean prouander that is wynowed
with the shoue^ and with the fan. Who themselves ought to be examples of
piety, equity, meekenes, and not like greedy Wolves thus to make a pray of
the sheep. Ezeck. 13. 4 19.
Likewise how this tithe gathering and co^tynual prowling may be enjoined or
made to accord to a christian Ministers office, Or how it is possible for the
true Minister of CHRIST diligently to attend his study and office together
with this his tith gathering, let any that knows the work of the ministry
judge. Yea rather let the holy Ghost judge, that expressly forbids the
ministry of the word to be entangled with such business of this life. 2 Timothy
2. 4
If it be here said these tithes may be gathered by an other, yet this shows
they cannot be gathered by the Minister. And so still this reason holds, that
therefore they are no fit maintenance for the ministry. The other reasons above
recited, prove the unlawfulness of them.

To the set stipendes also and gleabes, I in like manner affirm them to be an
other maintenance then that Christ has instituted for his ministry; yea to
take away that order, to the great detriment and manifold inconveniences of the
Church, and therefore likewise unlawful. Holding this proposition firm, that
where CHRIST has instituted a maintenance for his Ministry, the Church may
not devise or receive any new or other laws for the maintenance of their
ministry, then CHRIST has given. CHRIST then has ordained that they that
dress the vineyard and feed the flock, should eat of the fruict of that
vineyarde and of the milk of that flock, to which they attend. This
mainetenance in other places is set down to be the free contribution and
benevolence of the Saints from time to time, according to the present
ability of the one, and necessities of the other. This the Lord in wisdom
has thought most meet for his Church and ministry unto the wo^ldes end: As
whereby to knit the hearts of them together in the band of love, in all mutual
duties, to have each other in mind, to care, provide, and labor each for
other as they ought. The Minister according to his du^ty to s^eke pasture for
them, to thresh the^ out the corn out of the ears, yea to grind, prepare, and
divide yet to the nour^shment and comfort of them al. And they again on their
part to labor, to administer of their earthly goods to the necessities and
wa^tes of their Ministers and guides. Phil. 4. 10. and^.
Whereby y^ one is encouraged in their studies, labors, and diligence, thus
reaping the fruictes of the peoples faith and love, and are assured that they
do their duties to the approbation and good liking of the flock; which when
they shall fail and will not be drawn faithfully to do, then is not the
flock any longer burdened with or bound unto such a Minister. As one the other
side, if the people fall from the faith and refuse to walk orderly in the
faith, then are the Ministers no further bound, or to continue to administer to
such a people. But now whilst the Ministers mainetenance is made certain by
law, or bargain, by stint, rate, or proportion imposed upon the people, how
much and when each one shall pay, how much the Minister shall have yearly; It
first depriueth God of the glory due to him for his blessing upon their
labors and endeavors, in restrayning the free contribution and willing
benevolence of the people by this law or bargain, making yt of necessity,
stinting, and apportioning yt to this or that rate, which the Lord has left
at the liberty, discretion, and will of each one, as God has prospered, and
according to that present ability God administreth. (...). 13. 16
with which contribution and sacrifice how well God is pleased, 2 Cor. 9.
the Scripture every where witnesses. Then it takes away or extinguisheth
all those mutual and contynuall duties, Phil. 4.
benevolence, love, care, labor etc, betwixt the flock and the ministry.
The flock therbie not knowing or having means to do their duty unto their
ministry. The Ministers therbie so hindered, incombred, and with-drawen, as
they either slack, or neglect their duties to the flock.

By this corrupt custom also sondrie intolerable inconveniences and grievous
mischieues do ensue. This setting out land or certain rates by way of law or
bargain in every parrish or Congregation to the Minister, does hinder the
Church from the choice and use of such other Ministers as Christ in his
Testament has ordained to the government and service of his Church, the
parrish or Congregation neither indevouring to have more, neither indeed
suffered to have more, or by this means able or willing to keep more. This
setting out lands, tithes etc, to the Minister by way of law, does always
presuppose of necessity a true established Church, and true Minister in those
parrishes unto the worlds end: those lands and tithes being appropriate and
bound thereunto, and having none other owners. Which confirms and
establishes those gross popish errors of a personal and continual succession
of Ministers, and local contynuance of a visible Church. Again when this
living is thus by law given to a Priest for term of his life, be he never so
unable, unworthy, or negligent, the parrish is so long bound unto him, and
can by no means get rid of him. yea be he never so bad, his faults and errors
never so foul, they cannot without or until their Lord Bishop will, geat rid of
him, they must mainetaine him and receive his Ministry, whether they will or no.
Further these annual liuinges by law and set stipendes by rate, presuppose
always one permanent and certain estate both of the Parrishoners and
Ministers, The one, even every person ever to be able to pay so much, The
other never to need more or less: Yea that always to the worlds end all the
Parsons and all the Parrishoners of that town shall never need or be able to
give more or less, whether the Lord send scarcity of ple^tie, dearth or
cheapnes, sickness or health, loss or advantage, children or no chardge etc.
Again, such unreasonable inequality is used in the distribution of these
liuinges, the Parson of some one little Hamblet where are not twenty houses
having one hundredth or two hundreth-pounds by year to live on, an other of a
much greater town not having twenty pounds, yea peradventure ten pounds by
year for that chardge he has to live upon: And this for ever without regard
of the needs or labor of them, it being alike to them and their successors
whosoever. To conclude, the tithes and set stipe^des of these Parrish Priests
being of the goods of the profane, most wicked, and ungodly, even of al their
parrish indifferently; yet are more odious and unmeet for any christian
Ministers, who are not to stand hierdes to such dogs and swine to administer
to them the gospel and sacraments for their goods and hire. It was not lawful
for the Priest under the law to receive the offering of any stranger from the
faith, such might not enter into or offer in the Temple. Neither now under the
Gospel may the unbelieving have any fellowship with the Church, or
communicate in or intermeddle with any actions of the Church. But this
contributio^ is an action of the Church, a communion and duty of the Saints.
How execrable the^ is this their sacrilege and coueteousnes, that thus make
marcha^dize of y^ holy things of God, and let out themselves to hire even to
the profane, for filthy lucre. The true Ministers of Christ may not be
suspected, much less openly ^aynted of such peremptory faults as these,
which disable him from all ministry in the Church, and are eueriewhere set
down as undoubted marks of a false Prophet. By all which then as by all other
arguments of their antichristian office, entrance, and administration, we may
still and yet more strongly concl^de them not to be the Ministers of Christ.
Seeing neither the office they execute, their entrance unto their office, their
administration in their office, nor yet their maintenance, can be joined unto
the Church, Ministry, or Gospel of CHRIST.

THere yet remain a few base straggling offices of their Church, vzt. Their
Church-warde^s, Questme^, Parish Clark. These are al lay me^ (as they call
the^) yet intermeddle they with ecclesiastical affairs. their offices
perticularly I can neither describe, nor yet well distinguish. The
Church-warde^s are (as yt seems) an other kind of Deacons, They gather and
keep the Church stock and treasury, and also the penalties of such as come
not to their divine service, and also distribute the same unto the poor, the
reparations of the Church etc: they keep one of the keys of the town cheste.
The Quest-men are liker unto Elders, these (I suppose) they look to the order
and government of the Church, as well Priest as People. That the Priest use his
ministerial vestures, vessels, and trincketts, read his service, homelies,
injunctions, orderly. That the people do not bargain, talk, or walcke in the
Church and Church yard during the time of divine service; They also must look
to the alehouses that there be no tippling or playing, during the said time:
and who be absent from their Parrish Church, and present such defaltes at Mass
Commissaries Court accordingly. The Parrish Clarck he is the Priests
Accol^^th to help him to say his Mattens and Euen-songe, with his due versicles
and Resp^nse, to help him at his Sacraments Marriages, Church-goings,
Visitations, Dirges, Rogations at all assayes. He ringeth their bells to and
after their service, their knells and soule-peales; he keeps the Church door
keye; he sweepeth and ^rimmeth the Church; he nurtureth the boys and dogs
that they be not to loud at service time; yea he may do yet many things
more, if he have the Bishops letter; as in time of need to christen children,
and to read divine service in the absence of the Priest etc. To stand to show
the forgerie, several defaultes, or dissimilitude of these offices from the
Deacon or Elders that God has appoyneted, were tedious and needless, they
having neither mention nor use in Christ's Testament and Church.

Thus now have we summarily perused all this rabble of the Ministry of the
Church of England, and have not found any one of them right, or almost in
any one poyncte according to the rules of Christ's Testament, they are all
strangers there, they belong not to Christ's body his Church, neither are
they knit as members unto that head. But out of the smoke of the bottomless
pit they came when that fallen Star Revel. 9. and 13. and 16. and 17. and 18.
Chap.
Antichrist had the key thereof given him; to his body his kingdom the false
Church they have always belonged, always served; to him in his several
shapes they have always been knit, as the members to the head; from him and
not from CHRIST we all with our bodily eyes see the Church of ENGLAND has
received them. We see they bear not CHRIST'S but Antichrists image, marcke,
life, power. What then should hinder this assertion, that they together with
Antichrist their head do grow, live, reign, stand and fall as the branches
with the tree. Luke 11. 17.
Should a revoulte, division, and schism in a kingdom within yt self? No,
this but hasteneth the Lords judgments the sooner to make it desolate. Can
this revoulte and schism either transform or reform this ministry? Let
their present estate judge. 2 These. 2. 7.
Should Antichrists changing his shape from his mystery to his exaltation,
from his exaltation to his Consumption, Revel. 13.
Or his Ministers transforming and masking themselves under shows and visardes
of righteousness, 2 Cor. 11. 13. 14. 15.
make them ever the better, or hide and defend them from the light? No, all
things when they are reproved of the light are manifest. Ephesians. 5. 13.
The light of the Gospel shall discover and abolish Antichrist. 1 Cor. 3. 13.
14. 15.
As he rose by degrees, so shall he by degrees vanish; As he and his train
rose out of the smoke of the bottomless pit Revel. 9. so shall they all go
into utter darckenes, 2 These. 2. ^.
even thither again. Revel. 16.
The Beast and the false Prophet shall be taken by him that rides on the white
horse and his holy army, these both shall alive be cast into that lake of fire
burning in brimstone. The Lord himself has spoken yt. Revel. 19.

Now let us see what arguments Mr. GIFFARD after more then two years study
has brought us to approve his ministry by. He told us erewhile that they
were true Ministers of the Gospel, Pastors and Teachers, had a true calling and
ordination; Now come his proves. The ministry of the Gospel which brings
the word of faith and reconciliation betwixt God and the world, is the true
ministry of CHRIST, for the Devil and Antichrist ordain no such ministry.
Now the ministry of the Church of England does bring no word nor doctrine
but the sacred Scriptures; yt preaches faith in God through CHRIST, and the
doctrine of repentance, delivering the holy Sacraments as seals to confirm
the same. Let all the schismatics of the world barck etc. I am loathe to take
Mr. GIFF. in a Parologisme at the first where reasons are so geason, lest
hereafter we have no more, especially lest we have more varyance about the
form then about the matter in this, yet when he shall have reduced it to right
form, he shall then but have begg^d that which we demanded, and still look
that he should prove. vzt. That their ministry is the true ministry of the
Gospel. This, because every true ministry of the Gospel is in some office,
unto which office there must needs be a true and lawful calling, therefore we
desired him to prove their ministry in the office, entrance, etc, by the
scriptures. Mr. GIFF. giving us his bare word that they are Pastors and
Teachers, making no proof thereof, quite ouerskippeth their office and
entrance, and proves them Ministers because they do administer. As if a
private person should reason thus. I have knowledge of the law, I administer
true justice and judgment, Therefore I am a true Judge, a lawful Magistrate.
Does he thinck that this reason will excuse this usurper either before God or
his Prince? If he then will have any better speed, let him prove his
ministry directly and plainly by the scriptures, first in the office he
chalengeth, then in his caling unto his office, as all the Apostles and true
Ministers of CHRIST have done, and ought to do. And then if he can justify
his administration and be found faithful, he shall have praise with God and
man. Otherwise by this balcking and begging that he should, and has been so
often urged to prove, he but manifests his weakness and forgerie in those
poynctes, and but to loses as many of these preposterous arguments, as he
brings. Yet that he be not too far conceipted, or any other deceived with
this argument, against his next book, we give him to wiete, That the second
part of his argument is a false and impudent assumption. The Church of ENGLAND
brings and emposeth an other word and other ordinances then the holy
scriptures, as that devised abominable Leitourgie their idol seruice-booke,
the rule and foundation, yea the very matter and substance of their public
worship, and administration, their popish superstitious ceremonies and
trincketts, their ungodly and antichristian ordinances, ministry, and
government. To all these abominations they join, or rather subject and abuse
the, Gospel. And therefore preach not faith in God nor CHRIST, neither the
doctrines of repentance truly and sincerely: but deny God in their works and
CHRIST in his offices. They bear the yoke of Antichrist, draw all the people
unto them, souder them even the most wicked and impenitent in their sin and
iniquity, with their prayers, preaching, and sacraments. Not suffering any to
forsake these seen sins and abominations, or to come unto CHRIST, but
drawing and holding all the land under the wrath of God etc.

NExt he by the way makes a learned apology for ye dumb Pastors of the
Church of England his brethren, against whom if yt be objected that their
ministry is not the ministry of reconciliatio^, because they cannot preach
the Gospel; He here sets down a learned note by way of two rare
distinctions. We must first he says distinguish betwixt the ministry and the
Minister. The man may be of the Devil, and yet his ministry of God. Then we
must distinguish betwixt the function yt self, and the execution of the same.
As when the office is laid upon one that cannot preach, the function it self
is entire, the defect only in the execution thereof; Therefore the ministry of
the Church of England is the ministry of the Gospel, though some do not, and
others cannot preach. Sure this is so subtily contrived, as men of mean
judgment and capacity shall never be able to perceive how it is or may be
brought about. The first Distinction is granted, so the sin of the Minister
be secret, or not such as disableth him to the ministry. But what of this,
may any open, unworthy, or insufficient person be a Minister? Or is the
ministry of such a one good and acceptable? There is no such consequence from
hence to be gathered. To the second in like manner it follows not, because we
may distinguish and put difference betwixt the office yt self and the execution
of the office, that therefore any office of the Church may be given to any open
insufficient, or unworthy person; Or if yt be, that the ministry of such a
one is good or acceptable: For the calling of the Church cannot enhable such
open insufficient to the ministry, whom God refuses, or make acceptable that
ministration, which God disaloweth. Now then these dumb Pastors that cannot
preach, are apparently insufficient and incapeable of that office, therefore no
calling of men can make them true and lawful Ministers: And being no true or
lawful Ministers, their ministration is then unlawful, accursed, abominable
to God and men. These then being allowed Ministers, and their ministration
publicly by law approved, and received in the Church of England, we may
conclude the public ministry and ministration of the Church of England to be
unlawful, accursed, and abominable thus far forth, notwithstanding Mr.
Giffardes pair of distinctions. Otherwise, if he labored to prove the
ministry of the Gospel to be in yt self always entire, holy, and blessed,
notwithstanding the infirmities and faults of me^: this all men will grant,
and needed not his learned distinctions to prove the same. But what is this to
prove the ministry of these dumb Pastors, Or the other ministry of the
Church of England to be that ministry of the Gospel: which we for all the
reasons above alleged confidently deny.

HIs second reason. Such as have the caling and ordination of the Church, have
the ministry In the next sectio^ his Minor follows. In England the Ministers
have their caling and ordination by the Church of GOD, Therefore etc. To the
Mayor he adds a clause, that yt may be a true caling notwithstanding some
faults of ignorance or otherwise; So he understand this otherwise to be of
negligence, and not of any wilful and obstinate transgressio^s: Or not any of
those pere^ptorie faults excepted by the holy Ghost, which disable the elect
and disanul the election, then we thus far assent. But when we reason of the
caling of the ministri of England, we speak not of a true caling, though
imperfect with some faults of ignorance or negligence, but of a false
counterfeit and antichr^stia^ caling, which we have proved and affirm theirs
to be. The caling of the Church ought always to be yt caling of Christ
prescribed in his Testament, which theirs is not. To his Minor now, first we
deny the Church of England to be the true established Church of Christ. He
proves it thus That people which has forsaken heresies and false worship,
and embraced the doctrine of the Gospel has in it the true Church which has
the power. We observe much subtlety and fear in this position. For whereas
he ought to have affirmed Are the true Church, and have the power, he
fearefullie and subtly says has in it the true Church, which has the
power, not daring to justify or join issue of their outward estate, but
leaving himself a starting hole to flee to such secret ones as God may call and
have amongst them. We doubt not but God has in Turckye or Persia, yea in the
Church of ROME many dear elect; but should we therefore say that Turcky,
Persia, Rome, are the true Church? We affirm also and will approve against all the false Prophets of the world, that in this land the Lord has such a people
that have thus forsaken heresies and false worship, embraced the Gospel, and
have this power of CHRIST. But we deny this their Church to consist of this
people, to have forsaken heresies and false worship, to have truly embraced the
Gospel, or to have this power of CHRIST, to elect, ordain, excommunicate, or
to redress any enormitie: but are driven to these antichristian Bishopps for all these. Who receive not power of the Church, but usurp and exercise absolute
power over the Church, yea the whole power of the Church, as has been showed.
Which is unlawful either for the Church to give, or for any true christian to
receive or execute. Neither can th'aucthoritie of any mortal men or Parliament
make that lawful, which God in his word condemns and forbids. And so
even by this his own allegation, all this ministry made by and standing under
this usurped inordinate antichristian power of the Bishopps, are also
unlawful. To which if we add the unlawfulness of the office these Ministers are
called unto and execute, the unlawfulness of their calling in the whole manner
thereof unto, by, and in no flock certain, the unlawfulness of the ordayners,
as also of the ordained, their open ambition, greedines, and insufficientcy,
their false manner of probation and ordination, with all the ungodly and
execrable ceremonies, vows, oaths, subscriptions used to the same, none can
mistake this caling and ordination of the Ministers of ENGLAND, for that true
and holy election and ordination of the Church of CHRIST: without which true
caling there can be no true Minister. No true Church may use or can justify
any such false caling as theirs. And so still we must leave Mr. GIF. to prove
the office and caling of his ministry.

That ministry is of God, which is to bring men to the faith, and to build up
the body of CHRIST. The ministry of England is to none other end. Therefore
etc. The Minor he proves Because the whole drift, scope, and burden laid upon
them, is, to feed with wholesome doctrine and to guide in the ways of
godliness the sheep of CHRIST walking before them in godly conversation. Mr.
G. said erewhile that the Ministers of England were no intruders: But sure vt
seems they are very nimble leapers which skippe over the hatch into the
house, and will not stay until the Master of the house call, until the Porter of
the house open, but without any lawful calling or entrance will needs thrust
themselves Ministers upon the Lord and his Church whether he and they will or
no. Yea Mr. Giff. will prove himself and these his presumptuous companions true
Ministers without this caling or entrance, by the ends of their
administration, although the Lord of the house never caled them to be
builders, or committed unto them the work and ministry of his house. The
deceiptfulnes and disorder of these kind of arguments we have above showed,
and with the same general answer might dismiss this. Save that by the way
we must give him to understand, That his Assumption is a shameless
presumption. They build not upon but destroy the house of God, the body of
Christ. This their work, the present estate of their Church witnesses to
their face, and shows what manner of worckmen they are: where we find not one
pin, nail, or hook in due order and proportion according to the true
pattern. They feed not the Lords sheep but the Lords goats, and that not
with wholesome food, with sincere milk, that they might grow and be
increased thereby, as the general sin, prophannes, and ignorance of al
estates both Priests and people declare. Neither guide they in the way of
godliness, but in the ways of destruction and calamity. They have al declined
and been made together unprofitable. And the way of peace they have not known.
And as for the conversation of these Priests, it may well be an example to the
flock in all idolatry, superstition, impiety, unfaithfulness, apostasy, halting
and dissembling with God and man; worldlines, coueteousnes, deceit, and what
not. So that the saying of the Prophet is come about, That there are like
people like Priest. All this Mr. G. in his festered conscience knew before, and
that his shameless assumption would not pass with his adversary with whom he
had to do, and therefore he leaves the proof of this assumption, as also of
his office and entrance, and yet again assayeth by a new argument of the
effects, together with that which is properly adjoined to the Ministry of
CHRIST, to prove his Ministry.

THat ministry with the'xecution whereof there is joined the effectual grace,
power, blessing CHRIST. But such grace, power, blessing, operation is found in
the Ministry of England. Therefore. First here still must be observed a begging
and assuming of a true Ministry, which as yet is not proved: Neither does this
reason prove a Ministry, so much as show the infallible effects of true
doctrine and true preaching, whether it be by Ministers, or by other faithful,
which have the gift of prophecy, knowledge, interpretation utterance etc. For,
far from the truth is it to think, that only Ministers beget and win to the
faith (as some most shamelsse Bishops, and senseless Priests of this age have
published and mainetaine.) Then might they as well with the Papists permit the
word of God only unto Priests: yea suffer none but Priests to speak of the
word or holy doctrines, Act. 20. 32
if this use and end of the word were taken away, if the blessing and power of
God should not go with his holy word and truth in the mouth of all his
servants, Iam. 1. 21
both to call unto the faith, an to super-edifie in the faith: Else should al
duties in families, all mutual exhortations, Rom 11. 16
admonitions, Heb. ^0. 24. 25.
conferences cease. 1 These. 5.
But having the commandment of God to al these, 1 Cor. 14.
the evidence and testimony of the blessed and comfortable effects following
the faithful testimonies of al Christ's Disciples in all ages, Acts. 8. 4. and
11. 19. etc.
and contynual experience hereof amongst out selves daily, we dare affirm that
others besides Ministers may convert souls and begeate faith. So then this
argument of the effects proves not so much a true ministry, as it does prove
true doctrine. For no false doctrine can beget true faith, though many which
be no Ministers may beget true faith. Mr. Giff. the^ reasons very corruptly
and deceiptfully in attributing the conuertion of souls as proper and peculiar
to the ministry, which is not so, and in bringing these effects to prove a
true ministry, which only are to prove true doctrine. And now to Mr. Gif. his
assumption. We deny that any false ministry has promise of blessinge, or is
sent of God for the conuertion of souls, but on the contrary we find it
accursed, and sent of God for the seducing of the reprobate. The ministry then
of the Church of England being proved false in Office, Entrance, and
Administration, can have no such promise or blessing of God as Mr. Giff.
assumeth. If it be demanded then whether al under this ministry be damned. I
say it is a new question, and kept secret to the Lord, who only knows who
be his, when and how to call them. It becomes not us to give any such final
judgment of matters not known unto us: Yet this we may be warrant of the
whole scripture say, That the ways of the false Church and ministry are the
ways of death, and have no promise of salvation. But for the persons we judge
charitablie, even so long and so far as we may, measuring them by our selves,
as we sometimes were, hoping and not doubting, but God has many thousands
dear elect there, yea even in the Popish Churches, whom he in his due time by
his appointed means will call. If Mr. Giff. here insist and say that many of
those thousands are couerted by their ministry, Therefore their ministry is
not in the power of ANTICHRIST, or of the Devil, but of God, having that sure
seal that work of the holy Ghost. We have above answered that this rather
approves the doctrine then the ministry, and is to be attributed to the word
of God, rather then to the person of man. Further, that the false ministry has
no promise of blessing. Yet do we not herebie restrain the infinite power of
God from sauinge or calinge his elect even by the doctrine of the false
Church: which though it be so thoroughly leauened, corrupted, perverted,
abused, yet can the Lord bring the truth of his law and gospel which is there
read, and after their manner preached in such sort, ^o the ears and
cons^ie^ces of his chosen, as it shall both show them their degenerate estate,
^ow guilty they are of the breach of Gods law, how liable to his wrath, and
also show them the true means of their restoring, redemption, reconciliation,
salvation. Yet this does neither justify the false Minister of his
ministration, no more then when a young Boy, dumb Minister, or unbelieving
profane person reading the holy scriptures, or some other book of true
doctrine, some of the hearers (God so opening their understanding) should
thereby be brought to the ackowledging and faith of Christ, the fear and love
of God etc. This Boy, reading Priest, profane person, by reading is proved a
true Minister, a true preacher, a true christian; Or these that are thus won,
comforted etc, to seek no other Minister or means of their salvation then
this reading by these persons. Let the doctrine then in that poyncte whereby men
are thus begotten to these beginninges of faith, or to any increase thereof, be
always true and sound so far forth, the manner and time of apprehending, be
the work and power of God, the means and instruments of conuaying or
bringing, variable at the will and appoynctment of God. Yet are we only to
s^eke, use, and rest in those means which the Lord has ordained for our
instruction and leading forth in the will and ways of God, which means only
have warrant and promise of blessing unto us, howsoever the Lord by his
infinite power and worcking can and no doubt does save some in Turckey amongst
the heathen, in the false Church amongst the false worshippers, by what means
yt pleases him: yet may not we hereupon either resort unto or remain in
these forbidden places in hope of these effects, because God (if such be his
will) can save us here, or if it be not his will to save us the^ no true Church
of ministry ca^ avail us. This were most highly and dangerously to tempt God,
a reprobate kind of reasoning. God his will unto us is, that we always obey
and rest in his reueiled will, and not to presume upon his infinite will and
power, which he keeps secret unto himself. This caused the holy Martyrs and
faithful at all times, and us the Lords most unworthy witnesses at this time,
after that Gods spirit had wrought effectually in their and our hearts, and
opened our eyes to see part of his holy truth, as also some of the heinouse
abominations committed, defended, and wilfully persisted in in the false
Church and ministry, constantly even to death and bands to witness against
the same, and to forsake the false Church notwithstanding all the pretextes,
g^oses, and arguments the falfe Prophet shall adorn the Harlot with, or make
for his Ministry. So dear is the love of God and of his holy truth unto us, as
we can suffer our selves neither by men or Angels be drawn into any seen or
willing transgression of his holy word. And as for these arguments of Mr.
Giffard what other are they then the Papists have brought against the first
faithful witnesses John Husse, Jerome of P^^ge, Luther, Calvin, Frith, ^indal
etc, Or may bring at this day against all the Churches that are departed from
them. Unto the execution of our Ministry is joined the effectual grace, power,
blessing, and operation of the holy Ghost to the true convertion of some men's
souls, Therefore our Ministry is not of the diuil or Antichrist, but indeed
the true ministry of Christ. Else all that have lived thus many hundred years
before you in our Church, and knew not these new learninges you hold, are
damned: Else all that have died in our Church are damned: yea else you must
hold all the Kings and Princes, Nobles, Pieres, and people in our Church
reprobates etc. But let us come to your selves ye that are the aucthors of this
Schism. Where had you your faith, your first knowledge of God and of Christ,
if not in this Church by our ministry? we have the true scriptures amongst us,
we teach truly concerning the Godhead and the thee persons thereof, God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, though distinct in persons, yet
one God etc: We preach Christ in his two natures very God and very man. That
he came into the world for the salvation of al mankind. That God so loved the
world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever belieueth in him
should not perish, but have life everlasting. We preach Christ crucified for
our sins, dead, buried, risen again, ascended, glorified. We preach him in
his three offices to be our King, Priest, and Prophet: We preach all the
fundamental articles of our christian faith; and as we preach, so you believe
al these. Yea and we appeal to your consciences whether you have found joy
and comfort in your own souls at the preaching of these doctrines. Again, we
preach the laws of God in the tables, and beat down such sins as we see
to be contrary to the same, in such sort as many are drawn to repentance, to
hatred, sorrow, and remorce for sin: And these again we raise up with
comfort and hope of forgiveness, and with the promises of eternal life. These
things if ye schismatics feel not, yet unto many others which by our
preaching are converted unto the Lord indeed, which unto fear and trembling
do feel the power and sweetness of the lively word, we may say as the Apostle
unto the Corinthians in like case. If I be not an Apostle unto others yet ame I
one unto you, ye are the seal of mine Apostleship in the Lord. And as for you
Lutherans, if you continue not, that is not our default, if you fall from grace.
It is enough for us that you have felt this majesty of the word, and it
suffices to prove our ministry that the power of the holy Ghost goes with
y^, when men have been so moved, though they continue not, seeing the reprobate
may feel this power and taste this sweetness for a time. Now then our ministry
being thus proved by the law and the Gospel, and by the testimony of the holy
Ghost in these powerful effects, How can you thus separate from the means of
your salvation, from that ministry which has begotten in you, or at least does
begeat in others this knowledge, faith, comfort, etc? Our ministry the^ being
thus proved, our Church must needs follow, for a true ministry does not
belong, neither is at any time found in a false Church. Yea you must grant
that whilst we hold the true foundation, we are the true Church, though we
err in matters of circumstance and other doctrines, as you think: yet that
takes not away our being of a Church. The Churches at Corinth, Gallatia, Asia
abounded with many faults, errors, corruptions, as we read, yet are saluted by
the Apostles, recorded by the holy Ghost as true Churches. Now that we hold the
foundation, our confession of the articles of our christian faith, the ten
co^mandementes, the Lords prayer, etc. (which you also confess and use)
show. Therefore whilst you depart from us, you depart from the true Church.
Hereupon they might also use those rethoricall flowers of Mr. GIFFARD his
divinity to rail, reproach, and invaye. That they are rank Donatistes,
Lutherans, ignorant, furious, franctick, schismatickes, yea damnable
heretics, forsaking the ministry and truth of God, condemning the Church of
God, bringing the holy ministry thereof into contempt, and so bring in flat
atheism, barbarism, rebellion against Magistrates etc. How thincketh Mr.
Giff. would not these arguments fit the, Papists as well against them, as they
do him against us? Is he not driven to hard shift, when he must borrowe weapons
of them to defend himself, his Church, ministry, worship, government? They
must needs stand fast when they are built upon their grounds. Let him then
first answer the Papists to these reasons, before he bring them against us,
and then if he be not satisfied he shall hear what we can say to them. For
sure if they be not of force to bring them home again to their Mother of ROME,
they will never persuade us to go back to them. In the mean time Mr. Gif. we
signify unto you concerning this reason which you urge and dilate, That it is
a ground of Anabaptistrie to justify open transgression by inward motions. It
is a ground of Atheism to plead for or tolerate sin, because of such good
effects as you imagine to proceed thereof.

Mr. GIFFARD his next argument is drawn from our confession. We confess that
they were blessed Martyrs that suffered in Q. MARY'S days. But they were
converted by the same ministe^ie which we have now. They had the same motions
at the preaching of Latimer, Hoper, Tailor, Bradford, which our people have no^
at our preaching and Sacraments touching says, repentance, and resolution to
die for the testimony of the Lord. Therefore let the Brownistes and al other
wicked schismatics barck that we h^^e no ministry etc. This reason hangs
upon the same thread with this other last before, and is built upon the same
popish and Anabaptistical grounds. Touching the persons of these Martyrs, we
have already in our first reply unto your answer, set down our christian
opinion and judgment. Yet can this argument of their persons no more justify
this antichristian ministry of Lord Bishops, parrish Parsons, merceanarie
vagra^t Preachers, then it has pleasured the Pope heretofore, who had as many
godly predecessors and Martyrs to boast of as they. The forgerie of their
whole administration, preaching, worship, sacraments, is further discovered,
then these winde-shaken fig-leaues can hide the shame thereof. The truth is,
howsoever the Lord does reserve the canonical Scriptures, and some other
doctrines of the Godheade, the suffering, resurrection, and glory of Christ, of
the judgment and life to come etc, in the false Church and ministry, and by
his secret power and will can use the said scriptures and doctrines to the
salvation of some, yet these effects are not to be ascribed to the false
ministry or their corrupt ministration, adulterate Sacraments etc, which have
no promise of blessing: 2 These. 2. 9. 10. 11. 12.
And therefore those inward motions and comfortes received by them, are
delutions, without ground or warrant of Gods word, Esai. 66. 3. 4.
the actions as they do them not being acceptable, but accu^sed in Go^s sight.
The faith and repentance wrought by their (...) appears in the general estate
and life of their people, Ie^^* 6. 19. 20. (...).
yea of their whose Church. As to that christian zeal, courage; and consta^cie
to dye for the testimony of the truth (which he popish lie caleth Resolution)
and says is wrought by their ministry, we shall begin to believe yt, when
they begin to walcke in the truth, and to shake off that antichristian yoke
they stand under; but whilst in this manner they betray their whole ministry
and gospel, the whole power and liberty of the Church into the hands of these
antichristian Bishops, standing their sworn and marcked soldiers,
administering and preaching after their prescription and limitation, being bownd
by oath not to preach against any thing by public authority established,
how odious or enormous soever, Pet. 2.
but for fear and filthy lucre stand ministers of al these abominations, we
are warned by the holy Ghost not to be deceived with their swelling words of
vanity, promising us liberty, whilst they themselves stand the bond servants
of corruption. And for the aucthor of these blaspheamous books Mr. Giffard,
who is apostatate and fallen away even from that little faith and light which he
sometimes seemed to have, building now again the things he sometimes
destroyed returned with the dog to his own vomit, and as the washed sow
to the wallowing in the mire, yea most cursedlie blaspheaming the truth of God
and the poor witnesses thereof, as a most bitter and professed enemy fighting
in most hostile manner against the kingdom of Christ, for and under the
kingdom of Antichrist, we shall believe that he will suffer for the Gospel of
Christ when Q. MARIE retourneth again to persecute: In the mean while we say
with the holy Ghost: It had been better for this man never to have known the
truth, then after he had acknowledged yt to turn from the holy commandment
given unto him.

YEt remains an other odd popish reason of Mr. G. his old store, brought by
him in his first answer unto certain articles of ours, as the only proof he
the^ could find for his ministry, vzt: The affirmation and consent of other
Pastors and Churches, sending such as doubted to enquire of these strangers
their judgment of the Church and ministry of England, and in the mean time
councelling them to suspend their judgment. This reason and council because we
rejected as insufficie^t, unsound, and popish, requiring rather some proof by
Gods word of themselves (wherein we wholly rested, and not in the opinions of
men) then thus to be sent in this case from the learned ministry of England
unto strangers to know what they think of their ministry, as appears in
our reply, to which we refer ye reader for our answer to this argument.
Hereupon Mr. G. in his first public treatise against the Donatists of ENGLAND
renews this old argument or quarrel rather by con^riuing this odious
question. VVhither the people in these controuercies ought to be sent unto such
heretics and Schismatickes as we are, or unto the learned Pastors of other
Ch^rches. This question after he had thus charitablie framed, he as gravely
and reverently discusseth with these and such like holy christian passages.
See how sottishly ye cauil. Blind presumptuous heretical Sch^sm^tickes. Yours
is the course of al arrogant proud heretics and Schismatickes which covet to
have the people depend upon them, that they might have fame. Or unto unlearned
rash Brownistes, intruding themselves without caling and running before they
be sent. As the harl^^^ and whoores of the stews that boast and glory of
their chasti^ie. Who is more ^ierce and outrageous, more uncharitable in
condemning then ye Brownistes? And yet ye bragg of such patience and charity
as can not be overcome. The Devil counterfai^ing Christ's voice in heretical
Schismatics should not be able to allure and call away the sheep from their
shepheardes etc. part of 78. and of the. 79. page of his first book? How
thinck you, has not this Clarcke been well nourtured and brought up, that can
thus learnedlie devise and handle a question and refute his adversaries in
less then one page of his book? He that finds not these those mighty
weapons through God to cast down holds and reasonings, and to the captiuating
al understanding into the obedience of Christ; He that finds not this that
quiet and gentle spirit, that heavenly peaceable wisdom from above, that
lenity and meeknes wherewith the Minister of Christ instructs the contrary
minded, might even herebie doubt of Mr. G. his ministry. And see after this
storm is a little blown over, and he has somewhat discharged and eased his
full stomach, in the end he allows of our course and council for the trial
and proof of their ministry by the word of God only, and not by the opinions
of any men who^soeuer; Saying that it is the same in effect (if we could see)
that himself gave before. Peradventure Mr. G. means, if we could see into his
mind, for in his writing there was no such matter. But well, seeing we are
agreed of this course and trial of their ministry by the scriptures, why are
we thus reviled and reproched for consenting unto, demanding, and expecting
this trial? yea why is not this christian peaceable course taken, this trial
and proof made? why has not Mr. G. at the least approved his ministry in
the Office, Entrance, and administration by the evident scriptures? And thereby
both have approved themselves and convinced us, before he had pronounced this
balsphemouse sentence against us, who acknowledge with reverence every word of
God, thereunto submitting our whole faith and life to be tried, corrected,
directed in all things, which reproachful sentence Michael himself that head of
Angels and men, du^st not give even against the Devil in controuercie betwixt
them. These controuercies betwixt them and us being of no less momente then
Moses body, and none of us our own Judges in this case, but al standing to
the judgment of God by his word, ought to have been more soberlie and
reverently handled. Wherein what Mr. G. has failed we leave him to his
accomptes before that dreadful Judge, where the consent and applausion of the
Bishops and clergy of England shall not excuse him for all or any of these
despiteful reproaches and foul scla^ders that he has brought up and published
in these his blasphemouse books, upon the Lords faithful servants and poor
witnesses in bands against this antichristian ministry and their ungodly
proceedings. Which if here with all the deipe learning of Satan cannot be hid
or defended, how should they stand before his face that has his eyes like a
flambe of fire, Revel 2.
that searches the hearts and reins, and gives every man according to his
worckes. And for us, seeing we find this their whole ministry by examining
them by and comparing them unto the rules of Christ's Testament, to be false,
forged, and antichristian in their office, entrance, administration, and
maintenance, to have no place or mention in Christ's Church; Seeing we before
our eyes see them to have served in and belonged unto Antichrists* even the
Popes kingdom and throne, the false Church, with all the abominable
idolatries therein, we dare boldly affirm and conclude, That they keeping
these offices cannot now belong unto or serve in Christ's kingdom, his Church,
neither be kint unto Christ as their head. But as the Holy Ghost wittnesseth
of them, they have a King over them, the angel of the bottomless pit, whose
name in hebrewe Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon, in all languages and places,
Revel. 9. 11
the Destroyer. And as we find them, so according to the commandment of God,
we leave and avoid them: turning our eye and speech now a little to the fourth
principal cause of our dislike of, and separation from the Church of England.

THE FOVRTH PRINCIPAL CAUSE OF OUR SEPARATION FROM THE Church of England, is.
4 FOR that their Churches are ruled by, and remain in subjection unto an
Antichristian and ungodly government, clean contrary to the institution of
our Savior Christ.
FRom this proposition is this argument manifestly and directly drawn. No
true established* Church of Christ may willingly receive, or vvittinglie
stand subject under any other ecclesiastical government them Christ has
prescribed and instituted. But the Church of England willingly receives and
vvittinglie stands subject under a strange ecclesiastical government, other
then that Christ has prescribed and instituted. Therefore the Church of England
is not the true established Church of CHRIST.

The chardge and argument being so euidient and inevitable as Mr. G. in his
first answer (whilst he stood of the Reformistes side a suitor for
Reformation) durst neither for shame deny, not yet for fear affirm, he
sought by moving, and after his manner proving, a new question, to obscure and
turn away, at the least (until he saw further how the times would go) to
shift off the present proposition, that pressed so sore, with such ambiguous
doubtful delphicke words and speeches, as might be interpreted in what sense
himself list, And he salfly turn to that side that were likest to prevail
and carry the creadit in the world. First by way of Supposition and Admission,
in these words. If it were admitted that there is some yoke of antichristian
government, Under which the poor Church may groan, is yt therefore no longer
the spouse of CHRIST? Mr. Giff* having thus entre^ched himself, might issue out
of this sko^ce and turn to which side he would. As well might he from hence
have stood of the Reformistes faction, by saying that he never sought to plead
for, or to defend this government of these Prelates (but even in these words
he does affirm and pronounce yt to be a yoke of antichristian government, a
bondage, an oppression of the Church etc.) As now being reuoulted to the
Pontifical side, he says, he did but propounde it by way of question,
supposition, admission. For the present government, he holds yt the true and
very government of Christ in substance and matter, howsoever yt have not the
same form, and be not executed in that manner which Christ has prescribed; Of
which form there is great question, whether it be permane^t or variable;
Neither will he meddle with the discussing thereof, because he will displease
neither side. But this he held, and holds, That the true Church may be
oppressed and remain under some yoke of antichristian government. That it is
the lot of the Church to be oppressed with outward bondage, to be made to keep
the vineyarde which is not her own, to be beaten of the watch me^ etc. Mr.
Gif. was answered unto these, That there is great difference betwixt civil
bondage, and ecclesiastical bondage: Betwixt outward oppression or persecution,
and an antichristian yoke or government. That the Church had been or might be
in civil bondage unto, outwardly oppressed and persecuted by either civil
magistrates, as Pharao, Nebuchadnezzar etc, Or by false ecclesiastical
Ministers, proud antichristian usurpers, as P^shur, Caiaphas, Annanias etc. But
yet that the Church of God may never by the one or the other sort be brought
into bondage of, and wittingly remain in subjection unto any yoke of
antichristian government, not even to the least law, tradition, or devise of
man, which they see to be contrary to the word of God. For this was showed to
be a loss of christian liberty, if they should by the will or power of any
mortal man or men whosoever, Gal. 4. 9. 10. etc.
be again entangled in any yoke of bondage, or brought in subjection of any
law, devise, or tradition of man, seem yt never so holy or expedient, Gal.
5. 1. etc
be yt Circumcision* Days, Feasts, Fastes, Meats etc, Col. 2.
To be so contrary to the Gospel, as the truth thereof should not continue
amongst them, if they should give place to any man in the least of these
things by way of subjection for the space of an hour Gal. 2. 4. 5. To add
unto the word of God, to superordeyne unto the Testament of Christ, yea to
abrogate the Testament of Christ. Gal. 3. 15. To worship God in vain Mat. 15.
9. Not to hold the head, but to be rashly puffed up in the sense of their own
flesh Coll. 2. 18. 19. It was showed that Christ is the only lawe-giuer,
King, Husband, and Lord of and in his Church. That one kingdom cannot receive
two kings, One marriage bed two husbands, One house two Lords so contrary as
Christ and Antichrist, at on and the same instant, And that one neck cannot be
said to bear two yokes, and draw in them both at one instant: Neither one
person be a faithful subject, wife, servant to two so diverse and contrary
Kings, Husbands, Lords, 2 Cor. 6. 15
as CHRIST and Antichrist are. CHRIST divides not, neither has part, Reu. 11.
and. 12. Chap.
fellowship, or communion with Antichrist. There is contynual war betwixt
their kingdoms and subjects, betwixt the false and true Church, Gal. 4. 20
the false and true seed, they that are borne after the flesh, Io^. 15. 18.
etc. and 16. 2. 3.
persecuting them that are borne after the spirit. It was showed that we are
his servants and subjects to whom we obey. That this yoke and bondage of
Antichrist, breaks the wedlock, breaks the Covenant with CHRIST; Math. 6.
24
CHRIST'S love and Covenant being no longer bound or plight to us, Romans 6. 16
then we keep faith to him. which faith is forfeited, and war ended, by
yiedling and standing in bondage to Antichrist, by taking and bearing his yoke.
which bondage and yoke was showed and proved to be the badge of Antichrist,
Reu. 13. 15 16. 17 and 17. 15
the marcke of the Beast, which all the miserable multitudes upon which the
Harlot the false Church sits, are compelled to receive in their foreheades
or in their hands, Gal. 4. 26 and. 5. 1. 2
wherbie the children of mount Sina are known from the children of Jerusalem
that is above and is free with all her children: John. 8. 32. etc.
For all which children our Savior Christ has purchased a full and perfect
liberty at a dear and precious price, having given unto al his children the
arrhabon of his spirit, To. 8. 14. 15
not the spirit of bondage but the spirit of adoption as sons. 2 Cor. 3. 17
And where this spirit is, there is liberty. For if we be sons, then are
we free and no bond servants. For the bond servant abides not in the house
for ever, John. 8. 35
but the son abides for ever. Coll. 1. 12. 13
It was also showed him to be a blasphemous error to say That to bear
Antichrists yoke and government, is the lot of CHRIST'S Church. To conclude,
it was made plain unto him how fowllie he misvnderstoode, abused, falsified,
and perverted those places of the Song by him alleged to prove that
blasphemous error. So that if Mr. G. would either have been advertised or
advised, to make and put difference betwixt civil bondage and subjection, and
an antichristian bondage and yoke, betwixt bodily oppression and spiritual
subjection, Or would duly have pondered our opinions, reasons, and proves, Or
would have been admonished of his former dotages and errors, he could not
again in these points thus boldly have r^sisted the evident truth, turned
away the direct scriptures, unjustly chardged and blasphemed us, persisted in
his old d^^est^ble errors, tun headlong into new and more, and vnsufferably
abused and perverted the holy scriptures thereunto.

WE never denied, and therefore may evil be chardged to hold, That the Church
might not be held in civil bond^ge, bodily oppression, persecution etc, by
wicked ungodly guides both civil and ecclesiastical. But what of this? may it
hereupon he concluded, that therefore the Church may be held under Antichrists
yoke in ecclesiastical or spiritual bondage? There is no such consequence of
this. yet this is the state of the question propounded by Mr. G. in his first
answer. And this he there endeavored to prove by this reason, as also by the
places of the Song. And now again labors to bring to pass by an odd
subtle di^tinction or division of his own devising, and by sundry more places
of scripture. He divides this antichristian yoke into two sorts, a strict
yoke, and a lardge yoke. His strict or proper yoke, he says is only spiritual
and inward, where the faith and conscience are burdened and be in subjection
to receive Antichrist his laws and worship. The lardger yoke is, when the
Pastors of the Church do usurp more then they ought in external government,
or tyrannously abuse the power committed into their h^nds. This he calls some
antichristian yoke. The first he says cannot be borne without falling from
the freedom we have in CHRIST. The second (as the lot of the Church) may be
willingly suffered and wittinglie borne, and yet remain the Church of CHRIST.
and this by sondrie places of scripture he endeuoreth to prove.

First unto his distinction or division of an antichristian yoke into straight
and lardge, outward and inward, we acknowledge yt without the compass of our
reading, or understanding. We still affirm that no yoke or government but
only Christ's, may be borne or received of the true Church. We further say, and
already have proved, that all the laws and ordinances of Christ's Testament
(how outwardly and small soever they may seem) concern the conscience: and
that the wilful omission and transgression thereof, bondeth both body and
soul unto judgment, without repentance. So likewise we hold, that every
antichristian yoke chardgeth and binds the conscience, both body and soul,
It being opposite unto, and a transgression of CHRIST'S laws and ordinances.
And therefore wonder how these Academical divines these pleaders for iniquity
d^re hatch us these poisoned distinctions, of lardg and straight antichristian
yokes, the one binding, the other not concerning the conscience. Except they
can show Gods law. Or else some transgression of Gods law that binds and
chardgeth not the conscience. Until Mr. Gif. can do this, he must give us
leave not to receive his curious distinction of lardge and straight yoke,
outward and inward. We think also his reason somewhat hardly constrained,
when he concludes, because Antichrists yoke is spiritual, Therefore only
inward. We call yt spiritual because yt comes (as also Antichrist himself
does) by the effectual worcking of Satan: As also because it is wholly about
spiritual and ecclesiastical actions and procedings. But shall we therefore say
yt is only inward? Might not by these reasons the whole visible Church yt
self, all the public ministration, actions, and ordinances thereof, as also
every person and member thereof be said only inward, because they are al said
spiritual? Again it seems that Mr. G. little understands what an
Antichristian yoke is, that terms every sin and disorder arising in the
Church, an antichristian yoke. We confess the Church may transgress of
negligence or ignorance, yea and so suffer such ungodly presumptuous persons
and Ministers to abuse their power for a ceason; yet this is not willingly to
bear, or wittingly to receive any antichristian yoke; neither cease they
hereupon to be true Churches, whilst they despise not admonition, neither
refuse to repent being reproved. Yet this we say, the Church greatly sins
in suffering such presumptuous inordinate persons, whom they ought to cast out.
And if so be the Church either want will, and refuse to cast them out being
admonished; or want power and be not able to cast them out being discovered,
but it brought in subjection and remains in bondage to these guides, yt
cease in this estate unto our judgment to be the true Church of Christ.

And now to the scriptures Mr. G. brings, that the true Church may wittingly
and willingly be brought into bondage of some antichristian yoke Ezech. 34.
Ierem. 5. 31. Ier. 20. 1. Ioh. 7. 13. John. 9. 22. First we say, that these
Ministers were by office and caling true Ministers of the Temple, but their
Ministers by office and calling are not, and so no comparison. Then we say,
that these were now so wholly degenerate and apostatate in Iehoiakim and
Zedechiahs times, and the whole state so corrupted and fallen from God into
most execrable idolatries, as they were not to be held the true Churches of
God, but were pronownced by the holy Ghost whores, murderers, idolaters, so
commanded to be judged, esteamed, and forsaken of all the faithful: As every
where in those prophecies of Ezechiel and Jeremiah appears, and we have
lardglie in ye SECOND PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION proved, And himself in that
estate confessed, that they ought to be abandoned by the godly. For the
general estate in the time of our Savior CHRIST'S Ministry and suffringes,
we have also proved, that they were that malignant persecuting Church, which
did excommunicate CHRIST and all that confessed and believed in him: from whom
our Savior and his Disciples separated.

And now to the place of the third epistle of John. I vvrote to the Church, but
of them Diotrephes loving the primacie receives us not. For this if I come, I
vvil bring to remembrance the works which he does, prating against us with
malicious words, and not content in these, neither himself receives the
brethere^, and them that would he forbids, and casts them out of the
Church. These verses I have thus englished to the word, because me thinckes
the usual translation (though in yt self not evil) seems a little too much
to nourish some false collections, which neither the words nor circumstance of
the text will bear. But now what will Mr. G. gather or conclude from this place?
Diotrephes he says abused the power of government ambitiouslie. If he mean
the power of the whole Church, the power of communication, it would be showed
and proved wherein. If he say, in that he cast the brethren out of the Church,
We would first know of him what brethren the Apostle there speaks of,
whether those strangers, or such members of that congregation as were willing
to receive those strangers, and whether they were cast out by way of
excommunication. If he say those members that were willing etc, we affirm the
whole context, the argument of the Epistle precedent, the faults of Diotrephes
reckoned up, and the admonition subseque^t, to show the contrary, that he
means of the other godly strangers, Gaius in the premises being commended
for interraignement of those strangers. Diotrephes here blamed for these
faults, Of an ambitious humor loving and aspiring to be chief or first, and
could not endure to be under the Apostles. 1. Therefore he received not the
Apostles letter, 2. He pratled against them with evil words, 3. neither
himself received these strangers, 4. But forbad them that would, 5. And so kept
or cast them out of the Church. The admonition was, that they should not
imitate evil, but good etc. Many reasons might be drawn from these
circumstances, from sondrie words in the original, but especially by the right
dividing of these two verses it will appear, not to be meant of the abuse of
any censure of the Church, of excommunication. As also by the exhortation
drawn from these faults. For how could Gaius or any other of the Church
imitate him in this, when there was no more Pastors of that congregation but
Diotrephes (if he were a Pastor as they suppose) and by their rule only the
Pastor may excommunicate? But what now if it were admitted (which can never by
this scripture be proved) that Diotrephes did both usurp and abuse the power
and government of the Church, what will Mr. G. collect and enforce from hence?
First that this tyra^nous oppression did not make them to be no longer Christ's
Church which remained under him. Well, and what will, he conclude hereupon, That
these Parishes which wittinglie remain in bondage under the yoke of these
popish Prelates, which receive this false antichristian ministry, this popish
idolatrous worship and ordinances etc. are the true Churches of Christ? As there
is no consimilitude (except in this one poincte of evil, wherein yet these
Parishes far exceed) so is there no consequent or comparison betwixt a Church
and no Church, a true Church and ministry, and a false Church and ministry.
Neither have we a better argument in all Mr. G. his book to approve the
ministry and procedings of the Church of England, the^ the most odious sins
and faults of other Churches; which were not recorded by the holy Ghost for
us to imitate or to plead for sin by, so much as left for examples, and as
yt were land marks, to flee sin by. Again this Church here remained not
wilfully under this tyranny of Diotrephes; They never had been reproved and
admonished, therefore. Howsoever we justify not or tolerate the least sin
that God condemns in his word, yet we make not any sin, until
impenite^cie and obstinacy be joined thereunto, to disanul and break the
Covenant with God. Neither do we make every inordinate and presumptuous part
(when the Ministers of the Church extend themselves beyond their line and the
limits of their office) straight way an antichristian yoke, if they be not
seen or repressed at the first. For as it is said, both the Church and
Ministers may sin in such things and transgress the rule of ignorance or of
negligence. And so what will this example help their Church, which stands
wilfully and wittinglie in seen bondage unto these antichristian Prelates?
But Mr. G. says the Apostle did not will the faithful to separate themselves,
or not any longer to obey Diotrephes in any thing* well, and even this his
own fond collection does show, that Diotrephes sin was neither so
prejudicial, heynouse, or publicly known to the Church, as he would make yt.
For if Diotrephes had either usurped the whole power, or abused the public
government of the Church so far, as to cast out of his own sole authority
in his own name what brethren he lust, yea those of the most virtuous and
charitable, he had not to have been suffered in the Church, muchlesse to have
remained a Minister with such public heynouse sins upon him. This had been
contrary to the laws and rules of Christ's Testament, to the practice and
procedings of the other Apostles, to the safety of the Church. To al which it
is not credible or audible, that this Apostle would be so contrary* neither
may it be inferred from this place without grievous perverting the scriptures,
and injury to the holy Ghost. If Diotrephes fault had been in this nature so
heynouse and public, what needed the Apostle to say: If I come I will declare
or bring his worckes to remembrance, the Greek word is hupomneso. submonebo.
I will submonish. Again, the beginning of the. 10. verse, Dia touto. propter
hoc for this. shows an other cause, an other mattter, an other fault. Mr.
Giffardes other place. John 16. v. 2. serves his turn as evil. They shall
cast you out of their Synagogues, yea the hour comes that every one that
kills you shall thinck he does GOD good service. It is strange that Mr. G.
should think and use this as spoken of the true Church, when the very next
verse has these words. And these things they will do unto you, because they
have not known the Father nor me. I hope these are no marckes of the true
Church, not to know God nor Christ, or to use such barbarous hostility
toward the disciples and faithful servants of Christ. If then these marckes,
this tyra^nous usage, and the blood of the Saints be found upon the Church
of England, they shall by this glass and place descrie her to be the malignant
persecuting Synagogue, and not that persecuted Church consisting of Christ's
true disciples and faithful servants and witnesses. As to his other shoteancker
and fundamental usual place at al assaies. 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 4. (from whence he
draws a maine argument from the Church of Rome and of England, to prove them
both the Churches of God, Because it is there said that Antichrist shall sit in
the Temple of God, And Antichrist sits in the Church of Rome and England,
Therefore the Churches of Rome and of England are the Churches of God) I do
refer the reader to the second transgression for answer, which place and
argument he shall there find lardglie handled and discussed.

IN the next poincte Mr. G. in his bad conscience finding the little consequent
from civil to antichristian bondage, quite forgeteth, forsakes, and turned
the question, And would now make us or at least make others believe that we
hold that the Church may be in no outward bondage. whereas we hold yt may not
bear Antichrists yoke, or be brought into any antichristian bondage. Having
fully set down this opinion as ours, he pronounces us. Anabaptists, and
wondreth how so proud a spirit could be in rotten flesh, so flatly to
contradict the spirit of God in these places Genes. 15. Exodus 20. and all the
places of the Prophets, where the Lord threatens that they should be ledd
into Babylon, and be there in bondage. To take away his wonder though not his
folly, We give him again and again to understand, That we never denied but
that the Church might be in civil bondage, in bodily oppression, but never
might be brought into any antichristian bondage, either lardge or straight,
outward or inward, as he distinguishes. And therefore willed him to put
difference betwixt civil and antichristian bondage, betwixt bodily
oppression, persecution etc, and any ecclesiastical antichristian yoke. We
acknowledge the Church to have been in civil bondage, in great persecution and
bodily oppression in Egypt and Babylon; But that they were there in any
ecclesiastical bondage, or received any antichristian yoke, we utterly deny.
And demand of Mr. G. where he can show that any of that faithful there bowed
down to their idolatries, received any new laws and ordinances at those
tyrants for the worship of God, the administration and government of the
Church; Or if he can show that any did thus, whether those persons were by the
word of God to be esteamed members of the Church? And as to the place by him
alleged. 1 Corinthians. 7. 21. 22. Art thou caled a bond servant care not for it;
For the bond Servant cal^d in the Lord, is the Lords freeman, yt fully
shows that difference which we are driven so often to inculcate unto him
betwixt civil and antichristian bondage, The one here showed to be an holy
estate and calling, no preiudize to the kingdom of God, or to the liberty of
the Saints, The other in all those places above recited to be contrary to the
kingdom of CHRIST, to our christian liberty and faith, to be intolerable,
and not to be borne or suffered of the Church, or any member of CHRIST. In as
much as Antichrist is an adversary, an opposite and lawless fellow, that
lifts himself up not only against, but above God, showing himself that he is
God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. causing al both small and great, rich and poor to receive
his marcke Revel. 13. which marcke we have declared from sondri places to be
bondage and subjection to his statutes and decrees, even as christian liberty
is the marcke of the children of the free woman, of the heavenly Jerusalem*
Which bondage and subjection being the marck of the Beast, all the men that
receive the same either upon their fore-heade or upon their hand, shall drinck
of the wine of the wrath of God, of that pure wine mixed in the cup of his
wrath, and shall be tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels and
before the Lamb. and the smoke of their torment shall ascend evermore, and
they shall have no rest day nor night, which worship the Beast and his image,
and whosoever receives the prynt of his name. Reu. 14. And it follows
immediately. Here is the patience of the Saints, here they that keep the
commandments, of GOD and faith of JESUS. Whereupon we may conclude, that no
antichristian yoke, not even in the least things is to be borne or suffered in
Christ's Church by way of subjection not for the space of one hour, But all
things rather to be vndergonne, then to stoop down to the Beast to bear his
marcke, or worship his image.

BY this time Mr. Gif. having shot off al his new ordinance to little purpose,
retireth himself again to his old skonce, and will by no means be driven from
his two places of the Song. Wherbie (when he before so missed to prove the
Church in any antichristian bondage) he now lets that matter fall, and
brings these places to prove the Church to stand in outward bondage. Which
doctrine though it was never by us denied, but that the Church might be in
civil and bodily bondage, yet we affirm nothing less to be proved by these
places. In the first we hope Mr. G. will not be so gross to take those
vineyardes for local vineyardes, Cant. 1.
and that setting or putting to keep them, for civil or bodily bondage. for
besides that nothing could be more gross or diverse from that heavenly
spiritual argument of Solomon in that song, So would CHRIST never will the
Church or any member of the Church, to shake off any lawful or civil yoke
in that manner, to depart from their earthly Lords and Masters, to refuse such
lawful service and honest labor as they should enjoin them. Likewise to the
second place There may great difference be put betwixt bondage, Cant. 5.
and persecution or oppression. That the Church there was in grievous
persecution is evident, but that yt was in any bondage we cannot by that text
or any circumsta^ce thereof perceive. Thus Mr. G. every way misseth his
marcke, and as a giddye droncken man he reeleth from one side to the other.
Sometimes endeavoring by these places to prove the Church in bondage to some
antichristian yoke, yet not daring to affirm those vineyardes (which her
mothers sons put her to keep) to be Antichrists vineyardes, which if
affirm and prove not, there is no antichristian yoke to be dreamed on in that
place, all the strength of his reason or rather delusion lijng in these words
The Sons of my Mother were incensed against me, they set me the keeper of the
vineyardes, mie vineyarde that to me I kept not. The true interpretation
whereof it here booteth not to stand upon, suffices that no antichristian
yoke or bondage can from this place, or from any one word thereof be drawn
and enforced. But yet Mr. G. does herein press us with these places of the
song, in that the faithful did not here separate themselves from under these
evil pastors and governors, as herestickes and schismatickes do. And this he
again proves by the example of our Savior and his Disciples, who did not
separate themselves from the high Priests, Scribes, and Pharasies, so long as
the vineyarde was not taken from them etc. To which proof he has in the SECOND
TRANSGRESSION his full answer. To these places: In the first the Church has an
absolute and direct commandment from God himself, To go forth, not to stay
in the steps of that flock, to feed her kids above the tabernacles of those
sheepheardes. In the second we can but wonder to see Mr. G. so insensate and
gross to imagine, that these persecuting watchmen were Ministers or members of
the true Church. Especially seeing the two Churches so lively in that place
described, The one malignant and persecuting, the other the true Church and
persecuted. Between which I ween there is as great a separation as betwixt
light and darcknes, betwixt hell and heaven. Neither did the Church there stay
with, or was stayed by those watchmen, but went to the Daughters of Jerusalem
to seek and enquire for Christ; much-lesse (as this man doteth) stayed in their
fould in their tents, Or remained under the government and bondage of those
persecuting watchmen that openly opposed against Christ, and could not endure
that the Church should seek him. Neither can any thing be imagined more false
or contrary to the argument of that heavenly song, then that the Church of
Christ; may at any hand bear or stand in any bondage to the yoke of
Antichrist. Whose neck Christ adornes with chains, and she again her door
posts with garlandes for him. Song. 1. 9. and 6. 13. Under whose head CHRITES
left hand always is, and his right hand embraces her. Song. 2. 6. Song. 3.
She layethe hold of CHRIST, and bringethe him into her Mothers house, into
the chamber of her that conceived her. There also is his bed set up much
more glorious then the marriage bed of Solomon, about which bed sixty,
valiant men of the mighty men of Israel are said to stand and guarde, all of
them handling the sword, expert in war, with his sword upon his thing from
the fear by might. Song. 4. The neck of the Church is likned to the tower of
Daniel built for the armorie, where a thousand shieldes do hang, all the
targetts of the strong men. And Song. 8. Christ, says his vineyard is
allwaies and wholly before him, he chalendgeth and gathers all the revenues
thereof himself, he divides them not nor imparteth them to any other as
Solomon or other earthly Princes are constrained to do. What part or right
then, what honor or homage, especially what bondage is left here to
Antichrist? But thus they are broken that thus wilfully and of set purpose
stumble at the word, as this man does.

YEt proceeds this graceles man further, And is not afraid to affirm, That
the Church and every member thereof is in some spiritual bondage to sin, and
draws an argument from this position. That therefore much more may yt be in
some outward bondage to Antichrist. This execrable position and argument, the
holy Bishops and learned Priests of England are content to let publicly
pass from their view and correction, because yt pleads for the
antichristian usurpation of the one, and the servile bondage of the other. But
when this argument shall never so little by the word of God be skanned, yt
shall be found most heretical and blasphemouse. For verily if after our faith in
Christ, we be now left in any bondage to sin, then does sin still live and
reign in us, and we still bound unto and with yt, then has not Christ fully
freed us from the curse of the law, Death, and Hell. The^ was not Christ's death
a sufficient ransom for, neither exte^ded to al our sins, neither has he
subdued or set us free from al our enemies, neither have we as yet any perfect
peace or reconciliation with God, And then was his coming vain, then can no
flesh be saved therbie, then must we look for an other redeemer, or else
look for him to come again to dye for our sins that remain and reign in
us. For the reward of the least sin is death, being a transgression of Gods
law; And if we be in bondage to sin, then are we not Kings and Priests
unto God. Is not this a meet Minister of the Gospel, that knows not yet the
worck of our redemption, the benefit of Christ's death, the privilege of the
Saints, that cannot and will not learn to put difference betwixt the
frailty or pronenes to commit sin which is in this mortal flesh of all the
faithful, and that bondage and subjection to sin which is never found in
any of the faithful, after they have once truly acknowledged and embraced
Christ? Howsoever the ministry of the Church of England may allow and publish
these doctrines, yet are they most odious and execrable to the soul and
conscience of all that know, fear, or love the Lord JESUS CHRIST.

Now at length we are come to the second proposition of our argument, or
rather to the fourth TRANSGRESSION wherewith their Church of England is
chardged, vzt. That their Churches are ruled by and wilfully remain in
subjection unto an antichristian and ungodly government contrary to the
institution of our Savior CHRIST. This we showed in our first writing by the
public and present estate of the Church of England, in their whole ministry,
worship, administration, ordinances, ceremonies, censures, cannons, customs,
Courts, to be antichristian, even the same yoke and government that the Pope
sometimes exercised by those his natural children and unfaithful servants the
Bishopps, who now have gotten this power into their own hands. Most of these
(if not all) have been already in this present treatise declared and proved to
be idolatrous, popish, blasphemous, false, and antichristian, wholly swarued
from the rules of Christ's Testament. Any of these how Mr. G. has by the
word of God approved, let the impartial reader judge; This their
ecclesiastical government which now is in question, he faith is the same in
matter though yt vary in form from CHRIST'S government. Whereof now is arisen
a great question in their Church, Whether that Apostolic form of discipline
which they prescribed to the Churches, should be perpetual, or variable. The
Reformistes that hold yt perpetual sue and complain to the Parliaments for
the same Apostolic form to be established, and to have this present
government of these Bishopps and their false hierarchy with their Courts and
offices quite removed out of the Church and abolished. The Prelates that hold
yt arbitrable at Princes pleasures according to the variable estate of times
and Countries, hold fast that popish inordinate usurped power which they have
gotten into their hands, and therbie incarcerate, silence, seque^ter, depose
al such of the contrary faction as speak against their power, and present
government, with all possible hostility. yet all this deadly debate Mr. G.
covers in a word, calling it but a question about the outward form of
discipline: As also hides all the other most heynouse and detestable
enormities that arise and flow from their monstrous antichristian government,
under the same title of outward form of discipline. For both sides he says
do agree in the matter That CHRIST has left a power to his Church to choose,
to try, and to ordain Pastors and Teachers, And likewise that he has given
the power of admonition, suspension, excommunication. Only here is the
difference, that the one side would have this power exercised by Presbiteries
of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, as in the Apostles time; The other hold it the
more salf and quiet way to commit this power to the hands of the Bishop.
Which side holds the truth you shall hereafter know Mr. Giffard^ mind; when
the battle is fought he will then tell you of which side he will be. Till then he
will take the Bisshops side against the Brownists tooth and nail, and affirm
their government to be the holy government of Christ, and the defaultes thereof
not such as make yt to become antichristian, or a yoke of bondage, as the
Brownist with open throat exclaymeth. And for the other side (whereof he
sometime was) they, howsoever they would have yt removed, yet are far from the
Brownistes opinion; for they for the peace of the Church had rather stand under
yt, then under Christ's cross by witnessing against yt. Concerning the opinions
of both these sides for the execution of this discipline they speak of, we
have already showed both sides to err, and fully refuted their several
opinions by the way in the SECOND PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION, where we have
declared that the execution of the ce^sures and power of the Church belongs
neither to such a sequestered withdrawn presbiterie, Nor yet to any one man,
but unto the whole Churchioyntlie etc. We have also in that Second
Transgression showed the forgerie of their idol Suspension, and of the popish
Excommunication of these Bishops. And how the Church of England has no power
to excommunicate any person for any sin or heresy whatsoever: but only abuse
this most high judgment of God upon earth, to their filthy lucre and pomp,
excommunicating for nothing but for contempt of their antichristian Courts, Or
for not paying their ravenous fees and extortions, as also absoluing them for
money when they please. Whereupon whilst they want this power of
excommunication, it follows* that admonitions were vain and fruictlesse
amongst them, when they cannot have their due power, process, and effect.
sondrie of them also as these Bishops, the whole rabble of their false
hierarchi^ and Priests being incorrigible, such as will be subject to no
censure, neither receive admonition; but be more ready to smite and blaspheme
such as reprove them. Moreover in ye THIRD PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION we have
showed, how their Churches have no power in themselves to elect or ordain them
any Ministers, but are enforced to receive them from the Patron and the
Bishop, whether they will or no. Where we have also set down the counterfeight
and false manner of the ordination and institution of their Ministers or
Priests. Whereby evidently appears what kind of government this their
discipline of the Church of England is. So that here remains the less to be
spoken of this poyncte, the chief matters being already handled. Only here we
will a little entreat of this controversy betwixt these Bishops and Priests
about their form of Discipline, and somewhat generally of their Courts in
few words, and so put an end to this poyncte.

THis controversy Mr. G. affirms to be about the form and not about ye
matter of discipline, wherein both sides agree That Christ has left a power to
his Church etc. Does not Mr. G. deserve high co^mandations, that with one
logical distinction can both defend all the Popes hierarchy, Courts, Cannons
etc. and make also these two opposite factions the Bishops and Priests to
agree in matter? So that now belike all this long bitter hostility, contention,
and controversy amongst them has been about no matter. And then will not this
rare distinction hide or excuse the blame of either party. Again (save that
we will have no strife about inanitie of words) we alwaise took the form to
have given the being to the thing, and to have been so principal a part
thereof, as yt might never be severed from the same, howsoever in way of
discourse the form and the matter may for argument sake be distinguished. For
even common sense teaches, that no man or creature may be separate from their
peculiar and natural, form or shape. Neither any member of them from that
form, place, and office, which God has given and appoyncted to that member.
But al me^ hold yt monstrous to have a mixte or false shape. How much more
impossible and intolerable were it, but to admit any other form, or to
change that form which God has given and apoincted to any actio^ of the
Church? Either that form which God has given and prescribed is no true and
right form, Or else those actions without that true and right form, cannot be
said those true actions of the Church. How monstrous then is their
presumption that dare undertake to change, yea to abrogate those forms, rules,
ordinances that Christ has prescribed to his Church in his Testament? How
shameless and blasphemouse their ^mpude^cie, that dare pronownce this
adulterate mo^struous discipline of their Church, the same in matter and effect
with that government Christ has prescribed? Is not this of the one sort to sit
in the Temple of God as God, to change the ordinances etc? Is it not in the
other with the false Prophet to dawbe and uphold the throne of the Beast? If
God unto MOSES prescribed an exact pattern in all things that belonged Exo. 25.
4^
to that Tabernacle, Hebr. 8. 5.
even to the least pin, tape, hook, vtilence, with the due form, Hebr. 3. 5.
shape, measure, weight, place, time, v^e etc, and left nothing to his will or
discreatio^ (but his praise was that he was found faithful in all the Lords
house, Hebr. 2. and 12. 25. etc.
and had made and done all things according to the pattern showed him in the
mounetaine). If that word spoken by Angels was made firm, and every
transgression and disobedience received just retributio^ of reward; How shall
they escape, and where shall they stand, that neglect, yea reject, that
heavenly archtype, and only perfect pattern of CHRIST'S Testament, delivered
by the holy Ghost to the Apostles, by the Apostles to the Churches, confirmed
by the death of CHRIST, and by diverse signs and wonders from heaven: that take
boldness to innouate, change and alter the inviolable perpetual ordinances of
CHRIST'S Testament, and to set up a n^we Leitourgie, and to bring in a new
ministry and government according to the same. 1 Chronicles 28 ^1 etc.
If God were so jealous over the ordinances and vtilences of that material
Temple, which cosisted but of wood and stone, that he permitted not any thing
to those excellent servants Moses, David, Solomon 1 Kings 6. and 7. chap.
in all that business, which they received not by divine oracle from his own
mouth, Leu. 10.
Neither suffered wilful transgression in any that drew near to administer
before him, Nomb. 16.
but executed most fearful examples upon sondrie, 2 Samu. 6.
as Nadab, Abihu, Corath, vzzah vzziah etc. How much more iealouse and seueare
shall he be over the ordinances and administration 2 Chronicles. 26
of this spiritual house, which consists of the souls and bodies of men,
Heb. 12. 28.
over that kingdom of his Son which cannot be shaken, over that Tabernacle
which cannot be removed, Esa. 33. 20.
the stakes whereof can never be taken away, neither shall any of the cords
thereof de broken for ever? 1 Cor. 3. 17.
Shall not the Lord destroy them which thus misbuilde and dest^oy his Temple?
Can they thinck themselves wiser, or more in favor with God their Moses,
David, Solomon? 1 Cor. 11.
To have greater privilege then the Apostles? 1 Cor. 4. 17.
who delivered not any thing which they had not received, Mat. 28. ^0.
And bownde all builders and Churches to that which they delivered, unto the
worlds end, teachinge them to observe all things whatsoever Christ had
commanded them, 2 Timothy 1. 1^.
to keep the true pattern and that holy commandment undefiled and without
blame, 1 Timothy 6. 13. 14.
until that appearing of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. yea can they thinck themselves
wiser and fuller of eyes within and without, Zech. 3. 9.
to have greater sight and providence of things present and to come, things
inward and outward then the Lord and builder of the house himself, Hebr. 3.
6.
That they dare thus presumptuouslie violate and innouate the ordinances, the
outward form of government and administration (to use their own words)
which he has instituted for his Church and kingdom? Thinck they these of
less moment and value, the^ those ordinances and ^utward forms belonging to
the Tabernacle and Temple under ye law* Or is not this to perfer that material
Temple and the ordinances thereof to the spiritual Temple and the Testament of
Christ? The person and ministry of Moses, to the person and ministry of
Christ? To make Moses more faithful and absolute in his house then Christ? In
as much as the ordinances of the Temple were perfect and inviolable, such as no
Prince or Priest might add to, alter, innouate, or break the least of them.
But the ordinances and forms of Christ in his Church so imperfect, weak,
insufficient, yea so inco^gruent and unmeet, as they are left arbitrable at
the discreation of men, conformed to the will of Princes, to polecies, times,
and states? yea do not these men that hold the form or manner of the
administration of Christ's discipline (as they term yt) variable and
arbitrable, and that ^resume to prescribe an other manner of executing the same,
hold their own ways and devises more wise, equal, and convenient the^ the
Lords ways, and thrust their own into the place of the Lords? which forms
and devises of theirs can no more agree or be joined to the Lords ordinances
in his government, order, administration, then heaven and earth can be mingled.
Neither may they without sin be compared together. The Lords form that he
has given and disposed to every part, actio^, and exercise of his Church only
and best fitting and agreeing to the same, neither suffering or receiving auy
other. Revel. 21. 16
For as it is written, the form of this City is four square, most firm,
immovable, and proportionable the height, length, and breath thereof being
equal. Yea as our Savior pronounces with his own mouth most graciously and
often in the Song, All the members, ^ant. 4. 6.
features, and proportio^s of his Church, are most beautiful, amiable, 1. Chap.
and even rauishing the senses to behold, as we see there from top to toe
described; not only in the several parts, members, and joints, but eue^ in
the proper peculiar forms, proportions, features of each. How wicked then and
devilish is the opinion of these Bishops and their side, that hold the forms,
order, and manner of the actions, administration and government of the Church
prescribed in Christ's Testament, and together joined and commanded with the
actions etc, not to be perpetual, always meet or convenient, but to be
variable at the disposition and will of men? But how monstrous is their
presumption, and barbarous their havoc, that dare not only to bereave the
Church of that heavenly form which Christ has prescribed in his Testament,
but in stead thereof set up and impose their own L^ito^rgie, their own ougly,
deformed, and monstrous shapes, Revel. 13.
which ca^ no more agree to the offices and actions of Christ's Church, then
the paws of a Bear, the mouth of a Lion etc, can agree and be joined to an
humane body. which strange shapes and ^alse members agree and belong rather to
the mo^struous body of that Beast, then unto the heavenly body of CHRIST. For
if the great Creator have not permitted or given power to any mortal man to
make Esaias. 14. 13. 14. 15.
or give shape to the least member or part of an humane natural body, not to
make one hair, or being made to give yt color or sharp, white or black,
short or long; Muchlesse the^ has the Lord and great Architect of the church
his spiritual body, given power to any Angel or mortal creature to make or
change the least part or action thereof in matter or form. Romans 11. 34.
But as he has not called any man to council concerning these things, 1
Cor. 2. 16.
but has delivered unto all men a perfect pattern in his word, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
17.
where we have his whole mind, how he will have all things done in his
Church, so it behooves al men soberly to rest in, and carefully to beware not
to change, Act. 20. 32
transgress, or swerve from the same at any hand willingly: Heb. 12. 28. 29.
knowing that even the Lord our God is a consuming fire, and will be served also
of us in this his kingdom to his own good liking with reverence and fear.

Now seeing we find the form and pattern which Christ has instituted and
given most perfect and absolute, such as cannot be corrected or amended by any
humane devise or ingenie, such as cannot be separate from the parts and
actions unto which Christ has joined them, neither may those places or actions
receive any other form, but that therbie they become adulterate, displeasing
to God, pernicious to me^. It is evident that this government which the Bishops
exercise over the Church, cannot be the true government or discipline of
Christ, because by their own confessio^s yt is executed after an other form
and manner then Christ has instituted, Seeing (as we have by many reasons and
express Scriptures proved) the form is enjoined and joined together with ye
actio^ by the same authority, neither may by any mortal man be changed or
separate from the same. So y^ Mr. G. his own confession in that their
government wants the true form (for here we reason not of faults in a true
form, but of a diverse and false form) is reason enough to show, that it is
not that true government which Christ has instituted, And then must yt needs
follow to be a false and antichristian government: And consequently all that
stand under yt to stand under the yoke of Antichrist, and not to have Christ
their king and governor. Moreover the Brownist with whom he has to do, has
learned and does fully believe, That CHRIST rules in his Church by his own
officers and laws, and not by any such popish Officers, Courts, and Ca^nons,
as these BBs. do in the Church of England. All which he hops Mr. G. will not
say to be of the form of discipline. For sure he holds a true ministry and
the rules of the Bible to be of such necessity, as the true Church may never
receive any other Ministers or laws for their administration and government.
We have likewise lardglie already proved this whole ministry, administration,
ordinance, and manner of government, not to be according to the rules of Gods
word, but forged, popish, and false. Only in this place we would know of Mr.
G. if the Bishopps and their false Hierarchy, Courts, jurisdiction,
government were of God, how the^ these learned Reformist Preachers may sue and
seek to have them utterly removed out of the church. I would not here be
understood of their persons (whereof might be some color and reason enough) but
of their offices, Courts, jurisdiction, government: Al which they would have
utterly abolished and taken away; which if they were of Christ could not be
done without most heynouse impiety and sacrilege, without a most grievous
wound and mayme in the body of Christ, by cutting off such precious and
principal members and officers of Christ, and that for ever. If those BBs,
their accomplices, Courts, and government were of Christ, then are these
Reformistes which sue and labor to have them removed and abolished, most
dangerous and pestilent seducers, that persuade the Prince and realm to do
this violence to the body of Christ his Church, to reject the holy government
and ministry of Christ, which who so despiceth or puts away, despiceth and
puts away Christ himself; and so perswad and draw they their Prince and the
whole land into the assuted wrath and vengeance of God. ^ut now on the
contrary, if these Bishops, officers, courts, government be not of Christ,
then belong they not unto, neither have any thing to do or to intermeddle
with the ministry or government, or any action of the Church of Christ. How
great then on the other side is the perfidie and apostasy of these
Reformistes, that knew and pronounced in open Parliament that they were not of
God, and sought to have them utterly removed; Yet now for filthy lucre, and
for fear of persecution subscribe, swear, and submit to their antichristian
Hierarchy, power, courts, jurisdiction, and to all the detestable enormities
that flow from their throne? That diriue their ministry from, and exercise yt
under them? yea that exercise their ministry and keep the whole land under
their yoke, and so in the known wrath of God? How odious is the hypocrisy and
apostasy of this graceles man, that somtymes knew and stood against these
enormities, yet now as a withered fruictlesse tree twice dead, plucked up by
the roots, is fallen and apostatat from al faith, light, sauoure, conscience,
and feeling, as that star wormwood that poysoneth and makes bitter and
deadly all the waters he faleth into: now pleading and fighting for that
apostatical throne of iniquity, terming that now the government and power of
Christ in matter and effect, which he himself Page 56. and 58. of his book
confesses not to bind in heaven, not to be just as in respect of them that
do excommunicate etc, coloring all the abominations that flow from this
throne, and all the controversies about their government with a diverse outward
form. I hope he will admit the Testament and ministry of Christ to be of the
matter and substance. And the^ shall his halting on both sides, and double
dissimulatio^ appear to al me^, that durst not set down so much as the
controversy amongst themselves truly. which yet T. C. his Lord of Winchester
dealt more rowndly in, flatly denijng the Apostolic discipline to be either
perpetual or necessary: but especially elections, excommunication etc, by the
people to be either expedient or tolerable, bringing sondrie fleshly reasons
and politic inco^ueniences and impedime^ts to the contrary, the refutation
of whose blasphemies belongs to an other place. But this man thincking to
keep in with both sides, sets down the controversy to be only about the
form and not about the matter of discipline, although the Bishops abash not in
plain words to the veiwe of the world, and to the face of Christ, to deny
the very matter yt self. As both sides also do in deeds and effect; whilst
they acknowledge that Christ has given unto his Church the power of elections
and censures, Tit. 1. 16.
yet both of them withdraw this whole power from the Church. The one into their
sequestered Synodes, the other into their popish Courts; 1 Cor. 4. 20
If so be this power will be granted to be of the matter of discipline. But this
question is soon put to an end, whilst the Bishops deny the Apostolic
discipline yt self as tolerable in the common wealth, Luke 19. 14 etc.
and flatly deny Christ to reign over them or over this Church by his own
officers and laws. And therefore except he will give their persons, Math. 21. 33
acco^plices, and train, an immunitie from al ecclesiastical censures, not to
be subject for any transgressio^ or error to the reproof or power of the
Church: yea except he will resign his right into their hands, and give them
leave to reign and rule over all the Churches in this la^d, and that by their
own officers, courts, ca^nons, constitutions, injunctions etc, he is no King
or Christ for them: Nay if he will not bow down to al these and take their
yoke upon him. he is no subject for them, Reu. 13. 17
he may not buy and sell, nor live in this market, in this Church. Which
Officers, Courts, Cannons etc, if Mr. G. had proved to have been of the matter
of Christ's discipline (for of the form we will al grant him they are not) and
had approved and justified them by the word of God, then had he some color to
ask this question, whether some faults in their discipline should make yt
antichristian. But seeing these Bishopps and their Courts, Officers, Cannons
etc: were by us affirmed unto him to have no foundation or mention in Gods
word, no place nor use in Christ's Church, but to be contrary to the one, most
prejudicial and dangerous to the other, And he in all this space could bring us
no defense for them, We cannot see by his own reason (seeing they have neither
the true matter nor the form of CHRIST'S government) how their government
should be held and esteamed the true and holy government of Christ; And then
must that sequel (which he so fears) needs follow, that yt is an
antichristian government and yoke, such as the true Church and servants of
Christ may not bear and wittinglie stand under.

To perticulate all the several corruptions, abuses, enormities of the
government of these antichristian Bishops, is not in mie skill or power, not
knowing in any measure their Cannons, customs, orders, priueledges,
proceedings. Only this in general I may affirm, that of such pompeous
stagelike popish mixed Courts, handling both civil and ecclesiastical causes
iudiciallie, I never read through all the book of God, or to belong to Christ's
Church; Especially exercising such absolute power and jurisdiction over al
Churches, causes, and persons ecclesiastical: yea usurping, assuming, and
executing the whole power, offices, and duties of al Churches, yea even the
proper prerogatives and privileges only belonging to Christ himself. To make,
impose, or abrogate laws, To give or rather sell licenses and dispensations, to
have more benefices then one, to marry, to eat flesh at times of restrainte
etc, To call, sommon, and fetch by co^strainte al causes and persons of the
Church before them, There to determine and decree, to censure, silence,
suspe^d, sequester, depose, incarcerate, punish by mulct what Minister or
member of the Church they lust of their own absolute authority without any
controlement reprose or redress. The Church having no power or liberty to
reprove or refuse, no not so much as call into question any thing they do or
decree, to rebuke or censure these inordinate lawless fellows for any thing
they do either publickely or privately. The Church must receive and obey as
most holy, whatsoever they decree or impose with all reverence as the oracles
of God, though they be never so contrary to the word of God. The Church or
any other member of the Church in these Courts be not permitted so much as to
propounde or plead their own cause; But are by them compelled to their romish
litigious course and procedinges, To speak and plead by a feed Advocate or
Proctor, after their popish order and custom. Where for bribes and fees, al
causes (be they never so foul and corrupt) are handled, pleaded, and proceed,
that I say not succeed. And without such bribes and fees, no cause (be yt
never so just, and ye party never so poor or innocent) has audience or help.
Here being so many officers, catchpolles, attendantes to be feed and pleased.
To all these ravenous Birds with fingers the suetors and sommoned become a
pray. But especially the faithful, such as speak against, and will not of
conscience and faith unto God stoop down unto their antichristian power, or
obey their ungodly decrees; These shall be worse used then any traiterous Papists
or facinorous persons whatsoever; who shall all of them by their purse or
freindes escape well enough and find favor, when these poor souls shall
never geat out of their hands without wrack either of body or soul, either
death or denying the faith. These though there be no direct matter, evidence,
witnesses, or accusers against them, yet shall themselves be enforced to a
corporal oath (as they call it) upon and by a book, to answer directly and
truly to such articles and poyncts as shall be propownded unto them. If they
deny or make conscience either of the manner or matter of this oath, then
instead of godly instruction or christian persuasion, they are forthwith
committed to prison, yea for the most part to close prison, there to remain
shut up from al air, exercise, friends, duties, callings etc, until they
either yield to take this idolatrous, blasphemous, and impious oath, or dye
under their hands. No bail, maineprise, help, benefit, or redress by law,
by the Queens Royal writtes or Courts allowed to any, that are committed by
the least of this hellish Anarchie. Whose lawless and insolent dealinges,
oppressions, injuries, violence, may not be caled in question or examined by
any civil Magistrates or Courts. All which they patronize by her Maties.
high or especial Commission unto them, Although her Matie. suffers her Roial
Prerogative to be handled and considered of in some of these civil Courts:
yea and grants to all her free borne subjects the benefit and free use of
her Highness laws even in any cases or causes betwixt her Highness and them
according to the great Charter in the Magna Charta, whereunto her Matie. is
sworn. which Charter also these lawless Prelates most presumptuouslie and
tyrannously violate and break under color of her Maties. Commission: thus
setting her Maties Commission against her Maties. Prerogative and Courts
Royal, against that great Charter of the land, against all her Highness laws,
yea and against all the laws of God and the Testament and Kingdom of Christ.
But to say as it is, their procedinges are both against there commission, (if
they might be duly examined and conferred thereunto,) and against her Mat^es.
meaning. Whose mild, preceable, and just government in all causes that procead
from her self, assure us, that She would never wittingly grant such a
commission as should be so prejudicial to her own Crown and Royal dignity,
to the estate, of the Church and of the whole common wealth, as this whereby
these Prelates bear themselves and their ungodly procedings, is. That power
granted unto her Matie. by Parliament, to appoinct and aucthorize whom she
shall thinck meet to execute under her al manner iurisdictio^s, privileges, and
preemine^ces concerning ecclesiastical causes to her belonging, is, as also al
other her Princely power and authority always to be understood in the Lord,
so far as shall be found consonant to his word. For neither is there given
neither may or will her Matie take or exercise any further or other power then
the Lord her God gives her. In whom Kings reign, of whom their power is
diriued and holden, by whom yt is circumscribed and limited, to whom they shall
as any other persons, account.

If then these Prelates and their antichristian Hierarchy, these romish
Courts and their popish procedinges in the same, be not fownde to be of God,
to have any warrant in his word, or to belong to the ministry and government
of Christ's Church, then can no commission or humane authority whatsoever
make them lawful, impose, or enjoin them upon the Church. Neither ought any
Christian to obey them at the Commandme^t of any mortal man. Men must always
be obeyed in the Lord. Act. 4. 19
Unto whom when or wherein they be fownd contrary or opposite, there must God
rather then me^, be obeyed. His indignation that ca^ cast both body and soul
into hell fire, Mat. 10. 28
is more to be feared the^ theirs, that can but touch the body only. To obey
Gods commandments, and to refrain from al things that are fownd contrary to
the same, is no disobedience to Princes, neither to withdraw or derogate from
their sacred power, as this maligna^t Clergy would persuade. But they rather,
that encroch upon and openly impugn the Princes royal prerogative; that so
highly abuse their Prince, and that trust she commits unto them; that break
and violate al ye public laws and charters of the land; that usurp ye
civil sword, aucthority, and jurisdiction, which are utterly prohibited the^
by God; that usurp place above al in authority under her Matie. whoesoeuer,
to whom by the law of God they ought to be subject; that will not submit their
laws, doings, and persons to any civil trial at the Princes royal judgment
seats, but rather seek to withdraw some of the most high and chief causes
from her royal Courts and judgment Seats into their own Courts; that usurp
the proper peculiar place, titles, preuileges, power of Christ himself,
exercising absolute authority over al Churches, doctrines, causes, persons,
to bring in or cast out, erect or abrogate, what laws, ordinances, ministry,
ministration, government they lust without controlement; that will not submit
their public ecclesiastical decrees and procedings, nor yet their private
lives and conversation to the trial and censure of Christ in his Church by
the word of God; that make such barbarous havoc, mis-rule, and confusion
both in Church and common wealth; that seduce and deceive their Sovereign
Prince, their Nobles, Maiestrates, and the whole land, leading them in the
ways of death and destruction, tourning them out of the straight ways of life
and peace; that with their utmost endeavor and skill oppose against the
Testament and kingdom of Christ; that molest, spoil, and persecute in all
hostile manner the Lords most faithful servants her Matis. most loyal and true
hearted Subjects, for refrayning from their idolatries and enormities so
contrary to the gospel of Christ, which flow from their antichristian
government and ministry; that nourish, favor, and support the Lords and her
Matis. pernicious known enemies the Papists, those idolators, those
conspirators and traitors, who they say are not such enemies to their
pontifical estate and regiment as these faithful christians are; that are of
nothing so iealouse, vigila^t, and careful, not eue^ of their Sovereign
Princes life, or of the peace and prosperity of the whole land, as of their
own usurped ruynous kingedome, lest the light of the Gospel should break
forth, and discover their apostaticall throne, and antichristian procedings;
And therefore with all their might and may ne they strive to suppress this
light, and to oppress all such as in any sincerity and good conscience
profess and practice the Gospel, tollerating and chearishing rather any
mischief, any vile flagitious and dissolute persons, as by daily experience
is seen. So that by these marks and fruicts let the Christian or but
indifferent reader judge, Whether these Prelates and their antichristian
Hierarchy be to be held troublers of the Church and state, abridgers of the
Princes power, usurpers of public authority without lawful caling like
Corath, Dathan, and Abyram, Or we, as this accuser, this trompe of Satan, (to
bleamish our holy profession and glorious suffringes) shameth not to give out
of us. Although they all hitherto have not, neither shall ever be able (in the
confidence of Gods grace, and of a clear conscience we affirm yt) justly to
detect, or so much as to suspect us of any such crime, ^ Pet. 2.
endeavor, or intent. We reverence and are subject to every humane creature
for the Lord, whether unto the King as having authority over all, or unto
rulers as sent by him, for the revenge of evil doers, or for the praise of them
that do well, That according to the will of God, by doing well, we might put to
silence the ignorance of unwise men. Yet hold we not the offices, Courts, and
jurisdiction of these Prelates and their Hierarchy within the compass of this
Commandment, or to be the ordinance of God; But find them that very throne
of Satan, that Anarchie of Antichrist opposite to the kingdom and Testament
of CHRIST, most pestilent and pernicious both to the Church and common Wealth.
And therefore may not by Princes be suffered in Churches or common Wealth,
muchlesse by them be established over the Church and common Wealth, Revel. 17.
without giving their sacred power to the Beast. Neither may any faithful
Christian be brought in subjection to this their antichristian power and yoke,
Revel. 13. 15
without bowing down and worshipping the Beast.

To discuss or perticulate the several and innumerable errors, faults,
abuses, corruptions, enormities, in the ca^nons, constitutions, customs,
procedings of the several Courts that belong to these Prelates antichristian
regiment, I am not (as I have said) able, neither were yt in this place
expedient. By this which has been here generally said of them, their Courts,
and proceedinges, appears, how contrary they are to that government, and to
those ordinances which CHRIST has established and set over his Church for
ever. CHRIST'S Scepter is an everlasting Scepter, a Scepter of righteousness. He
has set down a most perfect and absolute government to his Church. He has
perticularly and exactly prescribed what officers, laws and ordinances he
requires in his Church. He cannot be separate from his own government. He
rules not his Church by any other officers or laws, then by his own which
he has instituted. These godless Prelates then, that appoinct other officers
and laws unto him and over his Church, wrest not only the Scepter, but the
Kingdom out of Christ's hands. And al such as stand under the antichristia
government of these presumptuous idol shepheardes, Zech. 11.
stand not under Christ's staff, amenitie, under his Scepter of grace, as the
sheep of his fould within his covenant and protection; but as the sheep of
destruction under his iron rodd, Psalm. 2.
wherewith they shall be broken as a Potters vessel. Here is our controversy
touching this fourth principal transgressio^, fully decided and determined by
Gods own mouth; That all which stand under any false ecclesiastical
government, stand not within the Covenant, but under the wrath of God. All the
mitigations then, reasons, and delusions of the false Prophets, shall never be
able to make void, turn away, or diminish these judgments, otherwise then by
their unfeigned repentance and speedy conuertion from their evil ways.

HITHER TO has Mr. Gif. brought us not one reason or place of scripture to
prove the present government of these Prelates and their hierarchy, to be
that heavenly government which CHRIST has instituted in his Church, but has
grieuouslie perverted many scriptures to prove that the Church might stand
under some antichristian yoke, although we in our first writing in this 4
PRINRIPAL TRANGRESSION blamed yt, as false and antichristian, In our second
showed yt to be such in the Officers, Courts, Cannons, procedings. Now at
length for a clusiue reason to prove and determine all the poyncts at once;
and to shut up his book, he has hatched and brought us forth this worthy
reason to rest upon. If the execution of discipline by Bishops be the yoke of
Antichrist, and if all the Churches which do stand under the same do
worship the Beast and be not christians, it must needs follow that such as
did ever execute this power, were Antichrists, and no children of GOD at that
time or before they repented. But by your own confession many of them died
blessed Martyrs. I conclude therefore, That the Brownistes cannot but with
heresies and most heinous injury and inordinate dealing condemn a Church as
quite diuourced and separate from CHRIST, for such corruptions and
imperfections in Gods worship as be not fundamental, nor destroy the
substance: for that wicked men come with the godly to the public exercises of
religion: for some wantes in calling and ordaining Ministers, and in
ecclesiastical discipline.

BElike Mr. GIF. is hard driven when this old popish reason already by us
answered, and now by him not over well repaired, is feign to become his chief
corner stone to approve this Church in all these chardges, and the only reason
he can bring for the Hierarchy and regiment of the Church of England. By this
reason his holy Father the POPE was wont to defend his triple Crown and
apostaticall Chair. Because in the same have sit many godly Bishops and
blessed-Martyres etc: so that if the office, power, and dignity of his
Popedom be antichristian, then must all these godly learned men that have
executed the same needs be Antichrists, and not true members of CHRIST, until
they repent: But they never were found to have repented these things, yet are
confessed by all that knew them in that age to be learned and godly: Therefore
Mr. G. and all this horned Clergy and Lordly hierarchy of England, cannot
without schism reuoult from, without heresy pronownce, this holy Sea and
office antichristian etc. Let Mr. G. now he sees the fordge and issue, bind or
loose, follow or leave this argument, at his own pleasure and peril. If he
suppose to escape by showing discrepance betwixt these godly predecessors and
ungodly successors in many circumstances and virtues: And so thinck this
reason will not press him half so sore as it does us: yet let him consider
(though I will not be the POPES advocate) that they here reason of the same
office, and not of the same circumstances, and that these godly predecessors
executed the self same office with these their bad successors. Yea so might
the example be put, as yt should be without any great difference in
circumstance also. And as to the difference betwixt the persons of the one and
of the other, (if that may be a solution to this argument) we shall not greatly
need to fear, finding this viperous generation, these idle, proud, wordlie,
fleshly, persecuting, blasphemous Prelates, nothing so like these their godly
predecessors these Martyrs, in labors, humility, bowntie, spiritual and
holy conversation, faith, patience, love of the truth, of the Saints of
CHRIST etc, as they are in that which is evil in these antichristian titles,
offices, Courts, jurisdiction, revenues, pomp etc. Which, (as we before said
unto you) so say we again, that no men or Angels can justify where Gods word
condemns, though all the Martyrs in the world should dye in and for them.
We may not be leed or drawn by the examples and persons of men (how good
soever) from one jot of Gods reueiled truth. The best men we see do err and
sin, there never was or shall be any man, that erreth and sins not in many
things. But should we because good men have done evil and erred, therefore
justify sin and error? That were high presumption greiuouslie to tempt God,
and to abuse the holy Scriptures, which record not men's faults to that end.
What sin or error might not so by the example of some good man or Church be
justified? yet these are Mr. GIFF. his best reasons for his Church, ministry
etc. and here his only reason, to approve the government of these Bishops and
hierarchy.

But now as we here justify and allow not any sin by the examples and
persons of the godly; so condemn we not these godly men's persons for sin and
error, until obstinacy be joined thereunto, which Mr. GIFF. cannot show in
these holy Martyrs. And therefore we deny the consequent of his Mayor or
first Proposition; That because the office and jurisdiction they executed were
Antichristian, therefore the men that exercised them were Antichrists, and not
children of God. We may utterly condemn the sin, and yet not so peremptorily
condemn the sinner. It is a sure position that every sin is of the Devil,
yet is there no consequence thereof, that every one that sins is of the
Devil. we see no such necessity as Mr. G. would persuade of that matter. The
godly may sin of ignorance, of negligence, of fraylety, yet not thereupon
until obstinacy be added unto sin, cease to be christians. These godly
Martyrs so lately escaped out of that smokie furnace of the popish Church,
could not so clearly discern, and suddenly enter into the heavenly and
beautiful order of a true established Church. It is more the^ one days work,
to gather, to plant and establish a Church aright, much more so many thousand
several Churches as are supposed in this land. It can be no wonder that those
godly men being so inexpert and unexercised in his heavenly work, never
having lived in, seen, or heard of any orderly communion of Sai^nctes, any
true established Church upon earth of so many hundredth years, ever since the
general defection under Antichrist so much foretold of in the Scriptures, no
marvel I say, if they erred in setting up the frame. But what then? should we
therefore justify or persist in their errors? especially should we reject the
true pattern of CHRIST'S Testament which reproves our works, and shows us a
better course? should we not suffer our worckes to burn, after the manner of
these deceitful workmen of these times? God forbid. For the^ should we receive
their reward and perish with our worckes.

Now to the second proposition of this argument we have already expressed our
mind concerning the suffringes, faith, and death of these Martyrs. We find
them obstinatly to have resisted no part of Gods word or truth he gave them
sight of at any time, but to have been very faithful and constant even unto
bands and death in that truth they were come unto. Further we doubt not but
they truly repented them of al their sins known, and faithfully laid hold of
Gods mercy in Christ Jesus for all their secret and unknown sins. Gods
grace we are assured is so much greater then all our sins, as the sea is
greater then one dropp of water. Therefore we doubt not of their happy and
blessed estate; all their sins and these false offices and ministry, which
they executed in their ignorance amongst the rest, being forgive them.
The Example then and errors of these Martyrs will not approve the antichristian
offices and government of these Prelates, nor yet justify the public worship,
ministry, confusion, sacrilege of the Church of England.

Mvchlesse will these two lame propositions of Mr. G. his final argument, bear
up his forged conclusion. where he concludes the Brownistes heretics etc,
Because they condemn a Church as quite deuorced and separate from Christ, For
such imperfections and corruptions in Gods worship, as are not fundamental, nor
destroy the substance; For that wicked men come with the godly to the public
exercises of religion; For some wantes in calling and ordayning Ministers; And
for some wantes in ecclesiastical discipline. If Mr. GIF. had taken the wise
man's council, he should not have answered a matter before he understood it,
much-lesse would he (if he had been ledd by the spirit of God) have blasphemed
the truth or condemned the innocent without cause. But as he began his book
without council, continued it without grace, and ended it without truth; so
has he herebie but purchased to himself shame, and brought upon his own head
the judgments due to an accuser, a blasphemer, a false witness and judge. What
opinion the Brownistes hold of the Church of England, their worship, people,
ministry, government, we neither know nor regard, neither is there cause why
we should be chardged or condemned for their errors and faults. For which
themselves, and this Church of ENGLAND that receives and nourishes all
sectories, heretics, wicked and abominable persons whatsoever, shall account.
For us, whom it pleases Mr. G. to term Brownistes, and whom he endeuoreth to
confute in this treatise, we never condemned any true Church for any fault
whatsoever, knowing that where true faith is, there is repentance, where true
faith and repentance are, there is remission of all sins. Far be it from us
to condemn any whom CHRIST justifies. 1. And for the Church of ENGLAND we
neither did or do condemn yt, (as this accuser suggesteth) for such
imperfections and corruptions in their worship as be not fundamental or
destroy the substance: but we condemned the public worship of their Church of
ENGLAND presently enjoined, received and used, as devised by men, popish,
superstitious, idolatrous, abominable, not such as God commands, requires,
or accepts, and therefore not such as any faithful christian may offer up
unto God, be compelled, or consent unto. This we showed in the first
PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION: this we have proved in the first part of this
treatise. 2. Secondly we condemn not the Church of England as separate from
CHRIST, for that wicked me^ come with the godly to the public exercises of
religion, But rather as never rightly gathered to CHRIST, for that all the
profane and wicked ar received and retained as members of their Church. We
gladly acknowledge that CHRIST came a light into the world, to offer salvation
unto all men, to have built his Church upon an hill, there to be lifted up by
the preaching of the word as a standard to al people and passengers, there to
have made a feast to al nations, and thither to inuit them. Neither were we
ever so envious of the salvation of others, or of the glory of God, (as having
found mercy, and being entered our selves) to shut the door or stop the
fountain of Gods grace against others: yea God is witness with what hearty
desire we long after them all, that they, even our greatest persecutors, might
be partakers of the same salvation, joy, comfort, and happiness with us: And
how we intermit not, much-lesse exclude, any means thereunto that God
puts in our power (though it were with the hazard of our own lives) to
bring them of the water of the well at Bethelem. But now though we affirm that
all the unbelieving and profane not only may, but ought to resort to the
public exercises of religion in the Church, as the most excellent means to
call them to the faith; yet do we not therefore believe or affirm, that the
profane or unbelieving may be received or admitted as members of the Church,
before they have made voluntary public profession of their own faith and
obedience; Or being entered by such profession, be permitted longer to stand or
remain of the Church, then they continue orderly to walk in the same faith
and obedience. And therefore we blamed these parish assemblies of England, as
consisting of a confuse multitude of al sorts of profane and wicked people in
differentlie: where they are al received, nourished, and retained, as members
of ye Church, though they were never called and gathered by the power of the
word, entered and received by the profession of their own faith, neither
walk orderly in the faith, or in any duties either public or private: And
so are al guilty of most high sacrilege and prophanatio^ of the holy things
of God; No such assembly or communion of Saints, as Christ's faithful
servants ought to repair or join unto. This we showed in the second
PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION. This we have lardgly proved in the second part of this
treatise. 3. Thirdly we condemn not the Church of England for some wantes in
calling and ordayning Ministers; But for having, maintayning, and retayning a
false and antichristian ministry imposed upon them, with a false and
antichristian calling and ordination even the self same that the Pope used and
left in this Realm; which false offices and ministry cannot be joined unto,
or exercised in the true Church of CHRIST. This we showed in the third
PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION, this we proved in the third part of this treatise. And
therefore with an evil and corrupt conscience has Mr. G. sought to hide this
transgression under some wants in the calling and ordaining Ministers, and
thus boldly and falselie thereupon to accuse us. We know there may be faults
either of ignorance or negligence in the calling ordination etc, yet these not
to disanul the action, much-lesse the Covenant so long as they are not
obstinatlie held and persisted in. But our assertion and controversy here is
not of a faulty ministry, caling, ordination etc, but of a false ministry,
caling, ordination etc, which we have proved theirs to be, and that no such
belongs unto, may be imposed, received, or retained in the Church of CHRIST.
4. Fourthly in like manner we reason not of some wantes in the government and
order of their Church, but of a false and antichristian government set over the
Church. Neither condemn we the Church of ENGLAND for some faults in a true
ecclesiastical government, but for having and standing under a false and
antichristian government, even the self same Hierarchy, Officers, Courts,
Cannons, Customs, Privileges, Proceedings, that the Pope used and left. This
we also have showed in the 4 TRANSGRESSION, and have now in this fourth
part, and through this book, fully proved their present ecclesiastical
government to be. To which four principal transgressions a wilful
obstinacy, an open rejecting and resisting the truth and al reprofe, a violent
and most hostile persecution of all such as either refrain, speak against, or
reprove their communion, ministry, worship, government, being joined, We may
by all these reasons, severally, and have by them altogether, proved these
Parrish assemblies in this estate not to be the true established Churches of
Christ, to which the faithful servants of Christ ought to resort and join.

So then all men may see how falsely this accuser has sclandered us, and how
far he has strayed from the present matters and transgressions in question,
both through his whole book, and in this conclusion of his book, where he
chardgeth, pronownceth, and condemns us as heretics etc, for condemning a
Church for some light imperfections in their worship, wantes in their
discipline etc: whereas we for their idolatry, confusion, sacrilege, false and
antichristian ministry, and government, obstinacy in all these sins, hatred
of the truth, and persecution of CHRIST'S servants, have proved the Church of
ENGLAND not to be the true, but the malignant Church. Therefore we condemn no
true Church as he accuses, neither for such causes as he surmiseth. Nor yet do
we, but rather God himself, condemn them. We but discover their sins, and
show them their estate by the word of God, refrayning and witnessing against
their abominations, as we are commanded by that voice from heaven. Go out of
her my people, (...). 18.
that ye communicate not in her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues
etc.

In the same love, knowing this terror and irreuo^able decree of the Lord
against the false Church and all her children, we most earnestly exhort and
instantly beseech, even so many, to whom the truth of the Lord and their
own salvation is dear, to flee out of the midst of her, 2 Cor. 6. 17. 18.
and to save themselves from this perverse generation, and to deliver every
man his soul from the fierce wrath of the Lord, Acts. 2. 40.
according to the council of the Prophets and Apostles of God. Iere. 50. and.
51. Chap.
And not to be stayed by the vain persuasions, Zach. 2. 7
titles, and promises of these false Prophets, of things present, as of the
Church, word, ministry, Sacraments etc, or deluded by their vain hope of
things to come, as reformation, salvation etc, or deterred with their vain
threats of schism, heresies, danger, persecusion etc, from obeying the voice
of God, whilst he yet speaks and calls unto you, and offreth grace, lest
you despise the acceptable time of the Lord, the day of his salvation, and he
swear in his wrath that you shall not enter into his rest for your
disobedience, and then hereafter your flight be in the winter or on the
Sabbath, when the wrath of God is come upon you, and there be no means or way
to escape. For the vain boastings of these Prophetts of things present, and
promises of things to come, read Revel. 18. where the Holy Ghost shows
their Church to become the habitation of Devils, the prison of every unclean
spirit, the cage of every unclean and hateful bird, howsoever she boast her
self a Queen; to be no Widow, to see, no sorrow. For this in one day shall
her plagues come, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnte in
fire, because the God that condemns her is a mighty Lord. You there read
how neither her shipmasters, marchantme^, Princes, or multitudes, shall be able
to reserve her wares, or preserve her from the burning of this heavenly fire;
No lamentation ca^ ease or diminish her sorrow and grief: No balm can cure
her wounds, no art reform or repair her breaches, nor arm or power shield
her from the weight of that great millstone that shall press her and all her
children to the deapth of hell, being lifted up over her by that mighty Angel.
The Lord has pronownced and his decree is irreuocable. The voice of his
heavenly harpers and musitions, the psalms and spiritual songs and lauds of
his Saints, shall never be heard in her any more: the skill and art of any
heavenly artificer, worckman, or builder, shall never be found in her any
more: the voice of the millstone that grindeth food for the soul, shall never
be heard in her any more: the light of a candle, muchlesse the burning lamps of
Gods spirit, shall never shine in her any more to keep out darcknes: the
heavenly and comfortable voice of the Bridegome, and of the Bride; of CHRIST
speaking to his Church in instruction, exhortation, comfort, of CHRIST'S Church
speaking to him in prayers, praises etc, shall never be heard in her any more.
Let her Ship-masters then, her Mariners, Marchantmen, Enchanters, and false
Prophets utter and retayle her wares, deck and adorn her with the skarlet,
purple, gold, silver, jewels, and ornaments of the true Tabernacle, Let them in
her offer up their sacrifices, their beasts, sheep, meal, wine, oil, their
odors, oyntements, and franckencense, Let them dawbe and vndershore her,
build, and reform her, until the storm of the Lords wrath break forth,
Ezech. 13.
the morning whereof al these Divines shall not foresee, Esaias. 47.
much-lesse eschew or withstand the terror thereof, Prou 1. 24 etc.
until the wall and the dawbers be no more. But let the wise that are warned
and see the evil, fear and depart from the same, so shall they preserve their
own souls as a pray: And the Lord shall bring them amongst his redeemed to
Sion with praise, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, they shall
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

FINIS.
AS WE showed in these 4. PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSIONS, in ye worship, communion,
ministri and government of the Church of ENGLAND, the causes of our separation
from their public assemblies in this estate; So at their instance we in like
manner set down unto them our purpose and intent, what we now endeavored and
meant to do, in certain breife Articles. Of those transgressions and
chardges, how this Champion has defended and cleared their Church, by that
which has been written now on both sides may appear. The articles of
themselves are so just and holy, as no Devil can impugn or deny* no man of
religion, conscience, or shame gaynesay or resist any one of them: yet has
Mr. GIFFARD (instigated by the spirit of vayne-glorie and envy) in a singular
zeal enterprised to answer and confute them all, as you may see in his first
writing. The cauills and vanity whereof, as also his unjust suspicions,
calumniations, reproaches against us thereupon being laid open in our first reply
unto him, so far has he been from desisting to sporne against the prikes, to
sclander, accuse, and rail on us, or to take a more sober and christian course
for the discussing and deciding these controversies betwixt him and us, as he
has burst forth yet into further malice and madness, blaspheming us in every
sentence of this his second answer to these our articles with such store of
contumelious and odious words, as if that corrupt synck of his heart could
never be emptied, the malice of his mind and venom of his tongue never
satiate or uttered against us, even now as fresh as if he had not rayled enough
or all in his writings and book before. But seeing his reproaches want both
proof and truth, they deserve neither refutation nor repetition. Neither can
they preiudize our holy profession, or us, or any way justify or excuse him
before God or man; but rather add to his fearful account before God, and
evidently show unto all men, by what spirit his heart and pen were guided at
the writing of these contumelious answers. Wherein yet most strange it is, how
he could take occasion to ^ade us with all this vituperie, for propounding
these godly articles and holy duties, especially having showed withal such
just causes of our separation from their assemblies. But let us now take a
view of his reasons wherewith he has disproued our endeavors in these
articles, and see whether they be of as great validity, as those wherewith he
has approved their assemblies in the transgressions by us objected. The
articles, answers, and our former reply I will not here again insert,
referring to the copies above.

HIs cauilling and trifling about these words [CHRISTES Kingdome] in his
former answer to our first Article, Article 1.
together with his hypocrisy in seeming to labor for CHRIST'S government,
were by us laid open in our reply: as also his unjust surmize, that we should
hold that CHRIST'S Kingdom could not be in any, except they had that his
outward ecclesiastical government, was there by us fully answered and
cleared. He now in his second answer as vaynely endeuoreth to clear himself
of his former cauilling and hypocrisy, by denijing the necessary sense of his
former words; and by propounding two new questions unto us instead of
answering our two questions unto him, which we rather expected. Let the
indifferent reader judge whether to all intendement he made not CHRIST'S
Kingdom only inward, and his ecclesiastical government but an help for the
preservation of his inward kingedome, in the first part of his former
answer, howsoever afterward he vouchsalfed yt to be a part of his Kingedome.
Unto his contumelious blasphemous questions we answer, That when he shall have
duly convinced us of heresies, or schism, to have condemned a true ministry,
to have falsely accused a true Church, then we will confess our selves to be
more then ignorant and rash: till then all these reproaches shall but follow
his other sins into Gods sight to hasten his own judgment. Our questions
also whilst they remain unanswered, (and as we thinck unanswerable,) must
still lay open their bad estate and hypocrisy, In that whilst they remain
antichristian Ministers in the false Church, And have so long continued under
Antichrists yoke and ecclesiastical government, they cannot be said either to
have or sincerely to labor for CHRIST'S ecclesiastical government, as he and
they then pretended. And here by the way I must draw two dangerous positions,
and in the same observe great contrariety in Mr. G. unto himself. First, in
that they and he pretended to labor, and had so long sued to Parliamentes
for CHRIST'S government or discipline, they confess the absence and want of
the same: For a fond thing it were to labor and sue for that which already
they have. Then if they want and have not CHRIST'S ecclesiastical government;
and receive an other ecclesiastical government over their Church and ministry
which is not his, yt must needs be a false and antichristian government: And
so they and their whole Church by their own confession stand under
Antichrists yoke and government, and have not CHRIST their King to rule over
them, except they can show that CHRIST does rule in his Church by Antichrists
officers and government, which I thinck will be hard to prove: and then are
they and their Church in a bad estate. As also Mr. G. herein contrary to
himself, who erewhile affirmed this present government of these BB s. their
hierarchy and Courts to be the true ecclesiastical government of Christ. And
that they were not antichristian. Further he has observed and reserved one
special poyncte in our reply. That the kingdom of God may be in the scattered
faithful, which as yet have not the ecclesiastical discipline. This we grant
and never denied: although Mr. G. whatsoever he now say, then surmized the
contrary of us, or else had small cause so vehemently to have refuted this
opinion. But we are content that yt shall now remain to his use.

THe second article of seeking Gods true worship, Article. ^*
he grants that al men ought to approve. Being demanded in our Reply, how
then he continued in idola^rie, a Minister of idollatrie, prophesied in BAAL,
and pleaded for BAAL; Or how he could approve our article, and yet condemn
us of schism and heresy because we forsake their false, devised, idolatrous
worship, and seek to worship God according to his word. To those he answers
that when we have proved their worship to be idolatry, and that they prophecy
in BAAL, and plead for BAAL, then he is content that men take us for no
schismatickes or heretics. And this I hope we have in this treatise done,
having showed their worship to be devised by man, idolatrous, abominable,
their ministry to be as false, diriued from and exercised under their BAALS
these Bishops; And how earnestly Mr. G. has pleaded for these Baals their
throne and all the enormities proceeding from the same, these his own books
shall testify. So that I hope we are now cleared with all men, and shall
hereafter be spared of him, from the odious accusations of schism and heresy.

THe. Art. 3. 4*
3. 4. and 5. Articles (after Mr. G. his division) tending to one effect, and
begetting but the same common difficulties, may together be handled. The chief
controversies about the same are these two. 1. Whether these public
assemblies of their parishes be antichristian and Babilonish. 2. Then whether
the Church consisting but of private men, may in this estate erect and
establish amongst them such offices and ordinances of CHRIST, as he has
instituted to the ministri and government of his Church. Of the first, both Mr.
G. and I have now lardgly set down our minds: so that I leave yt as fitter
for judgment, then any further discussing in this place; The reasons here
repeated. 1. How their Churches are from ancient descent within the Covenant.
2. And how their Church in this estate has begotten and nourished children
unto God, as the Martyrs, have been already often propounded and urged by him
in his book. I hope by that time he has well considered of the heresies,
sacrilege, and absurdities of the first, and of the vain assumption and little
consequence of the second, as they are set down in our answers, he shall have
little cause to use them so often, or to vrdge them with such confidence and
bitterness. For when Mr. G. shall prove, that a Nation so highly apostatate and
fallen from the faith, so deiply plunged into such execrable idolatries,
abominations, and hardness of heart, as in the papistical corruption, still
continues in this estate a true established visible church, within ye outward
Covenant of God, so far as we may and ought to judge by his word, the^
doubtless for mie part I will grant yt a sound Mayor proposition. And if he
shall bring the church of Rome for instance in the Minor, I must then yield to
his argument. Because y^ church at Rome was sometimes rightly gathered,
established, and within the covenant. Yet even then I suppose yt will be hard
for him to make the like assured proof, that ever her daughter of England was
rightly established into that christian order and within the covenant: But I
doubt rather, and by her present estate judge, Reu. 17. 2.
that she was among the children of her Mothers fornications, Deuteronomy. 23. 2.
and therefore without the Covenant. To the second reason it will also hardly
follow, that because some faithful men have been called to some general
knowledge of God and of Christ in this estate, and because they in their
ignorance cotynued in the same estate, that this should therefore justify the
outward estate of the Church which the word of God condemns, or prove yt in
this estate the true established Church of Christ, when they have nothing
aright according to Christ's ordinance, as we have proved in this treatise,
whether I refer for a more full answer of these reasons, hasting to the second
poyncte.

Wherein I before showed how God commands al his faithful servants (of what
estate or degree soever) to flee out of Babylon the false Church, and being
escaped not to stand still, to remember the Lord a far off, to let Jerusalem
come into their mind, to go up to SION, to seek out and to repair unto the
place where God has put his name. To seek the Church and the kingdom of
CHRIST, to take his yoke upon them, to assemble together in his name, with his
promise of direction and protection; and with his authority to establish his
offices and ordinances amongst them, given by him to the ministry and
government of his Church unto the worlds end, there to lead their lives
together in all mutual duties, in his holy order, faith, and fear. Now as we
showed all particular and private men whosoever, to be called out of the false
Church from confusion, and out of the world from dispersion, unto the true
Church unto order. So likewise showed we, that all these faithful persons
whosoever, were as yet but private men at their first coming out of the false
Church and gathering together, none of them being as yet called to any
ecclesiastical office or function in the Church, yt not being as yet
established into order. Whereupon we concluded, and still of necessity
enforce, That seeing God calls all his servants out of confusion, and will
not have them live in dissipation or disorder, but only in this order which he
has prescribed in his word; And has given his Church authority and
commandment, to erect, retain, and observe this order unto the worlds end;
And seeing in this estate the Church now consists but of private men; That
therefore the faithful being as yet but private men, ought by the commandment
of God to assemble and join themselves together in the name and faith of
Christ, and in all mutual duties orderly to proceed according to the rules of
the word, to a holy choice and use of such offices and ordinances as Christ
has ordained to the service and government of his Church. And sure were not
Mr. G. as forgeatful as he is ignorant of the scriptures, he could not but have
seen by the very phrase the first proposition confirmed by many scriptures;
The second by many prophecies of this general defection; and if not verified in
these present times, yet he cannot deny but some former not long sithence.
Therefore whilst he fights with the conclusion, he but spurneth against the
pricks, bewraieth the folly of his own heart, and no way auoydeth or
defends the danger therebie.

His best answer to this reason, or rather many reasons summed up, is (as he
thinks) to turn it away by two questions, and by manifold contumelies
against our poor persons; or (to say as yt is) by inaudible blasphemies
against the Church of God: likening the assembly of the faithful gathered in
the name, and joined together in the faith of Christ, proceeding to
th'establishing and exercise of Christ's or dinances; to the rebellious company
of Corath, Dathan, and Abyram, to a rowte of mutynous prentices assembled
without leave of their Prince to choose a Lord Mayor etc. His first question
is, That if all were private at the first coming out of the false Church, who
they were that caled them together? Or whether their coming together does make
them otherwise then private? We answer, that for any thing we can see, or
may judge by the word, they were but private men that first caled them out of
the false Church, and that caused them to assemble together, howsoever
peradventure endued with more excellent gifts, and more rare graces then
other. Further, that being thus assembled they ceased not to be private men,
until they were lawfully caled unto some true ecclesiastical office in and by
the Church. Yet all this notwithstanding, the Church in this estate now
consisting only of private men, ought to proceed to a right choice of
Ministers etc, according to the commandment of God. His next stombling-block
or question, is; Who should ordain these Pastors and Elders. And whether we
ever read of any ordained but by Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, and
Governors? And whether that power was not at the first derived from
th'extraordinarie Ministers to the Ordinary. To this we have above answered,
where we entreated of the ordination of the Ministers of England, and here
again do answer. That the Church had always the power to choose and ordain
their own Ministers, whereunto yt ought to use the most fit instruments,
whether these Pastors, Teachers, Elders (if such be to be had) or else where
they be not to be had to use the fittest means and instruments that God
exhibiteth. For this power of ordination is not (as Mr. G. and the unruly
clergy of these days suppose) derived from the Apostles and Evangelists
unto the permanent ministry of Pastors and Elders, neither belongs yt by
any peculiar right to their offices and persons segregate from the Church. But
yt is given by Christ and properly belongs unto the Church, whereunto their
Ministry and persons also belong, and are by the Church to be used unto this
worck as occasion is administered. And thus (if a veil were not laid over Mr.
G. his heart at the reading of the scriptures) he might find that those chief
builders the Apostles and Eua^gelistes themselves used this power, not to take
yt from the Church, but therein to assist the Church, As we read Act. 13.
Where the Church being assembled unto fasting, prayer, and other holy
exercises, yt is there said also, that they laid hands upon the Apostles, and
sent them out, though we doubt not the Church did it by some one or more of the
Prophets or Elders, Act. 14. 26. 27.
and unto the Church at their return the Apostles declared the success of
their journey. In which journey also, the Apostles ordayning or rather helping
the Churches to chose and ordain Elders, Act. 14. 23.
the word cheirotonesantes lifting up hands, whereby the whole action of
choosing and ordeyning is expressed, does clearly give the property and right
thereof unto the Churches, and not unto the Apostles only. who, as also the
Evangelists, did but instruct, direct, help, and assist the Church herein, and
not pluck away this power from the Churches. Likewise the rules for the choice
and ordination of Ministers in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, and other
places of ye scripture, as Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. are not perticularly
directed or committed to the co^sistorie of Elders, as they call yt, sequestered
and withdrawn from the Church, but unto the Church consisting of all the
members. which is thereunto to use (as in all other public and weighty
causes) such meet and fit instruments as the Lord affords and apoyncteth.
Neither is this action of approbation, and acception, or ordination of
Ministers so severed or disioyned from the election as these men dream: Or so
tied to the office or persons of the Elders, as the Church might either not
ordeyne, or not ordeyne without Elders. And as well might y^ Elders take into
their hands the elections, excommunications etc, of the Church, as the
ordinatio^ in this manner; Again if the ordination were thus of necessity tied
to the hands and office of Elders, how the^ should the Church after this
general defection and corruption under Antichrist (where all the stars were
fallen to the earth, Reu. 6. 12. 13. 14.
and the whole shape of the heaven departed away as a book wrapped up, a new
and strange ministry brought out of the bottomless pit with him, as we read)
ever recover or have any true* Reu. 9.
Ministry again in this world? where should they have true Elders to ordain
their Ministers? In the false and papisticall Church there can be no true
Elders or Ministers of Christ The true members of Christ can not be made the
members of that Beast, the members of that Harlot. The true Ministers of
Christ cannot belong unto, neither can administer in the false Church, but only
belong unto and administer in the true stablished Church of Christ. But now in
the time of this general apostasy and papistical corruption Mr. G. cannot
show any where any true visible established Church upon earth, with the true
ministry, government, worship, sacraments, ordinances of Christ, howsoever in
a singular conceit of his own, he have pleaded the Church of Rome, and her
daughters in their deipest apostasy, to be in the true Church, they and al
theirs within the Covenant from ancient descent, to have the true seal thereof,
namely baptism, there given unto them all. Yet here not being to be found
any true christian Ministers or Elders, who shall now ordain their Ministers,
at their first coming out of popery and departing from the Romish Church? For
now we will transfer the case from our selves (who are so odious in Mr. G. his
eyes as no good thing will be allowed in or to us) unto themselves.

When they first came out of popery were they then Corah his company, an
assembly of mutinous prentices? Were they not all private men? Or which of them
was otherwise? Ordinary or permanent Ministers they could not be: because there
was no true visible established Church upon earth, and for a thousand reasons
that might be drawn from the forgery of their office, administration etc, in
ye popish Church. Extraordinary Ministers, Apostles, or Evangelists the could
not be, because (as we have above proved) they were ceased after ye foundation
was once laid, and ye work rightly erect according to the true pattern.
Neither find we to any one established Church, the offices of Apostles or
Evangelists perticularly given, belonging, or erected in any of them as a
ministri of contynuance. Neither had these me^ the caling due to Apostles and
Evangelists. Nor yet did they chalendge or execute any such office, as
appears by their writings and profession, where they would not have been
ashamed of ye ministry God had caled them unto to have published themselves
such as they were. But if so be they had done this, yet their practice being
so discrepant from the Apostolic pattern and work of the former Evangelists,
we might not at any hand accept them for such. Thus then at their first coming
out of the false. Church, and gathering together, they were but private men.
What then, were they heretics and schismatics for departing out of the false
church? were they co^uenticlers, sectories etc, for assembling together? were
they usurpers and intruders without caling, mutiners, rebels against Princes,
and abridgers of their power, and withdrawers from their obedience and
allegea^ce for dissuading the people from the false Church, the yoke of
Antichrist and al their detestable idolatrys and enormities, for caling them to
the communion of Saints, to proceed to the choice of Ministers, and to the
practice of Christ's Testament as the Lord should reveal unto them? All this
they did, or at the least professed and endeavored to do. Yet I hope Mr. G.
that so builds their Tombs and garnisheth their sepulches, will not thus say
of them, howsoever he rail on us that do and protest to do no whit more. If
they were faithful Christians, such are we: holding the same commune faith with
them and al Saints, not (as yet) truly chardged, or duly convinced of any one
error contrary to the faith. They left the false Church, so do we. They
assembled and joined together in the faith of Christ, so do we, or at ye least
would do. They were but private men, and so are we. They herein are not judged
to have offended God or their Prince, and why should we for the same? They
herein did more, then to come out of Babylon, They did more then sweep or
repair the house, for they proceeded to the choice and ordination of
Mi^^sters, to the building of the house etc, Or else Mr. G. by his own reasons
must condemn them, the Church, and all the ministry of the land, yea of all
Europe, as well as us.

IF he allege that though they left their popish administration, and to
administer in the popish Church, yet they left not that ministry they there
had; We answer (as we have answered) that they received no better ministry
in the false Church, then the false Church could and did give them; neither
could they bring any better out, the^ they there received. But the true
ministry belongs not to the false Church, neither ca^ the false Church
ordain true Ministers. Again whoseuer leaves the public administration of
his Ministry, forsakes his Ministry: But they left the public
administration of their ministry. The like argument may be drawn for leaving
the Church whereof they were Ministers. And yet to stop his mouth farther, if
the Martyrs and first witnesses had a true ministry, such also have sondrie
of us whom he terms Brownistes etc, yea by so much a better, as he holds
the ministry of the Church of England better then the ministry of the Church
of Rome. Yea if Mr. G. his own ministry be good, such and the same have
diverse of us had, and are as yet vndisgraded, otherwise then by unfeigned
repentance of so detestable a Ministry. So that if they lost not their
ministry by forsaking the Church they received it of, and exercised it in;
why should Mr. G. be so severe to judge others, that may make the same plea?
If they say they left not the Church of Rome but the corruptions thereof, what
should let us to allege the same now against them, if we would stand upon
those shifts and doublings, But we use no such colored excuses, neither rely
upon men's persons and doings. we have the express commandment of God for
our warrant of al those things we do, or refuse to do, and stand to make
proof and trial thereof by the same word, gladly submitting our selves, al our
actions and whole faith unto this trial. Although also we have and use
the examples and practice of these faithful, that first came out of the popish
Church, and enterprised the erection and practice of Christ's Ministry and
ordinances amongst themselves, according to that measure of knowledge God gave
them. Whose errors though we shun (neither will mainetayne our own when
they shall be showed us, cleaving only to the true pattern of Gods word) yet
make we their president a bulwark for us against these cauilling enemies; Who
must, for doing these things either condemn them, and so themselves, and
their whole Church and doings with them, Or else with no shame or justice
condemn us of heresy, schism, sects, presumption, intrusion, rebellion etc,
for doing the self same things they did, or at the least professed to do; yea
for doing them better and nearer the true pattern then they did. If they in
this doing neither intruded without caling, nor presumed above their caling,
Why are we judged for this doing to do both? yea for this saying, to have put
an halter about our necks? Does not this our hange-man and executioner (that
with joy speaks of the chains and fetters, that these bloody Bishopps lay
upon the faithful servants of Christ, for leaving their antichristian yoke and
seking Christ's heavenly government) put with the same hand, and trise the
halter about these godly Martyrs necks, yea about his own and his Lord
Bishops necks, and all the Ministers necks of the land? that have no other
defense for their ungodly ministry and doings, then the erroneous practice of
these godly Martyrs, who (as has been proved) were but private men at their
first coming out of popery and erection of these Churches, as we now be? Mr.
GIFF. had not best show us many of these tricks of legier du main, lest he
ensnarrle and choke himself with the same halter he would cast about our
necks, and kill himself and his whole Church with that sharp weapon wherewith
he would kill us at once in his furious mood. For sure if it be unlawful for
private men to assemble, and in this estate to proceed to the election and
ordination of Ministers, then by the same law was it unlawful for them so to
do. Then are all these Bishops and Ministers private men, usurpers; no more
true Ministers, then such a one as the mutinous prentices should make Mayor,
were a true Mayor. Yea let me go further, if the Church consisting of private
men, may not in this estate erect and ordain Christ's true ministry amongst
them, then is there no true ministri upon earth, neither ever can be, until God
raise up new Apostles and Evangelists, and builds a new Church upon a new
foundation, which shall be when we have a new Christ. And then Mr. G. shall have
his dream. For he says that when God will have his work done, he will
raise up extraordinary workmen thereunto. But where read Mr. G. this positio^,
if not amongst the Anabaptists? Sure he never found it in the new Testament,
where we have the mind of Christ, a perfect foundation, an accompleat
ministry, Deuteronomy. 30. 11 12. 13. 14.
until Christ's coming. So that we need not to say in our hearts, who shall
ascend up to heaven for us, or descend from heaven unto us, Romans 10. 6. 7. 8.
or go over the sea for us to bring or teach us the Commandment of our God,
when the word is so near us even in our mouths and in our hearts for to do
yt. Therefore when Mr. G. shall make his proof of this assertion, And show his
warrant and promise that God will now raise up to his Church extraordinary
worckmen, and that til then no private men ought to proceed to the choice and
ordination of Ministers, but to tarry and expect this promise of the Lord:
Then surely we will acknowledge him no false Prophet, no Anabaptisticall
dreamer, and that we have presumed over far upon the Lords authority and
commandment given to his Church unto the worlds end, to choose and ordain his
ministry, and to practice amongst them whatsoever he has commanded. But now
because this were to bring Christ from above, and again from the dead,
because also we have Gods direct commandment to go out of the false Church;
being come out, to assemble and join together; and being so joined, to
proceed to the erection of his ministry and practice of his ordinances, and
have his authority and promise of blessing to these proceedings, because we
have the practice of Christ's Apostles in planting the primative Churches, and
now lately the examples of such as endeavored to build this Church they live in,
we dare not by any vain hope or threats of this false Prophet be drawn to
neglect so great salvation, to continue either in apostasy or disorder, and to
transgress or neglect the Lords commandment.

THe next objection against us is drawn from an especial observation in our
first Article, where we confessed the universal Church and kingdom of CHRIST
to extend to all such as by true faith apprehend and confess CHRIST JESUS,
howsoever they be skattered, and wheresoever dispersed upon the face of the
whole earth. Hence Mr. GIFF. concludes, that seeing the faithful may be in
state of grace and have CHRIST their King, though they live not under that
government and order that CHRIST has established in and to his Church,
therefore it is not necessary for private men to set yt up. Sure this is a
weak argument, and not worth half the noting and observation he has made of
yt: we must for all this deny yt: and find no more consequent, then if he had
therefore concluded that the communion of Saints, the ministry and
ecclesiastical government of CHRIST are not to be sought of the faithful,
because some faithful may be saved that live not in an established church,
vizt: such as are in captivity, sickness, age, or in such times and place, as
they know not where to find one day of the Son of man. Luke 17. 22. etc.
He might as well conclude, that because God is able and does save some in the
false Church, Therefore private me^ ought not to forsake the false Church. God
is able to save some in dispertion out of the established Church, Therefore
private men ought not to seek the established Church.

THe last and greatest matter is, that we run before the Princes
commandment, whose duty it is to reform Churches. Private men might not so
much as sweep them, much-lesse build them. For this is to erect a state and
government, because the power of the Church is both public and great. We
have above showed, that ye Church has Gods commandment and authority
always, to erect Christ's ministri and government amongst them. That the
Church in this estate consists only of of private men, neither are there any
true Ministers any where to be found upon the earth: neither any
extraordinary Ministers to be looked for, seeing they are long since ceased.
Therefore the Church in this estate consisting only of private men, ought to
erect this ministry and government: else should they also cease and never be
had again upon the earth: and so should there never be any established Church,
ministry, Sacraments etc, again in this world. yet here must be noted by the
way, that Mr. G. runs too much upon, and wresteth too far these words [
private men] when we speak of the Church consisting only of private men. Now
unto his crimination, the Church having this commandment and authority given
of God unto the worlds end, we before showed him that no Prince might take it
away, or without great wrong hinder them from the performance hereof. yea that
the servants of God ought not to be stayed from doing the commandments of
God, upon any restrainte or persecution of any mortal man whosoever. For this
we alleged the examples and practice of the Apostles, who then had been
guilty of the same disobedience and rebellion, if Princes in this business had
been to be stayed for, or their restrainte had been a sufficent let. yea that
persecution and the cross of Christ were utterly abolished, if the Church and
faithful were not to proceed in their duties, until Princes give leave. We
showed also, that the obedience and practice of Gods will was no disobedience
or prei^dize to the Prince. That we attempted nothing beyond our calling,
neither transgressed in our calling. We meddled not with the reformation of any
public abuse either in the common wealth or in their Church, otherwise, then
by prayers unto God, and godly exhortation. We only according unto Gods
commandment refrained from their idolatry and other public evils, and
assembled together in all holy and peaceable manner to worship the Lord our God,
and to join our selves together in the faith unto mutual duties. This we
showed to be the duty of every private man that would be saved, to leave the
false Church, and to seek the true Church. And being thus assembled and joined
in the faith, we showed it to be their duty together to seek that ministry
and government which Christ has left unto his Church, and for the Church to
erect the same.

Unto the Apostles proceeding without the license of Princes he makes a double
answer. One in respect of the persons of the Apostles, that they were
furnished with a special commission and authority from CHRIST himself to set
up his kingdom: which commission and power the Pastors and Teachers
successively received and delivered over to others, so that private men may not
have this power. The other in respect of those Princes in the Apostles time,
which were all heathen, and therefore it had been bootlesse to sue to them. But
where there is a christian Prince that holds the fundamental poynctes of the
christian faith (though otherwise this christian Prince do err in some
matters of doctrine, or touching the rules of discipline) every godly private
man is to keep a good conscience, not breaking the unity and peace of the
Church. But not to take public authority to reform.

THese instances of the persons of the Apostles and Princes as they are little
to the purpose, so do they him as little good. If the commandment of God were
sufficient warrant to the Apostles to do their work, though all the Princes of
the world resisted; then must the commandment of the same God be of the same
effect to all other instruments, whom it pleases the Lord to use in their
callings to his service also, though all the Princes in the world should
withstand and forbid the same. For neither dignity of the persons that are
used, make the commandment of God of more authority or necessity to be
done: neither yet the greatness or the goodness of the persons that withstand
this commandment of God, make yt of less authority or necessity. Only let
the servants of God be sure to have the commandment and calling of their God
for that they do, and then they need not fear the Powers that are placed of
Romans 13.
of God for the praise and not for the punishment of the good. Our question
then is not whether private men may do that which is not their duty, to which
they have no commanndement, as this accuser surmizeth to bring us into danger
and hatred; But whether they may not do that which God commanndeth them,
within the limits of their caling. As to for^ake idolatry and the false
Church, to seek the true worship of God in the true Church, though all the
Princes of the world, whether belieuers or infidels should forbid the same; And
this we affirm to be the duty of every particular person, whosoever forbid.
We say not now that private men may reform the false Church, abolish public
idolatry, or depose a false ministry that the King sets up. This were to
break the boundess of their calling, to intrude upon the Princes office; and
great cause had they then to fear, for he bears not the sword in vain.
Again, our question is not whether it is the office and duty of Princes to
see abuses reformed both in the Church and common Wealth (which we thinck no
man to be so ignorant or barbarous to deny, except the Anabaptists* But
whether the Church ought not now amongst themselves freely to practice CHRIST'S
Testament, either in erecting his officers and ordinances, or in reforming or
correcting any fault or abuse that arises amongst them, without staying for
the Princes license: yea though the Prince should upon the pains of death
forbid. This we affirm to be the duty of every particular Congregation,
Math. 18. and 28. 20.
CHRIST having therefore given unto each and all of them his sacred power and
authority to bind and to loose in earth, and to do all things whatsoever
he has commanded them, with promise to be with them unto the end of the
world. He has given them the two edged sword of his mouth to cut down all
sin, The mighty spiritual weapons of his word to bring in captivity
every thought to the obedience of CHRIST, 2. Cor. 10.
to to the overthrowing of all munitious reasonings and sublimitie lifted up
against the knowledge of God, and to have in a readiness to reuendge all
disobedience. To cast sin into the Epha, and the talent of Gods judgment upon
yt, and to remove yt out of the Church with all power and celeritie, I^^b. 5.
with the wings of a Storke and the wind under their wings, and to lift up
the Epha betwixt the heaven and the earth in the eyes of all men. Marck. 34.
etc.
CHRIST has given this authority to his servants whom he has left in his
house, and has commanded them all therefore to watch together. Romans 16. 17.
To observe and avoid them that cause any divisions or offenses contrary to
the doctrine that they have learned. Jude. 3.
To contend for the maintenance of the whole faith. Gal. 1. 8.
Not to intermit or to be withdrawn from any part of the same by any man or
Angel, for persecution or any thing that man can do unto them: every where
warning, instructing, and exhorting his servants not to fear persecution for
righteousness sake, to take up and bear his cross daily etc: Likewise for the
neglect of those things God reproves and stirs up the Churches To repent
and to do the first works, or else he will come against them speedily, and
remove their candlestick. Reu. 2. 10 and 3. 10. etc
To repent or else he will come against them speedily and fight against them
with the sword of his mouth, Commending those Churches that kept that they
had, the word of his patience in persecution, promising them the Crown of
life, if they remain faithful unto the death: to make them that overcome
pillars in the Temple of God etc.

Mr. Giffard he is contented, that under heathen or popish Princes the Church
now may reform or proceed in the practice of the whole will of God, but at no
hand where the Prince posesseth the faith in the fundamental poinctes, though
otherwise he err and mis-leade the whole Church in some matters of doctrine,
or touching the rules of discipline. In these abuses and corruptions every
private man is to keep a good conscience, but none to take public authority
to reform: Because these Kings are principal members of the Church etc. What
clear conscience any private man that yeildeth to these public seen errors
or transgressions, Or the whole Church, whilst yt wittinglie does, or suffers
these things to be done, can keep, we have above showed in the SECOND
PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION. How expreslie contrary this leauened traditionall
proposition of Mr. G. is to all these Scriptures and doctrines above recited,
is so evident to all men, as yt needs no further or lardger refutation. If God
have committed his whole word unto his Church, as the foundation of their
faith and of every action they do, commanding them to stand to the death for
the maintenance of the whole truth and the holy practice of the same; and to
cast out in his name and power all, that publicly and obstinatlie hold any
opinion, or that so commit any transgression contrary to his word: If God for
the neglect hereof have menaced to come in judgment, Deuteronomy. 13.
and exhorts the Churches upon the first discovery hereof to speedy
repentance; Ier. 6. 8. 23
How can Mr. G. persuade the Church to continue wittingly in open errors and
public transgression, or in this estate promise them peace? The holy Ghost
has not set down this as a note of a true Prophet: Neither has God promised
any peace to the^, that wittingly continue in any error or transgression,
until they repent: Does not one dead fly putrify and cause to stincke the
whole ointment of the Apothecary? A little leaven make sower the whole lump?
We would know of him therefore, whether that devilish distinction of
fundamental errors and transgressions, and such errors and transgressions as he
holds not fundamental (wherebie he turns away the practice of what part of
Gods word he lusts, and justifies (or at the least tollerateth) what open
errors and public transgressions of Gods word he lusts) will excuse him, or
any that wittinglie break the least of Gods commandments? And whether the
authority or christianity of any Prince will in that day excuse before the
Lord any man, that has at the Princes commandment committed, much more
continued to committ, any transgression, without unfeigned repentance? But if
the least error be contrary to true faith, the least transgression sin, and
no known sin or error to be committed or continued in: how can he persuade
the Church to commit or to continue in any error or transgression? so highly
to tempt and provoke the Lord? And now to the poynct. we would know of him
whether any Prince, much-lesse a christian Prince, may abrogate the
commandment of God, or take away that power and authority that God has
given to the Church unto the worlds end. If not, but that the commandments of
God remain always the same, and the Church has the same power under a
christian magistrate, that under a heathen, why then yt ought not to proceed
to the obedience and practice of Gods word, whether in correcting and
redressing faults, or in going forewarde in the ways of God as they are
reueiled unto them, as well and freely under a Christian Prince as under an
heathen? Is it because a Christian Princd is the principal and greatest member
of the Church* why by so much the rather ought and the better may the Church
do it, having now such a singular help and rare accomplement of so precious a
member. Every true member is given for the help and comfort, and not for the
hindrance and hurt of the body: We may then much better conclude, that the
Church under a christian Prince may proceed with all freedom in the sincere
practice of CHRIST'S Gospel: because he is a member of CHRIST and of the
Church: then under an infidel Prince, that is an enemy to CRHIST and to the
Church.

ANother reason he brings, why the Church under a christian Prince may not
reform without his license, or until he will* because it is the office of a
christian Prince to reform the Church, and therefore the Church in taking such
a public work upon them, should but usurp and encroch upon his office.
Because we are so apt to mis-vnderstand one an other, and to take words in too
lardge or straight a sense, it were good we set down what is meant by this
reformation here spoken of, before we proceed. We mean then by reformation,
to reduce all things and actions to the true ancient and primative pattern of
Gods word. This we graun to be the office and duty of the Prince to do
as well in the Church as in the common Wealth. The Princes eye may suffer no
transgression of Gods law, he is to ouersee, and see every one to do their
duties in the office and caling God has placed them. Yet is this no preiudize
to the Christian liberty and power of the Church, no impediment to any member
thereof, but rather a singular preservation of all duties, and an excellent
instigation of them all to do the will of God in their calings. For in all this
here is no power given the Prince to restrain any iore of the liberty and
power of the Church, or to withold any one person from doing the whole will
of God in their caling: Much-lesse is here any power give the Prince to draw
or compel the Church or any member thereof to the least transgression or error:
yea when the Prince shall in any thing be found contrary to God, God is then
to be obeyed rather then man. And this is no disobedience to the Princes
sovereign and supreme power over al persons and causes ecclesiastical or
civil, is no preiudize or impediment to the Church, or to any member thereof,
from doing the whole will of God in their calings: So in like manner are not the
proceedings of the Church according to CHRIST'S Testament, any derogation from
or enchrochment of, the royal power and prerogative of Princes, as this false
Prophet out of the mouth of Sathau would persuade: but rather a singular
preservation and most rare illustratio^ thereof. Whose reigns are never so
glorious as when, or glorious but when, God is worshipped and obeyed according
to his reueiled word, and those most chearished and favored, that are most
faithful therein. In the Church of CHRIST are al duties most faithfully taught,
and no known transgression of any known duty suffered, either to God or
man. How then can Satan himself say, that the proceedings of the Church, or
rather or Christ in his Church, are contrary to, or derogate from the royal
power of Princes? They cannot be of God that thus set at variance these blessed
powers which God has so conjoined and contempered for the mutual help each of
other, and the service of his glory. No it is the false Church and this
antichristian hierarchy that are prejudicial unto, enchroch upon, and vsurp
the Royal authority, power, jurisdiction, titles, honors, prerogatives,
lads, palaces, pomp etc* of Princes. The true Church both knows how to obey
the Lord, and their Prince in the Lord. They usurp not the Princes office
when they reform any public fault in the worship, administration, government
ecclesiastical etc, but execute their own office. For this is not the Princes
office to do in person, but to command the Church to do it by such
instruments as God has there unto ordained. This commandment of the Prince
does neither give the Church more power, or make the action more lawful:
Neither does the prohibition of any Prince take away this power of the Church
that God has given, or make the action that God has commanded more unlawful.
How then does the Church more sin in doing these duties in reformation and
correction of public faults, and proceeding in the practice of Gods will,
(which God has commanded to be done by his Church) then any private man
sins, when he corrects any fault in himself or in his family, or
begins to do any duty (which he before neglected) without his Princes
license? Seeing the Princes eye, power, and office extends as well to civil as
to ecclesiastical duties, as well to private as to public reformation. yea the
Princes license in all Christian consideration, extends to al godly duties and
honest actions, even to as many things either to be done or to be left
vndo^ne, as the commandments of God extend unto; For he is the Minister of God
for ye praise of them that do well, and for the punishment of them that do
evil. when the Prince resists or suffers not the word of God to have free
passage, he sins and does not his duty. But this ca^ be no excuse for us to
cease to do the will of God, or to intermit our duty. If he draw the sword
and smite us for well doing, that but augmenteth his sin, and the blessing of
God rests upon us that suffer for righteousness sake. we may not for fear of
persecution, or for the indignation of Princes leave the commandments of God
undone. For that were with this false Prophet to mancipate the law of God to
the will of Princes, and utterly to abolish the cross of Christ out of the
world, For Princes never punish me^ for obeying, but for breaking their hestes.
Beastly then and hellish is the speech of this man, That says, the Church
refuses the peace of their Prince, and provoke him to strike, when they
either reform such faults as are in the Church, or proceed to do such things
as God has commanded them, though the Prince forbid and will not give license.
But especially where the blasphemer is not afraid to say, that the Church when
it proceeds to the establishing and practice of Christ's ordinances, erecteth
a state and government of their own. Do they erect any thing of themselves,
or that CHRIST himself has not erected? Is not this to accuse CHRIST of
treason, because he says he is a King? And his servants of sedition, because
they set up his kingdom without the license, and against the will of Princes,
though it cost them their lives for the same? Is not this man a faithful
servant of CHRIST, a faithful subject to his Prince that so reprocheth CHRIST'S
heavenly kingdom, rejects his ordinances and commandments to make them
depend upon the will of Princes, that so seduceth his Prince, and would draw
her into battle against God almighty and his Church? Yea if to set up Christ's
kingdom in a christian estate without the leave or license of the Prince or
state, be rebellion and disobedience, a derogation from their sacred power, an
intrusion into their high office, how then will he excuse our Savior CHRIST
himself? who being borne in the flesh, but in the estate of a subject and a
private man (he neither being Minister of the Temple, nor magistrate in the
common Wealth, and that in a godly state under faithful magistrates, as himself
acknowledges) did notwithstanding by all means in devour to set up his
kingdom, preached, baptized, caled al men unto him, although the whole state
and governors earnestly sorbad and resisted him. Those governors were to be
obeyed, and he himself was obedient in all things, as became a true subject. If
it be answered that he did it by the especial commission and commandment of
God; We readily grant that a sufficient warrant unto him before God and men:
as also unto all others that have the commandment of the same God for that
they do. But what is this to our question? Whether the Church or such as have
authority from God, ought to be stayed from doing the commandment of God, by
the inhibition of a christian Prince or state? We grant it high sin and
intolerable presumption for any that have not authority of God, to
enterprise to do any thing in the Church, whether with or without their
Princes license. But if yt be unlawful for the Church, or such as have
authority of God, without the license of their christian Prince or
governors, Then verily our Savior and his Disciples offended herein, who
stayed not to do the will of his heavenly Father for the threats and laying
wait of the Rulers. Further, if it be unlawful and derogatorie to a Christian
Princes office and authority, for any to do Gods will in their callings, and
for the Church to proceed in the practice of CHRIST'S Testament, though
against his will, Then is it also unlawful under a heathen Prince. For the
christian and heathen Princes have one and the same authority, office,
duty, to see all things both in the Church and in the commune Wealth done
according to the will of God. There is the same reverence and obedience (though
I say not the same bowels of love) due to the heathen, that is due to the
christian Prince in regard of their office. The heathen Prince shall answer
as well as the christian for the neglect of their duty, for the abuse of their
power and place. And thus also if Mr. G. doctrines be sownd, the Apostles
likewise sinned against the authority of Princes, in erecting CHRIST'S
kingdom, and the Churches in proceeding to receive the same, and to do the
will of God, without their Princes license, and notwitstanding their
prohibition, Seeing that the unbelieving Princes have the same place, office,
and authority, and ought to have the same obediene in respect thereof, that
christian Princes have, or ought have. And sure most devilish and detestable
are these two published and generally received opinions of these contrary
factions of our English Clergy men; The one giving out, that the form of
ecclesiastical government prescribed in CHRIST'S Testament, practiced by the
Apostles and primative Churches in the times of persecution, is not now
necessary or tolerable under a Christian Prince. The other giving out, that
those ordinances and that government which they acknowledge CHRIST to have
instituted and prescribed to his Church unto the worlds end, may not now,
under a christian Prince, be put in practice by the Church, if he forbid the
same, as they might, ought, and were under heathen Princes by the faithful in
all ages. With the one of these blasphemous positions, the Prelates defend
their outrageous government, and all their antichristian proceedings. with the
other, the tyme-seruers these counterfeite Reformistes, color and defend their
perfidie, not witnessing unto and practizing the Gospel of Christ, and their
servile subjection to the government of Antichrist. By which positions both
sides most impiously abrogate the heavenly government and ordinances of Christ
in his Church, and intollerably seduce and abuse that most blessed and
comfortable ordinance of the christian Magistracy. Both of them hereby shut up
the kingdom of heaven against all men, neither entering themselves nor suffering
such as would, but holding the whole land under the enormous government of
Antichrist in the wrath of God, whose judgment therefore sleeps not.

YEt remains an other dangerous error which Mr. G. has picke^ out of a
certain answer made by me HENRY BARROVVE to three great Bishops of this
land etc; where being demanded whether the Queen may make laws for the
Church which are not contrary to the word of God. I (seeing whereat they
aimed: vzt: to maintain al these popish relics, devises, tromperies etc,
wherewith their worship and Church is pestered) answered (as I remember) to this
effect. That no Prince, neither all the me^ of the world, not the Church yt
self, could make any laws for the Church, other then CHRIST has left in his
word: But I thought it the duty of every Prince (especially of every
christian Prince) to enquire out and renew the laws of God, and to stir up
all their subjects unto more diligent and careful keeping of the same. This
answer Mr. G. after his accustomed manner pronownceth Anabaptisticall, de^ijng
and cutting off a great part of the power God has given unto Princes: and a
great part of Discipline. Proof of these chardges he makes none, except we
must take these two assertions in way of proof, until he bring better. The
first is, that CHRIST has given general laws or rules for matters of
circumstance that be indifferent and variable in the perticulars, and so to be
altered and abolished, as the peace and edification of the Church shall
require. And therefore that Princes with the Church are to ordain and to
establish such orders by those general rules, as may afterward for just cause
be altered. Mr. G. his antecedent here is so general and extendent, his
conclusion so doubtful and indefinite, taking such room to himself in both to
escape and euade, as except he draw nearer, and in his next book take the
pains to set down what he means in his proposition by [ general laws and
rules] and by [ matters of circumstance] And in his conclusion, what kind of
orders those [ such orders] are the Prince should ordeine and establish, he
shall be so far from distressing or convincing me, as I shall never perceive
where he is, or where about he goes. This when he shall do, then I shall know
what to answer him. In the mean time I confess many things of circumstance
as the time and place of assembling, what scriptures to read or to interpret,
how long to continue in prayer or prophecy etc, to be left in liberty at the
discretion of the Church, to be wisely used according to their present
occasions, to edification, order, decency. Of these and sondrie such like, the
Lord in wisdom saw it not good to set down positive or permanent laws for
all Churches and times: because the present estate and diverse occasions of all
Churches, yea of any one Church, are so diverse and variable, that prescript
definitive laws could not be set of such things in particular for the space of
one month, without manifold inco^veniences and great preiudize to the Church.
Of such things then as the Lord for these wise ends and weighty causes has
left in the liberty and discreation of the Church to be used and ordered
according to the present estate and occations thereof etc, may man make no
prescript positive laws in particular, to enjoin thereby this form, this time
etc upon all or upon any one Church, without restrayning that, which God has
left at liberty; yea without co^trolling and contrarijng the wisdom of God
(which no doubt is most excellently perfect even in the least things) and
without many other grievous inconveniences and intolerable preiudize to the
Church of God. Much better therefore should the Prince provide for the Church to
see them duly to observe the laws that God has given, and to use their
liberty aright, Or where they transgress in either of these, to reprove or
to correct accordingly, then to make and enjoin new laws of his own
devising, so contrary to the liberty, yea even to that order and discipline
CHRIST has given: which cannot be joined unto, exercised, or preserved by any
other laws then God has made; as by due examination in particular of the
least or best thing they thus devise and enjoin, will appear. CHRIST that
great Architect of his house has left us a most absolute and exact pattern of
all things belonging thereunto. unto which no humane devise can more be added
or joined, then heaven and earth can be commingled. Wherefore we may by better
right esteem Mr. G. a corrupter of CHRIST'S discipline, or rather a fordger of
a new discipline, for making and bringing in new laws into the church other
then Gods laws, Then he may pronownce us denyers and cutters off of CHRIST'S
discipline, for allowing and receiving no laws for any action in the Church,
but Gods laws.

HIs other reason is this. Princes ought to establish the whole christian
religion, to punish idolaters, wicked despisers, heretics, schismatics,
blasphemers etc; But this cannot be done but by laws made and established:
Therefore Princes ought to make laws for the Church. And I in denijng this,
deny a great part of that power, which God has given unto Princes. His first
proposition is no more then I have professed in mine answer. If he understand
his second proposition of other laws then God has made, I then deny yt as
most false and untrue. whereof until he make proof, he has not obtained his
purpose, nor convinced mine answer. And therefore til then must withdraw his
triumphant conclusions. I hold that Gods true religion is only founded upon,
and established by his own holy word and laws, and not upon or by man's
laws: And that the Prince may as well make a new religion, as new laws for
religion. Further, as I hold in Gods word sufficient rules and directions for
all actions of the Church: So hold I in the same most just judgments and meet
punishments to every transgressio^. So that the Prince can no way better
advance and establish true religion then by, yea can no way establish by but
yt, the promulgation, and due execution of Gods laws: calling all men of all
degrees to the hearing and sincere practice thereof in their calings, and duly
punishing al such as transgress the same after such order proclaimed and
established. God has incommended and enjoined the book of his law to all
Princes, therbie the govern both the Church and common Wealth in all things, as
we plentifully read Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 19. and 5. 32. and 29. 9. etc. and 4. 6.
Ioshu. 1. 8. 1 Kings. 2. 3. 1 Chronicles. 28. and in sondrie other places. The
King is not made the Lord, but the Minister of Gods law, to which he is
bownde, and for the transgression thereof shall answer unto God, as any other
person. He is placed in the seat of God, and the word of God committed unto
him, not to alter or neglect the least part thereof, Not to make new laws,
but to keep and see observed those laws which God has made. Great then is
their ignorance that think not that God has given sufficient instruction and
direction in his holy word for all actions of his Church. And greater their
wickedness that knowing this, dare give mortal men leave to make laws for Gods
Church. If they say that the Princes law must be consonant to Gods law, Then
I answer they have warrant and groundworke in Gods word. which if they have,
then are they Gods and not man's law: For Gods law extends as far as the
equity of his law extends. But what laws soever have no warrant of
groundworke in Gods word, those cannot be said to be co^sonant to Gods will,
because there we have the whole mind of CHRIST, and so are to be avoided as
superfluous, burdenous, and contrary to Gods word, how necessary or expedient
soever they may seem to humane wisdom.

AND now let the christian reader judge what cause Mr. GIFFARD had to pronownce
this mine answer to the Bishopps question Anabaptistical, when I therein
acknowledged the whole law of God, the place, office, and whole power of
Princes that God has given them, all which the Anabaptists utterly deny. Or
with what conscience he has chardged us as seduced by Brownes writing, And to
hold that Princes ought not to compel their Subjects to the true worship of
God. Neither ought to reform the Church. All which sclanders this my answer
which he here endeuoreth to confute, refuteth to his face:

FINIS.
A BREIFE REFVTATION OF Mr. GEORGE GIFFARD HIS SVPPOSED CONSIMILItude between
the Donatists and us, wherein is showed how his Arguments have been and may be
by the Papists more justly retorted against himself and present estate of their
Church.
Mr. GIFFARD a man inexpert in discerning the times and seasons, having long
skirmished with vain titles, and assuming the matter in question, undertakes
now to deface all Gods inviolable ordinances with a certain dialogue between
Augustine and the Donatistes, and to make CHRIST'S ordinances and our persons
odious as he supposes to all men thereby, to heal the wound of the Beast and
dawbe up the whole rabble of the Romish Ministry, laws, worship, government,
which al men of any judgment know to be received from the Pope. He takes upon
him to compare us to the Donatistes, and without considering the causes and
persons from which and from whom they separated, as also the times and ages,
He sclanderously wresteth some particular doctrines about separation, and we
therevpo^ must needs be Donatistes. But we have learned that we ought al to
take heed to the most sure word of God, and that he that speaks ought to
speak as the words of God. and to this law and this testimony if any
speak not, it is because there is no light in him. We refuse utterly to be
drawn into this kind of fruictlesse strife, and will not intermedle either
with the Donatistes not Augustines persons, nor yet with their causes or manner
of pleading them; but only show in a few brief notes how unjustly this
godless quarrelous man has dealt herein, even in the things he has set
down, leaving the better veiwe thereof to such as will bestow their tirne
that way, and those to due consideration, and impartial trial by the word
and spirit of God.

AT his first entrance into his discourse, he denies us to be Christians,
saying, all that are gathered by CHRIST'S doctrine only unto Christ alone as yt
is written one is your Doctor, even CHRIST, Math. 23. are only by his title
called Christians. But we are wicked Schismatickes, therefore we must be called
by the first Aucthors or chief maintayners thereof. To which we answer that
Mr. Giffard and his Collegiates have given out for undoubted doctrines, that
such as hold the fundamental doctrines of justification by faith in Christ
alone, are to be holden Christians; and to clear our selves a little further,
we seek to be gathered and ruled by Christ's doctrine only, and by Christ alone
as our King, Priest and Prophet, yea therefore we suffer, because we will not
deny this faith. But by his own argument he has turned himself and their
whole Church and Priesthood out of the fold, whiles they are not gathered unto
CHRIST alone by his doctrine only, but maintain Antichrists laws and orders;
his servants they are to whom they give themselves to obey.

To prove his former reason, he aledgeth the custom of the old time in Gods
Church and the scripture yt self Revel. 2. where the Nicolaitanes are
mentioned, Arians of Arius, Montanistes of Montanus, Nouatians of Nouatus,
Pelagians of Pelagius, Donatistes of Donatus. The doctrine we do grant, that
wicked Heretics and Scismatikes may justly be named of the aucthors and
leaders; But heresy and schism we deny to be maintained by us: And you
having never convinced us of heresy, neither can prove your Church to be the
true apparent established Church of Christ, must give account for your
malicious sclandering of us, and numbering us among such hateful heretics as
the Arians etc. If we be Christians, then must you give account for this
offense, which is not only done to us, but to his truth and to himself. You
affirm in an other place that you had rather give account for to much charity
showed to the wicked, yea for iustifijng an evil man, then for co^demning the
just, being iguora^t that the woe is pronounced against both. But here you have
forgotten your self herein, and by sclandering the truth you know what danger
you incur Luke. 17. 1. 2. Math. 18. 7.

He draws the original of Brownisme (as he terms yt) from Donatus, and
says Brown was the chief renewer thereof, yet afterward says there was a
Church of them eighteen years ago in London, wherein one Bolton was a chief
doer, whose fearful end is not forgotten. For the original of our profession we
fetch yt from Christ and his Apostles and practice of the Church in the
Apostles time, as all the Martyrs from time to time have done, according to
the light they saw. For Donatus and Brown they must answer for themselves.
We are buylt upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophetts JESUS CHRIST
being the chief corner stone; Other foundation then this can no man lay; we
offer our works to be tried hereby. It is Mr. Giffard himself that so well may
remember the fearful end of Bolton, for yt is true that (as I have heard) he
stood against your ministry for Cappes, Surplus, Cross, with many other your
Romish trynckets, as I have heard your self have done; after reuolting and
become a conformable member of your Church, hanging himself, yt is a
remembrance for Apostates. Donatisme (says he) in old time about twelve
hundredth years past was condemned, as approved detestable schism and heresy:
The Brownistes and Donatistes shall appear to agree together as two pieces of
cloth that are of the same woll, same thread, color, working, and breadth. If
this man had read with judgment the holy scripture as concerning the general
defection and Apostasy, with the increase and decrease of Antichrists
kingdom, he would have blushed to have entered this comparison. For the
Donatistes we have not to deal, yet if the right eye were not blinded, he
might have considered better the Donatistes causes of separation and ours, and
it would not have seemed so like together: the times, causes, persons from
whom and manner of their separation must be better weighed, which because he
has taken in hand to perticulate afterward, I will only show one here wherein
we make such a difference, as al his other are but trifles. The Donatistes held
still the same worship, government, offices, officers, entrance, and the same
administration of sacraments etc, that the other did from whom they did
separate, and as it seems received whole Cities and Contries to be the Church
as before; so that their separation was more like the sects and schisms
amonst your selves; you from the Papists, the Martinistes from you, the forward
Predicants (as they are called) from the Bishops, then any such separation as
we by the commandment of God make from false Church, false ministry, false
Sacraments, Antichristian government etc, unto the true ordinances of Christ:
Heretics and Sectaries make schism; but this true conuertion from the evil
to the good, from the false to the true few, find yt; although it be the
plain commandment of God. Reave. 18. 4. and the way to salvation Acts. ^. 40.
For indeed it is not enough to forsake the false ways, but to seek the
ancient ways of the Lord, and to walk in them, that we may find rest to our
souls. Mr. Giffard his setting down of the causes of the Don^^istes
separation, bewrays himself to seek only the defamation of the truth,
without show of reason. First he says that in the persecutions by the Romish
Emperors many being (as they were then termed) proditors and traditors of the
Books of God, the holy vessels their brethren etc, there was a rumor that
such offenses had b^ne committed by some. Now (says he) there came certain
Bishops from Numidia to Carthage a famous City in Africa to ordeyne a Bishop,
and found Cecilianus alredye ordained and placed in the seat etc. Thus far I
trust it will be granted me his pieces of cloth are not both of a woll; for the
difference, I refer to the obstinate and heynouse tra^sgressions wherewith we
have chardged these parrish assemblies. Further the Brownistes (as he in the
spirit of blasphemy terms them) approve of no such Bishop or Bishoprics, no
such seat nor ordination as they came about.

Well, the Bishops of Numidia were wroth that they could not ordeine. In this
poinct his threeds are not proportionable. We thrust not our ^elues beyond our
line in these actions, neither do any thing in the high matters of God through
ambition: These things are all found amongst your selves, the kingdom through
envy divided; for all your chiefest strife has been, whither a Sinode of
parrish Priests, or a Lord Bishop should create your Priests: this being your
principal contention, the one side must needs be Donatistes. He proceeds and
says, these Bishops of Numidia joined together, and laid a crime upon
^^^cilianus; they say his Ordeyner delivered the holy books and was a Traditor;
whereupon they would have Caecilianus reputed no Minister of CHRIST, but the
son of a traditor. In this Mr. Giff. discerns not colors: The Brownistes
separate not for any one man's person through envy, they show other causes
why they repute your whole ministry to be a false and Antichristian
ministry and not the true ministry of the Gospel; they allow not
ordination by one man but prove the offices, entrance, and administration of
your ministry to be wholly Antichristian; and hereupon we repute them no
true ministry of Christ. For the trial of this matter (says he) there was
no assembly of learned Pastors to judge in this case according to Christ's
ordinance, but furor, dolus, tumultus did bear the swaie. Here Mr. Giffard
says it is Christ's ordinance that an holy assembly should judge in such
cases. How will this agree with the office of your Archbishop. Further (as a
man ignorant in the scriptures, he would have the people excluded in their
Synods. The holy Ghost sets before us another order. Acts. 15. And for a
christian trial of our cause, we have every way sought it by supplication and
all manner of ways, but could never obtain it: But your whole brood have not
only refused it, and showed al exquisit tyranny upon our bodies so far as
they had power, by close emprisonment, rending us from our trades and families,
and al ordinary means of liuehood, but set their Priests eueriwhere to cry
out in their pulpits, gyuing out lies and sclanders openly and secretly, in
Articles, in printed Books, in private complaints and false suggestions,
wherein Mr. Giffard has not been behind, yet never vouchsafed us free
conference, nor have or can convince us of crime or error maintained by us. In
whom then is this furor, dolus, tumultus now found, but in these godless
Priests, that cannot abide the light, because their works are evil.

HE proceeds now to show what trials were granted the Donatists before the
Emperor, and by his apointment. Wherein there will be found little consimilitude
between our estate and theirs: for these Antichrista^ Bishops usurp such
power, as the magistrate may not call their actions into question, shutting up
the benefit of the common law against us, suffering no Jury to pass upon
those they murder in prison* nor no bail for any they commyt. I meru^l you
could set forth these ^rialls allowed the Donatistes without blushi^ng, and make
such hauock amongst Gods children now without any trial granted them.

Further it is rehearsed how these men the Numidian Bishopps and their company
condemned all Churches through the world, as wrapped together in the guyltines
of those Churches of Africa, al polluted, al unclean, al fallen from the
Covenant of God through such as had committed sacrilege and were not
separated: They said there was no true ministry, no true Church, no true
sacraments. To which we answer, that we are not to plead the Donatistes
cause; but setting their persons and causes aside, I trust it will be granted
me, that the def^ctio^ and Apostasy under Antichrist was general, in which
defection you will still remain in obstinate confusion not only retayning that
ministry, worship, laws, offices etc, but rejecting Christ's prescribed and
for ever commanded in his Testament; which your ministry, laws, worship and
government we are able to prone false and Antichristian: So that there is no
consimilitude in the Donatistes separation and ours in this poinct; their
matter being about sins committed in the Church, where there was lawful
office, worship, government as they did not deny; and our cause being about
the not having of a Church gathered unto CHRIST from the Apostasy, from all
them that remain under that Apostatical ministry, government, and worship,
and in that confusion we have warrant to separate Revel 18. 3. 4.

Now to the poinct: These Numidian Bishops taught, that so many as would save
their souls, must separate themselves. Mr. GIFFARD will grant I doubt not,
that if there were no true Church, true ministry, nor no true sacraments, it
was time to come out from amongst them, and have no communion with the tables
of Devils, as the Apostle reasons 1 Corint. 10. If the Donatistes separated
from the true Church, we do not so; but we separate according to Gods
commandment from the false Church, false ministry, worship, and Sacraments.
Prove your Church therefore a true Church, or our separation is just and holy,
and the only way to salvation. In the mean time let the Papist reason thus
with you: You separate from our Church, therefore you are Schismatics,
Donatistes, Heretics. If Mr. GIFFARD say no we hold you the true Church, to
have the seals of the Covenant, to hold many doctrines of faith, to be the
Temple of God, then we may lawfully hold you still Daughters of that damnable
harlot, murderesse of the Saints so often accursed, in whose cupp of
fornication you are dru^ken. If he say separation from the false Church is a
commandment of God, and that they have made a kind of separation, then all
are not Donatistes that make a separation, but the cause must be considered
from whom, for which, in what manner, and to what we separate or join.

Where he alleges that Augustine thought it an unequal thing to condemn as
they did at the first all the world for one man's sin; namely, for the sin
of this Caecilianus, and they thereupon took on hand to affirm, that as the
Church of Carthage and the Churches elsewhere in Africa were fallen from God by
the pollution of the sacrilege of Caecilianus and others, so all other
Churches in the world were destroyed by the like sacriledges committed in the
days of persecution. There is little consimilitude between the Dona^^stes and
us therein: For we separated not at the first for one man's sin, neither do
since condemn the Churches we know not* but for the whole ministry of
CHRIST'S Testament, worship, laws and ordinances* which you reject, deface, and
pervert, standing subject unto and administering in the Apostaticall orders and
offices of Antichrist, do we separate. But to answer your perticulars as you
have filled the printe with railing, lying, and vnfrui^tfull and impertinent
matters, were but to trouble the Reader and maintain strife. You bring a
story of their comparison between Caecilianus and Iudas-Iscariot whether
should be greater sinner, a repetition of Caluines Institutions, histories out
of Augustine, Tertu^lan etc* which your labor, as yttendeth but to a shadow
of defense of your railing, so I will leave their writings and you to the
judgment seat of God, where every one must answer for himself, and breiflie
proceed to your particular accusations falsely fathered upon us most of them.

THus we see (says he) that the Donatistes departed disorderly out of the
Church, not condemning yt for any poincte of doctrine, for therein they did
not disagree. Herein then we cannot be compared, till you have proved your
parish assemblies the true Church; and we hold that you have poisoned all the
fountains of sincere doctrine, and pervert the whole Testament, and turn away
the practice thereof by your damnable false expositions, yea that you teach not
one poincte sincerely. Again, where you say afterward that you will affirm
the worship in the Churches from which the Donatistes separated as corrupt as
yours, and here say they agreed in all poinctes of doctrine, we wonder what
your make your worship to be some things indifferent, as reading for prayer
men's writings, for scriptures homilies for interpretation, but no doctrine
contained in your worship.

And where you affirm that the Donatistes cried out all was polluted, because
such as revolted from the faith in time of persecution* returned, and were
again reco^^ed into the Church. you know we hold no such doctrine, but all
that God gy^eth grace to return by repentance ought to be received, though no
Apostate ^uer to bear office in the Church: yet such we take to be wholly
purged in the blood of CHRIST by repentance, which your parish assemblies never
did. But this (setting their persons aside) we take to be an undoubted truth of
God, that where no separation is made from Idolatrous profane Atheistes,
Heretics, tyrannical persecutors, nor no covenant entered by the faithful
unto the obedience and orderly practice of CHRIST'S ordinances, but a general
commixture with the world in sacrilege, in false worship, under a false
ministry, such assemblies are no true Churches orderly gathered or
established.

Now look says he upon the Donatistes of England. Antichrist has been
exalted according to the prophecy of Paul; he has sat in the Temple of God
etc. This man by his whole former discourse and present Argument (it seems)
herein chiefly compares us to the Donatistes, that as they made all their
quarrel for Caecilianus his vnmeetnes for his office; so we make our quarrel
for that Antichrist reigned, or does reign (as h^ after expounds it) in the
Church of God: wherein he affirms, that they which submitted or stand still
in subjection unto his decrees, jurisdiction, ordinances, ministry, are yet
notwithstanding the true apparent Church of God. First we answer, that we take
not the word [Antichrist] to be understood of one man's person, but of all the
falsely called Fathers of the Sea of ROME, and more generally of all that exalt
themselves above the ordinances of CHRIST and his Church, establishing their
own devises in place thereof, or give life unto the image of the Beast; for if
the same marks of pride, blasphemy and tyranny, erection of a strange
ministry, lifting up themselves above CHRIST'S Testament, ordinances, and
worship, be sound emongst your spiritual Lords in England, we see not but
Antichrist spoken of by Paul may be also found amongst you. Now if Mr. GIFFARD
had considered Caecilianus his estate (who at the hardest was but incapable of
that lawful office, and to that lawful administration, as it was on both
sides supposed, and concerning the outward order or manner lawfully ordained)
there can be no comparison between him and Antichrist. And for Antichrists
sitting in the Temple of God, Mr. GIFFARD must know, that many times the
Church is called the Church, not because yt remains still under the outward
covenant, but because yt sometimes did so: yea and at the first creeping up of
that man of sin, while the iniquity wrought in a mystery, yt was the Church
out of which he sprang, and in which he sometimes sat. The holy Ghost gives us
then hereby to understand, that this Antichrist who should change the holy
ordinances, should be an Apostata, he should be neither Turk nor Pagan, but
the bottomless pit should be opened by him in more subtle and strange
delusions; out of which smoke all your ministry is proceeded. But when he had
changed the ordinances, destroyed every green thing, caused all high and low,
rich and poor to receive his mark in their hand or foreheade, and suffered
none to buy and sell which would not fall down and worship him, the sun now
covered with sackcloth, the Moon turned into blood, the stars fallen from
heaven, the true worshippers murdered if any one stood up, Gods curses
threatened to all that worshipped the Beast or his image, or received his mark
in their hand or foreheade; we hope this man will not say yt was now the
apparent Church of God, lest he condemn not only the scriptures, but al whom
God commanded to come out of her, calling her the mother of fornications, the
harlot that sits upon many waters, hold of all unclean spirits, cage of all
unclean and hateful birds, confused Babell etc. So that if Mr. GIFFARD had
any salt of grace, he would better pervse the book of Revelations, which with
all the prophesies of the Prophets, of CHRIST himself, and of his Apostles,
make manifest this general Apostasy and defection under Antichrist, and not
now tell us a tale of Caecilianus. Does he not see in the whole Book the false
Church and true lively described? the one worshipping the Beast, the other
following the Lamb; the one persecuted, the other persecuting in most bloody
murder of the Saints.

Well (says he) but Antichrist is disclosed by the glorious light of the
Gospel, his damnable doctrine, cursed idol^trie, and usurped tyranny, are cast
forth of this land, the true doctrine of faith is published etc. First we must
here demand, whether these assemblies were then the true Church when they
were ledd by those damnable doctrines, and lived in that cursed idolatry,
bowing down to the Beast, and persecuting the Saints. Secondly, as we are
not unthankful for the abandoning of the POPES person, supremacy, with much
of his damnable wares, we demand of you what you think of those persons which
set open his shoppes again, keep his Courts, and exercise like usurped power
and tyranny that was before. But to answer directly, Antichrist is not
discovered in your assemblies, his damnable doctrines, cursed idolatries,
usurped tyranny, are not cast forth, the doctrine of faith is not sincerely
published. Again, what is all this to the proving of a true Church, a lawful
ministry, true worship, and holy government of CHRIST. Your parish assemblies
were received from the Popes hand, without any conversion by repentance or
orderly gathering by doctrine into any communion, the Popes ministry set over
them, the worship, though a little changed out of latin into english, some of
theirs left out, but al yt remains either taken from his Portesse or men's
devises, these assemblies still governed by those Courts, Officers and Canons,
that before. What place has now Christ's Testament amongst you? how is
Antichrist discovered, or his damnable wares cast forth? Is it not made subject
to these Antichristian ordinances, ministry, worship, government? It is not
limited, stinted, and aportioned, no further to be opened then to uphold these
execrable orders, idolatries, sacrileges? yea is not only the bare name thereof
used as a stale, and doctrine thereof perverted to the deceiving of the people
in this estate? Moses law was read every Sabbath day in their Synagogs, when
they crucified CHRIST: But you should have proved you had such assemblies, such
a ministeri, such a worship, such a government, as the Gospel prescribes.
Being then the same assemblies, contynuing in false worship under the same
ministry, government, all the Atheistes, Papists, Heretics, Antichristian
officers etc, in one co^mixture that the POPE left, we may well affirm you to
remain still the marcked servants of Antichrist, not speaking here how many
Antichrists are here exalted: leaving the damnable doctrines, cursed
idolatry, false preaching of the Gospel, to our lardger discourse in due
place.

But now Mr. GIFFARD beholding these things, that they have made no separation,
nor drawn the people unto the ordinances of the Gospel, is compelled to run
back again to justify the Church of ROME, and to maintain that these
assemblies were the true Churches of Christ in the deepest defection under
Antichrist: The Apostasy having invaded the Church, yt continued even then the
Temple of God in which Antichrist did sit, and that the very Idolators were
sealed with the seal of Baptism, professed CHRIST in some poinctes rightly,
their children from ancient descent within the Covenant, the ministeri so far
remaining as yt was the authentic seal delivered by them; the Brownistes not
understanding the scripture, thus in mad fury like blind hypocrites condemn
etc. Let us reason a little more coolely, rage will not serve to carry the
matter. We will here take it granted that your parishes, ministry etc cannot
now be proved the Church and ministry of Christ, except they were so in the
time of popery. We see further how well the Gospel is opened or Antichrist
discovered with you, when such a famous Prophet has not learned to read the
mystery writ in that Woman's forehead, which the holy Ghost records to be
this [ grea^e Babylon the Mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth]
Revel. 17. Again, the scripture says Cap. 14. If any man worship the Beast
and his image, and receive a mark in his forehead or on his hand, the same
shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God. Who will Mr. Giffard make this
Woman, if not the Church of Rome sitting upon the people, tongues, and nations
that were seduced or are seduced in this Apostasy. And how has he read the
scriptures that says, the seals of the Covenant belong to open blasphemous
Idolators and their seed? God says, he will punish the transgression unto
the third and fourth generation: He says nay, though they be the children of
Idolators and continue in their Fathers steps, they ought to have the seals
of the Covenant. Again, if he say the seal of Baptism in the false Church
belongs unto that adulterous seed, how will he deny that blasphemous
sacrifice and bread God, against which so many witnesses have given their
lives, which is plainly denijng of Christ to be come in the flesh, and
imagining him a fantastical body to be in every place* How can Mr. Giffard
yield them one Sacrament, and not the other? Fu^ther, how ignorantly he
speaks of the Covenant, and of a Sacrament made by that ministry, it were
too long to discuss. Well, in all this he has forgotten his comparison between
the Donatistes and us; they had no such controversy with Caecilianus: but now
pervse one of Mr. Giffards. The Church of papacy in the deepest defectio^ was
the visible Temple of God, having the true seals of the Covenant. I then
reason thus: The Church of of Ge^eua, Scotland, low Contries, France etc. have
separated from the Church of Rome which is the apparent Church of God, (for
none have the true ministry and the true authentic seals of the Covenant,
but the true Church) Therefore they are Schismatics, Donatistes, Brownists,
Heretics. Again Geneua, Scotland etc, condemn the Church of Rome by
separating from yt; therefore they do also condemn the Church of England,
which approves of and communicates with the Papists. Moreover how will he
answer this: Her Ma^ie. has expelled the Pope, his ministry, his doctrine,
and idolatrous worship; therefore she has expelled the ministry and worship
of the true Church: And what follows by Mr. Giffard his collections think
you? they that reject the ministry of Christ, reject Christ himself.

But these Brownis^es condemn the reformation by Magistrates etc. No, it is a
false sclander: We only put difference between the reformation by the
Magistrates sword, and the reformation by doctrine; and he is a false Prophet
that either goes about to set these at variance, or confounds them. The
Magistrate suppresseth the evil within the Church and without the Church in
their Dominions by bodily punishments in equity, and defends the godly. The
ministry of the word gather^th, guydeth, orders etc, a people unto and
under the true ordinances of Christ, by the Word and Spirit: The Prince may and
ought suppress all false worship, false ministry, idolatrous assemblies;
and proclaim and command true worship, orderly assemblies, true ministry
etc. But the workmanship hereof is spiritual, by doctrine etc, to be
accomplished in due order according to the rule of the word. Still we urge you
therefore to show us this gathering, ordering, and governing of a true Church
in these parrish assemblies, by the word of God. In the mean time you bestow
but your oil, meal, and your whole ministry and guystes to dawbe up
Idolatry, confusion, sacrilegde. Neither does the word [ reforma^ion] agree to
your Church, for cursed is he that buyldeth the walls of Jericho, not one
stone of Babel will serve for a foundation.

What comparison is there then between your reformation, and the reformation by
Ios^as; show the perticulars, we will answer: Else it shall suffice that he
sacrificed the Priests of BAAL upon the Altar, reduced the people to the true
ministry and ordinances of the Temple; If the Priests did not this according
to Gods word, then they were guyltie, and to be punashed by his sword. So that
these false Prophets, Inchanters, counterfeit time-seruers (which extol her
Mati^ for having granted the freedom of the Gospel, true ministry, true
worship, government etc, and yet themselves do misleade the people in a false
way to pe^dition) shall not only lie open to the Magistrates sword when God
shall put in their heart to execute his will, but answer before the Lord for all
this confusion, sacrilege, Idolatry, and filthiness maintained by their
deceitful tongues. I do not plead to have them put to death, because they
never knew or prof^ssed the truth; but to have their false offices abolished,
and they compelled to some lawful calling in the Church or common wealth, as
they should be thereunto found meet, and be lawfully called.

We are not deceived then in imagining that you would make us believe the
Princes did compel them to be a Church which were no Church before, without
any orderly gathering, guyding, and ordering of them by Christ's laws,
worship, ministry, and ordinances; for we deny yt your parrish assemblies
were in time of popery true Churches, or have now forsaken all false worship.
Prove your asseitions, and what discipline belongs to the false Church judge
you.

Of the pollution by communicating with open sinners.
WHere he makes the cause of our separation, and (as he calls it) our
accusing of these parrish assemblies to be utterly fallen from the Covenant of
God, to be for that they are polluted with communicating with open sinners, he
mistaketh, and (I fear) purposly fal^ifieth our mind and writings; for we
have added to this an obstinate and wilful retayning of al sorts of profane
as members of your Church, gyuing them the Sacraments etc. But as I have done
before so must you here take my answer, that we deny these parrish assemblies
to be true Churches, or to have any power or authority to cast our any
according to Christ's ordinance; so that we cannot reason with you as to make
the controversy of open sinners in the Church, but as a confused assembly,
not being ever gathered unto Christ, or guyded by his ordiances. We know that
in the true Church are and shall be open sinners, yet there are rules and laws by
due censure to bring them to repentance, or else to cast them out if they
remain obstinate in any open gross sin, of which things we will not enter
into discourse with you, denijng you to have either true Church, or power to
redress abuses in your parrish assemblies.

And where he demands what order of discipline we have observed in our
separation; We have learned that no other censures belong unto the false
Church, then pouring forth the vialls into the air, waters, sun etc. For
this we have the direction and commandment of God Revel. 16. and 18. 6.
Again, where should we find your Synod of Pastors in the whole tail of the
Dragon: you have no such order as you prate of unskillfully; your L. Arch-B. or
Ordinatie can teach you otherwise then plead for Synods of Pastors. For any
Christian or equal trial either in free conference by the Scriptures, or
trial by the common law, we have upon the dispense of our lives long sued for
it, and cannot obtain any as we have said, and find nothing but furor,
dolus, tumulius amongst your brood.

Now after his former discour^e, he will from poinct to poinct prove us to
agree with the Donatistes. First (says he) the Donatistes did accuse and
condemn the Church and ministry of the Churches most falsely. And I say
(says he) the Brownistes are as false accusers as they, and condemn as
iniustly in all crimes. Here are bold and sore chardges; but Mr. Giffards* bare
word will not stand. The Donatistes cause was not about the orderly gathering of
a true Church, but for the casting out of the unworthy: not about the office,
entrance, or administration of the ministry, but about the sins of such as
were in that office: So that if Mr. Giffard would look again of the cause, he
should find no cause to keep this stir as upon a stage to no end or
edifijng. We have often told him in our former writings, that our matter is
not about offenders in the Church, but about the being or not being a Church.
In the mean time he handsomely lays upon their own filthiness saying
companies and swarms of drunckardes, gluttons, whoremasters, covetous
worldlings, greedy usurers, extortioners, oppressors, bribers, defrauders,
liars, backbyters and sclanderers, envious hateful and contentious persons,
swearers and cursers are suffered and admitted to the Lords Table; this says he
in many or in most of their parrish assemblies, And many of their ministeri
such. Where admit them a Church in his own conceit, let him ad now this more
which is as true; that they have no power to redress these evils by due
censure, for that they thus co^tynue after they have been long and often
reproved for this sacrilege, and we are bold to pronounce the Priest as the
people, a de^ne of theiues, a cage of unclean spirits, as the harlot that
receives all comers, cast together into Iesabels bed.

He further confesses that the threatenings of the Prophets against Israel are
due unto them; Whereby he confesses these assemblies not to be the Churches
of God: For all the Prophets that prophesied against Israel in the defection,
pronounce her not to be the Church of God; read Hosea. 1. and. 2. Jeremy. 3.
Ezechiell. 23. But says he, might not the Donatistes have pleaded that there
were many wicked people and wicked Ministers in those Churches from which they
separated. We answer, that is not question; For first we deny you to have
any Church orderly gathered unto the ordinances, worship, government of
CHRIST, which they did not: And again we have not to reason what they might
have excepted against those assemblies or ministers, but what they made the
cause of their separation; wherein you trouble but your self, and with odiouse
names deceive the ignorant, to make any show of agreement between our cause
and theirs.

It will be demanded (says he) whither Cyprian and the rest of the godly did
worship together with those open sinners in their days, joining with them in
prayer and in the sacraments etc. No, the question shall be Mr. Giffard, Whether
if they did communicate with the open transgressions of the law in their time,
they did well and lawfully therein, or no; for I trust you will grant that the
Church has always power to cast out the obstinate offenders; read then the ^
of the 1 to the Corinth. a little more co^sideratly, and tell us whether they
faulted not in keeping in their fellowship the incestious person, and for not
purging out the leaven from amongst them; for what says the text, Now I write
unto you that you company not together; If any that is called a brother be a
fornicator, or an Idolator, or railer, or a drunckard, or an extortioner, with
such an one eat not. Where the words me synanamignysthai be not together
commingled; and after, with such an one eat not shows a plain inhibition
of communicating with the open profane or impenitent offenders: For where is
this commixture or commixion, if not in that holy banquet and conjunction in
the communion and supper of the Lord: and if Mr. Giffard could discern the
spiritual things, he might see the outward signs of bread and wine to be
tokens not only of our union with Christ and benefit of his death, but also of
our communion with the members of his body spiritually; as the holy Ghost
reasons saijng, The cup of blessing which we bless, is yt not the
communion of the blood of CHRIST, and the bread which we break, is it not
the commanion of the body of CHRIST? for we that are many are one bread and
one body, because (...) are partakers of one bread: For us then to come
together in this banquet and spiritual rejoicing with the members of CHRIST (to
our judgment) we have true comfort one with another: But with the open profane
or obstinate open known transgressor there ca^ be no good rejoicing,
fellowship, or communion: for besides the wicked Priest that presumptuouslye
blesses where God curses, and commits sacrilege in delyuering the sign
of Gods Covenant with his people in CHRIST, to the treaders under their feet
of his body and blood; so the whole Congregation, and every one that
participateth with those open wicked, transgress (in not admonishing and
casting out the leaven) against so many rules as command admonition and
excommunication by due order, and partake with ye wicked against God by their
rejoicing with them as brethren. But (as I have still pleaded with you) we know
better order then blind separation in pride, for the sins committed in the
Church; denijng to reason with you what is to be done in the Church, till you
have proved your Church to be a true Church established, guyded by the officers
and laws of CHRIST; so that all your matter is but the fighting with your own
shadow, and flying the question in hand.

But my purpose is not to follow your gameplay either to justify the
Donatistes, or those learned Pastors, neither to reject the truths, nor
maintain the errors of either of both sides; we have a better foundation to
buyld upon, and a surer word to trust unto; it is because you have no furniture
on your self that you set forth this show, and fight under other men's names;
Your savor is lost if ever you had salt: Look on one of your Arguments how
well it will prove your matter. The Brownistes use 5. or 6. places of scripture
which the Donatistes used; therefore the Brownistes be Donatistes. Let the
Brownistes answer for themselves; but sure I must deny both Proposition and
Consequence: For neither do we agree in the application of these, with them;
neither do we aledge all the same places because we allege some which they
alleged for excommunication of the open known obstinat wicked in the Church,
or separation from the false Church. Neither does it follow that because we
allege some places they did, that therefore we are Donatistes. If you allow
any separation from Turk or Pope, you must agree with Donatistes in some of
these scriptures. Esaias 52. 2 Corixth. 6. And in this your exquisit search you
have had one place alleged yet now, which if you had well looked upon, you
would have been ashamed to have compared us to the Donatistes. It is written
Revel. 18. 2. 3. 4. 5. verses etc, where your mother Church of ROME with all
her Daughters is proclaimed no longer to be rested in, or communicated with. If
your assemblies be such a cage, stand in such confusion, have the same
ministry, laws, worship etc, then we must come out of her.

Where in consideration that you would conningly turn away all places that
command a separation, by other men's expositions, and have not managed your
cause in your own name, I will briefly demand whither you will maintain
these doctrines or no: For the convincing whereof I shall either refer you to
our ha^dling of the 4. transgressions, or else gyne you answer when you deal
perticularly in your own name. First begin to set down under your own hand
that these scriptures Come out from emongst them, Depart out of her, Separate
your selves etc, are not understood of a separation both of body and mind.

Secondly, that the Minister being a swearer, drunkerd, covetous worldling etc,
he continuing obstinate in his sin, in that estate may be suffered to
administer, and the godly may communicate with him in sacraments and prayer.

Thirdly, that it is lawful for the Minister to deliver, the parties to
receive, the people to communicate with open known unrepentant professed
whoremasters and multitudes of wicked.

Fourthly, that open sin may be tolerated in the assembly.

Fifthly, that when open sinners be common, and such persons many, it were no
safe to use the censures of the Church.

Sixthly, that there may be a separating in heart, and coming out from them in
mind, with whom we communicate in the Church.

That there is no polution, participation, or communicating with other men's
sins, but either by doing the same evil, or consenting in heart to the
evil; and though they remain in their open filthiness unrepentant, our
communicating with them in the sacrament or prayer, or the priests delyuerie
of the Sacrament unto them, is no rejoicing with them in their sin, no
communicating with other men's sins, no allowance or consenting or approving
of them in evil, nor no sin or transgression in us.

That they which are the Temple of the living God, and in the midst of a
crooked and perverse nation, apearing as lights in the world, having the word
of life, nothing can infect them which they tollerat for unities sake, neither
are they put up in any straight, because God dwells in them and walks
amongst them.

That to separat from such a perverse and crooked generation were dangerous,
lest we should separat in spiritual separation from the good, such separation
were seditious.

That David was not separat in body from the open wicked and unclean in the
sacrifice, in his days.

That Is^ias himself in one Congregation with them, did touch the uncleanness
which he reproved in the people.

That the Apostle Paul and the Church of Corinth did tolerate and communicate
with such as committed fornication, though they repented not but continued in
their sin after due admonition.

That in policy for fear of schism excommunication may not be used against
open obstinat sinners, but they may be tolerated and communicated with of the
godly.

That when he which for some notorious crime is reprehended has the multitude
his companion, it is not healthful to reprehend or exco^municat, but to
tollerat.

That the cause and person of the tares being understood of the open wicked and
unrepentant, does not preiudicate the cause and person of the wheat growing
together in the field, and whither you will interpret this of the Church.

That the cause and person of the chafe does not preiudicat the cause and
person of the corn being together in the same floor, until the last wynowing:
the same of the goats and sheep in the pastures: the fishes good and bad in
the net: the vessels of honor and dishonor.

The causes and person of the chafe, bad fishes, goats, vessels of dishonor
being understood of the open known wicked, whore-masters, murderers,
heretics, Idolators etc, and the field, floor pastures, net, house etc, of
the apparent Church, and make the inhibition of plucking up the tares a
commandment, then is not only the censures of the Church, admonition,
excommunication etc, but the use of the magistrates sword not only needless,
but utterly unlawful to be exercised against any transgression. Let Mr.
GIFFARD see how he is plunged in Anabaptistrie, Athisme, and blasphemous
contradiction of the whole reueiled will of God for the cutting down of sin.
But let Mr. GIF. or his Ordinary in their own name subscribe these foresaid
Positions, and he shall hear our answer: We will not confute them in the
persons of dead men.

We then conclude this point thus; that Mr. GIFFARD has ignorantly skambled
about the sins arising in the Church, and the order of reprehension, when all
our question is of a separation from a false Church, consisting of the world,
of Athiestes, Papists, heretics, and all sorts of profane not gathered
unto CHRIST: So that he has but fought with his own shadow in comparing us to
the Donatistes in this poinct. Again, al Augustines reasons are against
separtio^ in ye Church, without discreet and orderly using of the power of
Christ's by the censure of excommunication; whereas you all confess you have no
discipline to execute, neither belong CHRIST'S ordinances to your Antichristian
ministry and Babilonish assemblies, which we deny to hold the head CHRIST in
this their subjection to Antichrists ministry, ordinances, worship. It is
but then your ignorance to make comparison between the Donatistes and us.

To the Worship.
THat the Donatistes did separat themselves from as corrupted a worship as the
Brownistes do, Mr. GIFFARD will stand to affirm. Says he there were prayers
and oblations for the dead, then significatiue ceremonies, superstitious
signing of themselves with the sign of the Cross etc. To which we answer,
that Mr. GIFFARD affirmed in the 6. page of his book, that the Donatistes
departed disorderly out of the Church condemning yt not for any poinct of
doctrine, for therein the other Churches and they did agree. Now here he would
make comparison between them and us, in disalowing the worship. But it seems
Mr. GIFFARD holds not any doctrine to be contained in the worship, which
indeed ought to co^teine nothing else, and sure it is a strange worship that is
not grounded upon doctrine.

The second thing in this place we will note, is, the time of these corruptions
in the worship: namely as he reckons within two hundredth years after CHRIST.
If their worship were then as corrupted as ours is now, we merueil how you will
defend the platform of your Church government from that time that was so
corrupt, calling yt the primative Church. Your fellow Priests Arguments from
the primative Church (as thy falsely call those times) will be of small weight,
if you make their worship as corrupt as this derived from Antichrist. In the 44
page he grants as much of the government, that it was then thus corrupt,
when our tyme-seruers will only cleave to that pattern, and neither he nor they
to the Testament of CHRIST.

Thirdly he has forgotten his scope and Argument: He should by his promise
have proved that the Do^^tistes and we were of one judgment in this poinct;
and that they made the false worship one principal cause of their separation,
as we do: so that he has forgotten himself in this place, as a man not knowing
where to make show of something.

Next, where Mr. GIFFARD grantes that in those assemblies where the worship is
idolatrous it is lawful to separat a man's self, he (contrary to those
expositions of the 2 Corinthians. 6. and other places to that effect) now grants
a separation in body and mind both. I will not rebuke him nor charge him of
inconstancy, because I perceive him to contradict his holy Pastors of these
times where he sees them to err.

But he by and by returns to his vomit again thus: There are many and great
corruptions in the worship before it come to that: where certain fundamental
poincts of doctrine are holden, the worship cannot be idolatrous; but in the
deepest defection in popery there were certain fundamental poincts holden (as
he faith in an other place) whereby they were still in the Church and under the
Conenant, therefore there is no idolatrous or blasphemous worship that may in the
Papists Church be separated from. Mr. GIFFARD may be a good subject, but sure
his grounds of doctrine are popish and pernicious. We here demand of Mr. GIF.
whither such corruptions and errors as he speaks of, might be of the godly
that knew them such be offered up by themselves or communicated with in the
Church.

And Mr. GIF. must give us leave to say it cannot be their worship was so
corrupt as yours, consisting of so many patched devises of your learned Popes
so long hatched, and by so many heads as have out of that fordge of Satan's
minting house contrived yt, even out of Antichrists treasury of deceites. As
for errors that have no good foundation, we may show him twenty for one.
Hitherto then Mr. GIFFARD and his brethren that have separated from the Church
of ROME as they would pretend, yet retayning still that worship, are brethren
with the Donatistes, as he pleases to deride that holy name of brethren.

To the Ministry.
THe Donatistes cried out that the Churches from which they separated had no
true Ministers, but that they were all false Prophets, Iudasses, persecutors of
the just, generations of vipers, because they said they had their ordination
from them that were such. The Brownistes lift up their voices with all their
might and call us Baalls Priests, the marked servants of Antichrist, false
Prophets, seducers and such like, because (as they say) we are ordained by
Antichristian Bishops, therefore we be Donatistes. Mr. GIFF. his Argument is
denied. Jeremy, our Savior Christ, and diverse of the Prophets against Israel
did in this manner pull off the visardes of the false Prophets, disclosing their
wickedness to ye people; were they therefore, Donatistes or Schismatickes?
Calvine and all of you cry out against the Popes ministry at ROME, are you
therefore Donatistes and Schismatickes? The matter then must be considered for
which they so called them. The Donatistes for no other cause, then for that
some of them were ordained by Iudasses and traitors: the Brownistes, for that
these are ordained by Antichristian Bishopps which exercise an other spiritual
government then CHRIST'S. Wherein if you had eyes to see, there is no comparison
between their cause and ours. First the person that did ordeine sat^ in a
lawful office as the Donatistes supposed; did also ordeine (as they thought) in
manner according to the rule of the word; the party that was ordained, meet
for the ministry; the office to which he was called, lawful; the
administration wherein he was to administer, holy and good for any thing they
saw. The contrary of all which we find in your ministry, and the thing
wherein you would have us likened together was never our reason, which is the
wickedness of the man's person that does of his sole authority ordeine for many
Churches, which we neither approve in the Donatistes or you: Our exceptions in
this case I say has never been against the person of your Ordinary, although
we might justly. Take next time your matter together, and look whose kingdom
you administer in, what calling, office, Leitourgie, flock, and be ashamed of
your comparison, by so much as your ministeri is more wicked. Again, you here
put the cause of our casting of the Bishops and their train into the lake, to
be, for that they exercise an other discipline then CHRIST'S, as though this
were some small matter, which if you put the word government of the Church, you
shall find it the denial of CHRIST to reign in his kingdom, a suppression of
at his laws and ordinances, even the whole Testament, and erection and
practicing of an other. Let him that reads consider what state all stand in
that remain in this kingdom erected against Christ, and what ministry the
seducers in this foraigne priesthood exercise of God or of the Devil, for
CHRIST has but one ministry, one Gospel, one government over his Church.

Now seeing there is no comparison between the Donatistes cause and ours, I
would (if he would forbear to conclude me a Donatist for this poinct) demand
this question in their cause if their accusation had been true, Namely, whether
one that has professed the faith, and after so foully apostatat as to accuse
his brethren, deny the faith, persecute the truth* he sometimes professed,
may without repentance be received into the Church again. Then whether though
he repent and be received, he be ever capable of the ministry or no. Then
whether he alone may ordain an other Minister or no; if he do, whether the
other be a lawful Minister or no. But in such cases in the Church I could like
well to here some man to persuade to repentance, or to cast out the obstinat by
due order; and neither Augustine nor Angel from heaven to plead for a
tolleration of open transgression; which pleading for sin makes us suspect
the matter very deeply, iustifijng neither.

Their similitudes, the river from the fountain, the members, the head, the
stock and the plant in their application we approve not, but hold the doctrine
erroneous that they thought any thing could be ordained from the person of the
man in that sort. But your descent from Antichrist and pedigree in that
kingedome is an other thing, if you would please to conceive it; namely, that
your office, names, liuinges, entrance, administration etc, is of the Pope and
of Satan, and that when his kingdom shall be abolished, your office, name,
entrance, Vicarage, leitourgie and all shall be cast with the great millstone upon
them with all such trafique into the bottom of the sea. Hereupon it is we say
your descent is from the Pope within few degrees, being the children of these
Antichristian Bishops, which are the creatures of the Pope, who is the eldest
son of Satan, and his vicar general upon earth, whose image, mark, power
and life you bear, and together with him live, reign, stand and fall as the
branches with the tree; for when the power, decrees, government, offices,
worship etc, of Antichrist is gone, all your ministry is vanished for ever.
The Lord therefore put in her Maties. heart to extirpate the same, and to
advance CHRIST'S laws, ordinances, ministry, worship etc, as he is worthy,
that every knee may bow unto him.

But Mr. Giffard affirms we shall not be able to prove our accusation of their
Ministry, that yt is by descent from Antichrist; his reason is, there is no
Minister in England by the Pope etc. We shall not here need to seek out a Pope
in England: If he will learn to distinguish between the Popes person, and his
decrees, Canons and orders after the Popes orders of priesthood, he must be
driven to confess their whole ministry, office, entrance etc, to be drawn
by descent, and we thinck Mr. Giff. will not hang the life and virtue of holy
things upon men's persons, but upon the ordinances of God, lest he be a
Donatist.

He further affirms the ministry of publishing the Gospel, delyvering the
sacraments, is not the devise of man but Christ's ordinance. Do you think Mr.
Giff. can beg the question to affirm a Ministry whose office, entrance etc,
is of Antichrist, does publish the Gospel* Again, that they receive yt as
Christ's Ministry, when it is from point to point wholly found to be after the
orders of Antichrist.

And when no shift will help him out, he is feign to affirm valiantly, that the
ministry was not utterly destroyed in popery, for there remained the Sacrament
of Baptism. See here how he has plunged himself into the sea of popery, and
ouertumbled ye doctrines of his learned Fathers. T. Co. says from Malachie,
that the ministry is not tied to the succession of men's persons, but to the
law and ordinances; and what ministry the Popes is, read Revel. 9. etc. You
charge her Matie. very far, to have cast out ye true ministeri out of the la^d
for putting our Pope, Cardinal, shaue^ crowned Priest, Friar, Monk, Abbot. And
if ye Baptism could not be a true Sacrament without a lawful Minister, then
your ministry being unlawful, there is no seal with promise, no true church etc.

Seeing then the holy Ghost has described that Church to be the Harlot sitting
upon many waters, the mother of fornications, confused Babel, murderesse of the
Saints, an hold of unclean spirits, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful bird, neither ministry, Sacraments, worship, or any thing
remains there according to Gods ordinance; and at the best you make your self
and this whole land Scismaticks from the true Church, Ministeri, Sacraments,
if it so stand with the Church of Rome and ministeri thereof, and of necessity
you are al Donatistes by your reasoning, though my purpose is not to defend and
prove in this discourse, but to call a few notes to your memory: I will
conclude this point, that you are driven to the Popes ministry for your
orders, now desiring you to satisfy us next time concerning the Popes damnable
mass or Sacrament of the Altar; if they be true Ministers, whether the Church
ca^ have one Sacrament good and in other evil, one with promise the other
damnable, blasphemous, and accursed; for I take it they cannot be true
Ministers at the Font, and sacriledgious massmongers at the Altar. Weigh these
things more co^sideratly, before you publish such doctrines in England again.

To the Sacraments.
THe Donatistes did hold that the Sacraments or efficacy of them, depend upon
the worthiness and holiness of the man that administreth: But the Brownistes are
not of that mind. To this objection he very charitablie answers, that in
this great rank point of donatisme he can find no difference at all: Let the
words and meaning of both be skanned, and it shall appear manifestly that
they hold the self same thing, neither more nor less, but like even brethren,
or else Mr. Giffard will be found a common liar and sclanderer. This man may not
be suspected of any malicious practice to deface the truth, yet is found to
make his comparison by his false sclanders, and not of any direct sentence of
ours. What sin he is fallen into that so often dirideth the word brethren,
let the godly consider.

The Donatistes held that if the man being a lawful Minister were a sinner, the
Sacrament delivered by him was no true Sacrament: Mr. Giffard confesses we
hold no such thing; where is then the consimilitude.

The Donatistes held that the faith or conscience of the gyuer did give faith
unto, purge and make clean the conscience of the receiver; and so of the
contrary the guyltines: which doctrine we hold to be blasphemous; it is only
ye holy Ghost that works faith, and purges from an evil conscience.

The Donatistes held, that if he which did administer were an open sinner, he
was no Minister, and so no Sacrament. We do not hold that every open sin
makes the Minister no Minister, seeing the high Priest many times sinned under
the law, yet his office still retained: but we hold that the Minister ought to
repent his sin before he administer, and the Church to admonish him of his
known sin before they suffer him to administer, and not co^municat with him
if he be obstinat. If the Church neglect their duty, he and they transgress,
yet do we not say that it is no Sacrament that he delivers, or that his
ministry is disanulled. But we must put Mr. Giffard in mind how far he is
gone from our cause in this comparison. We never disalowed their Sacraments as
being administered by a lawful Minister in a lawful office, yet the man a
sinner. But of such counterfeites as have neither lawful office, entrance etc,
but stand enchanters in Antichrists kingdom: so that these are not the
personal sins of a Minister in the Church; wherein Mr. Giff. wickedness
appears to make the question of the man's person or his sin, when it is the
ministry, office, entrance, administation, al which we hold to be
Antichristian, and to have nothing to do with the seals of Gods Covenant in
this estate: not here to speak of the altering of the institution in the manner
of administering yt, which the Donatistes never either had cause or made
question of, as it seems.

And whether any promise is made to the elements abused in the false, yea
whether to the elements or to the keeping of the laws and ordinances in the
true Church, let Mr. Giffard. make answer.

Further, when we affirm the Sacraments of the false Church to be no true
seals of the Covenant, because they are Idolatours and Idolatrous, the Lords
ordinances profaned and laws wholly violated, we do not thereby conclude it
to be no Baptism concerning the outward washing; for we can put difference
between a false and none, a false Sacrament or counterfeit sign, and none, for
the false Church is said to have her peace offringes. And although we hold
them highly to tempt God to their own condemnation (if they repent not) that
wittingly profane or of wilful ignorance transgress those high ordinances,
as in the false Church to be superstitious of the element where the law and
Covenant is broken, yet do we not thereupon affirm we need any reiterating
of the outward sign, as the Donatistes; but hold this false sign now a true
sign, sufficient to us concerning the outward washing. Circumcision in the
Apostasy of Israel which was without promise to the receivers in that estate,
and nothing but sin in yt, yet stood for a sufficient outward cutting when
any of them returned to the Church and ate of the Passover, whereof it was not
lawful for any uncircumcised to eat: how the sign might have been reiterated
if need had so required, we may see by that of ye Apostle 1 Cor. 7. for
gathering again their circumcision if it might be gathered again, then
secondly cut.

Where Mr. Giffard then in stead of performing his comparison says, that the
Donatistes in rebaptising did better of both, because he that is not baptized
ought to be baptized etc; he bewrays his ignorance, that cannot put
difference between a false Sacrament and none, a false sign and none: The
grossnes also he supposes to have been in us, is found in himself, that lest
he should make the false and counterfeit washing in the false church to be
none, runs to justify the Church, ministry, sacraments etc at ROME, and
so must conclude himself of necessity a Schismaticke or a popish Priest, which
he will.

And where he demands whether he that knows he was never baptized can be
saved if he seek not to be baptized when he may have yt. We demand again how
ever true baptism should be restored, if the false sign of baptism which was
then without promise in the false Church, should not now be sufficient
concerning the outward sign.

To the Government.
IN the principle of principles, that I say not the very sum of all causes
of our separation from these assemblies, namely the government which Mr.
GIFFARD terms discipline, he can not find any co^similitude between the
Donatistes and us; for the confesses he has not read that they did take any
exception against it in that time. Take your word discipline for all the means
that CHRIST has appointed by his laws, ministry and censures, to keep,
guide and govern his Church, jointly and severally to be instructed in their
duties, and see what a dilemma you are come unto, this being granted that
herein there is no agreement, seeing the chief cause of our controversy with
you is for the rabble of this Antichristian and pse^dohierarchie Courts, etc,
which have no place in the Church of God, where CHRIST'S officers, offices,
laws, censures, ought to govern and guide his Church.

But here according to your accustomed manner you go about to say there were
faults to be found in their government then, yea as well as in their worship
etc, which you affirmed to be as corrupt as yours is now; wherein (if ante
regard were to be had of your words) you would not only make those Bishopps in
as evil state as these, that Church as yours now; but have cast into the fire
all the platformes that your learned Reformistes have pleaded for, from that
falsely so called Primative Church. Well, I have told you the question is not
whether they had the true government or no, whether in that government there
were corruptions, defaultes or negligences, but whether the Donatistes
separated therefore or no; they had the same offices officers, laws, censures
that the other, so that you speak not only false in saying they might have had
as just cause in this respect of separation as we, but also bring the Argument
to confound your self with your whole Church wherein you stand a Priest. Thus
you are separated from the Church of ROME, but retain still the same
hierarchy, worship, government that they used and have, as the Do. of the
Churches from which they separated; therefore you in this as in the rest of your
Arguments conclude your selves Donatistes, Heretics, and Schismatickes from
the Church of ROME.

But Mr. GIFFARD will deny that the Donatistes had as great cause to separate
from those Churches from which they separated, as those English Priests from
their Graundfather the Pope, for it was not so corrupted. The same we answer
to you for your government, how then shall we end this matter? I take it, thus;
that the Priests of England despise the Popes person, and yet keep the same
orders, laws, officers, offices that he erected: So the Donatistes kept still
the orders of government that the Churches they separated from. Now if we can
clear our selves that we retain not the same government amongst us that the
Church does we separat from (which I think cannot be denied) then Mr. GIF.
has in a chief principle put himself and this whole laud into the number of
Donatistes. The Argument is now this. The Church of England separateth from the
Church of ROME, and yet keep their government and worship, therefore the Church
of England are Schismamatickes and Donatistes; and an other poinct, that there
can be no true Sacraments, no true Church under a false government: And Mr.
GIFFARD is yet further out of his way.

To the Argument of many Churches.
HE granting that we herein differ from the Donatistes, in that they condemn
all Churches in the world we do not, will needs notwithstanding have us
Donatistes in this poinct also: For (says he) though they shoot not their
arrows at them, yet their arrows strike them, their Arguments upon
consequence will reach so far, yea run thorough the sides of all Churches.
This we answer: you must first clear your selves of those things wherewith
you are chardged and pressed, and trouble not your self with other men's
matters, seeing you make this but a cloak for your wickendnes to shrowde your
self under other men's persons with whom we have not to deal. We utterly
refuse to enter into this controversy of the estate of other Contries: we know
the word of God is near us (thanks be to God) by which if your cause be good,
suffer it to be tried. As for the consequence of our Arguments they are but
your own collections to pass over your own sins, and set the strife
between us and other Churches, which we will not be drawn unto. And all men may
here behold this sower of words and strife maker will counterfeit not only
consequence, but Arguments of his own head, to raise quarrel: In all which
he has forgotten his promise to compare our writings and theirs together; and
flies to his own collection.

In this part of his stage play he begins thus. The Church of ENGLAND is
esteemed and reverenced emongst the Churches as a sister, and so communicated
with, yet they all know what her faults be in her assemblies, in her worship,
in her ministry and government, in as much as they are apparent. Unto the
first we suppose your worship, ministry, Church government, are not so
apparent unto them as you give out. Secondly we doubt, yea I may say it is
untrue, that they justify your ministry, worship, or government. Thirdly
admit they should thus sin either of ignorance, negligence, or infirmity,
standing otherwise orderly gathered to the practice of CHRIST'S ordinances,
they are not for this sin (till after due convincement and admonition they
remain obstinat) to be presently judged no Churches: But what I think of
their estate, you shall here pardon me, I will not intermedle till I be called.

As for your harmony of Confessions, if it be not the harmony of the
Prophets, CHRIST and his Apostles, it skilleth nothing us what consent you
make. Again, it is not an accord in certain general Articles that can
satisfy this matter, when in the perticulars you descent to the overthrow of
al: Such an harmony you may very well make with your mother Church of ROME, and
a great deal more large: Neither do their Confessions agree with you in the
estate of the ministeri, Church government, nor worship: Scotland, Geneua,
France etc, have an other ministry, offices, choice, ordination and
ministration, an other government, worship etc; but it were too large to
discuss: And now hold to your Argument, and see what will follow. The Church of
ROME have the same confession of faith, which you call your Apostolic Creed,
that you have, yea the Lords prayer, (as you call it) Athanasius Creed etc,
therefore they and you agreeing in this harmony of confession, are one body one
Church. Again these Churches you say hold you the Church of God, and you hold
the Church of ROME to be the Church of God, therefore you are one body al, and
then you and all the Churches Schismatickes from your mother Church.

If the Church of ENGLAND be Antichristian and idolatrous, and worship the
Beast etc, then the Churches which perfectly know the same and yet acknowledge
her a sister, are partakers of her sin, and so to be condemned with her. The
same Argument we thus return you.

If the Church of ROME be Antichristian and idolatrous and worship the Beast,
the^ the Church of ENGLAND which perfectly knows the same and yet
acknowledges her a sister (as Mr. GIFFARD does say) is partaker with her
sins, and so to be condemned with her.

Al those Churches says he which know the Church of ENGLAND in this estate and
do yet reverence her as a true Church of CHRIST, do co^dempne those as
heretical Schismatickes which call yt Antichristian and separat themselves from
yt. We answer, that all those Churches he speaks of do not approve the
church of ENGLAND in this estate, neither condemn us in the things we
withstand therein, and receive it again thus: At the first coming out of
papacy all the Churches in the world did approve the Church of ROME, and
condemn those as heretical Schismatickes which caled it Antichristian and
separated from yt: Let Mr. Giffard put to what conclusion he will. I take it Mr.
Giff. must now leave the bare title of Church, ministry etc, and flee to the
proof of their profession and orderly walking, by the word of God; which if he
do not, yet do we buyld thereupon as upon a most sure foundation.

As to Mr. CALVINE, we refer you to his confession of faith printed in the
latter end of his own Catechism, and if he be contrary to himself in his
other writings, look you unto it; we do not for the holiness of the man
justify any of his errors (as no man is without) neither for his errors
reject any truth he held; knowing of the one God has had mercy as we hope, and
for the other Gods word approves it: so that we believe not any thing because
such a man said so, but because by the word and Spirit we hear CHRIST himself
speak. And you do greatly abuse his writings, in using them after your own
^ense in his name contrary to his mind and purpose, and by your leave
wrasting them to your own judgment, deceiving others thereby. In his confession
he affirms there is no true Sacrament with promise (as I do remember) but
where the Minister has a lawful office and outward calling to administer; so
that all his Arguments must be understood of such a Church as have a lawful
ministry in office, entrance, and administration, and cannot be applied to
yours. Moreover he reasoned against the Anabaptists and such as held an
integrity and perfection in the Church, and separated for every sin
committed, without due seeking of redress. And if he erred in these or any
other doctrines, we do not therefore hold them presently to be no Church in
which he was Minister, or which did in like ignorance receive the said
doctrines; it is obstinacy in error that only deserves casting off, and that
by due order. As for most of your places expounded by his mouth and now
received by you to maintain open sin and to communicate with the open known
transgressors, they are so common and stale, that every infant in the faith
can show you your vanity, if in your own name you durst propound them. Your
learned brethren have given them over as sclender collections, you will now
revive them; put them in your own name, else we have nothing to say, the man
being dead, whose steps God give you grace to follow in that which is good.
But this is a simple course to justify your own ways by men's names and
writings, when Gods word convinces you of sin and wickedness. For that place
of the Epistle to the Corinth. 11. Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of that bread and drink of that cup, yt does not discharge us of any duty
to others by admonition and due censure, for the same God has said Admonish
one another, tell thy Brother his fault, if he repent forgive him; go first^
reconcile thy self to thy Brother, then bring thine offering: If any that is
called a Brother be a fornicatour etc, be not com^ingled together, with such an
on^ eat not: So that our examination must be whether we do follow these rules
also; and Mr. CALVINE himself says it is sacriledg for the Pastor to give the
Sacrament to the open unworthy. What communion is there then between him that
openly stands under the wrath of God the Minister that commits sacrilege,
and us in that banquet. We may better reason thus then: we are commanded to
examine our selves and so eat, therefore I must examine my self also with whom,
what, and how I do come to receive. But what have we to do to reason what is
to be done in the Church to the preventing of Gods wrath and reprofe of sin,
when our question is of the utter forsaking of the false Church with all her
wares and stolen waters. So that we conclude al Mr. Calvines Arguments must
be enforced against such as separate themselves from the true Church,
otherwise himself and you all shall be found Schismatics from the Church of
Rome. As for the Church of Corinth and Churches of ^alatia, they were separated
from Idolatours, orderly gathered, established and governed by CHRIST'S laws,
true Ministry, worship, and stood not obstinatly to maintain and retain
open gross sin, and to murder the messengers sent early and late to reprove
them, as you do: So that there is no comparison to be made between you and
them; for thus the Papist might plead with you. There were sins and
corruptions in the Churches of Corinth and Galatia, but it was not lawful to
separate from them, therefore it is not lawful to separate from the Church of
Rome, wherein still you see your selves concluded Schismatics and Donatistes.
But because we will not intermedle with Calvine nor other Churches, Let us
return again to your comparison between the Donatistes and us, from which you
are so far and so long digressed, as a man little regarding wherein he busieth
himself.

Concerning the Magistracy.
IN this matter he first terms us Donatistes, for that we cry out of
persecution, and of the false Prophets that incence the Magistrates hereunto.
We answer, we complain not of impatiencie nor yet for revenge: only (as
duty binds us) we seek to the lawful Magistrates for some redress of our
miseries which we wrongfully sustain, and show the people the ungodliness of
their woeful guydes, or rather wolves; and if you had any grace you would
rather be moved with pity, then compare us to either Schismatickes or
heretics for our just complaints. But herein our cause differs from the
Dona^istes, that we are persecuted by the Clergy, which is armed (according
to the order of their bloody predecessors) with civil power together with
their popish ecclesiastical jurisdiction both in one person, contrary to the
law of God: which unlawful power they only vsurp to keep CHRIST out of his
office, suppressing his laws, offices, people, worship, with all force in all
unmerciful cruelty, so far as their horns will reach pushing poor Israel.
And howsoever her Ma^^e and her honorable Council see not their wickedness, or
suffer them and wink at their doings (which God grant it be not laid to their
chardge) yet we find this Antichristian prelacie both the false accusers, and
hateful molestours of Gods children; so that the persecution is chiefly by
that brood: And whether haling unto, and shutting up in most strait close
imprisonment till they have murdered them without trial whom they get into
their claws, never loosing their hold till either they dye in prison or revolt
from the truth, so that many are made to blaspheme and deny the holy ways of
God though their merciless tyranny, whether this kind of tyrannising without
any free conference or judicial proceeding, thus pulling the husband from the
wife, Father from children, servant from master etc, al from their lawful
callings and trades, be not barbarous persecution, let al men consider. If we
diserue death let us dye in due execution, if banishment banish us; but first
by order convince us of some crime or error worthy thereof, if you will clear
your selves.

Mr. Giffard after this Ismalitish derision of our persecution, proceeds to
accuse us of some doctrines derogatorie to the Princes authority. As first;
that Princes may not make laws. 2. that we should hold the Prince ought not
to reform the Church by their authority. 3. That none of the godly Kings of
Judah did compel any to the Covenant. 4. That the people of CHRIST'S kingdom
be spoutanei etc. In all which, besides that there is no comparison between the
Donatistes and us in these poinctes, he does but follow the steps of that
old peruerter of the truth. We will the^ first show briefly how we hold this
doctrine, and how far we are from that he would insinuate into the Magistrates
ears, as though we sought to diminish their lawful jurisdiction, power, or
rule. For laws making we hold, that Princes are limited by the law of God (as
he himself in an other place confesses) and ought not to proclaim any law that
has not warrant from Gods law either in express words or necessary collection
from general rules, still keeping within the equity. For reforming we hold,
that ye Prince ought to supresse all transgressio^ of Gods law, and punish al
persons without partiality according to the offense within the Church or
without the Church within their own dominions as well for the transgression of
the first Table as the second, and to defend the obseruers thereof in all equity,
and yt whiles we walk in the ways of God we are not afraid of yt power, but
give God glory and them due obedience, whether they be of the Church or no. To
the 4. we hold, that none can be received into the Church, but yt willingly
makes public confession of his faith, for neither may the Church receive nor
they be holden of the Church, without this repentance and confession. Yet we
grant that the Prince may command and compel her subjects to the hearing of the
public doctrine and prayer of ye Church, but to enter Cou^n^t or be received a
member it is to be done by doctrine, faith and repentance: Neither did the
kings of Judah compel the Priests to receive any uncircumcised or Idolatours
into ye fellowship of the Church. Faith is the gift of God, wrought by his
Spirit and word: The Prince may co^pel to the means thereunto, but not enforce
faith.

The Donatistes resisted the Magistrate so far as they durst (says he) and
when Julian the Apostata showed them favor, their circumcellio^s made revel in
companies, walking with clubbes and staves, did spoil and beat such as
lighted in their hands etc: The impatient hear of Brow^istes is not unknown
etc. Let this lawless man show where ever any of us have resisted the
Magistrate, or spoken evil of the ruler of the people, or gone about to revenge
our selves by any violence or unlawful means. As for his prophecy what we
would be if we had power, it lays open himself to be a malicious false
Prophet to incitate the Magistrate with lying dreams. Let him better consider
and he shall find that this Antichristian Prelacie has been not only the
procurers but shedders of much innocent blood, usurping civil power: And how
they have behaved themselves toward their sovereign Kings and Princes, let ye
Records be searched; in your Church are found daily treasons, bloodshed etc,
and most plentiful in your mother Church of Rome: This then is but the false
report of Sanballat and Tobia to hinder Gods Temple.

Now admiring Mr. Giffards clearing of the Donatistes of error, affirming
they differed not from the other Churches in doctrine, as also manifest or al
least protest our innocence from these and all other errors in the particular
course handled or else where to be found, I will set down three or four gross
errors before him, which we detest in the Donatistes; as:

That he which or deineth a Minister (as it seems they allowed ordinatio^

That the conscience of him that gives, may wash the conscience

That when he which baptiseth is manifest a good man, he gives

That those which are baptized by a wicked man though in a lawful

That it is lawful in some respects to kill themselves.

That the Magistrate cannot compel us to that which is good.

That we have free will after regeneration. I will not now justify Mr. Giff.
explaining of their minds, whether in these or any other we handled, I take
al in this matter from his record, which I hope he will not affirm to be
false.

As for his learned Fathers how they have wrasted the scriptures new Testament
and old in more then twenty false expositions and flat contradictions of the
scope of the whole Canon of the word, to justify open iniquity by slightes,
and tollerat it in the public assemblies with all their doctrines of
separating in heart and not in body, at common meats and not at holy
communion, that all nations should be the apparent Church etc, we leave them
al, denying to enter controversy with dead men, wishing Mr. Giffard to spread
such deceites in other men's names no more, but to come orderly to some
christian trial by the Book of God. In the mean time he sees we neither
hold of Donatistes nor of Augustine, but follow faith in a pure conscience to
our knowledge, ready to be instructed wherein we err. And when he has made
such a lardge discourse to prove us Anabaptists, Montanistes, Arians,
Pelagians, Nicolaitans etc, we shall in stead of conflicting with a beater of
the air, and unconscionable sclanderous rayler, demand the end and use of his
labors, and now leave him to his account for his defacing and blaspheming of
the truth, wishing all men to beware of such methodes of imposture.

I. G.

FINIS.
A FEW OBSERVATIONS OF Mr. GIFFARDS LAST CAVILLS ABOUT stinted read prayers,
and devised Leitourgies.
HAving heretofore written an answer to Mr. George Giffards pretended defense
of stinted read prayers and devised Leitourgies, and since received an empty
reply, wherein he does nothing less the^ yield to any sound reason alleged,
but ungodly cauilleth at and peruersly wrasteth the sense of so much as he
touches, I seeing no cause of further strife (his former convinced) to
intermedle again with particular handling of his chafe and smoke, his reasons
in effect the same before answered, have only thought it my duty to illustrate
unto the Readers, some few brief poincts abused by him, that they may the
better be able to judge of the former writings, whereunto with these few helps
following I refer the trial.

WHEREAS I alleged out of the 8. to the Romans and out of the 4. to the Galath.
that in the very time and action of our prai^ng to God, the spirit of God was
the only instructor and the only help, no other help mentioned or that can be
collected in the Scriptures, Mr. GIFFARD having granted that reading prayer is
not praying, does now answer, that how soever the Scripture does extol and
magnify outward helps and means, yet when they are compared with God which
works all in all by them, or when the scripture will set forth the efficacy
and work to be his alone, they are either not mentioned, or else if they be
mentioned, so cast down, as if they were nothing. God buyldeth his Church
(says he) by the ministry of men, yet Paul is said to plant, Apollos to
water, but God to give the increase 1 Corinthians. 3. and therefore to gather from
those places Romans 8. Galat. 4. that there need or may be no outward help or
means in the very action and instant of praying, is far awrye. In which
answer it evidently appears he is so bent to turn away all truth and raise
new strife, as there can be no expectation of agreement: There is no sequence,
neither does the Scripture alleged prove his own reason, so that nothing
hangs together. No man doubts but that sometimes and in some places of
Scripture the outward means of begetting and increasing faith is only recited,
and sometimes the secret work of Gods spirit only, sometimes both, when yet
they are not divided but go together, and all of God both inward work and
outward means, though in way of comparison I never so read, but rather the one
repeated for both: For shall I say, that when the word of God and preaching
thereof is ^hewed to be the power of God unto salvation, that the inward work
of the Spirit is therefore not mentioned, because the other is of God? the^ both
inward and outward means being of God and Gods own work, though the one by
instrument, that there is silencing of the one in way of comparison, is not
true. But all this is nothing to our matter: He should plainly have affirmed,
that from these places Romans 8. and Gal. 4. it cannot be proved, that in the
very instant time and action of owre praying to God, the spirit only
instructs, without outward helps of instruction; and he should have seen I
could prove (as then I did) the contrary unto him Romans 8. 26. The Spirit does
together supplye or h^lp our infirmities, for we know not what to pray as we
ought, but the the Spirit yt self makes request for us with sighs and groans
unutterable. In the action of praying the Spirit is here set down in this
place to be the means and help of instruction, teaching us to ask aright, no
other means or helps of instruction in that instant time and action of
pra^jng mentioned in this or any other place of scripture: Therefore in the time
of our praying and laying our hearts open to God, the Spirit only does instruct
and opens our mouth. In this place let the word synantilambanetai be well
considered. Again Galath. 4. 6. it is said because ye are sons, God sent
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts crying, Abba, Father. The Argument
here is the same that before: this word [ crying] shows the work of his
Spirit or rather office, in our continual occasions of prayer to direct us to
unburden and unfold the heart, so that in the instant action we see no other.
And where I showed him that reading in the action of praying could not be caled
an help of instruction at that time when we were pouring forth our hearts unto
God, the eyes and hands lift up to heaven, our meditation fixed upon our known
occasions, and heart and mouth unfolding them, my reason this, That the mind
and body could not be intent upon two diverse distinct and several exercises
and duties of mind and body at one time and instant, he inverteth my words,
and steals them as a new shift to help himself (as he supposes) returning
them thus in way of question, demanding whether fasting, lifting up our eyes
and hands to heaven, prostrating the body and kneeling be prayer yt self, or
outward means and helps to make the prayer more ^erve^t. Every simple man will
laugh at him (says he) if he make them prayer yt self; and if they be helps,
then I have brought the former proofs not from an idle, but from an unsound
brain. Leave scorning and reproach, and consider what helps we did all this
time entreat of; was yt not instruction of the mind by some other spiritual
exercise then prayer in prai^ng? will he call fasting, kneeling etc,
instructions of the mind what to pray? then be must needs plead for his Image
and al poperye, if these bodily actions and gestures be instruction of the
mind, which are but preparations to make the body serviceable and apt to and
in this duty. Further, how learnedly he disputes to make reading one of these
bodily gestures or bodily actions only, let it be considered of. And as he
confounds these bodily exercises and spiritual exercises, so he shows
himself ignorant and unable to discern spiritual gifts and exercises one from
an other, with the distinct use of them; demanding whither the voice of an
other that prays, be an outward help or prayer yt self, an outward means to
make our prayer more fervent. He thinks I will be laughed at, if I say it be
prayer yt self. Sure if in any assembly, or where two or three are in CHRIST'S
name gathered together epi ^oa^^o and homothymadon unto the same thing and with
one mind, for avoiding confusion they do use but one voice, and that by Gods
order and commandment, the others hearts going with the words and saying
Amen, they that hear pray not as well as he y^ according to Gods ordinance
speaks, our public prayers are not ye prayers of the Church, but of him
that speaks only. But now God has otherwise taught 1 Cor. 14. etc. Acts. 4.
yt must needs be, that Mr. GIF. is in great error to think none but he that
speaks prays. I take the^ such hearing of an others voice, prai^ng; and
this to be a foul error to publish the contrary; but that prayer both
edifieth him that speaks and him that hears, and together in heart prays,
I make no doubt. Yet hereupon to affirm, that there are other means of
instruction to be used in the insta^tactio^ of praying then praying yt self,
were as gross as the other, and both a confounding of spiritual exercises, and
flat co^tradictio^ of the Scripture, especially so diverse weighty actions of
mind and body, as proseuche, and anagnosis, pouring out our hearts to God in
prayer, and reading. At other times I did not only allow, but teach, that we
have all the days of our lives need to be instructed to pray aright, and that
reading is a blessed means thereunto. So that you see whiles you of purpose
will oppose, you run your self upon the rock; in stead of iustifijng your
accusation of two heresies to be found in my first reason, you have published
this follye, which you must retract, if you will obey the truth.

Mr. GIFFARD the^ granting, that reading is but to help to prayer and not
praying, and now being showed yt it can be no help in that instant action of
praijng, let us proceed to pervse an other of his mistakings and wilful
peruertings. I affirming, that the holy Ghost never enjoined us to any certain
number of words by stint and limitatio^ in praijng, as commanding the very
words to be said over when we pray, he every where in his wrytings as a
supposed foundation to their Leitourgie and Collects, alleged out of Numbers
the 6. Mat. 6. Luke. 11. example of Psalms, and now Deuteronomy. 26 that ye Lord did
by commandment bind them to those very words saijng over, when they prayed
or blessed in those forms which are there prescribed. For my reasons in
disprouing this popish carnal conceit, I refer the Reader to my former answer
to his published pretended defense of reading for praijng. One reason was
drawn from the words of y^ text Numb. 6. 32. where ye hebrew words Coh
Tebaracu, thus shall you bless, do not import a tying them to ye very words of
this form in blessing, but to the rules and instructions there taught them
concerning the matter yt self for their direction, which I collected by this
word Cob, which is an adverb of similitude, signifijng with us as much as
[after this maner] and therefore cannot be to say the same words, but according
to ye same instructions. Where first he reprocheth me for that Tebaracu was
false printed, thereupon chardging me I cannot read two words right of hebrew,
which were no great ignominy in their priesthood: But shall we say Mr. GIF.
cannot read two words in latin rightly* because in the 28. page of his book
he repeateth out of Augustine, ^poli sui, for populi sui? This I mention as
sorry to see the defendor of this false Hieratchie so empty, to leau^ sound
doctrine, and thus to trifle; if he had been at the print, it should have been
amended it seems. Now to the doctrine gathered of this word Coh, Mr. GIF.
would invert the words in his own sense, thus; that where I said, the Lord did
not command to say the same words but the like, that is, according to those
directions of doctrine, he gathers, that I should affirm yt unlawful to use
those words at all, yea that they might not use all or any of these words at
any time. Whether this be a Christian interpretation of my words or no, I
leave not only to all men's, but chiefly to his own conscience to be
considered. Yet he still covertly persisting in his error, produces a place of
Scripture, where the word Coh (as he thinks) is used for the saying of the
very words. Exodus 3. The Lord said to Moses, Thus shall thou say unto the
children of Israel EHEIE has sent me unto ye; moreover God said unto Moses,
thus shall thou say unto them, The God of your Fathers etc. According to Mr.
Grenewo^ds interpretation (says he) Moses is not commanded to say those words,
but the like. True, he is not here bound to this certain number of words, or
the same words. If then they should say, what is his name that has sent thee,
he may not say EHEIE has sent me, because God said Coh etc. Now Mr. GIF.
shows himself a shifter: I did never hold it unlawful to use any words of
the scripture as need required, it is your sclander: where you have in all
your books affirmed we hold it unlawful to say thy kingdom come, or use any
phrase of scripture to right use; your vvoeful vvrasting of the tongue for
untruths, vvil turn to your further judgment. I proved only by the word Coh,
which signifies [after this maner] that God comanded not the very certain
number of words to be said. And where I said the word Coh was so used in all
the Prophets (when they say, Thus says the Lord) to this end, that neither the
holy Ghost had registered al their very words they spoke, nor that they were
tied to the prescript number of words, he would have it thought I should hold
those words which are recorded, not to be the words of God; which vvrasting of
my words, is but his empty quarreling to turn away this firm doctrine:
namely, that God did in those forms of prayer mentioned by him, prescribe the
sum of their blessings and petitions, whereunto they ought according to their
several occasions within the limits of these doctrines, frame their suites
and desires, and did not tie them to a certain number of words. Now he finding
himself pressed, in that all his proofs are at once brought to be weapons
against him rather the^ vvarrant, It being proved unto him that those forms
are repeated in other words in other places, and that the Priests used other in
blessing the people, as Eli blessed Hanna: also that the Apostles used other
words in prayer, and never that very form and number of words, he plainly
denies that our question was about the bynding and limiting to the very
words by commandment, and says our question was, vvhither it were
idolatry to use those prescript phrases or no. Thus the man is fled, not only
contradicting all his writings, making void his proofs, but granting as much
as I affirmed upon the word COH, has given me the whole cause against his
will: For if these places will serve to prove an apportioning by number and stint
upon commandment, then Mr. Giff. has no proof for his Collects, no though
these had been so, yet his patched broken mass-booke should have been far from
coming in place of true prayer. But that this is a popish dream to think in
prayer they were bound to some certain number of words saying over, it was
also co^uinced unto him by the Greek word houtos, where Christ commandith his
Disciples, saying, When you pray, pray thus, Our Father etc. Which word [thus]
Math. 6. 9. singnifieth, [after this maner] or according to this form, rules,
and instructions; for if the commandment should go to bind us to the very
words, then this word [ when you pray] would bynd us never to use other words,
for the text says, when you pray, say thus. To this he answers, that
respecting the rules for matters, when is as much as whensoever you pray,
because we may not depart from those matters contained in those general
petitious: But in words it is not so there, We must consider to distinguish
etc. Well, has he not lost himself, and still against his will yielded the
matter; namely, that we are not in these forms of prayer bound to the very
words saying over, and that ye holy Ghost did never by commandment stint or
limit us to any words in praying, which in deed is common with inchanters: And
I take it he will easily yield me this point, for if he remember Augustine to
teach, that then we pray that prayer which Christ taught his Disciples, when
our prayers are grounded upon those doctrines and instructions, or to that
effect: And Calvine to to say; the Son of man would not prescribe us what
words we must use in prayer, he should have put us to less trouble: So that
besides his mass-booke was never prescribed by the Lord himself or vvarrant of
his word, he sees it unlawful to apportion, limit and stint as by measure and
weight certain members of words, sentences etc, in prayer. As for his
examples of the Psalms, I refer to my former answer, namely, that praying is
one thing, and singing a psalm an other.

Now then we have heard that reading is not praying or any help to pray in the
instant action of praying, when we should power forth our own hearts to God:
Also that it is unlawful to bind man to numbers of words of sentences in
praying. Let us come to the first general argument, which is this. No
Apochripha must be brought into the public assemblies; for there only Gods
word and the lively voice of his own graces must be heard in the public
assemblies: But men's vvrytings and the reading them over for prayer are
Apochripha: Therefore may not be brought into the public assemblies, either for
laws or worship. Here he finds fault with the word Apochripha (although
it has been an antie^t word in this sense, and now published in their Bibles
to distinguish other vvrytings from the authentic scriptures) vvilling me to
go to the matter yt self, drawing by firm conclusion, that nothing is to be
allowed any place in the Church, which is not ye perfect rule yt self in
writing or without error uttered in speech, and he will yield. This I did prove
unto him by an Argument he was not able to answer, and did leave out the word
Apochripha, thus. Only the Canonical scriptures and lively voice of Gods own
graces are to be brought into the public assemblies for doctrine and prayer:
But men's writings or Collections are neither Canonical scripture, nor the
lively voice of Gods graces in such as he has appointed to speak in ye public
assemblies. Therefore no man's writing may be brought into nor imposed upon the
public assemblies for doctrine and prayer.

Now where he cauilleth about the perfectnes of the rule and absolute
perfectnes of the graces, it does not help him: For the word of God being of
necessity by the law and ordinance of God, to be read in our own language, I
trust he will not deny yt to be the written word of God for the imperfectness
of the translation, being (to the best search the Church can make) skanned by
the original tongue and still amended; or at least the Church no further bound
to yt, then yt shall be found to be the perfect rule: so likewise the lively
voice of Gods graces are not for the imperfectnes to be excluded, being Gods
appointed ordinance; neither is any fault in the translation to be allowed,
and error in doctrine or prayer are presently to be admonished and repented
of. Mr. Giffard then must deny the Bible translated into our own language to
be the Canonical Scriptures, and deny the lively voice of Gods lawful
officers, and such as are thereunto called, in doctrine and prayer, to be the
manifestations of the spirit and utterance of Gods graces for the assembly, or
else grant the proposition firm: And if he can put dead men's writings into
the place of either of these, I will yield. In the mean time I hold such
translations to be the word of God, and by Gods ordinance put into our own
language, to all our knowledges retayning ye words of God, which word and the
lively use of Gods own graces in the mouth of such as he thereunto appoints,
are only to be brought into the public assemblies for prayer and doctrine;
for God has commanded these unto us as his own ordinances in his assemblies,
and no other means whereby either God speaks unto us, or his people unto him,
in the Congregation. To this all the scriptures bear witness; the word is
always firm, confirmed with miracles from heaven, and commended to us by
Christ, the Prophetts and Apostles, to be the foundation, Canon, light,
lantern etc, the graces of the Spirit given for the interpretation, prayer,
doctrine etc. CHRIST is ascended up into heaven, and has given gifts unto men
to serve their time and minister in their place in this house. These graces
still renewed, not only in those called of God in this service for their daily
administration, but new workmen thrust forth into this harvest, as the Lord of
the house disposes: which graces of his Spirit are compared to two olive
branches, which empty out of themselves through two golden pipes Zachary 4.
12. And to seven thunders which utter their voices that cannot be written. Away
therefore with your patched mass-booke, yt may neither stand for a foundation
in Gods house, nor for the lively voices of these thunders: you make yt a
monstrous Idol by putting yt in either of these uses, yet you will make yt
serve for both. We have nothing to do with your matters of order, as you
understand that order for time, place etc; we reason of the spiritual action
yt self, when we entreat of ye means whereby God speaks to us, and
appoints us to speak unto him. We can cast out the errors in the
translation or doctrine or prayer, and yet retain Gods word in our own
language, and the lively voice of his graces in the assembly: When you can do
so with your devises and new hatched Leitourgies we will give ear unto you
and them; till then we thinck of your counterfeit plays and pleas for your
Idols and detestable sacrilege and high profanation of Gods ordinances with
Iannes and Iambres to resist the truth. Paraphrases we hold to be men's
writings and expositions, and not the word of God, nor the lively voice of
Gods grace of interpretation or prayer, therefore to be excluded this place of
service unto God. Thus you see the further you wrestle, the further you make
your wares, the best of them, odious to every godly conscience. You say I
deceive the simple by gyuing them one crabbe amongst many apples; but you may
behold your best apples such as the holy Ghost has foretold us Revelations.
18. to be entisements to evil: It is well you will grant my Propositions so
sound; and I would wish (if such be Gods will) they might be better favored.

Now because I will not stand either repeating or contending about Syllogismes,
I will take this much yielded of your own conclusions, which is as much in
effect as I have affirmed, where you teach me thus to reason. No man's writings
are the undoubted truth of God, but have errors and imperfections: therefore
men cannot further ground upon them, then they be consonant to the Canonical
scriptures. Again, The Church is builded upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets: therefore our faith is not to rest upon men's writings. Whereupon
does necessarily follow, that if men's writings may not be builded upon nor
rested upon, how should you dream it lawful to impose them for laws upon
the public assemblies, or to have them there read to bear rule as the words
of God? And this you confessed in an other of your writings, that God spoke
unto us out of his undoubted word, or by his own word. If then God speak not
unto us by men's writings that be of private interpretation, in the assembly,
nor that they can be made groundwork to buyld our faith upon, or to rest
assured upon, yt will be granted I hope that they are not to be imposed upon
the public assemblies as laws and rules, but left to every man's private use
in their liberty, as they will answer for themselves what use they put them
to, and whither they do not prefer them before the book of God, or prejudice
themselves by them. This first poinct is then plain, That only Gods undoubted
word is to be imposed, brought in, and maintained in the public assemblies as
laws and rules, no other vvritings being authentic or Canonical. But here Mr.
GIFF. does in effect affirm, that the word of God yt self is not authentic or
Canonical, except in the Hebrew or Greek Copy: Wherein he goes a little
beyond the Papists, that will yet allow the word of God in latin: And if it
should be defended, that the word of God were not the word yt self that
we have in our own language, it will follow that no man could have assurance
of faith, except he understood both Hebrew and Greek, yea be able soundly to
interpret the scriptures in both. If the translations be so far men's vvritings
that yt cease generally to be the word of God that is not written in Hebrew
or Greek, and men's writings not to be grounded or rested upon, where shall
our assurance stand? And might not Mr. Giff. as well say, the Hebrew and Greek
Copy are but paper and ynck, many faults and errors by the print in vowells,
accents, letters; and so conclud we had not Authentic or canonical scriptures
at al, except men's erroneous vvritings might be of equal authority in the
assembly that the scriptures? must he not bear with me in accompting him an
Atheist or Libertine in thus reasoning? Hence then we see vvhiles you go about
to abase the Canonical scriptures, and extol your patched Leitourgie, you fall
into many blasphemies, as I have before told you. We hold yt the word of God
in what language soever, still rejecting the errors in the print, in the
translations etc; as they are known unto us, and not to the word yt self for
the imperfections or errors in the translation and print. Now when you can so
reject the errors in men's writings, as you can make that which remains the
undoubted word of God, not agreeable only, but an Authentic approved
Canonical scripture, authorized from God to be the very eternal foundation
and rules, limitts and laws given by himself unto his people, you may lift up
your stumped Dagon into this place, if there be some truth in their vvritings
(as what men's vvritings have not some, and the holy name of God very much)
yet is that truth in the Scripture yt self and here so mingled with chafe,
that it were not only unprofitable and a hindera^ce of the true use of Gods
word, but an abolishing and defacing of the word yt self; the majesty
where of ought to terrify you from this presumption. And where you say that
you decide not controversies by any translation, but by the Authentic Copies
of the Hebrew and Greek, I trust you speak only of such as are able by the
interpretation thereof so to decide controversies, and hold it not unlawful
for any such as have not that help, to co^vince error by the power of the
word and conferring one place with an other in any translation, according to
the analogy of faith, though I grant we ought to use y^ best approved. But if
this were not lawful, surely no man might prophecy in the Church, which
has not the gift of interpretion of the tongue, neither might any affirm any
scripture to be true, but they which have knowledge of tongues: How blasphemous
is this gear, vvhiles you are ignorant of the power, wisdom and agreement of
the word and spirit, and diversity of gifts given unto men; the Word and the
Spirit approve each other, and bear witness each of other, in what language
soever God gives yt, to our understanding. Prophecy and knowledge of tongues
are two several gifts, not always given to one member, but distributed as God
in his wisdom has appointed. 1 Cor. 12. and prophecy commanded for the more
excellent Cap. 14. But this is sufficient in this place, that the word of God
is the word of God in what language soever, and to account yt being verbatim
translated, or at least so far fo^rth faithfully translated, man's writing, were
blasphemy: but men's writings can never be so holden the authentic scriptures
of God, how agreeable to the word soever they be. My Argument is then firm, and
thus left upon you: Those writings which be not the word of God being
imperfect, and never without error, may not be imponed as laws and Canons upon
the public assemblies, or there be read or i^^erpreted, or offered up in
worship: But such are almens writings that be not the authentic word or God yt
self. The public assemblies are only bound to the reading and interpretation
of the Scriptures, which God has ordained to be read in a known language, and
for prayer and prophecy has ordained the lively voice of his own graces in
the mouth of such as he has appointed to be the mouth of the Congregation unto
him, and his mouth unto them. So y^ your pa^ched Leitourgie, paraphrases,
songs in rhyme, homelies, and al your dead men's writings, are cast forth of the
public assemblies, and manifest to be Idols when they are thrust into that
place.

Now where I alleged that the binding of the public assembly, yea of all
assemblies, to certain writings of men every day and year their number and
portion of words, daily, monthly and yearly in all assemblies the same matter
an words reiterated, in stead of pouring forth their hearts unto God according
to their present needs and occasions, was a setting of themselves in Gods seat
and taking the office of his Spirit, which only knows the wantes of the
several assemblies according to their diverse occasions, he runs away from
the matter, as one unwilling to hear of this their (...) and counterfeit
babbling, demanding whether every one should utter their own particular wantes
in the public assembly, or should pray nothing but that every one feels
the present want of in himself, or should tell the Minister before hand what
every one of their wantes were; then how the Minister should remember al. Are
these any thing but mere canils? can any of these follow upon the former
doctrine? And let him look again, whether he that is the mouth of the
Congregation unto God in public prayer, must not consider the present public
occasions of that public assembly, and thereafter frame his prayers, all the
people joining in heart to his words of petition or thanksgyuing, saying Ame^
to so much as he asks according to the will of God and need of the time, yea
and if they have not feeling in such prayers, they are unfeeling members: yet
neither does he intermedle with private or secret wantes, neither need they
tell him them; he is sent for the public affairs of the Church, to commend
the several actions general and public, unto God: And as they are diverse in
every assembly, so must he be a man of wisdom to know, see, and consider
them, lest they al rashly step into the house of God to offer up the sacrifice
of fools, and make a cou^terfeit babbling Eccle. 4. Yet the sin of this is
nothing co^parable to the doung your Priests cast forth by prattling over your
English Portuis, which y^^ Lord will one day cast in your faces. As then in
private prayer we are to lay forth our own wantes and estate of our own
soul, which cannot be done by reading an other man's writings, always singing
one song, customably repeating in superstition certain words, our hearts never
ripped up, examined, nor the diseases thereof laid open unto God, seeking due
cure: So the man that is the mouth of the whole assembly prays, as the mouth
of one body, for all their open public present wantes and occasions: Which
occasions, considering the persons and actions, are diverse and cannot be
written for one assembly before hand, muchlesse for all assemblies in a whole
kingdom, neither by man nor Angel. See then the mock erye of your service
book, and what Idolatry is committed by yt, to the abandoning true prayer
according to the present wantes and occasion.

The next thing to be considered, is, about making of laws in the worship of
God. Where he would persuade us that their whole Leitourgie containing al their
public worship, government, offices and ordinances of their Church, be but
matters of order and conveniencie. Then the compelling and teaching the public
assembly to read over men's writings both as Canons and laws in the Church,
and publicly and privately to offer them up in stead of true prayer and holy
invocatio^, is a matter of comelines and conveniencie. In the mean time it
must be a turning away of the whole order and ordinances of God: For what is
the whole Testament of Christ but an order for every office, person, action in
the Church, if he will have it taxis, and then must confess their Leitourgie an
other order of public administration, and so as I have said an other Gospel,
an other Testament, a setting up an other worship. And hereupon I trust I may
call all this an adding to the word of God; yea I will go a little further, an
abolishing and disabling and dishonoring of the word yt self and graces of his
spirit. And whither all this smoke of the bottomless pyt may not be reproved
with these scriptures, not only Proverb. 30 verse. 5. 6. Deuteronomy. 4. verse 32. but
also Reu. 22. verse. 18. 19. let the godly ponder and search: and let the
fearefulnes of the threats deter all flesh from presuming to alter the
ordinances, laws and worship of the most high God. And that the very reading
of an other man's writing for my own prayer, or the prayer of the Church, in
stead of pouring forth our own hearts, is a changing of the whole worship
into the making men's writing an Idol, which is by these places condemned as an
accursed sin, let the most hard text (as he in carnal wonder exclaymeth) be
looked into Revel. 22. verse 18. 19. The words are plain: If any man put or
add any thing unto these, or if any man take away from these words, he shall be
judged as follows. Now if the adding an other whole Worship, and suppressing
of that God has appointed, be not an adding to these things written, give
sentence as you will answer. O (says he) but it is said God will add unto such
all the plagues written in this book; and there is in this book mentioned the
lake of fire: As though the lake of fire is not due for every sin, and yet
not every one that commits sin to be condemned; what sin is it that
deserves not the eternal wrath of God? yet not every one that sins given
over to that judgment, for either yt may be of ignorance, or of negligence, and
washed away by repentance in the blood of Christ, or it may be repented of and
left when we see yt. Mr. GIFFARD has read well the curses of the law and all
the curses due for sin, that sees not how many curses the law and the
Prophets pronounced upon sin, to call the persons themselves to repentance;
showing together the equity of Gods law, and yet withal the free mercy of God
to al yt truly repent their evil ways. All that receive the Beasts mark in
their hand or forehead, are thretned to be cast with the Beast and false
Prophet into that lake; yet I doubt not but many that have been so seduced
into that sin, shall by repentance be saved: Not that I encourage any to
continue in such fearful estate, to harde^ their hearts against the threatenings
of God, but that I would have Mr. GIFF. to put difference between the curse
laid to the sin, and the condemnation of the person sinning: And seeing he
takes that lake a particular severe threat to the Apostasy under Antichrist,
I would he had the grace to consider how it lies upon him, whiles he speaks
out of ye mouth of the Beast, if he repent not to turn from his evil ways.
Let it further be weighed how ignorantly he charge me to condemn al
Churches, for this small examplifying of this Egiption darkness, Idolatrous
worship, and exalting men's writings into this defacing of Gods word and true
worship, they neither being guylty of such a sacrilegious Leitourgie, as this
Egiptian Calf hatched at ROME, neither are to be presently judged no Church for
others sin, till they join obstinacy to their transgressio^. But shift the
matter as you will, or rather as you ca^ apeare before God, I will not make less
the sin, or the judgment due to sin, for men's persons, no not of whole
Churches, if they shall be guilty therein: My desire is by discovery of the
sin, to bring men to repentance, and unto the awe of God in his worship: who
are guyltie besides your selves in such sacrilege, as to abrogate the
Leitourgy of Christ, and set up an other, or to restrain Gods true worship,
and to give life to ye image of the Beast, it skilleth me not; let sin be
sin, and God righteous, and the^ examine your selves, if they or you be
clear I rejoice, neither do I think or ca^ charge them with such Idolatry as
is here erected: I take it you will be found ye scla^derer of other Churches, to
hide your own filthiness. But says Mr. Giff. those scriptures are against the
adding of humane precepts and laws to be kept as parts of Gods worship to
bind ye conscience to seek righteousness and ye forgiveness of sins, or ye
merit of eternal life in them, or against such rules of government as God has
to be perpetual. In which we must take your meaning to be this; that you grant
where any humane precepts and laws be enforced as a part of Gods worship, or
as laws to bind the conscience, or when righteousness is sought in them, and
forgiveness of sins by observing of them, or merit by them, or if they be
against such rules of government as God has set to be perpetual, if the
additions or constitutions be such as any of these, then such laws and
constitutions are against the perfection of the word of God, against Christian
liberty, and in the chief things which con^erne Gods worship, against the
ground and foundation of our faith, and so a thing most detestable and
accursed, which our Savior CHRIST refused justly to observe with the blind
Phariseis, wherein you have granted as much as I ever affirmed: For is not your
whole Leitourgie being an other then CHRIST'S Testament, your whole reading men's
writings in place and in stead of laying forth your own present wantes and
occasions in prayer to God, humane constitutions, and made a part of Gods
worship? at least such pretended worship as you think good enough for him?
Weygh the matter uprightly: Again, whither your whole Antichristian
government, offices, Courts and ministry, be not constitutions and
ordinances against such rules of CHRIST'S government as be perpetual, and an
innovating of his Testament, examine; which you shall soon perceive, if you
look but what CHRIST'S perpetual ordinances, offices, officers and laws for
the guyding, ordering and governing of his Church be, prescribing every one
their place, duty and limits jointly and severally, and not find your
ministry registered there, but a strange Leitourgie and worship borrowed from
the Pope, which came out of the bottomless pit; confess your sacrilege in
suppressing CHRIST'S whole ministry and ordinances, and erecting an other for
the perpetuity of his, even to every nail and py^: The holy Ghost shows
that only to be his ministry, till we be all a perfect body in him, and his
whole ministry and ordinances a kingdom that cannot be shaken Hebr. 12.
Ephesians. 4. a commandment to be kept undefiled till the apearing of JESUS
CHRIST; his Scepter an everlasting Scepter; the Son as faithful in his house
as MOSES a servant in the Tabernacle, who made all things according to the
pattern: So that it is to be wo^dred Mr. GIFFARD should think any part of
Christ's government should not be perpetual, that was given by his Apostles the
master buylders and layers of the foundation, whereby all actions should be
tried to ye worlds end. May not Mr. Giff. as well call into question the
perperuitie of the Testament, as the laws and rules for the government of his
Church. Now if your whole false Hierarchy, Offices, Officers, Laws, Worship,
be plainly other the^ CHRIST'S, as in our other writings are proved, and shame
will inhibit you to deny, how can you be so drunk with the cup of the Whores
fornication, to think you have no constitutions, laws or traditions, which are
a part of worship, and against such rules of CHRIST'S government as the Apostles
have prescribed for the ordring of his house, and the same ordained for all
Churches til we become all a perfect body in him? But if Mr. GIFF. will show
himself so void of al conscience and truth, to say al their traditionall
worship and Antichristian Offices and ordinances be neither part of their
woship nor constitutions disanulling the ordinances of Christ, yet will be
confess I doubt not this kind of worship and government to be imposed as
matters to bind the conscience, being all the ^eruice of God they have, seeing
he would also have all that observe them not, to be censured and excommunicat
for this merchandise: yt were a sore matter a man should be cut off from Christ
and his Church, given over to Satan, and the i^dgment ratified in heaven
against soul and body, for a matter that byndes not the conscience, As though
the soul and body (howsoever some things perteine to the one, or is done by
the one as proper work thereof) were not both to be counted when the
conscience shall be opened to answer for all done in both, or by either of both,
even whatsoever we have done in soul and body; and Calvine would but divide
the soul and the body in Civil causes. But Mr. Giffard would go a note
further; namely, that in the service of God in such causes as the transgression
deserve excommunication, to be no matter bynding the conscience. But it may be
Mr. Giff. does suppose, that except the constitutions ecclesiastical be such,
as righteousness be commanded to be fought in the doing them, and forgiveness of
sins and merit by them, all is well. Then, besides the other abuses granted,
he must be demanded whither those traditions of the Fathers, which our Savior
Christ and his Disciples refused to observe, were imposed as meritorious?
whereunto we answer, No: For in the superstitious washings of cups, of
beds, with all such trincketts, we see to be no such matter Mark. 7. and
Christ's words in saying, they laid the comma^deme^ts of God aside to set up
their own traditions, does show wherein the sin was; namely, to do and
observe such things of vain glory, superstition, or custom, as God had not
enjoined them, and to leave undone the laws and commandments of God; which
sin is your transgression at this day: Read therefore the 7. of Mark and 15.
of Matthew more diligently. Further those superstitious traditions Gal. 4. and
Colos. 2. the observing whereof were the denial of Christ, were neither held
meritorious, nor justification sought by them, many of them being Jewish
ceremonies, sometimes as rudiments commanded of God, now abolished and no
further burden to be laid in such outward things; no, We read not that the
law of God yt self was either commanded, or so observed, as to seek
righteousness by yt. Now then to the matter; Mr. Giff. thinks CHRIST and his
Apostles did well in refusing to obey the traditions of the Fathers at the
Pharisees commandment, and so must confess it lawful and a duty of us to
refuse to observe your Jewish ceremonies and Romish superstitious traditions,
which are so many as even your whole Leitourgie and worship contain nothing
else, Gods laws and ordinances not only left undone, but all that plead for
them and seek to walk in them, persecuted with deadly hatred. And how Mr.
Giff. will prove that there is no adding or diminishing to or from the word of
God, by imposing and creating more laws then God has made in his worship and
government of his Church, but such as be made part of the worship, or bind
conscience, or be meritorious, or against such rules of his government as be
perpetual, though I take all your orders, laws, worship in this compass;
yet how you can poue this, I know not; for look again upon the scriptures
Pro. 30. 5. 6. De^^. 4. 2. and 12. 32. and. Gal. 3. 15. Revel. 22. 18. 19. and
you shall find, that to add, superordeine, innovate or diminish or take any
thing from the laws of God already prescribed for his worship, were to
abrogate his law, to lay further burdens then he has laid, to make his
law imperfect, and set our selves in his seat; yea whatsoever we put to
which he has not commanded, or whatsoever we inhibit that he has
commanded, is here forbidden: For this says the Lord, Ye shall put nothing
unto the word which I command you, neither shall you take ought therefrom
that you may keep the precepts of the Lord your God which I command you
Deuteronomy. 4. 2. And that this was as well in the outward ordinances of the Temple
as in the judgments, is plain in the first verse. Again in the 12. Chap. 32.
Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do yt; Thou shall put nothing thereto
nor take any thing therfrom; and in the Proverbs. Every word of God is pure,
put nothing unto his words lest he reprove thee and thou be found a liar.
Now the scripture speaking so absolutely and generaly against al addition or
detraction to or from his ordinances, Mr. Giff. ouershooteth himself of his
bare word to contradict and limit so express commandementes; for these
scriptures (says he) are against adding of humane precepts and laws to be
kept as parts of Gods vvrship, to bind the conscience to seek righteousness,
forgeuenes of sin, merit in them, or against such rules of government as God
has set to be perpetual. This is true, but this is not all, for the law is
general against all inventions, traditions, constitutions, whatsoever God
has not commanded, as the second Commandment does also teach. Thou shall not
make to thy self etc; so yt God has left nothing to be laid upon his Church
by commandment, which he has not commanded: And therefore that place of the
Apostle to the Gal. 3. 15. must be better perused: If it be but a man's
Testament when yt is confirmed no man does abrogate yt or superordeine any
thing to yt: CHRIST'S Testament then being much more perfect, his whole mind
for the ordering of his house manifested therein, it is wicked presumption to
alter the ordinances thereof, or to hold them unmeet or insufficient for any
age or estate. Well, Mr. GIFF. could now be content thus far to limit the
power of the Church; namely, to have her subject and obedient to his voice;
but that he supposes there may be laws ecclesiastical made, of things in
themselves indifferent; that where the scripture has commanded such things to
be used at our liberty for order, for comelynes, edification and glory of
God, as matters of place, time, and such circumstance. But he here mistaketh
his text, for the Lord commands by the Apostle in that place 1 Corint. 14.
that those public business and exercises of the assemblies, should be done in
order, in comlynes, to edifijng; and does not leave something to be commanded,
which the master buylders has not prescribed: For to bind those things by
law which God has not bound in his worship, we are to add new traditious to
bring us into bondage of the creatures, which the same Apostle denies ever to
be brought into bondage unto 1 Corint. 6. 12. in his own person teaching us
so to walk: the Lord see in his wisdom cause to leave them in our liberty,
knowing there vvoulde be no end of such particular laws, especially if he had
left it to man's wit to make and unmake laws therein: For the orders you speak
of then, meaning circumstances of time, place, kneeling, sitting, standing etc,
there can be no further laws of them, then the Apostle has set, and (as the
Minister of CHRIST prescribed) that al be done to edifying in comlynes, order
etc. Of these to set particular laws, were to break these general laws of
God, whereby he teaches us the true use of them, and leaves them in the
Churches liberty as need requires to use them or not use them: Neither can
all assemblies be bound in these things to the same in particular, that being
needful and decent in one, that is not in an other. And in that you would
have them no further commanded, then they be needful, convenient, decent etc,
you condescend that there can be no settled law in particular laid upon the
Church in them: For to use them so far as they be convenient, necessary, and
to edifijng, is the law and commandment of God; and to use them further at
any man's commandment, were both a breach of Gods law, and making the
creatures stumbling blocks, Idolles, bondages, and every way sinful. And
when the Church commands them so far to be used as they are commanded of God,
the Church does but ratifye and see Gods law executed; so that you have lost
your self, whiles you should have proved your bold assertion: That the Church
has power to ordeyne laws, for to create or make laws, which you see the
folly of, being now driven to another shift; that in the particular things
whereof God has given general laws, we may make settled laws, and yet but
for the time they be convenient; Whereas in deed Gods law is the same and
nothing else. But because they be necessary in one place, that be not in
another, at one time, that be not at another, of some persons, that be not to
other, there can be no law set in the particular one day for all assemblies
in such things. Neither shall any disagreement be such amongst the several
Churches, as need any contention for them, vvhiles every assemblye do that
which is to themselves most meet, most convenient and necessary in such things,
for the present time. The Pastor and Elders were of small discretion if they
might not have these things in their liberty; and even these doctrines and
examples are in this point against your self, which you have alleged from
other Churches. But my purpose is not to contend about men's writings, nor to be
drawn into controversy with other Churches, when I am to deal with your
present sin; for the avoiding whereof you thus rage. If your cause be good,
plead it by ye scriptures, and I will be so far from casting out darts against
al Churches, as I will not deal with their estate, till I be further
occasioned; the rather may I omit this labor, for that you have alleged one
place of scripture which you suppose will bear ^p all your matter: If yt help
you not, I see not how you will de^end your assertion. In the 15. of the Acts
where it is said the Apostles, Elders, and brethren at Jerusalem met about the
question of Circumcision and other Ceremonies of Moses law, which some would
have burdened the Gentiles with, we see there (says he) that the Apostles
themselves did decree some thing for ye time, which afterward were to be
altered when the occasion was taken away, namely, that the Gentiles should
absteyne from blood, and from strangled, for avoiding offense to the weak Iues.
First let us see what the decree was, and then it will appear how little yt
serves Mr. Giff. his purpose: these be the words. Act. 15. 28. 29. It seemed
good to the holy Ghost and to us, to lay no more burden upon you then that
vvihich is necessary of these things, to absteyne from Idolothytes, and from
blood, and from strangled, and from for^i^^tion; from which keeping your
selves, ye do well. For one of these, which is [fornicatio^] we have here no
question, it being by the moral law always forbiden: For the other Mr.
Giffard would thus reason. The Apostles themselves did decree them for the
time, therefore the Church has power to make and ordeyne laws in things of
themselves indifferent, about the worship of God and public exercises. For our
answer, we would have Mr. Giff. first learn, that he, in saying ye Apostles
themselves did this by the direction of the holy Ghost, has overthrown
himself; for these were the Master builders, appointed of God to be law
makers for the whole Leitourgie and worship of CHRIST to all posterities, even
all the laws and ordinances of the new Testament, confirmed by miracles from
heaven, delivered by their ministry unto us: It will not follow then, if the
Apostles had made and ordained some law here, that therefore every Synod or
any Synod may impose laws and commandments by themselves ordained, till
they show they have that power given them the Apostles had, and an other
Leitourgie to be made, which they shall never be able to do, without a new
Christ. We have a sure foundation already laid, whereupon all Synods and
Counsels must build, and suffer their actions to be tried thereby; they have
not power to inioyne one title, which is not by y^ word of God enjoined us.
Further, what did the Apostles here that they had not vvarrant for; neither
would they lay any yoke or burden. And as for these things, they do as
much bind us now if there be like cause, namely, not in Idolothyts, blood, or
that which is strangled to offend our vveak brethren, if the Iues should be
now again called, neither to offend any in meat or drink for whom Christ
has dyed: Neither was there here any absolute law made of these things, nor
necessitye for the present time, fu^der then it should be necessary for the
respect set down; for otherwise it had been to build again the things
destroyed; only they thus counseled and adonished the Gentiles to use their
liberty in these things, as they might give noe offense to their weak
brethren of the Iues, the more to draw them on in the ways of CHRIST; for
they do not inioyne yt as a law, but tell them they shall do well if they
observe these things, by no necessitye enforced. But we do not now observe
these things, the occasions being removed. True, therefore I trust you will
grant, that no man shall be further bound to any constitution in such things
indifferent, then there shall be cause, neither need we public order to
retract; so that you leave the matter to me, that we can be no further bound
in such things, then by those rules of edifijng, order, comlines, occasion
shall require, so that we neither need nor can have settled laws herein: how
much more bondage and burden is imposed under this Antichristian yoke, the
things being of themselves most loathsome and detestable Popery, abrogating and
making void all the true ordinances laws and worship of CHRIST, and so
enforced as whot persecution proceeds against any that of conscience absteyne
from them, let it be considered. Neither has there ever been detracting this
thirtye years of any your abominations, neither is held lawefull for them
that sees them unlawful, to forbear them, without deadlye hate, to be
followed to the death. Blessed be our God, that has delivered our souls out
of such Egiptian servitude; our lives are not dear unto us, neither shall your
reproach move us.

Now concerning the last places of the Treatise, where he is utterly mute in
this, that all which stand under another Hierarchy or spiritual regiment
then CHRIST'S, be by outward profession no true Christians, or under the
promise of salvation, also for the freedom we profess in holy obedience to
all statutes and ordinances of God; as he has left untouched the matter, for
which he aledged the 7. to the Romans, namelye, the outward professed bondage
to a false spiritual government, so I having before largely expressed my mind
in that poinct of doctrine, and in such as then were about these things
opposed, refer any that desire the truth herein, to ponder the reasons and
proofs there set down, not minding to repeat again, or to be set aworke in
unfolding his troublesome and confuse cauills in abusing this place, or to make
further replye, till I see more capeable conceypt in him of such principles of
regeneration and sanctification, of freedom and bondage; yet for others
direction, one cavil or two shall be briefly set in veiwe. First where he
supposing I had been in error (and he himself fast fettered in heresy and
feeth it not) charge me to run as far on the other side, as a wheel
turned with contrary motions of the stream, for saying I held the dear
children of God might fall into any sin, except the sin against the holy
Ghost, yet be restored by rep^tance, Gods grace so far abounding, always
considered (as then I noted) that obstinacye in any sin, made them to us the
servants of sin whiles they so remayn^d, not speaking this to give leave or
encouragement to presume in the least or first step of sin, lest God leave
them to themselves, but to give them hope if they return that have so fallen*
he excepteth generally against all presumptuous sin, saying, of ^railty Gods
children may fall, but of presumption he makes great doubt, for (...) so
sinning to be renewed by repentance, for it is spoken of the Maranatha to be
pronounced in this life to none, but that be in that sin against the holy
Ghost: and here to fill his paper (as his common shift is, when he can neither
affirm nor deny) he puts me to new questions: You must (says he)
declare how filthye incest is, not sin against the holy Ghost, nor if a man
kill his Father or Mother or children, nor witchcraft, nor familiarity with
spiritts, is not your meaning that the regenerate man may of presumption and
obstinacy commit these? If Mr. GIF. should thus understand the word may, he
is in the same fault to say the regenerate may sin of frailty: And I answer
further, he could understand the word may otherwise, if (as in all his
writings) he carried not this mind to take all in evil part, to quarrel,
he could have vnd^^stood it thus; that God suffers of his elect to fall
into such sin, yet he is able to reduce them by repentance, and has made
promise to receive them if they return; and not have cauilled in this manner
in such things, the horror in the very naming of which sins shakes the
flesh and bones of the godly to hear or behold; so that his drift is but to
cast in a little wormwood, to deface the truth delivered: Therefore I will
only prove the general doctrine before affirmed, and for these perticulars,
let him that takes pleasure in r^king in them, being sins not once to be
named amongst Gods children, answer himself. And much better might he have
put his question thus. Whither wilfullye committing of sacrilege, and
presumptuous continuing to enchant in a false m^nistery, with Iannes and
^^mbres resistinge the truth, persecutinge the light against their knowledge,
be not within the compass of that sin against the holy Ghost. That Gods
elect after regeneration do fall into presumptuous sin, and for a time
persist in obstinate sin, and may be restored by repentance, I thus prove.
Many of Gods children may be excommunicat, and upon the repentance be
received again, as the incestious person 1. Cor. 5. therefore do for a time
remain in obstinate sin. Again every sin is to be prayed for, but that
one sin against the holy Ghost 1 John. 5. 16. Therefore pre^umptuous sin is
committed of Gods elect after regeneration. That all presumptuous sin is not
sin against the holy Ghost, we shall see by the description of that sin
Hebr. 6. and 10. where there is dispyting of the spirit, accompting the blood
of JESUS an unholy thing, persecuting the light they have sometimes tasted of,
and such like notes, which are degrees further then presumption; for there is
presumption of ignorance, of rashness, of hope of mercy, and many times do the
Prophets charge the people with rebellion against God; so that all presumption
cannot have the curse maranatha pronounced upon it, or the persons not to be
prayed for. But sure I grant, that presumption is near to that sin, and
there cannot be that high sin without presumption. But now if all sin but
sin of frayltie were unpardonable, your Clergy were in a woeful case, that
thus maynely resist the truth, and persecute Gods servants.

Neither is this doctrine any way contrary to that I delivered, namelye, that
the regenerat man cannot be said to stand in bondage to sin after
regeneration, and the servant of God at the same time by outward profession;
for none are in bondage to sin after their calling to the faith, (to our
judgment) but such as continue obstinate in their open known sin after due
admonition: that such stand not by outward profession the servants of CHRIST
but of sin, and are to be excommunicate, he willingly grants; and
hereupon merueileth how I should gather, that obstinat gross sinners should
not be excommunicat, which he might plainly perceive if he had eyes; for if
all the regenerat be in bondage to sin, and so the servants of sin and of
Satan, how should they cast out an other for bondage out of their fellowship
by the power of CHRIST? If Mr. GIFF. say, because the obstinate is in greater
bondage then the other; this proves not that the bond can cast out the bond by
the power of CHRIST. Again, if all be in bondage, then none can be holden
without for being in bondage to sin; so that none should be excommunicat,
none without, the world and the Church, light and darkness, CHRIST and Beliall
should be mingled together. To all which he has made no answer, but
demands certain questions, and makes such a formal conclusion, as if all
were in bondage unto sin. His questions I grant al affirmatively, yet deny
his consequence. Let him plainly prove therefore by evidence of scripture, that
all that do sin are bondslaues of sin; and when he has so done, I shall
thereupon conclude him a flat Anabaptist in the chief ground of their
profession. Very gladlye therefore vvoulde he leave out the word [bondage],
and falslye accuses and sclandereth me, in saying I hold that men can not
outwardly appear sinners, and stand the servants of CHRIST both at a time,
which is an open untruth: Yt is he, that cannot put difference between
sinning, and bondage unto sin; so that in one word all his questions are
answered: If any be in bondage to sin, he stands a servant thereof. Now
for the 7. to the Romans, the Apostle setting forth the strift between the
flesh and the Spirit, speaks sometimes in the person of the one (if I may so
speak) and sometimes of the other; sometimes of the new man or regenerat part,
or of himself so far as he is regenerat; sometimes of the old man, which is
not wholly slain, but full of rebellion strives for maisterie. Now I must
demand of him, whether of these two have the pre-eminence, dominion and rule in
the regenerat, the graces of the spirit, or the rebellions of the flesh? The
same Apostle says the spirit, and that part of the man renewed therewith,
which we call the inner man In the 8. Cap. he makes it plain, The law of
the spirit of life in CHRIST has freed me from the law of sin and of
death. What is the law of the Spirit but the power, rule, and dominion of the
Spirit of God in us? And what is the law of sin, but the power of sin, and
bondage, wherewith we were sometimes led headlong by Satan at his pleasure, but
are now freed, that it no more does reign or bear rule in us unto
condemnation. Again, whosoever are ledd by the Spirit of God, are the sons
of God; and in the 7. Cap. 4. and 6. Cap. 16. know you not that to whom you
ex^ibit your selves servants unto obedience, his servants you are to whom you
give your selves obedient? DAVID feeling the great assaults of sin in his
flesh, and his inhabilitie to keep the Law of God, earnestlye prays unto
the Lord Direct my steps in thy word (says he) and let none iniquity
have dominion over me. After the strong man is cast out, CHRIST bears the
rule over us and in us, by his Spirit. So the scripture every where
pronounces us Saints by calling, Kings, and Priests, a people set free; not
that we sin not in thought word and deed howrely and daily, but that sin
has not dominion over us: If then we were in bondage to sin, we are the
servantes of sin and of death, which God forbid. Where Mr. GIFF. therefore
reasons thus; the regeneration is imperfect, therefore the freedom is
imperfect, therefore there is some bondage, yt is blasphemy: For first our
freedom is perfect in CHRIST, else his death is not sufficient. Then though
our sanctification be not perfect, yet is there no bondage, but a rebellion of
sin; which if yt should reign, we were not the servants of CHRIST: And
while it seems for a time to reign, and we obstinatly to cleave unto yt,
we are judged (so far as men can judge) the servants of yt, and so given
over from CHRIST unto Satan, till the grace of the Spirit again to our
judgment again appear to bear rule. As for DAVID in the whole year after
he had committed adulterye and murder, he never pleaded for his sin when
he was reproved, nor did no longer cleave unto yt. So likewise though we
fall and sin, and be ^edd away with sin, yet are we not in bondage
thereunto, until we obstinatly and wilfully give our selves unto yt from
CHRIST, which you find not in the 7. to the Romans but resisting of sin, a
hatred of sin, a will to do good, a repentance and continual recouerye of
himself, and flying unto CHRIST. So that your doctrine is false, to say, the
Apostle stood in some spiritual bondage; and my Argument still firm, that
these Ministers and people which stand in a professed bondage to a false
government, their pray^rs are an abomination unto the Lord, till they repent
and submit themselves unto CHRIST and his laws and ordinances. Which the
Lord give them grace to do, even speedely to depart out of the house of
bondage, and from all subjection of his Antichristian Hierarchy.

CHRIST'S unworthy witness for the truth and freedom of the Gospel. JOHN
GRENVVOOD.

FINIS.

