The sum of christianity gathered out almost of al placis of scripture, by
that noble and famous clerk FRANCIS LAMBERT of Auynyon.

And translatyd, and put in to prynte in English, by TRISTRAM REVEL. The year
of our lord.

1536.

The table of this book.
First there is an epistle of the translatour to ye most virtuous Queen ANNE.

There is also the epistle of the Author in place or stead of a prologe. to the
most noble lord, lord Sebastyan prince of Lausane, in the which is made
answer to those things that Tregaryus writ to the same Lord in his epistle
prefyxed, his hundredth paradoxes.

Also these things following be entreated upon in.385. paradoxes or questyons,
divided into chapiters.

The first Chapter of the blydnes of the worlds paste and has Paradoxes.29.
The second Chapter of the holy Church of god and reprouable synagoge of
Satan of canonyzynge and inuocatyon of Saynctes and has Paradoxes.31. The
third Chapter of the communyon of Saints, of excomunycatyon and bulls of
the son of perdycyon and has Paradoxes.14. The fourth Chapitre of true
good works and the law of grace, and the gospel, and virtues of the
faythefull, and has Paradoxes.20. The fyfthe Chapitre of the prestehode of
the faythefull, and true ministres of the church.i. byshopes and deacons, and
has Paradoxes.38. The syxte Chapitre of punyshme^t and deposi^g false
byshopes, and false apostles, and has Paradoxes.31. The seuenthe Chapitre of
the auctoryty and ministry of byshopes, and in what things they ought to be
subject to princes, and rulers, and of sanctuaryes, and has Paradoxes.27.
The eight Chapitre that bishops may not be princes and lords, and has
Paradoxes.13. The nynthe Chapitre of abrogacyon of first fruits tithes and
offerynges, and what the faithful owe to their bysshoppes.i. ministers of the
word, also of those things that they owe to princes and rulers, and has
Paradoxes.28. The tenthe Chapitre of the table of the lord and execrable
costomes of the kingdom of the son of perdycyon, utterly to be extincte and
put down and of Purgatory, and has Paradoxes.36. The eleuenthe Chapitre of
sects and beggyng, and has Paradoxes.18. The twelfthe Chapitre to whom it
belongythe to judge of doctrine if it be of god or not and of wicked
vniuersyties, and has Paradoxes.15. The thyrtenthe Chapitre of the parts (as
they call it) of penance and all that belongythe there to, and has
Paradoxes.85.
This term Paradoxe is a conclusyon or posiscyon or questyon.::

The epistle of the translator
To the most gracyous Queen ANNE, most dear wife, of our most drade
soueraygne lord, HENRY the eight of England, and of France king, defender
of the faith, and lord of Irelande, and under god, next, chief, and supreme
head of the church of England, your most bonde^ orator Trystram Revel
wysshethe health.
GRace, and peace, from God the father, and the lord Jesus Christ, be with
you most Gracyous Queen / most humbly, and with all reverence gyuynge lauds
/ and praysynges unto almyghtye god for your grace, even after the mind of
saint Paul, Ephe
always in all my prayers for your grace, with gladness, because of the
felyshype which your grace has in the gospel, from the first day until
now, and am surely certyfyed, that he which has begone a good work in
you, will also go forth with it, until the day of Jesus christ, with the
increase and establyshement of his gospel, as yet but young and has many
enemies, to whom the lord send the day of his visytatyon, to hes honor and
glory, and your grace to persevere, with all dylygence as your grace have
begone to promote, further, and set forth, ^oh. 1.
Gods word, upon the self same zele that saint Johan cried in deserte,
make ready the way of the lord / So that every man may be ruled by the last
will, and testamente of our eldest brother, and lord Jesus Christ, which is
suffycyent for all us to live after, to everlasting health, to know God ye
father to be God alone and who^ he has sent Jesus Christ, (...). 17.
without any other foreyne or straung laws, he has also straytly commanded
his lawyers, ^^odi. ^.
byshopes over the congregation or any other, nether to add or dymynyshe one
Jot, to, or from his foresaid last will, isai. ^^.
sayng, I am thy god, the God of Zelotes, one alone suffycyent, thou shalt
have no strange gods i^ my syht, ^ie. 31.
nether turn to the right hand, nor the left. And now hear Israel the
precepts, and judgments, which I teach the, that doing them, thou may
live, and goinge in, may possess the land that the lord God of thy fathers
will give the. Thou shall add nothing to ye word yt I speak to the, Deu. ^
nor take any thing from it, keep the commandments of thy lord god, and
hold the kings high way, the pathe of holy scripture, which is the word,
besides who^ there is none other, furthermore upon the self same charge, he
has ordained, instytute, and made executors for the performaunce of his said
testament, that every man without respect of person, should be equally
received, and yt of sundry wise. First he has instytute, Mark 17. Math 16.
Mark 10. Lu. 2. Hu. 1 3. Regum. ^
Bysshoppes to teach his people therein to lose, to bind, to pronau^ce grace,
and remissyon of sins, given thoroughe his word. Moreover he has put
kings, princes, and rulers, i^ their auctorytes, to punyshe, correct and
expulse from his congregacyon, transgressors of his laws, and strangers, not
seeking to edefye but to kyl, which be called blood suppers, men living after
their own brains, and fantasies, not coming in at the door but another
way, setting forth their own laws and tradycyons, almost deceyuynge the
very elect, as is well known to the faithful, with suppression and treading
under foot, Math. 4.
even to this day, the light of everlasting veryte, the lively word of god. And
for ye cause most christen Queen, that noble and famous clarke FRAVNCYS'
LAMBERT Author of this little treatise, perceiving both the exilynge of the
gospel from christen me^nes hearts, ^oh. 16
and also the ruin, and destructyon of ye faithful, most like a true
champyon has set forth, to the quycke Image the pestylente doctrine, and
acts of the kyngedome of perdycyon, the church of Antychryste, the men of
sin, the Pope, and his sects, in many works with great labors and study,
chefly in this little book, clearly confutynge the synagoge of Satan as a noble
executour of his brothers aforesaid will, and by the same auctoryte has
descrybed and set forth true mynisters of gods most holy word, a book to
be read of all chryste^ people, therein they may learn to walk in their
calling, pryncypally byshopes over the congregation, which said little
treatise by a good christen brother lent to me, as yet both young in years,
and much less in learning, have taken in hand to translate this so precious
a treasure, and offer it to your most noble grace rudely set forth, trusting
that your grace will cause the same, eloquently and ornatly to be translated
by some of your dyscret, wise, and well learned clerks, most humbly besechynge
your grace, in good part to take this my rude enterprise, pryncypally (to
confess the truth) because I am very unmeet to do such a thing and partly
for lake of time, oppressed with pouertye, the which (as the Poet MANTVANE
wrytteth) is enemy to good manners, conseque^tlye my wryttynge is very course
and base, as yet far from the trade of a writer, the which be the causes of
my offering to your grace, so rude a volume, so indygeste a phrase, and to be
brefe, so unseemly set together, wherefore I humbly beseech your grace, to take
these my first fruits (if they may be called fruits) even as Christ our
master has accepted the offering of the pore woman whose will was good,
Mar. 12
Lu. 21.
when she offered all that she hade though it was but little. And the holy ghost
preserve our said soueraygne Lord, and your most dear husband, your grace,
and the lady ELEZABETHE Pryncesse, Daughter, and heir unto you both, and
give to you the light of his mercy, to whom, with god the Father, and the
Son, be honor, and glory for ever more. So be it.

The epistle of the auctour.
To the noble, and most gentle lord: lord SEBASTIAN, of Mount faulcone,
prince of Lausanc. FRANCIS LAMBERT the unprofitable seruancte of Jesus Christ,
grace, and peace, of god the father, and the lord Jesus Christ.
NOt many years passyd, most noble prince, wha^ I should preach the pure, and
wholesome, word of god, at your city of Lausane. I did perceive, by many
arguments, both the sobre gentylnes of your mind, and also the outragyous
wyckednes, of certain flaterers, and deceivers. For at altymes, where as you
were present, at my sermons, you did most purely fauer the word of god, and
when you were constreynyd, with urgent busynes, to be absent (which was ones,
and eftsoon) as you have enformyd me, very many were about sumwhat busyly, to
alyenat, or make you strange, ye as it were to say, enuiously to draw you
from the word of god. like fyrye burning knights, adfyrmyng that I preachyd
heresye. But at the last the mighty verytye, has so conuycte you, that you
have written many things for me, and I gladly confess, that for the love of
you I was gentylly enterteynyd, with the Berne^ses, Ligurynes, Basylyanes, and
Friburgyanes. Farthermore, at my departing from you, you instantly desired me,
very often to write to you, which to do I gladly promised, in time convenient.
wherefore I beseech your hyghnes of pardone, because I have not performyd it to
this day, for it chansyd another by obliuiousnes, or negligence, but very often,
when I was about to do it, I was constreynydly rapte, to other matters. The
last of al I would have made answer, to the hundredth paradoxes, or
questyones, of CONRADVS TREGARIVS the Augustyne frerese^t to you. wherein he is
very busy, not alonly to pull you away from Christ, but also the noble
gentyles of Heluetia. although he do glory, with pretens and zele of the
spirit of Christ, in the spirit of error and blyndnes. Verily he does
teach nothing less then Christ. For he laboryth very sore, to undermine the
vyneyarde of the lord of companies. that is to say, the congregacyon or
church of christen people, even like to a crafty or wyly fox. but this fox,
must be taken, I say this little fox, ye the which is without effycacytie,
or strength of the spirit, that other he may be sauyd, or else confoundyd put
down. according as the spouse commaundyth in the cantykles, saing take to us
these foxes, these little foxes, that undermine the vyneyardes and the little
eyes of the vynes. which words, how they should be vndersta^dyd I have
declared, in my enarracyon in to the cantycles. Farthermore wha^ I was about,
an answer, in to the said paradoxes, or conclusyons, the derely beloved, and
true teachyd brethren of god VVLSGANGVS FABRICIVS Capito, and MARTINE BVCER,
two of the byshopes of Argentyne, preuentyd me. And for that cause I did leave
of my purpose and took on hand, the reiteracyon or setting forth the
comentaryes (which I had begone) in to certain of the prophets, with many
other things. for I know them to furnyshe that matter, more dylygently then
shall need that any man should add any thing to their wrytinges. I would but
alonly monishe you, to beware, and take heed of such wolves, going in shepes
clothyng, that they do not in every place vyolently rapte, slay, and dystroye.
I have also made answer, to the epistle that he did write to you in the
beginning of his book. deferring to write to you matters, of greater grauytye,
unto a time more convenient, as well as if I had made answer to the said
paradoxes, or conclusyones. Nor you shall not merueyle that I said, there be
many byshopes of one city, for verily every city, has so many bishops, as
it has true euangelystes or preachers, for every preacher, of the truth, I
say of the truth, that does not preachelyes, decrees, inuencions, dreams,
laws, and cou^selles, of men, but the most pure and simple word of god, is a
true byshope, although he be not called so of many the church of god, has no
other byshopes, but these. therefore there as is no pure minister of the word
of god, is no bishop, and without doubt, we have been very long and many
years without byshopes, in the most fearful judgment of god, for they that
have be called byshopes, to this day, be nothing less than byshopes, except
they will be called wicked, or purse byshopes, or byshopes of the kingdom of
antichriste. Verily a byshope is called by interpretacyo^ an ouersear or
watcher, and every man is byshope of the thing that he most entendythe. But
there is no man so blind, but he perceuyth to what things these byshopes of
the kingdom of perdycyon entende. Ye and they glory them selves, in lyenge
words saying. He that does a thing, by another / aperethe to do it by him
self. This rule / is execrable / and cursyd before the lord, in those things
that pertain to the office of a bishop whose highest point is ministry of the
alonly word of god, for they may committee to other the ministry of
sacraments, because they be pryncypally sent to the ministry of the word. As
saint Paul writes of him self, in the first epistle to the Corinthianes
the first chapitre, saying Christ sent not me to baptyze but to preach the
gospel more over these buggyshe bysshopes, substitute or have none under the^,
that is a pure euangelyst, but hyre wretches, and most couytouse marchantes of
lukre, that seek nothing less then the glory of god, and health of souls. I
shall brefly entreat upon with your hyghnes, of those things that I copiously
writ upon, to the most noble lord JOHAN Cardinal (as they call it) of
Lotherynge. what the Pope, with his Cardynalles, Archebyshopes, Byshopes,
Abbottes, Chanones, and all other benefised men, shall do, lest they peryshe,
but may be sauyd. For of truth / all their hyghnes is of the dyuell. Let them
beware therefore / that they be not euerlasti^gly confoundyd / and peryshe. For
byshopes be alonly prophets of truth / and there should be so many byshopes,
as the multitude of people requires. Ye and to confess the truth, I can not
call your hyghnes, a byshope except I should flatre, and do against my
conscience, which is to be auoydyd of the faithful, even as the venyme of the
serpent Aspis. I confess you to be a prince, I know not you to be a
bishop, because you preach not the gospel. But it is not in every man, to
preach the gospel, but of the^ to who^ it is given of the lord, for they
must be send to it, of him. And these be the true byshopes, of the church of
god. Therefore dylygently endeavor, your self that tre^e byshopes, may be
encreasyd, within your lordshyp. Bysshopes may not be lords, but alonlye
doctors, or teachers, and servants of the people of god. It is injury to a
prince, to be called byshope, ye and utterly the most grievous mockage, if the
thing spoken, be delygently examynyd, would not be think him self deludyd,
that were called by a name nothing (...) for him? when any man is called
^^sho^e, what other thing is it than to say, behold a preacher of the word of
god, contynually preaching the gospel, having knowledge of holy scripture,
teachi^g the people, with the alonly and pure word of god, attrybutynge to god
his due honor and praise, herberous, or keeping hospitalytie, geuyng example of
him self to other to follow the gospel in living, most dylygent in redynge
and expounding the scriptures, and yet he has none of all these. I will
suffer every man to call you a bishop, which I will not do my self lest I be
iniuryous to you. I well know that you be prince of Lausane, ye and I would
that you should so play the prince, that you would dylygently labor to have
many true byshopes under you. For verily every paryshe ought to have his propre
byshope, the which should be chosen of the people, and co^fyrmed by the
cominaltie of the church of every place, and to do this thing they have no
need of letters, rings, sealles, tokens, and such other of this kind very
much vsyd clean contrary to the word of god. So long they should be
accountyd for byshopes as they preach most purely the gospel of the kingdom
of god. From the which if they swerve one jot, and teach strange doctrine,
they ought to be deposyd, and put out, of them by who^ they were elect and
chosen, that is to say of the comynaltie of the church before named, and other
more apt to be elect. But of this matter I have spoken more at the large in
an other place. Therefore I will return to our purpose of Tregarius. He did
write to your hyghnes supposyng you to be Fabiane, where as you be Sebastiane
as the letters bear wytnes, given to me by your own hands, wherein he goyth
about, to supprese and tread under foot the eternal verity of god, under
the name (as he has written) of Lutherane sect, and under color of zele
toward the church, he rayleth the most lyce^tiously in to the truth, and
that same church, ^ho is he (at the least) that perceives the things of
god, that folowith Luther, or says I am of Luthers sect? Luther is a man,
and therefore of him self a liar, but if Luther, or any other speak the
verity, and truth of god, what is the cause that we do not give place to the
truth, which the holy ghost does make open to us, by Luther? For I pray
you is it not written of such men: you be not they that speak, but the
spirit of your father that spekith in you? it is nothing sauery, nor pleasythe
not at all, that some men do say, and talk of the wisdom of god, which is
found in Paul's epistles. they call it Paul's philophie. I do give place, and
believe the wrytynges of Paul, Petre, Ioha^, Esaie, Hieremie, and other
prophets of god, not for them, but for the spirit of god, which did speak in
them. Luther has not teachyd me, another his wrytynges, those things the
which I have known by the gift of god, in holy scriptures Yet for all that I
confess, me to know Luther, ye and not a little to have profytyd thorugh his
company. I know him to be the apostle, and angel of god, that is to say sent
of him. For it is inpossible that he should be sent, but of him, to have
written those things that he has written, that is, the scriptures of truth,
and even as it is not to be condempnyd that Paul has written because he was
a man, in like case, another Luthers wrytynges are to be co^dempnid because he
is a man. For it is not Luther, but god yt has written and spoken in Luther.
But these Tregarius, to obtain the favor of Antichriste, under the name of
Luther, does openly speak against Christ and his viritie. He does also
under that name resyste the impollutyd scriptures of god, all the prophets,
and his lovers, and callythe them defenders of sects, causing great rumores,
repletynge the world with all unquietness, Philistianes having vain and
folyshe armoure, mockers / and deceyuers / and of this manner does rail
against them with the most opprobrious crimes. Forthermore he does reprove
them of vehemente and wicked zele / and says that they have forgote the
saying of our savior. Learn of me for I am meke and humble in heart and
again. bless them that say evil of you / and pray for them that persecute
you. But now look upon the craftynes of this fox, perauenture he is afraid /
least that he should be put out and exilyd of antychrist / from the
tyra^nycall prouincialshype of his sect / and for that cause / he so fervently
defe^dyth his part / setting at naught the word of the lord. Now if he take
this for a sect / to love and teach the most pure word of god (the which we
doubt not of) we do couit, and half this holy / necessary, eternal, and
invincible sect / and before him and such like / we will be of this sect /
and cleave to it must surely / orels without remedy we should peryshe
perpetually. we be adhere^tes and defe^ders of this eternal / heavenly / and
deuyne sect / and it is necessary / that we be tumultuous or bryngers up of
rumoures for it / against the execrable / cursid / and abhomynable sect of
antichriste. For the word of the lord does burst up carnal pease / and does
raise up the sword very often in him self / according to the sayi^g of the
lord, I did not come to send pease / but a sword. Math.x. and it is written
Luke.2. that Christ is put in to the fall (of the unfaithful) and in to
resurrection (of the faithful) and in to a sign that shall be resysted and
spoken against (of those unfaithful) if we should teach worldly things /
being carnal and hypocrytes / they would not resyst and rise against us as
they do, but because we preach things contrary to the world, the world
hatyth us / and callyth us tumultuous / and sedecyous fellows. Ye and before it
Christ him self was a sower of evil seeds / a sclaunderer with words / a
sedycyous fellow / an herityke, a deceiuer, a subuerter of the people / and an
evil doer. Forthermore all that live mekely in Christ Jesus / and couyt so to
do / suffer persecucyon of it. 2. Timoth. 3. God does command us also / of
Tregarius / and such other men of that sect / which no doubt pertayne to
the abhomynable court of that purple whore of Babylon / mother of all
fornicatyon / in the eyghtenthe Chapitre of the reuelacions of saint. Ioha^
saying. Go from her my people / and be not parttakers of her sins / and
receive not of her plages / for her dampnable sins have come to heaven / and
the lord has remembryd her iniquities / reward her even as she rewardyd you
/ and give her double according to her works. and power in double in the same
cup / which she filled unto you and as much as she glorified in her self /
and lived wantonly / so much power you in for her of punyshement / and sorrow.
This wicked whore i^ time past has filled to us her abhominacio^s / in the
golden cup / of the word of god. For she has confyrmyd her tyrannyes / by
placys of scripture / falsely vndersta^dyd / and under the most holy name of
Christ / she has outragyd / above that at man can speak / even against
Christ him self. Verily god will that we give doble to her in that cup.i.
better things then that dru^ke whore that is to say / that we do not fill to
other now, after the trut^e receyuyd / the abominable / and ^ynki^g dunge of
the wisdom of the flesh / and inuencyons of men. But much more pr^cyous
things / the which do a^^^e with the golden cup of the w^^^e of god that is
to say, the spirit and truth of the lettre, by who^ is openly known that
these iugelers be antichrists, scismatykes, heretykes, children of perdicion,
and men of syn. To whose precepts because we do obey / and give place, they
name us to be sclanderers, repleting all the world full of rumors and horyble
crimes. But and I might move this questyon to them in what thing do we err? I
pray you do not they with an indurat heart resyst / and speak against the
truth. Ye and that same truth it self does name his enemies, in every place
/ wolves / Foxes Bears / Lyones / Dogs / Leoperdes / wild beasts / false
prophettes / pseudo apostles, roten seeds, unfaithful, hypocrites, folishe,
cowerdes, not hearing the voice of their lord god, a baren house, the church
malignant the synagoge of Satan, the generacio^ of the lords furye,
apostaticall gentyles, having the front of the great whore, the fruit and
generatyon of Vipers, the counsel of the wicked, Dragones, the kind of the
serpente Aspis deaf and stopyng their ears, the enemies of the lord, a
wicked covent the tabernacles of sins, the sede of Chaname, Egypt, and
Sodom evil trees and unfruitful, mokers, that say to men saying will not you
to see / speak pleasant things to our ears take heed of our errors, let
holy Israel cease from our sight, the black tails of smokye bronddes,
ydolles, blind studientes, the generacyon of Cain wicked and adulterous,
deceyuable workmen, fellows of theuys, effemynate, deserte children, false
doctoures whose god is their belie, and glory in their confusyon, the tasters
of earthly things, thieves of innocents, and wydoes, and does name the^ that
resyste, and speak against the doctrine of mekenes, with such names of this
kind which of us, could ever attain to such a vehemence of speaking. that
in confoundyng the reprouable, we might obtain one part of the pythye
rebukyng that is found against them in holy scripture. And peradventure
Tregarius will reprehende the holy ghost, and say that he does fyl the world
full of hatred and malice / because that such names / should be put in holy
scripture, or at the least say that these be contrary to Christ, when he
says. Learn of me.etc. And again say well by them that say evil by
you.etc. the which (as we have said) he did aledge against us. But what is
the cause, that he did not take heed, also of the word that folowythe, you? of
men that say evil by us we must speak well, but not of them that speak
evil, by the lord Jesus Christ, and his verytye. No nor yet we may not make
lies, to say well by any man. For (and a man might be bold with you) is this
well said, to say that Magister noster the noble doctor Tregarius, a good
seruande of Christ, and does well in suppressynge the church and word of
god, for the synagoge of Antychriste and lies of men. Or is it lawful for me
to write, the reverend father in god, Prouyncial of the Augustyne freers, by
the hyer Germanye, is a good orator, and can write very well, for the
counselles of the Pope, his Cardynalles, and Byshopes, and with a noble proof
openly declarith, that the Synagoge of the Pope, is the true church of god? am
not I rather bound to speak plainly after the word of god, and say. this
fox, this wolf, this falsse prophet is about to turn the people, from the
sermones of truth, to the lies of antychrist, and couytith to bring the prince
of Lausane, and the noble gentyles of Heluetia, from god and his Christ, and
would that they should always persevere, and continewe in darkness of errors in
the which we have be drownyd so long season, and has not one iota of
scripture to confyrme those things that he adfyrmythe in his lyeng, whereof he
must needs fall. For he can never withsta^de the mighty word of the Lord, the
which he so sore reclamyth against, of whom he shall be confoundyd, trode^
down, and consumyd. Ye and if there were, innumerable thousands of the
prophettes of Baalle, with this Tregarius, they shall be dystroyed, and fall from
the side of the^ that love, and teach the pure word. One Helias, one prophet
of the lord, shall overcome, and dystroye the^ all although they would resyste
with plain battle, and cry and howl in their de^nes. but in case that he
think him self not worthy this name, as to be called a fox, or a wolf let
him do none of these aforesaid. for we be co^straynyd to it by the word of
god. for all that be of this sect, are to be publyshed, to the people of god /
that they may beware of them lest they be deceyuyd. This blind doctoure,
callythe us, Phylystianes wearyng vain and folyshe armoure. and of this manner
this blasphemer railith and wonderythe, I would to god, that he were not a
blasphemar against the spirit of god, and would not speak wittingly against
his conscience, with what armoure do we resyste these enemies of Christ and
his word? Is it not the eternal scriptures of god? and this iugeler callythe
them vain and folyshe. But what is the cause that he was not present at this
last conflycte or disputation, at Argentine, where he might have be sure to
have dysputyd with the Byshopes of the same City we will gladly give our selves
to death if we be overcome, and conuicte, where as if he were co^uicte he should
sustein no danger at al. but he would not that the people should know his
lies, the which had be disclosed in deed, if he had dysputyd, ye or to speak
near the mark if he had be present at the said conflicte or dysputacyon. the
simple people, have the judgment of the spirit above al such proud bugges
the which we call Magistrinostri, because they love the word of god, the
which the other be about to suppress and tread down. For is it not written?
Thou have made me wise, over mine enemies through thy co^mau^dmentes, for it is
to me everlasting. I do perceive, above all that teach me, because thy
testymonies be my study. I understand above old men, because I have
searchyd, thy commaundmentes. the hundrethe and.xviij. Psalm. Forthermore from
these sage and wise men, god does hyde his mysteries, the which he does
vouchesafe to reuele and open to the young little ones. they know and perceive
this lyterature, and attrybute very much to it, therefore they do not enter in
to the lords power, verily these other, be admytted into the said powers and
fearful judgment of god. For verily there is none although he be lernyd, that
is admytted to the inteligence of the scriptures of god, but even he that does
attrybute or give nothing at all, to the science or wit of man toward the
understanding of the^ but al only to the spirit of truth. These me^ will not
that the little flock of Christ, should judge of his voice, and it perteyneth
most chefely to the^. For be not they the sheep of Christ^, and he their
shepeherde? but there is one voice alone of this shepherde or pastor, which
does hyely please his sheep without any other. And they know and hear his
said voice. Johan.x. It is also said to them, prove you the spirits, if they
be of god or not. which they do prove, and know by the scriptures of god, the
which is ye only and most sure testimony to prove, if the voices of the^ ye
teach be of god or not. also Psalm. 18 and.118. and Esa. 8. they he called
testimonies or witness. let these Tregarius, with all his sect, outrage as much as
they will and deny the word of the lord, that is to say, that the company
of the faithful to be apt judges of the word for without doubt he shall shortly
slide down and fale, because he goyth about it with stafe made of read, of
the shadow of Aegypte, of the dreams of men. If god be with us who is
agai^ste us? Let not this hartles knight over boldly promise to him self the
vyctorie. I say yet again he shall fale, and be confoundyd. we be not about
this through our selves, but through the stone, that is, our faith by Christ,
couyteth to subuerte this lyeng and wyckednes. He has his hedde, antichrist to
whom he does attrybute and give more then to Christ, and to whom he does
cleave with all his heart, the verity and truth of Christ setaparte.
wherefore we of necessity must needs hate him according to the saying of
Dauyd Psalm. 118. I have hatyd the wicked, and Psalm. 138. Did not I hate
lord them that hatyd the, and was mouyd over thy enemies? I did hate them with
a parfecte hatred, and they were made enemies to me. wherefore now in the mean
season let him count us for mockers, because we be apostata from Antychryst,
and curse him lest yt we should be apostata from christ, and let him
opprobryoully speak against us what he will, for we glory for them al before
the lord, of who^ his destructyon is at hand, because that baren tree is not
abashed, to count ye sayers of truth, for mockers, for no other thing but
because they speak the truth / as who say / the truth it self were a
mockage. This wyked man will not be overcome of the truth, of the which we
glory in the lord to be conuycte, for we our selves in times paste did walk
i^ the spirit of error, but now the veryte of god has overcome us, by the
which god has delyueryd us, ye and daily does deliver us, from the most
grievous darckenes of ignorance and erroures, whom we do instantly pray, yt he
will make perfyte the things which he has begone in us, we will not be
conuycte of the decrees of men, by whom he is co^uycte, and most shamfully
straungelyd, as I very well know, so that in the things of god, he may be
confutyd, of innumerable children, and husband men, for it is to wit, that the
most vyctorous word of god, which they love, is able to preueyle against a
hundredth thousand such as Lregaryus is, if our armor be not inuyctoryous (as
he denyethe them to be) let him condescende or come forth, and prove how
inuyctoryous they be, but he does war i^ horses, and charyotes, that is to
say with the sotletyes of men, verelye we war in ye name, and word of our
lord god in the which we despise, him and all that war against us, he
does also say that the Church, is not so destytute, namely in this golden
time, that she should not have her warryours, truly these might be a sainge of
blind Byarde oh how nobly does he know what the church is, and who be her
warryours, he supposethe the church to be that which countethe the wise men of
the world to be her sodyours, as who should say it were not written. I will
destroy the wisdom of yt wise and will cast away the understanding of the
prudent, where is ye wise, where is the scrybe, where is the searcher of this
world, has not god made the wisdom of this world folyshenes. 1. Corinthy.
1. these be not the soudyours of the church of god, but the simple, pure,
meke, that with all their hearts cleave to the word of god, most highest, of
such, that be of this kind, the frunte of the great war of our church
which is peasyble is ordyned the which is called by the Hebrewe term
Schulamitis, and not Sunamitis as be supposethe, for the Hebrewe books have it
written of this manner in the syxt Chapter of the Cantikles Reuertere,
Reuertere Schulamis. ye which words in english be, return, return, or turn
again my peasyble church, and in the.7. chapter. what shall ye find in my
peasyble church, but companyes of warryours, spoken by this term, Schulamis,
let him have his church, the which he callethe Sunamis, that is to say the
synagoge of Antychryste, miserable, captyuate, stony, and indurate, and we well
have ^ures the which we call Schulamis, that is to say, the church of god,
the spouse of true Scholomon which is by interprytacyon of Christ yt pesable
king all whose souayours, strong, ye most strongest, be always gyrded with
the most persynge sword of the word of god, for nyghtlye dreades Lantik. 3.
and these souayours be made most ware and wise to the battelles into the
coniuringe of Antychryst, whom god him self has made truly wise Ioh. 6. of
whom the reprouable Aegipte Sodom, and Babylon, be not able to suffer the
least scyrmyge, or lettynge lose, nor never could. This Trygaryus, does
say, that we threaten great things, but to whom, or do we threte^ our
selves, do not we rather open, and declare the thretenynges of the dreadful
power of god, the which we be certyfyed of, shall fall most grievous into the
kyngedome of the son of perdycyon. he does also say that in bringing up
rumoures, and sclanders, we so perpetually be of one mind, that no man doutethe
of it, but we have al one spirit, I make answer, that when we call them
wolves, beasts, antychristes we do not scla^der the^, but show forth what the
spirit does judge of the^, by the testymonye of scryptures but it is not
alonly, in this one thing; that we be al of one mind, for we do dyssente
almost in nothing, that ye same spirit of god does teach us in the said word
he did prophesy as Cayphas did, ye even against his will, not dylygently
markyng yt we hade al one spirit although he would yt his sainge shuldbe
otherwise understood. But nether be nor yet al his sinagoge, i^ any thing be
of one mind, saving in this that they have all coniured against god, Christ,
and his verite, for what do we se in them perpetual strife, of Thomystes,
Scotystes, Occanistes, of Nomynalles, Realles, Summeles, and such other of
this kind, stryuynge even contrary one to an other, whereby is well known
that they have nothing comen with the doctrine of christ, ye which is the
doctrine of mekenes, and unity, and they be also strange from his spirit, he
does furthermore say that we with a vain gloss of words, do wrast and wrythe
the holy scryptures into our own se^ce, where as we do subdewe our sense by all
means into the service of the scripture of god, and glory to be over come^ of
the truth as any man may openly perceive, yt shall look upon our comme^taryes,
and also we do affirm nothing, that is not proved by the open testymonye of
the scripture, what is the cause therefore yt he does count our exposycyons
for vain, but that he is about with his craftines to mock and have in
derysion all the scryptures of god, woe be to the thou blind iogeler, for thy
judgment is at hand, because you art not affrayed to count the testymonyes of
god most highest, for vain and folyshnes, peraue^ture thou doeste think the
spirit of god to be compared to thy doble craftynes, ye warsse then a fox,
but yt shall shortly be destroyed with the power of the same spirit, we will
not cleave to the counsel or phantyse of any man except it have the testymonye
of the scryptures of god, in what thing do we err the^, or what have we
reprouyd at any time, that does agree with the scryptures of god, or what other
things should we receive, we do receive the wryttinges of men, that agree with
the said scryptures, not for the men, but for ye truth sake, the word of truth
ought to judge, who should have written ryghtfully / if they deny, yt we have
the truth, let them improve our probatyons, by ye word of god. Tregaryus will
do it, he makethe argument Pro and Contra, Primo, secundo, et tertio. etc. we
will hear this sainge, ye lord speaks it, to whose least jot of speaking
ryghtly taken, we give place, but we openly accurse the sotletyes of Tregaryus
and his sect, not because we be ignorant i^ the^, for we have labored our
selves in such sophestycal knottes, but because it is wyked, and against the
word of god, to entreat apo^ the scryptures of faith, with such contencyous
arguments, nor we do not deny (as he does impute to us) that the word of
god may not be expounded, but we would not that this exposycyon, shuldbe of the
proper sense of any man, although he be learned, and holy, but of the sense of
Christ, which is than so, when we expound scryptures. by scryptures, for as I
have spoken in many books, it is impossyble, yt any man should ryghtuously
expound scryptures of hes own sense or brain And yet besides these Tregaryus
has added to, a blasphemye against the lord, that he supposythe there to be
many gods, that can be no manner ways err, the which does perteyne alonly
to god him self the highest, and greatest, besides whom there is no mo gods,
for who, but he is immutable, so that he can not err, for all saints have
sin.i. concupiscence, as long as they live and say as is written, in the
first canonycall epistle of Johan the first Chapitre, if we should say yt we
have no syn in us, we deceive our selves and truth is not in us, but for all
that they do not work iniquite or wekydnes for syn does not reygne in the^,
as is plainly declared To. 5. and. 6. he is afraid also lest that he be
iniuryous to the elect, and in the meanese so^ blasphemies the lord, god
has no need of our lies, no nor yet hes saints verily when god has mercy of
ye sinners, or the unjust, and makes of the^ saints their vnrytousnes does
commend, and laud ye rytousnes of god To. 3. for verily from thensforthe his
justice apperythe more glorious, and he is manyfestly declared to be just, and
true, in hes sermones when he is cruel over the wekyd and the rebellyon not
obseruyng his promyses is judged, he does feign him self to write for the
church of god, and yet does nothing else: but aledge the decrees of men / for
that thing that this crafty false prophet does of the councelles, he does it
so that he is about to subvert all the pryncyples of faith, I do confess, yt he
speaks many things true, chefly in the beginning, but at the last he
doublethe his voice of the church, and her councelles, whereby he may more
lightly and surely power out his poyso^, but as I said in the beginning he is
answered enoughe at al to his questyons of them before named, It does greaue me
sore / most noble prince, to make answer to the wekydnes of these deceyuer, I
would but alonly give you warning, that you with all dilygence should flee, and
avoid, the poison of him, and such other, for you must do so of necessyte, if
you will play ye true prince / or else it is impossible that you should be sauyd
/ now perceive / I do this with a great hope / remembryng our old amytye /
the which in times passed / you did vouchsafe upon me / and of ye noble mind
of your good lordshyppe / I will not go about to oynte your head with oil of a
sinner / the burden is great that oppressythe you, take heed therefore lest you
peryshe under it / take heed also, that you have under you / true christen
people / and yt christ may regyne in them / for then you shall cheflye play
the true prince / when you chefly give delygence / that Christ may be a prince
in your subjects / take heed also yt the most pure word of god may be
preached to you, banyshe from your lands / al false prophets / wolves, and
such manner of marchande me^ / and I would that you should perfytlye know /
that if your people peryshe your soul shall be for theyres, ye if it be through
your cause, and if there peryshe but one / pryncypally beware of al hoded men /
for all they / except a few / have coniured against god / and hes christ / but
above al other take heed of these, for they are to be flede of you that glory
them selves wykedly / with the title of obseruantes / execrable to all
Chrystyanes / for their ypocrysye, has led very many / ye almost innumerable
to death / I pray god ye highest and best / that they may shortly be expulsyd /
the courts of al princes / and by little, and little, it is hyely necessary yt
you extyncte / and put down / the tyrannes of the kingdom of Antychryst.i.
these dysceytfulnes of perdons ydolatry of saints that sleep / the offycyalles
courts / cursyd costomes / by no means to be permytted of Chrystyanes, the
outragiousnes of sects, with all such other, and then conceive in your mind,
that you will have holy scryptures in your hands, and stody upon the^ night,
and day, the holy ghost will teach, and inform you / by what means all things
shall be well orderyd within your kingdom, for and if you deny the word of god to
the people, they ought not to obey you, for they be the sheep of Christ they
will be fed with ye meat of his holy word, therefore all the people of the
faithful, may say to their princes / and rulers, ye they be bound to make
co^gregatyons for it, and say / we will hear the word of our lord god, we
will not hear the decrees and laws of the pope / we will not ye ^ecreralles of
these glosing sophysters, the which if princes / or rulers will deny them when
they wylbe taken for faithful, ye said people may depryue them their kingdoms
/ and lordshypes / the people be subject / in all things, to princes, and
rulers / saving those things / that be against the word of god / or that
they should not have the word of god preached / let your hyghnes give place to
the truth / and god shall increase you in althynges / and establyshe your
kingdom. I was aduertysed of late, that because a certain minyster (as we call
it) a pressed, despysynge yt decre of antychryst, prefarryng the precepte of god
is married to a wife / for the which, he is taken prisoner of a certain tyrante
through your consent, and they do say that he does persecute him to death /
take heed, that you consent not to any man, for your soul shuldbe for his, he
has done a thing necessary, which god has commanded to all that can not
absteyne, as I have copyouslye opened, in my book of matrymony and euede^tly
proved it. To ye most chryste^ King of France, the which I did put forth
because of my own marriage for I am married, although the synagoge of the son of
perdicyon was mad at it, for we must rather obey god then man, god has
commanded matrimony to every man, that can not abstain, ye pope prohibyteth,
and makes ypocrytes, to whom should we give place, not to god, the lord did
make no distynctyon betwyxte the layealtye, and the clargye the commandment
is general perteyning to every man, of every state ye and if your highness will
believe the truth, take a wife, and by your exmaple you shall destroy this
cursed decre of antychryste, for when he did command to the Clargy, chastyte
of living contrary to the word of god, he did multyply al manner of lecherye,
and to speak the truth this reprouable order is spronge of no other thing but
of dysceytfull spirits, and doctrine of deuylles, as you may plainly perceive
ye first of Tim, 4. the same judgment is of the prohybyting of meattes, i^ the
same place very copyously I hade no space nor time to wryt many things to you
therefore I have brefly made answer to that wyked Tregaryus wherein I have put
much good council, because this deceyuer goes about falsely to instruct you,
of ye authoryte of the cou^celles of the church of the which matter we hade
comunycatyon very often in your palace, I shall also add to.385. Paradoxes or
co^clusyons / concludynge another thing then Tregaryus has teached, I do
also make ready my self, to answer to them al, where so ever it shall be, either
in Germanye or in France, or where so ever they will, so yt they will hear me,
and not go about to put me to death un hard, I will dyspute the matter openly
if the counsel be holde^ in France and will no other judges, but the most pure
word of god, and all that judge syncerely after it, because it is no otherwise
lawefull, in case they overcome me with the word of god, and prove that I
dyssent from the truth, in those things that I shall affirm by the same
word, let them order me as they think it best, and if they be conuycte, I
will not that they should be in danger of the least hear of their head, but
alonly let glory be given to the truth, wherefore I beseech your Lordeshyppe
to accept this treatise of Paradoxes, or conclusyons, compendyouslye
concludynge almost all what so ever does perteyne to Chrystyanytye / and do
not dysdayne my dewetye toward your hyghenes / and perauenture God, the
greatteste / and most hye, will grant that I may shortly put forth under
your name some thing more exelent, peace and grace, of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and joy of the holy ghost be with your noble lordship and with all your
people. So be it.

Christ on the cross

The first Chapitre. The cause of the great blyndnes of the world, which
has continued so long time, by what means the verytye of scriptures of god
has be hid and suppressyd. Capi. i. The Paradoxes.
OF Christ and his apostles,

They did preach the

For it is impossible, that any man for the spirit sercheth althynges, ye the
botome of gods secrets.







in one jot, it is not of the holy ghost, but comes of the lyeng and
folyshe sense of men, for every man of him self is a liar. Psalmus. 115.

Hat long after the apostles days

By what means it came to pass, that they were deprived the equal judgment
of god, and true intellygence of scriptures, and blyndyd every day more then
other, so that by the multitude of sophymes and carnal inuencyons the light of
everlasting verytye and truethe was utterly hid.

whereof the most pure textes of scripture were forgotten, and inuentoures,
feynours, and dreamars were receyuyd, as chydyng / Sophesters / Scotystes /
Thomystes / Occanystes Summystes / and such other.

After that man's wisdom and the exposycyon of scriptures of god, which is
inpossyble to it, for it peruertyth the germane and true sense of it, and we
fall in to the most rude and ieoperdouse confusyon of blyndenes ygnorance and
erroures that almost there shuldbe none that walkyth not in lyenge.::::



but that he might open and show the testymonye, of Christ Jesus, and many
things of this matter in the same place.::::

They that believe by eloquence, so

In all the ieoperdouse time of error

The lyeng and reprouable sense, word. was inuentyd the supercylyous, and
proud state, of the pope, his cardynalles, and bysshopes, and what soever
does perteyne to the apostatate kingdom, as be the monastycall sects,
indulgences of years and days from pena and culpa. etc^. decrees, and rules of
men, vsurpyng of rythes, first fruits, and oblacyons, inquisitours.i.
protectoures of this heryticall iniquity, promocyons of false deuynes, scoles
of decrees, and such other of this kind execreable feynynges of the dyuell, by
the which unto the time appointed, that is, unto the time that the iniquities
of this kingdom of the son of perdicyon was endyd, the same kingdom was
establysshed,

and feynynges of his heart, and not their true and germane sense, not the
mark of the everlasting spirit, and did glory with his inuencyons, so that
there was none that might be acountyd any thing worth at all in mynistery of
the word, but such a ru^ler, of whom might be said. Behold here a goodly
preacher a noble pla^e, with his new inue^cions, in preachi^g and writing he
is copyous, and moves merry conceits in every place, that is as much to say,
as derysyo^ and mockage of the holy ministry of the gospel, and to be brefe,
the bysshopes, apostles, and prophets, of god, were not serchyd for. But
Antychristes and their synagoges which with their inue^cyons with one brethe,
can provoke men both to laughe and weep, vomyte a hundredth allegaciones,
pratyng and preaching to the people, decrees and laws of men, customs and
deades of many years, examples and dreams, of old wives, monstrous lies of
the kyngedome of Antychriste, ypocrytes, deceyuers, liars, not wyllyng to orden
the justice of god, but the justice of the flesh, and of their sects and of
antychrystes not sekyng the glory of god, but their own glory (they did all
strive for the pope, and the minorites for their Francys, Bonauenture, Scote,
and Occam. etc against Dominike, Thomas, and Capriolus.etc^. and so of other)
slobelyes, deuouri^g up wydoes, and i^noce^tes howses, ye all the substance of
the world.



lovers must needs sufre persecucyon for it is impossible that the word of
the cross should be without a cross, and that it should not be spoken against
for Christ and those that long to him, be put in sign of co^tradictyon. Luc.
2. because therefore that the doctrine, that has continued so long, the
decrees of Antechriste, the pride, and all the apostasy of his kyngedome, has
be observed so long time in an execrable pease so that freely this man of sin
with the tyrannes of his kyngedome, what so ever they would, scarsly any man
withstanding, did ordain change and dystroy, contrary to the plain textes
of scripture, by what means it is well known, this peryllouse blyndenes to
have reygnyd by such contynuance.::

The.iiij. and most euydent sign monstrouse places, lyeng bulls, steli^g of
tithes first fruits and offerynges, usurping of kingdoms and lordshyppes,
sacryfyce of masses, and all other atteynyng to the kingdom of Antechriste,
clean contrary to the immaculat word of god.::



And for that cause, the lord has

Secondly, he has showed, that

Thyrdly god has made manifest himself above all that is called god or
worshypped (suppressing the laws and true worship of god) so that he does
sit in the temple of god as god, and is taken of the faythefull, which be
the quycke temples of god, for the vycker, of the hye god.



deceyuable inue^cions of men abiecte. be dylygently received, written, and
preachyd. The second is, that al sincere preachers although they be personally
separate, nor one of them hearyth not another or read his wrytinges yet do they
for the most part agree, but in case they dyssent for a time, in any thing
then the scriptures of god, delygently serchyd, they be appesyd and contentyd.
The third is, although many do abuse the lybertye of the gospel, yet as many
as do receive this doctrine, gently, and mekely, be meke, merciful,
faythefull, reioysyng in spirit, pacyent, very gentle, full of charytie,
procuri^g the glory of god with out any superstycyousnes, or hypocrysye,
copyouse in fruits of true good works. The fourth is, that this doctrine, is
never resysted, nor spoken against, but of the children of perdycyon, carnal
men, antechristes, and men of sin, even as Symeon did prophisy of Christ, in
the.2. chapitre of Luke, sayng, in that sign that shall be resisted and spoken
against. etc. yet for all that they do not specially name innocents, and true
preachers it can never be but they shall be resysted and spoken against, for it
is written, if they have persecuted me, they shall persecute you. John^ in
ye.15. cha. and again: all that will mekely live in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecucyo^.2. Tymo. 3.



err (yet do they all say as is written the.118. Psalm. I have erryd as a
sheep that has peryshed) but for all that they were never brought into
error, for they do never consent to it, lest they peryshe in it, they do
always so err that they say. Lord my heart is ready, my heart is ready, verily
they be always ready if they were teachyd, to forsake all erroures.

who soever couyteth, to be parttaker

And although this was chefely begone, and false brethren as you may
perceive. 2. Thessa. 2 and.1. Iohanis. 4.

Of the holy church of god, and reprouable synagoge of Satan of canonysynge,
and inuocacyon of saints.
The second Chapitre.
The second Chapitre.
THe church of God is

Ecclesia is a greek word called in laten, Congregatio in english a
congregation company or church.

They be saints, that be translatid alone, holy / good / just / mighty /
everlasting / not having another god like to the in thy majesty.







of faith. and Roma. 5. we being justified of faith let us have peace. and
again. To. 3. and Galt. 2. every man shall not be justified of works but of
faith.

All true faithful, be saints / and

The church of god is invisible and

For when the word of the lord, whom it brings forth fruit, but we can not
specially show one of them.







is our advocate, and a mercyfulnes for our sins. 1. Iohannis. 1.

The holy mother of god, and all

The pope and other with him, that

To adfyrme that the pope, or any

Alonly the elect, whom god has

For any man to be of the church of god kind condycyon, age, nacyon color
of clothyng or deynteousnes or any other outward thing nothing profyteth. As
is plain. Galath. 3. Coloss. 3. but sincere faithful, do admyt no outward
thing that does not agree in all thing with the word of god.





Therefore of faith / and infidelyte /

who so ever lives not and works

Of this kind / is the hole church

All that be of the synagoge / of the

Therefore because / the kyngedome of his world / verily all other / if they be
noble men or marcha^tes, artificers / or husbandemen / so that there be sincere
faith / in which they live / and work / and dysse^t from the kingdom of the
pope / be ecclesiastycall / and of the church of god / to who^ these
scismatikes have done the most poysened injury and wrong because they have
called them seculer and carnal or temporal / and they have co^maundyd with a
hateful pride them selves to be called ecclesiastical and spiritual.





to live under any prince / so that Christ and his word be freely sufferid, as
it was lawful for the Isralites to live under Nabugodonosor, Cyro, Daryo,
Assuero, ye Romans, ye Asserye^s.etc^.

From this forsayde synagoge there

He is the very great and true antechriste,

Even as it was necessary to the

Of the comunyon of saints of excomunicacion and bulls of the son of
perdycyon. Capi. 3.
The third Chapitre.










forgyuen and coueryd, and are not ymputyd. Psalm. 31. so that if one syn be
retained, yet does other remain hatred, and cursydnes.::

Bulls, Iubylyes, and all pardons,

who so ever, does trust to these

Alonly god receives the elect of

wherefore no man living, neither or lawefully denounce him for such one,
except first it be perfeytly known, by testymonye of scripture, that he be
depryuyd it of the lord.







agree with the word of god, or because he is ruled by the word, be
excomunicate, cursyd or enterdyted, of the pope or his, it is turned to him
i^to the most precyouse and amyable blessing, for when they curse god
blessythe. Psalm. 108. and to those that love god all things be wroght in
goodness. To. 8.

Of true goodworkes and the law, of grace, and the gospel, and virtues of the
faithful. Capi. 4.
ALl though we be iustyfied alonly by faith yet

Faith is never with

True good works be, whatsoever

what things that be not prohibit

what so ever is not of faith is wicked,









and that hyely, that we may be sure if those things that be in our hertes be
of god or no, for by what reason (as I have said) should we be more sure, the^
of the scriptures of god, which be his testymonyes.:

And although we had need, of the

wherefore it is heresye to affirm

Therefore the testymonyes of god





Habitus, but the favor and benevolence of god, having us free when we believe
him and he has his grace that is kind to him.::::



also of this is spoken. Eisaie. 53. in his science, he being just shall
justify my servants very many.

Because therefore that faythefull,

Read what god does command,

Of the presthode of the faythefull, and true mynysters of the church that is
byshopes, and deaco^s. The fyfte Chapitre.
The fyfte Chapter.








Presbitri, but Saserdotes, which we call prestes for Presbiter is a greek
word, and sygnifythe a senyour or elder, and is proper to the hye mynysters of
the church, as bishops, or preachers of the word of god, Sacerdos, which
we call a pressed is who so ever is sacrated to god by faith.

Every true senyour.i. every true

The pope with all his bishops,

Presthode of the kingdom of the

Prestes of that kingdom can not for ye time they admyt many things for the
infyrmytye of other.



Ecclesia. i. the church is a congregacyon therefore he that rulythe hit with
the word, is called a preacher / fyftely a seniour or elder.i. Tymo. 5.
senyours that govern well be worthy double honor / and also / against the
senyour, syxthely a byshope that is an ouerseer.i. Tymoth. 3. a byshope must be
fautles / and to Tytum. 1. a byshope must be without blame / and Act. 10. ye
holy ghost has maid you byshopes seuenthely an apostle / for apostle is a
messenger and sent / and comes of ye greek word (...) that sygnyfyth to
send that is necessary for the mynysters of gods word / to be his
aposteles that is to be sent of him Romans 10. how should they preach except
they be sent / but some be great apostles and some less 2. cor. 11. Also
that you may know ye office of a bishope and apostle to be both one / when
Peter Acts. 1. said that some man must be desired into this mynysterye and
office of an apostle / from which Judas was exyled, he did aledge this place of
Dauyd and his byshoppryke another shall possess.

You may gather therefore / because join this term false to every one of them.





in the cetye / they brought to pass / by treason / that he should go forth of
the cetye and he so banyshed they took hi^ prisoner by and by before the.9.
monthe whom Anthony abbot with a false procter / and many false pharysyes were
about to bring him to that pass / yt he should deny Christ and his veryte.
But the holy champyon of god perseuered immouable / and was never over come /
the lord confyrminge his breast with his spirit / then they moved i^ their
reprouable minds / ye last of all that is the.12. day of Ianuarye Anno.1525.
at vuy a town of lotheringe the same Johan reioysynge and being glade in the
lord / not warned before of it / but led to execucyo^ / when that he would not
recante into the favor of antychryste they made him a glorious merter of
Christ / with most cruel torments of fire, and who^ they did covet to extyncte
/ they crouned with a incomperable dyedeme of glory / even against their
wylles so that if it were lawefull to call upon saints he were to be named no
less then Peter or Paul and other aposteles / but there is one advocate and
our mediator the lord Jesus Christ. I have brought this paradox that we may
gloryfye this saint Johan in the lord and the lord in hi^ / and also that his
burners and bochers / may se their fautes / and most grievous crime / and may
amend lest they perish / ye lord Jesus Christ make them of Saules / Paul's /
that is of the enemies of Christ and his truth / his friends, and of
persecuters defenders and his preachers.





of the rule of the Mynorytes. Capitulo. 15.

It is necessary for bishops to be

It is the most grievous crime / and

Of the co^gregacyon of the faithful

The counsel of every place ought

And if there chance any to be elect unprofitable, vnlernyd, or strange from
the word, or that does offend the co^gregacyon of god by horemongynge or any
other crime, or not wylto admytte holy matrymonye, or having a unchaste wife,
or children dysse^tynge from mekenes. etc^. the electyon must be revoked of
them, and let the electyon turn to the congregacyon that they may call a
bishop to them mighty in works of mekenes, and the word.

of calling.:::

All canones of the world can not

Kings and princes and other

If one, or two, or mo houses of the

Those should alonely be chosen in word and ma^ners well to order the church
of god, and their wives must be chaste honest, sober, and faithful in all
things.







or uncleanliness, and that they might more safly be conuersante with other.

Also by an other reason that they

They that have chosen byshopes,

A just cause of deposycyon of the

Deacons of the church, be those.7. deacons elect and instytute of the
apostles at jerusalem, of whom Stephen the Marter was one.::::

Men of good wytnes, faithful, and married must be chosen deacons.1. Tymothe.
3. which if they be pore let them be sustained with the comen alms by the
decree of the church.



Of punishment and putting out false bishops and false apostles from the
congregation of the faytheful. Capit. 6.


may not be compared Pro. 3. nor precious stone may not be assymulat to it,
and all tresure is counted but as cley in the sight of it. Sapien. 1.

Profane doctrine, and strange

Such manner of wyked sermones and

If he ought to be taken from the

An heretyke after the third monyshyon, and not bringing the pure word of
god, he is not to be received into your house, nor you ought not to salute him
for he that salutyth him consentys to his evil deades. 2. Ioha^. canonycal.







of the lord, those verily are chefely to be taken away that dystroye souls
of whom false preaching is chief.

All preaching of the kingdom of

Therefore this most pryncypally

Let them expulse false bysshopes.i. that spring daily.







of antichryst, should peryshe, I do rather counsel and would always that they
should be banyshed then slain / for they may amend.

In case you obiecte those that worship

Forthermore there is one doctrine of

Therefore they that be of the kingdom

Nor it is not true (that some say)

They that attain to the kingdom for euangelystes of Christ. For under the
cloak of Christ and his most holy word, they being deceyuyd craftily strive
against both Christ and his word. they are to be fled of all faithful,
and of princes and rulers to be extyncte. lest they preach or affirm any
such thing or else to be taken away and banyshed the company of the
faythefull.





but in to hypocrysye, might it the^ have be said that Paul and the company
of the Corinthians had compellyd him to hypocrysy.

Therefore, we conclude that every

Therefore it is laufull for byshopes

And if they that rule be enemies

And if they couyt to be sauyd, let that most dylegentlye, and let them
pray the lord, that he will vouchsafe to lyghten them with his spirit. For
then they prayeng in faith god will make open his trewethe.



God the lord would send another Iosy as that would dystroy all great
buldynges, places, aulters, phaanes, secres, decrees, of antychriste and all
that belongs to that curfyd worship 4. Reg. 23. and. 2. Parali. 34.

In what things bysshoppes of the church of God, should be subject to
princes and rulers and of their auctoryte, and mynystery that is of the word
and sacraments, and of sentwaryes. The seuenthe Chapitre.:::
Bishops.i. mynysters







shuldbe ruled by the alonly word of the lord.

Their auctorite is, to correct with

It is also aparte of their office,





then they are to be obeyed.

And they may constrayne.i. lest

For all that the company of the

wherefore messengers that is apostles subject to princes and rulers as other
cytyzens be.









out hate or malice have shed blood, may be safe, unto their innocencye
known they may return to their own.

who so ever with sword, staff, or

No bishop has aucthoryte, upon

Bishops have no need to be

If any bishops in them selves doctrine ought to be deposed of them and
separate the comunyon of the faythefull.









The eight Chapitre. That bishops may not be lords and princes, and it is
against their office. The eight Chapitre.
Bishops be not lords

Nor they may command

It is not out of pacyence, but a Cozhi daughter of Sur the prince of
Madianites. Numeri. 15. And also Mathathias with that zele. sleynge a Iue and
the messenger of the king of Antioche, the first book of Machabeus the
second Chapitre. Like wise Helias whose sermones were even as fire or a
burning bronde. 1. Kings. 17. and Ecclesiasti.48.

Bishops may not be princes and lords of any place, but of their own
howsholde. for it is contrary to be a byshope and a prince. For to be a
bishop is to be a mynyster and faythefull seruande.



And because the pope, and his byshopes,

If that they be of the hye princes,

It is not laweful for bishops, to

For there is no process, that may

But it is lawful for them, to have the scryptures in writing.





to have on, or two, or three servants, for they be not greater then Peter, or
Paul, or other apostles, which have gone very ofie, with one dyscyple alone
to the mynysterye, of the word, to whose humylyte both the pope, cardynalles,
and all the tyrants of his kyngedome ought to be restored, but what counsel
these kings, and lords that have admitted those dygnytes of Antychryste, with
their honor may use. I have spoken of in the epystele to the noble prince,
Johan cardynall of lotherynge.

Of a brogatyo^, of first fruits, tithes, offeringes, and what the faithful owe
to their byshopes.i. to true mynisters of the word, and of those they owe to
princes and rulers. Capitulo. 9.
FOr mynysters of the Exodi. 23. and.34. thou shalt not apere void in my
sight, and Deuterono.16. he shall not apere void before the lord.







declared in the epistle of S. Paul to the hebrews.:::

wherefore bishops, and prestes

Nor they do not succeed to ye law

They be therefore execrable thieves,

For they be dew to the^ by no law,

Also Christ speaking of tithes.

And if you say they should have be given the^, Ergo now, you conclude
folishlye, because the law is abrogat, for the^ it should follow that you should
have be cyrcumsysyd, offeryd beasts, go to Jerusalem on days appointed of the
lord, Ergo now, if this consequente be naught nor the first.





kingdom, may lawefully require one halfepenye, under the name of fryste
fruits, tithes, and oblacyons.

Let these flow belyes work, and

To true byshopes.i. to true euaungelystes,

For it is said cheffelye to them, that they may show Christ, and hes
mekenes ye in their deades.





lord did apoynte the kings of Israel. 1. Regum. 8.:::

Also they must have tithes, twelftes

I do not understand of vsurus

what shall then be of tithes, shall

I give these counsel to the faithful,

we say this of the^, that be able, for or else that which they may freely,
chefly for a common weall, and mynysters of the word of whom the greattest
count must be given. 1. Tim. 5. senyours that govern well be worthy double
honor, chefly they that labor in the word and learning.





but they shall have the law of ye lord, in which they shall read, all the
days of their life, and learn to dread the lord, and their god, and keep his
precepts, as is said in. Deutryno. 17.

Of the table of the lord that it is not a sacrefyce, and of wyked and vsurus
customs of the kingdom of perdycyon utterly to be pluckyd away and of
purgatory. Capi. 10.
THe pope and his scoles the grace of god, and remission of sins is promised,
of whom they that believe be pertakers, and both kinds to be given, to all
that have proved them selves whether they believe in ye promise of god, and at
the last, by these taking to show the lords death, until he come to
iudegement.i. to remember, and be a memoryal of his death, to them that believe,
for so often does he dye to them, with the most surest sign that is to say,
the fruit of his death is given to them, as often as they eat this bread, and
drink this blood in faith.





was not ordained of the lord, to be kepyd so or borne about so po^poslye but
that it might be eaten.:

And for that cause let sincere euaungelystes

we do not say, that this table is to

It is the deuty of bishops to order

The hye preparacyon is, that any gods promise that being pertaker of this
table, he shall obtain his desyer by the merit of the passion of Christ, of
who^ this feast is a memory







is the sacryfyce.:

It was an execrable faynynge of

It is laweful no more to the faithful

All that, now the truth opened

Therefore if any man in any place Qui pridie. etc^

And let him take heed, that neither as for one offense knowing that the
faithful is not bound to ye tradycyo^s of men, but is free, yet because of the
weak these outward things, are not in every place to be left out.





lawefull / and what is it that he dare not dyffyne against the immaculate
scriptures of god, so yt any thing may come to the tresorye of hes kingdom.

In a dysceytfull spyryte / and doctrine

Thereof has the deceyuynge of

I pray you let the kyngedome of

But alonly by faith in Christ we

Although he that is iustyfyed of

If by fire / ye prayers of other / any Christ was dead for us.







him blessed are they yt dye in ye lord, that is in the faith of Christ.

Also of them yt dye so in the lord

The death of sinners.i. of unfaithful blessed is the man, to who^ the lord
has not ymputyd sin.

Furthermore faithful lazarus being of Luke. Capitulo. 16.







Of sects of perdycyon, and beggynge. Cap. 11.


Alonly one profession is of health,

Because there is, one, and the most suffycyent rule of all, that believe the
word of god all monastycal sects be superfluous, and unprofitable.

Paraduenture they hurt not, and

For verelye the monastycall sect daughter of the blood, sukker devouring
althynge, and always saying, bring bring, an ensacyate depnes of tradycyons of
me^, stryuynge even contrary to the word of god.:







their labor get necessaryes.

Therefore it is not laweful, to give

For how often are we mouyd i^ holy

Also it is more blessed to give then

So saint Fraunces will not, yt his

All monks and monyalles, that perceive

I would not condemn, no I kinds, if they were scolles of the faytheful, in
whom they should be well instructyd, with the alonlye word of god, and honest
labors, and might frelye go forth when they would, the^ they should always be
better, and more chrystyanly be conversant.::





going forth of all cloisters might be free, and by all means so to do, that
they which yet tarry in cloisters live subject, and be dylygently instructyd
with the alonlye word of god, or else what shall these cloisters be, but chafe
ringe houses, and bond houses of the devil these last. 18. posytyons, and
other belongyng to monastycal sect, I have declared in my co^mentarye into the
rule of ye minorytes more largely.

whose deutye is to judge of the voice of the lernyd / if he be of god / and by
what we be assuryd / also of wekyd vnyuersytes. Capi. 12.
IT does belong to the

For of the word of god / they alo^ly can judge, yt have the spirit of
christ, whose deuty is to judge, of hye things 1. Corinthi. 2.:::::

abba Pater. and he gyuethe a testymonye to their spirit, that they be
children, and heirs of god, hayres annexyd with christ, he axethe for us with
teres unable to be spoken of, and makyth intercessyo^ for saints after god,
which Paul speaks of most ceposlye. Roma. 8.





Therefore they that be of ye church

Verelye they that be not of that

For any man to judge, of the word

Vnyuersyties that have be of many

Promotyons of deuynes which the most foles be promotyd, wherefore they be
abhomynable to god.





they do openly against the gospel, for in truth all these be abhomynatyon
before the lord.

If al cloystures of the world, that

Princes and rulers, if they will iustlye rule, let them take heed above

Of the parts, as they call it of penance. Cap. 13.
THe parts of holy and true penance,













what true penance is.
for it is nothing less then penance, and makes naught but an ypocryte,
wherefore we call it false.

This diffynityo^ of penance is most cold, penance is to lamente sins
paste, and in morning not to commyt them again.:::

True penance is to amend daily from syn, with faith in Christ, by the
which he steadfastly beleuyth all sins to be remyttyd to him by christ, and
hollye to be given him to walk, in newenes of life.

This daily amendynge is a curcyfyenge of ye flesh, and mortyfyeng of it,
necessary to all faythefull, which christ commands to be borne about in
name of the cross, that with frut, and in veryte we may follow him.i. to
believe most purely to him, and follow him.

All the life of a chrystyan is to be penytent, and believe in Christ, that is
to mortyfye daily and rise by christ.

For a man although he be holy, as long











Of true good works.
A True penitent is never without

They that be of the coniuryng and

The prophets of antichriste, that

we say that there must be good verily the pope and every man is alyer.
Psalm. 115.







Of lybertye and subiectyon of the faythefull.
or in his name which be all one.

This liberty is not that they may

The lybertye of the spirit, is not

Also as you may se of Paul to the

This liberty makyth a man sincere, of truth, plentyful, full of charity, and
most full of all good works.





Of contrycyon.


take the mournyng of his only son, that is, that we should be sorrowful and
mourn truly for our sins, because the will of a sinner can not fulfill it of
it self.

For every precepte of god, is inpossyble

But it is by the high goodness of

That the precepts of god be inpossible

: Of confession.
under the color of mekenes.

It is the most co^fussyd maase, what

For by what aucthorite, be these iugelars

True and profitable confession

To this thou must chose a propre

It is execrable and abhomynable is bound to admytte for a confessoure and his
pastor, merchants and rauenynge wolves, of the kyngedome of the son of
perdycyon.



to be louid, serchid for, amplectio, and him self to have of him self no
justice at all. and knowledge this without feyninge, the fyfthe let him se^e
some faithful and conynge man that knowythe to give counsel of health and
with the scriptures of god, and can make strong the mind of the penytent in
faith, and if there be not a man having faith to do this thing or he
dreadyng him to be unlawful, or not having the word whereby he may comforthe
him in the lord. If there be a faithful woman in who^ he knowyth these
aforsayde to be, to that same faithful woman, ye all though she be ioynyd
carnally to him. I say very nigh. It is lawful for him to be co^fessyd
generally. I say generally that he by no reason count his sins lest he
infecte the herer, for as we have said evil comunicacyon corruptyth good
manners, and of a truth that same foul and lycencyouse spekyng of the
confessyons of antychristes factyon have infecte innumerable and have drawn
them to the most enormouse crimes.

Therefore let nothing be opened of any man lest that for man's feynynges and
doctrine, he beseme to despise the things of god, for god never co^mau^dith
that, what so ever many have iudgyd in the spirit of error, wonders and many
punyshementes be given of certain liars against them that will not nombre all
pertyculerly, but I have made open that al these be of the devil in the book
of the causes of the blyndenes.etc^.



believe that the word of absolucyon what so ever it be, is a sure sign of the
grace of god and remyssyon of sins as he has believed to be given him of the
lord. for all the works of god be in faith. Psalm. 32. and every man takes
so much as he beleuythe, and if he believe nothing he receyuith nothing.

The form of absolucyon is free, so

All such absolucyon is good, and

The more pure and simple the absolucyon

All absolucyons of the kingdom things to gyther without fruit, of the keys,
of the holy mother the church of the apostles Peter and Paul, of
excomunycacyon more and less from pena and culpa.





Of signs of grace, and remyssoyn of sins.




it in faith, the most suryst sign of grace, and remyssyon of sins.

This table is a memory of a sacryfyse

For to affirm that it is a sacryfise

The third sign, is the word spoken

These signs be the vessels of

But signs do not bring grace,

It is not given by signs but by faith

By faith we be pertakers of all the

Also these signs without faith /

Paul says Ephe. 5. Christ has with the lauer of water, by his word,
verelye it is clensyd with the word, when it believes it, of the which
clensynge, the lauer of water is a sign, he said not symply, it is made clean
with the lauer of water, but put to, by the word, that you may know the
making clean, to be sygnifyed by ye lauer.





whether any cases may be reseruyd even contrary to the eternal scryptures of
god.

Nothing at all may be reserved to

The church ca^ nether lose or bind

Of satysfaccyon, and (as they call it) inioynynge of penance.
Because satysfaccyon, for sins does show a suffycyencye of

For nether with fasting, prayer,

There is one alone full, and true satysfaccyon

















that he cleuynge to this manner of confession, should styke to us, as the
prophets of antychryste inioyne us, but we have written so of penance, that
al dreams, and lies of men, put away, and all crafty conueyance, and great
burdens of the kyngedome of antychryste reiecte, Christ and the word of
truth may reygne in every place.

we have spoken of penance, and those

The conclusyon.
THe sum of christyanyte we have breflye written, that is in.385. peradoxes, or
posycyons, that this book might be to bear, in the hands of the^, yt desires
it, there was.ij. things, that mouyd me cheflye to do it, first there be very
many, that put forth reprouable peradoxes, as there was one Tregaryus, by
whom they be about to make, the simple people strange, from the truth, the
other is that before the.ix. monethe, at the noble cetye of Wetens, the
company of antychryste, was gathered against me, which mouyd me, to styke up
many posytyons, verily I put to them a hundredth and.xxvi. who^ I have now
increasyd to.385. let the^ answer therefore, if they have any thing, let not
these blind pharesyes stand i^ their own conceyte, and legates, and tyrants
of the son of perdicyon, that for hes decre, and like preaching, did make
the noble wytnes of Christ. S Johan castellane, sometime my welbelouyd brother,
the last of all that is ye 12. day of the monethe of Ianuarye Anno. 1525. at
Vuy a town of lotherynge, with fire they made him a martyr of Christ, but for
hi^ god shall fight against them, and for one well raise a thousand, and if
they hade slain me to, and Christ hade vouchsafe this glory of martyrdom to
me, for me ten thousa^de should rise, for surely antychryste, with all his
kyngedome apostata shall fall to the glory of the lord Jesus Christ, and
that with spirit of his mouth, which with the father, and the holy ghost
lives one god glorious, for ever more. So be it.

WOo woo be to the thou purple whore / whore of Babylon, that loves ye sign
of ye rose coloryd beast, and to it empire, thou art made drunk with the
blood of prophets, and saints, and does call to the shedynge of the blood of
ye elect, as it were to a feast of de^tyes promysinge to thy assystentes,
grace, and remyssyon of sins, with thy false iogelynge. woo I say to the for
thou shalt be dystroyd, for with the vyolence of a mylstone thrown into the sea, thou shalt be send into the botome of hell, and thou shall be found no
more Apoca. 18. because the lord has remembered the blood of his elect, whom
thou haste slain, and whom thou have deceyuyd to establyshe thy lies, and
abhomynatyons, and has always trod under fode, ye veryte of our lord Jesus
Christ, for the which thou shall be trodden down of it for evermore, and the
beast that thou haste worshypped shall peryshe with the. So be it.

Let this be done lord Jesus, come quyckly, thy enemies overcome, and reygne in
us. So be it.

The end of this collectyon of places of scripture.:::

