POLITIQVE discourses, treating of the differences and inequalities of
Vocations, as well Public, as Private: with the scopes or ends whereunto
they are directed.

Translated out of French, by Aegremont Ratcliffe Esquire.

Suas habet Respublica ligaturas.

Imprinted at London for Edward Aggas. 1578.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, principal Secretary
unto the Queens most excellent Majesty, Aegremont Ratcliffe Esquire, wishes
continuance of health, long life, with increase of honor.
THE counsel given us by the ancient, aduising each one (Right honorable,) to
covet to be that he is, and no more: if it be well, and duly considered of, is
not to be rejected: for that we be thereby taught two especial points, most
worthy to be embraced of all men. The first is, that there is nothing more
decent, commendable, or yet more beneficial to man, then to be contented, and
constantly stand to his calling: without coveting, as often as his fond
affection shall egg him, to be other then he is, by changing of his manner of
living. For that, as Numa Pompilius (being called to be King of Rome,) said:
There is no change more dangerous, and more to be eschewed of every wise and
wary man, then the changing of his calling, or the manner of living, he is
in. The second, and cheifest, is: that there is not one, who (beside his
apparent calling made by man's means) is not secretly by the unspeakable
providence of God, called to some vocation: that is to say, to one manner of
living, or other. And who has not his particular distinct talent assigned him,
to be employed to Gods glory, and the common utility of ye society of al
men? Which, as it should appear, has been the cause why that Philosophers,
seeing (as Seneca says) that a forced nature, or inclination, seldom or never
thriueth, or brings forth good fruit: have been of advice that children,
after they have atteined unto the years of discretion, and understanding,
should partly be permitted to the choice of the Faculty, Occupation, Art,
Science, or Trade of life, they best like to follow: as that, wherein (in
very deed) for the most part, they thrive, and profit best. Such be the
secret furtheraunces of God, for the commodity, ease, and relief of his
creatures. And, to speak by experience, if a man do well consider their
youthful course, he shall not fail to see children, almost even from their
cradle, and first understanding, given to like or mislike, to choose or refuse,
and also to be more apt to one thing then an other. Some given to a form of
Architecture: some to Letters, some to Arms, some to Sciences, and Mechanical
occupations: and so forth.

All, most apparent tokens, yea, evident signs, of this secret vocation,
surpassing the comprehension of man. So that this ancient counsel, is no
whitte dissenting in that point, from the advice of the celestial
Philosopher, and most blessed Apostle Saint Paul: who, upon this
consideration, wills each one to walk worthily, and with all humility,
meekness, and patience, charitably supporting each other, in the vocation we
be called unto. For (says he) there be distributions of graces, and
administrations: and also gifts, different, or unlike one an other, given us
according to grace: and distributed to each one, after the measure of Christ's
blessed will and pleasure: to be by us (following his advice) willingly, and
with diligence, and fidelity, prosequuted, without being yrked or annoyed, or
yet of our selves disturned from perseueraunce in the intentive exercise
thereof, for any occasion, whatsoever. Two most remarkable lessons, and worthy
to be remembered and spoken of, in these our days full of disorder: when that
no man (or at least few or none,) is contented with his own lot: but every
one led with I know not what kind of self love, greediness, and ambition,
seeks to be all in all, and is not many times afraid (as if he had as many
sufficiencies, as vain thoughts, or fond motions,) like a blind monster to
attempt things in despite of Minerua: that is, to undertake things yt be
contrary to his natural instinct, and to cast (though for the most part, to
his own confusion,) at that which passes his reach, and capacity. Without
consideration either of his talent, given him, not to be cast aside, or
negligently dug up in the Earth: but rather to be used carefully, and also
liberally employed to common profit. Or yet caring for policy, the nource,
and conseruatrix of all well founded Commonweals: as that which respects
the Public, and all men in general, and not any particular. Or once thinking
on his duty, which teaches him, orderly attendance, virtuous perseverance,
and humble obedience. Yea, or yet (which is the worst) without remembering the
fear of God: who has created him a seely member, of the huge and mighty
body of humane society, and appointed him his distinct charge, not to be
exercised to his own particular, but to the relief, and common maintenance of
the universal body: neither more, nor less, then as we see each member of
man's body travel in his degree, for the sustentation, and continuance of the
whole. All, and every one of them, by Gods most wise providence, being so
straightly restrained within the limits of their duty, that no one may, or
can leave his own, to take to him his fellows office, or charge: no more then
one man (if he keep himself within his bounds) may, or ought to incroch, or
intrude him self into an others: but to the very end (following their
example, so necessary for our instruction, proposed unto us,) firmly to stand
to his own, without starting, or of his own motion, once looking on another.
A consideration, though of great importance, in these days little thought
on, and less regarded. For, who ever saw so many discontented persons: so
many yrked with their own degrees: so few contented with their own calling:
and such a number desirous, and greedy of change, and novelties? Who ever
heard tell of so many reformers, or rather deformers of estates, and Commonweals: so many controllers of Princes, and their proceedinges: and so few
embracing obedience? Which begins now (the more pity) to be lagged at the
carts tail. And to be short: such strange, and souden alteration in all
estates? Does not the unlearned Layman, undertake the office of a Minister?
Does not the Minister disallowe of inferior orders, and level (as a man would
say) with both eyes at once, (for failing,) at the Bishops myter? Is the
Bishop, trow ye, so exempt of self love, and desire of honor, as that he
could not be contented to leave his former vocation, to embrace the supreme
dignity of Priesthood? Likewise, the Plough man, does he not think the
Merchant happier then himself? The Merchant, does he not tickle at the title
of a Gentleman? The Gentleman, does he not shoot at the mark of Nobility? And
ye Noble man, has he not his eye fixed upon the glory and greatness of a
Prince? What Prince could not be contented to be Monarche of the whole world?
What should I say? Would not the Lawyer (think ye) agreeably accept the title
of a Lord? And thus of other: No one almost living not infected (witness
experience) with this pestiferous canker of fond self love, impatient
ambition, or yrkesome coffeehouse of his estate: but for the most part,
all corrupted with the delight of dangerous change, and innovation. And what
should be the cause of this disorder? Forsooth, in my opinion, either the
ignoring of vocation: I mean, that men do not know, or consider themselves,
to be but particular members of an universal body: and that they, in that
respect, be, by the incomprehensible ordinance of God, called and appointed
each one in his degree, to some assured particular estate, and honest manner of
living, by his secret providence: and not by hap, or fortune (as
Philosophers of old time held opinion) allotted unto him, to keep him self
sufficiently occupied (without needing to seek any other, if he list, as he
ought, constantly to persevere, and apply the same) in this life, in all
virtue, to the common relief (as is before said) of the universal Politic
body and society of all men in general. Or if they knew this: because the
natures, and manners of men be so depraved, and corrupted, as that they neither
force to observe this vocation, or fear to violate the same: but fare, as if
every one were ordained to live, as a GOD unto him self, without respect of
the Public: not caring, so their turns be served, what become of the rest.
Wherefore, considering how necessary the remembrance of this vocation is, and
wishing therewithal the impression thereof in all men's hearts: as that,
which is not only the original, and chief part of humane society, but
also the guide, and sure directer of all actions, and affairs, be they
Public or Private, Politic or Domestical: I have taken upon me to
translate out of the French, into our vulgar tongue, a Book entitled,
Politic discourses: treating of vocation, and the diversity thereof in
sundry kinds. By the which, as we be assured of the interior, or secret
vocation, or manner of living each one is called unto, (as is before said:) so
we be also taught, how, and which way, each one ought orderly, and duly, to
enter into exterior, or apparent Public vocatio^s, or trades of living: and
have also laid before our eyes, as well the duties of them that have power and
authority, to call men to Public vocations: as of them also, which seek, or
sue to be called thereunto: and likewise, how each one ought to behave
himself, and constantly proceed in that he is called unto: with diverse other
points worthy of knowing, touching that subject, (as I can learn,) not yet
treated of by any other: and have made bold to cause the same to be published
under your Honors protection: hoping, though I have in this my translation, (as
a young beginner) rather imitated mine Author verbatim, in his right sense, and
meaning: then sought by polished style to beautify the same: that yet for all
that, you will account no whit the less thereof, but accept it in good part,
as presented for a testimony of a hearty desire to gratify your Honor with
any other agreeable service, whenever it shall please you to command. Thus
committing your Honor to the tuition of Almighty God, I take my leave,
praying him to preserve, and continue your Honor in health, long life, and all
honor.

Your Honors duetifully at command, Aegremont Ratcliffe.

To the most mighty, and most Christian King of France, Charles the ninth of
that name.
Since it is so, that each thing naturally coueteth and desires that, which is
good, and that there is nothing that may so much avail to the conservation of
humane life and society, as that which is necessary and profitable for him:
it is most certain (Sir,) that among all things created good and beneficial
for the avail of this life, there be none that be to be compared with the
commodity and profit that comes from man. For what is it, that has
maintained and caused Commonweals, Realms, Alexander Iu. Caesar.
and Empires to flourishe, but men? Alexander, Julius Caesar, and other
excellent and great personages, by what other mean have they done so great
and renowned things? So that it is most clear (without need of greater
testimony in so apparent a thing) that there is no one thing after God so
commodious and profitable for the weal of life, and humane society, as man
himself: even as contrarily, it is a thing no less certain and evident, that
there is no evil, be the same never so great and detestable, which chances
not unto men by them selves and by their own default. Wherefore he that took
upon him to search out the causes of man's death and destruction: after he had
gathered together an infinite, as sicknesses, pestilences, floods, Dicearchus.
Cicero. lib. 2. of his Offices.
and other, concluded in the end, that there have a far greater number,
without comparison, been destroyed and put to death by man's mean, as by
wars, seditions, murders, poysonings and otherlike, then by any other
mischief or mishap. Which has moved ye ancient to say in common proverb, Men
like wolves toward men.
that men were like unto wolves toward men: And contrarily, that man was God to
man: meaning thereby, that even as there is nothing more beneficial to man,
then man him self: so there is nothing more contrary and damageable to man,
then himself. But to what end will you say (Sir) tends this discourse? It
is, that thereby I will infer, that among all politic things, and which may
apperteine to the government, and administration of the Public, there is
nothing so reco^mendable as to understand what belongs to vocation: that is
to say, which is the way and manner to live, whereunto every one is duly called,
and what is the duty and office of them that have authority to call men. For
without doubt, the first part of a Common weal well instituted, consists in
well choosing, picking out, and ordeining of men apt and meet for the Public
choice, each one according to the manner of living he is called unto: Neither
more nor less, then, as we see in the government of a ship, the first and
most requisite part to be, that the Pilotes, Patrons, and Governors be well
chosen and ordained in the same. And even as the good husbandman reaping most
commodity of his tilth and labor is he, not that has most land, but that can
best choose and discern the property and nature of each plotte of his ground:
So the best governor and administratour of the Public is he, not that has a
great extent, and most subjects, but that can best handle men, in well
choosing them apt and meet, each one for his office. This being most certain,
that some say, that The prince and lord ought to husband his lands,
lordships, and revenues by men: but that he must husband men by himself. And
if so be that Artificers and handicraftes men be blamed, because they neglect
the providing of instruments, and tools meet and necessary for their Art
and Science, and also for not knowing the names, usage, goodness, and place
where to fetch them: how much more shall the Prince, Sovereign Lord, and
administratour of the Public, be blame worthy, handling things of so great
importance, and doing his actions, not with tools without souls, but by the
aid and service of men, if he be in that point slothful and negligent? As
there never was thing better said, then this, that To vanquish and be
vanquished in war, is but an accident of well or evil choosing and ordeining
of men: So say I, that the weal and woe happening to a realm, proceeds no
whence else, but of ignorance and negligence in the feate of vocation. And
there is no greeuouser sickness, or yet more dangerous to be feared in the
body of a common weal (as in man's also,) then when as the members be ill
disposed and ordained, it being impossible that they should then do their
office well. For proof hereof, let us behold all the seigniories and kingdoms
that ever were, and we shall undoubtedly see, that as long as careful diligence
in ye well choosing and ordering of men, has been (...) in them, they have
continually prospered, and flourished: but as soon as through the ignorance or
negligence of them that should have looked thereunto, force, ambition, favor,
and avarice crept into them, straightways they began to (...) And without
seeking for other examples then our own, we must not think that any one thing
more prospered the reign of king Loys II. King Loys the II. of France.
of that name, your auncestour (Sir) then his singular dexterity in the feate
of vocation. For, true it is, that there has not any king been before or
since him, that has been better skilled in making of good choice of men
meet for his service, and singularly of them which were in authority and
credit about his person, as those in very deed, on whom depends most good
and harm, to the rest of the administration and government of a Realm: and
by negligence in taking good heed unto the which, oftimes has been seen
happen unto kings, that which chances upon Theaters, that is, that he yt
plays the part of a servant, causes himself now and then to be better
heard, then he that holds the scepter in his hand, who scarsly can make
himself to be understood: And so happened it unto king Agesilaus, Agesilaus.
Lysander: Galba, Ononias and Lacon.
by the ambitious enterprise of Lysander: and to the good old Emperor Galba,
by the arrogancy of Ononias, and Lacon, his servants, and since to many
other. Also men must not think that the infinite disorders, troubles, and
confusions we see daily in all estates of this realm, be they Politic, or
Ecclesiastical, without exception of any, proceed from else where, but of the
negligence, and rechlesnesse heretofore in the feate of vocation: all men
having ben indifferently admitted and received to the public administration.
So that by reason that every man has heretofore ben allowed and advanced to
charges, and dignities, and offices, not so much in respect of virtue,
demerite, and sufficiency, as by undue and pernicious means, we now see all
perverted and mard by extreme confusion, and disorder. And therwithal (which
is worse) men's wits and understandings, by that mean so disturned from the
path and study of virtue, that in place of the same smally regarded and less
rewarded, they have given them selves to follow other ways, and means, by
bringing solicitations and secret practices, by money, presents, favor, and
ambition, which be the plagues and capital enemies of a Common weal: Each man
beside that using in his vocation, after he have once by hook or by crook
atteined the same, the like and very self diligence and care that they do,
which have bought a house or heritage to no other end and intent, but to see
what profit or revenue they can make thereof: As for the rest, living in the
same, The selling of Offices openly taunted
so newfangled and inconstant, as that without any stay, as soon as they be
entered into one kind of living, they straight seek to leave the same to
enter into an other: or if they keep it still, they cause sundry other and
diverse charges together, changing their roabe and fashion of living as often as
they list, without any respect of the public, only thereby to satisfy their
greedy ambition and avarice. Wherefore we may not marvel at so manifold
troubles, inconveniences, and disorders, in deed no less pitiful then
lamentable, as be seen in these days: in the which you (Sir) are called to ye
crown by right and lawful succession, in hope and assured expectation of all
men, yt the gifts, graces, and virtues of your ancestors, shall be no less
hereditarie in you, then this sovereign, royal, and divine authority, which
it has pleased God to put into your hands: and my self being your most humble
and obedient servant, desiring nothing more then your increase and greatness
to the commodity of your subjects, have enterprised to treat this argument of
vocation, not yet, yt I know, taken in hand by any other man: which truly has
seemed unto me ye meetest for this time, yea the most necessary for all men,
beginning from the head to the foot. And because you are sovereign head of
all (Sir) and he, in whom therefore, the sovereign authority lies, to call,
establishe, and dispose each man to his manner of living, to the advancement of
your realm: and to whom also by good reason, all that is done in yt respect,
should be dedicated and consecrated: I have boldly adventured to present the
same unto you, and to cause it to be published under the protection of your
most royal name: hoping yt though the work be unworthy of your Majesty: that
yet for all that, it shall be received of you, as presented by him, who desires
to profit the Public, and thereof to his power to give proof and testimony.
Praying God (Sir) that with the increase of your years, it may please him, to
give you also increase of honor, and all that apperteyneth to your Royal
Majesty, with the continuance of long life, and all prosperity.

THE FIRST BOOK of Politic discourses, upon the mean how to enter orderly
into offices, and charges.
CHAPTER. I. That the vocation of men, has been a thing unknown unto
Philosophers, and other that have treated of the Politic government: of the
commodity that comes by the knowledge thereof: and the Etymology, and
definition of this word, Vocation.
Sundry great personages both learned and well acquainted with affairs,
have both learnedly, and wisely written of Politic matters, which concern
the government, and Public administration: yea, and have established most
necessary and profitable laws, ordinances, and statutes touching that suit:
howbeit there is no one among them all, that has once busied himself about
the ruling, or direction of the Public estate, in that point, that
apperteineth to the vocation of men, nor yet given any certain law, or rule
meet to ordeine, and appoint a convenient number of persons in charges, and
offices, occupations, conditions, and manners of living, according to the
necessity of each Town, City, or Assembly of men, great, or small, to the
common relief, and service of all men. The cause why ancient Philosophers
have not treated of vocation.
And yt because (as it seems most probable) that they knew the same to be
needless: because that, in that be half, as every man may see, daily
experience gives us sufficiently to understand, that in the universal
Public estate, there is no one thing beter ruled, and guided for the ease and
commodity of men, then the vocation of every one distinct, and different,
accordingly as the necessity, and common want requires. And that this is true,
mark any Town, or place of assembly you list, great or small, and you shall
not fail there to find a sufficient number of artificers, men of occupation,
officers, or of other manner, and condition of life, for the interteinement,
and common service of the people there assembled. But if you ask after the
laws, ordinances, or other reasons of this policy, doubtless you shall
find the same to be done without care, labor, diligence of man, or other
politic foresight. The singular providence of God, in the feate of vocation.
Wherein we have great cause to marvel at the singular providence of God: who,
even as he has by admirable Art framed man, with sundry members serving one
another, each one in his office: has in likewise so preserved, and conduced
the assembly and society of men, as that the same is, by a secret vocation
of each one to his office, and manner of living, maintained and conserved by
common succor, and mutual aid: a thing no less excellent and admirable,
then smally considered of, and less esteemed of all men.

That the knowledge of the feate of vocation, is more necessary, then the
knowledge of the course of the Heavens.
And since that men have been so diligent in seeking, and discovering the order of
the Heavens, the course of the Sun, and Moon, the mouings of the stars,
and all other celestial dispositions, being by ye knowledge thereof allured to
the high speculation of God: what should be the cause why they have been less
diligent in seeking of this politic order, passing it under silence, although
the same be no less excellent, and miraculously maintained by mean of this
vocation, which concerns men, each one in his calling? Especially, seeing that
the knowledge of the heavens, and course thereof, although it be much esteemed,
is a great deal further off from us, more difficult, and less needful:
whereas this is at hand, familiar with us, bringing with it a meruellous
commodity, for the enterteinment of the conuinction of men. The Prince of
Philosophers Plato, and after him Aristotle and other, The opinion of Plato,
Aristotle, and other, touching vocation.
treating of the administration and government of a Common weal, knowing our
infirmity and indigence to be such, as that it has need of common aid and
succor, say that the same indigence or necessity, has caused the assembly
of men, and the building of towns and cities: but they reach not unto the
point of knowing, and celebrating of the effect from above, miraculous in the
feate of the vocation (or calling) of all men, whereof we mean to speak: But
confusedly attributing all to Nature, say, that we be borne thus unlike one
another, and be naturally inclined to sundry manners of living: The
Astronomers opinion.
As the judicial Astronomers, would have the cause attributed to the planets
and celestial bodies, The opinion of Phisicians.
according to the difference of their positions and aspectes: and the
Physicians, according to the mixtion of humors, and difference of
temperatures, every one in his profession, Cicero his opinion.
assuring him self to have found the cause. And Cicero, going about to teach
and instruct man in his office and duty, speaking of the deliberation every
man has, in choosing of his manner of living, says in the end, that the same
depends on the force of man's spirit, his natural inclination, and chance
of fortune: No one of them all knowing ought that concerns vocation. So that
the ancient with one consent, have in the end, called men's several manner
and fashion of living, by this word represented in Latin, Sors, Vocation, in
old time, called Fortune, or Hazard.
signifying of it self, as much as, Hazard or Fortune, sithence by them
appropriated to the state and condition of man, as subject to the government
and uncertain guiding of Fortune, to whom they refer the ruling and issue
of all things. But we knowing all things to be ruled by the only divine
providence, Why vocation is so called.
reducing all thereunto, call the manner of living we be now in, Vocation, as
holding for a thing most certain, that it is by the ordinance and providence
of God, Difference of gifts.
that we be thereunto called, and not by Fortune: Acknowledging that there is
difference of gifts, administrations, and operations, divided to each one,
according to his good pleasure, and one only spirit working all in us all:
Wherein we wish, that they which desire that an other beginning and nearer
then God, who is the first general cause of all, God is the general
beginning, the most certain of humane actions,
and the furthest distant, should be sought out, should first well consider the
little certeintie that has been in all that, which has been disputed by men
in time past: and then we suppose that they will not mislike, if in the
prolixitie and confusion of the causes by them alleged, we, not following the
direct way required in such a matter, have at the first entry stayed our
selves at a most certain and true cause, and from the which, be the same never
so far off, more assurance and direction shall be had, then following the
pathe other have showed: This word, Fortune, taken by some for God.
the most of all which, for all that, to wit, they that have committed all to
Fortune, shall be found all to be of one side, having by this word, Fortune,
meant God, in things they understood not the causes and reason of. It is then
vocation, we mean to treat of, most requisite, profitable, and necessary to
be known: For there is no one place and part of humane life, be it in public
or private affairs, be it in the politic or domestical estate, be it that a
man determine or deliberate alone by him self, or for an other man, where this
vocation ought not to march foremost as a rule of life, a guide, and assured
direction in all actions and thoughts. But our intention is, not to stay at
the particular institution of each one, in his manner of living: for beside
that, that the same is a thing amply enough treated of by other, and out of our
purpose, it should therewithal be too prolixe and tedious. So that it shall
suffice, The division of this work.
that we show (rather truly, then teaching wise) what this vocation is, and
the manner how every man ought to be called duly: And afterward speak of
the diversity and multiplicitie thereof: that we may also in the end,
summarily and in general, describe how every one ought for his part, to be
intentive, constant, and diligent, in following of that which belongs to his
vocation. Wherefore ye must first understand, that this word, What this word,
Vocation signifies. Vacation has an other manner of meaning then vocation.
Vocation, taken out of the latin tongue, signifies that whereunto a man is
called: which in deed is of an other manner of force then the common word,
Vacation, which we use, signifying the trade of living which each one commonly
tends or plyeth. For beside the same, is signified unto us by this word,
Vocation, the express will and ordinance of God, correspondent to the state
and condition of the life we be in, as thereunto called by him. And it is to be
wished, that this word were henceforth common, and printed in the hearts and
mouths of men: For the better understanding whereof, we will say once again,
as by way of definition, that the vocation or calling of man is no other thing,
but the trade of life and manner of living, whereunto each one is called, not
by Fortune, but by the assured providence of God, to the conservation of order,
policy, and government of the life, and society of men: as contrariwise, by
this word Reuocation, is signified the counter appeal, What Reuocation
signifies.
or (to speak plainlier) the calling back of the manner of living, whereunto a
man was before called: no more casual then vocation, ne yet less of the
providence of God, and to the conservation of the order, policy, and
government of life, and humane society.

CHAPTER. II. That there be two ways or means to be called to vocations: the
one interior and secret, the other exterior or apparent, done by man's means:
and first of the interior, which consists in the testimony of the
conscience, and natural inclination.
Now to treat of the way (as the order of teaching requires,) and mean how
to enter orderly into vocations, and offices: it is not without great reason,
and appearance, that our elders have said, the beginning to be the half of the
whole: Meaning thereby to let us understand, yt in all things men ought chiefly,
and with great diligence, to give order, that the beginning be well established
and ordained. For to speak truly, the beginning is not only the half of the
whole, but it has beside that, a respect to the end. It being a very uneasy
thing for him to make a good beginning, that has not forecast, or comprehended
with him self the end of his enterprise. The begi^ning shows the end.
Thus having presently to speak of the order that each one ought to keep, to
enter into his vocation, which is the beginning and principles of life and
humane society: The chief party of the politic estate, rests in the
vocation of men.
we suppose to have the chief, yea, the total party of the politic charge,
apperteining to the enterteinement of Commonweals, Kingdoms, Empires, and
Monarchies, to treat of, be it that we look to them that seek to enter into
vocations, or them that have power and authority to receive and call other
thereunto. Partition of the work.
Because that when the beginning and principles be not well established and
ordained, the rest of the enterprise shall very hardly have good issue.
Wherefore, treating of the way and mean, how to to enter into vocations, we
will speak as well of them that have authority to call men, as of them which
seek to enter thereinto, the one as well as the other of them, being to be
admonished, least the order and policy of government of the public, be by
them disturbed, and brought into trouble and confusion: which can not but
happen, They which enter and receive into vocations, cause either good order,
or disorder in Commonweals. Two means to be called to vocations.
when neither the one nor the other takes diligent heed, least the means
requisite and necessary in a matter of so great importance, be not utterly
neglected and forgotten. The way and mean then, to be duly and orderly
promoted to vocations, is double: the one interior and secret, and the other
exterior and apparent: As touching the interior and not apparent, of the which
we will first speak, the same consists in the assured testimony of the
interior, partly of the conscience, and partly of each ones natural
inclination. The testimony of the conscience has his regard to God, and the
profit of the Commonaltie of men: The mean how to be called by the
testimony of the conscience, and natural disposition.
The testimony of the natural, regards each ones proper inclination,
according unto the which, each one ought to found and advise him self, by the
testimony of him self. And although the first trial, which lies in the good
and well ruled intention, be great: yet does it not suffice alone, unless that
by the proper testimony of our own selves, we know our natural inclination
or sufficiency, to be agreeable unto the same: because that it is most
certain, that God distributeth his gifts and graces, to each one as it
pleases him. The gifts of God be diverse and different.
And even as we see great variety and difference in the body of man, some
light and nimble, ready and apt to run, other strong and mighty meet to
wrestle, in some beauty, in other comeliness: so is it of wits, each one
having some natural inclination, proper and particular to him self, very
considerable in the feate of man's vocation. Cicero. The choice of the trade of
living is a very difficult thing
So that it is not without cause that Cicero concludes, that the deliberation
and choice of every man's manner of living, is one of the difficultest things in
this life. For in very deed, there is not he (especially that is well borne)
who naturally from his first understanding, is not of him self given to
speak, wish, dream, follow, or do some one thing willinglier then an other,
and which he vnwillinglier leaves and forsakes also. That I mean, wherefore
every man may think him self ingendered, and whereunto assuredly he is called
out of heaven: yea, wherein he shall find both heaven and earth more
favorable and beneficial, and profit more then in any other: For God and
Nature help, favor, and advance, that which they have begun.

Plato his opinion touching the interior vocation.
Plato, (to whom all antiquity consents and agrees) is of opinion, that
man has two good Angels destined by his planet, the one of his nativity and
life, the other of his profession, which we call vocation: the which if it
disagree with him: he thinks can not be other then painful, and of small
profit. What so ever it be, we may well enough say, that there be two sorts
of people which be very unlucky, and unfortunate: the one of them be those,
which neither make profession of any honest office, nor yet do ought else that
may profit, or avail the commonaltie of men: the other be they, which make
profession of some charge, disagreeing with their natural inclination. Of
which, Two sorts of people unfortunate.
the one may justly be blamed of sloth and retchlesnesse, yea, of rebellion
against God and Nature, who calls them to some honest office, and wills
them to follow that which is appointed and begun in them: And the other be
worthy of great compassion, because they be so unfortunate and unprovided of
counsel, as that forsaking the guide of nature, they follow that whereunto
they be not called. Proverbs aptly applied to the interior vocation.
For the first, the ancient proverb has been made, which says: that GOD is
angry with truants or idle persons: and favorable to them that apply them
selves to some honest exercise. And for the second, an other that says: that a
man ought not to enterprise or do ought in despite of Minerua: that is to say,
against his natural instinct: A forced nature never thriueth.
Seneca saying to this purpose, that of a forced nature or inclination, men
reap small profit. Which is the reason, as me seems, why Jupiter is so
importunately prayed in the Pythagoricall verses, to solace and ease men of the
infinite toils they daily live in: or else to show them by some good Angel,
the way they ought to keep in their actions, during this life. As who should
say, that all the evil which is in mankind, proceeded from no whence else,
but of the confusion and uncertainty of men in their vocation. But above al
other, that secret way, The interior vocation is chiefly to be considered in
public vocations.
by privy testimony of man him self, ought to have place in them that be
called to any public vocation, be the same Ecclesiastical, or Politic:
that is to say, that men should not ambitiously through avarice, or any other
lewd greediness, accept any vocation offered unto them, Zeal toward the
public, ought to be in public persons.
but of a good zeal, to the edification, profit, and common utility, ready
patiently to bear all hatred, injury, and loss, for maintenance of truth
and justice: And to be short, that they moved with love of the public, and
not with any particular, should enter into public charges. For, as Pelopidas
going to the wars, answered his wife, Pelopidas saying to his wife
recommending unto him the care and safety of his own person, that it was to
private soldiers that the same was to be recommended, and not to Capteines,
which ought rather to be mindful to save other men's lives.

So likewise is it not the part of such persons as enter into public charges,
to have regard to their own particular, but only to the public. And beside
this secret testimony of good zeal and intention, the other testimony of
sufficiency, or at the least, of not insufficiency self, ought to be in us.
Wherein it behooves every one to take good heed, Mistrust and presumption, are
to be eschued in the interior testimony.
lest over great fear, or distrust of him self, do on the one side hinder or
make him slack: or else on the other side, lest that over great arrogancy and
presumption deceive or hasten him on headlong. For they be two points, which
ordinarily do most abuse and deceive them, that be in the way of entry into
vocations and public charges, and the last more then the first, for as much
as confidence and presumption, be I know not how, a great deal prompter and
more natural to man, then distrust, as we shall hereafter show more at large in
place convenient. It behooves also to measure ability, with the consideration
of the enterprise.
Who so also purposes to enter into any vocation and charge, ought not only to
remember how honest the thing is that he undertakes, but also must there with
all principally consider and measure his capacity and power.

CHAPTER. III. Of the exterior vocation, made by man's means: and first of the
Ecclesiastical, in all his degrees.
AS concerning the exterior and apparent vocation, made by the exterior and
apparent testimony: the same is also very necessary and requisite for all
persons, called to the public vocation, that is to say: to the
Ecclesiastical and Civil vocation: but especially to the Ecclesiastirall, in
the which each thing ought to be guided by decent and convenient order: And
therefore, least any man should intrude him self into the handling thereof, it
is expressly prohibited, and forbidden, not to intermeddle him self therein,
without this exterior and apparent vocation. The authors intent.
We will not speak here of the vocation of GOD simply, that is to say, of the
vocation made by him, without other mean of man: As Moses, Aaron,
Extraordinary vocation.
the Prophets, the Apostles, and many other since, were called, because it
is a thing out and above our intent: having not taken in hand to treat (as
we have before said) but of the Civil, and Politic vocation only.

But coming to the exterior calling, made by the help of man, we will first
speak of the apparent or Ecclesiastical vocation, and then come to the
Politic, still observing the order we have begone. Of the apparent
Ecclesiastical calling
Wherefore ye must understand, that the Ecclesiastical calling was in old time
made by the consent, and approbation of all men, not in vprores, and confusion,
but at the instance, and request of the people, election of the Clergy,
authority and approbation of the Prince: To the end, that he should be
placed, and preferred above all men, who should be approved of all men. And
there was no difference between the vocation of Bishops, and that of the
inferiors: The exterior vocation of Bishops, and inferiors.
saving that the Bishops were made by the Metropolitan, and other Bishops of
the province present: and the inferiors, the Bishop of the diocese alone
present. As for Abbats, they were made by the Bishop of the diocese also, The
apparent vocation of Abbats.

The ancient vocation of the Levites.


by consent, and election of the Monks only, and not of the people. And if we
look further to the time of the old Testament, we shall find the Priests of
the Leuitical law, not to have been consecrated, and ordained, but after they
had been brought into the presence of the people. Howbeit by succession of
time, first the consent of the people has been put out, and then the Clergies
also, and the election of Bishops, The calling of Bishops reserved to the
Chanons.
reserved only to the Chanons of cathedral Churches. As for inferior
benefices, the entier provision has been left in the Bishops hand by
collation, every one in his diocese: the Pope Bishop of Rome excepted, who
has reserved unto himself this authority, to provide, by concurrence, and
prevention, indifferently in benefices of all diocesses, The vocation of
bishops and Abbats in these days.
as he does yet at this present, as all the world knows. At this instant the
provision of Bishoprics, is otherwise made in this Realm, because the king
names such persons as him pleases to choose, in all the Bishopprickes, and
Abbeys of his realm, and after his nomination the Pope approves. The exterior
vocation of Popes is very ancient.
As touching the vocation, and manner of calling of Popes to their Pontificacie,
it was was in old time like unto the manner of calling of other Bishops, at the
least wise, but little differing from the same: for, the election of the Pope
was made in the presence of neighbors, and Bishops next at hand, which
were then called Cardinals, and the chief of the Clergy of Rome, by the
consent, and at the postulation, and request, as well of the Clergy, as of the
Laity, the authority, and approbation of ye Emperor: and that of the person
of some Deacon, or Priest of Rome, who had passed the inferior degrees, and
not otherwise.

The vocation of Popes, given to Emperors.
Since that time, the Popes gave the full power of election to Charelemaine, and
other Emperors, which has since been by them renounced: so that at this
present, the manner of calling of Popes to their Pontificacie, is only
reserved to the Cardinals, duly assembled in the (...), according to the
constitutions of Pope Alexander 3. Gregory. 10. and Clement. 5. Which to be
short, be all the manners of calling to Ecclesiastical vocations used in
these days.

CHAPTER. IIII. Of the apparent Politic vocation: and first of Magistrates,
beginning from Moses days, and so consequently to the the Graecians, and
Romans until this day.
AS touching the politic, or civil vocation: if we look back to Moses
days, undoubtedly we shall find, Moses days.
that the way of choosing of Magistrates, was ordained by him, saying: I am not
able alone to bear this burden, therefore choose ye out from among your selves
such as be wise, of experience and be known, each one in his Tribe, and
quarter, and I will give them charge to govern you. It appears also in many
places, The Grecians days.
that in the time of the Grecians, the people were likewise provided of
Magistrates by election. Aristotle saying to that purpose, that offices be, and
ought to be offered, and proposed unto them, whose sufficiency, and industry
is known, and seen of all men: Although that in Greece, being governed by
sundry Civil estates, diverse and different to each other, according to the
difference of Commonweals, the Magistratts were also created in some places
there by lotte, as in Public weals intermedled, and indifferently ruled, and
governed by the people: And in other Commonweales better founded by election,
but not altogether without the casting of lottes, joined thereunto, to avoid
the briggings, and practices of the ambitious, The Venetian estate.

The time of the Roman Republique.


as is yet to this day used in the Segniorie of Venice. In the Romans days,
they proceeded likewise to the election of Magistrates in full assembly of the
people, by the plurality of voices. And without seeking further, it appears
sufficiently by the ordinances of this Realm, He manneth France.
that the old manner was, to proceed by election and nomination in all
judicial seats, when so ever any office was vacant in the same: whereof the
sovereign courts do yet to this day retain the shadow, and figure only,
without other effect ensuing.

The reason of this election was great, and necessary, founded upon the
insufficiency of man, and impossibility to be able to answer alone to so
great a charge, as was well enough known to Moses, a great personage
replenished with the spirit of God.

CHAPTER. V. Of the apparent vocation to the Royal digninitie, and incidently
of the well founded Monarchy of France.
THere is in civil estates governed by a Monarchy, a vocation sovereign above
all other: to wit, The dignity Royal: Whereunto, it appears that in some
places, they were called by the election, voice, and suffrage of the people:
and in othersome, by succession. And whether of these two, is the better, has
vene a question propounded by Aristotle in his Politiques, Aristotle.
but left by him undecided. We use that, which (in my opinion) is the better:
To wit, by succession, which is also found the most flourishing, and the
longest of continuance of al other: as ye kingdoms of the Syrians, The vocation
to the Regal dignity of Fr. The law Salike.
Egyptians, and Parthies bear sufficient testimony. And to save labor, they
of England, France, and Spain: especially of France, because it is not
only by succession, but simply by succession of Males, according to the law
Salike.

Aristotle.
Although it seem that Aristotle, as it it were glansing by, would rather
approve, and allow the vocation of kings made by voice, and suffrages, calling
the same which goes by succession, A barbarous domination, such as of the
master, over the servant. But that may not be understood of a kingdom, and
Monarchy so well constituted as ours, fastened, and linked, not as Dionyse the
tyrant said, The Monarchy of Fr: well founded.
with a chain of Diamants, with force, and fear, but with the chain of
benevolence, and love of subjects, purchased by justice, and virtue: The
which, though it be looser, The Monarchy of France snaffled with two bridles.
not so fast girte, and straightly stretched as the other, is for all that a
great deal firmer, and of more force to keep, and enterteine a principality
a longer continuance of time. Having over this Monarchy, The Monarchy, is
most durable, that is kept under bridle.
two principal, good, and sure bridles, to temper, and keep the same from
running riot, after the unbridled affection of one man alone: to wit, religion,
which has always been in singular recommendation with our Princes, and by the
neglecting whereof, authority, Theopompe king of Macedon.
and obedience easily wax cold. The other, is justice, whereby their laws,
ordinances, gifts, pardons, and alienations be moderated, and tempered. The
Ephores, were certain counselors in the Lacedaemonians common weal, which
had the controllment (among other things) of the kings doings, if he did ought
amiss contrary to the laws, and without whose advise the king could do
nothing, etc.
And the which the bounty, and wisdom of our Princes has not been
accustomed to account so much bridles, as firm pillars, upon the which their
authority is the surelier stayed, to be thereby the firmer, and more durable.
As Theopompe said unto his wife, who was offended, because he endured himself
to be brideled, and kept under by the Ephores, and reproched him, that through
his cowardice, he should leave the kingdom of Macedon the less unto his
successors, yea greater (said he) because it shall be the more durable, and
far surer.

CHAPTER. VI. Of the exterior vocation to the Imperial dignity, as well of
the East, as of the West.
BEside the Royal vocation, there is the Imperial calling, whereof we have
not yet spoken, whereunto, it appears, that men have entered by diverse means.
For it is most certain, that the first usurped that authority by force, and
violence: As Julius Caesar, Augustus, and since them, some of their
successors, partly by consent of their soldiers, and authority of the
Senate, and partly by the only election of their soldiers: but in sundry
manners, some violent, and forced: the other voluntary, and agreeable.

The Empire divided into two, the East and the West.
And this Imperial authority growing in the end to such feebleness, and
decay, as that it held no more title in Italy, and the West Countries, the
Romans were constrained in the time of Constantine, son to Leon the fourth,
eight hundred years since, or there about, to address themselves to the
French: so that the Imperial majesty, was divided part in the West, The
West Empire.
and part in the East. The West was put into the hands of Charlemaine, and
his successors, almost all Almans unto this present day. The East Empire.
The Empire of the East, through the over great cowardice, and negligence of
the Emperors of Greece, is fallen into the Turks hands, and detained in
extreme tyranny by them of Othomans house, and race: the which began to
grow in greatness, and estimation, three hundred years since, or there
about, during the Empire of Albert of Austriche. But to return to our West
Empire, and the manner of calling thereunto, Charlemaine first Emperor of the
West, after it was divided from the East and the manner how
Charlemaine (as we have said) was the first called to that dignity, severed
and divided from the East, being at Rome, and having there restablished Pope
Leon, into his pontificacie, or bishops sea, whence the Romans had expelled
him: (as it is written) upon Christmasse day in the Evening, the Pope with a
loud voice proclaimed Charlemaine Emperor of the Romans, always August and
prosperous: and that Charlemaine refused to accept the Imperial title, without
the consent and favor of them of Constantinople, then chief seat of the
Empire, and of the Emperor him self, who was then there with his mother
Irene. Since that, The Imperial vocations in these days.
by reason of sundry troubles happened while the West Empire was vacant: as
well by means of diverse Princes, as of the Pope, either of them pretending
right and authority in the same, Otho. 3.
it was thought good in the time of the Emperor Otho. 3. Gregory. 5.
and of Pope Gregory the first of that name, (about five hundred years ago,)
that thencefoorth the Empire should be provided for, by voice of election. The
seven electors of the Emperor.
And that there should be seven Electours made, and created of the greatest
Princes of Almain, who should have power, and authority to choose him, To wit,
the Archebishops of Mayence, Coloigne, and Treuers: the king of Boheme, the
county Palatine of Rhene, the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquis of
Brandenburge: which is the manner observed even to our days, in calling
Emperors to that authority, and dignity.

CHAPTER. VII. Of the exterior vocation of them, which ought to govern
during the nonage, and minority of a king.
IT comes to purpose to treat here of an other vocation, no less necessary
then the Royal: to wit, of them, unto whom the government of a realm ought
to be given, the King being unable to command and rule, by reason of his
tenderness of age, that is to say, being under fourteen years: and
consequently, to know unto whom it apperteineth to call men thereunto. Some
be of opinion, Legitime vocation.
that (as we have said) the Royal vocation to be legitime in this realm, that
is to say: ruled by succession, introduced by the law, and not elective: that
so likewise the calling to that government, and charge ought to be judged
legitime. But the question has been, whether the same ought therefore to be
ruled according to the disposition of the civil law, which calls the next
of kin to suceede, and before him, the mother, Women debarred from all
administration by the Emperor Justinians constutions.
according to the Emperor Justinian his institution: because it has been
called again in doubt, whether the same constitution may and ought to reach
in a case of administration of so great importance, as the same of a realm:
the infirmity of the sex having been found such, that all other
administration (the same of her own children excepted) has been prohibited,
and defended her. Howbeit it is certain, if we will herein follow examples,
that we shall find infinite wives, as well of Kings, Emperors, and other
Monarchies, which have governed and ruled, both prosperously, and wisely, to
the well liking, and contentation of their subjects, during the Nonage of their
children. But it seems to many, that the particular disposition of the law
Salike for this realm, The law Salike.
does not in any case permit, that the female should be admitted to the same.
Whereunto a man might answer, that the law Salike does in deed exclude
women, but it is from the Royal title, and not from tuition, and government:
Feodarie customs.
no more then the laws, and chiefly our feodarie customs, do debar women
from the administration of fieofie, although they exclude them in diverse
places, from the segniorie, or souereigntie of the same. And whereas it may be
said, that there is great difference between the administration of a
kingdom, and the administration, and government of a fieofe: for answer
thereunto, among other particular examples of our histories, the example of S.
Loys mother is alleged: which in deed every man indeuoureth to wrest to his
own sense and purpose.

But there be some, which leaving this legitime vocation, will contrarily
maintain, The elective vocation.
that the same ought to be elective, according to the universal custom of
this realm, He means France.
by the which all tutelages be elective, commonly called datiues, and not
legitime: and that it should belong to the states of this realm to provide the
same by election, because the Royal, and most ancient law having
transferred all the right of commandment, and administration, which belonged
to the people, to one alone, and the exercise of that power, and authority
ceassing for a time in the person of him that can not exercise it, the same
ought in the mean while to return whence it came first, and remain there
until such time as there be, by their consent, meet and sufficient persons
provided and deputed, to exercise the same authority: allowing for all that,
that the legitime, ought to be preferred before all other. But though this
opinion were veritable, yet may men allege to the contrary thereof, the
tumulte, and confusion of a popular voice, and of the Commonaltie of a whole
Realm, chiefly in time of such troubles.

Among all these reasons, Conclusion upon the example of these days.
and means of the one side, and other, I can not find a better resolution
then the same, that we may gather of the order held in the prudent and wise
gouernemente we see at this present in this Realm, He means Charles the
ninth his days.
through the singular providence, and goodness of the most virtuous, and
wise Queen Mother, and of the well-beloved King of Navarre, chief of the
Princes, (in line collateral:) with the sage advise, and counsel of all the
other Princes, assisted by many other great personages well experimented in the
affairs of estate. All and every of them, according to their degrees, and
preeminence, called to the same administration, as well by mean of the
legitime, as of the elective vocation: not by the voice of a Commonaltie,
which in deed is both uncertain, and confused: but by the gratification,
and approbation of all men.

The odious name of Regencie, in the mean while, being buried, and kept under
silence: and all commandments, and ordinances made under the title Royal:
Of the government after Alexanders death.
as we read after the death of Alexander the great, that to avoid, and appease
the controversies, and contentions risen between sundry great personages, it
was by them wisely devised, to cause one of Alexanders fair and rich
pauillions to be set up, wherein their assemblies of counsel should be
made, to deliberate of the affairs of estate, and to ordeyne and command,
under the name and title of king Alexander, then already deceassed, (as we
have said,) and of none other.

CHAPTER. VIII. Of them that ought to be called to the government of the
Empire, when there is any lawful impeachement, to rule and govern, happened.
AS for them, unto whom the charge and government of the Empire ought to be
given, when as any like disturbance shall happen, speaking only of our West
Empire: there is very great difference between the same, and that we spoke
last of: because the same is provided by election, (as we have said,) and not
by the law of succession: so that they which be chosen, be always of
approved, and competent age, decent quality, and sufficiency. And therefore,
if there happen any impeachement, it must return again to the first way of
election. Thus much touching the ways, and means, which we have before
declared, ought necessarily to be observed, to enter orderly, and by due
means, into vocations. Adding further, The exterior testimony required in
some private vocations.
that though we have before said, that apparent testimony is only required,
and necessary in Public, and Common vocations: that, yet notwithstanding, it
lets not, but that the self same testimony is also required, and
necessary in private vocations: as we see by experience in sundry Towns, and
well ordered Cities, where no man is admitted to the Public exercise of diverse
Arts, Sciences, Professions, and Occupations, before he have made due proof
of his sufficiency.

CHAPTER. IX. Of the best form, and manner of all apparent Vocations: and
incidently of three kinds of civil estates, and of the best, and most
perfect manner to govern a Common weal.
HAving hitherto recited sundry means and ways of calling unto
Ecclesiastical, and Politic vocations, inferior to the Royal estate, and
dignity, and that, without declaring which of them we like best: it shall not
be amiss before we fall from the matter, briefly to show our opinion. Two
kinds of politic estates.
Wherefore ye must understand, that there be in number, three sorts and manners
of civil estates, to wit, three manners of governing of Commonweals,
assemblies, and societies of men: of the which, the first is by a Lord alone,
as by a King: the other, by the dominion of many, as the segniorie of Venice
is: and the third by a Commonaltie, as Swicerlande is. So that to tell
presently which of these kinds of vocations seems best unto us, the
answer shall be diverse according to the diversity of gouernementes: to wit:
That in respect of a popular estate, (I mean) well ordained, the best way,
and manner to call men unto vocations, shall be that, which shall be made by
the voice, and consent of all. And as touching the domination of many, likewise
well ruled, that which shall be made by the voice, and approbation of many, be
it by lotte, or by them both joined together, as Aristotle rehearses treating
of the election of Magistrates. And as for a Monarchy, likewise well founded:
that is to say, provided of a wise and discreet governor, complete in virtue
and justice: that which shall also be made by the advice of one alone:
accommodating the way of calling unto vocations, in each civil estate,
according unto the sundry manners of gouernemente of the same, presupposing
always the same to be ruled, and governed, by each one in his perfection.

Every politic estate apt to fall into the vice next at hand.
But for that each one of these estate, being by himself alone, has been
found imperfecte, and easy to vary, and fall into a vice which is his
familiar, and very nighe neighbor, by reason of the frailnes and imperfection
of man. Monarchy. Tyranny. Aristocracie. Oligarchie. Republique. Democracie.
As the simple Monarchy, into a government called, Tyranny: the dominion of
many, called Aristocracie, into a Monopole, or faction of certain ambitious,
and greedy persons, called Oligarchie: and the popular government, called a
Common weal, or Republique, into an unbridled license, and abandon, called
Democracie. All differing in this point, that some, which be the good, have no
other booty, and respect, but to the weale-publique: and the wicked, to their
own particular profit: The one like unto the government of the father, toward
his children: the other of that of a master, toward his servant. Those three
kinds of Public gouernmentes, that being each by himself alone imperfect,
by reason of the vice, imperfection, and in sufficiency of men, (as we have
declared,) they that have wisely treated of Commonweales, have been of opinion,
that to render a public estate very perfect, and complete, The most perfect
public state is the same, that is mixed with the three.
it is necessary to compounde, or at the least, to mix the same with the
three together, that the one might serve for a bridle, and counterpeise to the
other. In the which Civil government so framed of the three, we will say
likewise, that the most perfect, and best established manner of calling unto
vocations, shall be by those three ways also above said, conjoined together.

As, to make our meaning the better, and more familiarly to be understood, we
will now show as for an example of a Politic, and Royal estate well
ordained, the same of the Realm of France, because it has in the first
place, a King, sole, Example of the most perfect estate taken upon the realm
of France. Aristocracie.
and sovereign Lord above all other: and in the which, by reason of the
weakness of counsel, government, and wisdom that consists in one man
alone, there is a form of a Senate instituted, that is to say, a good, and
notable company, and assembly, of excellent personages, to maintain the law
(which only ought to command,) and justice, in their force. The which
does ratify, and approve the laws, statutes, ordinances, pardons, gifts,
alienations, graunts, and other things of like importance in the Public: and
in the which the people is maintained in moderate liberty, to be heard at
the provision of offices: yea, and in possibility, by virtue, to be
participant of the cheifest and sovereign handling of the Public, and in so
doing, to ascend to the greatest honors and dignities, The perfect estate is
mixed.
as well Politic, as Ecclesiastical. For in such a Politic estate, we find
the three Civil forms of government to be kept, and equally retained: I say
equally retained, according to the Geometrical proportion, and not the
Arithmeticall: that is to say, according to the dignity, and preeminence of
each Civil estate, the one above the other, as it ought, and as we see to be in
the composition of man's body. Because that in the first place, we find a
Monarchy, Of the Monarchall estate.
in the institution of a King alone, to honor, obey, and reverence above all
other: Neither more nor less, Artabanus and Themistoles.
(said the Persian Artabanus, to Themistocles, then the image of the living
GOD rules and governs this world. Aristocracie.
Then find we, that this Monarchy holds of the Aristocracie, in that the
same is aided and tempered, by the form of a Senate, we have spoken of, the
cause of the long continuance of kingdoms, Theopompe.
as Theopompe, King of Macedone said and we have before declared: And the
authority of the which Senate, Plato. A conterpeise.
is called by Plato, a counterpeise to the Royal power, and authority,
profitable and salutiferous to the universal body of the Common weal.

And beside all this, we find also, that this Public estate does participate
of the Republique, in that, that moderated liberty is reserved to the people,
whereof is engendered an obeisant amity of men, which neither be bond slaves,
ne yet excluded from honors, and dignities, no not from those which be the
greatest.

Then, to come to our point, we say, that even as that has been esteemed the
best manner of governing of a Common weal, The Realm of France: compounded
of three politic estates.
which is made by this Politic estate, partly compounded of the three, as
the realm of France is, which in deed is better then any other: That even
so, the best manner, and form to call unto vocations, is the same which is
participant, and composed of the three ways, we have before spoken of: howbeit
according to the excellency, and prerogative of each estate, unto the which
we have accommodated his form, and manner of calling unto vocations in the
same. The best way to call to vocations.
And in so doing, that the best manner of calling unto vocations, shall be the
same, which shall be made, first at the instance and request of the people:
unto whom the prerogative holding of the right of a Republique shall be
reserved, to have power to demand, and propose some such, as they shall
think to be the honestest men, and most worthy of Public, Politic, or
Ecclesiastical offices, and charges, each one in his own Country, City, or
Province. Then shall the right of election be referred to the judicial seat,
Chapter, or other Public order, Ecclesiastical, or Politic, established
above the other. And to the king the sovereign authority to approve and
authorize one of them that shall be thus first duly chosen, and then presented
unto him. And this fashion and manner of calling unto vocations, which be
Ecclesiastical, is the most ancient, and expressly spoken of by the
ordinances of the Church, made in the time of Boniface 3. of that name. As also
for the Civil estate, it is written many days ago, that the Roman Emperor
followed the manner, and form, the Christians observed at the choosing of
their Clergy, as we will straight declare, speaking of their office, and
duty, which have authority to call unto vocations. So that we can give no
better advise, then to reduce things to their original, and first beginning.

And to proceed further, we say that not only in the feate of vocations, and
the respect of the manner of calling thereunto, that consideration is best,
which has regard to the three Politic estates, intermingled as we have
said: but that also every good, wise, and politic man, in every act, or
counsel, which touches the Common commodity, The civil man ought always to
have respect to the three politic estates together.
ought still to have this consideration laid before his eyes: and do as the
good Physician, who to conserve the body in health, does not only look unto
certain members, or some one part of the fame, although it be the greater,
but universally to the whole body. For so undoubtedly ought every good
counselor of the Public to conserve equally the body of the Common weal,
in his perfection.

A mean power well conserved in every estate, preserves the universal body
of a Realm.
Because it is a point fully resolved in the Politic government, that there is
no one thing, that so much conserueth and mainteineth the same, as the
mediecritie of authority conserved in his mean, by just counterpeise of each
of the Civil estates together. As contrarily there is nothing yt so soon
causes the ruin thereof, as excessive authority: enterprised beyond
measure, The power of authority is not restrained within his limits, but by
force.
by one or other of those Politic estates, and gouernmentes of the Public.
Because that greatness and authority do not willingly contain themselves
within their measure, or limits, unless it be by force and constraint, which
once taken away, it cannot otherwise be, but all must come to a disorder, and
abandon.

For proof hereof, leaving a part sundry Realms, Examples of civil estates
perished by excess of authority.
as that of Assyria, Persia, and other, and also diverse Commonweals, and
Greek Aristocracies, perished by this excess of authority, in unequal
government enterprised by one of the Civil estates before rehearsed? Let us
only go go to the city of Rome, and we shall find, The royalty of Rome.
that the royal dignity took end by no other thing, then by the arrogant
authority the Kings usurped, despising the Senate and popular liberty. The
Roman republike.
And sithence the people being governed by Consuls and a Senate, we shall find
also, that the whole Civil estate was sundry times in great peril, sometimes,
because the Senate took too much on them, and otherwhile, by being too soft to
the people: So that in the end, the excess of power caused the change that
insued, by means of a number of flatterers and clawbackes, Flatterers abuse
them that be in authority.
which incontinently, to advance them selves, gathered about the same, causing
it to abuse his authority. As we may ordinarily see about Kings, which to the
like end, cease not to persuade them, that they alone may do all, and that
they need not to submit them selves to any other: following the counsel of
Theopompe, (of whom we have before spoken) his foolish and indiscreet wife,
until such time as they have brought them into ruin and loss of their
estate. Seeing not, or if they see it, desiring that it should not be seen,
that there is no better mean to command, then the latter, conjoined and
tempered with the three politic estates: ne yet better way to call unto
vocations, the^ the same which has such equal respect unto them, as we have
before declared. But it is time that we now speak of the office and duty of
such, as have authority to call unto vocations.

CHAPTER X. Of their duty and charge, which have power and authority to call
to vocations, Ecclesiastical, or Public: of what importance their charge
is: how hurtful the sale of offices is to the Common weal.
IT follows now to speak as well of their duty, which have the charge and
authority to call and provide, as of the^ which desire and intend to enter.
Much good and evil depends on them that have power to call men.
And to begin with them that have power to call, be it either to
Ecclesiastical or Civil charges: undoubtedly, there is no one thing of so
great importance in the Civil administration, ne yet whereof more good or
harm depends, then of the diligence and negligence of those, that have power
and authority, The principal party in government.
as being the principal point, and most requisite in the Civil government,
well to discern and choose the very nature and sufficiency of every man, that
is by them called and received into any public service. As it is said of the
good husbandman, that the knowledge he may have of the winds, of the quality
and disposition of the air, A comparison between them that have power to call,
and the husbandman.
and other things, which be in very deed most necessary in husbandry, be to
small purpose, unless he first be well acquainted with the nature and property
of each soil, and know what it may bear: as Virgil writes, saying: First
ought we learn by skillful use,
What ylke soil does brook or refuse:
Corn in one place, elsewhere vines thrive,
Each thing has place where best to live:
High trees best fruits often times forth bring,
But in deep dales, green meadows spring.


So it is undoubtedly of the nature and property of wits, inclinations, and
sufficiencies of men, each one in his degree, chiefly to be understood by
them, which ought to make choice and election in the Common weal. For even as
there is no member or part of man, be the same never so small or secret, which
has not his virtue and several property, greatly serving to the conservation
of the whole body: So is there no one wit, the which, so the same be well
chosen and employed, may not serve, and bring some fruit to the Common
utility. But to speak truly, such care and knowledge rests not in the
head of one alone, be he never so able: so great, and notorious is the
weakness of man. Aduertisment to them that undertake alone the authority to
call.
And they that enterprise this charge and authority alone, ought to take good
heed to that they do, and not to be easy and light in providing, before they
have well and nearly inquired, and diligently considered thereof. For, since it
is so, that one of the difficultest things to man, is to pick out, and choose
some kind of living, fit and convenient for him self, yea, though he be aided
by the knowledge of his own proper nature and inclination: Vocation to
offices, is a difficil thing.
how much more difficult a thing must it needs be, alone to provide for
offices, men meet and worthy of the Common government? Truly it is a thing
surpassing the ability and capacity of one alone, be he never so excellent.
Virtue is to be sought out where ever it abide.
So that the only virtue and sufficiency of men, meet for the exercise of
Ecclesiastical or Politic callings, must be only that, which must be sought
out, in what habitation so ever it harbor, be it either in young or old, poor
or rich, noble or common person: as if offices and public charges were the
rewards of virtue, and not of blood or race, or yet of wealth and riches.

But to come particularly to Ecclesiastical and Civil vocations: men had such
care in old time, Diligence used in old time in the vocation ecclesiastical.
to perform that which belonged to the Ecclesiastical, that not contented
with the politic election (whereof we have spoken,) they beside that, declared
and published the name of him that was chosen, that every man might be received
and heard, that knew ought worthy of blame and reproach by him.

And the Emperor Alexander Severe, who reigned about the birthe and first
foundation of the Christian Church, The Emperor Seuerus ordinance.
seeing the singular diligence Christians used, in the providing of
Ecclesiastical charges, made a constitution and ordinance, by the which,
following their example, he ordained, that the like should be observed for the
estates and offices of his Empire: saying (as Lampridius testifies of him,
Lampridius.
) that sith the Jews and Christians kept and used that most commendable
fashion, in purueying of their offices, by greater reason he also ought to
keep the same. And to speak more freely, since it is so, that they which have
this sovereign authority of God, Against retchlesnesse in the ecclesiastical
vocations.
to be as his vicars and lieuetenants, be most diligent and careful, in
seeking and finding of people meet and excellent for their particular service,
as Cooks, Barbars, Musicians, Faulconers, and other like, what excuse can they
allege or pretend, being less diligent in providing persons sufficient and
capable for the public service, and in seeing that offices be provided of
persons meet and capable, and not the persons of offices. Plato.
If it so were, says Plato, that the helm and governing of a ship were given
by favor of friends, or sold for money, without consideration of
sufficiency, (as Sylla said of young Marius: Sylla, and Marius.
) or that the rudder were given to him that knows not how to handle an oar:
in what danger and inconvenience should they of necessity be ere long, that
be in the same? So undoubtedly is it of every Realm or Common weal, governed
by persons established in the same, without regard of the weal public, and
respect to virtue and sufficiency. Nothing being more certain (as the
Emperor Justinian said) then that the beginning of all iniquity and
injustice, Justinian Emperor.
proceeds of the sale of public charges and offices. The spring of al
injustice comes of the sale of offices, Alexander Seuerus says.
For (as the Emperor Alexander of whom we spoke right now, said) it is
requisite that he that buyeth, sell again afterward. I will never suffer
(said he) that there be merchandise of offices in my Empire: for, if I permit
the same, I may not afterward punish, A custom observed at Rome, by them that
desired to enter into offices.
nor condemn men for selling, having before bought of me. Therefore the
ancient Romans, while their Common weal flourished, in token and testimony,
that no man ought to present him self, and much less be received by buying,
especial suit, money, or corruption, but by virtue, and for deserts sake: had a
custom, when their assemblies were made, to proceed to the election of
Magistrates and officers, to deck and clothe them selves in a white and single
loose garment, ungirt, and without iacket, and in this apparel to present them
selves to the place appointed, and simply by them selves, and not by other, to
request the citizens to have them in recommendation.

So that there never entered into men's heads a greater error nor fonder
opinion, It is an absurdity to hope for profit, of the sale of offices.
concerning politic affairs, then to have believed that the sale of offices
should bring commodity to a common weal: As if the principal force of a
kingdom, depended on the alms or gathering of money. As in our days, some
which have been greatly abused have thought. Not seeing that, quite contrarily:
it is the mean to overthrow and destroy the principal foundation of the
same: as present experience does but over well teach us. Aratus. Which is the
most assured treasure a Prince may have.
The same being far truer that Aratus said to Philip son to Antigonus king
of Macedon, that there was no treasure or profit more assured to a Prince,
then the government of a Common weal, and the conduction of men, well
ordained: ne yet a stronger and better fenced fortress, then the love,
fidelity, and good will of subjects. For, as Plato says, Plato.
it is not the scepter of massiue gold, that is to say, wealth and riches,
that makes Princes to prosper, but the obedient amity of their subjects.

Oh, I would to God that we had hitherto had the force and virtue of men in
more estimation, The virtue of men more recomme^dable, then that of money.
then the force and virtue of money: and then had we not seen the trouble and
disorder in all estates that we now see, the Public estate and zeal being
converted into gain and merchandise, not without great shame and dishonor to
them chiefly, that have set the shop open to al men, making offices no less
common, then a harlot in the stues. So that it is a difficult thing in these
days, to find one, unto whom a man may not say, Julius Caesar's saying, to
Silla.
as Julius Caesar said merrily unto Sylla, vaunting in choler, that he would
use against him the authority and power that his office gave him: Thou have
reason (said he) to call that same thine own office, for it is thine in
deed, since that thou have bought it. A detestable thing, and by the which the
study of virtue has been sore decayed, every man seeing the same avail so
little to the obteining of offices, and aduauncing to degrees of honors. For
even as (says Marcus Cato. Marcus Cato.
) Diers for the most part die the color which they see is most sought for,
Virtue quaileth by selling of offices.
and leave the same yt has less cost: So men naturally give the^ selves to
yt, which they see most esteemed and honored, be it virtue or vice. And ye
must not think that the utter destruction and ruin of the Roman Republique,
The ruin of the Roman Republique by sale of offices.
above all other that ever were, the most excellent and renowned, has taken
his beginning from elsewhere, then from this merchandise and traffic of
offices: and when as the people made account thereof: as an ordinary gain,
selling offices openly without shame or fear, for ready money. Whereof they
failed not to make their profit, which coueted no other, but the mutation and
change of the state.

Discommoditie and hurt coming by the sale of offices.
So that he spoke most wisely in my judgment, that said, that he that first
gave money to the people of Rome to enter into offices, took from them their
authority, and was therewithal, cause of the utter ruin of their Common
weal. Because that this corruption being once entered in the provision of
offices, is of such nature, that soudenly it passes from hand to hand, unto
the Judges sentences, and in the end perceth so deep, that it spotteth and
soyleth all clean things, after it have once made the chief of the Common
weal bondslaues to money. So that for conclusion, as Paul Aemile said, that,
Paul Aemile
for a man to vanquishe or be vanquished in the wars, was but an accident of
well or evil choosing and raunging of his people in battle: All
inconveniences happening to commonweals, come by fault of due vocation unto
offices.
we may well enough also say, that even so likewise the prosperity and decay
of a Common weal, is no other, but an accident of a good or evil election,
and provision in offices, of persons meet and necessary for the same. Which
shall suffice for that which concerns them, that have authority to call unto
vocations. Let us now come to them that be desirous, and intend to enter into
the same.

CHAPTER. XI. Of their duties which seek to enter into vocations: and how
that no man ought to intrude him self.
Now to come to them, which intend and have desire to enter into public and
Ecclesiastical vocation: we will first say, that no man ought to enter, or
intrude him self into any vocation: that is to say, unless he enter by the
ways and means here before declared, being thereunto called by him, that has
power and authority to do ye same. Example of the Paininies. Of Cato and his
Son.
A point in deed straightly kept and observed by the Ethnickes, witness yt
which is left us written of Cato, writing for his son, to Pompilius chief of
the Roman army, because he had cassed certain ensigns, under the which his
son, as then unwilling to retire him self, was. I pray thee (wrote he) that
it may be upon a new oath, yt my son may follow thee: for being discharged
of his former, it is not lawful for him to fight, unless he be first duly
received by thee, and by the way he ought to be. And he wrote as much to his
son, and commanded him expressly, that he should beware, otherwise of his
own head, to present him self to the combat. Wherein we have in our days
seen diverse ouershoote them selves fowly, and also full evil befall them,
because that of their own head, and without other commandment they entered,
and left them selves be shut up in towns and castles besieged, exposing their
persons indiscreetly, to the peril and danger of the enemy, without being
otherwise at all orderly and duly, as they ought thereunto called.

Furius Camillus.
Furius Camillus in like manner, at that time that Rome, (all saving the
Capitole, wherein certain of the inhabitants were retired) was taken by the
galleys, being chosen by common consent of al them that had abandoned the
city, to be their Captain: said, ye he might not accept that charge, unless
he were first lawfully chosen, and confirmed by the voice and suffrage of them
that were then besieged in the capitole: Because (said he) that they be those
at this present, which may represent the body of the city, by whose
commandment and consent, I may enter into ye charge, and not otherwise. Aratus
a valiant and famous personage among the Grecians, Aratus blamed for intrusion.
being deputed Captain of the Achaians, was blamed and openly reprehended,
because that he had of him self seized the office of a Magistrate, and
anticipated the time, although but of five days only, yea, though it was done
to succor the territory of Messia, left in pray unto the enemies, by
Timoxenus, then Lieutenante general.

And truly it falls ordinarily so out, They that intrude them selves be
rejected of God
that he that beside his lawful vocation, desires the government of the
Public, and of his own motion intrudeth himself into affairs, is rejected
of God, as we will show herafter, speaking of the constancy that is to be
retained in each man's vocation. There is an old Roman law made by V.
Publicola, Valerius publicola.
by the which he was condemned to loose his life, that durst undertake to
exercise any charge, A law against intrusion.
which had not been lawfully given him: As if the Romans had esteemed that
there was no injustice greater, or more detestable, then to usurp an
authority, or power, of himself. If we will mark the Epistles of Saint
Paul, Saint Paul witnesses his vocation: and so does our savior Christ also.
we shall not see him in any one thing more diligent, then in testifying his
vocation to be legitime. And also, if we must needs come to the Son of GOD,
has he not alleged the manifest testimony of his father, and of S. John,
teaching us thereby, what and how great reverence we ought to bear unto
vocation, being impossible otherwise to prosper in the same.

CHAPTER. XII. That neither the good intent or zele, or yet the sufficiency of
him that intrudeth him self, or yet the very want or need of those that
exercise vocations: may serve for excuse to them, that enter uncalled: And how
that it behooves to attend patiently until we be called
AND a man may not stand or stay upon a good intent or zeal, nor yet upon
his own sufficiency, thinking by that means to enter of his own head
uncalled: Although, which is more, that the fact enterprised were of it self
greatly to be esteemed, The delivery of a country from tirannie.
and praise worthy. For (as for example,) there is nothing more commended
among men, be they Historians, Orators, or Philosophers, the^ the deliverance
of the City or Country from Tyranny: And yet he is manifestly condemned, who
uncalled, that is to say, vnappointed to the office of a Magistrate for
redress of Public wrongs, and without lawful authority, dare of himself
do such an enterprise. And to proceed further, is there ought not only
before men, The preaching of the gospel.
but also before GOD, more to be esteemed, then the preaching of the Gospel?
And yet, though thou were the most sufficient Divine that ever was, if thou
be not thereunto called, (as has here before been said,) undertaking the same
of thy self, thou art culpable, and blame worthy. And it suffices not to
say, that necessity, and the want of good Preachers moved thee thereunto: for
God is the Lord of the harvest, (says Jesus Christ,) who will send harvest
folk, when it shall please him. Teaching us, that our office in the mean
while, is to pray unto him, that it may please him to send us them.

The Magistrates fault.
As we may in like case say, of that which concerns the Public estate, that
the fault or rechelesnesse of Magistrates, Julius Caesar rebuked.
may be no sufficient cause, for a private man, of himself, to take upon him
the punishment of offenders. So did Julius Caesar, over rashely, having never
before had any Public charge, when he, of his own private authority, caused
certain Cilician Rouers and Sea Pirates, which he had taken, to be hanged and
set on the Cross at Pergamus, under color, that Iunius, Praetor (or Shirife)
of Asia, unto whom he went to crave justice, had showed himself cold and
slack in doing of punishment: which could not give him authority io do it
of him self. Nasica reproved.
No more then before him, unto Nasica, who having requested the Consul
president of the Senate, Tiberius Graccus slain
because Tiberius Graccus faction raised a tumulte in Rome, that he would
succor the weal Public: and having received this wise and well advised
answer of the Consul, that he would not begin by force, and laying of
hands, before condemnation pronounced: For all that, rising in choler, under
pretexte (said he) that the sovereign Magistrate made no account of
succoring of the Republique, furiously took arms, and by force, seditiously
slew Tiberius. Wherein, as the Consul showed himself a very wise man, so did
the folly and rashness of Nasica, appear very great, undertaking that,
which by no means was permitted him.

And it behooves, that every man, in the mean while keep himself patiently
and constantly in the place and estate he is in, Men ought to abide patiently
in their places tarrying until they be called.
(as shall more amply be declared hereafter) without hasting himself hedlong,
or fearing that God does not see him, in what place so ever he be, or may be,
be the same never so base. For God looks down, even to the basest and lowest
things: no place being so hid and secret, in the which he finds him not, and
out of the which he draws and takes him not, whenever it be his good
pleasure to serve his turn with him.

As we read of Marcus Curious, whom he found out well enough, Marcus Curious.
sitting in the Country by his fire side, to place him in the Senate of Rome.
And Quintus Cyncinnatus at the ploughe, Quintus Cyncinnatus.
to advance and promote him to the supreme degree of Dictator. Joseph also a
long time before, Joseph. Moses. Saul. Jonas.
was well enough found out in prison, and made governor general of Egypt.
Moses amiddest his sheep, to be prince over the people of Israel. Was not
Saul also found out seeking his fathers Asses, to be promoted to the Royal
dignity? And to be short, Jonas, in the very whales belly, to be sent to the
Ninevites? And thus of other.

CHAPTER. XIII. That the suing for an office, by honest means, is not to be
reproved.
But in thus disuading each one from entering into vocations, by any other mean
or way, The pursuit of an office by honest means allowed.
then by orderly calling only, without intruding himself: I mean not for all
that, to reprove, as a pernicious or evil thing, their intention, which moved
with good zeal, do of their own motion present them selves to some vocation
and charge, and especially which by honest means sue for the same: rather
because that they deserve it well, Plutarche.
then of set purpose to obtain the same by ambitious brigging, (as Plutarch
said writing to Traiane: Example of Cato of Vtica
) and more in respect of the Common profit, then of any particular. As it is
written of Cato of Vtica, who had oftentimes been solicited by his friends, to
ask the office of Tribune of the Roman people, and would never give ear unto
them, although he might easily have obtained the same, Metellus.
until such time, as certain years after, he was advertised that Metellus,
by the encouragement and instigation of Pompeie, meaning to raise parcialities
and factions, made friends to get the same: saying then, An honest man ought
to seek to enter into offices, A notable saying.
for the Commonweals sake: and that though he might oftimes very easily have
got that office, he would never require the same, while there was nothing a
do, but had reserved himself to pursue it, when as it behooved, not without
great danger, to fight for the commodity, and weal of the Common estate,
Pompeie and Crassus.
and protection of liberty. As within a while after to resist Pompeies, and
Crassus rash enterprises brigging for the Consulshippe, he did in deed present
himself, and asked the office of Praetor, to the end, said he, that the same
might serve him as a fortress, to make head against their Consulship: and that
being no private person, he might have the more authority to resist them,
which held the first and principal place of commandment. Which
undoubtedly be considerations worthy of a virtuous man, seeking to enter into
the administration of a Common weal.

It is written, He that desires the charge and function of a Pastor and
Bishop, desires a good work. And Esaie being asked of God, The Prophet Esaie.
what he should be who^ he should send, said straight, Send me Lord, Lo I am
here. The good intention excuses not the pursuit made by corruption
The Roman laws have not condemned or reproved the honest suing or seeking of
an office, or government, so that it were without presents, money, or
corruption, for that which ought to be purchased by virtue, should not be
bought with money, no, though his meaning who pursued, Example of Bibulus
obteining of the Consulshippe. The ambitious pursuit, of Themistocles.
tended to a good end. As theirs was, which meant, by the consent of Cato, (a
virtuous and well renowned personage,) to bring, or labor to get Bibulus
Consulshippe by corruption, to hinder the ambitious election of Lucilius,
labored for by Julius Caesar. And as Themistocles meaning was also, who
fearing least al should be lost, if Epicides, son to Euphanides, were chosen
general, to conduct the wars against the King of Persia: Epicides.
because he was a coward, and subject to money, bought with ready coin
Epicides ambitious pursuit, of set purpose to prevent and make him leave off
his enterprise.

The honest compassing of offices commended in the city of Sparta Plutarche.
It is most certain, that by the Grecian laws and customs, this virtuous and
honest acquisition of Public charges, was not prohibited, no, not in the
city of Sparta, which has been the best policied, and ordained of all the
towns of Greece, chiefly in the time of Lycurgus, of who^ Plutarch speaking,
says, that the same was as then, the most honorable pursuit, and the most
honorable combat that might have been seen among men, that was made, (if it so
happened ye Senator died,) for his place, in the which the law would that the
honestest man of the town should be substituted. For he (says he) bare away
the price from all pursuers, not that was the swiftest among the swift, or the
strongest among the strong, or the richest among the rich: but who was the
most virtuous among the virtuous, reaping for reward of his virtue, full
power, and sovereign authority, in the government of the Common weal.

He that presents himself ought to be well provided and instructed
But he also that will present himself to demand and sue for any charge, ought
to prepare himself, and be well instructed in all that apperteineth unto the
exercise and sufficiency of the same, and by good reason: much more then he
that determines with him self to tarry until he be called, Example of Cato.
without making other mean or suit. As it is written of the same Cato, of
whom we spoke right now, that he being determined to demand the office of a
Questor, would never attempt the same, before he had diligently ouerread ye
decrees and ordinances which concerned the charge and office of a Questor: and
which is more, until he had particularly inquired of all the points thereof,
of those which had longer experience to know summarily, what the power and
authority, of that office was, Against them that present themselves ill
instructed and provided. Euribiades.
that he might be fully capable and sufficient, before he opened his mouth to
ask the same. And to him, whatsoever he be, that would otherwise advance him
self, might that justly be said, that Euribiades said to Themistocles, that
in games of price, and of running, they that rise and make their course, before
the time appointed, ought to be chastised, and sent back again. Thus, the
honest pursuit, as before, Pursuit ought to be made without doing wrong to
others.
shall not be to be reproved, so it be made without doing wrong, injury, or
damage to any other person, although he were a competitour, and laboring or
suing for the self same thing: A good comparison. Crysippus.
for nether more nor less (said Crysippus) then they that run, and seek to
win the price in wagers of running, do but their endeavor, when every of them
does what he can with slight, might, and maine, to be former, and win, so that
it be without shouing and thrusting with his hand, tripping, or other let of
his companions race: so is it a thing blameless in this life, if every man
seek to get that he thinks decent, profitable, and convenient for himself,
Lucius Lucullus.
so that he do it without wronging any other body. The honest modesty of
Lucius Lucullus in this point, Marcus Lucullus.
was greatly esteemed of the Roman people, because that, seeing his younger
brother Marcus Lucullus suing for an office in Rome, he would never demand or
accept any before him, but tarried his brothers time, and opportunity, and let
slip his own: by which his courtesy, he entered so much into the good grace
of the people, that being absent he was chosen Aedile, and his brother also
with him, for his sake, both at one time.

CHAPTER. XIIII. That we ought not to be offended, if we cannot atteine unto
the vocation sought, or sued for: and whence the great grief of a refuse
proceeds.
But if there hap a repulse or refuse of ye vocation labored for, I am of
opinion also, that he that has failed of his purpose, ought not to enter into
any sorrow or trouble of mind, A fond custom.

Cassius offended with Brutus, because because he was preferred before him.


as they did in times past at Rome, not only the refused, but also their
Parents, Friends, and Alies, with a disgrace which continued certain days:
nor yet to fall at debate and contention with his competitor, as Cassius
seeking to be Praetor Vrbane of Rome, did with his brother in law Brutus,
because that Julius Caesar, preferred Brutus in the same: and with therewith
all, He that is put back ought to think, that he has sped as well as he that
is received.
that he should think himself to have received no less then he that has
spedde.

As it is written of the gatherers of Manna from heaven, that he that had the
most, had no more then he that had least. And much less ought he to esteem
himself rejected of GOD, but rather to think that he is in singular favor
with him, because that refuse is more to his commodity, then if it had
happened otherwise, since he has declared his good pleasure to be such. For if
it had not pleased him so, it had not ben in the power of man that it should
have chanced otherwise. At the least he ought to do no less then the Painime
Grecian Paedaretus, Paedaretus rejoices because he could not obtain an office
he sued for.
who failing to be of the number of the three hundred of Sparte, returned
iocund and merry unto his house, because (said he) I have this day known the
town of Sparte most happy, to be so well provided of men, that it has three
hundred more worthy and sufficient then my self. And the Roman Cato, was he
not maruelously commended for his modesty toward his competitor Publius
Sulpicius, Cato bare patiently the refuse of an office he labored for.
after he had been vanquished by him, in the pursuit of the Consulshippe?
because he said nothing else, but that men should not marvel, if he would not
yield or give to any other, that, which he esteemed the greatest bliss that
might happen unto himself, although that Sulpicius had received great honor
and advancement by his mean? Whence the grief of a refuse proceeds.
Truly to take at the heart a denial or refuse of any honor, proceeds of
no other thing, but to have too egerly and beyond measure desired the same. And
even as we ought not to be proud of any honor, so likewise ought we not to
abase or trouble our selves for any denial what soever that may happen: The
office of a good Citizen.
because it is the part of a good Citizen, to keep himself always alike
ready, and to offer his body and wit, to serve the Common weal.

CHAPTER. XV. Whether a man being disorderly and unduly entered into any
vocation, may lawfully brook and abide in the same: and whether the
administration in the mean while, done by him that is unduly entered, ought to
hold or be of force.
AND the pursuit made by such honest means as we have spoken of, is so far
from blame, as that although it so fell out, that a man were entered into any
Public charge and administration, be the same Ecclesiastical or Public, by
a dishonest meaning, yea, by unlawful means, (although that such a thing be
an evil example, Whether his administration that is unduly entered, ought to be
approved or not.
and hard to prosper, for that very seldom or never comes an evil beginning
to a good end:) yet for all that, if such a one reform his former intention,
and conform himself as he ought to do to his vocation, I dare boldly say,
that he of himself does not amiss, (where there is a superior, who has power
over him,) to abide in his office: for all vocations of themselves continue
always good, and there is nothing but the perverse intention of man corrupted
with disobedience, that is to be reproved. Yea, though he that is unlawfully
admitted, continue still in his perverse intention, men hold opinion, that,
that which has been done during his government, ought not therefore to be
disanulled, because of the consequence of that which has been done during the
same: as for this only occasion Cicero was resisted, Cicero resisted.

Example of Clodius.


going about to have made void all ye had been done by Clodius, during his
Tribuneship: not for that, that Clodius was not known to be a wicked man, and
unduly admitted to ye Tribunship, as a Patrician and noble man: but for the
consequence and inconvenience only that might have insued. Sylla, and Caesar.
For the which respect, all that Sylla, and Caesar had done, was approved by the
Senate, although the one of them had declared himself Dictator, and the other
usurped by force the Monarchy of Rome. But though this treatise asks a
longer discourse, yet because it is somewhat from our purpose, we will leave
the fame, and return whence we came fro.

CHAPTER. XVI. That men may sometimes intrude themselves into offices.
ALthough this rule be most true and certain, that no man ought to enter of
his own head into any Public vocation: yet for all that, such necessity may
sometimes happen, that it ought to have no place. As for example, in the Common
government, although the Public revenge and defense apperteine only unto
Magistrates: yet, if in place, out of the presence and succor of Magistrates,
any man be assailed by robbers or thieves, so that power and resistance be
required, he may, and ought without fear, to help and defend him self, and
use the force and authority of the sword, which otherwise apperteineth to
Magistrates only. As the Divines say likewise in the Ecclesiastical estate,
if it so happen that there be need and want of Church men, and in all other
like cases, led by the necessity of brotherly charity, yt then the same is
permitted to every one, which belongs to the Ecclesiastical duty and
office, although that otherwise it be prohibited.

CHAPTER. XVII. Of them which will not intrude themselves, but rather draw
back, and take away all occasions that might cause them to be called, or being
called refuse the same.
THus have we hitherto seen, how that it is not lawful for us to intrude our
selves, or enter into vocation, unless we be thereunto duly called. But there be
some that be so far off from presenting, or intruding of themselves, that
thinking to do better, they contrarily flee, and as much as in them lies take
away all occasions which may cause them to be called: of the which this is a
meet place to speak. Vocations exposed to many dangers.

The state of marriage. Menander.

The politic estate.


Because there be many, which seeing vocations to be things of great charge,
and exposed to many perils, dangers, and adventures: be it that we look on the
domestical state of marriage, which the Poet Menander likeneth unto a
navigations amiddest waves and tempests: or else on the politic estate,
exposed to so many ingratitudes and slanders, wherewith so many great
personages have been oppressed: Notable examples.
as among the Graecians, Lycurgus, Solon, Aristides, Themistocles: among the
Romans, Camillus, Scipio, Lentulus, Cicero, and infinite others, Themistocles
dissuaded his son from meddling with government.
which have been constrained to say that honors, dignities, and public
administrations, were no other thing, but funeral pompes. Wherefore
Themistocles father, seeking to dissuade his son from intermedling himself
with the government of the Common weal, The ecclesiastical estate.
went along the sea coaste, showing unto him the bodies or hulles of old
galleys cast here and there without any count made of them, telling him, that
men did the like of governors: when they were able to serve no longer. Or be
it also that we consider the Ecclesiastical estate, wherein through al ages,
there have been so many disturbers, wicked ministers, vessels of wrath, sowers
of heresies and dissentions.

Considering then so many inconveniences, such servitude and subjection in
vocations full of sweat and travel, The cause why sundry have forsaken their
vocations. Thales to Solon.
some have kept them selves from marriage: as among other, Thales, who seeing
Solon sore troubled with the news that were brought him of his sons death,
said thus unto him: Thou must understand, Solon, that the fear of the self
fortune, that is happened unto thee, disturneth and keeps me from marriage,
and desire to have children.

Other have forsaken and given over all charge, and administration of the Weal
Public, and other subjection: Diocletian, and Maximian: Metellus, and
Lucullus: Crates and Diogenes.
and in stead thereof, have given themselves to the following of their
pleasures and delights, preferring their particular ease, before the public
profit: as it is written of Diocletian and Maximian Emperors: and before them
of Metellus and Lucullus. Other (as Crates and Diogenes) laughed and scorned
all worldly things, yea, all order and government also, as things not only
uncertain and subject to the wheel of Fortune, but also accompanied with
infinite care and travel, hindering the fruition of the true felicity. Other
have through fear and want of courage fled the meddling in affairs, Nicias.
as the Athenian Nicias, who did always eschew the honors and charges of the
Commonweal, although he were oftimes chosen thereunto by his Citizens, as the
honestest and worthiest man of the Town. Other because they be called to mean
offices, thinking them selves worthy of greater and better: or else because
they had before had and exercised worthy charges: following not therein the
example of Quintus Fabius, Quintus Fabius.
who after he had been Consul, and above all other, disdained not to march in
the wars under other Consuls. The contemplative life.
Other preferring the contemplative before the active life, have retired
themselves out of Commonweals, and company of men, founding themselves upon
this sentence, that there is no better thing for a man, then to live to
himself, and in such sort as it be not known that he has lived: and
therefore have forsaken and refused their vocations they were called unto: as
it is written among other, Amonius.
in the Ecclesiastical history, of a Monk named Amonius, who seeing himself
called to the function and dignity of a Bishop, cut off his own ears,
threatening also to cut out his tongue, if they pressed him any nearer to
accept such a charge. And other moved, I know not with what kind of contempt,
hatred and disdain of the conversation of men, Conon. Gabrias. Timon.
Alcibiades.
have left and abandoned their society: as among other, Conon, Gabrias, and
one named Timon, who fleeing the frequentation of all men, would converse with
no one, but with Alcibiades alone, and that because (said he) that he alone
should one day be cause of the total ruin and destruction of the Athenian
Common weal: so much did he abhor the company and frequentation of men.

Of all which, to answer truly, They that flee vocation shoot at the self
same mark that kings do.
me thinks needelesse to say ought else, but that which Cicero speaking of
this manner, said, that it is greatly to be feared, least that those kind of
people shoot at the self same Butte and end, that Kings, Princes, and great
Lords do: that is to say, to live at their pleasure, without pain, care, and
trouble, out of all subjection and servitude, not being able to endure and
supporte the molestations, necessities, injuries, reproaches, and slanders,
ingratitudes, and persecutions accustomed, and which the parties called to
vocations and Public charges received ordinarily, but being overcome with
impatience and indignation, to see before their eyes so many evils, confusions,
disorders, and wickednesses, in the assemblies of men.

Contemplation is lame, without the action.
And as for speculations and the contemplative life: knowledge and contemplation
only (as we will show hereafter) is a lame and imperfect thing, unless the
same be so accompanied with the action, use, and handling of affairs to the
Common profit and service of men. And yet will I not deny, but that in some
vocations and professions, Contemplation more necessary in some professions,
then in other some.
contemplation is more needful and necessary, then in other some, and
therewithal, the restrainte of the action very commendable in them, which by
excellency of wit and understanding, have wholly given themselves to lerning
and writing, for the instruction and erudition of others, or otherwise to do
some thing beneficial to the society of men: As Plato and his Scholemaister
Socrates, Plato and Socrates.
who being on a time asked (as Xenophon writes,) why it was, that he having
traveled so much to make good governors, and administratours of Commonweals, did himself notwithstanding, so earnestly flee the administration, and
government of the same, without ever having vouchsafed to undertake the rule
of any: asked for answer, whether of the two were the better, and most
beneficial to a Common weal: to govern the weal Public himself, or to
teach, and learn to do the same well. And yet was Isocrates in the like
case, Isocrates.
greatly commended, because he abstained by the space of the four score and
eighteen years of his life, from al charge and public administration, It is
a robbeie of the common weal, to frustrate the same of the service due by all
men.
it being for all that most certain and assured, that it is no less injury
to a Common weal, to frustrate and disappoint the same of the common service
due by nature according, unto the gift, grace, and ability that every man
has received, to be employed to the Public commodity and profit of all
men, then to rob and spoil other men of their goods.

So that we say, It is a wicked part to refuse the government of a common
weal.
that even as it is not lawful for a man to intrude himself into any
vocation, before he be thereunto duly called: so to refuse the same, or else to
take away such occasions as might cause him to be called thereunto, is a
wicked, cowardly, lewd, and perverse thing. The girde Saturninus gave unto
Marius.
Wherefore Saturninus spoke unto Marius like a virtuous man, calling him
Traitor, because he refused the Consulshippe in time of trouble and necessity:
saying, The reproach the Athenians gave to Aratus.
that to refuse such a charge in time of peril and need, was nothing else,
but to betray the Common weal. As the Athenians did in likewise reproach
Aratus, refusing to be their Captain general, in the most distress of their
troubles, that he did as the Mariner, who abandoned and forsook the helm of
his ship, even when the tempest was most vehement and outrageous. As also may
be said of every Public charge, unless there be a very just cause and
consideration, which dissuadeth him that he is called. For it is not said,
that it is always necessary for a man to accept the vocation he is called
unto, because he may sometimes have just and reasonable occasion to refuse the
same.

As the secret and assured testimony, Just causes why to refuse public
charges. The time.
of his own inability, or infirmity, be it of the body, wit, or age,
causing insufficiency, or else some other occasion grounded on the time, which
peradventure would not suffer him yt should receive ye office to exercise ye
same with such diligence and liberty as he ought to do. Example of Cato.
Which was the cause why Cato (whom we have so often remembered) being careful
of the Common weal, dissuaded his son to intermingle or entangle himself with
the government of the Republique, in time of tyranny: Because (said he) that
to do as it should behooue the dignite of Cato his son, the quality of the
time and affairs would not permit, Pompeius Atticus would never sue for any
public charge, and the cause why
and to do otherwise, was neither decent nor honest. As it is likewise written
of Pompeius Atticus, that he would never ask or sue for any charge or office,
because the manners of his time could not permit him to enter thereunto, with
the sincerity required by the laws. An honest man in a corrupt time
resembles unseasonable fruit.
And to speak truly, an honest and sound man in a corrupted time, is very
like unto fruits coming out of season. For even as men see them gladly, and
praise them with admiration, without using them: So the ancient innocence
being once grown out of ure, and after long distance of time coming to show
it self again, amiddest the corrupt lives and depraved manners of men,
purchases assuredly great glory and renown: But otherwise, the same is not
found sortable to be set about any work, meet to be employed in
affairs: because that the gravity and perfection of virtue, is
disproportioned to the corruption of the time.

The knoweledge of a more sufficient man, is a reasonable cause of refuse
Further, if he that is called to any vocation known in his conscience any one
sufficienter or meeter for the advancement of the Common service then
himself, he ought to be deemed to have just cause of refusalls, as it shall
more amply be declared hereafter, when we shall speak of the constancy that
is to be retained in vocations. There be many circumstances to be well
considered of, by him; that is chosen to bear any office, before he refuse the
same. Which for all that come al to one point, which is, that his refusal ought
to be more founded upon the consideration of the common profit, then upon his
own particular, wherein undoubtedly a man may easily err. And if we will
narrowly examine the foolish and indiscreet, ambitious, and extreme avarice of
our time, we shall find that the example of late happened in the person of
Mounsier de Moruillier, Mounsier de Moruillier.
bishop of Orleans, is both monstrous, miraculous, and also worthy of memory:
Because that after that he had been called to be of the kings privy counsel,
as one who had handled the affairs of France, both abroad and at home, in
great reputation, known of all men to be of no less experience then learning,
good life and conversation: being chosen to be Chancellor of France, which is
the sovereign dignity, yea, if a man might so call it, the Solstice of the
honor of justice, he would not accept the same. Wherein truly his great
wisdom and integrity may not suffer him to be taxed, as having more respect
to his own particular, then to the public, or else that any one should say,
that by so doing, he loved him self better then the public, or yet reproach
him of pusillanimitie: for he has given sufficient proofs of his magnanimity,
always accompanied with zeal and labor, employed for the Common weal. So
that I can not impute the cause of the same his refusal, but to one of these
two points, or else peradventure to them both at once: that is, to the time,
(which I dare boldly affirm to be such, as the like whereof has not been many
years sithence:) or else to the charge of his Ecclesiastical vocation,
esteeming him self unable to bear two so great burdens at once. But such
considerations, worthy in deed of a most honest man, fall not commonly into
every man's brain.

Neither do I mean to reprove the modesty and reverence, The humble and
modest refusal of public charges is not to be reprehended. Moses. Saul.
Examples. Numa Pompilius.
proceeding of the humble acknowledging of him self, whereby offices have
oftentimes been and may, with some honest excuse, be refused. As Moses called
of God, to retire his people out of Egypt, answered, Lord, who am I? And Saul
seeing him self chosen king of Israel, moved with a commendable
shamefastness, hid him self, and retired out of the company of them that had
chosen him. And Numa Pompilius king of Rome, who began his answer with an
honest refuse: and so in likewise infinite other. But for all that, without
approving or allowing of their saying, Of them that say that we ought to accept
any public charge uncompelled. Plato. Conclusion, upon the^ which desire or
refuse public charges.
which thinking to speak modestly, have affirmed, that a man ought not to
accept or enter into any public vocations, but by constraint, or unless he
be compelled. For that which is voluntary in virtuous things, is much more to
be commended, then that which is forced: unless that with Plato, we will
understand, constraint to be a modest refuse, tarrying for commandment and
entreaty. For conclusion, even as it is the part of a wise and virtuous man,
not to extol him lightly in vain hope and opinion of him self, and less to
be dazed at the brightness or excellency of an honorable office or dignity:
So after he be once orderly called, and that he have modestly excused him
self, to stand or strive any further, is the part of an indiscreet man,
bearing but small reverence to the authority of vocation: nor yet such respect
as he ought to do, to the commodity of the common society.

CHAPTER. XVIII. Whether one man may duly be called to two vocations: and
first, of sundry domestical, and other private vocations at once.
AND since it is so, that we diligently search out all that apperteineth unto
vocation, meaning to leave no one thing behind, if we can possibly, as
certainly we desire and seek to do to our power: It is not out of purpose to
ask in this place, whether one man may be duly called to two vocations and
manners of living, and consequently intermeddle him self, in the exercise of
them both at once. And to answer the same, it is very clear, Domestical
vocations be compatible in one person.
that the domestical vocation in it self, which consists in fathers,
mothers, children, masters, and servant, does tolerate ye office of father,
son, master, and servant, al at once. And also, Domestical vocations
compatible with the private.
that the same is not incompatible with private vocations: as with a
domestical, to be an husbandman, artificer, or merchant: for though those
callings be unlike, Of sundry private vocations together. Plato.
yet does ye one bring no impediment to the other: but that one man may
exercise many private vocations together. Plato in his treaty of laws, says,
That the imbecillitie of man's nature permits not, that two arts sciences, or
occupations, may be at once exercised by one man: although that in an other
place he tells, (but as it were for a wonder) of one Hippias, Hippias.
who being in good array, used not the help of any other workma^, to make his
clothing and apparel, but his own hands: Plato his law.
wherefore (says he) it shall stand for a law in every city, that no workman
or artificer, shall use two occupations at once, but every artificer shall plie
his own art, and seek to gain his living by the same: and if any man do the
contrary, let him be compelled to cleave to one and no more, either by
imprisonment, penalty, or banishment. And undoubtedly, there is great
appearance in this law and ordinance that Plato made, because the same is
grounded on the infirmity and weakness of man: which has since that, Aristotle.
ben followed by Aristotle in his Politikes, saying: That nature had given to
every one of her creatures, Man resembles not the Delphike sword.
his particular office and charge: and has not made man, like unto the
Delphike sword, which serves to many and sundry uses.

CHAPTER XIX. Of domestical vocations joined with the Public. Politic, and
Ecclesiastical: and of the domestical vocation of marriage, with the
Ecclesiastical.
THe difficulty has been esteemed great, for the domestical and private
vocations before rehearsed, ronioyned with the Public, Ecclesiastical, or
Politic. And to speak first of the domestical by marriage, The vocation of
marriage with the politic.

The vocation of marriage with the Ecclesiastical.


the conjunction thereof with the politic, as to be married, and therewithal
placed in office or public charge, was never misliked. But to be in wedlock
and the Ecclesiastical estate both at once, the Roman and Greek Church be
entered in dispute and discord about the same: because that the Grecian Church
allowed them both joined together, affirming the same to be founded upon the
institution of marriage, for procreations sake, and to serve for a remedy
against incontinencie. Agreing in that point with the opinion of Crysippus,
Crysippus opinion touching marriage.
who said many days before that, that every wise man ought to marry, unless
he would incur the indignation of Jupiter Gamelius, and Genethlius, that is
to say, of God the author of marriage and generation: In consideration
whereof, Lycurgus called the^ infamous, which would not marry.
Lycurgus noted them of infamy, which refused to marry. But the Roman Church
contrarily has prohibited the same, because that men should the better give
themselves to prayer and Ecclesiastical service, least that through the
continual cares, and daily charges that be in marriage, they should be
withdrawn, Marriage a mean to trouble man. Plautus. Cicero. Nircius.
and distracted from the service they be bound unto: The same being not without
reason that Plautus says, that he that would find some mean to trouble him
self, need but to take upon him to govern a ship or a wife. Cicero after
the deceasse of Terentia his wife, being requested by Nircius to take his
sister in marriage: answered, that it was not possible for him to tend to
marriage, and the study of Philosophy at once.

CHAPTER. XX. Of private vocations, with the Public Ecclesiasticalll.
AS touching private vocations, that is to say, not established in public
offices: there is an other doubt, whether the same may be exercised with the
Public. For first, if we consider the old law of Moses, Moses.
every kind and sort of people, may not be received and admitted, to that which
apperteineth to the Ecclesiastical vocation: And Aristotle agreeing thereunto,
Aristotle.
namely excludes Artificers, and men of occupation. But since the coming of
Jesus Christ, this difficulty has seemed to cease, because that men of
occupation, and base condition, have been called by him self. But for the
decency of Church men, that they might have the better mean and leisure, to
apply and give them selves to their function and charge, and tend to study,
and continual prayer, it has been thought best, that they should have some
revenue and mean to live: Not for all that, that the vocations above said,
should otherwise be of them selves incompatible.

CHAPTER. XXI. Of private vocations, with the Public Politic.
AS for the Politic vocation, to know whether the same may be communicated
unto them which be in the exercise of private lives: the ancient which have
written of Politic government, Phileas. Hippodamus, Lycurgus. Plato.
Xenophon. Aristotle.
as Phileas, Hippodamus, Lycurgus, Plato, Xenophon, Aristotle, and other have
utterly rejected from all degree of honor and dignity Public what so ever,
of a common weal well ordered, all those that exercise vile and base arts, as
unmeet and incapable of the Public estate. Which (as I have said) is
understood of a Politic estate well consituted. Difference between the
Monarchall estate, and the Popular.
For in the simple estate of a popular Common weal, not so well instituted, it
is necessary, that such folks be called to offices, if not to all, at the
least ways to some, for fear least otherwise, there might some change of
state or sedition ensue: Cautons be towns, which have set them selves at
liberty and join all in one communaltie.
as we see it still at this present practiced in Suysse, throughout all the
Cautons, that be maintained by this popular estate, in the which all offices be
temporal, so that the time of their charge being expired, and ended, they
return to their private life. But in the Monarchall estate, under the which we
be, it is an other thing: because that Magistrates be in the same perpetual,
distracting, and occupying a man sufficiently, without tending any other thing:
and therefore ye two vocations by good reason, be not receiuable at once, Arts
and occupations be the gifts of of God.
as we see is practiced among us: Not that we esteem arts and handicraftes,
not to be the gift of God, and no less in their respect serviceable and
commodious, for the weal of humane society, and to the exercise of virtue,
then the greatest and most apparent vocations: yea, which is more, yt from the
one a man may clime to the other, if he hap to be found capable: but only
because (as I have said) yt our offices be of perpetuity, and such as require
such a one, as from his youth has been given to ye exercise of ye same and no
other.

CHAPTER. XXII. Of many Politic vocations together.
IT follows now to speak of many politic callings together, whether they
may be exercised by one alone, to satisfy ye same also: if it so be, yt in
private charges, the imbecilitie of man be such, ye one alone can not be
perfect, and sufficient for two, there is far more appearance to say, yt much
less shall he be found capable, or sufficient to take on him ye handling of
many public charges at once. And in deed, Aristotle treating of Magistrates,
Aristotle his opinion, touching many politic vocations together, in one weal
public.
is of this opinion also, saying, yt each one may far better discharge yt
which belongs to his office and duty, when he imployeth himself but about
one, and is not impeached with many. But he means, and restreineth his
saying, to great towns and cities only, because (says he) yt in small, it is
not possible by reason of ye few number of citizens, yt offices may otherwise
be changed from one to an other as they ought to be: speaking of commonweals, in the which Magistrates be temporal: howbeit, if our former
proposition, of ye imbecilitie of man, and yt he cannot be as a Delphike sword,
serving to sundry use, abide true, me thinks it should be out of purpose, ye
Aristotle's meaning should reach more to a little then a great town. For to
say, yt the necessity of changing of temporal offices require it so: it is
certain, yt to ye proportion of ye lesser number and assembly of men, fewer
Magistrates should also be required: and therefore should ye difficulty of
changing offices also cease, were it not that Aristotle's saying (by all
likelihood of truth) is to be understood, Interpetation of Aristotle's opinion.
to reach no further then the terms of a Republique, and not of a simple town
or city: and in ye which Repub. although the same were but mean or little,
there should for all that, be required the like number, and sufficiency of
Magistrates, as in the greatest. For undoubtedly, to every Repub. he speaks of,
there is indifferently a certain and like number of Magistrates by him
ordained, necessary for the same: In the Monarchall estate many politic
vocations, be not compatible together.
be it great, mean, or little. But being in the terms of a simple town or
city, governed under a Monarchy, as we be, not composed in form of a
Republique, in the which all offices be perpetual, I durst say and auow it for
a thing most certain, that many Magistrates and Politic estates, may not be
exercised by one person alone.

CHAPTER. XXIII. That the handling of many vocations together is a dangerous
thing, and that whereunto a Prince ought to have an especial good eye: as also
of many Ecclesiastical vocations together, and of the Ecclesiastical and
Politic vocation and administration.
ARistotle him self imitating the same, numbreth in another place the handling
of many offices by one man alone, among the chief vices of a well ordained
Common weal, The Carthagians reproved.
reproving the Carthagians, which contrarily esteemed such maniment or handling
to be very honorable and prayseworthie. As we see also ordinarily about Kings
and Princes, Our days.
some of that opinion, which think their authority, credit, and renown, so
much the more extended, by undertaking of many charges, and sundry affairs. A
thing no less dangerous and full of peril, then the insufficiency of man is
evidently known, and whence we see great and foul faults ensue. A Prince
ought not to admit many charges to one man alone.
Wherefore the Prince ought above all other things, to take good heed not to
commit to one man alone, be he never so excellent, many charges and Politic,
or Ecclesiastical administrations at once, were it for nothing else, Marcus
Cato.
but that the so doing (as Marcus Cato said) is either to make small accept of
offices, The danger that comes of giving many offices to one man.
or else not to have many men which be thought worthy to exercise them. And,
to speak uprightly, to commite so many charges and offices to one man alone,
is no other thing, but to restrain the honor, reputation, and estimation
desired of every man, to a very few persons, and in consequence thereof, so
much more to discourage and divert men from the love and study of virtue:
whence it happens, that we see Princes by that mean oftentimes, have need
of men, even in the handling of their greatest, and most urgent affairs. And
so subjects abide bondslaues to one or two, to the great vetriment of their
estate. Whereas alluring each one by all means to the study of virtue, and
presenting to all men gouernementes, and offices, in reward thereof (as they
ought to do,) they should as well abound in virtuous and honorable
personages, It is a great treasure for a prince to have wise mynisters.
as in abundance of prosperous success in their affairs. For neither is
there treasure more precious, nor yet defense more to be desired of a Prince in
his Realm, then a good number of wise and grave Counselors about him. As it
is written of Darius king of Persia, Darius saying to Zophyrus.
who presenting a Pomegranate unto Zopyhrus his wise and most trusty servant
and counselor, said these words: I cannot wish ought in this world more
excellent, then to have with me, as many Zophyres, as there be grains in this
Apple. On the other side also, he that is well advised, ought not take upon him
sundry offices, and charges at once. For as there be in man's body sundry
members, having diverse offices: so by reason ought the politic body of man,
A good comparison.
to have difference of members, degrees, and offices, in diverse persons:
otherwise if the whole body were the eye, where should the hearing be? And as
it is an unseemly thing in man's body, to see one member do, and undertake, the
office of an other: so it is a very dangerous, and an indecent thing, to see
one person take upon him many, and diverse charges, and offices.

Of two ecclesiastical vocations at once.
And that not only in Politic, but also by great reason, in Ecclesiastical
vocations. For it is most certain, that by all ancient constitutions of the
Church, no man may or ought to intend two, as being a thing straightly
defended, and which at the first beginning, was inuiolably observed, and in no
case admitted: saving that within a while after, it was permitted in case of
necessity, and evident utility to the Church, (if it so happened that any
bishop died, and until such time as some other were provided in his place,)
that an other Bishop might visit and procure the benefice of the Bishops sea
vacant: but without taking either the title or fruits thereof, or yet being
absent from his own Bishopprick about that visitation, and procuration, (which
is commonly cally a Command,) above six months. A thing undoubtedly founded
upon a good consideration, as many other likewise instituted to good purposes,
but since drawn to an evil, The right of a command drawn to an evil
consequence.
and pernicions consequence and breach, as every man may see, without needing
longer to trouble or stay our selves about the same. As also beside that in
succession of time another gappe has been opened in case of eminent, or
excellent learning, or greatness of house, or family, which is no less
pernicious: Although I mean not to deface, Eminent learning and greatness of
blood makes not a man capable of two charges.
or diminish that which apperteineth to the excellency, and greatness of
Nobility, knowing, right well, that in consideration thereof, many less
worthy have been preferred before the most worthy: It being most reasonable,
that the virtue of those which profit also after they be dead, be also
recognized and honored in their successes. And even as dim, and dark places
be lightened by reuerberation of the Sun: so ought likewise the light, and
bright beams of predecessors, to make their followers, and aftercommers to
shine. But this favorable consideration may not extend to the taking away of
the insufficiency, and impediment of that man's imbecillitie, who is well
known to be unable to discharge the duty, and exercise of two Public
charges, Briares were Giantes with a hundred hands. Gerion. A notable example
of pope Clement the fourth.
as it is said: unless so were, that yet at this present there were some
Briares to be found, which as the fable tells, had an hundred hands: or
else a Gerion, who as men feine, had two, or three bodies, and as many
sufficiencies. And it is not without great cause, that Pope Clement the fourth
of that name, is greatly renowned and extolled, for that being advertised that
one of his nephews had three Prebendaries, straight compelled him to renounce
two of them, and keep but one, what soever his friends could allege to
diuerte him, declaring them to be but small benefices, and without charge of
souls: And that considering he was his nigh kinseman, he ought not only to
dispense with the three Prebendaries, but also provide him of better and
greater benefices. Whereunto for answer: I would to GOD (said he) that all
Prelates, and Popes, would imitate, A virtuous saying.
and follow the steps of our Lord Jesus Christ, and not their Parents,
Cousins, and Nephews: for he is not worthy to be successor unto the Apostles,
who is nearer or makes more account of his own, then he does of the poor of
the son of God his Church. Let every man therefore take heed, how he intrude
himself into two Public, Politic, or Eccesiasticall vocations: and let
them also that have power to call men thereto, see yt they be diligent in
preventing the same.

We would treat yet further of the Ecclesiastical vocation, joined with the
Politic: to wit, if one person might exercise them both: were it not that, by
that which we have before discoursed, it appears sufficiently, that they
ought not in any case to be joined together in one person, but to be ruled, and
administered by several persons. As it was wisely declared by Fabius Maximus,
Examples of Fabius Maximus: Aemilius Regulus.
who then being about the election of Consuls at Rome, he did what he could to
hinder the choosing of Aemilius Regulus, a Quirinall Priest: because (said
he,) we may not withdraw him from his sacrifices, and chiefly from the
diligent care he ought to have of Gods service.

Agreeing in that point with Aristotle, who rejects, Aristotle sundereth two
vocations.
and sundereth the one administration from the other, saying, that they ought
to be altogether distinct, and severed. And undoubtedly with great difficulty
may both at once be executed, and discharged by one person, King Philip de
vellois his ordinance.
without great prejudice of the one of them, and most commonly of both at
once. Therefore was it ordained in King Philip de Vellois his time, that no
Priest, or Ecclesiastical person, should be deputed to assiste at the
parleament, where the affairs of state were then treated, and determined of.
And the cause of that ordinance is thus penned: Because the King makes
conscience to disturb, and diuerte Prelates busied about their spiritual
government, and will have such in his parleament, as may amply and
continually, without departing, attend upon the same. These be the terms of
the statute, the which until this present, that the parleament is restrained,
and since king John his days in the particular affairs of justice, has been
diligently observed. (:)

The second Book of Politic discourses, treating of the manner how a man
should behave and govern himself, in the offices he is called unto.
CHAPTER. I. Division of the vocation in general, or common to all men: the
particular vocation concerning every man severally: and first of the general.
Now after that we have defined vocation, and the mean to enter duly into the
same: it behooves to know, how every man ought to behave himself, and what
diligence is to be used in the exercise of that which belongs to his
vocation. That there be two sorts of vocations: Two sorts of vocations.
the one is general, and pertains equally, and indifferently unto all men:
the other particular, which belongs distinctly, and severally, unto every
man: the one contemplative, and the other active: for as much as man is created
to live, not as herbs, and plants, or yet as brute beasts in all
sensuality: but according to the reason placed in his understanding, apt
partly to speculation, and contemplation: partly to the action participant of
both lives: Man is not created to live like beasts.
the one of the which rests in contemplation of things, altogether
separated from the body, and the other in the action of the same: whereof we
draw this general division of vocation, by the which we begin: terming the
one general, and the other particular. Not that we be not equally, and in
general called, and meet as well for the one, as the other: but because that
we be all indifferently called to the knowledge, speculation, and contemplation
of God, and distinctly, and differently to the action, according unto the
difference of every particular vocation. Comparison of two vocations with the
members of man's body. The perfect rule of life consists in the love of God.
For even as all the members of the body be appointed particularly each one
to his office, and yet for all that, all created to one end, to wit: to the
preservation of the body in general: So we, being all particularly appointed
each one to our manner of living, be therewithal called to one general
vocation, belonging to the union, and conjunction of us all together with God,
as being each of us called to the knowledge of him, to love and union with
him, to the end each one of us should afterward here in earth guide and rule
his vocation, and particular kind of life, according to the government
prescribed unto us all by his law, wherein only the true, and perfect rule of
life, and humane society, consists. And the which undoubtedly, if it might
once thoroughly enter into us, all particular vocations, which concern the
institution and reformation of men's manners, whereof we have to treat
hereafter, should cease, as needless and superfluous: so that it should be in
vain to speak of them. For, what need should there be of Doctors,
Preceptors, Magistrates, and Superiors, or other public, or domestical
policy, if the mind, and life of man, Aristotle.
were so ruled, and of it self governed, by the union, and perfection of love,
and charity? This saying of Aristotle being most true, The office of justice.
that where amity abides, there needs no justice: because that the office
of justice, is no other, but to render to each one, that which belongs unto
him, which we see amity executes of it self sufficiently.

Disorder proceeds of the vice of man.
But it is most certain, that all confusion proceeds of our own
imperfection, because that in stead of uniting of our selves unto God, (as it
is said) and also reporting of our manner of living, whereunto we be called,
to the common profit: we will neither know, obey, nor love any other, but our
own selves, putting our confidence and trust in our selves: that is to say: in
our own wisdom, strength, force, and virtue. Wherehence, all contempt of the
Common weal, and disorder in humane society, springs: every one going
about to ravish, or take for himself, that which belongs to God alone, and
the Commonaltie of men. Wherefore, it has been most necessary, to repress,
and contain man's fury, and arrogancy by laws, precepts, instructions,
disciplines, doctors, magistrates, swords, penalties, and punishments, and to
induce vocations in diverse sorts, and manners, very needful for the
necessity and infirmity of man, and therefore ordained unto him, as an
exercise meet to rain him to order, and divine government.

Wherein we have greatly to consider of the singular bounty of God toward us:
who, The goodness of God seen in the feate of vocation.
although that of himself, (if his blessed will had been such,) he had been able
by him self, his Angels, or otherwise to have governed, and ruled all things:
for all that, has vouchsafed that notwithstanding, so much to honor man, as
by him, as his own instrument, to do his work: meaning thus, by mutual
office, industry, and means distributed to each one, according to his
pleasure, to retain us in the bond of amity, least the eye should say to the
hands, or the head to the feet, and so the other: I have no need of you. For
else, if each one had been sufficient for himself, and had known to have had
no need of other, the pride, and arrogancy of man is such, that we should
have seen no other things but envy, disdain, and arrogancy reign, and
consequently al dissipation, and disorder of nature, in worldly things. And
thus much breefly touching the general vocation.

CHAPTER. II. Division of the particular vocation into a calling, which
consists in the private office, or else in the Public charge: and first of
that which consists in a private office, as the Oeconomicall vocation, and
Domestical wedlock.
AS for each man's particular vocation, ye must briefly understand, that
every vocation consists either in a private office, that is exercised by
private persons: or else in public offices, exercised by public persons:
the private consists partly in ye Oeconomical charge: that is to say,
domestical: as in the rule, and government of wife, children, house, and
family: partly in an other office and manner of living in general, of
private persons, and no whit at all public: as in the exercise of Mechanical
arts, and occupations, as hereafter shall be said. The Public office,
consists partly in the well ruling of the interior, partly of the
exterior: to wit, of the Ecclesiastical estate, to rule the interior, Order
necessary to treat an argument.
and conscience of men: and in the Politic estate, instituted for the
exterior, and corporal peace, and tranquillity: the Politic estate
exercised partly with arms, and partly without arms. Of all the which
vocations we must speak summarily, and by order. For having heard the first
part in order, that is to say, what the vocation we mean to speak of, is,
order will, that we afterward know what the same is, and wherein it consists,
according to the variety, and multiplicitie of the same: desiring not to be
thought troublesome therein, if at the first entry, we stay somewhat in
writing of things, which be in very deed both common, and easy: but yet for
all that profitable and necessary, for continuance of the argument we have
enterprised to treat of. Because that to prove any argument, or matter
whatsoever, by method and good order, it behooves to begin with the easier,
and most familiar things.

We will then begin with the Oeconomicall vocation, as that which is the
mother, The Oeconomicall vocacation is the mother of all other.
and nurce of all other, and wherehence as well Magistrates, Governors, and
administrators of the Public, as Churchmen, Doctors, and teachers of good
manners, and sciences, and all other whatsoever, yea, al assemblies, and
societies of men, do proceed. For, whereof be Towns, Cities, Countries,
Provinces, Realms, and Empires compounded, but of households, and private
families, by success of time assembled together? The state of marriage.
Thus shall the vocation of marriage (in deed general, and common to the
other, if we look to the only conjunction made by the same, but yet for all
that by us placed in the rule, and number of the particular, as being a
domestical manner of living, which may be particularly, and by it self, in
any one without the other) be the first of all other in order, as so instituted
even from the first creation of the world. Which (as Aristotle says) is
the chiefest society, The society of marriage. Aristotle.
and company of all: so made, not so much by the reason and counsel of man
(as other be,) as by the commandment of a natural appetite, and instigation
to engender his like, common to all creatures: and which company once taken
away, of necessity all other must decay, and consequently the whole world
become barren, and desolate. Whereof it follows that they which have been of
this opinion, (as among other, Symonides.
Symonides was) that ye same society is a captivity, a shipwreck, and
necessary evil, from the which, if we could abstain, we should be happy,
be greatly to be blamed: even as they be also, which have for gain, and lucre
sake, take upon them to counsel, and persuade men to the same, Antigorus.
Demetrius.
as a good thing: as Antigonus did his son Demetrius, rehearsing these verses
unto him.

Will we, nill we, needs must we wiue,
Against nature, the way to thrive.
Aptly encountering these verses of Euripides: Will we, nill we, we must obey,
Against nature, the thriuing way.


Vocations comprehended under the Oeconomicall vocation.

The husbands and wives duty.


Under this Oeconomical, and domestical calling, be comprised, the vocations of
husbands, and wives, fathers, mothers, children, masters, and servants The
office of all which consists principally, to wit: the husbands and wives, in
a mutual and reciproke love and amity, and the common care of household
affairs, howebeit according to the difference of nature: the which because it
is found more endued with strength and virtue of body and wit in man, then
in the woman, it is reasonable that unto the man also, as the more excellent,
and for the commodity of the society of them both, the superior authority
should apperteine, and remain recognized of the wife, The fathers and mothers
office. Plato.
by an obeysant amity.

As touching Fathers, and Mothers, their office lies principally in the good
education, and institution of their children. For, even as (says Plato) unto
them that plant in the earth, the difficulty consists not in planting, but
in the well husbanding of the plant having once taken root, and life in the
earth, and beginning to take nouriture and growth: Plato. Lycurgus.
So likewise is it of the institution of children: which is so much
recommended, that the auncientes them selves (as Plato, Lycurgus, and other,)
would not that the same should al together be under the puissance of their
fathers, but under the public power, and authority: because the Public
has therein more interest then the fathers. Therefore fathers be particularly
taught, to bring up their children in learning, correction, The Fathers
office.

The Mothers office.


and obedience: the mothers to be careful of their nouritour, and
interteinement, giving all example of sobriety, chastity, and modesty in
manners, and behavior: and diligence in that, which concerns their meanie
and household. Children also must be advised on their behalf, to reverence,
Childrens duty.
and obey their Fathers and Mothers: no one thing being, which after the Poet
we owe unto God, is more to be recommended to man: Plato.
Plato saying to this purpose, that there is no image, or remembrance of GOD
in earth, so much to be reverenced, as our Father, Mother, and Graundfathers.
As for Masters, The Masters office.
and servants belonging also to the domestical vocation, they be likewise
admonished: to wit, Masters, to call to mind that there is a Lord, and
Master above all, with whom there is no acception of persons: and therefore
must courteously use, and entreat their servants, as those which be the
tools, and living instruments of household, and by the which they must
govern, and rule all other things, and the servants by themselves.

Seneca does justly therefore reprove the old Proverb, which says, As
many enemies, as servants: For they be no enemies (says he, An old
Proverb reproved by Seneca The servants duty.
) unless it be unto them that make them such, by seeking to be served more by
fear, then by love. Servants also must be advertised to obey their Masters
in all fidelity, and simplicity of heart. Which shall suffice for this time,
for the institution of the Oeconomicall vocation, most serviceable to the
Politic. Because that the Oeconomicall science, that is to say: the Art of
well ruling of a household, is one of the principal parts of the politic
science, which consists in the ability of well ruling, and governing of a
great multitude of men, and such as we see in a City. For, a City is no
other thing, but an assembly of many households, and houses together. And
therefore, it is not without very great appearance, if the civil, and
domestical virtue of the Roman Marcus Cato, The virtue of Marcus Cato his
civil and domestical rule, preferred before Aristides.
has been by some preferred before the same of Aristides ye Grecian, both
great personages in the feate of Public administration. Because that Marcus
Cato was known to be no less good husband, then wise governor of the
Public: whereas Aristides has in this point ben found faulty, because he
had not the foresight to leave unto his daughters, only wherewith to marry
them, but left his posterity in extreme poverty and need: rendering justice
by that mean somewhat odious, and the less to be esteemed, as if it
impouerished men, ruined families, and were more beneficial to all other, then
to them that minister, and have the same. But this is no place of further
discourse on this matter: let us then proceed to the other vocations following.

CHAPTER. III. Of an other private vocation beside the Oeconomical, and of the
division thereof, into diverse kinds.
Plato his opinion touching vocations.
AS touching other vocations which be private and not public, Plato, as we
have heretofore said, has espied men's necessity to be such, as that it has been the cause of their assembly yt they might continually succor, and help
each other by reciproke aid: and therefore says, that nature has produced men
in variety, and diversity of wits, and inclinations, convenient for humane
society: the one to command, the other to obey: some for husbandry: some
also for merchandise and traffike: some for arts and sciences: and so of
other. Making a distinction of men's wits, A distinction of men's wits
according to metalles.
according to metalles, and accommodating each man's manner of living, unto them,
according to the property of the inclination thereunto most conuenable: to the
end that he that should be found participant of gold, might serve, and be
accommodated, and applied to the most excellent estate, and manner of living:
and he that should be found participant of iron, might be placed in some
inferior and meaner office, hard, and painful, and so consequently of other.
The indigence of man proceeds of his own vice.
But we passing beyond the reach and knowledge of nature, say, that this
necessity, and want proceeds of man's imperfection, and vice, for punishment
of ye which vice, he is enjoined to live in travel and sweat of his body,
each one according to the grace, gift, and manner of living imparted him, to
the Common relief, and profit, not by fortune, but by the certain pleasure of
God, which we call vocation

And of this imperfection, and imbecillitie of men, be the Particular and
Private vocations (we have now treated of) issued: part of which, Division
of private vocations.
apperteine to the nouriture, decking, and health of man's body, part to his
abode, and recreation or pleasure. Those which beelong to man's nouriture be
they, which consiste in husbandry and tilthe of the ground, traffike and sale
of the fruits thereof, and therewithal in the bringing up of beasts created
for his food: husbanmen and merchantes being thereunto ordained and appointed
in sundry manners. As also for his apparel and interteinement, there be
sundry vocations, and occupations: yea, almost as many, as there be members in
him, beginning from the head to the foot. For his health there be Physicians,
Surgians, Barbars, and other like, instituted. For his habitation, or dwelling
place, all Architectes, and other which serve for vtensiles, mouables, and
household stuff: For his recreation, Chaunters, Musicians, and other, ordained
to give honest pleasure, and recreation unto man: Not comprehending a great
many more, which be for the commodite and ease of man, impossible al to be
written. Points to be recommended in private vocations.
To al which above rehearsed, each one in his degree, ought in general, and
chiefly to be recommended, to wit: To them that be dedicated to labor, and
tilth of the ground, attendance, diligence, and travel: To merchantes, and
handicraftes men, good delight, truth, and loyalty: To them which be for
health, and cure of men, learning, experience, and fidelity: And to the last,
which be for recreation, a ready and pleasant grace, without
fantasticalnesse.

CHAPTER. IIII. Of the Politic vocation, which consists in Public
office: of the division thereof into spiritual, and secular: and first of the
spiritual or ecclesiastical and also of the same, which belongs to
Masters and Rulers.
THe Public vocation ensues now, which we call so, because it consists
in the conduction, administration, and government of the Public in general:
and is as the head of a man's body in respect of other members of ye same,
which is ordained partly for the interior or secret government of man, and
partly for ye exterior or apparent: The one called Spiritual, and the other
Secular. The spiritual vocation.
The Spiritual vocation, which we call Ecclesiastical, is that, which is
instituted for the government and inward peace of conscience, and reformation
of the mind, Plato.
which is the chief and principal part of man: this being most certain,
that Plato says, that all good, and evil, proceeds and comes of the
soul in the body. The Secular, The secular vocation.
which we call Politic, respects corporal and temporal things, which
apperteine to the policy, rule, and government of this present life among men.
The Emperor Valentinian.

Saint Ambrose B. of Milen.


That which me thinks the Emperor Valentinian gives sufficiently to
understand, speaking of the promotion of S. Ambrose (being before a secular
Judge) unto the Bishop sea of Milen. We give thanks unto GOD, for that (said
he) that it has pleased him to give the government, and charge of souls unto
him, into whose hands it had before vouchsafed to commit the government of
bodies. We will then speak first of ye Ecclesiastical vocation, and then come to
the Politic.

The Ecclesiastical vocation, The Ecclesiastical vocation.
is Minister of the word of God, guide of all wisdom, enseigne of virtue,
purgation of vice: and without the which the knowledge of man is ignorance,
his light darkness, his life eternal death. To begin then to speak first
thereof, the same consists in Doctors, and Pastors of the Church: Doctors
Pastors.
The Doctors be appointed for the interpretation of scriptures, and the
Pastors for Ecclesiastical discipline, for ye administration of Sacraments,
and exhortation to the word of God. Under which name of Pastors, be comprised
Bishops, Priests, and other like, having the cure of Churches. As for
Archedeacons, Deacons, Subdeacons, Lectours, Chaunters, Acolites, and other,
their constitution is inferior, destined and appointed to ye Ecclesiastical
service. Al which Bishops, Pastors, and other superiors have thus ben appointed
by the degrees, not to use the dominion, or power reserved to the Politic
estate of Magistrates, The order of Ecclesiastical vocation, not appointed to
rule and command.

The ecclesiastical vocation ought not to be entangled with the politic.

Aristotle.

The Church has her jurisdiction several from the politic magistrates.

The ecclesiastical office. The duty of them which be taught.

The vocation of Magistrates.

Socrates.

Preceptors ought to be reverenced as Fathers.

Alexander.


whereof we will speak straight, but for the conservation of Ecclesiastical
discipline, and above all things it be houeth to take diligent heed, least
those two vocations he confounded, or intermedled the one with the other. For
Aristotle himself says, expressly in his Politiques, that the order of
people instituted for the religion, is to be rejected, or put out of the number
of Magistrates, as from them, unto whom power and authority, to ordeine,
judge, and command, is reserved. And yet for all that, the Church has her
proper jurisdiction for the discipline, and policy of manners, and spiritual
things, though altogether distinct, and other then that of Magistrates, but
howbeit very auailable for the succor and aid of the same: whereof here is
no place to speak further. And al persons called to this vocation, be
admonished to instruct the people well, and to live virtuously without
reprehension. As they also, that be instituted by them, be taught to bear
honor unto their Pastors, as unto them that watch for their flock.

The vocation of Preceptors, Masters, and those which teach sciences, and
manners, comes in good time to be spoken of here, because it is joined with
the Ecclesiastical, and discharged by the self mean, either of the tending
to the institution, instruction, and interior reformation of the mind:
Socrates speaking whereof, said: that he that would institute, or conform
many to the Public government, was to be preferred before them which
governed the Common weal them selves: Preceptors being no less to be
honored, and respected, then our own fathers: because that of the one (said
Alexander the great, speaking of his Schoolemaister Aristotle,) we receive
life, and of the other, well living.

CHAPTER. V. Of the Public vocation, and of the division thereof: and first
of the Royal vocation and dignity.
IT rests to speak of the Politic vocation ordained for them, upon whom
the Ecclesiastical power can do no good, by doctrine and exhortation: to the
end that by the Magistrates sword, they may at the least wise, be retained and
withholden from evil doing, as the wild beast is let and restreined by the
collar and mousel. This vocation is no less necessary and profitable, then
the very elements by the which we breathe and live. For beside that, that by
this vocation we be maintained and conserved in life as well as by those
elements, religion, peace, amity, and the common society of men, is thereby
the more conserved among men. And without Magistrates, it should not be
possible that men could endure together without prompt and souden dissipation
and disorder. Wherefore, Obedience due to Authority.
every man is admonished to yeald him self obedient unto the superior powers,
which be ordained by God: the Magistrates them selves being called Gods. Plato
says after Horace, Plato. Horace.
to this purpose, that the Princes and governors of men, be as if they were
ravished, and surprised with divine fury, not understanding the one half of
that they do, as if they were sometime transported, and beside them selves:
and that therefore they ought justly to be called divine men, as being inspired
and guided by divine motions. For even as (says he, in an other place) sheep,
oxen, and kine, be not governed by their like, but by a more excellent nature,
to wit, man: so man's nature of it self is too feeble and weak, to govern
it self, unless it be assisted and guided, by the divine nature. And
therefore is it that Lycurgus, Numa Pompilius, Wherefore diverse ancient men,
feined to have conference with the Gods. Moses. David. The royal dignity.
Sertorius, and diverse other, feigned to have conference with the Gods: that
which a good Prince ought to do, not feignedly or by dissimulation, but by
true religion, and certeintie of faith, and hope, in the conduction of God: as
Moses, David, and other like did.

The royal dignity comprehending summarily in it self, the authority and
power of all Magistrates at once, is the same which is also consecrated with
greater and holier ceremonies, as that which approaches nearest to the
divinity, and unto the which, it is the more earnestly and in particular
signified to do justice: for there is nothing so seemly and decent in a
Prince, or yet that makes his life so celestial and divine, as to do and
exercise justice: as contrarily, there is nothing that rendereth the same so
beastly and brutish, Mars. Timotheus. Pindarus. Jupiter. Themis.
as injustice: because that Mars, who signifies force, is a tyrant (as
Timotheus says:) but law and justice (as Pindarus says) is Queen of the
universal world. And Jupiter (as Poets feign) has the Goddess Themis, that
is to say, Right and Justice set by his side: which signifies, that a Prince
ought to do nothing, Traians saying full of justice.
but that which is holy, righteous, and just. And therefore the Emperor
Traiane, proceeding to the creation of one of his Liuetenants general, putting
a sword into his hand, said right wisely unto him: Use this sword in just
causes: and when I do injustice, draw it against my self. Likewise the wise
Poet Homere says not, Homere.
that Princes and Kings have received of Jupiter the keeping and custody of
engines and artillery, ne yet strong ships, to ruin and overthrow towns:
but holy laws, and Justice: and therefore calls he not that king, the
disciple and familiar friend of Jupiter, which is most bloody, most violent, or
greatest conqueror: but rather him, that is the most upright and just Prince.
Agesilaus.
King Agesilaus says, that men ought to mete the difference of a worthy and
unworthy king, by the measure of justice, as well as by the measure royal.
And in my opinion, Charles the fifth king of France of that name, A most just
act done by Charles the fifth of France.
among other, did one act right worthy of the meting by this great measure,
and is to be remembered in this place: he had unjustly and without desert,
discharged and deprived sundry persons of their charges and offices, the which
he having soon after espied, he pronounced his own sentence against him
self, in manner following: We of our pure and noble office royal, unto whom
it apperteineth to correct, as well our own doings as others, as often as we see
that justice has been thereby wounded and perverted, especially in greeuing
and oppressing of the innocent: have declared the deprivation by us made, and
that which has insued, only to have proceeded of our especial or absolute
power, and not of right, reason, or justice. And undoubtedly, the true and
firm glory of a king, The true royal glory.
is to submit his highness and majesty unto justice: and he can not do a
higher, more royal, and divine thing, surpassing common virtues, then to
conform him self as much as in him lies, to God, in the administration of
the same: considering that the execution of justice, without comparison, is far
more royal, then to make war: because that the making of war, is an
enterprise no less common to the good Prince, then to the tyrant, and so is
not the doing of justice. And yet for all this, I would not but that a good
Prince or King, as is said of the Goddess Pallas, should be both Polemike and
Politic, A king ought to be both Polemike and Politic, and how. Wise counsel.
that is to say, having properties requisite to govern as well in peace as
war: Provided always, that the same be made and guided to the commodity of
his subjects: following therein the property of a good Pilote and
Shipmaister, who has a continual regard to the life and security of them
that be in his vessel: or else of the good shepherd, who has nothing in more
singular recommendation, then the defense and safe keeping of his flock.

A wise saying of the Emperor Adrian.
The Emperor Adrian reaped great commendation for a sentence worthy of a good
Prince, spoken to this effect at his first entry into his Empire: to wit, that
he ruled and governed his Common weal in such sort, as every man should see,
and know that the same should be to the common profit, and not to his own
private. Difference between a good Prince and a Tyrant.
No one thing being, wherein the good Prince may better be discovered from a
tyrant, then by an administration like unto the same of a good steward, I
mean, redounding to the profit and commodity of them yt be governed by him,
and not to his own particular, as the tyrant does, following the example of a
master toward his servant. Wherefore, this admonition of Antigonus (a king in
Asia) seems unto me both worthy of praise and memory, Antigonus.
when that to repress the insolency of his son toward his subjects, he
said unto him: Do thou not know my son, A kingdom is a noble service.
Agamemnon. Luripides.
that our kingdom is no other thing, but a noble service? Confirming that
which king Agamemnon had before said of him self, in the tragedy of
Euripides, who in his Aulide, names himself Iphegenia.

With th'apparence of greatness, though we pass our days,
Yet serve we the people, for the most part always.
To the which purpose the Shepheardes also in a tragedy of Sophocles,
Sophocles.
speaking of their flocks, say thus: We serve them though we be masters.

Men in old time gave three titles to Kings, Three Royal titles. King.
to wit: of King, Judge, and Priest: King, to rule and command, as the father
over his children, to their commodity and profit that be under him: As he
has been called Judge, Judge.
because it is he who ought to yealde right and justice to every one: there
being no greater bliss for mankind to hope or look for, (as Plato says)
then when the sovereign authority united and coupled with wisdom and
justice, Plato.
shall recounter and meet in one self person: And Priest, Priest.
because of the care he ought to have of religion, that the same may above all
things, be well and purely co^serued in his realm: as we see the same to have
been the first and thief thing, that was had in recommendation with the Kings
of Israel, and for the which, Kings in times past, have obtained the title of
most Christian, as the most excellent and royal title they could have taken.
And in deed, The title of most Christian King.
there is nothing that so much conserueth and makes kingdoms to prosper, as
religion: as in like case, there is nothing that breeds so much mischief and
misery, Religion makes realms to prosper: and the contempt thereof breeds
their ruin.
as the contempt and neglecting of the same: as we may see, and well learn by
an infinite of examples of our time. And it is not to be believed, that God
has raised this mighty and cruel nation of Turks against us Christians, for
any other cause, but for the little respect of religion that has been, and yet
is in us. A Scepter given unto Kings in remembrance of their oath.
Therefore ought Kings diligently to call to mind the three titles above
rehearsed, for the effect of which they have given their oaths, at their
admission and entry: In memory whereof, and because they should have no
occasion to forget the same, there has of all antiquity a scepter been given
unto them, having upon the upper end thereof, in signification of the same, a
hand stretched out.

CHAPTER VI. Of the vocation of Justice.
THe vocation of Justice, very commodious and requisite for the society of
men, consists in many most necessary degrees, provided that the number of
the^ be not excessive: It being most certain which Plato says: Plato.
that there is no greater sign and conjecture of a corupted Common weal, then
when there is a great number of Judges and Physicians in the same: because that
thereby it appears, the manners of men to be sore depraved, and their lives
very intemperate and dissolute. Laws and magistrates ought to be cut off, and
maintained in sufficient number only. Ecprepes Ephore.
For certainly these be two points: the laws and Magistrates, by the which the
administration of a city, realm, or Common weal, receives as much or more
hurt then good, when they be not cut off, and maintained in a more necessary,
then superfluous number. Ecprepes Ephore the Lacedaemonian was much commended,
because he cut a sunder with an axe, Cythera.
the two strings which Phrynis the Musician had added to the harp, more then
the seven ordinary: as if this wise man would a far off have prevented the
superfluity of vices, lest the same should proceed to the corruption of life.
How much more were he to be esteemed, who in a Common weal perished through
the excessive number of Magistrates, laws, and ordinances, should be the
author of the cutting off, and reducing of ye number and unbridled multitude,
to a moderate and necessary number? Further, they that be of this vocation,
ought especially to be well wakened with this sentence: Warning to Judges and
Lawyers.
Take heed to that ye go about to do: for it is not man's judgment that ye
exercise, but Gods. Certainly it behooves, that every minister of Justice, be
in the exercise of his vocation, void of favor, acception of persons,
avarice, hatred, and vengeance, having no other thing before his eyes, but ye
simple verity, and just judgment, which of it self represents a manifest
piety and equity, always ready to deal uprightly, as often as occasion
shall be presented. And especially to take heed, Laws may not serve for
cobwebbes. Justice must not be delayed.
least the laws and ordinances be made cobwebs, where nothing but flies be
caught: and that justice be not so delayed, as that the parties travel and
expenses surmount the cause, more process arising of a sentence or decree then
before: as it has often happened, and many good houses thereby utterly undone.
Therefore Cato, surnamed Censorius, Cato Censorius.
upon a time as they determined in the Senate to cause the court and auditorie
of Rome, to be richly adorned, and some would have had galleries built to keep
suitors under covert: impugning the same (said) I am of opinion, that the
entries of all courts and auditories should be paued with galthrops, to keep
men as far off as may be, and that they should approach the same no more, then
if it were a dangerous rock: Meaning thereby, that it was not the part of a
good Judge, to allure and nourish men in processes or suits, but rather by all
means, to dissuade and disturne them. All ministers of justice bound to the
law of verity. Panetius. Cicero.
Under the Judges be many other ministers of justice, as Advocates, Atturnies,
and other, which be bound to the law of verity: although that Panetius, a man
much renoumed among the Stoiks, and followed by Cicero, was wont to say, that
it belongs to Judges to follow the verity, but that it suffices for
Advocates and Proctours or Atturnies, to have the color of likelihoode of
truth.

Thus may you see, Power given to Magistrates.
how that the authority of the sword, is given unto the chief Magistrates and
estates of the Politic vocation, for the punishment of offenses, and tuition
and defense of subjects: and to that end, power to make wars, and bear
arms against all seditious persons, disturbers of the common rest and
tranquillity, to make laws and ordinances, and beside that, power and
authority to impose, raise, and levy taxes and impostes, for maintenance of
Public charges, and not otherwise: A good King being therein known from a
tyrant, The difference between a good king and a tyrant.
when he imposes nothing on his people, unless the same be for the utility
of the Common weal. Whereof it follows, Obedience due unto the superiors.
the inferiors for their part, owe due obedience unto their superiors, as
ministers and executers of Gods authority, and that not only for fear of
authority, as of necessity: but also for conscience sake. This obedience is
so much recommended by holy scripture, as that to backbite, or say evil of our
superiors, is straightly prohibited: yea, although they were wicked, as we be
taught by sundry examples. Men (says Cornelius Tacitus) have to honor things
past, A grave saying of Cornelius Tacitus.
and to obey the present. And as they ought to desire to have good Princes, so
ought they, what so ever they be, to endure and support them. Even as (says
Aristotle) wisdom is the virtue of all other meetest for him that commands:
Aristotle.
even so the good opinion, estimation, and reverence of subjects, and
inferiors toward their superiors, A king ought not to be offended to hear his
falts Alexander. Loys. 12.
is that which is most necessary and requisite for them. A Prince ought also
to understand, that it is a thing worthy of a King (as Alexander the great
said) to suffer him self to be blamed, and to hear evil for well doing:
King Loys 12. of famous memory, saying to this purpose, that a king ought to
take pleasure in hearing now and then Enterludes and Comedies, playde with
liberty, (as he did often times:) because, said he, that thereby he may
perceive and learn many things done in his realm, which otherwise he should
not know.

Certainly, superiority, and inferioritie, commandment, and obedience. be
things produced, Superiority and inferioritie things both necessary and
natural.
and engendered at once, and naturally lincked, knit, and joined together, for
the commodity, and profit of all men, and whereof all things be participant,
and conserved: yea, even the very elements, and which is more, alone in
himself: Because that superiority, and commandment, lies in the soul and
reason: and inferioritie, and obedience, in the body and senses. So that if the
inferior order be confounded with ye superior, of necessity soudeine
disorder, and ruin must needs ensue: and that incouenience needs happen, A
fable of a Serpent.
which is spoken of in the fable of the Serpent, whose tail came one day to
quarrel with his head, saying: that she would go her torn formoste, and not
always lagge behind: which when her head had granted her, she found her
self sore troubled, not knowing how, nor which way she ought to go: and so
was the cause that her head being constrained against nature to follow that
part which had neither sight, nor hearing to guide herself, was all to torn.
Such is the virtue of these two points well united, and ordained, as
contrarily the harm is great by ye confusion of them. Wherefore, Phocion, of
many Capteines and few soldiers.
Phocion having led the Atheniens to the wars, and seeing sundry resorting
to him, which intruded, and intermedled themselves with his office, and charge
of Capiteine, exclamed saying: O Hercules, what a confusion is this, where
there be so many Capteins, and so few soldiers? Demades, Demades of
Alexanders army after he was dead. Cyclops Polyphemus the Giant
after the deceasse of Alexander the great, aptly compared his licentious, and
disobedient army, unto Clyclops Polyphemus, after his eye was out: As likewise
may be said of every City, assembly, or society of men, when these two
points of authority, and obedience, be not correspondent and united.

Superiority and inferioritie, be the firm bands of all vocations.
And that this is true, behold for example all vocations, whereof we have spoken,
and ye shall not find that there is any thing serving so much to the union, and
interteinement of ye same, as this reciproke superiority, and inferioritie,
authority, and reverence, be it between the husband, and the wife, the
father, and the son, the master and the servant: and specially between the
superior and the inferior. Because it correspondeth to the first, The first
law of Nature.
and sovereign law of Nature, that he who of him self is less then
sufficient to govern, Authority and obcisance must be maintained within their
limits. Solon.
rule, and defend himself, should submit himself unto him, that has more
ability to do the same. To this purpose Solon being asked which was the best
ordained, and most happy Common weal: the same (said he) that best obeys
the Magistrates: Provided always, that the obedience of subjects be not
servile, nor yet the authority of superiors over much affeeblished. For
as well the one, The kingdom of Perse. The Athenien Republique.
as the other breed troubles, mutations, and change in Commonweals: witness
(among other) the kingdom of Persia, extinguished, and decayed by holding the
people in over great servitude: and the Athenien Republique spoiled, and
destroyed by the excessive liberty and license of the people. The happy
Common weal (says Plato) is the same, The happy common weal of Spart
in the which the Prince is obeyed of all men, and he himself obeys the
laws. Spart among all other Commonweals, has been worthy of great honor,
and praise, as that wherein the best science that men can learn, was taught: to
wit, to obey, and to command: and whither therefore, the Philosopher
Xenophon, being familiar with Agesilaus, persuaded him to send his children,
to be brought up and instructed. Xenophon.


CHAPTER. VII. Of their vocation, which deal with the Finances or princes
treasure.
Under this Politic vocation we speak of, there is an other particular,
which bears no small wooke, especially in this realm: That is, the calling
of them that be chosen, and appointed both Finances, of the which some be
called to handle and receive, other to ordeine, and other to hear the
accomptes of the handling and administration of the same: All the which offices
concerning the maniment of Finances, (that is to say of the Princes revenue,
and therefore) were instituted as Plutarch rehearses, in the life of Valerius
Publicola,) to the end that the sovereign, The first institution of these
that deal with Finances. Plutarche.
and principal Magistrates should not be diuerted by so light a matter, from
the tending of greater and weightier affairs. And also (if they were wicked,
and lewdly bent) that they should not have the mean to execute their wicked
determinations, having in their hands, and disposition, both the handling of
the principal affairs, and the money also. Also least they should peradventure
in the end be forced to use the counsel that Alcibiades gave to Pericles,
Alcibiades. Pericles.
when they told him that Pericles was troubled about the rendering of his
accomptes: what (said he) were it not better that he troubled himself not to
render any at al? Or else be constrained by despair to do as Laches, who took
the Isle of Lesbos, Laches.
and being called in justice to render account of his charge, which consisted
in the two maniments, drew out his sword, and slew himself openly before the
world. To al those above said, fidelity, and loialtie ought chiefly to be
reco^mended, and to them so much the more, because yt this treasure more the^
any other, Aristides. Princes treasures subject to theft. Plato.
(as Aristides said speaking of meddling with ye Finance of Athens, whereof he
had been Tresurer) is willingly subject to theft, and evil demeanor. Wherefore
Plato said, that in ye feat of election, and approbation of Tresurers, there
needed no less circumspection, and diligence, then in the choice, and
approbation of a head, or general of an army. Because that the Sinews of
war (that is to say) the principal force is deposed, and put into their
hands.

CHAPTER. VIII. Of the warrelike vocation.
THe warlike vocation (that is to say) of men of war, comprised also under
the Politic vocation, and yet differing from that we have hitherto spoken of,
in that it is exercised by arms, and the other without arms,) is not, as it
is showed in many places, reproved, but allowed, and commended: provided there
be no injury, molestation, or oppression done to any one by them that be
called to this vocation of arms: but that they content themselves with their
pay and wages: so that, being called by the King, Prince, or Magistrate, having
authority to do the same, to go on warrefare, to maintain subjects in
peace, and repulse injury, outrage, and sedition, we may not think that the
simple obedience to such vocation, be other but greatly to be esteemed, and
necessary, what soever may happen thereof, be it that we kill, or be killed:
This being most certain, that it is a good, and commendable act, to sley an
enemy disturber of the peace, weal, and public rest: be it either in open
war, or else by laying in wait, surprise, Jesus Naue.
or ambushe: God himself willing Jesus Naue to provide himself of spialles
and use ambushes.

A man of war ought not to ask or inquire, after the cause, why he is
employed.
And, although it so fell out, that the wars were evil, unjustly, and for
trifling cause enterprised: yet for all that, he that is called to that
vocation, ought not to inquire the reason thereof, ne yet, under that pretext,
to refuse the obedience due unto his Prince, unless the cause were notoriously
known to be unjust, and unreasonable: as to maintain, or set up a false
religion, or other wise. For, the natural and due order to conserve peace
among men, requires that the authority, advice, and enterprise of war,
should apperteine to kings, and Princes, and not to particular persons. The
authority and advice of war be longs, to the Prince.
The Prince also undoubtedly ought consideredly, by good advice, and not
through ambition, glory, and greedines, revenge, or other passion of mind,
entering into the high path of kings, (as the Orator Cineas said to Pyrrhus)
named insatiable desire to reign, and without great occasion, Cineas.
to come unto this extreme mean and remedy of war. To be short, men of
war ought to be such, Pyrrhus. What kind of men soldiers ought to be.
Plato.
as Plato in few words aduertiseth them: to wit: like unto good watching
dogs, which be cursed and dangerous unto such, as come from without to do
hurt: and courteous, gentle, and tractable to them which be within: and not,
as the Greek proverb says: Lions at home, and Foxes abroad.

And I would to God, that they of our time had this lesson well in mind,
Themistocles
and would show themselves such, that men might not justly vpraid them, as
Themistocles did some of his time: That they were like unto Casserons, because
(says he) that ye have a knife in deed, but ye have no heart.

CHAPTER. IX. Of the comparison of vocations one with an other: and first of
the Contemplative, with the Active.
WE have seen what the vocation particular and general, is, that is to say,
the vocation contemplative, and active, and the active vocation as well Private
as Public, with all their kinds, and differences: without omission (as we
think) of ought that may belong to the politic, civil, and humane
declaration. The author means not to speak but of humane vocation.
For, as touching the highest secret, and especial vocation of God, and
chiefly, that which ought not to be drawn to example, as of many called to
diverse actions, which be not to be brought in consequence, here is no place
meet to speak of them. Now to make the excellency, and utility of all ye
vocations, above rehearsed ye more clear, and evident, we must next come to
the comparison of each of them, as well of the contemplative with the active, as
of every of the actiues also together one with an other: The case standing so,
that as well of the one part as of the other, there be very great, and
apparent reasons, and also that oftentimes such comparisons come in question.
We will then begin by the comparison of the contemplative vocation, The
contemplative vocation rests in the noblest part of man.
with the active calling: and speaking first of the contemplative, it is
without al doubt, that the same lies in the noblest and most excellent part
of man, which is the mind: whereby also, as by the noblest instrument of all
other, the highest, and greatest actions, yea, the nearest approaching unto God,
be exercised. For there is nothing wherein a man may approach so nighe, and
which is more to conform himself wholly unto him, then by this contemplative,
and speculatiue vocation: because that the action of this contemplation, is no
other thing, but a familiar conversation with God, accompanied with the
fruition, and continual inioying of a pure, and firm delight in all
tranquillity, contentation, and accomplishment of al felicity. Contemplation
consists chiefly in the virtue of wisdom.
And because that sapience is, of all other, the chief virtue, as that which
rests in the knowledge of divine things, so much also is this contemplative
vocation, (which consists in this virtue,) more excellent then the active,
which rests only in prudence, and other inferior, and baser virtues.

Furthermore, the highest virtue, The greatest virtue is that which causes a
man to have least need of other help.
and action of man, is that which procures him the less need of other aid,
and mean, and in the which, the point of felicity consists: which is
seen in the contemplative vocation, the which having, as it were, no need of
worldly things, is contented, and satisfied in it self: whereas the active
vocation stands but in humane actions, exercised by the lesser, and inferior
part of man, mortal, and transitory, no ways sufficient of it self, but
having need of al things treated: being therewithal in continual care, toil,
and desire to atteine the point, and butte of felicity, (nevertheless
imperfect,) proposed in every action. Whereof insueth that the active vocation,
is as much different from the vocation contemplative, The excellency of the
contemplative life.
as there is difference between the understanding, and the body, between
heaven, and earth, between the superior who commands, and the inferior
who serves, and obeys, and between that, which is immortal, and that
which is mortal, and perishable. And there is nothing so seemly, and worthy
of man, as the contemplation, and trying out of the truth, guide and light of
man's life, which otherwise should be but a confusion, and darkness, yea, an
eternal death. Howbeit, coming now to the active vocation, Of the active
vocation.
if we do well, diligently, and thoroughly consider that which is to be
considered of, that is: what is most decent, natural, and meet for the
weal, profit, and continuance of humane society, we shall not find any
thing so convenient as the active life: all actions being reported to the
benefit of the commonaltie of men, The excellency of virtue rests in
vocation.

Man is compounded of understanding and body to contemplate, and do.


neither more nor less, then the actions of every member of man's body be
referred to the conservation, and interteinment of the same. And as it is said,
that the principal praise, and excellency of all virtue lies in the action,
so the principal bliss, profit, and commodity of this humane life, lies in
this vocation. For to what end should man be compounded of a body, and
members to the same, as well as of reason, and understanding, but to serve his
own turn, and to use his action, and consequently to do that which belongs
to the conservation of the universal body of man, by means of sundry, and
diverse actions, according to the variety, and diversity of every man's
particular vocation?

Certainly, even as there is nothing so great to nature (as we have said,) as
this common, and reciproke exterior action of every one, redounding to the
maintenance of a bond, and universal conjunction of all men: So is there
nothing so monstrous, and against nature, as the abandoning of this
commonaltie, The abandoning, and leaving of the action is monstrous and against
nature.
by neglecting the action: I mean the apparent action (as I have said,)
knowing right well, that in the contemplative vocation, there is also an action
but interior, (whereof I have spoken) which is not communicated to an other
body: and there is nothing more lame, nor imperfect, then contemplation above,
Examples of two Cities.
and sequestered from the same. For proof hereof, look, for examples sake,
upon a city, or other assembly of men alone, as perfect in sciences,
knowledge, and speculation, as you would wish: and one other also aparte by it
self, no less accomplished in prudence, other virtues, and humane actions:
and you shall find by experience, within a short space, whether of these two
vocations, and manners of living, shall be be best, and most conuenable for
mankind: without doubt ye shall see the city, or assembly given to
speculation fail, and the other florishe, grow, and increase. For what could
the state of man's life be, what the generation, what the nouriture, what the
education, and institution of children, what the order, and government of
towns, how should arts, and sciences be exercised, and to be short, what
should the society of man be, without the action, that is to say, when men be
wholly given to contemplation? And doing neither more nor less then is written,
among other things, of the Philosopher Anaxagoras, Anaxagoras ravished by the
contemplation of celestial things, had suffered himself to perish, had not
Pericles succored him. Pericles.
who by the contemplation, and rauishment of the love of celestial things,
fell in such disdain, and contempt of earthly things, that he forsook his
house, left his lands lie barren, and therewithal fell in such
rechelesnesse of himself, that neglecting his own life, and nourishment, he
was in danger of death, had he not been succored, and relieved by Pericles,
unto whom praying him instantly that he would desire yet to live, he said,
they that have to do with light, O Pericles, let them power oil to maintain
the same: thus leaving the whole care of his life in Pericles hands.

If we will yet proceed further, Beasts that live alone, be dangerous and
hurtful. Tame beasts be profitable.
and look not only on men, but also on brute beasts, we shall likewise see
those which live by themselves alone, to be more hurtful, and damageable,
then beneficial: as on the contrary side, those that be tame, and
accompaniable (that is to say, living in flocks, as sheep, bees, doves, and
other like,) to be altogether commodious, Against them which abandoning the
common manner of living flee the company of men.
and profitable for the use of man. That which Homere does sufficiently
witness, saying for reproof, and injury to a certain person: Wretched must
we call him, and eke without law,
Who from men's company, himself does withdraw.


As if he would say, him to be a rebel, and disobedient to the law of nature,
The Active vocation is the nursse of man's life. He that seuereth himself from
men is either more or less then man.
and to do against the duty of an honest man, who forsakes the common trade,
and manner of living, and abandoneth (as much as in him lies) the state of man's
life, of the which, the active vocation is nurse, and conseruatrix: Aristotle
saying of him that seuereth himself, and flees the company of men, that he
is either more then a man, sufficient alone to himself without need of any
other: or happily less then a man of his sociall nature: who is not only
borne for himself, no more then all that which the earth produces, but for
the usage of men, one for another by mutual office, and reciproke duty or
endeavor: that which Nature teaches us sufficiently, though it so were, that
there were no other thing to learn us the same. The fruit of contemplation is
nothing unless it be communicated to some other body.
And what better testimony can a man give of the pleasure he receives of his
contemplation, then to communicate the same to some other body? And, even as
by the contemplation of Gods works, he knows, and sees his infinite, and
admirable bounty toward mankind: so, to do in like manner, by actions, and
works of justice, and charity toward men. The true point of felicity, being
no other thing (as Philosophers define) but an action, The true point of
felicity.
and operation by virtue: which certainly be the greatest reasons, and
considerations, that may be brought either of the one part, or other. But men
cannot, (you will say) take from ye contemplative life, but that it is the
cheef, as the most approaching unto God. It is true: But also you shall not be
able to deny, A very apt comparison between both vocations.
but that without the action, the same is lame, and unprofitable to mankind:
and that therefore the active vocation alone, is not more profitable, and
beneficial unto him, then the contemplative alone without the action. But
thereunto might be replied, that the action ruled by prudence only, and other
inferior virtues, not reaching to the degree of sapience (which is the
knowledge of divine, and humane things, and of that which is just, and unjust)
cannot be also other, but mancke, and imperfect without contemplation: yea, a
very blind confusion, and trouble of all things, that men live in the dark
ignorance of God, and of that which is just, and reasonable: those being the
principal guides, and lights of all necessary actions, to maintain humane
society in his perfection.

So that in the end we shall of necessity be constrained to confess that
as well the one, as the other vocation by itself, and severed, is manck,
imperfect, Either vocation is imperfect, alone, and severed.
and of no avail to the commonaltie of men: the action alone, and by it self
serving the same nothing at all without the guide of contemplation, ne yet
contemplation alone, unless the action ensue: it being no less requisite for
man's need, and necessity, that each one exercise here in earth his
particular vocation openly, and to the commodity of all men, then to know,
and contemplate that which is above. And even as the love of verity desires,
and coueteth contemplation: so undoubtedly, the bond, and union of humane
society, seeks and requires also the work and action.

That which the most holy, The law of God, instructs man in both
vocations joined together.

The contemplative vocation is preferred before the active, contrary to Cicero
his opinion.


and most perfect law of God teaches us sufficiently, made no less for the
active, then for the contemplative vocation, but instructing man equally in
them both, and yet for all that, beginning first by that which apperteineth
to contemplation, and then descending to that which concerns the action,
shows us sufficiently, that it is unto the vocation contemplative, that the
first place apperteineth: although that Cicero in his treatise of offices,
would have maintained the contrary.

CHAPTER. X. The comparison of active vocations one with another: and first of
the public vocation, with the private.
Now to come to the comparison of active vocations, one with another, and to
begin with the Public, and the Private, it seems at the first entry,
that there is no proportion at all between the one, and the other, nor
therefore any appearance why to enter into the comparison of them. For, what
proportion is there of a house to a town, city, province, or Realm? Or what
comparison may be made (...) the art, and science of ruling of a family: and
the art, and science of governing a great number, and infinite together, no
more then to exercises Mechanical, in respect of exercising of liberal arts,
sciences, and moral, and Public doctrines? Certeinely to enter into the
comparison of those two vocations, seems that it is to do neither more nor
less, then who so would make comparison of the head to the feet, of rivers
to the sea, or else of the state, health, and disposition of the whole body,
to the state, health, and disposition of one member alone.

The public calling is the band of other private vocations.
The Public vocation being a sure band, and accord of sundry things,
otherwise, and without the same, dissioynted, and discording together, and
consequently exposed to many dangers, and of small durance. So that it
behooves that the one command, and the other is expressly enjoined to obey.
And as much distance as is between commanding, and obeying, so much
difference seems to be between the one vocation, and the other: which
shows well, that the Public vocation, is the same of all other actiues,
unto the which, without difficulty, the first place is due.

But yet for all that, The private vocation.
(to come to the Private vocation) the comparison of these two vocations, is
not without controversy, ne yet so easy that a man may well deem thereof at
the first sight. For the Public vocation must needs confess, that without
the Private vocation, it can do nothing at all. Because it is most certain,
The private vocation mother of all other.
that the Private calling is the Mother, and spring of all vocations: and of
the which all be ingendered, as well Magistrates, Governors, and
Administratours of the Public (as we have before said) as Priests,
Preceptors, Teachers, and Doctoures, and other whatsoever: yea, all companies,
and assemblies of men, as Towns, Cities, Provinces, Realms, and Empires: So
that the Private ceassing, and failing, of necessity all other cease also.
Futher, most true it is that the Politic art that is to say, The politic
art depends of the Oeconomicall.
the art of well ruling and governing of a Commonweal, depends principally
on the Oeconomicall that is to say, on the science of well governing of a
household and family. Because that it is impossible that he should govern
sundry families, that is not first skilled in the well ordering and governing
of one alone: And it cannot be otherwise, but that he that is unable to the
one, must be also unable to the other. And which is more, it is requisite that
every government and Public administration resemble, and take his pattern
of the Oeconomicall.

For, where the King, or other sovereign Magistrate shall govern more to the
respect, The Oeconomicall calling serves for a pattern to the public.
and profit of them he rules, then of his own, then shall the same be no
other but the government of a good Father of a household, toward his
children: or else contrarily, if he govern with more regard of his own
particular, then of them whom he commands, then shall the same also be no
other, but the government of a master, toward to his servant. So that the
domestical government to say uprightly, is nothing, but an example, and
pattern of the Public, whether we have regard to commanding or obeying which
is the principal and chief lincke, and band of Public government. For in
the one and other you shall find one self fashion of commanding, as well in
asking, as in a father of household, and in a Tyrant, as in a master: as also
one self fashion of obeying that is to say, in children, and them that be well
ruled, and governed, in servants, and them that be tyrannized: The obedience
of the one being filial, and loving: and of the other, servile, and forced.

And to say that the Public administration is the health, The universal
health is the soundenesse of every member.

Public richesse, is the wealth of many.


and universal disposition of all the body, in respect of the health, and
disposition of one member alone, represented by the domestical government:
what is the health, and disposition universal, but the soundness, and
disposition of every particular member? No more then Public richesse, is any
other thing, but the wealth, and richesse of sundry particular persons. So
will we always come to this point, that the Public can not be ought without
the Private vocation, It booteth not, meaning to diminishe the dignity of
Private vocation of so much, to say, that the fame is enjoined to obey, because
that commandment belongs to the Public vocation: For put case it were so,
it is a less matter, or less apperteining to the government, and the
administration of a Common weal, to know how to obey well, then to know how
to command well? Certeinely the virtue of obeying well, To know how to obey
is no less then to know to command
is no whit inferior to the same of commanding well, if it be not greater:
For hardly shall he command well, who has not first learned to obey well:
And there shall more Commonweals be found decayed, and destroyed by want of
obedience, then by want of commandment. Besides that this vocation consists
as much in the exercise of virtues, sciences, The private vocation surpasses
the public in the exercise of Arts and Mechanical sciences.
and moral doctrines, as the Public: but true it is, that it consists not
in ye exercise of the Politic, no more then the politic in the exercise of
the oeconomicall. And the Private has also therwithall, more then the
Public, the exercise of arts, and Mechanical sciences, wherein the
nouriture, clothing, harboring, and lodging of man consiste. And beside that,
the care of his health, and disposition, The excellency of the public
vocation in respect of the private.
of his pleasures, and pastimes, with infinite other commodities, no less
necessary for mankind, then one of the elements, without the which man's
life cannot dure. And yet for all that, we may not say, but that the public
vocation, has this point, and advantage of the private: The scope of Public
vocation, comprehends in it the drifte and end of all other vocations
that it serves to maintain the greatest and most perfect society, and
company of all, and which comprehends under it self, all other societies,
and commonalties together. Further, that the scope, and drift of the Public
vocation, (which is bliss, and felicity,) comprehends in it self all the
ends whereunto each Private vocation tends separatly and by it self. All
their drifts ending, and resting in this scope of vocation public, which
Philosophers say to be an action, and operation by virtue, whereunto all
Private vocations tend, neither more nor less, then all springes, and Rivers
do to the sea.

And, albeit that the final end of each one in particular be all one, and
like unto that of a City, or Common weal: yet for all that, the same of a
Republique is so much the more to be esteemed, The most common felicity, is
the most divine and perfect.
as the bliss and felicity thereof is the more common to many: Of all
felicities the same being the most perfect, and nearest approaching to the
divine virtue, which is most common, and dispersed among many.

This Public vocation having besides that, altogether conformity to the
reason of Architecture, in respect of other active vocations, because that it
has authority, and eye over them all, ordeining to each one of them what it
ought to do: neither more nor loss, the^ the Architectures, or Master
workmen over all the workmen which be needful for the raising and
construction of a building.

The public vocation was before the private.
Furthermore, to say that the Private vocation is the chief, and which may
stand without the Public, and not the Public without the Private: is
clean contrary, if a man consider more exactly thereof. This being most
certain that the thing, which is whole entier, and perfect, is naturally
before the parts thereof. As for example, the Architect meaning to build a
house, has sooner conceived in his imagination, the whole building that he
will make, then every part thereof: So will we say of a Painter, of that he
will paint, and of every other workman going about to utter his conceit, he
begins by one part, and ends by an other, all still for all that remaining
imperfect, until the entier perfection, consummation, and total accomplishment
of the work, before wholly conceived: and the total being once destroyed,
Parts be nothing without the whole.
of necessity all the parts thereof must come to nothing. And the parts may
not be esteemed ought, I mean, in virtue, efficacy, and power, in respect of
the whole, unless the same total be accomplished in his entier, no more then
the foot, or hand of a man's body without the conjunction of the whole body:
So is it of severed houses, and families, not joined, and incorporated to the
entier, and perfect body of a Town, City, or Common weal.

CHAPTER. XI. Of the comparison of Private vocations together.
THus much touching the first comparison of active vocations, that is to say,
of the Public with the Private, by the which we have begun. It follows
now to enter into the comparison of Private vocations together: and
afterward, to come also to the comparison of Public vocations one with an
other. As for the Private calling, yt is to say, the domestical, and
Oeconomical, with the Mechanical trade of merchandise, and other, exercised by
Private, and not Public persons, we have already touched the most part of
that which may belong to the conference of them, in the likening we right now
made of the Public vocation, with the Private. Wherefore, we will not stay any
longer about the same, having sufficiently given to understand (as we suppose)
that although that the Private calling, which is not domestical, be very
necessary, and peradventure as much as the domestical, the same being no
less requisite to nourish, interteine, and conserve, then to engender: that
yet for all that, the domestical is to be preferred before the other. For even
as some parts of men, The Domestical ought to be preferred before other.
no whit inferior for his necessity, be for all that hid, and less esteemed
then the other: And as iron for usage is esteemed no less needful then
gold, but yet for the value, the gold more accounted of then iron: so is it
of the domestical vocation, the which though it be not in respect of the
necessity, more to be esteemed then the other Private: yet for all that, for
the respect of dignity and ornament, it is more to be praised, for sundry
reasons we have here before deduced, which to avoid prolixitie, and
troublesome rehearsal, we will not repeat.

CHAPTER. XII. Of the comparison of Public vocations together: And first of
the conference of the Ecclesiastical, with the Politic: and of the Politic
caling with out arms, to the same that is exercised with arms.
WHerefore coming to the conference of Public callings together, which
consist in the Ecclesiastical and Politic calling: it seems also, that in
conferring here before the contemplative and active vocation, we have treated
that which apperteineth to the dignity and excellency of the one and the
other: The ecclesiastical calling preferred before the politic.
and by the self reasons that we have placed ye contemplative in the first
rank, we will adiudge the same also to the Ecclesiastical vocation. For though
we respect ye Ecclesiastical as an active, undoubtedly there is no action so
excellent, as that which instructs and informs the interior, which is the
principal part of man, where hence all the good or evil of ye exterior
proceeds. Or else if we account thereof as participant of the contemplative
(as it behooves of necessity, that al active vocations be so: as we have
before said,) in ye case, it is also most certain, that there is no vocation
whereunto contemplation is more proper and necessary, ne yet which is more
composed of the same also: and therefore, to the which the first place and
degree of all other actiues, does better apperteine. There rests then only
the last comparison of politic vocations, Comparison of the Politic
vocation exercised by arms with the same without arms.

The vocation exercised by arms, is royal and excellent.


which consist in offices, and estates exercised, some by arms, and other some
without arms: the one for war, and the other for peace. Of the which also to
speak our opinion summarily, beginning first with the vocation exercised by
arms: without al doubt, the virtue military has always been esteemed more
excellent and royal then any other, as that whereby men have purchased more
reputation and glory, more ample dominion and obeyfance, then by any other
else. As it may easily be proved by the example and good testimony of the
mightiest Empires, Realms, Monarchies, and Commonweals, enlarged and grown
to their high renoume and glory, only by exploytes of arms: whereunto all
laws, ordinances, Magistrates, and affairs of state and justice, submit them
selves: all arts and sciences also: yea, all things, at the only brute of
wars and arms, retire them selves, be whist, and keep silence. To be short,
by arms peace is purchased and maintained, where from, as from a spring, all
wealth, all bliss and felicity do proceed. So that it is not without cause,
if the warlike calling has in all ages been esteemed worthy and meriting
great honor and praise.

Howbeit, this Politic vocation without arms has always been the same, The
politic vocation exercised without arms, thought better then the other.
and good cause why that has been judged the chief, as the most profitable and
necessary, and by the which greater things have been achieved, then by that
which has been exercised by arms. For proof whereof, we need but to come to
the nearest and most particular comparison of certain of the greatest and most
excellent personages Politic and Military that have been, and thereby we shall
more perfectly understand, whether of ye two vocations is preferred, and more
renoumed then the other. Among other, it is written of two notable personages in
the Athenien Common weal, which were very famous, the one professing arms,
Comparison between Themistocles and Solon.
and the other Politic government, to wit: Themistocles and Solon: the first
renoumed above all other Atheniens for exploits and feats of arms, and the
other for good laws, ordinances, and other institution of the Common weal: the
one undoubtedly extolled, and approved to be very valiant, The Isle Salamine.
Xerxes. Areopagites.
by the famous and so much spoken of victory he got in the Isle of Salamine,
against the great king Xerxes: and the other no less renoumed by the
establishing of the Senate of Areopagites, so beneficial to the Public: and
the one of the which, did once stoutly succor the Atheniens by force of arms,
but the other by good laws, and wise and well established counsel, has not
only in his life time, but also many days sithence profited them. Themistocles
Themistocles can not show wherein he has aided Solon, and Solon may prove he
aided Themistocles, with a good and wise counsel, and a Senate he instituted
in his Common weal: Comparison between Pausanias, Lysander, and Lycurgus.
by the advice whereof, the war was enterprised and conducted. As much may be
said of Pausanias, and Lysander also greatly renoumed, and by whose warlike
virtue, the Lacaedemonian Empire was greatly enlarged, the which for all that,
may not in any case be compared, or approach any thing near unto the laws,
discipline, and institution of ye Republique, made by Lycurgus. And if they
will allege for them selves their force, valiantness, good and wise
conduction, it will be told them that they had nothing but that which Lycurgus
had left, and put into their hands. And, not to be tedious, as much may we say
of every other Common weal, well and wisely instituted. Comparison between
Marcus Scaurus, and Caius Marius. Comparison between Quintus Catulus and
Pompeius.
It is therefore that Cicero (speaking to this purpose) does no less in his
time praise the eloquence and learning of Marcus Scaurus, then the arms and
forces of Caius Marius: nor yet Quintus Catulus his Politic skill and
experience, less then Pompeius the great his prowess and valiant acts,
saying: that arms served to small purpose abroad, without good counsel at
home. Yea, he comes thus far forth, that he produces the dangerous
coniuration of Catiline, suppressed and extinguished by him self being Consul,
Catiline his coniuration suppressed without arms.
without arms, or other mean and aid, but only good counsel and diligence.
Wherefore he was afterward had in such reputation with Pompeie, (having won so
many and so great victories) that he said unto him openly, that the glory of
his victories had served him to small purpose, if Rome, wherein he might have
triumphed, had not been conserved by the wisdom of Cicero.

And since we must needs come to our particular examples of this realm:
Comparison between the Court of Parleament and the glory of Arms.
the court of Parleament has it in any respect, given place to the glory of
arms? the reputation thereof having ben such through out all Europe and
Christendom, that the greatest Lords, Earls, Dukes, and Princes thereof,
have voluntarily come to submit themselves, their controversies, and arms unto
the justice of the same: yea, (to avoid prolixitie) Popes and Emperors:
Frederick the second.
as we have read of Frederick the second of that name, being fallen at debate
and deadly contention with Pope Innocent the fourth, Innocent the fourth.
because he had deprived him of his Empire in the Counsel of Lions. Such
reverence has been borne to this sacred and honorable justice, neither more
nor less, then in times past unto the Oracle of God: yea such, as that of
late, in the year of our salvation 402. 402
certain Spanish Knights brought thither a treaty made and passed between
the Kings of Castile and Portugal, A treaty made between the Kings of Castile
and Portugal brought to the Court of Parleame^t.
concerning the state of their realms, to cause the same to be there openly
proclaimed: which was done, and they carried with them the act of the
publication, thinking not to have had sufficient assurance of their pactions
and covenants, for the tranquillity of their countries, unless this most
famous and renoumed justice, did authorize and approve the same. And in good
sooth, there is neither virtue, or glory of arms, to be conferred to this
religion of justice, the which causes weapons to fall out of men's fistes,
without stroke striking. True it is, that the virtue military requires a
valiant heart, strength, and constancy: but if we do well consider of
Politic affairs, and their accidents, we shall find that they require no
less virtue at all: And to speak plainly, The politic vocation requires no
less virtue then the military.
that it is by counsel at home, that all wars have been enterprised, and for
the most part executed. Furthermore, to what purpose be wars enterprised? Is
it not to have peace? Peace then, as the end of war, is more to be praised
then war is: even as health, which is the end of Physic, is without
comparison, more to be esteemed then Physic it self. To the Politic
vocation then, exercised without arms to obtain peace, Two manners of fighting
among men.
the first degree is due. And truly, considering that there be among men, two
manners of contesting and debating, of that which falls in question and
controversy: the one by reason, and the other by force: it is certain, that
the one manner is humane and honest, and the other brutishe and dishonest,
whereunto men ought never to come, but when they have first assayed all other
possible means, by counsel and reason.

CHAPTER. XIII. That all vocations be so commodious and necessary, for the
entertainment of life and humane society, that which so ever we look on, or
consider of, the same seems still the most necessary.
Now having spoken of all vocations, and manners of living, and then conferred
the one with the other, making comparison of every of them, there is no man (as
I think) who sees not clearly, how necessary and profitable they be, for
the conjunction and union of humane society: yea, so necessary, that one can
not stand or continue without the other. And which is more, such is the virtue
and efficacy of either of them, that pondering each of the^ severally, one
after an other, it seems the same still, upon the which we cast our eye, to
be the principal, and more necessary then ye other. As for example, looking
upon the contemplative vocation, what think ye, I pray you, of all other
actions wandering here and there, in the ignorance of divine things, and of
that which is just and reasonable, Cyclops Polyphemus.
but that they be as blind Cyclops Polyphemus? Also on the other side,
consider of the active vocation only, what would ye esteem of al contemplation
and speculation, without the action, other then as of a body without soul and
life? And coming particularly to the actiues, if ye happen to weigh the
Ecclesiastical by it self, what would ye judge, that all actions could serve
the interior of the man, motive of ye exterior, being neither well instructed
nor yet reformed? Then passing to the Politic, what may ye think of all
other severed and discording, without the union, accord, order, or government
of the Public? Likewise, proceeding to the warlike, what contemplation,
doctrine, preaching, policy, science, justice, household, family, merchandise,
occupation, Physic, Cheirurgerie, Music, or other private vocation so ever
is it, which retireth not, and gives place at the only terror of arms, and
which stands not in need of them, to be maintained in peace, safety, and
defense against the enemy, and hostility? Then coming to Private callings,
and first to the domestical, what vocation may we name, that may want the
same, considering that all take their beginning and original thereof. And
finally, descending to Private, which be not domestical, what vocation having
taken essence, may live, and dure in this world without the same? And thus
still considering of each of them a part, and by them selves, ye shall not fail
to find the same to be such, as all other in comparison thereof, shall seem
nothing unto you. So admirable, artificial, divine, and pleasant a thing it
is, to mark this bond of humane society, by means of those vocations, most
necessary and meet joints and members of the same: and yet for all that, very
rarely or not at all considered of by most men.

CHAPTER. XIIII. That there is not one man who is not called to some vocation,
and has not sufficient matter in the same, to keep him self occupied in the
exercise of virtue.
OF the which treating hitherto, I shall not think to have wrought a small
feate, if I have atteined unto the point whereat I have a long time leueled,
and sought to come unto, which is, that every man may know, that there is not
he, who is without a vocation, and who is not called to some one. Then that
there is no calling, wherein is not sufficient ado, for a man honestly to
employ him self in the exercise of virtue: nothing being worse, then to think
the contrary. As many do, because they be not placed in state, dignity,
office, or else some other occupation, or Public and apparent charge: which
causes them to say, that they be not called to any thing in this world, and
that they have nothing to do: or else, if it so happen, that any of them
think and know well, that it can not otherwise be, but that he is called to
some charge, yet is he for all that yrked, and disco^tented with the same, as
of small value in respect of other more excellent or apparent, which he sets
before his eyes: whereof proceeds great negligence, and coffeehouse to
each one in his manner of living, being thus induced into such an opinion
which is mere false, and most necessary to be cut off.

Every man ought to be persuaded that he is called to some vocation and
sufficiency to exercise himself in virtue.
For first it is necessary that every man persuade him self, and be assured
that it is not possible that he be otherwise in this world, then called to
some vocation, and such as suffices to hold him honestly occupied, (wherein I
mean not in any case to comprise such manners of living as be vicious, and
reproved, as to be a Cosiner, Bawd, Thief, Usurer, Iuggler, and such like,)
it being so, that every person is by necessity in some Public, or private
charge, The vicious kind of living is not comprised under the name of vocation.
and that it can not otherwise come to pass, but that at the least, the one
must be either a Father, Mother, Son, or Daughter, Master or servant,
superior, or subject: all manners of living being universally, and in general
comprised therein. And there is no one constituted in any of them, which has
not the mean duly to busy, and exercise himself in virtue (as we have
said,) at the least, if he will acquit himself well. And for proof hereof,
is it to have nothing on hand, to be in marriage, to have the charge, and
government of wife, children, and family? Marriage.
The son, or daughter be they bound to no charge, being called to obedience,
temperance, chastity, Son, or Daughter. Servant, or subject.
and good manners? The servant or subject, shall they say, that they have cause
to be idle, diligence, fidelity, service, and obedience being commanded
them? And may Magistrates, and superiors say they have no great charge? To be
short, is there any one living, unless he be either wholly impotent of wit,
or of body, especially, if he purpose to be a commodious and beneficial member
to ye Co^monaltie of men, that can say that he wants occasion and mean, to
employ him self, in doing of some good thing auaylable to ye same, in what
estate, fashion, and manner of living so ever he may be, be it in the public,
or Private life? For (as Aristotle has in his Ethickes,) there is no less
mean to do well in the Private life, then in the Public. It follows then,
(for conclusion,) that there is not one which is not called to some vocation,
and which has not means enough honestly to employ himself in the same,
There is no less mean to do well in the private then in the Public
vocation.
to the common profit. And without all doubt, justly ought he to be reputed
accurssed, and ingendered against nature, who (serving but as a burden, and
unprofitable charge here on earth, should say that he knows, or feels not
himself called to any one thing, and would not employ himself in this life
about some honest, He is accursed that knows not himself to be called to
some good and profitable vocation.
and profitable office. It rests then, only to have always before our eyes,
this society of men, which we so oftentimes repete and to purpose each man in
his vocation constantly to obey the same. Of the which constancy to be
observed by such, as (being thereunto orderly called) do virtuously practice
their vocation, it is now both time, and place to begin to speak.

THE THIRD BOOK of Politic discourses: treating of the constancy, and
perseverance a man ought to have, being duly and orderly entered and called to
offices.
CHAPTER. I. That inconstancy, especially in the feate of vocation, is common
and natural unto men: And that therein he surpasses all creatures: of the
cause of this inconstancy: and the opinion of diverse persons upon the same.
IT is said, Three things requisite for the accomplishment and perfection of
any thing.
that there be three things chiefly necessary for ye perfect accomplishement
of man's intention, joined with the work, and action which ensues thereof: to
wit, The way and mean (as the first in order, and before all other required
and necessary) how to be able to atteine unto his intention, and his action
also: The second, the knowledge of the thing whereunto man seeks to come: The
third and last, the constancy, and perseverance that each man ought to have
after he has compassed the same. We have hitherto spoken of the two first,
declaring (as the chief, and principal point by us propounded) which is ye
way to enter, and orderly to come unto offices, and vocations, afterward the
mean to understand and know them, that he may the better govern, and
maintain himself in the same. Now rests the third and last, without the
which all that has hitherto been by us said of the other two, should be to
small purpose. For what can knowing of a thing, be the same never so great
and excellent, or yet the obteining thereof profit, if a man straight ways
will leave, and rashely forsake the same again? Constancy, above all other
things necessary in man's actions.
So should it assuredly be a thing of small effect, and less avail, to have
understood by us what the vocation of man is, and the mean to obtain the
same, unless a man would, after he is placed, constantly behave himself, and
resist impechement, lettes, or occasions to the contrary.

The misliking of the condition of a man's own life is a natural thing
And so much the more necessary is this latter part for each one, as it is an
assured thing, that there is no disease more frequent, and common to man, then
easily to discontent himself, and mislike of his own condition, and gladly to
delight in that which apperteineth to an other: Showing him self therein far
more ingrate, and worse of condition, and nature, then all other creatures. For
as the Ecclesiasticke says, we see the Sun rise, and fall in his place, by
his course, and accustomed moving: floudes run to the sea, and yet the sea
not ouerflowe, but still keeping it self within his bonds and limits: and
then the floudes take their course, and returning to their first springes,
afterward to reflowe again into the sea: The moving of the Sun, Stars, and
Planetes, and to be short, all creatures keeping their order, and containing
themselves within their limits of nature, Man excedeth all other creatures in
inconstancy.
and in that which God has ordained unto them. But man alone contrarily,
always to be inconstant, and looking an other way, not content with the
condition of the life he is established in, whereof proceeds all curse and
affliction of mind yea, and which is more, great ingratitude toward him, who
places and appoints each one in the vocation he is in. A man is never the
better for changing his calling.
And yet is it so, that if it were permitted man to change his calling, and
condition of life with any other, we should undoubtedly see, yt he would find
even as much annoyance and discontentme^t therein, he found not more, as in the
former that he had forsaken, Example of Vulteius Mena. Horace.
and in the end desire to return thereunto again. As it beefell Vulteius
Mena, of whom Horace writes in his Epistles, concluding that every man ought
to hold himself to the condition of life, he is called unto. Example of the
fable, speaking of an Ass.
Which is also represented unto us by the fable of the Ass, which complained
of his estate, and condition, desiring now to be a horse, now a dog, and
still finding worse then before. Which has caused some to say, that if all
evils and troubles were on an heap together, to be distributed equally unto
all men, that there is not he, which should not take his own evil again,
because he has no part with any other: Evil recompensed with the good.
the world being governed in such sort: the evil is recompensed with the
good, and divided to each one according to his vocation, by just and equal
proportion.

It is certain, Man naturally regards his evil rather then his good
that man's nature is always inclined sooner to have regard to that which
harmeth him then to that which does him good, which he easily forgets:
and contrarily prompt to that, which by apperance seems to do good to
another man, without consideration of the evil, he sees not. And we see well
enough, when a shoe sits well upon an other man's foot, but we feel not
where it pincheth him. Wherehence this light and mutable inconstancy
proceeds in the mind of man, whereby he forsakes his own vocation,
straight to run to an other: whereas, if he regarded, as he ought to do, the
commodity is given him in this manner of living, he is in, and considered well
of other men's evils, he should live in greater contentation, and constancy:
exempt from ingratitude, and affliction.

We see by experience the newfanglednesse, Man is soon annoyed with his own
trade of life.
and variety of man to be such, in the mamment of his vocation, that almost
as soon as he is placed in any state, or fashion of living, he is by and by
yrked therwt, and disliking of ye same, straight desires an other: as by
example, we see him yt is married, think him happy yt is not: and contrarily,
him that is free, praise his life that is wedded: even as they which lead a
private life, covet nothing more, then to have some Public charge: and they
that be in the same, Horace.
praise nothing more, then to be private: Horace saying, in his Epistles to
this purpose: Being fast in wedlockes bands y linckte, the single life we then
best think.
The widow deems them best some say, who^ loves links keep fast chaind always:
Bind fast then with bond durable, how shall we this Protee mutable?


So displeasant (as Terence says) are we of ourselves, and discontented with
our present estate, still aspiring to yt which passes our capacity. The Roman
people yrked with the Monarchal estate, Terence. Example of the Romans.
and government of one alone, would needs be commanded by many, first by
Consuls, and then by Tribunes in diverse mutations, and changes: as ye Israelits
before them, annoied to be governed by many, asked a king, where they found
worse then before: and thus has it always ben, and shall be of the
inconstancy, and instabilitie of man, most manifest, and apparent in the
exercise of his vocation. The famous and wise Philosophers espying this
variety, The opinion of diverse which have searched out the cause of this
inconstancy.
and inconstancy of man, prompt and inclined to all disorder, and yet for all
that, seeing in natural things, so permanent, and measured an order, be it in
the moving of heaven, of stars, and planets: be it in the so well according
discord of the Elements, and so equal counterpoise of the earth: flowing and
reflowing of floods and rivers: be it in all other creatures, great and small,
all keeping their natural order, have been maruelously (and not without cause)
amassed, whence it should come yt such disorder, and confusion should be in
mankind, ye most excellent, and noble of all other creatures. And in the end
have imputed all the fault and cause thereof, partly to the matter whereof men be
compounded, as frail and caduke: partly to man's will so light, and variable of
it self: and ascending higher, be come to every ones fatal destiny, saying:
ye there is a certain connection, and conjunction of the first cause, with the
second, natural, and of the will of man, so constreined yt it is not possible
to be able to avoid them. And in ye end, there were a sort, and manner of
people, The Manicheis opinion.
which were named Manicheis, engendered of a depraved, and corrupt Philosophy:
which passing further, dreamed, and imagined that there were two Gods, the one
good, and the other evil, to whom they imputed the cause of all this confusion,
and disorder. But we must confess that all this fault comes no whence else,
but of the corruption, The corruption of man causes his newefanglednesse.
and deprauation of man's will, and judgment, (a point not sufficiently known by
the ancient Philosophers) from the which there proceeds a blind confidence,
and presumption of himself, which is the spring of al error. Every man
coveting to be a God to himself, yt is to say: to undertake when so him
lists ye government, and administration of men, and Commonweals, without
attending until they be otherwise called. So sore be they infected, and
perverted by this malign, and false persuasion: You shall be as gods. Witness
Caesar, Sylla, Pompeie, M. Antonie, Gene. 2. Example of Sylla, Pompeius,
Caesar, and others. Brutus, Cassius, Cinna.
and infinite other, which led by this arrogancy, leaving their vocations,
have procured, and raised infinite seditions, and disorders. As also Brutus,
Cassius, Cinna, and their companions conspirers, and murderers of Julius
Caesar: ye which blinded by their own particular, and arrogant counsel, in sted
of restoring the To. Republike (as they were not ashamed to promise) stirred up
parcialities, and nu^berles troubles. In recompense whereof they received in ye
end most miserable death, A good lesson for rebels.
no one of them remaining within three years after vnslain by the sword, either
by others, or by their own hands: which is the ordinary fruit of their
rashness, which passing out of limits, The reward of them which advance
themselves uncalled: is to be rejected of God.
and bounds of their own vocation, over unadvisedly, and audaciously take upon
the^, ye which pertains to God only, whose will and pleasure is, that every
one should keep, and contein him self within that, whereunto he is called,
without straying elsewhere.

CHAPTER II. Of the three chief adversaries, and enemies to man's co^tancie in
the exercise of his vocation: and first of ambition of glory and honor mixed
with emulation: and of the opinion of them that think ambition, and gealousie
necessary among Citizens.
THere be three principal plagues, enemies, Three capital enemies to the
constancy of man.

Example of C^imon, Pericles and other. Nicias, Alcibiades, Aristides,
Themistocles.


and adversaries to al constancy, proceeding from one self spring: to wit,
ambition, envy, and impatience, as may daily be seen by experience: and from
the which they that have been greatest, and the most renowned among men, have
not been able to warrant themselves. As he may easily see that will take some
pains to consider as well of Cimon, and Pericles, of Nicias, and Alcibiades,
their behauiours in the administration of their public: as also of the same
of Aristides surnamed The just, who was so transported with the ambition of
glory, and honor intermedled with emulation, and envy, having Themistocles
for his concurrent, and competitor, that he feared not franckely, and
publicly to propound unto the Atheniens, that unless both himself and
Themistocles were by them chased away, and cast into the Barather, (which was a
deep dongeon wherinto malefactors, and such as were condemned to death were
cast headlong,) it were not possible that the affairs of their common weal
should ever prosper, or yet that their city should be but in greater peril,
and danger. As Dion in like manner, having caused Heraclides his concurrent in
the exercise of the gouernemente of Syracuse, Of Dion and Heraclides.
in the end excusing himself, showed unto the people, that otherwise it should
not have been possible to have given order to the seditions, and troubles
(which incessantly sprang up among them) as long as they two had been
jointly in authority.

Thus far were they sundred from the love, Pelopidas, and Epaminondas
virtuous companions in government of the public.
honor, and amity, that Pelopidas, and Epaminondas (which were in deed
right brethren in arms, and companions in public charges) bare still
continually one to another. Neither of them seeking either glory, or riches
for themselves: (unto the greediness whereof, quarelling, and seditious envy,
is always lincked:) but referring each other others acts, and prosperous
exploites unto the public honor, and service. Plato his saying being most
true: Plato of them that strive for the souereigntie.
that they that fought, and contended to have souereigntie in the government,
and the administration of Commonweals, put the Public estate in no less
peril, and danger, then Mariners do their ship, striving among themselves,
who shall govern and stir the same. Marius and Sylla both sore tached with
the self vices, Marius, and Sylla.
having taken a light and frivolous foundation of capital enimitie, because of
the victory of Iugurtha, the which either of them attributed unto him self,
by their so doing, so entangled the Common weal with civil wars,
parcialities, and irremediable dissentions, that finally the same ended it
self in a violent tyranny, and confusion of the whole state, and Empire of
Rome, which does right well declare, The Poet Euripides touching ambition.
and approve that the Poet Euripides was a wise man, and well acquainted with
the mischeefes that fall upon Commonweals, when he counsels governors to
flee ambition, as the most intolerable passion wherewith men's minds be
chiefly vexed, and as a most present, and mortal fury to them that
acquainte themselves with the same: and whereof we may say that which is
feigned, the Fox said unto the sick Lion mentioned in Horace Epistles.

The steps be seen both all and some,
Many cast themselves into ambition but few return.
Of them that toward thee be come:
But of such as from thee retire,
I see n'apparent sign appear.
The fable of Ixion against the ambitious.

The Centaurs


And it is not without cause, that men take the fable of Ixion to have been made
against the ambitious. For, even as the Poets feign that he had to do with a
cloud, thinking the same to have been the Goddess Juno: and that of this
embracing the Centaures were ingendered: so the ambitious embracing vain
glory, as an image of true virtue, never does act which is just, or worthy
of a virtuous man, but produces effects, wherewith some bastardises is
always intermingled, according to the diversity of the winds, which drive
and toss them: now stirred by envy and gealousie, and then I know not by
what desire to complee, having no other intent: but to accomodate themselves,
and be agreeable unto the appetites, and affections of them that may advance
their ambitious attempts: no other thing resting them, by this mean, but the
only title, and appearance, of Magistrates, governors, and administratours of
the Common weal: committing (under the cloak, and shadow thereof) foul
faults, and manifestly furious, as if they were folk out of their wits, as
if they would have honor should not proceed of virtue, but the same to be
virtue it self.

Example of Tiberius and Caius Graccus.
As thereof, among infinite other examples, the same of the two Roman brethren,
Tiberius, and Caius Graccus ought to suffice us, both the which being nobly
borne, very well brought up, and with a good and virtuous intent entered
into the maniment of Public affairs: were for all that in the end lost,
and spoiled by the greedy ambition.

And in like manner Marcus Crassus having the second time by practices, and
slightes: Marcus Crassus.
forceably atteined the Consulshippe, with the government of Syria: burning
with a miserable flame of ambition, because that, among many millians of men,
he was not, as a man would say, esteemed the chief, or most worthy, but
rather by common opinion, deemed to be inferior, and not comparable with
Caesar, and Pompeie, as if all had failed him, committed so many foul
incongruities throughout his government, and cheefely in the voyage he made
against the Parthies, that in the end, (through his great defaulte,) his
honor, and almost all the huge army he led thither, was miserably, (not
without great damage of the Common weal,) overthrown, and cut in pieces.

Wherein a man may clearly see, Of them that allow of ambition and gealousie
among citizens Lycurgus.
how far they be from the truth, which be of opinion, that ambition, and
gealousie, in the government of a Common weal, ought to be sown among
Citizens, as a sting of virtue. As it seems to be the opinion of him that
established the Lacedaemonian laws, willing that honest men should always have
some thing to clear, and debate one with another. Homere. Agamemnon. Ulysses.
Achilles.
And the opinion of Homere also, having made Agamemnon rejoice to see Ulysses
and Achilles at foul words together: which he would not have done, unless
he had thought that debate, and envy among principal personages, did serve to
cause one to have an eye over an other, to the advancement of the Common
weal: as there be natural Philosophers also, Discord causes the life, and
harmony of this world
which hold opinion, that if a man deprived this world of discord, and
debate, the course of the Celestial bodies would stay, that the generation of
the world should cease: for that (as they say) that is the cause which
mainteineth all the harmony of this world. Vicious dissentions between wicked
Magistrates.
But certeinely the same ought not to extend to vicious and excessive bralles,
and dissentions between Magistrates passing the bounds of contention of
virtue, (whereof we speak) most dangerous, and damageable to Common weals.
Neither more nor less then as we see in Elements, and contrary humors, of
the which man's body is composed, that the distemperature, and unequal power
of the one over the other, is the cause of dangerous sickenesses, and
accidents chauncing to man's body.

CHAPTER. III. Of ambition, and vain glory mixed with avarice, and of
impatience in sundry manners.
TO speak of the ambition of glory, and honor meddled with the ambition of
goods, and avarice: beside the example of Marcus Crassus we of late alleged,
Example of our time.
the excess of examples of our time ought to be more then sufficient, without
needing to have recourse to other. Because that every man evidently sees what
variety, and inconstancy the same has ingendered unto us, in all estates
as well Ecclesiastical, as Politic: whether we list to discourse by it self
the change that is made in every of them: or else thoroughly consider of the
mutation, and variety which is made from one estate to another, that is to
say: from the Ecclesiastical, to the Politic, or from the Politic, to the
Ecclesiastical: by the change of habit, Horace. Priscus.
and manner of life, from hour to hour: as Horace says in his Satyrs,
speaking of the incomparable inconstancy of Priscus. For I dare boldly say,
that there shall no Politic estate be found, before our time, where so many
examples of inconstancy, and lightness in vocations, and public estates,
may be espied, as we might have known in our days: A thing greatly to be
blamed, not only in them which show themselves so newfangled, and variable,
but also much more in those which receive them, thereby cherrishing the
greatest evil, and inconvenience that may be brought, or induced into a
Commonweal.

And as touching impatience, Of impatience in sundry kinds.
whereof we have also spoken, as ingendered of ye self spring: it is most
certain that man is no less easily induced thereby to leave, and forsake his
vocation, and run a contrary course. Take it so, that we speak of
impatience, and inability to bear a refuse, or ingratitude. Example of
Coriolanus.
As Martius Coriolanus at Rome, who seized, and provoked by ye same, took
arms against his own country, being unable virtuously to bear, as it became
him to have done, the ingratitude of the Roman people, having refused him the
instance, and suit he made for the Consulshippe, whereof indeed he was the
worthiest of all them, that could have then demanded the same. But the honest
man called to the handling of a Public charge, ought rather to desire (as
Marcus Cato said) to be deprived, Marcus Cato.
or put by a good turn, then once to give occasion of an evil. Whether it
be that we speak of the impatience of the time and attendaunce, Absalon.
as Absalon who being unable patiently to tarry so long to reign, rashely,
David.
and unjustly took by force, king David his fathers dominion from him: or else
of impatience of labor, as Lucullus and Diocletian, Lucullus, and Diocletian.
who forsook their public charges, preferring their particular ease, and
rest, before the weal public: Or else also of the impatience to bear, and
suffer reproaches, injuries, or other adversities, which ordinarily be
presented unto every Public person. Timolion.
As it happened unto Timolion, who (having caused his own brother Timophanes
to be slain, Timophanes.
therein virtuously preferring the weal public of his country, before the
love of his blood: because that Timophanes, contrary to duty and justice,
went about to have usurped the tyranny of Corinth, whereof his brother
Timolion had given him the charge and custody), could not bear, or by force
of reason vanquishe the passion he received of the lamentations, Cleomenes
virtuous opinion.
injuries, and reproaches his mother and other gave him, but was so danted with
remorse, and impatience, that he obstinately, and contrary to ye advise of all
men, utterly quited the meddling with the maniment of Public affairs: wherein
the opinion of Cleomenes King of Lacedaemon, was much better, saying when he
was driven out of his country by King Antigonus, that he that abandoned
himself, and yielded to trauelles, and labors, or yet to the reproaches, and
praises of men, must needs confess that he is vanquished by his own
cowardice. For as it be houeth a man to keep himself warily, and be ashamed
of foul, dishonest, and evil actions, so also to be aferde of all kind of
blame, reproach, or evil opinion of the world is a fault of magnanimity.

CHAPTER. IIII. Of remedies against inconstancy: and of the two points
chiefly necessary for him, that will retain constancy in the exercise of his
vocation.
Wherefore having hitherto treated of the inconstancy and variety natural and
proper to man, specially in the execution of his vocation, and the chief cause
thereof, of ye which an ignorant blinded: yea, an arrogant, and presumptuous
opinion, and confidence of himself, backed with ambition, envy, and
impatience, is ingendered: It follows now to come to the remedies and
means, by the which, notwithstanding so many impediments, and adversaries, we
may still constantly persevere in our vocations. For even as (says Plato) the
cloth which we mean to die good Scarlet, A good comparison made by Plato.
least the same should afterward loose his color, ought first to be
diligently washed, and prepared by the Fuller, and afterward died, and redied
in the self color: So he that determines constantly to persevere in his
vocation, and calling, ought first to be well prepared by good institution,
and discipline, and then confirmed, and resolved in the pursuit of his
enterprise. Thus then to enter thereinto, we think that he that purposes with
himself constantly to follow that, Two points necessary for him that meneth
constantly to persevere in his calling.
whereunto he is called, ought chiefly, and first of all, to have two points
in singular recommendation. The first of which lies in moderately thinking,
and esteeming of himself, and not otherwise, if we must needs say so, then of
a small and frail instrument, tarrying the workemans hand, to dispose and
employ it to such works as he shall like best. The other, Notable sayings.
and second is, the obedience and reverence due to vocation: that is to say,
to the Politic order, instituted for every man to be called unto, according
to his manner of living, not by chance, or unawares: but by the certain
providence of God, as we have before said, without otherwise enterprising any
other of himself, although that he know him self both sufficient and worthy
of the same: yea, which is more, though the ways to enter therein were both
easy, and also open for him.

Solon (to this purpose) being by reason of great trouble risen in Athens,
between the poor, and the rich, Example of Solon.
by general consent chosen mediator, and reformer of the laws, and Public
state, was, for his great virtue, advised, and solicited by the cheifest of the
Citizens, seeing the hurly burly very difficil to be appeased by the law of
reason, to take upon him the principality and sovereign authority:
alleging, to induce him thereunto, Apollo.
an Oracle of Apollo, speaking of him, which served to that end every man
then spoke of: and that if he refused the authority presented unto him, he
should but openly declare him self betrayer of the Common weal, in the
troubles and need it then stood in: further, that a Monarchy once accepted,
incontinently loses the name of tyranny, and becomes a just kingdom, when
he that takes the same is an honest man: as in time past Timondas, Timondas.
Pittacus.
who by their consent made himself king of Negreponte: and Pittacus, since
King of the Corinthians, with diverse other considerations: But for all that,
they could not prevail so much, as once stir him from his resolution,
which was constantly to persevere in his charge, whereunto he was duly
chosen, and called, without ever consenting in any cause, to usurp the charge,
which he thought not to be in all respects justly offered unto him, which
undoubtedly he would not have done, if he had not ben retained by these two
bridles, which be, the humble and the modest opinion of himself, with
obedience, and reverence to Politic ordinances.

For else, who is he, be he never so virtuous, the bridle being once loosed to
arrogancy, contempt, and irreuerence to the weal Public, that would not
easily have given ear to such persuasions, and so apparent reasons? Indeed it
is written of Lycurgus, (who established the Lacedaemonian laws,) that he in
like manner refused to be King of Sparte, the kingdom belonging by right to
Polydectas his brothers son, of whom his widow remained with child,
because that, although he were in very deed a personage most sufficient and
worthy of such a royal dignity, he would not consent to marry her, who, to
that end, would have destroyed the fruit she had in her womb. Difference
between Solon, and Lycurgus case.
But this differs much from Solon his doing, because that it seems, that
that which the one could not accept without iniquity and evident crime: the
other contrarily might not refuse without reprehension and manifest blame.

We will add unto the Greek by us here alleged, an other Roman example,
Example of the Roman Virginius.
which is neither less excellent, or less worthy of memory. It is of
Virginius the most renoumed Captain, who had done as much or more service to
his Common weal, then any other of his time: he being exhorted, Nero.
when Nero was chased out of his Empire and slain, to take the Empire to him
self, as the most esteemed, and best worthy of the same, being as then chief
of the strongest legions, and having under his power a good part of the Empire,
which was all Gaul: for all that, notwithstanding the necessity and extremity
he was then put to by his soldiers, which earnestly requested him to accept
the same, yea, so solicited and pressed him, that a Colonel of a thousand
footmen presented a naked sword, and told him, that he should either
deliberate with him self to accept the Empire, or else to receive the naked
sword through his body: would not give ear thereto, but persisted in his
resolution to abide in the state and charge he was in, saying: that he was
neither determined to accept the same him self, ne yet to suffer it to be
given to any other, but to him that should be duly chosen, and called
thereunto by the Senate, unto whom only the authority of election
apperteined. Since it is so then, that Pagans have borne such reverence to this
Politic order, The Christian has more occasion to be constant in his
vocation then the Pagan.
what sufficiency so ever has been in the^, and what need or necessity so
ever has happened: we that have an other manner and more clear light and
knowledge of the effect, virtue, and authority of vocation, how can we
inconstantly, and through arrogancy and vnreuerentnesse, forsake or leave the
vocations whereunto we be called, to intrude our selves into any other?

CHAPTER. V. That the wrong persuasion of them that enter into offices, causes
their impatience in the same: and of the true persuasion and admonition that
they ought to receive, which in fleeing impatience, enter into the same.
AS concerning impatience, whether the same come of ingratitude, attendance,
labor, reproach, adversity, or any such like thing, commonly received, (as we
have said) by them that meddle with the Public: the same proceeds
ordinarily of a fond and blind persuasion, which for the most part occupies
their heads, which aspire to Public charges, purposing with them selves an
other end and issue, then they ought to do, as of wealth, honors, pleasures,
authority, and greatness: for if the contrary happen, as of necessity it
can not otherwise do, unto him that means to acquit him self honestly and
uprightly: Symonides.
No more (said Symonides) then Larks can lack and want creastes upon their
heads: straight in stead of resisting by virtue and patience, they enter into
choler and impatience, whereby they straight abandon and forsake their charges,
or else abide in them with annoyaunce and grief. And it befalls them (as
Plutarch says in his Politiques, Plutarch.
) as unto those which for pleasure and recreation sake, when the weather is
fair and clear, and the sea calm, be entered into a ship, hoping to have an
easy and pleasant navigations: for afterward being driven by souden tempest
into the maine sea, looking still upon the firm land whence they parted, they
abide forced and compelled in the ship, but not without great displeasure. It
is not therefore with this persuasion that it behooves to enter into vocations
in expectation or hope of particular ease and gain: but contrarily, The true
persuasion a man ought to have entering into Public charges.
with assurance to be exposed, (as it were in the maine sea) to infinite
dangers, waves, and tempests. For otherwise, unless that man's wit and
understanding be confirmed, and fortified by reason, and the knowledge
especially, of the reverence due to vocation, it is impossible but that he must
easily waver and stray, through the infinity of occasions that be presented,
though oftentimes, but very slight: whereas it behooves that the resolution be
not only good and honest in it self, but also firm, and not subject to
change: lest it happen unto us, as it does to likerish and deintie mouths,
which oftentimes, with most fervent appetite desire a meat: and when they once
have their fill thereof, be straight glutted therewith. For so happens it to
many, which after they have instantly sued and labored for an office and trade
of living, be incontinently anoyed with the same, by reason of ye weakness of
their imagination, and apprehension of the public respect, transported for
the most part, with their own particular.

And therefore (said the Philosopher Panetius, Panetius.
) they that be called to dealing in affairs, being exposed to many dangers
very difficult to prevent, ought to do as wrestlers, which being called to the
combat, and upon the point of wrestling, do plant them selves strongly upon
the ground, with both their arms raised alofte, and set right up before
them, for a rampire, ready and provided to defend and assail. For even so,
said he, the man constituted in a Public charge, ought to be prudent, and
fortified with constancy against all assaults, whereunto he is continually
exposed, lest that by chance he be taken unprovided, and forced by impatience
in the end to say that which Demosthenes said, Demosthenes overcome with
impatience.
having experimented the troubles men receive in government and administration
Public: that if two ways were laid before him, the one to the government
of Public affairs, and the other to hell, that he would sooner choose that
which led to hell, then the other.

Undoubtedly, this impatience we speak of, above all other to be eschued by
the Public man, ordinarily is accompanied with, I know not what kind of
obstinate selfwill, the which the impatient does fondly esteem to be
stoutnesse of courage, The impatient account obstinacy, stoutness of
courage. Plato. Obstinacy is solitary.
and magnanimity, ignoring that obstinacy is the thing in the world, that he
that will meddle with the government of a Common weal, and converse with men,
ought chiefly to eschew: As that which (as Plato says) dwells with
solitariness, that is to say: that they which do obstinately stand to their
own opinion, and will not at any time acco^modate the^ selves to any other:
dwell in the end alone. Who so ever therefore will live in this world,
especially in charge and Public administration, must of necessity be a lover
of patience, and not for any accident, mischance, or adversity that happens
unto him, abandon that which belongs to his office and duty, but rather so
much the more to fortify him self, and persevere in his vocation. Metellus.
For, to do well (says Metellus) in place where is no danger, is a thing
common enough: but to do well where danger is, is the very office of an
honest and virtuous man.

Neither may a man cease to persevere, though he see many complaints and
lamentations proceeding, Complaints and lamentations, ought not to hinder a
public man from perseverance.
because of good and upright administration: as it chances most commonly unto
them, that by nature be honest and just men, which for the most part, be not
agreeable to the common people, because that indeuouring themselves ordinarily
to reform them, they displease them, even as the bands and ligatures of
Physicians and Cheirurgions do them that be wounded and hurt: For although the
same be to put, or restore loose and displaced members into their natural
joints again, yet for all that, A man cannot govern with out committing some
fault.
they put the patient to much pain. Ne yet ought he to leave the perseverance
in his vocation, although he now and then commit some faults in the same, as he
can not other wise choose but do: because that, not to fail in the handling
of affairs, is a thing surpassing man's nature: but to learn by faults, to
beware in time to come, is the point of a wise and virtuous man. Or although he
see no happy issue of his well doing, because that it suffices to have
testimony with him, that he has faithfully acquitted him self in his
vocation: in this assurance to fortify him self in the same: The Catoes more
wise then happy.
as the virtuous Catoes, which were more wise then happy in their counsels,
did always. Truly inconstancy and lightness, make the act evil, which
otherwise of it self is good: and the choice founded upon an assured knowledge
and firm discourse of reason, never changes, although that the thing
enterprised, succeed not always to a good end.

CHAPTER. VI. That vocations ought to be esteemed as an exercise and trial of
virtues: and how detestable a thing inconstancy is, and contrarily, how
commendable constancy is in any vocation.
WHerefore vocations, specially the Public shall be presented to all persons,
which mean constantly to persevere, and acquit themselves in them, as
exercises and proofs of virtue, by the which (as Bias said) a man is soon
discovered what he is: Bias.
no one thing being, which more tries or bewrays the nature of man, then the
license and authority of a Magistrate, which stirs all the passions that be
harbored in the bottom of man's heart, and causes all secret vices hid
therein, to appear. Wherefore Cato of Vtica, Cato of Vtica
seeing him self chosen Questor of Rome, protested that he was not come to
intermeddle him self in the affairs by chance and adventure, nor yet to
enrich him self, or else to satisfy any particular passion, but that by mere
deliberatio^ he received the administration of that charge, as the very
exercise of an honest man.

Socrates against inconstancy.
Socrates did so much detest and abhor this inconstancy, that he said, that
even as it is naturally recommended to each one to keep his own, and not to
have an eye upon others: that so likewise each one ought to be no less
diligently advised, well and carefully to do that which belonged to his own
charge, without enterprising ought upon an other man's office: and that it was
no less injustice to abandon and forsake his place, then to abandon the
defense of him, that should be committed to our guard. And without doubt, to
forsake his vocation, to enter into an other of his own authority, is to do
as the man of war, who leaves the rank his Captain appointed him: or else
to do as the Captain, who leaves the forte or castle committed to his
charge, of him self, and without license of his Prince, to go to an other,
under color of meaning to succor the same: because that it is a thing most
certain, that for the danger and peril of any other place what so ever, but
the same which is committed to his tuition, he ought not to depart from his
charge: Ecclesiastes.
Ecclesiastes saying to this purpose, that the man forsaking the place he ought
to keep, does as the bird that abandoneth his nest. A saying used in old time.
And therefore the men of old time said wisely, Covet or desire to be that thou
art, and no more: Meaning by this most worthy sentence, to retain and keep
each man in his calling, without permission to change or abandon the same, at
his own fond appetite or fantastical motion. And if so be, Jesus Christ
observed his vocation.
yt all that is before said content us not, let us then look upon the example
of the son of GOD, and we shall see, that though he were Lord of heaven and
earth, that yet for all that, being a man in this world, he kept him self so
precisely within the bounds and limits of his vocation, that he refused there,
to exercise the office of a Judge or other Magistrate, and Public authority.

Numa Pompilius, Numa Pompilius of the changing of his condition of life.
when the Romans sent for him to be their King, said, that among all the
mutations dangerous to man, the alteration and changing of his estate and
manner of living, was that, which was most to be feared and eschued. A good
comparison.
And indeed, if it to were, that man's members had this sense, to know the
greatness or smalnesse of each others work and action, was there ever any
greater confusion, if under color thereof, the one would forsake the office
whereunto he is deputed, to undertake the same of an other? A familiar example.
Or else to show the same yet by a more familiar example, if we should see in
the domestical house, that servant which is deputed to one service, forsake the
same, and undertake at his pleasure, his companions: as the secretary, the
barbars: ye barbar, the stewards: ye steward the pages: and so of other, would
we not say, yt such were greatly to be blamed, because they went but out of
their offices, and disobeyed their masters pleasure? So it is assuredly of
every of us, in the feate of his vocation, toward the sovereign master of
all, who has given unto each one of us his office, faithfully to stay and
employ our selves therein, without permission to go out of the same of our
selves, be it upon never so good an intent, occasion, or particular opinion,
might the same by appearance never so much tickle or flatter our spirits.

Loys the eleventh of France.
King Loys the eleventh, a most wise Prince, and above all other skillful in the
choice of men meet for his service, gave also upon a time sufficiently to
understand, how recommendable a thing each ones constancy in his vocation is:
he had among other of his privy counsel, a merchant, a man of good wit and
service, by means of whose traffic, he had intelligence in sundry strange
countries, and therefore favored him so well, that he caused him to sit at his
boorde: it happened upon a time, A good story
this merchant seeing him self thus in favor, desired the king to make him
Noble: which, in consideration of his service, was easily granted him:
whereupon (thinking to have, by so much the more advanced him self in honor
and estimation,) apparelling him self straight in Noble man's attire, he came
to present himself at the kings dinner, as he was wont to do, looking that he
should have been commanded to sit down as before, and that in a more
honorable place then of custom, but he was well deceived: for it chanced
quite contrarily, that he was left standing all the dinner time, and not once
so much as bid sit down: whereof sore abashed, not knowing whether it were by
chance or otherwise, that he was so forgotten, the king rising from the
boorde, called, and said unto him: If I have heretofore accustomed to make you
sit at my table, and do no more so now, you must not marvel thereat, because
that while you were chief of your sort and calling, I did no man wrong to
honor you for such a one: But having changed your estate, and put your
self into the same wherein you are not the thousandst in degree, I should do
wrong to many, if I now preferred you before them in that behalf. A worthy
saying of Loys the eleventh of France.
By the which saying, assuredly worthy of such a king, we be taught, that there
is nothing more seemly for a Prince, then to conserve to each one the degree
of honor that apperteineth unto him, and that it is better for a man
constantly to keep himself chief in his own place, though it be inferior,
then to leave the same, to make himself second to a greater.

Numa Pompilius, Example for constancy by an ancient institution in the
Romano sacrifices. Hoc age.
of whom we spoke right now, instituted that in all sacrifices, ceremonies,
and processions of Priests, these words, Hoc age, which is to say, Do this
attentively, should by some man be cried out with a loud voice: A custom in
deed both commendable, and right worthy to be imitated and followed in a
better thing: as that which teaches a man to gather his wits together, and
leave all other works and thoughts to be attentive to that he has to do. For
undoubtedly man's negligent rechlessenes in the exercise of his vocation is so
great, that every day, morning, and evening, the same self voice, and words
ought to be heard of each one, and cried with sound of trumpet, to stir
man to be diligent, and attentive to that whereunto he is called, and to do
nothing, as it were, in way of his discharge only.

Also, sith it is so, Philip king of Macedon.
that Philippe King of Macedone, after he had obtained victory against the
Atheniens, was praised, because he ordained that every morning at his
vprising, one of his Pages should with a loud voice pronounce these words to
him: Philippe, thou art a man: to serve him for an admonition, and kenuing of
himself: how much more should it be a thing esteemed praise worthy and
necessary, if every day, each one in his own behalf were advised to be
careful, and diligent in the discharge of his calling? And that therefore, to
begin with the greatest, to the meanest, it were said to the king, Thou art
king, be attentive thereunto: And to the Churcheman, Thou art Gods Minister,
and disposer of his word: And so of other.

The Scythians.
To the end, that, as it is written of the Scythians, that when they sit
drinking, and making merry together, they cause now and then the stringes of
their bows to twang, as if that the so doing served to call again, and
retain the force of their courage, and hardiness, which otherwise would
glide, drop away, and be destempered with the voluptuousness of the wine
they take: Also, that by this voice, and frequent admonition, resounding in all
men's ears, every one might be retained in his office, and not be carried
away, and distracted by the number of adversaries, and enemies, among the
which we live continually, altogether contrary to the constancy required in
the exercise of our vocation.

CHAPTER. VII. Of them that say that there is a certain revolution, and
praefixion of time, or place, in the which a wise man ought to leave off the
dealing in affairs.
Moreover, I cannot be of their opinion, that say that there is a certain
revolution, and prefixion of time, or place, in the which a wise man ought
wholly to leave off and forsake the administration of Public affairs, neither
more nor less, then when the flower of age, and strength of body, be once
passed, a man is no more meet to just, or yet to wrestle, or do any other
like exercise of body: in this respect praising Lucullus, Example of Lucullus,
Metellus, and Scipio the Africane.
because he left the dealing in affairs in good time: and Metellus surnamed
Pius, because that in his old days he also retired himself: As Scipio the
Africane, who seeing that the glory of his noble acts moved ye Citizens to
envy him, changed the remnant of his life, into rest, and abandoning all
Public affairs, went to dwell in the country. Amuretus the Turk, not long
since, Amuretus the Turk.
after he had gotten a famous victory against King Vladislaus, whom he slew,
moved with this consideration, dismissed himself of his Empire, Vladislaus
King of Hungary.
and quiting all affairs, made himself one of Mahometes Monks: least (said
he) that fawning Fortune should hereafter deceive, and play him a slutishe
trick, whereby possible the glory he had won in that conflicte, might
vanishe, and be obscured. And contrarily they which heretofore reproved
Marius, Marius.
because that he could not retire, and content himself after a goodly and
excellent exploytes of arms, the which he had achieved to his great honor:
having thereby atteined the accomplishement of perfect felicity, without
being able for all that, to prefixe, or set an end of the course of his
prosperity: Saying also ye like of Cicero, Cicero.
that he should have grown aged more happily, if after he had suppressed
Catiline his coniuration, he had retired him self to his house, without
further giving himself to the Public. And thus of many other. For such an
opinion is rather founded upon a particular respect, then upon the public:
according to the which we mean still, that the intent of all persons entering
into, or going out of vocations, Marcus Cato his saying.
should always be ruled. And therefore Marcus Cato having continually this
only end before his eyes, said, Dionysius of Siracuse.
that eue^ as Dionysius the tyrant of Siracuse was told and advised, that he
could not be better buried, then in tyranny: that even so, he also could not
better nor with more honor, grow aged, then in still intermedling himself,
even to the very end, in affairs of the Common weal.

CHAPTER. VIII. Of diverse cases, in the which it is permitted, yea,
necessary for a man to leave his vocation: and of the authority of
Reuocation: equal with the same of vocation: and incidently of the honest rest
of age, and of the wisdom, and discretion men ought to use toward the
Prince, commanding evil things: with many other purposes.
BUT although that it has been, and is our principal drifte, and intent, to
provoke, and exhort men constantly to follow, and apply that which belongs
to their calling, without leaving or abandoning ye same in any wise: yet for
all that, there may sometime such occasion be presented, ye it is permitted:
yea, requisite and expedient for a man to leave the same: whereof it behooves
us also to speak in this place. As first of all, when a man is duly, and in
such manner as we have before debated, called from one vocation to another:
Whether being called from one vocation to an other, we may lawfully refuse the
same.
For in this case every man is bound straight to follow the voice of God, who
calls him by their means to whom he has given that power: unless he have
some very just cause in himself, to disturne, or disuade him therefro^: as
some secret testimony of his inability, and weakness, be it of body or
wit, or else some other insufficiency, and consideration, which may be in
sundry manners, according to the time, and occasion presented: Provided
always, that the consideration be, as we have still said, rather founded
upon zeal toward the Common weal, then upon the love of his own particular.

That which we say, Whether being called from a higher to a lower place we may
make any just refuse.
that being called from one vocation to an other, we must straight obey,
leaving our former, receives no great difficulty, being called from a meaner
to a greater vocation: but being called from a greater to a lesser, the
question would seem more doubtful, and difficulte: to wit, whether there
ought to be the like obedience in straight leaving the first, to receive the
last, and lesser, or baser. For undoubtedly, there be but few, which raised
in high degree of honor, would willingly come lower: and yet for all that,
reteining the end we have always proposed, which is the consideration of the
Common profit, without any particular respect, there should seem to be no
difference, whether we be called from a mean vocation to a higher, or from a
higher to a lower, why there ought not to be equal obedience, as well in the one
kind, as in the other. As we read in the Roman histories of many, and among
other of Quintus Fabius, a great personage, Example of Quintus Fabius.
that having been Consul of Rome, in sovereign authority, he refused not for
all that, his Consulship being ended, although he came from being the chief,
There is mo^^ trust to be given to him that comes from a higher state to a
lower, then to the contrary.
and principal conductour, to go to the wars under other Consuls. And
verily, there is far greater trust, without comparison, in a man coming from
a great, to a less: then unto him, who from a base, is advanced to a higher:
and the conduction of affairs, should also be far surer, when the principal
governor shall have about him a number of excellent, and virtuous personages,
already experimented, which by their wisdom, and good counsel might
supply the vnexperte rawnesse of him that should be advanced from a base, to a
higher: He means France.
howbeit, as we live in this Realm, offices being perpetual, I cannot say, but
there should be just reason to refuse the less office, and charge, coming
from the exercise of a greater.

Reuocation is a sufficient cause, for a man to forsake his charge.
It is also lawful, yea, expedient, to leave his vocation, if there happen any
reuocation, be it for any criminal cause, forfaiture, infamy, or other just
occasion happened: so that the reuocation be made by him that has authority.
For as it is reasonable, that he should be constituted in office, which is
thought worthy: so is there nothing more reasonable, then that he should be
deprived, that is declared unworthy: Example of Tarquinius king of the Romans.
as King Tarquine for his injustice, and violent authority: when he was not
only revoked, but also the royal dignity wholly abolished, and disanulled by
the people, which had called his predecessors to that preeminence, and
authority: although the same were the most ancient of all other, and by the
which Rome it self had been founded. And Adulphe Emperor of Alomaine orderly
chosen to the Imperial dignity, Of the Emperor Adulphe
was for his insufficiency afterward revoked by the self Electours, and
deprived of the sovereign power: such is the authority of Reuocatio^. So that
it was not without very just cause, that Aristides, Of Aristides.
so much renowned in Greece, being revoked, and dismissed of all charge, and
public administration by the banishment of Ostracisme (or popular authority)
was driven out of ye Atheniens camp, against the Lacedaemonians, whither he
was come to render himself, with intention to have fought on his citizens
side, because that it was during the time of his exile, and whiles his
reuocation yet lasted, and also without being otherwise called thither, then of
himself. Flaminius chosen Consul, Flaminius blamed for disobeying his
reuocation.
and dispatched to make wars against the Milanois, being revoked, by reason of
sinister presages happened, was justly blamed, and reproved: because that he
being then ready to give the shocke, notwithstanding his reuocation, gave
battle: although that he defeated, and overthrew his enemies, and returned to
Rome, laden with rich spoils: so severe obseruers were the Romans of this
vocation, what felicity, or prosperity so ever might have insued, thinking it
to be more expedient for the Common weal, that this reverence, and obedience
(which we so diligently recommaund,) should be kept, then to vanquishe their
enemies in battle. Scipio Nasica, and Caius Marius, Scipio Nasion and Caius
Marius, commended for obeying unto vocations. Agesilaus.
being toward the Provinces allotted unto them, and revoked for like cause,
were the better esteemed: because that they incontinently quited their
Provinces, and straight returned to Rome, where they voluntarily deposed
themselves of their estates. And Agesilaus king of Lacedaemon, was never so
much honored for any act he did, as because that he abandoned his great, and
prosperous conquestes in Asia, as soon as he had received a little billet sent
him out of his own country: by the which he was advised to return home.
Leaving by that means, with Asia, a fair, and worthy example of obedience,
Haniball disobeyeth his dismission.
due to them that have power to revoke: far other then Hanibals was, who
beginning to have evil success in Italy, never meant for all that, (unless of
mere force) to obey his citizens, which revoked him to defend them from the
wars they had on hand, and in their own country. Alexander the great.
And Alexander the great being for the self cause called back into his own
kingdom of Macedon, refused not only to return but also scorned, when he heard
of the great battle his Lieuetenant had had against Agis, Agis.

Darius King of Persia.

The authority of reuocation nothing inferior to that of vocation.

A man may lawfully disobey the reuocation made by them that have no authority.

Henry the fourth. Duke Rodulphe.


saying, that it seemed unto him, (hearing those news while he defeated king
Darius in those parts,) that they told him of a battle of Rattes, and Mice.
In doing whereof, without al doubt, they were both worthy of blame. For the
authority of Reuocation (made by them, as I have said, that have lawful
power, and commission to do it:) is nothing inferior to the same of vocation.
I say, especially by them, that have lawful power to do it: for if they were
other, then should there be just cause not to obey the same. As Henry the
fourth Emperor of Almaine of ye name, being duly chosen by the Electours of
the Empire, and yet for all that revoked or dismissed by Pope Hildebrand, who
sent the Imperial crown, wherein these verses were engraven, unto Rodulphe:
Christ Jesus, whom Scriptures the rock do call,
To Saint Peter, the crown gave, before all:
And I, who in earth his place represent,
To thee Duke Rodulphe, the same now present.


Meaning, to say that the Empire was by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
conferred unto the Pope, The reuocation made by part, and no sufficient number
of them that have authority to do the same, is insufficient.

Example of Coriolanus.


and that by Popes it ought to be given to Princes: of which enterprise, for
all that, full evil befell him and Rodulph: because he accepted the same, as
the history thereof bears more at large. So should it be also, if the
reuocation were made by some, and no sufficient number, or part of them that
had authority to call: as it happened unto Coriolanus, having been chosen
Capiteine general of the Volsques, by consent of all, and revoked by Tullius
alone, having as then in deed greater authority then any other.

For, I will gladly dismiss my self of my charge, (said he) and remitte the
same into the hands of the Lords of the Volsques, if they all command me, as
I have by commandment of them all, and not otherwise accepted the same.

If a man were called to some authority, charge, The time of charge being
expired, the same ought to be given up.

Of them which usurped their vocations. Sylla. In Caesar, M. Antonie, Lepide,
and August.

Timolion left his charge.


or Public dignity, for a certain time limited, or else by occasion of
some souden accident only: the time once expired, or the occasion ceassing, he
should be more then blame worthy, who that notwithstanding, would continue and
persevere in the same: as for example, Sylla, Julius Caesar, Mark Antonie,
Lepide, and August, the which contrary to the institution, and Public
ordinance of their offices, ordained only for a time, did forceably, and by
violence usurp, and deteine the same: and so continued in their sovereign
authority, or to say better, in their tyranny. Wherefore Timolion, among
other, deserved great praise, because that he, of his own free will, as soon
as he had wrecked, and defeated them that would have usurped the government,
and made an end of that which was committed to his charge, quited the state,
and charge of Captain general of Siracuse. Pelopidas and Epaminondas kept
their offices by force
And contrarily, Pelopidas, and Epimanondas, were justly accused, and blamed,
because they kept their office, and government of Boetia longer then they
ought, although it was but four months only.

If he also that is entered into any vocation, Infirmity of body or wit is
a sufficient cause for a man to give over his vocation.
cannot any longer satisfy the Common weal, wherein he has been received,
by reason of his infirmity of body, imbecillitie of wit, feebleness of
age, or else through some other impediment what so ever it be, happened unto
him, it shall be best for him to depart, or forbear, and dismiss himself:
because that Public vocations be ordained unto men, to be used to the
public service, and not to be inioyed in respect of any interest, or
particular profit. As, among other, Appius Clodius a notable personage, who
partly because of his age, Example of Appius Clodius.
and partly because he had lost his sight, surceassed, and gave over his
charge, and neither went any more to the Senate, or yet intermedled himself
with any Public affairs. And we have in our days seen the Emperor
Charles. The Emperor Charles the fifte.
5. upon the like consideration of age, and imbecillitie or inability longer
to sustain accustomed travels, retire himself wholly from affairs, and
Public administration.

Honest retraite and consolation for age.
And in very deed, a man feebled with age, and whom crooked years compel to
withdraw himself from the maniment of affairs, as well of war as of peace,
is not only excusable: but much to be commended when he retireth himself unto
some honest consolation to pass the rest of his days quietly: and especially,
when he has the mean to retire him self to the most happy, and most
honest contentation, of learning, full of rest, and tranquillity of mind: in
the delectation thereof, conjoined with honest contemplation happily to end
his virtuous actions, all reported or referred to the only butte of virtue,
proposed to every good seruitour of the Public and profitable member of
humane society. And verily it is a seemly, and honest thing for age, to
repose, and refreshe him self, after a number of toils, and troubles, in the
study of Philosophy, in reviving of the part contemplative, and mortifying
(at the least wise brideling) in good time, the part ambitious, and active.

Having done his duty in any charge, without prevailing, or profiting in the
same, a man may retire him self. Example of Solon, and Pisistratus.
We say the like as before, if that after a man has done his full endeavor in
any office, or charge, he see that he cannot avail, or profit therein. As
Solon, who, having done his vttermoste to resist, and suppress Pisistratus
tyranny at Athens, and seeing that no man would give him ear, withdrewe
himself to his house, where he took, and set his army in the streate
before his door, saying: As for me, I have done what I have been able to do,
to succoure, and defend the laws, and liberty of my country: and thence
forth kept himself quiet, without any more meddling with the government of the
Public weal. For in the like case, I durst boldly say, that it should be
lawful for a man, to abandon his vocation. Example of Cicero.
As we read likewise of Cicero, that during the seditious, and civil wars,
and when that the government of the Common weal ceased, forced first by the
tyranny of Marius, then of Caesar, and other, he in the mean while having no
mean to attend on affairs as he was wonted, retired himself to the study of
Philosophy, seeking to profit the Public otherways, by teaching of young
folk, or else busying himself in compounding of sundry most vtile, and
profitable discourses of Philosophy, until such time, as the troubles
beginning to cease, A charge may be forsaken, when a man man may not exercise
the-same with a safe conscience.
and the Common weal to recover it self, he returned again to the
administration of affairs, as before.

Beside the cases before spoken of, there is yet an other worthy of noting,
which is, that whenever, and as often as he yt is called to any charge,
cannot exercise the same as he is bound to do, and without offending of his
conscience. As we will show for example, Example of Papinian.
of Papinian a most eloquent, and renowned lawyer, who being requested by the
Emperor Caracalla, The Emperor Caracalla.
to excuse him by his learned eloquence, of the murder most unnaturally
committed on his own brother Geta, Get a brother to Caracalla.
stoutly aunsweared: that he could not do it: and that it was not as easy a
matter to defend a murder, as it was to commit it. Whereupon he suffered
most cruel death, choosing rather to abandon, and incur the danger of his
life, then to approve a dishonest fact.

And therefore if a King, Prince, or superior did command any unjust, and
wicked thing, it were better for a man to abandon his office, and vocation,
Wisdom and discretion is to be used toward a prince commanding a wicked thing.
then to be in them, a minister of iniquity. But for all that, I mean after
he has prudently, and discreetely behaved himself toward his Prince, and
superior, that is to say, after he has made some honest excuses, or else
given some better advice, according unto the matter presented, by all mean
possible, to dissuade him, or at the least to qualify his commandment: doing
even as the Sun, which neither follows the course of the firmament
directly, ne yet has his moving altogether opposite, and contrary, but going
somewhat byasse, and by an oblique way, makes a disturned, or crooked line,
which is not too extremely swifte, but goes turning softly, and by his
obliquitie, or crooked course, causes the conservation of all things,
mainteining the world in good temperature. As men affirm it to be the manner
of the GOD of nature, in the guiding, and government of this world, not to
force any thing, but mollifying the same by gentle demonstrations, A man ought
not to be precise.
and persuasions of reason, to constreine it to obey: for else, a man may not
soudenly, and rashly forsake or leave his charge, as some which be too precise,
and scrupulous think they may, because they cannot abide, nor endure diverse
faults and wicked things, which be daily discovered and seen in the
maniment of Public affairs: and thereby oftentimes take soudeine occasion to
make many alterations, and chaunges, and in the end to leave, and forsake their
vocations: which proceeds no whence else, but of lack of knowledge, or
rather of want of experience.

There be also which passing further, say, When a country is utterly
depraved, a man may leave his office.
that if the state, and Public government of a country, were so depraved
and corrupted, as that vice were publicly approved in them for virtue, or a
lie for truth, injustice for justice, that then it should be best for a man
not only to abandon his Public vocation, but also to depart altogether out of
the country it self: alleging to this purpose an example written, among other
Grecian histories, of one call Amyris, Example of Amytis.
who, because he had seen a master, pursuing his servant, bare more
reverence to his fathers tumbe, the^ to the temple, and image of the Goddess
whither he was fled for refuge, and the fact to be approved of all men, did
abandon the Town, which soon after was burnt and utterly destroyed.

We will here for the last, add yet one other cause, no less virtuous, then
rare and seldom frequent, When a man knows any one more sufficient then
himself, he may well give him place.
when it is also lawefull: yea, necessary for a man of himself, and without
offense to give over and abandon his vocation. It is, when that he that is
placed in dignity, and Public charge, knows that there is an other man,
that can better, and more to the advancement of the Common weal, execute
the charge laid on him. For in this case it is a point worthy of singular
praise, and commendation, to give his place to him, that should be found and
known by the opinion of men, better to deserve the same: preferring the
Public utility, and profit, Example of Minutius and Fabius Maximus.
before particular affection. As Minutius did most virtuously behave himself
toward Fabius Maximus, when he quited unto him the Dictatorship: as one known
more worthy to command alone, and willingly submitted himself under his
charge, and commandment. The Satrapes successors to Alexander. Antigonus.
Eumenes. Example of
And less did not the great Satrapes, or Princes, successors to Alexander,
having war with king Antigonus, when they all voluntarily yielded the
authority of commandment unto Eumenes, and submitted themselves unto him, as
one known to be the most worthy, and sufficient to be sole Capteime general
of the army. Pope Coelestine.
Pope Coelestine did also in this point right well show his great modesty,
when that being admonished of his insufficiency to bear charge of so great a
Bishoppricke, he renounced voluntarily, having been but six months Pope,
showing by his so doing, more respect to the Public weal, then regard to any
particular appetite. That which I repeat oftentimes, because that this
consideration fa^^ing, his intention that gives his place to an other man,
cannot be but altogether lewd, and perverse: As the same of Nicias the
Athenien, Example of Nicias the Athenien.
a personage for all that of great value, was, who justly received reproach and
blame at all men's hands, because that he, of a desire to save his own person
in time of danger, resigned the honor, and charge of Captain, to one named
Cleon, a rash man, of no reputation, having in so doing respect but to his
own, without caring at all for the Public: doing as a Mariner, who
abandoneth the government of the helm, to an other man, even when the tempest
is most furious, and violent.

CHAPTER. IX. Finally, to what end each vocation ought to be referred.
Now to conclude, there need not many words to make men understand, to what
end every vocation ought to be referred or reported, as a thing already
sufficiently showed, and declared. For even as we see in Music, Harmony
pleasant, and agreeable unto the ear, to be compounded of many distinct and
different tunes: So have we also seen the interteinement, and common accord of
humane society to be composed of many, and diverse vocations distinct and
different: and their end to be put peace and union, neither more nor less
undoubtedly, then the end of travel of every man's members tends to the only
conservation, and continuance of the universal body of the Communaltie of men.

In respect whereof Cicero said most wisely, that to take away ought by force,
To do against the society of man, is a thing repugnant to nature. Cicero.
and unjustly to make his profit, and gain, of the hinderance and damage of
an other man, is a thing more repugnant to Nature, then death, poverty,
grief, exile, or any other thing, be the same never so grievous that may
happen unto man, either in his person, or goods. Adding further, that if it so
were, that each member of the body, had the understanding to think, that it
were best for him to draw to himself the health and life of his companion,
that it could not otherwise be, but that in short time we should see the whole
body decay and die: that even so among men, if each one would ravish to
himself the goods and commodities of other, it should not be possible, but
that earelong the common society should be dissipated and broken.

And this union, and mutual commerce of men, says Plato, The happy common
weal as Plato writes.
is so allowed of, as that it is impossible to devise or imagine a more assured
Common weal, and nearer approaching to the immortality of the Gods, then the
same wherein there is a Commonaltie, and union, not only of all goods, but
also of each thing that nature has appropriated to each one: as of the eyes,
ears, and hands: to the end that whosoever should hear, or do any thing,
should employ the whole to the Common use, and profit. And in the which
Common weal in the end, there should be such a participation of joy, and
sorrow, as that for one very cause, and occasion, all should by one common
affection of mind be touched at once al merry or al sad. Following therein ye
saying of Solon, who being asked which was the City of all other, Solons
opinion.
that seemed unto him the best governed: answered, The same where they that be
not outraged pursue as egerly the redress of an injury, as they them selves,
that have received the same: And Plato sticks not to say, Plato his opinion
touching the commonaltie of women and children.
that the very Commonaltie of women and children, was necessary in a Common
weal, and City well instituted, not in respect of any other communication, or
society, as it is most likely, then of mutual love, and well ordained
charity, minding to show, that there is nothing that ought to be so dear and
precious, which by common affection should not be common among us. For even
as in the bodies of beasts, the parts of them live, be nourished, and take
the spirit of life, by the bond they have one with an other: So likewise the
society of men, joined and fast linked together, with the chain of this
common affection, and respect to the common weal, is by common foresight
conserved, and increased.

And truly this society is the end whereunto each vocation ought to be
directed: but yet for all that, The end of all vocations, is fellowshippe and
society.
not grounded upon I know not what peace, tranquillity, and humane glory,
wherein the wisest and most renoumed among the Philosophers be falen on sleep:
but referred to the place whence the same proceeds, that is to say, to
heaven, the honor and glory of the Almighty. For as long as particular
affection of glory dwells and abides in us, it is impossible that the true
union which we seek, should be in the society of men. This being a most
certain and assured thing, that all glory is accompanied by a particularitie,
chief enemy, and adversary to Commonaltie, the daughter of Charity, who is
meek, humble, courteous, and patient, not seeking her own commodity: which is
so high a point, that undoubtedly it forces and streineth our nature, yea, all
humane Philosophy. For there is nothing harder and more grievous to man's
ears, inclined naturally to his own profit, then to hear that he must
renounce the love and good will he bears to him self, A man to renounce
himself to serve other, is a troblesomething to hear.
wholly to abandon him self, to procure an other man's profit: yea, to quite
his own right: to leave the same to his neighbor. But therein do we not also
with the Philosophers, follow nature as our guide, but the spirit of God, who
warns us in the scriptures, that the gifts and graces received of him, be by
him freely imparted unto us, to be again by us liberally employed to common
profit, and that therefore the right use of the good liberality bestowed
upon us, consists in a liberal communication to other. That which the
members of our own body teach us sufficiently, no one of them being, which
does not employ him self more to the commodity of the whole body in general,
then to his own particular.

Wherefore, Epiloge and recapitulation of all the book.
having now showed what vocation is, and treated of the manner to come orderly
thereunto, and of the office and duty as well of him that has authority and
power to call thereunto, as also of him that is called in general and
particular in sundry manners: and having also spoken of the multiplicitie and
variety thereof, so that it cannot be, but that a man must needs know, that
he is called to some one of them: then having done you to understand, the
natural inconstancy of man, in that which belongs to his vocation, and the
cause thereof, with the mean how to maintain him self constantly therein,
and the end whereunto each vocation ought to tend: Making an end of this work,
there where we have begun: we think to have sufficiently showed, that the
vocation of man is a certain manner of living, distinct and different in
sundry kinds, according to the necessity of man's imbecillitie and need,
proceeding from the divine providence, and not by chance of Fortune, to serve
for mutual succor, and reciproke aid one to an other: whereunto every man
ought to be called duly, and constantly maintain him self in the same, to
the conservation of the order, policy, government, and union of the life and
society of man.

FINIS.

