A SHORT Apology for Christian Soldiers: wherein is contained, how that we
ought both to propagate, and also if need require, to defend by force of
arms, the Catholic Church of Christ, against the tyranny of Antichrist and
his adherentes: penned by Stephanus Iunius Brutus, and translated into English
by H. P. for the benefit of the resolution of the Church of England, in the
defense of the Gospel.

O Israel if thou return, return unto me: and if thou put away thine
abhominatio^s out of my sight, then shall thou not remove. Ierem. 4.1.

LONDON. Printed by John Wolf, for Henry Carre. 1588.

THE QVESTION. When the Subjects of any Prince, are either afflicted for
Religion, or oppressed with tyranny, it is lawful for the Princes inhabiting
about them, to send them aid.
THis Question requires more conscience to be used than learning, if we will
determine any certain thing thereof: for it is such a one, ye which if
charity in these our days were not become cold, were altogether needless.
But as the manners of men are in these days, the course of the world is come to
this point, that there is nothing among us either of greater price, or of
smaller praise than charity, and therefore it is a very necessary question to
be determined of those which are tyrannous Princes, and cruel to their
subjects, as to their souls, to their bodies, to the church of God, to their
common wealth, to their own kingdom, may lawfully be resisted for the
benefit of the church of Christ, and for the increase of the same. But because
that either the crafty dealing of tyrants is such, or the simplicity of the
subjects so much, that the one is not known before he have spoiled his people,
and the other perceives it not before they be brought to present danger, and
into such narrow streights, as that they are compelled to crave the aid of
other Princes: The question is demanded, whether it be lawful for other
Princes adjoining, to send them aid, they either defending their religion, or
their common wealth, or the kingdom of Christ, or their own country. Many
there are which think it lawefull, whose covetous mind is such, as they
think by ayding the^ to increase greatly their own substance. For so did the
Romans, so did Alexander the great, and many other, which under the pretense
of expugning the cruel dealings of tyrants, have often enlarged their own
livings. And we have seen but of late days, and example hereof in Henry the
second, king of France, who under a pretense of defending the protestants, and
reducing them from servitude into liberty, and to preserve the Princes of the
Empire, made war against Charles the fifth. But if at any time it happen, that
either the gain is small or the danger great, then we see many Princes
content to make it a great question, and to dispute doubtfully whether it be
lawful or no. And as the one does cover his ambition and desire of gain under
the cloak of piety, so the other does pretend justice and equity for his
excuse, when as in deed neither piety does depart the one, nor justice
detain the other, both of which virtues, or rather divine qualities, seeking
altogether those things which may benefit their Christian brethren, and the
church of Christ. Therefore let us first enquire in the cause of religion, what
piety and justice do exhort us unto. It is manifest that the church of God is
one, that Christ is the head of the church, whose members are so knitte and
joined together, that the least of them cannot suffer violence, but that the
whole must also grieve and sorrow with it, and therefore the church is
compared to a body. The body does perish many times by a wound received, not
only in the arm or in the thigh, but even in the least member thereof. And
therefore it is in vain for a man to say that he is careful for the church of
Christ, when as he suffers her to be rent asunder, and be torn in pieces, in
whose power it is to save her. Furthermore, the church of Christ is compared to
a building, and a building if it be undermined in any place, it falls to the
ground: a building in what ioynte or tenant soever the fire comes, it is
wholly in danger: and therefore he may well be laughed at, who because he
dwells in the sellar, or some lower part of the house, has no care to remove
the fire from the top of the house: or when the enemy undermines one part,
has no regard of it, because he dwells on the other side. Moreover, the
church of Christ is compared to a ship, but a ship being in danger upon the
sea, is wholly in danger, that if one part be broken, the whole perishes.
And therefore they which are in the fore part, are as safe as they which are in
the hinder part, and they are as safe which are in the top, as they which
are under the hatches: so that it is verified in a common proverb among us,
that they which are in the self same danger, are said to be in the same ship
together. So that he which is not moved with grief of the body, nor with the
burning of the house, nor with the tossing of the ship, gives out a plain
argument, that he is not of the same body, that he is not of the same
household, and family of Christ, that he is not in the same arc or ship,
which is the church. But he which is moved, although it be never so little, he
must as well bring aid to afflicted members of the church, as to him self,
because in the church of Christ we are all one. And it is our bounden duty,
that every man should aid as much as in him lies, and so much the more, by
how much he has received riches at the hands of God, which are not given him
for his own possession only, but also to be bestowed upon his poor brethren,
being members with him, according as they have need. This church as it is one,
so is it committed and commended to the patronage of all Christian princes
whatsoever, for because it is not so safe to commit the universal church to
one, and it is against the unity thereof to commit to every one a piece,
therefore it pleased God to commit the universal Church to every one, and
every part thereof to the universal defense of al. And this he did, not only
that we should defend it, but also that we should increase it. And therefore
if the German Princes do defend the church of Christ in Germany, or the
Prince of England in England, and does not aid the churches also in other
countries, but does suffer them to be oppressed and desolate, they may be
thought to have forsaken the church: for the spouse of Christ is one, which if
she be violated and defiled, all Princes must set to their helping hand to
deliver her. The restoring of this universal church being afflicted in part,
as it is the duty of every private man, with most earnest prayer to desire at
Gods hand, so it is the duty of Magistrates by their powers, by their
assistance, by all means they can, to raise her up being fallen, and to set
her in the prosperity she was before. There is not one church of the
Ephesians, and another of the Colossians, and of the rest: but all these are
parts of the universal church, and the universal church is the kingdom of
Christ, which kings and princes, and magistrates ought to enlarge, propagate,
and amplify, against all enemies and adversaries of the same, and for this
cause was there one only temple among the Jews, built by Solomon, which did
represent the unity of the Church: that builder might be called a foolish
builder, which making one part of his house windtight and watertight, does
suffer an other to let in the rain and the winter. So likewise all Christian
kings, when they are admitted to the crown, they receive the sword expressly
upon this condition, that they shall defend and maintain the Catholic and
universal Church, the which sword when they have taken into their hands,
they shake it to the East and to the West, and to the North, and to the South,
and to all quarters and climates of the world. Now when they take upon them
the patronage and protection of the church, they understand no doubt the true,
and not the false church, and in her defense they ought to employ all their
industry, force and strength. Of this we have examples in godly princes, that
it has always been observed. In the time of Ezechias the king of Judah, 2.
Chro. 31
the kingdom of Israel was in servitude to the king of the Assyrians, even
from the time of Osea the king. Wherefore if that only church of God, which
was in the kingdom of Judah, and not the universal Church was committed to
Ezechias, and that he had authority to defend the Church, no farther than he
had to command tribute, surely Ezechias especially in those times, in which
the Assyria^s were masters over the whole world, would have kept him self
within the limittes of the kingdom of Judah. But we read that he did inuit by
messengers, the whole people of Israel, the subjects of the king of Assyria, to
celebrate the passover in Jerusalem, and that he did aid the godly men in
Israel, in breaking down the high places, and spoiling the powers of Ephraim
and Manasses, 2. Reg. 22. 2. Chr. 34.
and others, which were in subjection to the Assyrians. We read also of Josias
the godly king, that he did purge not only his own kingdom, but also the
kingdom of Israel, subject to the king of Assyria, from the worshipping of
Idols. So yt where the cause of the glory of God, and of the kingdom of
Christ is touched, no limits and bounds ought to abate and quench the zeal of
good and godly princes. But if the force of their enemies be great, let them
understand by the examples of these kings, which did truly serve the Lord,
that they may not or need not fear any. These examples of godly Princes many
Christian kings have followed, whereby the Church which was only within the
limits of the land Palestine, has been, and is spredde throughout the whole
world. Constantine and Licinius, were both Emperors, the one of the East, the
other of the West, they were fellows of like and equal authority. It is a
proverb, that those which are equal, have no jurisdiction the one over the
other. Nevertheless, Constantine when he saw Licinius under the pretense of
religion, vexing and killing the Christians, he proclaims war against him,
We must ^eade this advisedly, because we may not by ^he word of God rest our
own ^rince if he ^e wicked.
and by force of arms, sets up the free service of God to the Christians:
and in the end Licinius breaking his league which he had made with him, and
returning to his former cruelty, he caused him to be put to death at
Thessalonica. This did Constantine the great, whose godliness is so much
celebrated and set out by the Christians in those times, that they said it
might very well agree to him, which was prophesied by Esaie ye Prophet, that
kings should be nursing fathers, and Queens nursing mothers to the church.
When he was dead, the Roman Empire was divided among his sons, that they
should all rule equally, among which Constans did favor the Christians, and
Constantius the Arrians, which also drove out of Alexandria Athanasius, an
enemy to the Arrians. If there were any account to be made of limits and
bounds, it were most especially between brothers: nevertheless Constans
threatens his brother, that unless he restore Athanasius into his place
again, he would come with force of arms against him. If Constans doubted
not to do this only for restoring of one Bishop, may it not more rightly be
done, when a great part of the people is oppressed, when they humbly require
aid, and desire that they may keep their religion among them, the nobles of
their country being chief authors in this request. Sozom. li. 7. ca. 18.
So Theodosius, being persuaded by a Bishop of Asia, took up arms against
Chesroem king of the Persians, that thereby he might rescue the Christians,
(being all private men) which were vexed in the cause of religion. The which
thing those godly Princes which made so many laws, and had such special care
of Justice and equity, would never have done, if they had thought or judged,
that they had entered into the limits, or gone about to break the laws of
their Princes in so doing. To what end were so many expeditions of Christian
Princes into Syria, against the Saracens, to what end were so many taxes
reared, sums of money levied, such war proclaimed against the Turks, and
so many forces erected against them, if it had not been lawful for all
Christian Princes, even for those which dwell farthest off, to deliver the
church of God from tyranny, and from the yoke of servitude. And by what
arguments and reasons were they urged, and stirred to take this war in hand,
but only because the church of Christ is one, because Christ him self had
cited all able men to take weapon, because that common dangers were to be cut
off by common aid, all which do very well agree to this cause we have in
hand. So that if it were lawful for them against Mahomet, and not only
lawful, but also that rewards were given to them which did willingly take
arms, and punishment to those which did detract the same, why may we not do
the like against ye enemies of Christ? And if we may do it against the Grecians
besieging of Troy, why may we not do it against Sinon, which by setting cities
and houses on fire, does rob and spoil. To conclude, if it be a godly act, to
deliver the Christians from bodily servitude, (for the Turks compel no man)
is it not much more acceptable in the sight of God, to deliver their souls
from the slavery of Satan, to place them in the clear light of the Gospel:
and these so many examples of godly Princes, may be unto us insteede of a law.
But now let us here what God by the mouth of his Prophets does denounce
against those, which either do not promote the instauration of his church, or
make no account of the great affliction thereof. The Gadits and the Rubenites,
and the half tribe of Manasses, do demand of Moses, Number. 32. Iosu. 4.7.12.
Deuteronomy. 3.
that he would give unto them and their family, their portion, on this side of
Jordan: and Moses gave it them, but upon this condition, that they should not
only help their brethren the Israelites, in obteining of the land of
Chanaan, but also because they had first received their portion, they should go
before them, and place them selves in the first ray: but if they would not,
then he would curse them, and compare them unto those which were judged rebels
at Cadesbarnea. For (says he) shall your brethren make war, and shall you
lie at peace, nay rather ye shall come over Iordane, neither shall you go back
to your children, before the Lord has driven out his enemies before his face,
and have given rest unto your brethren as unto you: then shall ye be found
innocent before the Lord, and before Israel: and those to whom the Lord has
given such a benefit, as to have their portion first, those he will lay great
punishment upon, unless they help their brethren, unless they be partakers
of their labors, and go before them into the land of Chanaan. Likewise when
the men of Nepthali, and the men of Zabulon, (Debora being their Captain) did
take arms against Iaben, Iud. 5.
being a tyrant, and the tribe of Ruben did sport and delight him self with
his pipe among the herds of cattle, which should have been foremost, and
first have armed him self: Galead thought him self safe, the river being
between him and his enemies: Dan boasted that he was master of the sea: Asher
put his trust in the ruggedness of the rock: the spirit of the Lord speaking
by the mouth of the Prophetess, condemned them all: curse ye Meroz says the
Angel of the Lord, curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to
help the Lord, against the mighty. Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite, shall
be blessed above other women, blessed shall she be above women dwelling in
Tents. Notably it is said of Vrias unto David, the Arcke of Israel and Judah
dwell in tents, and my Lord Ioab, 2. Sam. 11.
and the servants of my Lord, abide in the open fields, and shall I then go
into my house to eat and drink, and company with my wife? by thy life, and
by the life of thy soul I will not do this thing. Most wicked is that of the
people of Israel, which taking their ease in Sion, and trusting in the
mountains of Samaria, lie upon beds of Iuorie, Amos. 6.
and stretch them selves upon their beds, and eat the lambs of the flock,
and calves out of the stall: they sing to the sound of the viole, they drink
wine in bowls, and anoynte them selves with the chief ointments, but no man is
sorry for the affliction of Joseph. Therefore the Lord God has sworn, I
abhor the excellency of Jacob and hate his palaces, I will deliver up the
city with all that is therein, therefore now shall they go captive with the
first that go captive. ^ud. 8.12.
Most wickedly did the Ephraimites, which did not only rejoice with Gedon and
Iepthe, having gotten the victory, but also did envy them: and when they were
in dangers did forsake them. Wickedly did the Israelites. which cried out to
David when he had the victory, behold we are thy bones and thy flesh, which
before when he was driven into narrow streights, said, we have no part with
David, ^. Sam. 5.
nor in the son of Ishaie. Wickedly do all those which being Christians only
in show and profession, are content to be present at the spiritual banquet,
but refuse to taste of the cup of bitterness together with their brethren,
which content to seek for their salvation in the church, not withstanding they
have no regard of the safety and welfare, either of the Church or of the
members thereof. And farther also they are content to acknowledge one God for
their father, one Christ for their redeemer, one holy ghost for their
sanctifier and preserver, one house and family of the faithful, one mystical
body in Jesus Christ: nevertheless they do not bring their aid unto Christ
being afflicted in his members, nor send their succor to their poor brethren
in their extremities. This ungodliness is great, and what punishment is
necessary for such as offend in this point? Number. 32.
Moses compares those which forsake their brethren in their dangers, to those
rebels of Cade^barnea, whereof not one entered into the land of Chanaan,
according to the counsel of God. And let those men seek for no place in the
heavenly Chanaan, which are not desirous to succor Christ him self being
both miserably afflicted, and also slain again every day almost a thousand
times. Christ him self utterly condemned those which did not receive him when
he was a stranger, which did not cherish him when he was cold, and did not
clothe him when he was naked, which did not succor him when he was poor, and
lastly, which did not endeavor to set him free when he was a captive. Therefore
those cannot think but that eternal fire is prepared for them, which every
day both see and hear these things with their eyes and ears, and are not
moved, so that we may say justly, it will be easier for any Infidel at the day
of judgment, then for them. For let us reason thus: did the Jews only
crucify Christ, and the Scribes and Pharisees? Did the Ethniks only persecute
Christ, and the Turks, and certain Christians, in his members? The Jews did
believe and profess that he was a deceiuer: the Ethnickes that he was an evil
person, the Turks that he was an infidel: all other, that he was an heretic.
And therefore, if we respect their mind and intent whereby al offenses are to
be measured, they persecuting those whom they thought to be wicked, impious,
and ungodly, it does appear, that in the proper sense they did not slay Christ
the son of God. August. in Psalm. 82. Ambro. li. ^. de Offic. Gratian. in
decretis.
But those do truly persecute Christ, and those do truly slaye him, which
willingly suffer him to be afflicted in his members, whom they surely know and
believe to be the son of God, the Messiah and Savior of the world. Finally,
he that does not deliver a man from danger when it lies in his power to do
it, he is guilty of his death, as much as he which murdered him: Quia enim
noluit open far, voluit occidi, for, because he would not help him, he would
have him slain, and in such crimes the will is specially to be respected. But
the offense of Christian Princes which do not help the afflicted in the cause
of religion, is the greater: by how much the number is greater which are
slain, and by how much the matter is more heinous to kill a brother than to
kill an other, to slay a good man than to slay a thief, to slay an innocent
man, then to slay an heretic, to slay by deceit than to slay by ignorance.

But concerning those which send not their aid, to the afflicted by tyrants,
or set not to their helping hand with those which take upon them the defense of
the common wealth, let us also dispute what may be determined. The league
between them is not so straight as the other, nor the manner of aiding so
precisely commanded: when as the cause of the Church is not handled, which is
one among all, and which being one is universally committed to all: but the
cause of the common wealth is decided, which is one in one country, and
another in an other, which is to be defended by the men and power of her own
country. But (says Christ) the Jew is not only neighbor to the Jew, but
to the Samaritane also, and to every man: and we ought to love our neighbors
even as our selves. Therefore it is not only the duty of a Jew to deliver a
Jew his own country man, but also to deliver every stranger (if he will
fulfill his duty) out of the hand of his enemy. Neither let any man dispute
whether it be lawful to defend an other, when as he judges it lawful to
defend himself. Nay, rather it is more lawful: for he is provoked to the
defense of him self, either by anger or by revenge, or by some other
perturbation of his mind, so that in defending of him self, he does many
times go farther than he ought to do: but in aiding of his neighbor, it is
only charity that moves him, and in this aid and assistance, the most
immoderate man that is, can easily observe a mean. Here in this point we may
learn of the very Ethnicks the^ selves, what nature and common society
requires of us. Cicero li. 1^ Offic. ca. 3 ^
For (as Cicero says) because the nature of all men is one, nature herself
does prescribe thus much unto us, that one man should help an other whatsoever
he be, even for this only cause, because he is a man: if not, then take away
from us all society, all fellowship among men. So that as there be two
foundations of justice, the one that we hurt no man, the other that we do
good to all: so there is also two kinds of injustice, the one is to offer
injury, the other not to help him that is iniuried. For he which deals
iniustly with any man, either being moved thereunto by anger, or provoked by
some other perturbation, he does as it were violently lay his cruel hands
upon his brother: and he also which does not defend him if he can, is in as
great a fault, as if he should forsake his parents, his friends, or his
country. So that which the one does, he does it being moved with anger, which
continues but a little space, but that which the other does, he does it of
an evil mind, which is a perpetual tyrant within him: and the sudden fury
of the one may easily be excused, but the determinate counsel of the other is
no way to be tolerated. But peradventure thou will say, I doubt least I should
by ayding the one, offer injury to the other: nay, rather thou go about to
cover thy injustice under the covering of justice, for if thou look well into
thy self, thou shall find that it is not justice but some other trifling
cause, which does diswade thee from doing thy duty. For either thou will not
purchase evil will, or sustain the labor, or bear the charges, or else thou
art many times so detained, either with thine own business and affairs, or by
sloth, by negligence, by sluggishnesse, that many times thou suffer him to
be forsaken, whom thou should have preserved. And so long as thou do
pretend thine own business, because thou would not seem to injury an
other, thou fallest into the other kind of injustice, for thou do break
the common society, because thou do not spend any of thy study, of thy
labor, of thy riches, in defense of it. These things have the very Heathen
Philosophers done, only by the rule of policy, which many Christians see not,
being ruled by the rule of Christianity. Hereof rises the law among the
Romans, Diod. Sic lib. 2. ca. 2.
that if a man's neighbor seeing him cruelly heating his servant, do not seek
to appease him, he is condemned by that law. Hereof rises the law among the
Egyptians, that if one man found an other in the hands of thieves, and did not
deliver him when he might, he was condemned to die: if he did deliver him, and
yet brought not the thief before the Magistrate, he was beaten with whippes,
and commanded to fast three days. If these things were so in private men
refusing their aid, more lawful it is and requisite in godly princes to send
their help, not to defend a servant from his cruel master, or a child from
his angry father, but a whole kingdom against a tyrant, a whole country
against the fury of one private man, and an oppressed people against him,
which is nevertheless a common enemy, and a common plague. So that if he
neglecte to do it, does he not deserve not only as the other did, the
punishment of a thief, but rather some tormente invented for such tyrants.
Thucy. li. 1.
Herupon speaks Thucydides, that they are not only tyrants which bring me^
into servitude, but those much rather are tyrants, which have no regard to
repress the cruelty of tyrants: and especially those which would be called
the defense of Greece and of their country, but refuse to aid their country
when it is oppressed, these men be tyrants. For as they do violently get such
government, so they are compelled to use violence in keeping of it: because as
Tyberius was wont to say, Lupum auribus tenent, they hold a wolf by the
ears, which they can not hold without violence, neither let go without
danger. Therefore to extinguish one fault by an other, they heap up many
together, and they are constrained to do other men injury, least they should
seem to be injurious to the^ selves. But that prince which stands idly by,
and beholds the wickedness of a tyra^t, and the slaughter of the innocent,
taking pleasure in it as it were in a school of fence, is worse then the
tyrant him self, by how much he which sets the fencers together is worse
than the one that slays the other, and by how much his offense is more
heinous which kills a man for his pleasure, than his which killed him in his
own defense, either for fear or, of necessity. But peradventure you will say,
it is a fault for a man to meddle with the affairs of others: the old man
Chremes in the Poet shall answer, Pompon de regim* leg. 36.
Homo sum: humani nihil a me alienu^ puto, I am a man and therefore I think
whatsoever pertains to a man, pertains to me. If it be objected which some
say for the cloaking of their ungodliness, that God has appointed limits and
bounds to every nation, and that we may not as it were thrust in our sicle
into their harvest, neither is my counsel to the contrary, that under
pretense of aid we should invade the country of an other nation, or challenge
their jurisdiction unto us, or convey their harvest into our flowers: nor as he
did, who being chosen arbiter in a cause, Cice. 2. o^
judged it unto him self: but rather that we should cut short any prince,
inuading the kingdom of Christ, any tyrant afflicting his own people, any king
throwing down the props and stays of his common wealth. And this we must
perform in such sort, having respect not to private commodity, but to public
society, for seeing that justice does wholly concern others and not our
selves, and injustice our selves and not others, we shall then deal justly
when we have a special care of the good and prosperity of others. Finally, if
a prince do violently break the bonds of piety and justice, an other prince
may justly and lawfully exceed his own limittes, not to invade the others,
but to force him to be content with his own. If a prince use tyranny toward
his people, we ought to aid no less, than if his subjects should raise
sedition against him: and we must be the more readier to do it, because the
wickedness is more dangerous of many then of one. If Porsenna reduce proud
Tarquinius to Rome again: much more justly may Constantine be sent for by the
people and Senate of Rome, to expel Maxentius a tyrant out of the city. If
the proverb say, Homo homini lupus, that one is as a wolf to an other in
cruelty, why may not one man (as the same proverb has) be Deus, a God to
another, for aid and defense. They did in old time account of Hercules as of
a God, because he did vanquish and pull down Procrustes and Busyris, and other
tyrants, which were very plagues of mankind, Cicero 2. offic.
and monsters of the whole world. So was the Empire of Rome as long as it
continued a free Empire, it was esteemed as a common defense of the whole
world, against the mischief of tyrants, because the Senate of Rome was a
refuge to kings, to people and nations in their calamities. So Constantine
being sent for of the Romans against Maxentius the tyrant, the Captain of his
army being God himself, whose expedition and preparation the whole Church
did commend, when as notwithstanding Maxentius had the same authority in the
West, which Constantine had in the East. Likewise Charles ye great made war
against the Longobardians, being stirred up thereu^to by the princes of Italy,
when as notwithstanding the kingdom of Longobardia was already established, and
Charles could challenge no right or title which he had in them. Likewise also
when Charles the balde (so called) king of France, had tyrannously put to
death Lambert and Iamaetius, governors of the county, which lies between
the rivers of Sequana and Ligeris, and that the nobles of France did fly to
Jews king of the Germains, Charles his brother, to crave aid against Charles
and his wicked mother Judith: Lodouicke heard them most willingly in an
honorable assembly of the princes of Germany, by whose common consent it was
decreed, that for the restoring of those which were banished by Caluus, there
should be open war proclaimed against him. To conclude, as there have been
tyrants some in all places, so there are examples in all historiographers of
princes which have both resisted the tyrants, and defended the people. The
which examples princes in these days ought to imitate (that they be not
counted tyrants themselves) against those which deal tyrannously with their
people, with their bodies, with their souls, with ye common wealth, and with
the church of Christ. To conclude all in one word: piety commands us to
defend the law of God and the Church: justice commands us to restrain
tyrants, and those which overthrow the common wealth: charity commands us
to help the oppressed and such as stand in need: therefore they which do it
not: take away piety, extinguish justice, and make no account of charity.

FINIS.

