THE POLITIC AND MILITARY DISCOURSES OF THE LORD DE LA NOW.

Whereunto are adjoined certain observations of the same Author, of things
happened during the three late civil wars of France.

With a true declaration of many particulars touching the same.

All faithfully translated out of the French by E. A.

AT LONDON Printed for T. C. and E. A. by Thomas Orwin. 1587.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable his very good Lord, George Earl of Cumberland, Baron
Clifford, Lord Bromflet, Aton and Vescie, etc. E. A. wishes all increase of
honor and true felicity.
ANTIGONVS being asked whom he thought to be the worthiest Captain in his
time, answered, Pirrhus if he were of more years, not daring to pronounce him
absolutely the worthiest until he had experience to match with his valor:
even so if it were demanded at this day who justly deserved the name of a
politic and expert Capptaine, I think (without prejudice to any other) that
the Lord de la Noue, the author of this present treatise, whose wise government
in time of peace being no less commendable than his long service in time of
wars to the Church of God has been profitable, is not in silence to be
ouer-passed. Howbeit least I should (right Honorable and my very good Lord)
seem rather to blemish than amplify the virtues of so worthy a man through
the baseness of my style and unpolished phrase, I leave the same to be
notefied by those whose great knowledge and ripe judgment I do justly
prefer many degrees before mine own, being the rather thereto induced by the
like example of Menedemus the Lacedemonian, who was wont to say that the
quality and condition of the praiser ought to be as well regarded as that of
the praised. Insinuating thereby that it was unfit very for any man to
commend the thing wherein his judgment might fayl, or his education be thereto
not answerable. In as much therefore as his own works may in some measure make
manifest what is to be thought of his person, I do present them to your
Honors view and patronage in this our vulgar tongue faithfully and truly
translated out of the French, desiring though not deserving like favorable
acceptance, as I had good meaning to offer the same. For therein I am fully
persuaded the indifferent and not curious reader shall find matter sufficient
for the reestablishing of a ruinous common weal, if it be put in practice:
wise counsel for maintenance thereof: and lastly approved documents requisite
whether in civil or foreign wars, which albeit they were written
perticulerlie to relieve and restore the declining estate of the realm of
France, are also in my opinion not unnecessary for ours or any other that may
fall into the like, if God who is the protector and guider of all Realms
should not continue among us unity and godly peace. A work no doubt worthy the
writer, and yet at the first published without his priuitie or allowance, being
collected and disgested into one volume out of a heap of papers cast aside by
the industry and pains of the L. of Fresnes, whom, as himself reports, the
misery of the time and troubles of his own native Country, enforced as a
banished man to keep company with the said Lord de la Noue during his
captivity in a foreign land, dedicated to that excellent Prince and pattern
of piety Henry of Burbon King of Navarre, throrough whose royal patrimony
together with the just desert of the author himself it has received friendly
entertainment among the better sort of the French Nation: as I doubt not but
it shall find the like here among us English men, being shrouded under the
covert of your L. honorable protection, to the which I commit the same: thus
craving pardon for my boldness most humbly I take my leave of your Lordship,
to whom I wish long life with all increase of honor.

Your Honors most humble and hearty well willer, E. A.

To the King of Navarre.
SIR, it does many times so fall out, that those things which we imagine to be
most hurtful unto us, do redound to our greatest benefit. This when Chion (a
man in his days of good estimation among the Greeks) had tried in himself,
he did by a Letter of his (yet extant) give thanks to the contrary winds,
which maugre his head had detained him at Constan^inople, from whence he meant
to have sailed to Athens, because the said s^aie procured him the benefit of
entering a league of friendship with Xenophon who during his aboade, arrived
there with his troops after his return out of Persia, confessing that he had
more profited in the company of that gallant Captain, then he should have
done in the schools of the most famous Philosophers of all Grecce. After the
example therefore of that so notable a personage, my self will give thanks to
the miseries of this time, because that forcing me to become a Philosopher in a
strange land, they have wrought me this good, to have passed away eight or nine
months in the company of the Lord De la None. For besides that he is endued
with all those good parts which Chion notes in Xenophon, as well in respect
of his learning, as also for his knowledge and experience in arms: the
examples of his virtues and sweetness of his conversation did so help me to
digest both the public calamities and mine own particular discommodities,
that during life I cannot but yield praise to God for so great a benefit.
Howbeit the thing that made me most desirous of his friendship, was a
consideration that the farther he was through his afflictions driven out of
France and from your Majesty, the more did his affection to your service and
the welfare of the whole Realm seem to increase: for whether he walked or
slept all his imaginations tended nolie to the finding out of such means as
might best redress the calamities that oppressed our miserable Country, and
his ordinary devises to the seeking out of any thing that might advance the
reestablishing of the state in her former dignity: A matter at this day so
lamentable, as it seems rather to be wished than hoped for. Enjoying
therefore that sweet familiarity wherewith it pleased him to honor me, and
being on a time in his closet I chanced to lay my hand upon a heap of papers
thrown aside in a corner, as things not regarded, and finding that they
deserved to be more diligently gathered together, I began very gladly to read
them over: but he would not suffer me, saying they were but scriblings whereon
he had employed the most tedious hours of his leisure during his long and
straight imprisoment: likewise that among them there was nothing worth the
sight, because his continual exercise in warrefare wherein he had employed
himself, had denied him all opportunity to endite well, as also that in these
discourses especially (as never meaning other than to pass away the time) he
had taken no pains with the polishing or filing of them, and that he was
determined never to take the^ in hand again: so as at that instant I could not
obtain any thing of him. But the taste that I had then gotten did so set me on
edge that all his denial and despising of them did the more confirm me in my
desire, neither did I ever qease until by sundry means I had gotten sometime
one (...) sometime another, so long til at length I had gathered all this book.

Afterward having more carefully considered of the value of my booty,
accounting it more precious and profitable than to be kept in the bottom of a
hutch. I did what I might to persuade the author thereof to publishe it: but in
the end seeing that he made so small account of the same, that there was no
means to obtain his consent, I adventured unawares to him to go through with
my enterprise, as well for the commendation which I hope shall redounde unto
him, as for the commodity that all France may reap thereby. For this book
is replenished with most notable aduertisementes to both great and small, to
the end they emploie all their power and endeauours to redress and assure
this state which without dissimulation is very near to utter ruin and
destruction, It opens the means to attain to a good and steadfast
reestablishment: It entreats of concord which is the only ^iment that is able
to soulder and knit again together the dissolved members of this frail
ancient building: It does at large discourse of martial discipline, and
withal teaches how to use and well employ our weapons: It exhorts every one
in his vocation to embrace piety and to honor Justice: It teaches Princes,
Lords, and generally all gentry the true path and high way to climb to
virtue, and to recover the ancient honor of France, as also how to eschew the
danger of shame and misery. To be brief, whatsoever is most rare and excellent
throughout all the most famous Philosophers and Historiographers, concerning
the conduct and good ordering of a great estate, either the instruction of such
as make profession of honor is found to be herein set down in as pleasant a
language and delectable variety of matter, and withal so acco^modated to the
humor of our nation, that I hope to get the goodwilles of al those that shall
read this discourse, as having been the occasion that they are not frustrated
of the fruit and pleasure herein to be reaped: And this will they account to
be the greater, if they vouchsafe but to behold and consider of the horror of
the place where so exquisite a matter was conceived and brought into the world.
For who is he that waying the miserable captivity wherein the Lord of la Noue
was detained when he wrote these remembrances, being past hope, or at the
leastwise void of all appearance that ever he should get forth, oppressed with
sickness of body and anguish of mind, and besides all this most straightly
kept: who I say is he that viewing him in this miserable captivity will not
admire his wonderful constancy and valiant courage, which had been rare even
in the most virtuous ages, that could in the midst of so many calamities and
apparitions of most terrible things: yea as it were in the bottom of the gulf
of death, think upon the commodity of his country, and in such bitter
bondage maintain his soul in such liberty, that to hear him in his
discourses it might seem his prison had no power but over his passions, and
over all that might molest or empeach the tranquillity of his mind: either, as
Plato says, that those that are in heaviness and agony of death beginning to
put of their mortal bodies, have the powers of their souls more excellent
then in their perfect health; so the inconvenience of this prison having
quailed and suppressed his body, did help him to purge his understanding, by
vnclothing him of the cares of this life and nourishing him with most
beautiful and high meditations far more commodiously then he could have done
in his full liberty: which verifieth my saying in the beginning viz that the
things which we do most fear and think to be our greatest harm* do
sometimes turn us to greater prosperity and good. For so much of our bodily
ease as afflictions do take from us, so much strength and resolution do they
add unto our souls, whereas contrariwise there is no courage so valiant or
forcible but prosperity will weaken and extenuate, witness Mecenas, who as
Sencca says, had been one of the chief men in the world if too much ease had
not gelded him: for he uses that word to show how sore virtue is weakened
through too much felicity. And in deed if the outward appearance or common
opinion did not dazzle our eyes, we should perceive that those whom God does
most rigorously chastise in this world, are often times the same whom he most
sweetly instructs: also that the calamities wherewith he afflicts them are
not in deed any calamities. But like as it is a pleasure to behold two good
Fencers trying each other, and employing whatsoever their actiuitie or
knowledge well to assail and better to defend: even so does the Lord delight
to make those whom he has endued with most graces, to fight and withstand the
sorest adversities, and to exercise their virtue by diverse profes, the which
the more violent that they be, the more do they show forth the weakness and
small effects of all whatsoever that we call evil fortune against a valiant
heart armed with the fear of God. And who has more practiced this then your
self Sir, or who is able to show better tokens hereof. But least I should
pass my bounds, I will speak only of our author, whose example may be a
sufficient proof of the saying of Seneca. That an honest man cannot eschew
adversities, although he may well conquer and overcome them. And
notwithstanding sometimes he seems in the sight of the ignorant to be wretched
or unhappy, yet in the midst of all his mishappes he still enjoys perfect
felicity which has sworn so loyal amity unto him, that whatsoever
chances him yet is she still about him, with him and in him, and does uphold
his soul in so pleasant a seat, that in whatsoever estate she be, she is
still like unto her self, as being lifted up so high above all accidents of
human affairs, that she can in no wise be by them taynted. But to return to
that which I first began to speak of concerning the commodity of this book,
such espetially as shall hereafter undertake to write the history of our time
may find great profit therein, and learn how to put in practice the precept of
Tacitus, who wills that neither love nor hatred take any hold of the
Historiographers pen. For they shall see, that notwithstanding our authors long
emprisonment, yet he does in sundry places speak honorably of the Spaniards,
also in matter concerning our civil wars, he uses such sincerity in the
lively description of the truth, that he rather notes the faults of that side
where unto himself leaned, then of the others: and commends in those against
whom he bare arms, anything that he finds worthy commendation as earnestly
as the deserts of those on whose side he fought: in such manner that our age may
think it self happy, that in the midst of her most furious passions and
partialities, she could recover this platform of observations of the history,
thereby exempted from the universal contagion of hatred and favor. As also it is
to be hoped that this example may wake^ sundry others, who seeing how agreeable
a voice the same that is ruled by reason, is, in respect of taunts and
inuectiues full of bitterness which (as the small belles of the Choribantes) are
good for nothing but to trouble the most settled brains, will endeavor in
their writings to set forth that which God may have given them for the
instruction of the posterity, rather then the vehemency of disordinate
affections, whereof our age reapeth but too much reproach and hurt. I will
strain my self no farther in the particular setting down of the fruits that
may be reaped in this book, as well for common commodity as private benefit,
for they do sufficiently appear of themselves. Howbeit, in as much as it may
so fall out that the author, considering what small account he made of his
writings, in liew of rejoicing in the commendations that hereby shall redound
unto him, may find fault that I have thus published them of mine own head,
and withal that I have thereunto set his name, which he chose rather to make
famous by arms, as thinking it (according to the ancient error of the French
Nobility) no honor that men should know how far he honoreth or esteems of
learning; either else upon some particular hatred against this book, as still
putting him in mind of his captivity, I do presume Sir, most humbly to
beseech your Majesty to aduowe my doings, and to be my warrant in this that I
have preferred the public commodity before the particular desire of the
Lord of la Noue, who although he be but a bad valewer of his own works, is
nevertheless so affectionate a servant unto you, that he can no way mislike
any thing that he shall find to like you: as also to the end that France
receiving this book as it were at your hands, and adjoining the authors desert
to your authority, may love and credit it the better. True it is that the
over vehement minds shall not find these discourses to their appetities. For
so far are they from favoring their passions, that in deed their only scope
tends to the abolishing of the same. But all those that do in piety behold
this poor state fallen from her ancient felicity: all those that mourn
because France, which was wont to be the terror of the whole world, is now
become a reproach to the same: all those that are weary of bathing their
swords in the blood of their brethren, parents, and friends: To be brief, all
good Frenchmen that be good servant to the King and his Crown, will take
great delight when they shall see their good entents advanced forward with
such holy and wise aduices as they shall find in this book. For the author
hereof has not after the manner of some both ancient and late Philosophers
wasted his time in forging an Idea of Vtopian perfections: but has only
studied so to accommodate himself to our taste and disposition, and propounded
his counsels with so evident a facility and profit, that if we profit not
thereby, whether in public or private, we can blame none but our own
stubbornness and negligence. For in my opinion that man shall be over far
out of taste of all good reading, that shall not in these discourses perceive a
spirit free from all passions and partialities, dedicated wholly to the honor
of God, the service of his King, and the peace of his Country. This is it that
has embouldened me to offer them unto you Sir, thinking that as well in
consideration of their argument, as in respect of the great bonds wherein the
author stands your most bounden, they do by right apperteyne unto you. Not
daring therefore to pass the strict prohibition whereby my insufficiency
forbids me to offer any thing of my own, I do most humbly desire your
Majesty to receive them as some acknowledgeme^t of my vowed service. And I
beseech God Sir after so many deaths wherewith you have been beset even from
your infancy, from which he has preserved you, to grant unto you a long and
most happy life in perfect peace and assured tranquillity, to the glory of his
most blessed name, the honor of your Majesty, and the contentaiton of all
good French men your faithful and affectionate servants.

From Lausanna this first day of April. 1587. Your most humble, obedient, and
faithful servant De Fresnes.

The Argument and sum of every several discourse herein contained.
1 THat the realm of France does by little and little run into decay, and is
near to a great overthrow, unless God of his goodness vphould it. Also,
that as yet there be some remedies to raise it up again, in case they may be
with speed accepted. Page 1. 2 That by Concord small things do increase, and
by discord great things do decay. page 28. 3 Of the inconstancy whereby many
do use to hate, condemn and detest their neighbors, because of their
contrarieties in religion. page 45. 4 What means and proceedings are most fit
to use in the redress of an estate. page 53 5 That instruction or good
bringing up are necessary for all young gentlemen. page 71 6 That the reading
of the books of Amadis de Gaul and such like, is no less hurtful to youth
then the works of Machiauell to age. page 51 7 That our over small
consideration of the good things that we have, and our over eager
covetousness of the good things which we have not, do multiply our miseries.
page 85 8 That the poverty of the French Nobility proceeds not so much of
the wars which have continued these five and thirty years, as of their own
oversight in the mispending of their goods. page 101 9 That the Frenchmens
great affection to foreign wars, is at this time more hurtful then
profitable. page 115 10 Of three false opinions that misleade sundry of the
Nobility. page 128 11 Whether there be any means so to reform the musters
of France, as to reap any service of the same. page 145 12 Of the multiplying
of private quarrels, with the abuses therein committed, which greatly want
reformation. page 157 13 That his Majesty ought in time of peace to enterteyne
at the least four regiments of footmen, reduced into the number of 2500. men,
as well for the preservation of martial discipline, as to be always assured
of a great body of old Soldiers. page 169 14 Of the French Legionaries. page
176 15 That the ancient manner of aranging the horse in hay or file is now to
small use: also that it were necessary they should take the use of Squadrons.
page 184 16 Of the use of Camarades, which among the Spanish footmen are of
great account. page 190 17 Of the rewards ordinarily bestowed upon the Spanish
soldiers when they have done any notable piece of service, which they term
their Advantages. page 194
Four military Paradoxes.
1 That a squadron of Reistres should beat a squadron of Spears. page 198 2
That 2500. Corcelets and 1500 Harquebuziers may more easily retire three French
leagues in a plain field then 2000. Spears. page 203 3 That it is expedient
for a Captain to have sustained an overthrow. page 210 4 That daily experience
have taught such means to fortify Houlds as are most profitable, in respect
of the small charge thereof, and no less defensible then such stately ones as
the Ingeniors have aforetime invented. page 215 19 That the continuation of the
wicked proceedings of the wars of these days do make a just cause to seem
unjust. page 220 20 That a King of France is of himself mighty enough, though
he neither covet nor seek other greatness then his own realm does afford
him. page 226 21 That alliances of Christian Princes with Mahumetistes, the
capital enemies of the name of Christ, have evermore been unfortunate: also
that we ought not to enter any firm confederacy with them. page 234 22 That
the Christian Princes well united, are able in four years to expulse the
Turks out of Europe. page 245 23 Of the Philosophers stone. page 291 24
Against those that think that godliness depriueth man of all pleasures. page
312 25 That every man according to his capacity and vocation may use
contemplation. page 334.
Observations of diverse things happened in the three first troubles of France,
together with the true report of the most part of the same. The first
Troubles.
That the Protestants, but for the late accident at Vassie, had been prevented
in the beginning of the first civil war. page 346 Whether the Lord Prince of
Conde in the first troubles committed so great an oversight as many have given
out, in that he seized not upon the Court or Paris. page 350 Of three things
which I noted that happened before the armies took the field: The one pleasant,
the other artificial, and the third lamentable. page 352 Of the Prince of
Condees promise somewhat rashly made to the Queen Mother that he would depart
the Realm of France, and why it was not performed. page 357 By what occasion
the war did first break forth between the two armies. page 362 Of the good
discipline which for the space of two months only was observed among the
Prince of Condees troops both of hotsemen and footmen: Also of the original
of Picoree or Prowlinge. page 361 Of the reasons that moved the Prince of
Condees army to break up after the taking of Boisgency: also how he
converted that necessity into profit, and of the purposes of the King of
Navarre. page 366. That but for the foreign aid that the Lord of Andelot
brought in, the Protestants affairs had been but in bad case and many men's
minds shrewdly daunted, as well through the taking of Bourges and Roan, as for
the overthrow of the Lord of Duras. page 372 Of the Prince of Condees purposes
when he saw his foreign succor approach, and how he came before Paris, from
whence after he had there soiorned eleven days and done nothing, he departed
toward Normandy. page 375 Of six notable occurrences in the battle of
Dreux. page 379 Of the siege by the Lord of Guize laid to Orleance: also of the
Lord Admirals journey into Normandy. page 384
The second Troubles.
Of the causes of the taking of arms in the second troubles: also how the
purposes whereupon the Protestants had built themselves proved vain. page 388
That the P. of Condees attempt of three things set a proud face upon the
beginning of his enterprise, whereat the Catholics were at the first astonished.
pa 394 Of the most notable occurre^ces happened at the departure from S. Denis.
p. 396 Of the voyages of both the armies toward Lorrain: but to several
inte^ts. p. 400 Of the return of the two armies toward Orleance and Paris:
also of the course that the Prince of Conde took in victualling, marching and
lodging of his men. page 403 Of the new forces out of sundry Provinces that
met at Orleance, which invited the Prince of Conde to undertake the voyage to
Chartres. page 406 The second peace concluded at Lon-iumeau. page 409
The third Troubles.
Of the Protestants diligent retreat in the last troubles: also of the Lord of
Martigues brave resolution when he came to Saumure. page 411 That the respite
which his Majesty gave to the Prince of Conde, without sending any army
against him was a means for him to prevail of a great Province, without the
support whereof he could not have continued the war. p. 415 Of the first
progress of both the armies, when being in their prime they sought with like
desire to fight. page 418 That both the armies endeavoring to overcome each
other could not so much as come to battle: also that the sharpness of the
wether parted them, almost destroying as well the one as the other in five
days. page 425 Of the death of the Prince of Conde at Bassac. page 430 Of the
notable passage of the D. of Bipont from the borders of Rhine even into
Aquitaine. page 434. The siege of Poicters. page 438 Of the battle of
Montcontour. page 442 That the siege of S. John d'Angely was the springing
again of the Protestants. page 446 That the town of Rochel stood the
Protestants in this war in no less stead then Orleance had done in the
former. page 447 That in 9. months the Princes army marched almost 300.
leagues, compassing in manner the whole realm of France: also what success
they had in this voyadge. page 449. The causes of the third peace: The
comparison thereof with the former: also whether the same were necessary. page
454.
FINIS.
THE POLITIC AND MILITARY DISCOURSES of the Lord De la Noue.
The first Discourse.
That the realm of France does by little and little run into decay, and is
near to a great overthrow, unless God of his goodness uphold it. Also, that
as yet there be some remedies to raise it up again in case they may be with
speed accepted.

THE minds of every man ought to In what considerations this discourse is
necessary, and ought to be published.
be firmly and steadfastly resolved that God is the author of all politic
gouernements, which he has established to the end that through good order all
human society may be preserved and mainteyned in piety and justice: also
that it is he that vpholdeth them in their beauty, force and dignity, until
that upon man's contempt of his laws and corruption of their manners, he power
forth his wrath upon them, whereof do ensue the subuertions and alterations
of Monarchies and Commonwelths. Those men therefore do much deceive
themselves, who under the shadow of whatsoever mightiness or power, either
else in consideration of their long continuance, do imagine that the same
should make them perpetual: For they be matters which are neither sufficient,
neither can plead prescription against the justice of the almighty, who
limite^h the bounds of all estates which they cannot pass, when the time of
correction is come: as by histories (the light of time and register of things
passed) does sufficiently appear. Yea, there be many worthy persons yet
living which have seen the late beauty and eminency of France in the time of
Frances the first and Henry the second, who would be forie to be brought to
conceive any evil opinion thereof, notwithstanding the multitude of disorders
happened, either to confess that the foundations of the same are shaken: but
it were their duties rather to mourn then to dispute and replye against so
visible and sensible apparances of subuertion. For the most part of the roots
of this so great tree do lie bare and half withered: many of the branches
are dead: few leaves do remain, and the fruit is grown almost wild. And
to all this infirmity have time together with the late mishaps brought it.
Their best therefore were to confess the truth, and to their powers to labor
to mainteyne so much of it as is yet good and in strength and force. I know
that the foretelling of the falls, which cannot be done without laying open
the shame thereof, will seem but an unpleasant discourse to him that loves and
honoreth his country and nation. But seeing such perils do already astonish
so many hearts; also that the causes which plunge us therein do appear in all
men's eyes, were it not a great cowardlinesse in this urgent necessity to sit
still and say nothing? True it is that many men through default of good
intelligences do stand half amazed in the midst of all these miseries. And
like as the insensible waters do run down the rivers until they fall into
the Ocean wherein they be buried, even so those men by little and little
rolling themselves into the present confusions which carry them away, being
destitute of right understanding, do go forward, one after another until
they fall headlong into the gulf of destruction. It is a profitable piece of
work, when a house is on fire to show it to those that see it not: likewise
to urge such as see it and fear it, to help to quench it: also to admonish
other such as without any great consideration do peradventure kindle it, that
they do not well: to be brief, to exhort every one to help the master of the
house for the safeguard thereof, together with the preservation of his whole
family.

Sundry Philosophers in their writings have set down the causes of
translations and alterations of estates, as Aristotle in his Politiques, who
likewise have touched the means how to preserve the same: wherein they have
been so diligent and curious as to proceed even to the smallest causes,
whereof whosoever would perticulerly discourse, had need of tongue enough. But
because we are in greater necessity of the truth then of words, my counsel
is that we go and draw it out of the true philosophy where we shall find it
more lively painted forth then in any other doctrine whatsoever. The holy
Scriptures do among other make mention of three notable vices which for the
most part Three causes of the subuertion of Commonwelthe.
do concur and join together: and for the which God does with open
punishments and destructions overthrow commonwelths: namely, Impiety,
Injustice, and Dissolution, which a very learned personage of our time has
very well noted, whose opinion also being so well grounded I will both allow
and follow. Impiety says he, overthrows the conscience: Injustice either
Impiety.
public or particular, subuerteth all policy and common society of
mankind: Dissolution does diversely trouble and spoil families, so that
through the mixture of all these mischiefs, must horrible confusions do
ensue. Needs must we confess (though with mourning and sorrow) that they all
do so abundantly reign throughout this poor realm, that without the help
of the divine bounty we are in danger of great shipwreck even at hand.

It were not here amiss to speak somewhat of Religion, but I intend not so to
do, but only to warn our nation to consider that notwithstanding the
diversities thereof, yet they ought not to esteem one of another as of Turks.
For seeing both parts do confess that they worship one selfsame God: that
they ad^owe one selfsame Jesus Christ to be their Savior: and that the
Scriptures and foundations of their faith be all one, there ought likewise to
be such brotherhood and charity between them, that ceasing all hatred,
cruelty and wars, they should grow to some reconsiliation. Can we not be
content with above 200000. men of war perished through the fury of these
divisions? Was there ever more terrible Sacrifices then these? I think that
all that have any taste of religion should be hereby induced to pacify
themselves; as also that those whose felicity consists in revenge should now
be glutted with so much blood as have been shed.

But I will at this time speak only of three horrible vices, Atheism the
first branch of Impiety.
which are as it were the dependances of Impiety, and have infected all
France. The first is Atheism, the second Swearing and Blasphemy, and the
last, a pernicious use of Magic and sundry other kinds of Diuinations and
Sorceries. All and every whereof do dishonor and contemn Gods most holy name,
and merueilously provoke him. Concerning Atheism it is no new vice, but of
ancient continuance, yea it reigned in the time of King David as himself
testifies saying. There is no God as foolish men affirm in their mad mood,
Psalm. 14. and 53.

Their drifts are all corrupt and vain, not one of them does good.


It is a terror even to think that there should be any human creatures,
especially in these days wherein the light of the holy Scriptures does shine so
bright, that durst disaduowe their Creator: but it is no great marvel: for
the same Scriptures do teach us that in the latter days there shall be many
such people, whom, notwithstanding they do sufficiently bewray themselves, it
were good nevertheless to see painted out in such sort as they are described
in the wisdom of Solomon, who says thus. The wicked have said within
themselves. The days of our life are short Wisdom. 2.
and full of heaviness, neither have there been any known to return from the
dead: for we are borne of nothing, and hereafter we shall be as if we had never
been, for our bodies shall be turned into ashes, and our souls scattered as
the soft air, and in time our names shall be forgotten. Come therefore, let us
take and enjoy the goods that are here, and use the creature lightly, as in
our youth. Let us fill our selves with precious wine and parfumes, and let not
the flower of our time fade away. Let us crown our selves with Roses before
they be withered. Let there be no medowe which our intemperancie go not over,
and euerywhere let us leave the tokens of mirth, for that is our portion and
our lot. Undoubtedly among all our corruptions nothing seems more prodigious
the^ the lives of those that speak and live after that sort. For he whose
soul is polluted with any heresy or superstition, yea even he that follows
the laws of the heathen, do yet seek salvation and bow his knees before
some Godhead that he has forged to himself: whereas contrariwise these men
do flee from and contemn all, so brutish are their senses become. They had
need to be pitied, for of all that do cast away themselves, they are the most
castawaies.

If any man should ask who begat this generation, it were not much amiss to
answer, that it have been our wars for religion, The original of Atheism
in France.
which have made us to forget all religion. Neither can either the one or the
other say It is our adverse party that ingendreth Atheists, for they meet on
all sides. The duty of Kings is to suppress them, and every society ought
also to purge it self, because there fall but small blessings upon those
places where such venomous herbs do multiply. Of Swearing and blasphemy,
the second branch of Impiety.


As touching the second vice, Contempt of God ingendreth it, and custom
shapeth it. Yea it so happens that the most part of those that grow guilty
thereof, do become so senseless that they think it to be but a slight fault.
Our good Kings in times past, as S. Jews and others did make decrees for the
suppressing thereof, notwithstanding I suppose that in those days none but a
few unthrifts used much swearing. Afterward this plague took hold of the
Gentry, especially of the Soldiers, who (as it is said) in their late
iourneys brought the great oaths out of Italy, but within these forty years,
the blood has so ouerflowed and daily increased, that now the little children
of seven or eight years of age have skill enough to abuse the name of God; yea
even the peasants who live farthest from the Court and Cities, where
corruptions do dwell, (following the common course) can curse the heavens as
well as the Soldiers, who above all other do bear away the bell for this
iniquity. To be brief. Turn us which way we will, we still hear nothing but
blasphemy and forswearing of God. Thus do we see that evil example with want
of correction has bred perseverance in this detestable vice. Never did any
ancient Historiographer write that it was (any thing near) so common in any
age as it is at this day. If we consider the Jewish nation, we shall find
them but smally taynted therewith, for whosoever among them did blaspheme, he
was stoned to death. The Heathen did but sieldome swear, and held their oaths
in great reverence. The Sarazens which embraced Mahomets law, durst not
transgress herein for fear of Gods punishment; and even to this day the
Turks that succeeded them do absteyne from blasphemy. Surely all these
nations shall in the last day rise against us Christians, and especially
against us Frenchmen, who endued with more knowledge then those blind people,
do offend ten times more then they. If a man be atteynted of treazon
against his worldly Prince, every one will cry out, he is worthy punishment,
but unto him that blasphemeth and teareth in pieces the name of God (which is
treazon against his heavenly King) no man upon earth says one word,
notwithstanding it be written that such a one shall not be holden guiltless.

Some worldly wise man may come forth and say, that although Answer to those
that think it not meet so fore to insist upon punishment of swearing and
blasphemy.
this error be chastizeable, yet it is none of those that procure the loss of
estates; also that in case we could find means to redress ye other abuses of
France, this might afterward be well enough provided for. In my opinion those
wise men do resemble such as because they have many books, and have seen
their closures and red their titles, do ween themselves to be learned: for
they looking superficially only into the causes do never consider that the
principal things that bring misery and disorders into whole Countries, are
such offenses as are committed directly against God: notwithstanding, they see
that where the Magistrates do look that his holy name be had in reverence, the
Commonwelths do flourish and abound in all wealth: but if they show themselves
negligent therein, the scourge shall never depart from their house: neither
shall it stand them in any stead to say: I will for my part rule my tongue well
enough: for they be ordained, not for themselves only, but also for the
instruction and correction of others. Did they never read that which is
written in the 3. book of Moses? Whosoever curses his God, shall Leuit. 24.
bear the pain of his own sin, and the blasphemer of the Lords name shall
dye the death: the whole congregation of the people shall stone him, whether he
be a citizen or a stranger. These are his words that makes the foundations of
the earth to tremble, the Sea to run back, and that shoots forth his most
fearful thunderbolts against the proudest Cities. Let them therefore do all
that they can and employe their whole power to banish this evil, least by
supporting it they make themselves guilty thereof.

The third vice that depends upon Impiety is not so general Of Magic and
sundry sorts of Diuinations, the 3. branch of Impiety.
or evident as the former, notwithstanding it be as abominable in the sight
of God. For when the unlawful means of Diuinations and Magic arts have
alienated man from God, they plunge him in inevitable destruction. Herein does
the devil use two kinds of snares. By Witchcrafts which is the grosser sort,
he does ordinarily draw unto him the rude and simply malicious persons, who
either for the satisfying of their desired reuenges, or for the atteyning unto
other purposes, do so suffer themselves to be seduced by him that they grow to
acknowledge and confederate themselves with him. He does often show himself
unto many in sundry shapes, as experience teaches by the co^fessions,
proceedings and judgments given against them: and let such as doubt hereof
read the writings of Bodin against them, wherein they shall see what horible
mischiefs and villainies against both God and man those miserable creatures do
commit; which after they have renounced their Creator do submit themselves to
him; who laughing them to scorn do draw them into everlasting destruction.
The same Author reports that their Captain being taken in ye time of Charles
the 9. confessed yt in France there were above thirty thousand Sorcerers. It
is horrible to see so voluntary a protestation to the irreconsiliable enemy of
God and man: but when malice abounds, there is nothing whereto it will not
join. Such as are more spiritually wise and have in them some seeds of
piety, must have other policies that may bear some fayrer show to bring
them into these paths of perdition: for if any man should at the first show
them the dishonor that they commit against God, it may be they would refrain
themselves: but as the sleights of the devil are merueilous, so does he draw
them on by fayrer pretenses, until they find themselves so snared that they
cannot escape. The cause of these men's mishap consists in their corrupted
affections, which drive them by unlawful and damnable ways to seek their
accomplishment. One would know what success he should have in some great
enterprise: another how he might eschew some evident danger: The covetous and
ambitious man must know how to atteyne to his desires: he that hates and
seeks to do harm, the like: One seeks to lengthen his life, another to
shun death: This man desires to know the issue of the war: that man
whether the estate may be preferued: with infinite other such things as man's
imagination can conceive. To be brief, man's vanity has of vanity it self
made Oracles wherewith to satisfy his curious frowardness: hereof are sprung
up so many kinds of Magic, Enchauntments, Witchcrafts and Infinite sorts of
Magic.
Sorceries, that we say that there is nothing in heaven, in earth, neither
under the earth which the man that is plunged in this error does not use, in
hope to find some instruction or ease: although ordinarily he is frustrate of
his expectation, because therein he can meet with nothing but falsehood and
deceit. And what else is to be looked for out of the instructions of the
devil, considering The decree of God against such.
that himself is a liar and deceiuer: But that we may the better know how
these abuses are to be rejected, let us hear what Moses says. When thou
shall, says he, be entered into the Deuteronomy. 18.
land which the Lord thy God shall give thee, beware that thou follow not the
abominations of those people, neither shall there be found in thee any person
that shall pass his son or daughter through fire, or that shall enquire at
the Southsayer, or that shall observe dreams, or the singing of birds, neither
shall there be any Sorcerer or Enchanter, or any that shall seek counsel at
familier spirits, or that shall ask the truth at the dead: for all these
things be abomination to the Lord, and for such abominations will the Lord
drive them out before thee. This was no law devised by any Lawyer, but an
express inhibition of almighty God, wherein we may note three things. First,
that these impieties be the inventions of such as have forsaken God. Secondly,
that he detesteth them especially above all other offenses: and thirdly, that
he does grievously chastize them with most terrible punishments. But in our
days if any man covet to see where these accursed vanities are practiced, let
him go to the Courts, where he shall find some Where Magic and her train
do soiourne.
of all sorts and callings that are not only affectionate thereto, but do even
run mad after Soothsayers, as they did after one Nostrodamus and others,
whose lies were received for truth. Thence let him walk all over France, and
he shall find that among the Nobility, Clergy, and men of law, there be
many secret disciples of this profession, of whom I suppose some do not think
to do so much mischief as they do, and yet in these cases the least
transgressions are reputed most heinous sins, as witnesses the holy
Scripture, which to the end to aggrauate the heynousnesse of any offense does
say that it is as the sin of the Soothsayers. And undoubtedly the increase
and tolleration of such abominations, is one of the most evident tokens of the
subuertion of any Commonwelth: wherefore it is requisite that every one that is
polluted with this or the rest do cleanse themselves: For it is a hard matter
for him to be a good Citizen of France, that for so wicked a cause does
voluntarily banish him self out of the holy City of God.

Now must we speak of Injustice, which is a public and Injustice, the
second cause of the destruction of Commonwelths.
particular oppression used by such as be in authority or mighty over the
poor and weak, who also through their pride, covetousness and wealth do
practice all violence, deceit and extremity against the simple. These
disorders have been so long continued against the poor, that now it is openly
said that they are no longer shorn, but even flayne with a thousand
extraordinary oppressions and new impostes heretofore unknown, in such sort
that ye coin now wrested from them is watered with tears and accompanied with
most sorrowful complaints. And notwithstanding whatsoever knowledge that men
have of Gods final succor to the oppressed, either that he does chastize
their oppressors, yet will they not cease therefrom, but still continuing the
same course, they do day by day proceed to augment the miseries of others,
until they bring them to such a pass as themselves do tremble thereat. Thus
have we proceeded from year to year in so woeful an estate, that without
speedy remedy France must grow half desert. Then if we mark the men of
law which are ordained to minister justice to every man, we shall see a many
of them help themselves with this holy virtue, to entrap the wealth of those
that either through folly or need have entangled themselves in the most
subtle nets of pleading, neither can any man express the extortion that under
such color is committed. Moreover, there runs a great rumor of some
governors of Towns and Castles, and paraduenture of whole Provinces, who to
the end to mainteyne their pomp and fill their coffers, do use new laws to
the detriment both of the King and Commons: as if the purpose of offices tended
either to make an outward show, or to glut them with wealth, and not rather to
make their virtues to shine in such functions both to the relief of many and
to their masters honor. But if there be any behavior that may be termed rage,
it is the behavior of the men of war, who are so far out of square, that
having habandoned all humanity, they make no less hauock in their own
country, then in the enemies land where all is made a pray unto them: in such
wise that the foreign wars of France for these eighty years have not wasted
so much, as the soldiers robbery have done since these civil wars began.
Yea, and there be some gentlemen who as I think do imagine that the true
tokens of Nobility do consist in making themselves to be feared, and in
beating and presumpteously taking from their subjects any thing yt may be
commodious unto themselves, as if they were their slaves. The great cities,
what do they but encroch to themselves all the commodities that they may:
thunder forth their privileges, and lay all the burden and charges upon the
poor country people, who being besides pinched by the subteltie of the
receivers, it is a merueile whereupon they live and find themselves. To be
brief, if we look generally into the particular dealings of each one toward
other, we shall find plenty of fraud and vyolence, as if a man were brought
into the world only to hurt his like. Well, let that which is spoken suffize to
teach us that injustice draws near to her full period: For there is as
little care of oppressing the Poor, the Widow, and the Orphane, as there is
fear of the threats written against such as commit it. And yet we must think
that when oppression is grown universal and continual, then God hasteneth his
judgments to destroy us, because we will not amend when we are instructed
and taught, and that does the Prophet well show when he says. The Lord shall
enter into judgment with the ancients of his people, and with their Princes,
Esaias. 3.
for ye have wasted the vine, and the spoil of the poor is in your houses.
Why do you oppress my people, and bruise the face of the poor, says the Lord
of hoasts. This decree might be a sufficient warning to the oppressors, if they
were as easy to be taught, as paraduenture they be incorrigible.

The third vice before mentioned, is dissolution, under which term I do
comprehend Adultery, Pomp, Pride, Gluttony Excess the third cause of
subuertion of Commonwelths. Two fountaynes of excess.
and Drunkenness. Which to those that delight in worldly prosperity, are
merueilous pleasant imperfectio^s. And although in our age, nature is much
enclyned to riot and vanity, yet may we say that the evil example given in
most eminent places, together with impunitie, have been great helps to
increase this mischief, which takes the surer root when it is practiced and
borne out by the mighty. Now, among the vices above mentioned, Adultery has
the preeminence. And besides that it corrupts The kinds thereof. Adultery.
the body and poluteth the soul, it is ordinarily accompanied with sickness,
prodigality, murder, and other inconveniences that draw on each other. In all
places they are so addicted thereto, that they care no more for concealing of
it, as in time past when honesty held them in some shame. In these days they
seek only to cover the filthiness thereof with beautiful titles or pleasant
aunswers, yea they go further in some, even notable places. For they account
this vice as a necessary spur, wherewith when one is pricked and can guide
himself cunningly, or atteyne to any worthy price that he has desired, he is
exalted: he is envied: he is said to have a good capacity and quick
understanding. After this sort do they make black white, attributing
pureness to that which is filthy and foul. Youth which is easily catched
with these baytes, helped by custom, and not restrained by laws, does more
and more stir up their appetites hereto, and having once taken so bad a
train, the state of manhood and age do nourish rather then abolish it. This
vice does naturally resemble the Cancre which by little and little gnaweth the
flesh: for if once it begin to take hold of any, it so increases the
corruption of his affections, that it is afterward a hard matter to purge him
again. God for such like iniquities in old time rooted out whole nations from
before his face, as well to show that he abhors them, as also to teach
Magistrates not to leave them unpunished.

Concerning Pomp and Superfluity, the root thereof springs The pompes and
superfluities of the Court, Commons, Gentry and women.
in the Court, where vanity does so abound, that those persons which will be
any thing accounted of, must transform themselves into sundry fashions and
colors. For the outward show of things are in such estimation, that many
times men judge of the person by his apparel; so as it seems we would say,
that the chiefest perfections are hidden under the costliest garments. Kings
and Princes did not so soon change their ancient ordinary simplicity into
Italian glistering bravery, but their subjects immediately imitated them, yea
and some endeavored to exceed them: and this mischief has stooped so low
that pomp and pride appears even in ye mean citizens of simple towns.
Herewith has the Nobility especially empourished her self so sore, that she
can no longer so mainteyne her self to do the King any such service as in
time past. Neither do women for their parts forbear these superfluities: for
weening with outward ornaments to breed themselves more beauty, commendation
and honor, they have not since been so careful to adorn themselves with the
beautiful gifts of virtue which do far exceed the others.

At the tail of all these vanities comes Pride, which although Pride.
it be borne with man, does nevertheless whet it self and increase with their
smoke: or rather according to the opinion of others, engenders them. But
howsoever it is, the one still agrees with the other: so that of this
unreasonable presumption or ouerweening of themselves grows the contempt of
others, and thence come injuries, quarrels and manifold murders.

An other branch of Dissolution is table excess and great Table excess and
great furniture.
furniture, wherein many do suffer themselves to be willingly led away, as
taking this path which is so full of intemperance to be the only means to live
in pleasure and fame. All which bad customs do perticulerly corrupt and spoil
whole families, and being mixed with public errors do make the disease of the
universal body more incurable. Do we then think that God will long suffer
these corruptions which are to him so odious? It is not like: but rather are we
to fear least the judgment coming so slowly will be the more grievous. How
many kingdoms, where they have atteyned the fullness of al vice, have been
ouerrunne and given in pray to strangers? The histories do verefie it, and
the multitude of examples might terrify those who having power to repress the
mischief (at the least in part) do suffer it to increase every where.

Thus may we see some of the most manifest mischiefs that have and still do
infect France, briefly set down according to the A co^clusio^ gathered of the
former speeches viz. that France is in manifest peril in that the causes of
the subuertion of Commonwelths do in so many sorts bear rule therein. Tokens
of Gods wrath. Two observations meet for the curious.
purposed order, which are sufficient to make all men think (except the
corrupt or senseless) her danger to be most evident, considering how sore
the foundations of Piety and Justice, which should uphold her, are decayed and
shaken. The sins before mentioned are ye true causes that prepare to put her
to a great iumpe. Neither want we other signs and foretellings, which
threatening us, do warn us to endeavor to turn away the wrath of God from
us. Already have appeared horrible Comets and other strange sights in the
air, Earthquakes, the bringing forth of Monsters and fearful voices, which
have been felt, heard and seen, and being so prodigious, ought to terrefie us.
But if the curious do for their satisfying crave more curious and vain
observations, my self will allege them twain that I have observed in a
certain man's writings. The first, that we are now under the Climactericall
reign of the Kings of France, namely the sixty and three, which notes unto
us some alteration to be made. The second, that all the roumes made in the
Palace of Paris to place the pictures of our Kings, which some do imagine to
have been fatally so builded, are now full.

But to leave the^ to descant upon these vanities, I will speak Of the Periode
of Commenwelths.
of another forewarning more to be considered, which the Prophet Daniel makes
mention of: viz. of the common period, which in some men's judgment, he
attributes to all estates, and is unto them as it were a limite that they
cannot pass. At the least we see within that time wonderful alterations. And
it is comprehended within the compass of 500. years. Which experience has
sufficiently verified in diverse, especially in the ancient people of the
Jews, as Jasper Peucer has diligently noted. Bodin likewise in his
Commonwelth, following the opinion of Plato, has noted that the number of 494.
which he terms perfect, and is meant of years, is a term which few
Commonwelths do escape without encurring most dangerous alterations. Lib. 1.
Diuinat. cap. 7. and lib. 4. cap. 2.
Now, if we will apply this to our selves, and count how long it was between
the time that this Realm came to be settled and assured in the family of
Hugh Capet the author of the second change (which happened under Henry the
first his grau^dchild, who dyed in the year 1060.) and the death of Henry the
second, in whose reign many great corruptions, as well in manners as policy,
were conceived, which afterward were brought forth with incredible increase,
we shall find five hundred years fully complete. But the chaunges of most
excellent virtues into most infamous vices are most dangerous, because other
do still follow on which breed destruction without remedy. Yet must we not
say but this term is sometime far ouerpassed (which proceeds of Gods
great goodness) as we may now see in our Realm, that have perseuered in form
royal above 1100. years. As also that sometimes God in his wrath does shorten
it because of men's horrible sins. And although the knowledge of the time be
to them a secret article which God has reserved to himself, yet the
consideration of so many as well weighty, as trifling matters concurring to
one self end, ought to drive us to think upon his judgments. But much more
should we be thereto induced, in that we see the prophecy of Moses daily
draw to performance against us. And yet notwithstanding our so many
experiences and sufferings we cannot become wise. These be his words. If thou will not obey the voice of the Lord Gods sentence concerning the periods and
reuolutions of public and private estates. Deuteronomy. 28.
thy God to keep and do all his commandments, all these curses shall light
upon thee. Thou shall be cursed in the City and in the field: the Lord shall
send thee hunger and scarcity* and the plague shall take hold of thee until
it has consumed thee from the face of the earth. The heaven that is over thy
head shall be of brass, and the earth under thy foot of Iron: the vermin and
the rust shall consume all the trees and fruits of thy earth. The stranger
that is within thee shall get over thee and be the highest, and thou shall
stoop and be under him: he shall lend to thee upon v^urie, and thou shall not
be able to lend to him. The Lord shall cast thee down before thy enemies, and
thou shall get from them by a contrary way, and thou shall flee through the
hedge. A nation that is far from thee shall rise against thee whose language
thou shall not understand: an impudent people which shall not honor the older,
neither have compassion of the infant. The same shall devour the fruit of thy
cattle, and the fruit of thy field, and shall leave thee no remainder of thy
Corn, Wine, or Oil, neither of the flocks of thy sheep until it has
destroyed all. To be brief, thou shall serve thy enemy whom thy Lord shall
send thee in hunger and thirst, in nakedness and want, who shall put a collar
of Iron about thy neck until he has wholly rooted thee out. These be part of
the threatenings denounced against those that harden themselves in wickedness,
whereof we do already so feel the effects, that there want no more but the
last wounds to fulfill our utter oppression. And since Gods word has proved
so true in this bitter correction, let us fear least it so do likewise in our
destruction.

I suppose there be some Courtiers, who being but smally Objections against
the maxim taken from Moses.
satisfied by my speeches, will rather scorn me, because I endeavor to decide
matters of estate with Theological principles, and would better like that I
should have propounded some out of Polibius, Plutarke and Xenophon, to the end
by them to have judged of the casualties of Kingdoms: and willingly I would
have leaned to their opinions: but to the end not to be deceived Answer.
I have thought this way that I have taken to be the better* For
notwithstanding man's wisdom (which nevertheless is given from above) does
shine in profane books, yet is it very vain in respect of the heavenly
wisdom that appears in the holy Scriptures. Howbeit, to the end the better
to satisfy The Maxims of Philosophers concerning the alterations of
Co^monwelths.
every one, I will somewhat touch the opinions of these great persons
concerning the matter now discoursed upon. The matters, say they, namely
Aristotle, which breed innovation, alteration or destruction, especially in
Monarchies, are these, when there happen debate between brethren or mighty
men of the Realm: when the Princes are under age or in contempt: when the
Magistrates do rob the common people: when wicked and unworthy persons are
put in office and the good rejected: when the superiors do oppress their
inferiors with grievous injuries: and the tributes laid on the peoples necks
are insupportable: when Princes through their dishonest actions do become
contemptible to their subjects: when Justice is so cowardly and corrupt that
impunitie of vice bears sway: when we see an unproportionable increase in
one member of the estate* when dignities and offices are set to sale: when
poverty is so v^ersall that not only the private are poor, but the common is
poorer: when martial discipline is neglected: when concord quaileth among
Citizens and manners are utterly depraved: when laws are out of force and that
the Prince is ruled by wicked or ignorant Counsaylers: and when forrainers are
in greater favor and authority then the natural borne subjects. These are in
part the causes by them noted, which breed sundry alterations in estates and
bring them to naught. All which things The application of these principles to
the consideration of the state of France
may easily be seen to concur in ours, and thereby may we judge of the
sickness thereof. But albeit we are not altogether to contemn the
Philosophers opinions, yet must we rather cleave to those of the Scriptures,
which search out the original causes in man's transgressions: For GOD detesting
the same does withdraw his favor and protection from whole Realms, and then
spring up confusions. Whether therefore we look into the first causes, or
into those that ensue, we shall in all be sure to find matter and tokens of
destruction. How is it then that we fear not ours, when all judgments both
divine and human do foretell it? Howbeit, in as much as there is no disease
so great, but the sick person may conceive some hope of recovery, we are not
altogether to despair, but diligently to search among both ordinary and
extraordinary, divine and human remedies, for such as may be most
profitable for our restoration. And of those will we speak in the end,
after we have first laid open such dissipations as oftentimes happen unto the
mightiest Monarchies.

Some there are that notwithstanding they know there be An other objection of
theirs that think that we ought either very gently or not at all to touch the
wounds of an estate, namely of our own country. Two springs of great
desolation in an estate.
great dissipations, yet do they make them but small, especially when they
apply them to their own country, as well in respect of their charity
thereto, as also because they be loath to be the reporters of so many
mischiefs. In such affairs as this, we must not flatter neither our selves,
nor other men, but freely declare what passed experience does show. Among many
desolations happening to an estate ready to fall, the two worst are these.

The first, when one mighty nation, or many, being of diverse dispositions and
language do come to usurp, and bring into bondage: then is it not to be
demanded how many miseries the subdued must endure. The other, when a Kingdom
renteth it self in many peeoes, and that the quickest or strongest do seize
each upon his own portion, which they govern in diverse manner, and for the
maintenance of themselves do lean to strangers: then likewise ensues a
great overthrow of all things, and the calamities do long endure.

Of these two only will I now discourse, as being those which A discourse upon
the first cause or original of the desolation of an estate.
threaten us and are the worst, neither is it to any purpose to replye that
France cannot incur these inconveniences: For since so many and so detestable
mischiefs, together with so many and so diverse partialities have set in foot,
we must imagine them (without speedy remedy) to be the open ga^es unto new
masters. If we do thoroughly mark the accidents happened in sundry estates,
we shall find that many have decayed when civil dissension has so beaten
them down that they have not been able to defend themselves against
strangers. The kingdom of Judah A confirmation gathered in the considerations
of the subuertions of many mighty Monarchies, as of the Jews, Romans,
Grecians and Hungarians.
being mighty and flourishing under David and Solomon, and divided under
Roboam, it followed that the Kings of Israel and Judah held almost continual
wars against each other, and so weakened themselves, even in good manners,
that the Assyrians led them into captivity. Soon after that the Roman
Empire was divided in it self, the seat transported to Constantinople, and
that vice augmenting, the virtue of Princes decayed, the Northern nations rose
up and rent it in sundry pieces, neither is it possible to rehearse the
calamities of them that lived in those days. In the kingdom of Hungary which
in times past has been so flourishing and mighty, when those that should
succeed straue who could carry it away, the Turk stepped in between them and
became Lord of the greatest part thereof. And although the Turks conquestes
are extraordinary destructions, yet must we in these examples note Gods
punishments, with the causes that bring them in, thereby to take warning that
unless we prevent them there will be no want of such as shall put them in
execution: Yea, which shall come and bereave us of our liberty, life, and
land. And who doubts not that many nations The second confirmation taken of
the affections of the nations our neighbors.
our neighbors do but lie in wait for such occasion* Is not the Spanyard, who
seeks to force all men to stoop under his scepter and contemns the French,
mighty enough to bring us under? Will the Germaynes that distayne us, be slow
to such a booty? How suddenly will the Italians that behold us, be ready to
catch whatsoever may fit them? The English calling to mind their ancient
losses, may then have their remedy: yea the Scots and Suitzers which now
bewail us, may peradventure seek to pluck away each of them some one small
feather. Finally, the Flemmings that did love us, whose hate we have perforce
procured, how joyfully will they skippe in our necks? I take him to be very
senseless that does not fear it.

But some man will say that it is an easy matter in words and Objection
against that which is before said. Answer.
writing to raise up many nations, which nevertheless we sieldome see in
effect come to pass. Hereto I answer that whenever God is determined to
thunder upon the sins of men, he does much sooner stir up those whom he
pleases to use as ministers of his vengeance. And in case the report of
histories be true, with what celeritie I pray you did the Goths, Huns, Alans,
Francons, Burguignions and Wandales fall upon Italy, Gaul, Spain and
Affricke? Such was their fury and speed, that in short space they subdued and
wasted all those great Provinces. The like also did the Sarazens two hundred
years after in the conquest of Spain. Have not we also had trial in France
during the English wars that that only nation (which in deed by enheritance
at that time possessed almost the third part thereof) brought it into so
miserable estate that they were like to have been masters of all? Let us then
fear least that which has already happened to others, do fall upon us,
considering that our iniquities are so ready to the harvest.

Concerning the dismembring of an estate by the self nation, Discourse upon
the second cause of the desolation of a co^monwelth. Histories which verefie
this discourse.
among whom many times the stranger has his share, it is no less a kind of
miserable destruction then the former. This did the Empire of Constantinople
find soon after that Baldwine Earl of Flanders was made Emperor: For then
did Alexis Comnene (as Carrion reports) erect ye Empire of Trebizond. Thessaly
shaking off the yoke of Michael Angel yielded to ye Paleologues. Achaia,
Attica, Peloponessus, Aetolia, Caramania and Epirus had their several
governors, whom they often changed according to the sundry events of wars
and sedition. Especially Attica, Achaia and Peloponessus were governed
sometimes by the Grecians, sometimes by the Sicilians and Florentines, sometime
by the Genowayes and Venitians, even as the hazard of war favored:
notwithstanding most of them made there no long abode. The Bulgarians, Ruscians
and Seruians had their Despottoes, who being sometimes friends and confederates
with the Emperors of Constantinople and by and by again enemies, did with
continual roades wast Thracia and Macedonia. These confusions did deserve the
name of theeueries rather then of wars, because both the ground of them was
unjust, and the practices wherewith they help themselves most wicked. For they
sought all means to rent and tear the Empire in pieces, whereby the Emperor
of the Turks had opportunity to seize upon Constantinople and the other
Provinces. The same author in an other place says thus. I will likewise
rehearse the calamities that oppressed almost all Italy, as a punishment for
the sins that therein rayned: which happened during the mortal deuisions
between the Emperors and the Popes, when the names of Guelph and Gibeline
were the marks of each faction. For so many mischiefs were there then
committed, so much blood shed, so manytownes destroyed, and whole Countries
laid wast, that whosoever shall read the histories thereof cannot but
marvel. Then did there spring up many petty Tyrants in most towns,
acknowledging no superior, but leaning some to the Popes and some to the
Emperors, exercising all cruelties against both friends and foes, until that
Italy, rather wearied then satisfied with so many miseries, did after a long
time take an other course. I will also repeat one domestical example, namely
the division between the houses of Another history which more nearly
touches France, set down at large in the French Anales.
Burgundy and Orleance, which was so sharp as it induced the English wars,
which brought France to so low an ebb that it was almost utterly destroyed,
yea it had dismembered the state into sundry morcels, if Gods great goodness
had not helped. In the mean time for the space of forty or fifty years it
was made a pray: every one seeking either to keep himself, or to increase his
own power, either else to destroy his enemy. All public force, mightiness
or justice whereto men might have recourse, being utterly extinguished. To be
brief, it was a Country habandoned to every one that could catch any part
thereof, all which miseries do warn us that we may yet happen to try them
once more. For strangers may see so good sport that they may fall upon us
again.

But it is far more likely that our estate should incur the other The
extreme misery of France, if once it come to dismember it self.
dismembring whereof I have spoken. And the reason is, because the French,
being by nature fierce, and hating foreign bondage, will rather become subject
to it self, and so of this one great body make many pieces. For the assurance
whereof, the usurpers would put themselves into the protection of such of their
neighbors as could most commodiously mainteyne them, and withal were most
conformable to the opinions that they shall have embraced. When I do more
nearly consider this, I find no condition so miserable, disordered, and
confused as ours: which being such would bury all justice, lawful authority,
respect, fear, good manners and concord, and to the contrary increase all
malepertnesse, ambition, treachery, violence, Impiety, guile and sedition: And
who could delight to live among such storms, unless it were some barbarous
minded person? Among all these alterations I imagine some Prince to seize upon
some one Province: some Lord upon some Towns: some head Cities to convert
their Parliaments into Aristocratyes of some of their noblest and principal
Citizens: and others to grow into Commonwelths. Among the Nobility also other
sorts of Gouernements Oligarchiall or Monarchiall. One would become a prince
over his own Castles, an other a Tyrant over other men's. One quarter of the
Country would grow into Cantons, an other commit it self to some warlike
Capteyne, as for those that should at such a time find themselves seized of
the strong holds of the greater Towns, think whether they would have any
part herein: All which diversities of governments, humors and qualities of
men must needs bring in mortal war and dissension, which would not be
ended while we and our children were consumed.

Of these my speeches some man might imagine that I presuppose Whether the
Realm could subsist though such partialities should dismember it.
that the royalty should then be as it were made void: because that so long
as that remains in authority the aforesaid confusions can no way come near
us. Truly my self would be as loath as any man that the same should be so
much as contemned: For since we have lived 1100. years under that government,
it were our parts to reverence it, as a lawful power ordained by God, whereto
whosoever does not voluntarily yield obedience, the same is guilty before him.
Besides that we are to think no other government more meet to guide the
French then that. But because the matter whereof I entreat do lead me from
bad causes to those worse effects yt ensue, it has also caused me to set down
such things as might happen, to the end that imprinting in us some fear, we
should endeavor so to behave our selves as they might not come to pass. But if
we still persevere any time in our imperfections and disorders, let us not
doubt but God will take away his good Angel from France, whereby we shall see
the royal dignity disobeyed, and in small favor with the subjects, and the
same likewise exempt of all love and humanity toward them, which will be the
accomplishment of the desolations aforesaid. For the eschuing of which
inconveniences, we ought most zealously to pray to God long to continue our
King, and in him to increase all true Piety, Justice, wisdom, and
affability, granting us likewise to be as affectionate toward him as were
the Romans to the good Emperors Traian and Titus: for if the Realm should
fall unto children, especially now that the laws are out of force, Magistrates
contemned, manners corrupt, hatred and ambition excessive, it must needs be in
great danger.

Now let us proceed to the remedies, and see whether there The last part of
this discourse which entreats of the remedies.
be any so sufficient as to warrant us from destruction. In my opinion there be
some, if we can find the way to take hold of them in time. For in this tempest
wherein we are tossed we must not shrink up our shoulders and say, All is
lost, but we are valiantly to help one another. But to what remedies shall
we have recourse? To Philosophers rules? Or to passed experience of such
means as have served to underprop this Realm when it has been shaken?
Either else to the politic counsels of the wise that now living do know
our griefs? For that were the way that wisdom would teach. Hereto I answer
that we may reap The first and principal point.
profit out of all, but it is necessary that we begin further of. In as
much as we see that for our transgressions God has withdrawn his favor from
us, it is requisite that we appease him to the end he may return us it
again, otherwise all human remedies are in vain: for what power, wisdom,
or counsel is there that can alter any thing that he has decreed against us?
In the holy Scriptures we have a notable example of his mercy toward the
Ninevites that were heathen people: for when his Example.
wrath was kindled against them, and he had by the Prophet Jonas, to the end
to terrefie them, pronounced the sentence of their Jonas. 3.
destruction, they were so touched to the quick that their King and all the
people having fasted, wept and prayed, and turned from their wicked way; he
withdrewe his plagues, which already hung over their heads, and took them to
mercy. How often did the Jews feel his wonderful compassions, when for
their wickedness and Another example.
transgressions his scourges even light upon them? When they and their Kings
through true repentance turned unto him, he took pity of them and converted
their pitiful estate into prosperity. Whereof it follows, that our
sovereign and only means to avoid these calamities that do now assail and
threaten us, is to imitate those whom I have named. For as it is one great
comfort, when a man knows that his grief is not altogether incurable, and
that there be means to heal him, much more does it increase when he finddeth
the same to be easy. The same is in us, and consists in knowledge, will,
and execution, whereof every one through holy persuasions and example of the
greatest, may be made capable: For when men shall see first the King, and then
the Princes and such as are in authority either Civil or Ecclesiastical, in
earnest and without hypocrisy to make show as well generally as perticulerly
that to God only we ought to have recourse, and withal effectually to
declare a hatred of vice and love of virtue, embracing the politic union and
eschuing discord, undoubtedly the inferiors will study to do the like. But
what will the Catholics say: Objection against the former remedy.
Do not we what we can to appease the wrath of God with solemn Processions,
Pilgrimages, Fastings, Prayers and Offerings? And the like may the Protestants
say concerning their Prayers, Meditations, Abstinences, and singing of Psalms
and Himnes, wherewith they also endeavor to appease him. Undoubtedly we must
bring more then the outward show unto God, who Aunswe^
being the searcher of the hearts does see the clennesse or uncleanness therein
couteyned. But let us hear the Prophet Esaias and he will teach us how we ought
to guide our selves, in giving to us the same admonition that he gave to the
people of Israel. Mark the words of the Lord by his mouth. My soul, says he,
hateh your Esaias. (...)
solemn feasts and sacrifices. When you shall lift up your hands I will turn
my eyes from you: and when you shall multiply your prayers, I will not hear
you, for your hands are full of blood. Wash you and be clean, take away the
corruption of your thoughts out of my sight. Cease from doing evil and learn
to do good, seek judgment, help him that is oppressed, do right to the
fatherless, and defend the cause of the widow. Then come unto me says the
Lord. Though your sins be as red as scarlet yet will I make them as white as
snow. Hereby it appears that we must come sincerely unto God and amend our
lives in deed, if we will obtain his blessings; for to seek to satisfy him
with dissembling shows, is the way to displease and provoke him.

It may be there are some that will say, that to propound rules The second
consideration of the first remedy before mentioned, with an answer to those
that call it a Paradoxe.
of deuinitie for the reestablishing of Commonwelths, is no more but to set
down Paradoxes: but those men in my opinion are far deceived. For as
Justice, Wisdom, Fortitude, and Temperance are the strong pillars that uphold
the state, so must we think that Piety is the foot and foundation of them
all: for if they be not fixed in this most worthy virtue, they cannot but
shake, because it is necessary to begin the work with such a foundation.
Greater reason, then they, have I to say that it is no Paradoxe, but rather a
wonder that now in France there be so many that contemn those things which
stir up to integrity of life and reverence to God. At the least I am assured
that there are many good men as well of the one side as of the other, which
even long after ye reestablishme^t of good order and the preservation of the
estate, and will not reject my opinion. Leaving therefore unto those that have
far more learning, cunning, and experience then my self, the propounding of
more excellent matter that may serve to so good an end, and contributing to
this work only so much as I may, according to my small capacity; and through
my conceived fear least we should fall into such dangers as threaten us, I
seek in time to lay them open: because it is much easier to prevent such
mischiefs as have been foreseen, then those that happen unlooked for.

Having thus discoursed upon the first and most healthsome remedy, Discourse
upon other necessary remedies.
I will proceed to speak of the rest which also are necessary, and whereof
the Philosophers have made mention. Aristotle who had as good judgment in
policies as any other whosoever, does generally say that if we can find by
what means estates are corrupted and decayed, we shall also know the means
whereby they may be cleansed and preserved. Considering that of contrary causes
do proceed contrary effects, also that corruption is contrary to
conservation. Hereby may the simplest easily know how to put this rule in
practice. As for example: If the sale of Judicial Reformation of sundry
abuses propounded as it were by the way.
offices does breed the sale and perverting of Justice, then ought we to
forbear selling of them, and so to give them freely to good men. If pomp,
superfluous expenses, and unreasonable gifts have for their maintenance
enforced Princes to lay intolerable and unsupportable tributes upon their
subjects, then must they moderate their affections, to the end oppressions may
cease. If impunitie of vice does multiply and increase it, then must
correction deminish it. Even so is it in many other causes. Howbeit Aristotle
to the end the better to lay open this matter, propounds yet other means.
As, that nothing be done contrary to law and custom, especially that
mischiefs, how small soever, be prevented in the beginning. That those that
be put in public au^thoritie do behave themselves modestly, as well toward
them that bear no sway in the Commonwelth, as to them that do: in doing no
injury unto any, but living peaceably among the rest. That those upon whom the
safety of the Commonwelth do depend do continually watch and stand upon
their guard, and many times give cause of fear, to the end the Citizens may be
the more ready and intentive to do whatsoever is meet for public safety.
To beware that there happen no contention or debate between the mighty, also
that others which are no partakers be prevented before they meddle. That by the
laws there be order taken that no man wax too mighty. And that private
persons frame their lives to that form of government whereto they be subject.
Many other rules there be that help to this effect, which are to be seen in
the fifth book of this Philosophers Politiques, in the works of Plutarke, and
in other good authors; for I have here gathered together only those that first
come to hand.

But if we have but our own laws and old observations, yet That the
remedies to restore France are easy.
were the same so sufficient as we need not to borowe any other, if we would
put them in practice: Which if we do not, then are all other remedies in
vain. The most singular precept therefore that tends to the restoring of
this estate, is to be willing to restore it. This do I say because that within
these five and twenty years we have used so many practizes hereabout, that
now we think those to be but in jest that speak any thing in good earnest.
Such proceedings must we change: for necessity having taken place (who
prescribes a law to the greatest) we must now perforce do yt which before of
our own accord we would not. No man has herein so great interest as his
majesty. For the state of his Realm being well reformed, himself shall be
better beloved and obeyed of his subjects: more mighty, rich and quiet. As
also it is he that may do more then law, force, or any man whosoever. When he
has chosen what he will say or do (which the grace of God, his own singular
wisdom wherewith he is adorned, and the advice of the wise, may instruct him
in) it were a good precept that at the Court and in Paris (which are the two
lights that ought to lighten all France) order might be first thoroughly
established, to the end all others might direct themselves according to these
two most rich presidents. So long as the city of Rome kept her self sound,
her inferiors flourished in virtue, but when she came to be corrupt, the
infection was spread all over. Yet mind I not hereby to infer that all
disorders have their original from the rulers, for many do spring from the
subjects: but it is to be perceived that some of the principal fetch their
beginning from the principal persons, and so do remain.

There is yet an other sovereign precept, without the which all The third
remedy, which is most necessary.
the rest are to small purpose: and that is to seek some means how to take
order in the controversies of Religion without force of arms. For until civil
war be banished, it is but a folly to speak of redress, because the same
works a greater breach in the country, in manners, in laws and in men in
six months, then may posbly be repaired again in six years. Among other
the fruits thereof this is one, That it has engendered a million of Epicures
and Libertines. Secondly, it has made most part of the French nation so wild,
cruel and sauadge, that where they were before but sheep, they have now put
on the shape of Tigers. These two reasons might fully suffice to persuade every
one that is possessed of any one spark of conscience or charity, to desire
and wish that we might be brought into concord by fair and peaceable means.
For so long as discord holds our swords drawn, we do nothing but establish
a new Kingdom of Impiety, Injustice, Cruelty and Theft, wherein many thieves
and wicked persons do rise and grow rich with the spoil of the innocent, and
glut themselves with blood. A man may truly say, that if all the French nation
were divided into six parts, we should find that five of them do daily
mourn and pray to God to grant peace unto France, and a good politic
redress until an Ecclesiastical may be had: which disposition being in
manner universal, makes the difficulty to attain to that point a great deal
the less. The ordinary obiectiou hereto, is, that two Religions cannot
possibly consist in one Commonwelth. And when we ask wherefore, it is
annswered, because of their repugnancie, which breeds perpetual contention.
But I Answer to the objection, That it is impossible for two Religions to
consist in one commonwelth.
would know of them whether vice and virtue, good and bad be not also
contraries, and yet we must not for the remedying thereof bring a whole Realm
into dissension.

In the time of the good Emperors Constantine and Theodosius, also when the
two holy Bishops Augustine and Ambrose flourished in the world, were there not
in the Roman Empire both Pagans, Jews, and Arrians, whom the true Christians
were driven to permit to live after their own rites and consciences, rather
then for those contrarieties to kindle cruel wars and most ^^^lent
persecutions? Are we more wise or mighty then those Emperors, or more holy
and zealous then those holy Bishops? I think we had need of a good Orator to
persuade that. So that since they have so far exceeded us in perfection, we
are not to be blamed though we guide our selves by their rule as well in
matters of policy as of the Church. And notwithstanding under the Children of
Constantine there chanced some seditions and troubles for Religion, yet does
it appear that the Arrians were ever the authors thereof: for the true Church
has sieldome been seen to use persecution. Which this excellent sentence of
Augustine very well verefieth, that says. He that persecuteth is of the
devil, but he that is persecuted is of God. It is said that King Frances the
first, when the Suitzers were at war among themselves for Religion,
counseled them to appease such controversies by modest conferences and gentle
means; which since they have happily put in practice and sped well by it: for
thereby have they mainteyned concord among themselves, and mightily enriched
their Country, and yet are become never the worse. This sole example might
stop their mouths that uphold that fire and sword must determine our
debates, also that gentle means are unprofitable. But I cannot think that
such counsels can proceed from any other then most cruel and hypocritical
minds. To be brief, I think assuredly that if their Majesty's, their What
the chief and principal members of the state may and ought to do in the
restoration thereof.
Counsel, the Princes and the Court of Parliament of Paris, would unfeignedly
labor for a general reconsiliation and redress, notwithstanding whatsoever
contrariety, the same might easily be brought to perfection. Are they to be
restrained by the authority of the Popes precepts, who by his Nuncios seeks
incessantly to trouble France? Must they fear the rage of some of the Clergy,
that cry out, Kill, murder, have no pity upon the Protestants our
adversaries? Can the power of the Spanish Empire, (which they have provoked out
of season) force the^ to sheath their French swords in the bowels of France?
Shall the fear and complaynts of the Protestants (which are not without some
ground) so terrefie them yt they shall desist? Or may the secret practizes,
which tend to stirring up of great matters, fear them? Truly all this should
not let the^ from establishing ye sovereign law that brings health to al
France which is ye law of peace and concord. Only it is requisite the King be
armed with his grandfathers magnanimity to daunt all such as dare propound any
pernicious Complois against the Commonwelth, as also to harten those that are
desirous to say and do well. The Queen mother likewise is to remember that she
rather the^ any, is able to fix the nail in the turning wheel of division,
which would be to her life a Crown of most excellent commendations. The
Princes likewise must call to mind that domestical power acchieued by a
virtuous peace, is as assured and happy as that which is purchased with
doubtful and unfortunate war. This great Senate which makes such account of
fame, is to think that it shall lose the same that it has obtained, unless
it bring forth such excellent Senators as with pure heart and frank speech will
freely uphold, as did our Cato, (l'Hospitall) public equity. But if to the
contrary they show themselves obstinate and slack in readiness and labor,
they shall be the first that shall feel by the contempt and disobedience of
the inferiors, (whom they have suffered by wars and corruption to transform
themselves into barbarous conditions) how great an oversight it is, not to cut
off, when they may, the way to such confusions as tend to the subuertion of
the whole. A King by increasing his dominion atchieueth great honor, but much
greater does he obtain by uniting and clensing it when it is divided and
infected: for the first is compassed by force, the other by discretion. Such
brave exploytes (as worthy their greatness) are to them reserved, to the end
in the same to employe themselves. So did Charles the 7. to whom the
reestablishing of good order and ancient customs in his Realm through
wisdom, was no less glory then was the recovery thereof from the English
nation, partly by force and partly by fortune.

Now, in case discord were banished from among us, peace established, Means to
confirm the state after that it is set upright.
and a good reformation begun, yet must we (as I think) beware how we
reenter into any foreign war but upon either great necessity, or a just
and good occasion, but rather to keep peace with our neighbors: for otherwise
it is not possible to restore good manners and order. For so do I imagine that
in six years it may be half reestablished, and in ten altogether. Great
and strong bodies that are well founded, and have some good parts yet sound,
do rise up again as woonderfully as they were overthrown. The chief is to
begin well, for a good beginning is Reasons that should move us hereto.
half the work. Neither is there any doubt but God will prosper our endeavors
when he sees us well disposed to take away the evil and to restore that which
is good. The feeling of our miseries ought sufficiency to move us, as also
should the bad reputation whereto we are grown among all Christian nations,
who now do hate us as much for the vices that they impute unto us, as in time
past they commended us for our virtues. Now they stand no longer upon the
reproouing of the French inconstancy and insolency, as in time past: They
pass on a great way further, yea so far as all whatsoever disordinate or
dissolute behavior, whether in manners or in politic government, is
attributed thereto. This mighty kingdom which heretofore was the refuge of
the oppressed, and a school of all learning and honesty, whether our
bordering neighbors sent their youth to be instructed, is now by them termed
a den of dissolution which they fear to come near. Such as travail
foreign Countries, can (if they list to confess it) be good witnesses of the
reproaches wherewith we are taxed. Yea, which worse is, often times the common
voice attributes like imperfections both to the good and bad. I am ashamed to
write what I have heard, even of such as are very modest, who spoke rather of
compassion then reproach. Let us consider how many kingdoms have through far
less disorders then ours been destroyed. And since God through his patience
does yet give us space to rise again, let us not let slip occasion, but
speedely take hold thereof, least our ingratitude and negligence procure the
taking of those remedies from us which we may have despised. In the mean time
let us not faint, for I suppose there is no Estate in Christendom, that yet
has better matter then we, but it is now so mixed together, as if a man should
make a mangle of Diamonds, Rubies, Iron, Lead, Gold, Silver, Marble, Brasill,
Pearl, Corrall, Tyle and Slate. But each thing being reduced into order and
applied to his own use, the inferior matter would serve to make most
beautiful and excellent works, wherein the superior being gathered together
and adjoined, would also shine as most rich ornaments. God who has preserved
our ancestors from so many destructions, and given power and counsel to our
Kings in their greatest extremities, vouchsafe to defend us from the mischiefs
which threaten us, and increase the virtues of our King, and grant him grace
to be the restorer of his kingdom.

The second Discourse.
That by Concord small things do increase, and by discord great things do
decay.

THis most excellent sentence, so common among many nations, and which
experience has so often taught to be true, The notable saying of the Pagan
Micipsa ought to waken those that are, or ought to be best instructed.
was heretofore alleged by one Micipsa a King of Numidia, who lying upon this
death bed taught his children that the most sovereign mean to preserve
themselves and the Realm which he left them, consisted in the observation of
this rule. Himself lived many years in peace and prosperity, ordering his
doings with great discretion, and giving the world to understand that he knew
how to use such things as tended to the increase of an estate, and could
withal judge of those that might demiuish, the fame. As also that which ensued
his death was a great help to confirm that which he had said in his life
time* for his children either forgetting or contemning his instructions,
continued not long without debate among themselves, which bre^ their utter
ruin. In this example it were good to note some words spoken by this King
before he pronounced this sentence, as Salust reports. I leave unto you,
says he to his children, a Realm both strong and steadfast, if you be good,
but very weak if you be bad: for by concord do small things increase, and by
discord do they run into decay. Wherein his intent was to show that of
goodness (that is of virtue) proceeds Concord, and thence prosperity: and
contrariwise of vice grows hatred, of hatred discord, and so destruction.
This deserves to be considered: to the end not to be The consideration of
this sentence.
ignorant in the causes that breed goodly effects, neither in such as engender
the contrary. Truly I cannot but wonder of the knowledge that the heathen had
of many good rules, which carefully put in practice do greatly help man's
life, wherein also they have revealed their wisdom: notwithstanding, me
thinks that to the end well to know wherein the perfection of virtue does
consist, we ought not so much to depend upon the^, as to seek it in the
wisdom of God from whence all other barbarous and profane nations have from
time to time collected some small parcels, which breed light to their
understandings and beauty to their works. There shall we find the sovereign
concord to be the same which we ought to hold with God; for the man that cares
not for the contrarying of him, can hardly agree with men in any thing yt
reason (which ought to be his guide) commands. But for yt the discourse of
this point apperteyneth rather to the Deuines then to a politic man, I will
hold my peace, notwithstanding I think yt the consideration of supeeriour
matters does greatly avail to ye displaying of the inferior.

We shall not, as I think, need many words to declare what What concord is.
Concord is, which resembles not other liberal arts or sciences, whereof
few men have knowledge: for it is very common, neither is there any but may
make some trial thereof. We may in few words say that it is a commendable
affection which binds and strictly joins us with our like in all necessary
and honest duties. Without such consent it were very hard for any societies,
either great or small, long to continue, by reason of those contrarieties,
which as naturally do meet in those persons whereof the same be composed, and
would proceed to alteration, if by this holy virtue they were not ruled. If we
cast our view upon insensible creatures, we shall see that the agreement of the
elements among themselves does mainteyne It is dispersed all over the world.
the^ in their being, whereas discord overthrows the^. Of the te^perature of
the humors of man's body proceeds health; and of distemperature diseases. Yea
the fowls of the air, the beasts of the earth and the fishes of the sea
without an instinct of Concord natuturally imprinted in them, would destroy
each other. Far more the^ is man bound, man I say, who participateth in
reason, to have the use thereof in great recommendation: as knowing the
wonderful commodities that it brings, even to inferior creatures.

Before we come to entreat of public concord, we will speak The kinds
thereof, and first of the domestical.
a little of the domestical: which is as it were an apprentiship and step
toward the other, as also it is to be presumed yt he which shall have duly
practiced it in particular matters, will take a delight to use it in such as
are general. And this ought greatly to induce householders very carefully to
have an eye yt it bear sway in their houses, to the end their children, who
are the citizens that they leave to their commonwelth, may in time be
accustomed to reject all such Upon what considerations it is founded.
vain contentions as may dispose their minds to perturbe it. Howbeit,
peradventure the respect of their own commodity will further urge them to the
maintenance thereof. For unless it be some few overthwart persons (as we
term them) all others can sufficiently feel the fruit that comes of it.
And admit that families be composed of sundry persons, some to command,
others to obey, yet must there be no respect to exempt one more then another
from the use of this virtue. The master and mistress Of Domestical concord.
of the house must have it written in their hearts, and show it forth by their
gentle and moderate commandments. The children and servants each in his
degree by free and voluntary obedience, are to show themselves touched with
the same affection. It is requisite for brethren and sisters, which be to live
a certain space together, to observe an honest equality between themselves,
and yet deferring so much as shall be requisite unto him that has the
privilege of eldership: for through such mutual concord families do flourish.
And what person is well borne that rejoices not in the view of such goodly
examples? This moved David to say: Oh how happy a thing it is, and joyful
for to see
Brethren together fast to hold the band of amity. Of Civil concord.



This may be applied as well to great societies as unto small domestical
assemblies. For that which is convenient to the one, is also convenient to the
other, in respect of the similitude between the whole and the parts. But order
requires that we begin first to instruct by the smaller things: whereby are
we to learn, that since honest men do so delight to see union mainteyned
either in family or city, they will take much more pleasure in putting it in
practice: because there is more pleasure in action then in contemplation only,
especially when it is of it self approved and of others commended.

After ye pleasure follows yt profit: for it ordinarily falls out Of the
profit and pleasure that it breeds.
that those houses wherein concord does bear sway, do increase, and that
increase is the second thing that householders should reach unto, as to live
well, is the first. No man can deny but industry and diligence are the two
most necessary instruments to atteyne to wealth. And yet may we say the same
to be unfruitful in whatsoever company where discord takes hold: even as in
a Similitude.
Galley the labor of the slaves were to no purpose, if half should row one
way and half another: but when all with one mind and at one time hale toward
one self port, the navigations is performed. I will not search any examples in
antiquity to prove this Example in general.
my saying, because even at this instant we see enough before our eyes.
Namely, many families, as well of Gentry and Citizens, as of Husbandmen and
Farmers overthrown with discord, and many also enriched through the good
concord of kinsemen. Notwithstanding, to this purpose I cannot ouership one
notable example mentioned by Liuie, which although it be not practiseable in A
particular example.
this our corrupted world, yet is it meet to be considered. It is of a
certain Roman that kept in his own house sixteen of his children, all
married, and their families, who lived together a long time in perfect peace and
amity, and increased their substance. Which are effects in truth worthy
Christians rather then Paynims.

This when I do consider, I am ashamed to see that a man's child cannot in
these days be a week married, but he must have Defaults in the concord
required in us.
his stable a part and forsake his fathers house, to go build (as he
imagines) some new Monarchy in another place. And the cause of such
separations is, because men either cannot, or will not live in concord. I once
heard one say that he knew three gentlemen that after their fathers decease
kept house together, holding their goods in common, which they mightily
increased, and never parted household till their children were married, and
instructed in this excellent doctrine of union through their long practice. And
this I thought good to set down, not so much to induce others to do better, as
to stir the^ up by the consideration of difficult things to employe
themselves in such as are easy. I think there be few but will commend this
goodly kind of life; but peradventure there may be many that will contemn such
increase of goods as come so slowly: because in these days we see them come in
so suddenly. But say they what they will, yet ought we not to order things
according to present covetousness and confusions. Rather should they be
guided by reason, and after the similitude of natural order which keeps
measure and time, for those are the just ways, and for the most part such as
be so forward, are accompanied with some injustice.

Moreover, we must set no more by riches then by a good name, The means to
mainteyne concord.
and that does he get that bears himself modestly and in all facility among
his equals: for thereby do men judge that those minds that are so well disposed
in small matters cannot be badly bent in great. As also it is to be presumed
that he which can well agree with his father, will not greatly disagree with
his Kings commandments, also that he that can live peaceably with his brethren
will not lightly fall out with his companions: or that can submit him self to
domestical customs, will obey public laws. Has it not been seen that
out of small families, such persons have been chosen as have been thought meet
to appease the controversies of a whole state, because of the good concord of
their own houses? There be examples enowe of time past, and even now may we
find some small experiences. But in my opinion this is enough concerning the
fruits that arise of domestical concord. For there are but few but know
that it brings great.

Now will I enter into a larger field and discourse upon the public Of
public concord.
concord, which is so necessary for the helping of our poor France, which
through the banishment thereof is almost rent in pieces, that me think all good
men should bend their whole vows and endeavors to the calling of it back
again. And when we shall have showed how other estates are thereby increased
and redressed, men will be far the more affectionate to put it in execution.
Plato the Philosopher says, that the greatest mischief that can befall any
city is sedition, which is no other but discord. Whereof it follows A
sentence.
that concord, being the contrary must needs be a great benefit to them that
enjoy it. Likewise it is impossible to thrive by their commodities, before
this foundation be laid: yea we see that the greater plenty of power, wealth,
and ability that is in a state, if this good temperature be away, is but
matter of greater ruin. Some wise men in old time knowing this, did use to
send to such of their friends as had the government of commonwelths a sheafe A
notable Emblem.
of Arrows bound together, to the end to admonish them that as these so small
pieces of brittle ware being knit together made a strong body not easily
shaken, so if the minds of their people consented well together and were
united in themselves, yt which of it self were but weak, would become mighty
and strong. The experience here of has been seen in the Grecians, who so long
as they agreed among themselves, did withstand the power of the Kings of
Persia, which was incomparable, for sometimes they brought in nauies of 1000.
sail, an other time by land 600000. men, who all were overcome by small armies
of such men as loved like brethren, and which accounted ye bondage of their
fellow countrime^ as their own, so good concurrence was there between the^:
and so long as this continued they mainteyned themselves in credit and
felicity. Plutarke reports, that before the time of Aratus, all the towns
of the Achaians Another example.
were of small account, each trafiking and doing their affairs apart, and
taking no care but for themselves: but after he had joined Plut. in the life of
Aratus.
them together, and united sundry other small Towns unto them by perfect
concord, they grew into a great and mighty body in Peloponessus, and
oftentimes did resist such tyrants as sought to usurp their liberty, whereby
they became terrible to their neighbors.

But if any man imagine that examples taken of Monarchies A third example.
would better fit our estate, to the end to content him, I will also aleadge
some such. The first of the kingdom of the Lacedaemonians, wherein Licurgus
established most excellent discipline, which among all other things commended
prowess and concord: whereof also a long time they continued so good
obseruers, that their City seemed to be but one sole family, so steadfast and
good was their union. By that did they increase and purchase such fame, that
all Greece did oftentimes submit it self to their conduct and judgment. Many
other might likewise be hereunto added, as well Romans as other Nations,
whereof such as use the reading of histories cannot be to seek, and therefore
it were but a superfluous repetition here to heap them up again. Only it
shall suffice to remember that such Monarchiall estates have from time to time
increased as much by concord as by any other virtue that ever they put in
practice. And although the Romans in the days of their first kings did
sometimes disagree with their next neighbors, yet do we see that afterward
they grew into most firm accord, as with the Sabins, for of the two Nations
they became but one people, but far better ordered and a great deal more
mighty than they were before.

From this antiquity let us descend even to our days, and unto A fourth
example.
that which is evident in our own eyes, to the end thereby to be the better
persuaded, and consider the state of the Suitzers, for that may be unto us a
clear spectacle wherein we shall perceive the praise of concord and fruits
thereof. The histories do testify that the three little cantons, Schuitz, Vri
and Vnderualde, whose habitations are only in villages, were the first authors
of that their union, whereinto the rest are since incorporated. Which ever
since has so well continued, that at this day their body seems as it were
invincible. I must also commend the concord of Germany, which, notwithstanding
their controversies in religion and strife for dignities, has never altered,
and in deed it now flourishes as much as ever it did.

What excuse then may we allege, we Frenchmen, as a sufficient discharge
for that we have so long fought one with another, considering how other nations
can uphold themselves in conford and amity? Truly it is time we should take
instructions for remedy of our calamities by the felicity of others, to the
end to make us seek means to return into that which now has forsaken us.
The way is already found, if we would put it in practice. That is to grow
into concord among our selves, for so shall we rise again and increase.

I know some will say that it is but a discourse, to affirm that Objection
against the former counsel and advice. Answer.
France grew great by concord, for their increase proceeded of the Frenchmens
valiancie. Whereto I answer, that I will not deny but that force together
with justice and good order were causes of the increase, yet must they needs
confess that if these mighty pillars had not had for their base and
foundation, mutual concord between the king, the nobility, and the commons,
it must needs have yielded under the weight of so great a burden. Our first
ancestors did sufficiently show forth the profit that therein Confirmation
by the examples of the ancient Frenchmen.
they reaped, in that they knew how to use that virtue: For they were many
diverse nations, inhabiting the banks of lesser Germany: who not having felt
the Romans bondage, neither willing in any case to try it, did assemble and
gather themselves together, and named themselves Francons. Then they planted
themselves along the Rhine, from whence they stepped into Gaul which they
subdued. Thus has a certain learned man written in a treatise of the
original of the Frenchmen, which opinion I think to be more likely than that
which the other writers report.

Hereby it appears that concord has been one of the chief causes that of
many Nations we were made but one: and if we will farther mark the increasing
thereof, we shall find that same occasion has likewise stood them in great
stead. This do I speak in general, because the particular effects which
have from time to time ensued, would be over painful to rehearse, and may
likewise be troublesome. Only I will by* the way report the blessed concord
that was among Another example.
the French nation in the time of king Jews the twelfth, Frances the great,
and Henry the well-beloved, which continued above sixty years, not so much to
refresh the remembrance of diverse yet living, who have seen the most part of
that time, as for the instruction of such as have been only beholders of the
last disorders, to the end to labor them the more earnestly to long after a
good union of hearts, as yet so strangely alienated. It is most evident that
all these three Princes did greatly love their people, especially Jews: and
those charges that he laid upon them proceeded through the urgent necessity
of wars, notwithstanding some have been but rashly enterprised.

The like or rather more was their love showed to their nobility, as well in
respect of the access and familiarity that they allowed them about their
persons, as also of the worthy rewards bestowed upon them. Likewise we never
saw virtue in greater estimation, than at that time. But what obedience,
honor, and affection, did as well the nobility as communaltie than bear to
their kings? More could not have been wished: for they were never weary of
sounding forth their praises, beholding of their persons, and hazarding
themselves to all dangers for them.

Then if we would but consider the accord that was among the said subjects,
what should we do but wonder how they could since so far disagree? To be
brief, that all parts of this mighty Realm did together yield so pleasant
a harmony, as every man was glad to dwell therein, yea, even strangers
flocked to participate in that felicity. And notwithstanding in the time of
King H. the second many things began to alter, yet did virtue bear such
swaie, that the outward form at the least seemed fair.

After this manner did the Frenchmen live until the year 1560. when Concord
began to fly from among them, after whose departure virtue and justice have
not so much showed themselves abroad, nay they are gone to soiourne hear and
there among their private friends, where they assure themselves of better
entertainment. This, in my opinion, may suffice to prove that through concord
small things do increase, and great are maintained and kept.

Now let us compare that time with this which we now so often Beginning of the
discords of France.
have trial of, and we shall see the difference to be no less than between a
fair bright Sun shine day in the spring time, wherein nothing appears but
flowers and green grass: and a foul Winters day in the which the clouds and
tempests darkning the air, nothing is to be seen but ye grass deprived of
her ornaments, seeming to be white with frosts and snow. But like as by the
order which God has established in nature, after foul weather comes fair,
so are we to hope for a more fortunate world after this, when once we have
through a holy conversion appeared his wrath.

If a man enter into speech hereof by and by a number come in The original
thereof.
and say. Oh, what is it that has troubled and divided us, but diversities of
opinions in Religion? Likewise there are others which on the other side do
reply that it is not the nature of Religion to bring forth such and so many
calamities: but rather that the cause is to be impeuted to the malice of man,
who loves darkness more than light, and to their ignorance that think that such
contrarieties should be decided by fire and sword, when in deed they ought to
be determined by gentleness and clemency.

I would think that experience should make us wise in this difficulty, Fruits
of discord.
which shall nothing let me from prosecuting my purpose and declaring what
discord does engender. Neither will I go to seek examples hereof in foren
lands, neither in times past, but in our own Country and age: for if any man
be desirous to behold the image of all mischief, he need not seek farther
than into France, where this tragedy have been played, the actors whereof
being Frenchmen, who ever since they were sezed of this cursed passion, do
never stick to hurt each other. And like as a continual fever weakneth and
pulls down the strongest body: even so the continuance of our wars has
almost abated and deprived the Realm of the principal of her greatness,
mightiness, and beauty. Wherein appears the truth of the other part of the
sentence already alleged, viz. that by descord great things do perish and
run into decaie. Now notwithstanding hatred ordinarily ingendereth discord,
Diverse effects according to the diversity of the French men's passions tossed
with discord.
where amity for the most part bridgeth forth concord, yet has not this been
the cause that has driven many of those that are entered hereinto: but rather
some have been urged by zeal, others by persecution, and oaths by some duty
that they ow to other men. As also we have seen many diverse effects, some
more gentle than other some, whereby the authors of the same deserve
commendation in that they have in these unmerciful calamities borne themselves
more moderatlie. I dare not rehearse the horrible cruelties committed in all
places (notwithstanding some have felt them more than others) for the
remembrance of them cannot but either breed great horror or exasperation.
Yea, some such have been wrought as may be termed to be against nature: as
when some have delivered their nearest kinsmen to the slaughter, or dipped
their hands in the blood of their own friends. I think if any man had in
the days of king Frances the first foretold those things that have since
happened, he had been slame as a spreader of lies, and yet have our beastly
minds been such, that we have even extolled and magnified the prodigious
actions which blind rage has committed. I beseech God we never fall again
into the like abominable gulf of inhumanitie.

Thucidides a wise hystoriographer does briefly describe the The image of
France in the state of old Greece. Thucid. li. 8.
manner how the Grecians behaved themselves in their civil wars. Whose
saying I have thought good here to insert, to the end we may compare the
forepassed mischiefs with those of our time, thereby to discern in which of
these times malice prevailed most. After it was known (says he) that any
riot was committed in one place, others waxed bold to do worse, to the end to
work some novelty, to show themselves either more diligent than others, or
else more insolent and hot in revenge: and all the mischiefs that they
committed did they disguise with gaie titles, as tearming rashness,
magnanimity: modesty, cowardlinesse: headlong indignation, manhood and
boldness: counsel and wise deliberation, cloked dastardlynesse: Thus he that
showed himself most furious, was accounted a loyal friend, and he that
reproved him ran into suspicion. If any one of the contrary faction
propounded any thing that were good and honest, it was not liked of* but if
they were able indeed to impugn it, they had rather be revenged, than not to
be wronged. If by solemn oath they made any atonement, the same lasted until
the one see himself the stronger, whereby he might violate, infringe, and
overcome it through malice. Yea, he reports much more, which to avoid
tediousness I omit.

Now therefore would I know whether we have not been equal with the Grecians in
like actions? I think that none dare deny it: but that we have surmounted
them in cruelty it is most evident. Such Frenchmen as after so many ruins
shall remain, may justly make that exclamation that Agesilaus made for
Greece. O poor France how unhappy art thou, that have with thy own hands
slain so many of thy good men, as might have sufficed in a day of battle,
to root out all thy proudest enemies, which seek thy overthrow: Truly we
must confess that discord has brought not one sickness but many, and those
most great and dangerous.

And because there be some, who as it seems, would willingly cloak and
conceal some, and have us to counterfeit health, I How many calamities discord
has brought into France.
have thought good to set before their eyes that which a writer of our time,
entreating of our miseries, has set down: for any thing that tends to good
instructions ought to be read and read again in many places. Mark therefore
his words: Public discord has ingendered among us irreuerence to God,
disobedience to Magistrates, corruption of manners, alteration of laws,
contempt of justice, and the decaie of learning and knowledge. It has bred
horrible vengeance, ignorance of consanguinitie and kindred, oblivion of
amity, violence, spoil, wasting of Countries, sacking of towns, burning of
houses, confiscations, theft, banishment, proscription, cruel destruction,
change of government, with infinite other excesses and intolerable miseries,
pitiful to the eye, and woeful to the ear. I think that he says but the
truth, and as all good friends ought to do, to the end we should not account
our wounds, which are most dangerous, and as it were mortal, to be of so light
cure and so leave the sovereign medicines, and use such as be but slight and
frivolous. Neither do I hear report Why these mischiefs are here set down.
all these injuries, to the end to awaken the wrath of those that have
sustained them, for I have a far other meaning, which tends rather to root
out the remembrance of them all: but I do it only to the end that seeing our
shame, we might be ashamed. Which is as much as if a man should show to the
father his child sprauling on the ground al bloody with the stripes that in his
rage he had given him, and so say to him. Now that you are pacified look
upon the goodly piece of work that you did in your choler: for now you may see
that you have endomaged your self. Were not this enough to make him ashamed,
and withal, to withold his hands another time.

Now the better to lay open the mischiefs arising of dissension, I might
allege the examples of that that has fallen out in Italy, in the time of the
factions of the Guelphs and Gibelines: What should teach France the
consideration of her evil wars.
in England in the wars between the two houses of Lancaster and York, and
in Germany when the Popes maintained their factions against the Emperors: But
all this is not able to teach us so much as the least war of six that we
have had experience of already: because that the things that a man sees,
feels, and is employed in, do make a far deeper impression in the mind
than the simple bare rehearsal of things pase. And this shall make me to
contain my self in the bounds of our own Country: and that the rather
because we must of necessity ascend even unto the most ancient times to find
like monsters as are two of those that have been formed in our divisions. Whose
names if any man desires to Monsters bred in civil wars
know, the one is called Murder, the other Covetousness. The first can never
be satisfied with blood, neither the other with riches. So as notwithstanding
the peace that has been often concluded, has somewhat brideled them, yet have
they still entrapped somewhat secretly. I think that during the horrible
proscriptions of Silla, and slaughters of Marius, the like were bredde at Rome
and devoured the Romans, where ours were no sooner conceived, but they were
borne in France, and since have spoiled the Frenchmen. Thus is Rome the fatal
shop wherein are forged the swords of slaughter that have already shed so
much blood, where also are hammered the counsels of destruction which have been
most miserable unto those that have followed them.

The remembrance of all this filthiness and disorders ought to A necessary
and profitable exhortation.
breed a great compunction in our hearts, and prick us forward to embrace
virtue which heretofore has been so familiar with us, neither is it to be
doubted but that if we would set our affections thereupon, we should shortly
see it in as great honor all about, as ever it was: for notwithstanding the
Frenchman does go astraie, yet at length he returns to his way, and the true
means to return is by calling again our guide, whose name is Concord she will
set us in our right path where we shall find Piety and Justice ready to
receive us gladly: but withal let us take heed of leaving her least we go
astraie again: for if we follow her she will lead us aright* and soon into
the goodly and large fields of plenty and felicity, where honor and
contentation, who do there make their aboade, shall receive and fest us
worthily.

This will some man say is soon said, but not so soon done. Whereto I answer
yt the effect is difficult, but to them only that do themselves lay ye block
in ye way, as it were by a volu^tary contemning of ye counsels yt reason
offreth the^, coveting rather to ylease themselves in such unruly appetites as
feed only upon discords, contentions and hatred: howbeit we must remember
that all these vehement rages and practices of revenge (the true nurses of
discord) are Whether it be a hard matter to bring peace again into France.
no other but (as the Philosophers term them) defectes of the mindewhich
suffering it self to be lead by the senses, is moved at every chance that
happens: whereas it ought constantly to bear whatsoever in honesty it may
or should, to the end that by preservation of order and tranquillity, the
natural course of man's life may with more facility be performed.

I have many times noted, that after we had put up our swords into our sheaths
and began to be conversant again one with another, especially with our parents
and friends of the contrary party, we did together bewail the miserable
time past, wherein the one might have chanced to have slain the other, whose
life he had holden as dear as his own, and wished that in all our days we
might never have the like calamities again. Then haunting with such as we had
less acquaintance of, we light upon mildness and a mislyke of passed furies.
A third manner of men did we sometimes meet withal, which were the most
violente of every faction, and yet did we find in them far more moderation
than we could imagine. Then said I to my self: Must it not needs be that
there is some fury hidden in the bowels of France that thus intangleth us?
since so many preparations to unity and concord cannot any whit profit us, or
bring us to the inioying of this felicity? Yet was I not quite out of hope,
but that at length we might attain thereto.

All this made and yet makes me to imagine that want of visiting The means
how to reduce concord and expel dissension.
each other when occasion requires, makes us to grow savage one to another:
for in absence we set before our eyes only the iniuryes passed, whereto
comes report, suspicion and slander, so that though one were as white as
snow, yet by such blemishes he may be made as red as scarlet. We ought likewise
to consider that notwithstanding our wars have continued above 24. years,
yet do we still return to our Fathers houses, and necessity compels us to
be conversant again, not with our friends only, but also with those that have
been our sharpest enemies. Wherefore it is requisite that we resolve our
selves to mildness, and since we are to live and die, not among the Italians
or Spaniards, but even in the same land wherein we are ingendered, let us
endeavor to do it peaceably, rather than by languishing in tumults to be
replenished with terror.

Some man may object that since mistrust is one of the principal Whether we
must bu^y all diffidence.
sinowes of wisdom, it must not in so dangerous a time be laid under foot.
Truly my counsel is not altogether to bury it, but rather to leave it to
every man's liberty to use it conveniently as occasion may require: howbeit
I would have the occasions to be such as may bear some apparaunt likelyhoode
of truth, and not to rest upon every trifling imagination, until that time
have purged the hearts from rancour, and blotted inueterate hatred out of
remembrance. For we must think: sirst that in the end men will be weerie of
evil willing and of evil doing, because those things are of themselves
tedious and noisome.

Secondly, that some will conuerwhen any small spiritual motion touch them, and
make them know that it is a most hard matter for the^ to love God whom they
see not, so long as they abhor those that bear his image, and whom they
see. For this cause must we not despair of any, unless in them appears
some evident tokens of malice, and rooted cruelty conjoined with obstinacy.
Of whom we may say, The Physician has given them over, their familiarity is
unfruitful, yea, even dangerous.

Before we end this discourse, we must also speak somewhat of counterfaite
concord, and peradventure it will not hurt to set Of false concord.
down some warnings upon that point, to the end men be not abused, as they
that for want of waying and well looking to, do take counterfaite coin for
good gold, for in this so corrupt a world wherein we live, we must look very
near upon those things that bear a fair show: because that under such a
cloak mischief for the most part lurketh. When therefore we chance to see
a good agreement between some, with whom we are requested to enter society,
let us diligently enquire whether the end whereunto either of them does tend
be good or badde. For if it be bad, then may we conclude that agreement to
be false, and so consequently of small continuance and to be eschued. This may
better be made manifest by examples.

The first therefore that I will begin withal shall be of land Examples.
thieves and robbers, and of sea rouers. A man would sometimes think such a
fraternity and steadfast amity to be between them, as in his opinion there
could none be more excellent. But if we come to considerwhat these people be,
who for the satisfieng of their perverse desires, do confederate themselves
together, and trouble public tranquillity with their murder and spoils, in
respect whereof they are feared and hated as mortal plagues, what shall we
judge of their union, but that it is a perilous conspiracy? Lewd and
licentions women, that dwell even by pernission in sundry Cities, especially
in Italy and Spain, are so familiarly acquainted together, that it seems
their league to be of perpetual continuance. But so far is it from being
accounted concord, that in deed it is rather discord, cimented together with
poison: and I believe that almost all men condemn such confederacy, and would
be loath the pleasant name of concord should be blemished in such societies.
Notwithstanding still there be some that let themselves be caught in such
snares. Thus much concerning those persons that have embraced infamous kinds of
life, who both by diuiue and humane Offurious concord.
constitutio^s are to be reproved. There is another kind of concord which is
furious, as appeared among the peasants in Germany, who in the year 1525.
armed themselves to sack the gentry and spoil the rich. They lived one with
another as brethren, yea, they died courageously together, notwithstanding
their proceedings and purposes were abominable. In this rank I thought good to
place also the confederacy of the mad Anabaptists of Munster, who assembled to
the number of nine or ten thousand persons. Hear will I likewise add the
seditious assotiations of whole communalties or part of the same, for they to
the end to cut their throats that displease the^, do together, as did yt
Sicilians agree against ye Frenchmen, who for ye punishing peradventure of 500.
guilty persons slew 5000. innoce^ts: with such people we are rather to have
discord, tha^ concord: because their union aims at nothing but the alteration
of lawful societies. I doubt not but if some good Father being affectionate to
his convent, should read this, he would by and by say: It had not been amiss
among these to have placed the Lutherans and Huguenotes, whose whole agreement
tends only to the destruction of our holy orders. To this will I answer.
Sir, I have forborne that, because there is no reason to place those that are
not co^uict among the condemned: but if you with some of your brotherhoode will
dispute with them, and by good and forcible reasons of divinity confute them,
when you have so done I will obey you, but as your friend I counsel you not to
do it for fear least Marots words prove true, viz. That never any Papist
spoke well of Luther: also if they should come to dispute, one of them must
needs prove an heretic. For if you should chance to be overcome, you might
well enough give over the wallet, because no man would give you ought. But the
best both for you and them, is to live at the least in politic concord, and to
content your selves with the mischiefs that you have done each to other,
considering that man's life is of it self miserable enough, though thereto you
add no new miseries.

Now let us speak of those that have attained such a degree of abuse in their
lawful vocations, that we may say of them, that under Of tyranous concord.
the authority of laws and government, they pervert all equity and justice.
Of such assemblies we find many kinds, whereof to avoid superfluous
rehearsal, I will note only some of the chiefest. The first is a framed
tyranny, wherein the public actions do tend to strengthening of it with all
men's harms. In this we must imagine two sorts of men, namely, the tyrannizers
and the tyrannized. Concerning the last, inasmuch as force ever maistreth them,
they must hu^mbly stoop, waiting until it please God to raise up lawful means
of remedy. But for the first who live in so joyful and pompeous union
together, I do not think it either meet or honest to join with them, or to
participate with them in sacking, murdering, and robbing the innocent: much
better it were to eschew such concord. But who be those that have so lived* The
hystories do tell us and furnish us of examples enough both old and new. I will
content my self with the alleging of one only, which is of Caesar Borgia,
Examples.
Pope Alexander the 6. his bastard son, who in horrible wickedness was
equal with the tyrants of old time, who also is the goodly pattern that
Machiauel propounds to teach Princes how to rule. This man replenished all
Italy with blood and vice, and found but over many defenders and adherents to
assist him. Truly that man had but a slender discretion and less virtue, that
could have sought to live in such a tyrannous concord. Here might we place a
Democratie, utterly depraved, as was the Athenians when Solo^ was condemned to
death. Likewise a corrupt Oligarchie as also was ye Athenians, when the
Lacedaemonians established ye 30 governors, who afterward grew to be tyrants and
murdered all the best citizens. Next will I hear set down the Senates and
tribunal seats of justice, most part of the Senators whereof have consented to
co^mic al iniquity. Such a one did ye Roman Senate resemble in ye time of
Nero: for all such detestable cruelties as he practiced (yea, even when he slew
his mother) did they universally a(...)e, accounting them as works of piety,
and healthsome to the common wealth. But had it not rather been impiety for a
man to have labored to be of their order, and so to have profaned himself in
such a false concord*

Now will I speak somewhat of men of war in a common Insolent concord,
wealth, who are as it were the guard thereof, when passing the bounds of
discipline, they do confederate and unite themselves together, and so taking
upon them the spoil and robbing of the people, upon malice rather than
necessity, do destroy all. Of this union a man may say, that the greater it
is, the more noisome and hurtful.

For the last example of false concord, which also is no less peruitious than
the first, I will set down the same that was among Of heretical and
scismatical concord.
the Bishops assembled at two or three Councels, holden under the children of
Constantine the great. For the said Bishops being in manner al Arrians, or men
infected with some other heresy, did by a common consent condemn the Council
of Nice (which was the most notable that ever was holden) and those that
continued the soundest in points of religion. That which was concluded in their
assemblies was a plain conspiracy against the truth, and no holy union of
wills, notwithstanding they shrouded themselves under that beautiful title.

Of all which matters here deducted, every man, especially they that rashly do
ship themselves simply into all ports, may learn not The conclusion of this
discourse.
to suffer themselves to be circu^uented with outward shows, which for the most
part entangle the wisest, that hereafter they be not forced to use this phrase,
I thought it not. We are also to note that notwithstanding those that unite
themselves in manner before mentioned, are sometimes of opinion to persevere a
long time, they nevertheless do deceive themselves, because evil things be of
such a nature, that many times when they are grown to a certain degree and not
governed with any thing that good is, they (...) turn to overthrow Why true
concord does continue.
one another. But the concord that continues, is the same that is between
honest men, which also proceeds from the motions of an upright reason,
illuminated from above, which makes ^s affectionate one to another: for being
fed with so perfect a radical humor, it remains ever quick and fresh; as
the trees that are planted along the rivers sides. God grant therefore yt we,
even we Frenchmen may have the same continually lodged in our hearts, to the
end to help to restore our Country to her ancient beauty.

The third Discourse.
Of the inconstancy whereby many do use to hate, condemn, and detest their
neighbors, because of their contrarieties in religion.

THE only disputations holden about Of pretended zeal wherewith they cover
hatred and malice.
this matter in diverse Countries within these few years, were sufficient to
engender great hatred, yea, even among nearest kindred. But when to the
contention of words they join deeds, (from whence have proceeded infinite
injuries) then are the passions coroborated, and many men's hearts so poisoned,
that in the time of peace they cannot satisfy their hatred against such as
agree not unto their religious opinions, neither their cruel revenge in the
time of war. In this matter when we come to demand what cause has and yet
does engender and bring forth these extremities, many do sufficiently declare
that it is the zeal that every one bears to his own religion, that causes
them to be persuaded that all doctrine thereto repugnant is spotted with
impiety, and therefore they abhor both it and all that profess it. Now to
the end not to stumble in this so rough a way, I have thought it nothing
amiss to open the signification of the word Zeal, as also to show the fruits
that should proceed from so good a tree. Zeal Definition of zeal.
in my opinion, is an ardent affection of the soul which tends to the honor
of God and the salvation of our neighbor, whereof it also follows, that it
is offended when he is dishonored. Moses Exodus 31.
and Saint Paul did greatly declare the zeal that they did bear, even to
Gods people, when the one of them said, Lord forgive them this trespass,
otherwise blot me out of the book which thou have written. And Saint Paul,
who wished to be separated from God, that his Romans 9.
brethren according to the flesh, who glorified God might be brought into the
way of salvation. By these speeches, which some take to be excessive, we are
to understand the vehemency of their affection. Likewise may Helias and
Phinees be unto us examples of the wrath that some conceive when they see
impiety and wickedness to abound. F^^ it moved the one of them to put to
death all the 1. King. 18
Prophettes of Baal, and the other Zambry and the Madianite. Number. 25.
And such zeal is commended in the holy Scriptures, because it was guided by
the wisdom of God.

In this miserable world wherein we now live are there few to be found that
imitate Moses and Paul, either that follow the examples Abuse of the former
examples, and the means to amend them.
of Helias and Phinehes, notwithstanding many would use the same for a cloak
to their violent passions, as peradventure not considering that those were
particular actions, proceeding of inward motions, or express commandments,
and so not to be made consequents. Moreover, those days had especial reasons
for such kind of judgments, which cannot well agree with ours. But the law
of Charity which is perpetual and the foundation of the two aforenamed wishes
ought to reduce us to the same practice, and so might we aduowe our zeal to be
good, when leaning upon the said Charity it is guided by knowledge, which are
the two principal marks to discern the true zeal from the false. The
Apostle Saint Paul teaches us to eschew that which is without knowledge, for
being destitnte thereof, it aims rather at revenge, than Charity, as in
himself it appeared when he assisted at the death of Romans 10. Act. 7.
Steven.

Now will it be easy for us to know the marks of false zeal, if we do but
consider of the vices that are opposite to the aforesaid Marks of false zeal.
virtues, which are Ignorance, (wherewith malice is oftentimes mixed) and
hatred of our neighbor: for whosoever diligently observes not those
differences, the same do run into error. Of these affections, which every
one attributes to piety, are ingendered the judgments that we make of our
neighbors, whereof the most part are wonderful rash: for many there are who
seeing some one that consent not with them in points of religion, do not
only The iniquity of foreiudgements.
charge him that he walks in error, but also imediatly account him a
profane and wicked man. This opinion having once gotten hold in the mind, is
hard to be rooted out again, and is the cause of breach, as well of brotherly
love as of public concord. We must therefore take heed that in our selves
we conclude not so hastily upon the condemnation of those who^ we will not
vouchsafe to take leisure to know thoroughly. If we were to enquire whether a
horse or a dog were good or bad, we would have a time of trial before we
would judge, how much rather should we put that rule in practice concerning
men? otherwise we must make less account of them than of the said beasts. But
see how diverse do now govern themselves herein. If a man say to one, This man
is a Protestant, by and by he will answer, Then is he a wicked heretik. and
say to another, This man is a Papist, and he also will say, Then is he naught.
And why do you thus reprove him? Because say they, his religion is contrary
to ours. Truly this readiness is over ready.

Well, whether this judgment may be false or true, yet are we Of the
moderation that is to be observed in foreiudgeme^ts
in the mean time to use great moderation in both. When he that is blinded
with ignorance shall condeinne the true doctrine and the maintayners thereof,
his zeal shall not so justify him, that he may not justly be accused to be a
prophaner of the truth, neither will it any whit avail him to allege his good
intent, because the same can not alter the nature of things. But is there not
matter sufficient, not to laugh at, but even to bewail him, who being
spiritually blind, does not so think, but rather notes the cleerest sighted of
blindness? Well may it be said unto him, Thou Phisitio^ that iudgest thy neighbor
to be sick, and in stead of seeking to cure him, would that he were knocked
on the head, enter into a little consideration of thy self, and thou shall
perceive that it is thou that do abou^d in diseases, and those most
dangerous. Think therefore thrice before thou say once to another: Thou art an
heretic. But in truth it is a word in these days Of the insolen cie of those
that call others heretics.
common in most men's mouths, and some there are from whom if we should take the
use of yt term, their beads from their girdles, and hatred from their
hearts, they would be as much astonished as a covetous wretch that has lost his
purse. And yer are these men less to be blamed than some that willingly do
err, in that they know the thing that they reject, not to be reprouable.
Before these last men's eyes will I set a saying of the Prophet Esaias, Cursed be
you that call evil good and good evil, or that make darkness light, or light
darkness: to the end so hard a sentence terryfieng their consciences Isay. 3
may withdraw them from iniquity to righteousness. Others there be also
which being well instructed, do nevertheless Of the insole^cie of some which
forget the duty of Charity.
grow into such arroganice, that to those that yet walk in the paths of
strange doctrine, they give ignominious names, and do greatly disdain them:
Whereby they show their own abuse of Charity which in liew of pride and
insolency, should be meek as Saint Paul says. It were rather their parts
to have compassion of them, with all gentleness to take them by the arms, and
by little and little, removing the veil that blinds their sight, to show
them the gulfes wherein they do inconsideratlie plonge and cast themselves
away. For it is horrible cruelty, seeing the souls in evident danger, to
curse the bodies. One thing there is that moves these men, namely, the
falsenesse of the doctrine, which in truth is to be condemned. But they
ouerskipping this consideration, do build their hatred upon the persons that
are deceived therein, and do never think that they may in time be lightened
and converted, as some of those were that consented to the death of Jesus
Christ, who afterward worshipped him as God, notwithstanding they had before
crucified him as an heretic and seditious person. Reason would we should
presume of our neighbor that he will rise rather than perish, unless we see
any evident tokens of hardness of heart in him. Yet do I not here mean that
he should be flattered in his imperfections, neither take away all place
from particular judgments A restraint of the former speches.
proceeding of a good conscience, because as well the one as the other would
be hurtful, for so shall I cover the disease that ought to be opened, to the
end to be the better cured. But let him that will judge keep himself within
the rules of charity. For it so falls out, that those which through
presumption do condeme others, God condemns by justice.

Other some of these inconsiderate zelators are of a very bad opinion. That
is, that they are persuaded, that those whose religion they have reproved in
themselves, are not to be accounted their An other dangerous foreiudgment of
zeal without knowledge.
neighbors, no more than the Turks or Tartarians, wherein they are grosely
deceived. And in case they were as diligent in reading the Scriptures, as they
are to cleave to the readiness of their passions, they would be of another
mind. For there should they find that the word neighbor stretches
indifferently to all men, because mankind is conjoined together with a sacred
bond of community, to the end that by that bond men should be stirred up to
love each other. It is enough therefore for any one to be our neighbor,
because he is a man. For it lies not in us to blot out common nature. And who
is he how barbarous so ever, that bears not the Who is our neighbor.
image of God printed in his soul, although it may be that it is almost
blotted out? And for this cause ought we among so many blemishes, and in so
noble a creature, still to consider the excellent mark that God has
imprinted, to the end we hold not that to be abominable which himself can
crown with his grace.

In old time the Pharisees violating the laws of nature, acco^^pted An old
error renewed in our days.
none for their neighbors but their kindred, friends or benefactors,
restrayning within that small number, the thing that should be common to all.
But Jesus Christ corrected their false interpretation by the example of the
Samaritaine that relieved the poor Jew whom he found wounded by the way, whom
also a Priest and a Leuite had denied of all mercy: thereby showing that every
one is bound to do good even to the unknown, also that he is our neighbor
that uses most humanity toward us. Besides that we are to note that in those
days there was greater enmity between the Jews and Samaritaines, then is in
these days between the Christians and Turks. How then will they excuse
themselves that with the only names of Catholic and Protestant are so
sharpened one against another, that they disaduowe each other to be their
neighbors? Yet are there some so bitter as to affirm that Answer to some
men's objections.
they have reason so to do: and if you ask them why, they will answer, that
he that is vowed to Satan is worthy all rigor and unworthy any favor. Oh
proud pecocke! what worse can thou say of a Caine or of same detestable
Sorcerer? Know thou not that it is written in the Epistle of Jude, that when
Michael the Archangell contended with the devil about the body of Moses he
durst not curse him, but said; The Lord reprove thee? For although he apply
this place to those that do maliciously backbite their superiors, yet may it
also be appropriated unto thee that do denounce eternal damnation against
thy like. Why is not thy implacable wrath satisfied when thou do imagine his
soul to be destinate to eternal torments? This should cause thee to pity
his body, as we do the transgressor that is condemned to be broken upon
the wheel. Correct thy cruelty, that thy self be not condemned.

Hereby do we see that the errors of the mind do enforce the Correction of
the former error.
hatred of the heart. But Jesus Christ does give us a far other lesson in that
notable sermon that he made to the Jews when he said unto them. You have heard
that it has been said, Thou shall love Mat. 5.
thy neighbor and hate thy enemy: But I say unto you. Do good to those that
hate you, and pray for them that scaunder and persecute you, that you may be
the children of your father that is in heaven. For if you love those that love
you, what reward is it? Do not the Publicanes even so? And if you salute your
brethren only, what singular thing do you. Do not the heathen the same? Be ye
therefore perfect, even as your father which is heaven is perfect. I think if
those men that are so hard hearted did often read these words, their stomachs
Confirmation of this correction.
would come down when they see the sovereign master command so holy
things, and that with such meekness. Since also himself speaking of the most
of them that crucified him said: Father forgive them, for they wot not what
they do: Let us at the least, setting before us this example, say for them
that do us no harm and to whom we wish no good, Father forgive us, for we
wot not Luke. 23.
what we do. All these hatreds whereto diverse do seek to lay some ground are
to say the truth, no other but Jewish dealings, that is to say, a subuertion of
the law of common charity through false destinctions agreeing with the law
of our own appetites.

I doubt not but some will be sorry that we should endeavor to Answer to
those that will not be restrained by the rule of christian charity.
reduce them to such meekness, therein peradventure resembling a certain
Abbot whose only felicity consisted in molesting all the world with law
matters, whom a French king utterly forbad that exercise: but he answered that
now he had not past forty matters, all which he would cease since his majesty
so straightly commanded him, nevertheless he besought him to leave him one
half dosen for his pastime and recreation. And so would they that we should
leave them some, upon whom to discharge a little of the abundance of their
choler. Howbeit, herein they deceive themselves: for God will not be content
with half obedience, but will have it perfect and altogether from the heart.
But they will replye that these be evangelical counsels, but no obligatorie
precepts. This is another starting hole dug out of the school of
Sophistry, and is of no value. Howbeit hereof it ensues not, that we must
quite bury up all hatred: but we ought so to guide it that it take no hold of
things prohibited. Such as abound in this passiion may find scope enough to
walk in, yea until they be weary. First they may discharge their stomachs
against the devils, who of all creatures are the worst, neither need they
fear to exceed therein. For we cannot too much de^est any thing that is so
repugnant to God. Next they may hate all and every the sins which sprout
forth in the world as grass in the meadows: because they be the stinges of
death. The same may they do to all impious doctrines, for that God by them is
forgotten and dishonored: The wicked likewise, generally considered, may be
somewhat abhorred, as those that alter and polute public societies, although
peeticulerly the rule of charity before mentioned be to be observed toward
them. But if any, having malice to sell, would seek any more familier or
ordinary subject to employe himself upon, I would say unto him. Friend, open
the closets of thy soul and of thy heart, peradventure if thou seek well,
thou may find matter enough whereon to exercise thy self, as ambition,
Against who^ we should exercise our hatred.
intemperance, pride, cruelty, injustice, ingratitude, lying, deceit, with
other vices: whereof thy self wilt be abashed. There stay thy self, for
hatred is the means to tame those monsters whom thou make as thou knew
not of, and which do diffame thee. So know that thy hatred shall be fruitful
and sweet, wherein pouring it forth upon thy neighbors, it breeds thee
hurt and trouble.

Like as those that be well taught, hating men's imperfections How we ought to
love our neighbors.
can nevertheless love them, even so is it meet that we should in like for
behave ourselves toward our like, and not utterly withdraw our love from their
persons, although we condemn their errors and wickedness: for many times
they do through grace change, and from their vnpure ways come to those that
be pure. This charity whereof I speak is nothing repugnant to civil
Justice, neither does it abolish the indignation that we are to bear unto the
contemners of God: for if it were contrary to piety and public order, then
were it not human but inhumaine. Also the proportion between the same and
divine charity is good, for the one says: Thou shall love God with all thy
heart, and the other: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Concerning conversation, whereof some make such scrupulositie, Of connersation
with our neighbors.
alleging for their excuse. This man is an heretic, or that man is an
Idolater: me thinks they do over rashly deny it to those that have an
immortal soul as themselves, and do wear the especial badge of Gods
people: which is Baptism. If they think others defiled and themselves clean,
is it not a part of humanity to visit them to make them also clean? They
will answer, that they fear least spiritual uncleanness should infect them.
But examining the matter a little nearer, we shall find that that is not the
matter, but rather that it is a certain vyolent hatred that keeps them from
casting any good look upon those whom they account profane, which they seek
to shroude under the cloak of conscience. I think that diverse do herein
fail through ignorance, as being persuaded by some false teachers so to do:
but there be others that make themselves very scrupulous upon a mere
peevishness, to the end to seem the more holy, and yet in marking them well
we shall know them to be as they are, as Plutarke says. Lions at home and
Foxes abroad: that is to say, In outward show Hipocrites and inwardly
replenished with pride and vengeance.

We cannot hold any better rule in this case, then to imitate our Lord Jesus
Christ, who made no difficulty to haunt with all persons A rule to follow in
this case.
according to the rule of his vocation, notwithstanding ye Pharisees found
fault with him for it when they said to his desciples. Wherefore does your
master eat with Publicanes and sinners? But Jesus hearing them, said: The
whole need not the Physician, but those that be sick. By which his example he
teaches us to take compassion of those whom we find in the possession of
sin and error, whom we may in some measure help by instruction, if they
receive it. Some there are that say that he was never conversant with
Heretics. But I would feign ask these new Doctors what the Pharisees and
Sadduces were? For he taught the one sort and did many times dispute of the
scriptures with the other. We shall find that the first did woorship strange
Gods, and the second denied the immortality of the soul. Moreover, what were
the Apostles pilgrimages but continual communications with the Gentiles, to
the end to reclaim them from their errors? Then must not we be so cruel,
since those whose followers we boast our selves to be, used so great meekness
toward all. Some man may Exposition of the place of the Apostles touching
conversation with heretics.
here replye with S. Paul writing to Titus cap. 3. saying: that he must after
the first and second admonition flee the company of an heretic: whereto I
answer: first that his meaning is that he be so indeed, and not by
imputation. Secondly, that he be well known, and by lawful and
ecclesiastical proceedings manifestly and sufficiently convict so to be.
Thirdly, that we see him so obstinate, that notwithstanding whatsoever
exhortations either private or public, he will not amend, but endeavors to
infringe the unity of the Church in making others to go astray. Then is it
meet to put in practice his precept: for of the frequenting with such a man can
there come no fruit, but rather most evident danger. But all that err are
not noted with that mark. Since therefore we see the world so bent, that not
only in towns and villages, but even in families and small households, the
dwellers do differ in their opinions concerning the manner of the true service
of God, let us not wonder, neither be offended thereat: for ever since the
birth of the Christian Against offense taken of the contrarieties of religion.
Church have there appeared such divisions, which have continued sometimes in
secret, sometimes openly, and so will continue to the worlds end.

In such occurrences the best course that we can hold to avoid Rules to
follow.
the shipwreck of our souls, is to seek the way that leads to salvation,
which is not to be found but in the truth, and the truth in the holy
Scriptures. This being found, those that feel themselves adorned and clothed
with so holy a knowledge, are to employe so precious a gift of God to the
benefit of their neighbors, and not thereof to gather an argument to despise
and disdain them: to the end they may have their part in this blessing of
Christ, who says: Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy. And
as for those whose inconsiderate zeal does many times move them to Mat. 5.
wrongful judgments and condemnations, let them remember the saying of S.
Paul. That whatsoever is not of faith is sin. That Romans 14.
is to say, that no work, how goodly a show so ever it makes, if it be not
done of an upright conscience, grounded upon the word of God, is good. A
Divine might have written a whole book upon this argument, but I am content
only to have spoken a word or two by the way, as well in some sort to seek to
moderate our bitterness, which does but too much divide us, as also to kindle
a new our charity, to the end the same may serve at the least to reunite us
in a good politic concord.

The fourth Discourse.
What means and proceedings are most fit to use in the redress of an estate.

IF peradventure we should meet with some Since all France calls for
restoration, those men are not receiueable that oppose themselves there
against.
one that should say, that France is not in the way of destruction, what
answer shall we make him? Forsooth that he is both blind and deaffe. For
which way soever we look, we can see nothing but confusion and misery,
neither can we hear the sound of any thing but complaints and lamentations.
But if some other should then say that we ought to leave it in the same estate
wherein it now is, and never seek any means to relieve it: might we not
justly tell him that he is an enemy to virtue, in that he abhors not so
many vices and mischiefs as do on all sides infect and torment us? Let us
therefore leave those that are so doltish or corrupt, and harken to the voice
of the people yt sounds of nothing but Restoration. Yea even all other the
living, though vnceasonable, creatures, if they could express their desire,
would say the same, conforming them selves to the saying of S. Paul: That all
creatures do mourn and labor, waiting to be delivered out of the bondage of
corruption. But Romans 8.
there he means to speak of the universal misery and final renouation,
where our France now groueth after her own perticulerly.

All sorts both great and small do confess that she is very sick, and do
Diverse opinions touching the remedies for this restoration.
wish she were healed; but as touching the means to do it, they are at debate
among themselves. For some would have her let blood extremely: Others do
think it better to minister more gentle and easy medicines. In this
contrariety we must therefore seek which be the fittest for the state wherein
we are. For the chiefest part of a good judgment consists in knowledge how
to choose yt that may most profit. To the finding whereof I think there is
nothing that can better conduct us then ye experience passed among us,
conjoined with perfect discretion, which is the rule of all politic actions.
And under the conduct of so safe guides will I begin to enter the carrier.

Touching the first that are so violent in their opinions, and propound
Refutation of the opinions that counsel violence.
nothing but sword and fire, I cannot me think like of them. For
notwithstanding they seem to desire the general benefit; yet do they
indeed rather seek their own contentations and particular profit. Wherein
seeing reason resists their vehement nature, they have recourse to force,
with the which, if it lay in them, they would not help themselves much better
then a mad man with a sharp sword. It is strange to see that men in the
government of brute beasts, can use moderation and patience, and yet in the
regiment of their like, endued with reasonable soul and which are persuasible,
nothing may serve but cruelty! In the correction of things hurtful we are
sometimes forced to show rigor, which is not to be blamed, if the causes so
require, and that withal we put away all desire of revenge. But to guide the
instruments of rigor with envious passions, is the way to mar and overthrow
all. And this have we thoroughly experimented in our poor country, who is so
oppressed with those calamities, which through the rage of her own children
she has suffered, that now she does clutter but with one wing. And what is the
cause thereof, but these vyolent counsels: from whence are proceeded murders,
manslaughters, beginnings of wars, depopulatio^s, wrongful co^demnatio^s,
sackings, and other mischiefs, with which means some say that we should help
our selves for the saving of the state from destruction and expelling the
inconveniences already happened. Howbeit, in the end we have found such
remedies to be far worse then the sickness, and more meet to increase the^
to decrease the disease. They are not therefore to be termed remedies, but
rather most cruel reuenges, and destructions which have ravished and carried
away whatsoever the most excellent commodities of this realm, namely the
flower and abundance of men. What can those men now say that take such
felicity in the war and are so ready to persuade it, for now I protest that
they see that notwithstanding it has been six times renewed, it brings us
no commodity, but rather plungeth our France in all desolation.

But what will some passionate Catholic say: How can we Answer to a
replication made by two sorts of men against the former resutation.
root out those of the new opinion, if we may not help our selves with our
weapons? Truly my masters, may we answer, first it were requisite you should
prove it a just matter and for the common commodity, to polute your hands in
the bowelles of your fellow countrymen, before you be permitted to make such
a butcherly slaughter. Were it not better for you by clemency to bring them to
concord, and by good examples in life to endeavor to convert them? It may be
also that some Protestant, offended at things passed will say: We must have no
peace with these Papists that have done us so much mischief, before our
swords have made cruel revenge. To them would I privately say: Why are not you
yet weary, having tasted so many pains and miseries, but that you must
reenter again into new? Let us rather make war against our imperfections
then mainteyne them in our land, and endeavor to mollify the hearts of those
that hate us, by instructions, services and mutual duties: and so will God
send us an assured peace.

Thus me thinks we should answer those men that are so sharp set upon blood.
When upon evil will we seek war, it must needs be unjust: but when to
repulse cruelty and defend our innocence we are forced to bear it, it is
excusable, because necessity constrayneth. But among all the Frenchmens
furies, there have none been so terrible as the massacres. They were, say some,
the last remedies to restore France to union. And yet did never any thing
happen that so far disunited it. Hereby we might be taught to refrain
therefro, because such vyolent ways in liew of restoring, do destroy. And
when all is said, such counsailors deserve not the name of reformers, but of
deformers.

If the correction of any abuse come in question, some are not content with the
rooting of it out, but they must also spoil, drive away and kill those whom
they pretend to be the abusers; without destinction Answer to an other
objection touching strangers: especially Italians, out of whose destruction
some think the peace of France would grow.
of person or trespass. And if the Italians (who are mightily multiplied in
France) be spoken of, they wrappe them all in one offense and say that they
must be thus and thus used. But they should first think, that as among the
French there be both good and bad, so are there among them of both sorts. And
a man may affirm that such of them as apply their minds to goodness, do
prove most excellent, as also those that are given to mischief are aswicked.
Moreover, is it possible to imagine any greater confusion and injustice, then
for the punishment of some ten or twelve guilty persons, to give in pray a
thousand innocents to unbridled fury* If some Italians have brought wicked
customs and inventions into France, watch them, and finding them guilty,
punish them: but do not imitate them, for so might ye afterward be ashamed to
condemn them. Some accuse them to be the aucthors of impositions and
extraordinary taxes, which have almost oppressed the whole communaltie. It is a
cursed crime, and those that are so unthankful to France where they are
sustained and grow into wealth, as to be the occasions of causing it to be
eaten up and so oppressed, are unworthy to dwell in it. But we must mark well
who they be, and not impute the fault of a few unto all. What must we then
do? For sooth we must not repose any credit in them: but in the government of
the state, use such Princes, Lords and notable persons as always have been
accustomed to counsel our Kings. Nevertheless, if peradventure there chance
to be some among them who in respect of their singular virtue and fidelity
might deserve to perticipate in the chiefest honors (whereto the histories do
testify that in times past diverse strangers have achieved) who would debar
them? And hereupon I would demand of them what Frenchmen were more
affectionate to the estate then one James also Theodore Triuolsse: one Prince
of Melphy, one Duke Horatius Fernesius, and above all, the valiant race of the
Strossyes, of whom the last (who deserved to march in the first rank of ye
best Frenchmen) did voluntarily sacrifice his life for the turning aside of
those civil wars that began again to threaten our France.

I would wish we had half a dosen such strangers even in our privy council.
They have, will some man say, (I speak of those that traficke) all the greatest
Farms of the Realm. I do not marvel thereat, since they are given them. If a
Frenchman could find any such commodities in Italy, he would post thither
apace. The best remedy for that, is to prefer our own nation before them.
This is not yet all, for these men can in five or six years make the^ selves
rich. Truly if they atteyne to their wealth with either our public or
private detriment, they are to be condemned: but if their labor, diligence and
industry does advance them thereto, you may not blame them, but rather think
your selves very doults that can not do the like. And yet if we will look well
to some of our French men, we shall find that they have made as good a harvest
as ye rest. To be brief, since the most part of them are incorporate among us,
as having both houses, wives and children, were it not great cruelty
indiscretly to rent away such a member. France has always been very courteous
to strangers, and so in my opinion she ought still to be, namely to those
that we see do cloth themselves with the natural affections of the homeborne,
and that bring forth good example and better fruit. But the rest, who as
bloodsuckers do suck us up and then go their ways, or that bring in
pernicious novelties, they are to be accused, and being convict, to be made
taste of the severity of the laws of France. For the punishing of a few would
correct many. Howbeit, in the state wherein our Commonwelth now stands an
Italian Frenchionized, is as much to be esteemed as a Frenchman Hispaniolized.

But it is not the stranger only whom they would have to be so hardly
entreated, for when their passions prick them, they set them Answer to an
other objection of those that stomach the Lawyer, the Nobility and the
Clergy.
selves against the natural Frenchmen. Some say that ye seat of Justice
whereupon a certain form of Iusticers do sit, are now but traps and snares,
wherein with the bayt of laws and customs, both rich and poor are caught
and spoiled, and therefore that we must banish one part of the^ and rob the
rest, so to save and revenge our selves of their rapine, and restore judgments
into their ancient simplicity: Others raging against Friars and Muncks do
charge them that they are the examples of all dissolute life, idleness and
hypocrisy, who when they have lived of other men's labors, do also betray
their consciences, and therefore say that we ought to set fire in the four
corners of their couents. Some of the Commons complaining of the arrogancy of
the Nobility would entreat the^ after the manner of the Suitzers, (yet the
Suitzers have not done so much as these do think) so to establish a quiet
Co^monwelth. Part of the Nobility likewise disdayning the pride and insolency
of the inhabitants of some mighty cities, also their readiness to Commotions,
do wish

In this case would I wish his Majesty to establish such a law Against those
that counsel civil wars.
as was used at Locres that had relation to another. That is, that every one
that would propound any new matter in that Commonwelth, was forced to appear
before ye people with an halter about his neck: Then after the proposition
heard, if it were allowed, the halter was taken away and he let go free, but if
it were misliked, the^ was he strangled, to ye end by this rigorous punishment
to admonish every one not to be over hasty to bring in pernicious novelties
that might breed alteration or innovation of the state. The like were it meet
his Majesty should ordeyne, namely that whosoever would counsel civil war
should come in like sort before him, his Princes and Counsel, assisted with
three hundred persons accounted honest men and discreet and true Frenchmen,
taken from among the body of the Nobility, the body of Justice and the body
of the Cities, to the end as his proposition should be by them found to be
profitable or hurtful, he might be entreated: so peradventure the issue might
be such yt by this example many would be terrified and restrained from the
persuading of war, through the continuation whereof France has accelerated
her destruction and does frame her self to foreign bondage. Much more might be
yet spoken to ye weakening of this opinion, but this may suffice for those yt
will not dispute or argue thereupon.

Now let us see what we are to judge of the other two opinions which do seem
more receiueable. Many men are persuaded yt that Consideration of the second
advice, contrary to the former.
which commends the gentle and easy remedies is to be followed, as being
most convenient for us. And this are they moved to believe by the
consideration of ye ruins yt the rigorous have brought upon us: for thereof do
they conclude yt contrary effects must be atteyned by contrary means.
Secondly, they compare France to a body which by long sickness is grown into
so weak and feeble an estate that it cannot scarce stand: and do say that the
rules of art do forbid the ministering of so strong medicines to him yt is so
weak least they throw him quite down. And yt with like reason, politic rules
do not permit ye application of so vehement remedies unto a languishing and
half wasted estate. They say moreover yt during eue^ our small peace we might
perceive yt many things began already to recover, which teaches yt gentle
proceedings are merueilous proper to help to reduce France into yt good order
which we desire. And indeed this way seems as easy as ye first seemed hard.
But for want of following thereof we are fallen into wonderful calamities, ye
remembrance whereof has made me^ so timorous yt even words only do make the^
afeard. So that if we but speak of reforming of this or that, by and by they
imagine that we are about to begin to destroy them: so sore have the passed
injuries increased distrust. This is the reason why the most moderate rules,
ways and decrees are most fit and necessary How we must use this advice.
to begin withal, to the end to give to understand to those that yet are but
wild, that we purpose for the reestablishment of those things that are in
confusion to proceed with temperance, for so by yielding somewhat to their
imaginations and fear, we shall make them afterward more ready to obey
whatsoever shall be ordained, neither need we fear to find any great
repugnancie when men shall perceive that the reformers do mean well. For now
many things are changed over as they were in times past when some of the
members only had been displeased. Now does the whole body complain, and the
patient who before would not know his sickness, cries out after the
Physician.

It is impossible, will some say, to see so great consent in seeking Answer to
those that think it impossible to reform the state.
reformation: for such as gain by disorders would have them still to continue.
Hereto I answer, that we know well enough there will be contrariers. But on
the other side, when men shall see the greatest number well disposed, being
governed by authority and law, the rest will soon be brought into order. The
principal sign hereof is example and authority royal, courageously
commanding: without which nothing will be performed. And now will I Disorders
that need reformation.
set down some of the disorders of our estate, thereby to see whether the same
be as easy to remedy, as many do imagine they be: so from the lesser and
most easy I will proceed to the greater and hardest.

The first place will I attribute to superfluity in aparrell that exceeds 1.
Superfluiti^ in apparel.
every where, whereof proceeds general poverty: which to redress seems
but small difficulty, and yet it cannot be touched but two millions of men
will cry out and exclaim. What means is there then to provide for it? Even
to laugh at all those lamentations, complaints and rages. For from a fool if
you take his babble, he will storm, and yet is it requisite to do it least he
hurt others. But, which is yet worse: these excesses that we speak of do hurt
those especially that commit them, though at the first they be as pleasant, as
in the end they be pinched, when their living is morgadged out. He that would
perticulerly touch all these kinds of folly, (as the inuenters of auriculer
confession have divided mortal and venial sins into an infinite number of
roots and branches) should need a whole volume. It has in all ages been a
hard matter to cut off the things that men have esteemed to be their
principal delights, yea some histories do report that even the Romans were
much troubled therewith. Yet is there great difference between us and them.
For they exceeded when they had abundance of all things, but we do it now
that we have almost nothing: Neither do I fear that we shall enter into
sedition for this point. They that keep the Custom house at Lions will say,
that unless every man may have liberty of apparel the King shall lose above
three hundred thousand crowns of yearly rent. But if we turn over the leaf,
we shall find that there is yearly transported out of the Realm above four
millions of Francks, which is carried into Italy for such wars, and do cause
the King and his subjects to spend above twelve millions in superfluous
apparel that might well be spared. In the time of Phillip the Conqueror under
whom France flourished and was aloft, Velvet was out of use with them, neither
had they any store of Silks, at the least few men did wear them.
Nevertheless, the great men were never better obeyed, each one in his degree,
then in those days. So long as nothing but rich garments do procure
reverence and love, there is but small sted fastness therein, and therefore
there must be stronger bonds to bring us to our duties. Yet do I not mean
that we should order our garments after the simplicity of old time: for now
do many things abound that were then very rare. The third part of the
Nobility at the least could wish there were some good order taken herein, so
should they be better furnished with money and less endebted. And I believe
they could be content rather to spend that which they do consume in such
superfluities, in the Kings service in the field, where their expenses should
be better employed, the^ to empouerish themselves in these follies: and in liew
of so many gay hosen and cloakes brodered with gold and silver, to buy good
horses, armor and furniture, therewith to be worthily furnished in these
honorable necessities. So should we find above 1200, gentlemen able without
pay to acco^panie him, which are yet good relickes of our decayed France, and
might work as great miracles as ever did S. Mathurin of l' Archant. And as
these do cure fools (as yt report goes) so would the others heal certain
dolts yt think us Frenchmen to be even in the Hospital. Who the^ would make
any stir for these things: Peradventure the women, who are wonderfully
affected to these goodly ornaments, and would be very forie they should be cut
off. Indeed they should be allowed much more then men, as well to content
their curiosity, as also because they love to have somewhat that may give a
gloss to their beauty. Howveit, Aristotle says that women are the one moitie
of the Commonwelth, and therefore ought to be brideled by good laws, but they
will not believe him, but say that he is an heretic.

There be many other superfluities which I will not speak of, Other
superfluities, namely excessive expenses.
as having touched them else where. Only I have chosen this kind which is as
hurtful as common, which also I have laid open to the end to show that since
it may be amended, so may others likewise that make us worse and more needy.
Which if any man desire me to name, I must report these; excessive expenses
wasted in sumptuous Feasts upon small occasion: Maskes, Plays, superfluous
retenues, stately builoings, precious moueables: with many other pomps and
pleasures which all do stand in great need of reformation, because that many
do pass their duties and habilities: neither should a man lie, that should
say, that they are readier to spend 1000, crowns in such vanities, the^ to
give half a one to a poor soul that dies for hunger; or ten to a friend
that stands in great need. The cause whereof is overmuch self love and want
of charity toward others.

Now will I speak of matters which seem necessary to be touched, Of the
principal remedies for this disorder.
if we mind to reform the estate, notwithstanding it be dangerous stirring
of the^. There be that think that if in this our poverty those men be not
visited that have so unreasonably enritched themselves by our confusions, the
King shall be defrauded of a wonderful commodity that would arise of the
restitutions that diverse Of visitations.
should be forced to make, which also being applied to good uses, would stop
great gaps. This proposition is plausible and grounded upon equity, but ye
execution thereof is very difficult, considering the great number of those whose
consciences are larger then a Friars ^leeue, some in receiving too much, others
in serving their own (...)es, and others in catching and snatching. And
undoubtedly, if we should drive them to give account of their administration
past, it would breed some jar. Yet if there were but a few exchetors in
this number, (who now should deal faithfully in their offices, if they could
remember what shipwreck they had once almost fallen into) was should be sure
enough from any war there about. But to close with those that wear Swords:
that can both command and strike: and that have authority, friends, and
intelligences, undoubtedly it would breed great alterations. Was it not one of
the causes that moved Caesar to take arms, because they would have visited him
and his partakers, about the wealth that he had gathered in Gaul? When the
Gracchies propounded and purposed to put in execution the law Agraria which cut
off the possessions of the rich, what bloody sedition did ensue? For although
a thing be lawful yet is it not expedient to put it always in use, because
that neither the indisposition of the affairs can bear it, neither the time
require it.

Some will say that it is a gentle way, to redemand that thing by law that
has been usurped against law. True. But if we do well mark the
consequences, we shall find them so dangerous, that it were a great
oversight for the gathering up of a few small profits, to encurre great
losses. For since they that will not lose the goods that they have gotten, will
not for the keeping of them absteyne from vyolence, the surest way were now to
wincke at some incurable mischiefs and to look upon those that be curable.
The law of oblivion which we have always placed first in our outcryes, which
also the Romans and Athenians after their civil wars did put in practice,
does warn us in these chaungeable times to forget many things.

The like consideration is there to be had of the Clergy: for as many did
affirm that it were good to take away half their goods 2. Of the Clergy.
(which most of them do abuse) to discharge the Kings debts, considering that
the people in respect of their poverty are not able to do it: these great
words, as tending to deminish their temporal possessions, did so terrefie
them, that calling together their wits, they have with wonderful sleights
oftentimes overthrown these motions, wherein men began to take some small
taste, showing that they could never be any whit inclined to relieve his
majesty, unless he first set free the Church of Rome from the oppressions of
the Protestants; and after the rooting out of the^ they would work merueiles.
To be brief, by such means and devises they have so runningly given us the
turn, (as we use to say) that they are best in rest whiles the others are by
war pursued. And sometimes when they have been disposed to take the bit in
the mouth, what have they done? It was seen in the States holden at Blois in
the year 1577. For they there so played their parts that they set one part of
France against the other, while themselves indged of the blows: Yea some went
so far as to to say that the Clergy possessed above fifteen millions of
Francks in yearly rent, so that if any sought to oppress them, they would make
those that had bitten them to let go well enough. These examples do show that
it is not for us to use force against those that are able by force to resist.
But I presume that in as much as they are Frenchmen, they will never see their
King fall in necessity, but will succor him, in case they find that by
courtesy they be required. Besides that seeing they employe not the Church
goods to that use to the which they were bequethed, they ought not to refuse
to help him whose ancestors have permitted them the possession of the same.

The same moderate proceeding is in my opinion to be taken 3. Of the
Protestants.
with the Protestants, because all the extremities that have been practiced
against them to reclaim them (as the speech goes) have brought them with
force to defend themselves. For it is not possible that so bloody a work of
conversion can be perfected according to the first intent of those that began
to frame it, and therefore the best way is to leave it. If we presume that they
err, they must be reformed by the words of Christ and his Apostles, and not by
the persecutions and fires that have many years flamed in France. Fire
belongs to Sodomites, and not to those who in the midst thereof call upon
the son of God only. Our Kings having by their Churchmen been persuaded that
the rooting of them out of their territories should be an acceptable sacrifice
unto God, thinking to do well, have done their endeavors, and to that effect
consumed more money, men, and time then Caesar did in his Conquest of Gaul,
Spain, and England. Since therefore experience teaches that all this have
nothing profited, should we not seek more mild and convenient ways to
preserve, rather then to destroy men? His majesty might do well to say to
his Clergy: My masters, seeing the material sword has not in so many years
been able to bring your counsel to pass, labor you another while with the
spiritual, which is teaching and preaching, adding thereunto good life, to
redress piety and godliness. I would think that either part should take the
same course to convert one another, which so many excellent personages have
done heretofore: As Irineus, Policarpus, Athanasius, with other good
Shepherds, that have guided an innumerable quantity of poor souls (which
before were the bondslaues of ignorance and sin) into the way of salvation.
With the sword you may well bereave some of them of their lives, but the taking
of persuasions out of the heart cannot be compassed by any material instrument:
but rather by better persuasions of truth. Observing this rule, it were
moreover requisite, to the end to see some apparent rest in the Church., that
his Majesty should call a national, frank and free counsel (for the Pope
will never agree to any general, which he fears as thunder) consisting of
honorable Deuines, charitable and lovers of concord, who being holily assembled
may find some indifferent means able to reduce us to a Christian vniou, which
we all ought to wish, where before we fled one from an other through division.
Our masters may peradventure hereunto answer, that the Catholic Romish
religion must not be brought into question or argument, but rather the new
opinions, as being full of error: But if any Heretic will dispute let him come
to the faculty of Deuinitie, there shall he be talked withal with the great
teeth. Hereto I say that our masters have too great an advantage, when they
are in their maine Bulwarks, as at Rome, in the Spanish Inquisition, and in
Sorbonne. For there is not so subtle a Gospeller, but should lose his la^tine.
Yea Aristotle himself with all his Greek, if he were in the stay should find
himself hardly beset: for there have they more important arguments then those
of the first figure. For when they hear any that oppugneth their opinions, and
pricketh them with the stinges of the Scripture, by and by they deliver him a
sillogisme to dissolve, which is either of fire, water, or halter, whereto he
must aunfwer in person, not in figure, so as a poor condemned man before he
be convict is forced corporally to yield to the force of their arguments which
do necessarily conclude in death. The best way therefore were to give over all
these passed evil customs, and to follow those remedies that I have
propounded, or others more meet to attain to live in peace withal: for fear
least our masters endeavoring to compel others to admit their heavenly
opinions happen to lose their earthly possessions, as already they have done
in a great part of Europe. As also we do already in France see the ritchest
members of their Demaines in the hands of the Catholic warriors, who having
received such benefits for the rewards due unto their services, it will
shortly follow that (if the civil wars do continue) necessity and
couetoufnesse will procure many of them to appropriate to themselves the things
whereof before they were but farmers, as heretofore it happened in this Realm
in the time of Charles the Simple. This brief advertisement I thought good to
give them, as being assured that they would be loath either by power or
policy that any man should presume to thrust his hand inio their cauldron,
especially the Protestants, who as they say, have no right or authority in the
imposition of hands.

Concerning the law, which is a very vnproportionate member, Of the law.
it would deserne severe reformation, were it not that we are partly the cause
that many of the ministers thereof do abuse it: because that to recover and
recompense themselves they do (as some say) sell by retayle that which they
have bought by great. But the most especial remedy for this, were by little
and little and that without injury, to suppress half this mighty army with
all their superfluous formalities, which breed so many delays. So would it
follow that half their suites would fleet away with the stream. But what
excess is there in the order of receivers, as well in the multiplicitie of
offices as in their fees: which say they that know it, do amount yearly unto
1200000. crowns: Is not this wast of treasure, considering that under 100000.
would suffice to mainteyne a reasonable number that might have that office. The
whole revenues of ye great Duke of Florence or Saxony amount to no more: which
make me to wonder at our France, seeing the least pieces of our ruins do
counteruaile some small Kingdoms.

To atteyne therefore to the correction of all these disorders and Means to
apply the remedies.
many other that are to be seen in other vocations, it were requisite his
Majesty should duly and without partiality call the general Estates, by
whose means he might take good advice and necessary resolutions, so shoule
they reap but a few curses of those whom they shall have a little plucked
and he the profit. For whatsoever men say, or in whatsoever sort we take the
Frenchmen, they still love their King. Here might rise a doubt that might
breed blame to the use of moderate means, if the same were not opened and
decided. That is, that many would think much that as well under the color of
clemency, as also induced through a false fear, least by touching them we
might bring out of taste sundry persons to the prejudice of the Estate, we
should leave so many vices unpunished. Truly they might reasonably be
rejected, if they tended to restrain politic judgments, without which
Co^monwelths cannot consist. But it is to be considered yt there is a
difference between the courts of ordinary justice (which should always, if
it were possible, bear an equal course) and the means and proceedings which
customably are holden in the correction of disorders happened as well in
government, as universally in manners: for in these things sometime we are
forced to accommodate our selves to those persons, that are either over many or
over mighty: to those means and power that are small: Also according to the
time when an estate is divided, for that causes release of all severity,
attending more fit opportunity to use it. But when the law commands that
blasphemers, murderers, adulterers and thieves be punished, we must not have
regard to so many circumstances: for it is our duties to obey it, because it
is God that speaks: and in truth, that is the way whereby we should begin to
reform deformed estates.

Now it remains that we discourse of the other opinion which The third
advice consisting of the two former.
mixeth clemency with rigor. The allowers thereof do say that the meetest
remedies for France must be so compounded if we purpose to reap any profit
of them. For as the vyolent which do empayre the disease are to be rejected, so
likewise y^ gentle through want of strength to deminish it do prove
unfruitful. They do consider that the mischiefs and disorders are tied to
the whole body of France, even as the rust is tied to the Iron: Also that as
for the getting of it of and making the Iron bright, it is requisite not only
to wash and dry it, but also to power oil upon the rust to eat it, and then
diligently to skoure and cleanse it: so likewise the vices that have taken
footing do not avoid, as we say, simply, but must be forcibly thrust out as
a stranger should be thrust out of a house from whence he is unwilling to
depart. If, say they, our calamities were like to the calamities of an
offender, who having received the sentence of his condemnation, does suffer one
only officer to lead him where he list, it might easily be banished: but
resembling rather an untamed Horse, who when the rider touches him with the
spur, endeavors with his hinder heels to strike him, or with his teeth to
byte him, must by him that minds to break him from the same be led lustely,
and somewhile stricken with the rod, and somewhile chidden and threatened with a
sharp voice: so must we think that most of our vices are haughty and proud,
and knowing that you fear them, they do face you: but if you apply unto them
the severity of the law with some punishment, they are afearde and do hide
themselves. Moreover, when they that mislike of offenses do see that we do
with too much len^^ie and too softly proceed to correction, they imagine some
secret winking thereat, and so are offended at the Magistrate: by reason where
of they conclude that a moderate severity must be added to the remedies, or
else never to hope for much profit.

This advice upon better examination do I find to be very The confirmation
hereof.
well founded, and by applying it to some matters propounded may better
appear, as the Surgions do apply their ointments unto wounds, to the end by
their effects to gather the more knowledge of their virtues. But if any seek
to accuse me of taking delight in taxing of diverse persons, I will answer
that if we endeavor to wipe away the blemishes happened in any degree, we must
first show them. Neither will I bring for example hereof any other then those
of the same body whereof I am a member, namely the Nobility and men of war.
Let us now therefore look upon the misdemeanors of the latter sort against
the people in the time of peace when they go to their musters or return home
again, either when they change garrison: There shall we see that
notwithstanding themselves have their pay, yet for the most part they will pay
nothing, yea and must be set at the twenty souse mess, as we term it, and
at their departure their host must show them courtesy. This oppression may
peradventure seem to be but small, but I think it amounts to above
1200000. Franckes by the year. Neither may it be remedied by verbal
persuasions, or public prohibitions, but rather with armed justice must some
of them be severely corrected to the end to terrefie the rest. Or who
doubts but there be some Capteynes of the Infanterie, who having pay for one
hundred men do scarce retain thirty in their ^andes, and yet do scorn the
others that have no skill in turning the Staff, calling them doults* These
excessive theeueries, which redound to the great hinderance of the Kings
service, can no way be reformed but by exemplary punishments. At the least if
they yet robbed Gentleman like, it were somewhat tolerable, considering the
course of the time: but to proceed thus far is but clownish theft. The
Soldier may peradventure say: They use our service, but of money we hear no
news: In this case being deprived of the benefit of their pay, they are to
be exempt from the rigor of law, so that they live with discretion: But when
under color of non payment they shall exceed to all violent and infamous
actions, they are not to be excused, as not having any further privilege but
to live moderatly upon the people as is aforesaid. There are likewise of the
Nobility who either for their private quarrels, either to the end co encroach
the spoil of some fat benefit, do without reason bear Arms, whereof does
often times ensue many murders, neither is there any Province in the Realm
free from this abuse: Then if you send some inferior Sergeant at the mace to
forbid them, never was pilferer better swinged then he shall be: To send
likewise the governors letter, that is as could, because in these days the
governors in liewe of commanding, do pray, and this have our dissentions
brought to pass. What is then to be done in the restraynt of these petty
wars, which followed in the country, do kindle again hatred and breed
partakings? For sooth even trusse up five or six of these warriers, so to make
five or six hundred wise. To be brief, since by the continuation of eiuill
wars, impudency, malice, and disobedience are so sore increased, we must
not now think with proclamations and decrees to suppress them, unless those
also to whom it does appertain do take the rod in hand therewith to
minister weight to their words. And although in this reformation, considering
things in general, we are to proceed with much moderation for fear of
Commotions or trouble, yet if we perticulerly look into many vicious
qualities which hinder the reestablishment of order, I think it not amiss to
mix some sower with the sweet.

Thus may we judge which remedy may be most profitable, whether this or the
more moderate: For my part I suppose that Conclusion.
in some matters the mixed were necessary, although in other some the
moderate: as being assured that there will be less difficulty in making this
difference then in setting the matter in hand. But we drive of so long, for
our mischiefs are grown to that pass, that we are no longer to consult how
to cure them, but rather to wonder that we have not already done it.

The fifth Discourse.
That instruction and good bringing up are necessary for all young gentlemen.

SUch as have noted the singularities of The original of the difference that
appe^reth betwee^e the ancient Nobility and that of our days.
France, among the rest have set down that part of the Nobility given to
justice and valiauncie, wherewith it has always been adorned, not to be the
least, wherein they have had reason. For if we consider the times past we
shall by the apparent effects which from age to age have appeared, perceive that
out of this great stock have proceeded such excellent men as have greatly
profited and stood their Country in stead. But as all that has been is
subject to variety and change, so has it fallen out that the most part of
those that have succeeded in their ancestors goods, have not nevertheless
inherited their virtue: but rather being half buried in common corruption, are
degenerate and gone astraye from the ancient manners, whereby is greatly
deminished the commendation and good reputation in old time attributed, as
well in general as particular, to those that bear so fair a title.

Now, if we shall seek the causes that have engendered so many imperfections
in this universal body, we shall find that the most notable has been their
small care to see their young Children well instructed in honest discipline,
though withal I suppose that some have likewise erred in weening to atteyne
thereto, whereof it has ensued that the beginning being bad, that which has
been added has been of the same.

If the Parents for their excuse do allege that therein they have followed
the custom: that will not justify them, considering that in so necessary
occasions they ought to be directed by the instructions of the wise, who did
so greatly account of this, that to the end the posterity should remember it,
they have treated very largely thereof in the most part of their books that
they have left us. I know well enough that naturally every man has a certain
inward motion to keep and exalt that which he has begotten, but when this
affection is (...)lpen and guided by learning, it may better atteyne to the
desired purpose. And therefore it is not amiss briefly to hear the opinions of
the ancient Philosophers and Lawgiuers, to the end this judgment being
confirmed, we may afterward be the better disposed to do that which shall be
requisite.

All the most renowned Philosophers as Licurgus, Socrates, Why the good
Politickes did carefully commend the good bringing up of children.
Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon and P^utarke do affirm that the negligence in the
well instructing of youth does corrupt Common welths, also that the vices which
in youth are rooted in them can hardly be corrected. Whereas contrariwise when
virtue does in time take place, it afterward fructifieth wonderfully. They also
not only blame the fathers that through covetousness, sloth or ignorance do
deny their children that good bringing up that they owe them, but likewise have
an evil opinion of those Commonwelths that want order and discipline for the
instruction of youth. Yea and they further allege that the best natures
wanting good bringing up, do grow very pernicious, likewise that they cannot
in age be crowned with honor, if in youth they never learned to walk in the
path of virtue. To be brief, they all are of opinion that as Plants and Trees
for want of husbandry and proyning do grow wild, so youth if it be not
polished by good customs do wax rude and vicious. This in brief is one
small morsel of the instructions by them left in general as well to the
Parents as Magistrates: to exhort and stir them up diligently to see youth
brought up and instructed in all honest discipline. But what need we seek so
great proofs and confirmation hereof since no man calls it in doubt? Rather
ought we to declare how we should proceed in this bringing up, to cause it
to fructify in the beautiful actions of virtue. Herein likewise it is
requisite to help our selves with the doctrine of the same Philosophers, who
have so well discoursed upon every thing that belongs to all parts of civil
life that (the heavenly precepts only excepted) it is impossible to devise any
better direction. I will therefore here set down some sayings out of Plutarke
to this purpose. There is nothing, says he, In his treatise of the bringing up
of children.
that brings so soon to virtue and makes a man happy, as good
instructions, in respect whereof all other goods whatsoever are but small.
Nobility is a goodly matter: but it is but a benefit of our ancestors.
Ritehes are most precious, but they consist in the power of fortune: Glory is
reverent, but uncertain and chaungeable: Health is precious: but subject to
change. Contrariwise, knowledge is the only divine and immortal quality in
us. For there are in man's nature two principal parts, understanding and
speech, whereof understanding is as it were the master that commands, and
speech the servant that obeys, but this understanding is never habandoned to
fortune. It cannot be taken away by s^launder, corrupted by sickness, nor
wasted by age, because it only waxes young in age. War which as a vyolent
stream takes away and scatters all things, can not carry away knowledge.
Also the answer that Stilpon the Megarian made when Demetrius having taken the
town of Megara, demanded whether he had lost any thing of his: saying, No,
for war cannot take away virtue, deserves remembrance. Hereby may we know
the inestimable benefit that proceeds of good bringing up, which although it
be most necessary, yet are there other things, that as says the same
Author, must concur therewith to make a young man perfect in virtue. Now he
names three, Nature, Reason and Use. By Nature, he means inclination: by
Reason, doctrine of precepts: and by Use, exercise. The beginning, says he,
does come to us by nature: the increase, by the precepts of reason: and the
accomplishment, by use and exercise: And the time of perfection, by all there
conjoined. If there be defect in any of these three parts, nature must be of
force therein defective and deminished. For Nature without doctrine and nurture
is blind, Doctrine without nature is defective, and Use without the two former
is imperfect. This instruction ought well to be noted, as containing the
principal matters that Parents are to consider in the fashioning and
disposing of their Children to virtue. And although they can not be always
found so well together as a man would wish, yet should not that discourage
them from proceeding to approach to the best and eschew the worst.

Some Parents there are whose Children they find to be of Of the faults that
parents commit.
so lumpish and heavy a nature, that they think it but lost labor to go
about to teach them the things that they presume they can never learn. But
herein do they err, for upon those that want the power of nature is most art
and labor to be employed, there with to supplye the first defectes: so
sometimes in time the one amendeth by the other. Experience daily teaches us
that when a Horsekeeper is disposed to take pains, he does in one year so
form and teach, even a great carte Horse, that he makes him show some
actiuitie and become profitable in certain pieces of service: Is there less
hope then to be conceived of a young child? Who although he have some
natural imperfections (we mean not such as may hinder the principal actions
of either the mind or body) yet with continual exercise may be brought into
frame to learn sufficient civility to keep himself from dishonoring his
Parents. Likewise in doctrine and nurture I will here note another error that
often happens and Plutarke reproves: There are now, says he, some Parents,
who through want of experience do commit their children to such masters as
falsely profess In the same treatise.
themselves to be that which they are not: sometimes also they know the
insufficiency of such masters and yet will put them in trust, therein
imitating the sick man, who refusing the skillful Physician reposeth himself
upon such a one as by ignorance kills him. Others there are also who through
covetousness for sparing a little wages, do choose simple masters, therein
seeking a good penyworth of ignorance. Upon which saying, Aristippus on a time
iested with such a father: For when this father asked him what he would take
to teach and instruct his son: he answered, a hundred Crowns: A hundred
Crowns, quoth the father, O Hercules^! that is much, Why! I can buy a good
slave for a hundred Crowns. True said Aristippus, and so thou may have two
slaves: Thy son and him whom thou have bought. Truly that father is very
unwise, that trauaileth continually to gather much goods, and yet will deny a
small part thereof for the instructing of those that must one day possess
them. But what comes of this nigardlinesse? After his death they prodigally
wast that, which with so great labor he has gathered together: or else
become extreme covetous for lack of good teaching how to use riches. But
those men are to be moaned, who having many Children and being poor cannot
satisfy their desire to have them well instructed, but are forced to put them
some here and some there into other men's hands, where they may be in danger
of evil example: Albeit thereof they are to have an especial care, that they
mistake not: but of that we will speak more at large in an other place.

Youth likewise do fail in that which concerns the use and Of Childrens
faults.
exercise of the good things that they have begun to learn: for when they
should put them in practice, to the end to settle a good foundation in them,
they grow careless, or suffer themselves to be led away by the force of
vicious affections, which strive to suppress in them the rudiments of doctrine
and virtue. Then therefore is the time that Parents should especially beware of
discontinuance from that which cannot be formed in them without continuance. A
man when he has planted a tree, is very careful to proyne and look to it
until it has brought forth fruit, and then is he satisfied in that he sees
it is not barren, neither his labor lost.

The like care is to be had of young Children; for to the end to be assured
that they have profited, we must first see most evident testimonies, and then
is the care the less. Oh how happy are the Children whose fathers, even from
the cradle, are so favorable as never to cease their instructions until the
years of discretion: to the end their minds and hands have no less
perfection then their bodies growth, force and health? For since the conduct of
their life is afterward to be grounded upon themselves, it is very requisite
to procure that the foundation be good. Thus much in general briefly what is,
after the doctrine of Plutarke, to be observed in the instruction of youth.

Now must we see the manner how the French gentry do behave Application of
the aforesaid to the French Nobility, and first to careless ignorance and
covetous parents.
themselves in the nurturing thereof, so to know wherein they do ill and
wherein well. Then to show what may be added, for the establishing of a better
order then any that yet is used in so necessary a matter. But before we
speak of those that herein do show their good affection to their Children, I
must say somewhat of the others that do but little or not at all discharge
their duties therein. Truly those be such people as would be sent to
school among beasts, to the end by their example to learn to have more care
of that which themselves have engendered: for when they shall see with how
vehement love the brute beasts do keep and nourish their young ones, they
must be very senseless if they be nothing moved therewith. Many fathers
there are that think the greatest bonds wherein their Children be especially
bound unto them, do consist in that they have begotten and fed them. Neither
is it to be denied but that the same be very great, nevertheless one more
there is which must not be forgotten, and is no less to be confessed,
namely, instruction in piety and virtue. For of this benefit is man only
participate, where all other benefits are common also to beasts. Man is borne
to a better end then to live, that is, to live well: and that must he be
taught to do, since he has reason to comprehend it. And therein also does
fatherly love manifest it self, and childlike duty increase. But many
fathers do fail herein through ignorance, contenting themselves with keeping
their Children at home, clothing them and giving them their fill of meat and
drink, as if they were to care for their bodies only: And the cause of this
retchlesnesse proceeds of their own ill bringing up in their youth. Others
there are whose hearts are possessed with such extreme avarice, that they are
so far from being willing to spend some one crown upon the teaching of
their children, that they even think to have done much for them, if they give
them food: therein showing themselves unworthy of issue.

The Lacedaemonians had a law, whereby those Children were discharged from
relieuing such Parents in their age, as were careless in seeing them
instructed in their youth: which they ordained to the end to make them more
ready to fulfill the precepts of nature, as being assured that he which
denies his child instruction and correction, leaves him to be a pray to
vice which afterward draws him to destruction.

Other fathers there are so fondly minded as to ween that there comes but
small profit of putting their Children to School, thinking it enough for them
to be able to write and read a little. One shall be so great a Huntseman,
that all his delight shall be in Hounds and Forrestes. An other, a quareller
with his neighbors, and rough to his subjects: One that shall allow of no
other kind of life, but to be lusty in his house: An other altogether given
to suites and law, as thinking nothing more convenient for him then to
increase his state with subtelties and barreting guiles. To be brief, every
one loving his profession would that his children should take the same course,
whereby to be like to himself, as if he were ashamed that they should pass
him in the knowledge of virtue. Thus do the false shows of pleasure, profit,
and honor abuse men, and bind and restrain them to the same object whereto
evil custom has made them most to incline.

Now let us speak somewhat of those whose wills are good to have their
children taught, and thereto do employe themselves, and yet cannot always
atteyne to their desired purpose. Of those some deceive themselves, others are
abused by the degenerating of customs. Concerning the first, they are easily
satisfied with a Of the parents that are well affected to the institution of
their children.
few outward beautiful demonstrations that they hap to see in their
children, and never seek further but thereby to judge that they have well
profited, which they have not done, in that their inward man, that should be
especially looked unto, is not well ordered.

The second imagining that good examples should always shine in Princes
Courts, foreign Countries, or wars, do very inconsideratly cast their young
seed into those fields which they think to be fruitful. But experience
teaches them that many times report is a liar, and many grains are quite
lost. Howbeit, the better to lay open this matter, we are to understand that
those French Gentlemen that love virtue and honor, so soon as their children
be of age able to travail abroad, do ordinarily send them forth to learn
that which at home they cannot. And their manner is either to make them Pages to
Princes and Lords: either to put them among the Princes footmen, either to
send them into Italy or Germany, either else to commit them to the
Uniuersities: all which are fit means to instruct them in civility, warfare,
learning, or knowledge of ^ongues, whereby men climb to honor, riches and
virtue. And since there are no other ordinary ways but those, men are
constrained to take them; yea and they are to be commended, who led by a good
desire do so train up their Children: But as in all places the corruption of
manners is great, so without especial good heed we find that thinking to
gather Honey, they bring home nothing but Gall.

First for those that become Pages. It may be said that going Of Pages.
into diverse Courts they see many gay things, as Tryumphes, Feasts, Combats,
etc. They learn to apparel themselves hand* somely: to speak according to
the diverse qualities of persons: and to order their gestures. They do moreover
see many honest exercises: but it is to be doubled that they do not so well
bear away those things, as they priu^ in their minds other bad fashions which
abound in the said Courts, whereto also their age is inclined. For they
go(...)e dissolute in speeches, incontinent in deeds, blasphemers of GOD, and
above all, scorners and injurious, and finally most expert in lying and working
a thousand deceipts. But some will say that their Masters and their Esquires
have an eye to them, yea but too faintly. And when the said Pages are grown a
little crafty so as they can cover their malice, and with all that they have
atteyned some small derteritie in any other matter, their hidden vices will not
appear until the snme have taken sure root. But if any Lords have a more
watchful eye to correct, it is much if there be two of the six: so far are
we grown to neglect the true care that we ought to have of youth. The only
remedy therefore to be used herein is, first that parents suffer not
themselves to be so bliuded with a vain opinion of greatness that they cover
rather to place their children in the service of a Prince, where is but small
good rule, then in the house of a Lord or Gentlemen that will have a rare to
instruct them in all honesty. Secondly, that if they may, they sometimes look
to them, to the end to judge of their corruption or amendment, and according
as they fiude to take them home, or leave them still abroad. And thirdly, not
to suffer them to be Pages above four or five years, then to keep them at
home a while, so to make them forget whatsoever had they shall have learned,
and to confirm them in virtuous behauour, before they settle the^ in any
vocation wherein to continue.

Many there that are sent to the regiments of footmen, and they go thither at
fifteen, sixteen, or seventeen years of age. In Of Apprentizes in arms.
time past being a little elder they were made archers in the bands of
Ordinance, and then did all those companies consist of Gentry only, and the
Capteynes had a care to keep them in good order. As also many went into the
bands of footment of Piedmont, who had most excellent orders. Contrariwise, now
that discipline is reuersed even among the footemenl it is perilous for the
instruction of youth. For having for the most part none but unthrifts to their
masters, evil examples do in time draw them into disorder, and in liew of
fashioning them bring them quite out of fashion. And to what purpose is it to
learn to discharge a Piece, to knows what warding, sentin^ll, or skirmish do
mean, and to show the brave countenance of a So(...)ier, if in
counterchaunge hereof they habandon themselves to Sundry ^i^es: among which,
blaspheming of God, quarelling with friends, playing away all even to the
shert, filthy lust after Harlots, and for the fulfilling of all disorder, an
unbridled liberty to ^eate, rob and devour the people without compassion,
do bear the greatest sway. These abuses do the most part of our footmen
commit, except it be peradventure some old regiment and ancient garrison
that live in better discipline. The best remedies therefore for parents in this
necessary evil, is, not to send their children alone, neither to suffer to
enroule them selves in the first company that they list to choose, but to
hearken whether any of their neighbors will likewise send theirs, and so to
join three or four of them together as it were sworn companions, with
prohibition, the one not to leave the other. For being so together, shame will
restrain them from evil, and withal they shall still succor one another in
their necessities, if besides their fathers be acquainted with any honorable
Capteyne, they should direct them to him, with earnest request to have a care
to rep(...)ue them when they do amiss.

Some there are lik^wise that take upon them to travail into Of such as
travail into sorraine countries.
foreign countries, upon a certain conceived opinion that others drugges are
better then those of their own land: Others also do allow thereof in respect
of the learning of common languages, serving to communication with strangers.
Such as travail into Germany where the customs and behauiours do far
differ from ours, at their return are found to be dull and rude, so that for
the refyning of them again their parents must send them into other places,
whereof arises double labor, double time and double charges. And it does
oftentimes come to pass, that some having been brought up in the gross manners
of Germany, and then returning to find the unbridled liberty of France; do
so vnconsideratly fly upon it that they stray out of the right course. And as
for the voyadges into Italy, there be more that undertake them, especially to
be instructed in many honest exercises which do there abound. But among those
Roses they meet with many Thorns, because that a thousand baytes of lust
being as it were sown in the goodliest towns, youth which is desirous of
novelty and fiery in affection cannot be kept from going to taste, yea even
to glut it self with these sweet poisons, and so by continuance do become
most indurate therein. Thus is the habitation of Italy to those that apply
themselves to goodness more profitable, and to those that apply themselves to
lewdness hurtful and worse then that of Germany. But what counsel is to be
given or remedy to be provided against these inconveniences? The fittest is to
send the younger sort, whose manners are not yet formed, into Germany where
simplicity does take most place, and let the others that are already any whit
grounded in godliness or love of honesty, go into Italy, notwithstanding
the proverb: That never good horse nor bad man amended by going to Rome. This
likewise must Parents yet note, that they keep them not there above two
years, so to be the more assured that foreign wickedness take not so deep
root but that it may easily be plucked up again.

Now does it rest that I speak of study in famous Uniuersities, Of Students
in Universities.
whether many Gentlemen do send their Children to be instructed in learning*
which also they the rather do because the life that they there lead is
somewhat better ordered then in the aforename(...) places, where much vanity
is learned as well as civility. They persuade themselves, and not without
reason, that the liberal Sciences are a great ornament to Nobility, and
makes it more worthy to administer all public functions: which is the cause
that they seek to have them at the first watered with so good liquour. Howbeit
this notwithstanding, among many that there spend their youth, few do reap
any great profit: which proceeds of that that the fathers do take them away
so soon, even at the time that they begin with judgment and discourse to
attain to the depth and consideration of the excellency of Sciences. And in
my opinion, the chief cause that leads Parents so to do, is for that they
see that Ecclesiastical promotions are not given to the learned, but to those
that can best court the Cardinals and Bishops, or the Kings favorites: and the
offices of Justice in liewe of being conferred to the best deseruer, are sold
to him that has most money. This considered, and likewise perceiving that the
greatest honors are gotten with the sword, they will have their children
betymes to accustom themselves to Arms. And peradventure they are not herein
altogether inexcusable. One thing more there is that brings them out of taste
with keeping them long to study. That is, that when they come to consider the
countenances and simple and unpolished fashions of Scholars in respect of the
ciuilities, courtesies and dexterities of those young Gentlemen that have made
but two iourneys to the Court, they think that their children shall never come
time enough: who also for their parts need no great force to fetch them from
the College: because the inclination to liberty, together with so many fair
bragges, whereat they level a far of, which also the world presents to
their view, makes the^ but too desirous to get forth.

I will not speak of the delays made in Colleges in the teaching

of children, for it is well enough known, that there is no good thing but has
some bad mixed withal. Herein cannot the parents better provide, than with
themselves well to advise of what profession they will have their children to
be, to the end to accomodate their studies to the same vocation: as being
assured that he that Of those that bring up their children at home and of
others that are forced to put them forth.
is vowed to the war need not to proceed so far in study of the
sciences, as those that thereby seek to grow and enrich themselves. They must
also have a care that they put their children to learned tutors and well
conditioned, least in lieu of knowledge they should reap ignorance, and
corruption in stead of temperance.

Other Gentlemen there be, who seeing disorders every where, had rather keep
their children at home, and there to spare for no stipends unto sufficient
masters, than to send them forth. This is a good way for those that be very
rich, who also have opportunity to give them companions of their own age,
with whom they profit better than being alone. But so cannot the poor that
have enough to do to cloth and feed theirs, whom also necessity, as is
aforesaid, forces to make them pages where they may: as well to have them
fashioned, as to ease their own charges. It is sufficiently known that there
be many valiant Gentlemen of 7. or 800. Frankes rent, that have four or five
children apeece ready grown, sitting about their hearths, what can they do
with them but entreat their friends that are better able than themselves to
give them their finding and instruction, which is the most commodious way for
them that they can choose: whereof does ensue a great bond both of the Father
and the child to him that shows the^ this courtesy, as also a great love of
him toward them, in that he finds himself to be thought worthy the
government of others. The Lords that inhabit each province of this Realm, do
owe that liberal honesty to their poor neighbors: for if they be virtuous,
can they any where better sow so good seed than in their neighbors lands? and
it may so light as it shall yield fruit ten fold. Some such have been a man's
page as afterward has saved the life of him, yt brought him up. And although
some free heart can never be weary of employing it self in such actions as
purchase so sure bonds: yet must it proceed according as abilie may afford,
so to avoid such inconveniences as we have sometime seen in the houses of
sundry those Princes and Lords that have entertained every page yt have been
offered them. Whereof the number was so excessive, that it extinguished all
care, not only of instructing, but also of clothing them, so as sometime you
might find some of the^ all tattred, playing at scales with the stable boys.
These are briefly the most ordinary forms of proceeding in the instruction of
young gentlemen heretofore practiced, wherein are declared the errors therein
committed, the commodities and discommodities thereof arising, and the remedies
that may be used.

Now must we draw forth some public discipline for the before named, whereby
they may be instructed in good manners and honest exercises Of the public
discipline of young Gentlemen.
with most commodity, least peril and greatest fruit. The ancient lawgiuers
that have prescribed laws to all sorts of common wealths, do will that
children be taught in public places, touching withal every thing that is
necessary for them to learn, whereby to become virtuous and good citizens.
Aristotle in his Politiks treats thereof at large, as also does Plutarke in
his small works. They say that man consisting both of body and soul, must
also be instructed and exercised in that which belongs to the^ both. For that
neglected, the soul stu^bleth in ignorance which is the mother of many vices,
and by idleness diseases increase, and the body waxes delicate and tender.
Among the ancient nations in old time none were so curious in the well
nurturing of their youth as the Lacedaemonians, and so long as they observed
their customs, they had infinite virtuous persons, yea, their women and
children became famous. The like affection ought to be among the kings that
reign in these days, especially toward their nobility: from whence do
proceed their Princes, mighty Captains, governors, and chief officers,
Ambassadors and inferior Captains, whose service they use in defense of their
crowns. For in case they desire to reap worthy service of all these when they
be men, they must first have some care of the^ when they be children: because
ye Prince being ye common father of his subjects, ought to procure that they be
good. Whereof I do conclude that to the end to see good fruit proceed of the
well nurturing of the Gentry, the parents diligence only does not suffice, but
that it is also requisite that public orders do concur therewith, to the end
that the one mixed with the other a more prosperous issue may ensue. In old
time our kings founded many goodly colleges, to the end al their subjects
indifferently might be instructed as well in divine as humane learning. As also
we may say that in old time Princes houses were schools, wherein young
gentlemen were trained up in civility and good manners: when like wise the
ordinances of the men of war did in part serve to instruct them in martial
feats. But now inasmuch as in those places they find not so exquisite nurture
as might be wished for, it were expedient to proceed to ye remedy propounded:
yt is, yt it might please his majesty in sundry parts of ye realm to establish
certain places dedicated to such instructions, which besides the ordinary
fruit, might also yield this commodity, yt parents should not be driven with so
great expenses, and uncertain success to send their children so far away, as
having eue^ at their gates, as it were, most excellent schools of al good
exercises: for there is never a year but there go 3. or 400. young Gentlemen out
of France, ye most of good houses, into foreign countries to see and learn,
which proceeds of valiant minds with extreme desire of knowledge. But every
thing well waied, ye said viages do breed more inco^uenie^ce than profit: For
they carry ye coin out of ye realm, and return fraught with vices: besides
that, of all yt go the one half do never return, but are taken away either by
sickness or other casualties.

It were enough in my opinion, to se^d their children at ye age of 15. years to
places so ordained, because the^ they begin to grow meet for ye exercises of ye
body yt require strength, and that in the mean time until they come to that
age, their fathers cause them to be taught either in their own houses or at the
universities. These places whereof I mean to speak, might be named Academies,
whereof I would in every head city of this realm appoint one, were it not yt we
are not yet disposed to do too much good at once: and therefore to begin withal,
I would wish that 4. might be erected in the 4. quarters of the realm: which
would most conveniently be at Paris, Bourdeaux, Lions, and Angiers, whether al
ye other provinces might have recourse. Or it were not amiss to establish the^
in 4. of the kings houses whereto the king does but seldom repair, namely, at
Fontain beleau. The castle of Moulins. Plessis of Tours, and at the castle of
Congnac: for ye lodgings are large and worthy roial works. In the^ might be
taught many kinds of exercises as well for the body as the mind. For the body,
to learn to back a horse, to run at the Quintain sometime armed, and sometime
unarmed, to handle their wepo^s, to vault, and leap, whereto might also be added
swimming and wrestling, for all these make a man strong and (...)mble: Some
Catholics there are that would have young Gentlemen also to dance galiards
among themselves only, notwithstanding dancing be but vain, so to learn to form
the actions and to have ye bolder grace abroad. These also might be the
exercises of the mind, which are no less necessary than the rest. To have in
our own language, lectures out of the ancient writers yt entreat of moral
virtues, policy, and war. They might also be instructed in ye Mathematiks,
Geography, fortificatio^, and some most usual languages. And this is profitable
for a gentleman, I mean to know so much as he can make use of. Furthermore,
because ma^s life consists as well of travail as of rest, it is meet yt his
idle time be employed in some honest occupations, to settle and content his
mind, least it wander into bad cogitations and resolutions. Which moved
Aristotle to wish young men to learn music: so as there should also be masters
appointed to that end: likewise to play upon instruments, or to practice the
pensill. And for the teaching of all these Of masters and Rectors.
things, I think 8. or 10. masters to suffice, who had need to have good
stipends according to the several qualities of the persons. For every one
knows yt he that can teach to manage a horse deserves more than a Painter.
Likewise inasmuch as it is requisite to have good orders in every society,
especially in a house where so many persons must meet, to the end that obedience
and civil honesty may the better be observed, it were good also to choose for
those four places, as many virtuous Gentlemen to be superintendents of the
said Academies, to whom as well the masters as scholars should yield al
reverence, who also should see to the ordering of all things. Every of them to
have 2000. frankes maintenance, to the end to keep residence upon the place.
Neither should their office continue above 3. or 4. years, which expired, to
make choice of new. For if the youth yt might have recourse thither should not
be so brideled, they would hardly bear themselves modestly, considering the
liberty that already they begin to take. The authority also of ye abouenamed
might extend, seeing any lewd, and as it were incurable schqller, to bannish
Expenses.
him the Academie, and to drive him thence. The charges for the maintenance of
every Academie would not amount to above 3000 crowns, and so the whole four to
12000. by year, which were but a small matter in respect of the great fruit yt
would arise of the same.

But some good common wealths man will say, that it were better to devise how
to discharge the king of his debts than to put him in Confutation of a common
objection.
new charges. To whom I answer, that thus he should pay one of the greatest
debts that he owes, which is to adorn his nobility with virtue. Besides that,
who so list to look well shall see an infinite number of yearly expenses much
worse bestowed. Howbeit, to the end not to burden the realm, which is alredie
but ouercharged, the rediest way to do this, were to take the first benefices
that shall fall without charge of soul, and be in his Majesty's gift, and out of
them to appoint payment. For as well they be given to such as spend ye revenues
in profane or rather so filthy uses, as it is a shame to say. The clergy do
ordinarily complain yt the noble men catch at spiritual promotions, which then
they would not do, because yt being instructed and at their charges, they would
not seek to trouble public order For those that embolden themselves to such
things, do it for want of good nurture. Afterward when the affairs of of
France might The execution and fruit of this order.
be brought into better order, the king might discharge the clergy of this
bond.

Now does the difficulty rest in the finding of so many masters, For unless
it be at Paris the other towns are in a manner utterly unprovided. At the
first peradventure we must fetch some out of Italy, especially such as can
teach to manage a horse, to use weapons, or to vault, although I suppose that
among the Provinces there be many poor gentlemen sufficient for this purpose.
But before these Academies shall have stood three years in use, themselves will
have framed more masters than we shall need. For the Frenchman is ready to
learn arts and sciences, especially if he see them in account, and that
those that have skill be maintained. Furthermore, notwithstanding the masters
that should teach, have their stipends out of the common purse, yet should they
not be debarred from taking by permission some honest rewards of their
disciples, to the end to make them the more diligent to teach them well. As
also the superintendent might to his best avail boorde some young Gentlemen,
which would redound to their benefit and their parents commodity. To be
brief, there might be such discipline, that such as should commit any
dishonest act, should be corrected, either by exhortations, punishments, or
shame, as has been said, to reform them of their misdemeanors. Perticulerlie
to discourse of the orders to be observed in these exercises were but
superfluous. Only we should think, that except the principal feasts and
sondaies, no day should be exempt from bodily actions. It is also to be
considered, that inasmuch as the escuiry cannot have horses inow to teach all,
every young Gentleman, especially the rich, at his coming should bring one
either broken or unbroken. For either with the one or with the other they may
always exercise themselves. Besides that, it will be a commodity to their
parents to send their horses to be there brokrn, whether great horse or
curtals. Neither do I doubt, but by such time as a young Gentleman shall have
continued four or five years in such a school, he will be able to show
himself in any Princes court: For being skillful in so many honest
exercises, and withal instructed in other things that are not comprehended
but by the understanding, who will not wonder at eighteen or nineteen years
of age to see such towardness? Now if either in the court or other where we
see one endued with such qualities, we like of him and wish him good luck: What
the^ would we do if we should see all the provinces of the Realm plentiful in
such fruits. What a contentation might it be to our king to see himself
environed with a nobility, not in name only, but in virtue? As also what an
honor for the parents that have erected so goodly pillars for the upholding
and glory of their families? Likewise our youth being thus instructed, we
shall not need to fear to send it into any place wheresoever, because it
shall be of good proof: and in liew of spoiling it self, it shall choose the
best in other places whereby to profit. Neither shall there need above six such
in a whole band of soldiers to bring the same into liking with all
commendable exercises: whereas now for the most part they all employ their
vacaunt leisure, either in trifling or hurtful pastimes: so should the
asse^blies which often meet in the provinces to decide controversies, or to
leauy grain, be converted into sweet and pleasant contentions between young
gentlemen, sometime in towns and sometimes in lords houses, to run at the
ring, or to fight at barriers, with such other exercises whereby to win the
prises allotted to the most active: then would they also maintain chalenges,
and of these communications in so honest recreations engender acquaintance and
fruitful amity. I will leave to the judgments of such as have haunted the
courts and wars, to note how soon the young men that I have spoken of, will
grow both good courtiers and better soldiers. For being already so well
instructed in the actions both of the body and mind, such a preparation would
make them capable of that in two years which others (who besides the helps of
nature have but small learning) can not comprehend in six. Finally the report
of this good order being spread through foreign countries, we should have great
resort of strangers to participate in the said instructions, which would
greatly redound to the glory of our country.

This is one small means in some sort to keep the universal corruption
(which as an ouerflowing stream seeks to win Conclusion.
ground) from further infecting of our nobility: Besides we might conceive
this hope, that by continuance of such an order we should by little and little
see good manners restored. As also that age seeing youth so modest and well
taught would be afeard to transgress and have a greater desire to understand
what is worthy themselves. Only it remains to persuade his majesty to
provide either these or better establishmentes, which I assure my self, he
would not be against, in respect of that singular affection which he bears
unto his nobility, who having been ever heretofore ready to sacrifice their
lives for his service, would be much more bent thereto when by new benefits
their bands shall be increased.

The sixth Discourse.
That the reading of the books of Amadis de Gaul, and such like is no less
hurtful to youth, than the works of Machiauel to age.

I Have heretofore greatly delighted in reding Machauels Advice upon
Machiauels writings.
Discourses and his Prince, because in yt same he entreats of high and goodly
politic and martial affairs, which many Gentlemen are desirous to learn, as
matters meet for their professio^s. And I must needs confess yt so long as I
was content slightly to run the^ over, I was blinded with ye gloss of his
reasons. But after I did with more ripe judgment thoroughly examine them, I
found under yt fair show many hidden errors, leading those that walk in them
into the paths of dishonor and damage. But if any man doubt of my sayings, I
would wish him to read a book entitled Antimachiauellus, the author whereof
I know not, and there shall he see that I am not altogether deceived. Of the
books of Arnadis.
Neither do I think greatly to deceive my self though I also affirm the
books of Amadis to be very fit instruments for the corruption of manners,
which I am determined to prove in few words, to the end to dissuade innocent
youth from intangling themselves in these invisible snares which are so
subtly laid for them. Evermore have there been some men given to the writing
and publishing of vanity, whereto they have been the sooner led, because they
knew their labors would be acceptable to those of their time, the greatest
sort whereof have swallowed up vanity as the fish does water. The ancient
fables whose relickes do yet remain, namely, Lancelot of the lake,
Pierceforest, Tristran, Giron the courteous, and such otheas do bear witness
of this old vanity. Herewith were men fed for the space of 500. years,
until our language growing more polished, and our minds more ticklish, they
were driven to invent some novelties, wherewith to delight us. Thus came ye
books of Amadis into light among us in this last age. But to say ye troth,
Spain bred the^, and France new clothed the^ in gay garments. In ye The
original.
days of Henry the second did they bear chiefest sway; and I think if any
man would then have reproved the^, he should have been spit at, because they
were of themselves playfellowes and maintainers to a great sort of persons:
whereof some after they had learned to Amadize in speech, their teeth watered,
so desirous were they even Their fruit.
to taste of some small morsels of the delicates therein most lively and
naturally represented. And although many disdayned and rejected them, yet have
but over many, having once tasted of them, made them their continual food.
This sustenaunce has ingendered evil humors that distempered those souls
which peradventure at the first thought not to have grown so weak.

My judgment therefore of these books in general, shall be Thsir author.
this. I think (unless I be deceived) that he that composed them was some
courtly Magitian, cunning and sly, who to the end to bring his art into
estimation, and withal to procure unto those that be dealers therein, both
honor and fear, has cunningly feigned 1000. meruayles which he has covered
and wrapped up in a number of pleasant, desired, and usual matters, so as the
one running among the other, the whole might be the better received. I know
there are some that will find my opinion to be very strange, because they
ween that the author of the said books intent was no other but to leave to
the posterity a portrayture of the exercises of the Courts in his time, and
withal to forge a spur wherewith to prick forward young Gentlemen, and to
incite them to entertain love and practice arms, as the two only most
beautiful obiectes, that may delight, fashion, and cause them to climb to
honor. But their judgment is too simple, as staying rather upon the
consideration of the beauty of certain outward matters, than upon the truth
of the inward. For notwithstanding I grant that the instructions and examples
of this fabulous history, may also be propounded, to the end to teach both to
love and fight, yet will I say that the most of those loves are dishonest, and
almost all the combats full of falsehood, and not to be practiced, so that the
following of those rules is to walk in error. All therefore that I pretend to
show may far better appear by deducting the particularities that I have noted.

I will begin with the persons of Alquif, Vrgand, and their like, inchanters
and witches, there termed Sages, as also the Magical The proof of the former
point in the consideration of the first fruits of these books,
or deuillish arts which they used ase called Perfect wisdom. Yea I think if
the author durst he would have named them Prophets, which name they deserved,
but with this tail, of Satan. When these Sorcerers or Witches came to any
Princes court, they were cherished and wonderfully honored, yea, they were
admired as if they had newly come out of heaven, neither did themselves fail
to named the poison of Impiety.
seek meet occasions for to come, as when they must part two knights fleshed
to murder each other to minister pastime to ye Ladies, either to bring
enchanted armor to save a young Prince that was to receive the order of
knighthood, either to set a whole Court in an uproar by some terrible sight,
and then to appease and qualify it again.

But I do amiss in going about to specify their miracles. For we must
imagine that Jupiter and Minerua in old time did never so much as these.
Moreover, when there was any question of enquiring after things to come, they
were straight sought unto, as the Painims used to go to the Oracle of Apollo.
We are not therefore to marvel that they were much made of, sithence we see
them thus endued with a supernatural power. For these kinds of Magitians are
accounted good and succourable. But the author forgeth also others, as
Archalaus the Enchanter, Melie, and many The inetnt of the author of these
books of Amadis.
more that delighted only in doing mischief. Whereby we may easily perceive
that he makes Magic arts matters indifferent, thinking them lawful or
unlawful, according as they be used well or ill. Yet, it seems he allow
the use thereof among the Christians, and disalloweth it among Painims. These
does he say to have drawn their knowledge out of the books of Medea, who in
old time was a notable sorceresse. But his Vrgande the unknown he says, to
be instructed by the wonderful precepts of great Apollidon, whom he faineth to
have been as another Zoroastes, wherein he speaks better than he is aware. For
Apollidon may be the same Apollion mentioned by Saint John in his Revelation,
namely, the Devil, whom we may say to have been the common schoolmaster to
them all, because that so pernicious arts, replenished with fraud and lying,
cannot proceed out of any other shop than his. We must therefore settle our
selves, and beware we be not snared in the writings and persuasions of those
that after they have masqued and disguised impiety, would harborowe it among
us who are to drive it away as a most horrible monster. Most men when they
hear speaking of inchauntments and sorceries, do at the first scorn or
detest them: but if they suffer themselves so far to be led as to delight to
talk of them, or to see some of their proofs, they do by little and little
take a custom not to abhor them. Like unto such as having long eschued
serpents, do nevertheless by seeing and ha^dling the^, come at ye length to
wear the^ about their necks, notwithstanding nature does somewhat thereat
rapine. Some may say Why the reading of those books is pernicious.
yt of a fly I make an elepha^t, also yt if yt reading of these follies which
every one accou^teth but fables, were so dangerous, our great learned men should
likewise abstain from reading ye books of Ia^blichus, Porphirie, Psellus,
Apolonius Tianeus, and such like, who have at large intreted upon Magic, and
the co^municatio^ yt may be had with Demons, as also of yt sacrifices yt they
require. Whereto I answer, yt there is great difference between those yt
peradventure never read any other books but Amadis, wherein the sugar yt is
dispearsed al over, makes the^ to swalow great morcels of Alloes at unawares:
and ye others who grounded in learning, age and experience, do seek for some
roses in ye large forests of thorns. For the first not knowing the snares, are
suddenly taken, whereas the others perceiving the^ a far of, do seek to break
the^. Truly ye youth of our courts wtin these 10. years, had not ben so ready
to feed their curiosity with such meruailes, had not the laid books of vanity
prepared the^. And this is it that has caused Astronomers and inchanters to be
so well welcome. Many account it no inconvenience to see and learn those things
yt procure mirth and meruailes: but they perceive not yt the same is the
beginning of yt game, and that the poison lies in ye tail. There be other
pastimes enough though we meddle not with those wherein the magitia^s cunning
varlets come to play the feats of pass and rapasse: and such as enter
familiarity with the^, do never escape their paime^t, not in Apes coin (as yt
proverb terms it) but in much worse, which these petie transfigured maumets
(that come to play with the simple) do liberally deliver them: For in the end
they catch the souls, infecting the^ with a foolish belief, which by little
and little carries the^ from God. The prophet Balaam, though a false Prophet,
did nevertheless say very well, That the people of Israel was blessed, because
they had among the^ neither Southsayer, deuiner, nor inchanter, If we will
enjoy yt like bless we must also imitate that people, as well in rejecting the
persons at yt writings, which are as baits to inure us in devilish mysteries.
Thus much of the first and principal poison hidden among the the fruits of
Amadis delights. The second fruit termed, The Poison of pleasure.


Concerning the second, which I term the Poiso^ of pleasure, which also is
much more open than ye other, and wtal so subtle and penetratiue, yt to eschew
harm thereby, we must first use very good preservatives: it consists in many
sorts of dishonest lusts, which therein are so lively described, yt young men in
the consideration of the^ are deceived, as the birds were in ye sight of Zeuxes
counterfeit fruits. The French translators have studied well to polish their
translatio^s, also have added as I ween (for the true Spanish) a^guage is too
simple) all yt fairest ornaments Impudent and foul loves.
yt they were able to borow of Rhetorike, to ye end ye new might be of the more
efficacy to persuade yt things whereto many are but too willing to be persuaded:
and having made it more copious and wanto^, it is not to be demanded whether
the sound thereof be pleasant to the ear, through yt which being once passed,
it tickleth ye most tender affections of the heart, which it moves more or
less according as the persons are disposed thereto. Oh what a goodly
instruction is it for ladies, to see young princesses frying in amorous flames,
for some knight who^ they never saw until within two hours before, for albeit
shame and modesty ought to restrain the^ wtin the bounds of shamefa^^nes, yet
does the author make the^ confess, and eue^ at the first that the violent
stings of the God Cupid (who^ they do blame) have wounded the^ so deep, as not
being able to get out at the door they must creep forth at the window, into
some delicate garden to eat Apricocks. But this I have noted, that fortune have been to them always so favorable, that never any of the^ took harm, so that
well we may apply unto the^ this song,

Your pace it is so swift Guillemette, your pace it so swift.
But for the knights they are more quick upon ye spur. For so soon as the
beam of beauty have dazeled their conceits, they are not only in a continual
heat, but also even roasted and roasted (as the good old wives of our towns do
say of the souls in purgatory) so yt they never stand still, until they have
found some remedy to refresh the^. Neither do these loves in all these
difficulties want some subtle Dariolets, yt is to say, The infamous bauldry of
a blotter of paper.
cunning bauds. And I believe Homer, in ye personages that he has brought in
to describe sundry offices did never make any to play their parts better than
can these: who know more inventions tha^ a very for of subtilties, to catch the
birds with the snares of pleasure. This comedy thus played, the author
imploieth al his aloquence to show yt man's felicity consists herein, and it
is of no small force to infect delicate youth with ye daily reading of these
follies, do harbor them in their hearts: I ween yt in the monastery of
Franciscans at Paris (which is the fruitfullest clapper of Monks between this
and Rome) there is none, but if he had as often read the discourse of Amadis,
as ye old miracles of the golden legend, and the new fables of ye co^formities
of S. Frances, would feel himself pricked to the quick with these dangerous
temptations. Much rather the^ ought such yonglings as trot up and down ye
delights of the world to forbear them.

It may be alleged that most of the love tricks there entreated of, do tend
to marriage. I grant it. But before they proceed to public marriages, almost
all of them do commit secret follies as Pollution of holy Matrimony.
it were for a learning, whereof oftentimes proceed such claps as blemish
honesty. Howbeit, who so on the other side will note the ^a liances of
Florisel, Don Rogel, and many other knights that were more eager upon this
game, than is a promoter after his pray, shall find goodly lessons to kindle
incontinencie, which already flameth but too much in young breasts. The author
not content to teach how to abuse lawful love, and to practice unlawful, has
also feigned fantastical, which nevertheless, says the story, have brought
forth their effects. As that of Amadis of Greece and Queen Zahara. For some
Magitians perceiving that they glaunced each at other, although Amadis was
married, yet taking pity of their passions, as also to take away the spot of
adultery, did inchaunt them them both in goodly delightful gardens, where
forgetting themselves, they nevertheless forgot not to beget two pretye babes,
named Anaxartes and Alaxstraxeree, and then having vnwitched them again, let
them go where they list, without remembering any thing that had passed
between them. What else is this but a secret representation of Mahumets
paradise? Whereof this author thought good to give the Christians of his age
some small taste as peradventure somewhat sauouring of Mahumetisme (for then
was all Spain full of Sarazens) to the end they might accustom themselves to
feed both their bodies and minds with carnal thoughts and deeds. I leave it
therefore to the judgment of such as are endued with any integrity, whether
the reading of such books stuffed with such filthy follies, be not
dangerous both to young and old: for having once redd them, they cannot
afterward so cleanse themselves, but still there will remain some spots to
stain their conuersations.

I once heard a good Gentleman say, that they contained a hidden property in
the generation of Horns, and I doubt himself had had experience thereof. For
he wore two petty horn buddes Whereto such books are meet.
hidden behind his ear, which another of the same occupation had there
fastened in full payment of the like some, which not long before he had received
of him in pure and true love, and therefore the better to be believed, since he
spoke as a craftesmaster. Truly my counsel were to banish and send all such
books into Sicil, where the men keep continual watch for fear of surprises
bye night. So should we see whether their vigilancie could warrant the^ that
this Productiue cause should not fructify among them. Some attorney of Amadis
may peradventure make this objection, that diverse though they never read those
books, can nevertheless do as bad as the rest. I think there be such, but I
give them double blame, in yt their inclinations are so ready without help to
run into mischief,

Now let us proceed to lay open some other bad drugs that are to be found in
this shop. And in my opinion this may challenge the 3. The third fruict, named
the poison of reuendge.
place, which is a miserable custom brought in by this author, who auoweth
that the highest point of knights honor consists in cutting one another
throat for frivolous matters. And of these tragedies he makes a sovereign
pastime for Kings, Ladies, Courts, and Cities. Oftentimes we see in the lists
the father against the son, the brother against the brother, the uncle against
the neuew, where when they have hewn one upon another two long hours, they
have both through faintnes fallen down all tainted in blood. Sometime he
faineth they knew not one another, another time that they assailed each other
to try themselves. But what gross and villainous ignorance and trials are those
which procure the perpetrating of so horrible paricides* It may be answered
that they be the instructions of the great Apollion aforenamed, who being a
murderer from the beginning, delights wholly in committing of murder. In old
time the Romans took pleasure in forcing men to fight to outrance before them,
but these were trangressors that had deserved death. Where contrariwise ours
are the sons of Kings, Princes and Lords that counterfeit swordplaies: which
can persuade unto youth that read these examples, nothing but yt they still must
be fighting with one or other, to the end to be esteemed of and feared. And
peradventure such impressions have multiplied the quarrels in our France within
these 30. years, to such quantity as we now see. Also it may be said and that
justly, that such spectacles, through customable beholding the shedding of man's
blood, have made our courts pitilesse and cruel. Let therefore those that
desire to feed their eyes with blood, imitate the manner of England, where they
bring in wild beasts, as Bears and Bulls to fight with dogs, which pastime
is without comparison far more lawful.

This likewise was another custom of the knights of those days, That if any
one had made promise to go about any adventure with The fourth fruict, named
forgetfulness of true duty and abolition of all good orders.
one of these pilgrims, who always travailed alone with them: though their
sovereign Lord, or their father or mother should command the^ even with
lordlike authority and fatherly power, to desist therefro to the end to serve
in some other necessary service, yet if they gave it over, it was a perpetual
infamy to the^, for they were bound by the order of knightood to follow their
ge^tlewoma^, who sometimes was of a reasonable disposition. These be new laws
which upon a bravery tend to blot out of men's minds the same which nature
has so lively engraven and so highly commended unto them. In this respect
therefore are theyalso to be buried in oblivion.

I know I shall be accused of ouerseuere censuring, or else of slandering of
our chronicler of Amadis: for whose justification it will be said that in many
places of his books he greatly extolleth Christian Defense of the censure
aforesaid.
piety. Whereto I answer, that he cannot well excuse himself touching this
point. But by that which he says, it is to be judged that he discourses not
thereof but only for a cloak to shroube himself, and that he has read but
little in the Bible. For he propounds a wild and savage religion, that
dwells only in deserts and hermitages, which he should have described more
civil and domestical. But how should he deal sincerely in divine matters,
that handles humane so profanely.

Finally, I will yet set down one point concerning the exercise of arms,
which he makes so unlike to common use, that it is rather a mockery and
abusing of youth in giving them such precepts: The last fruict named partinent
sables.
for although the wiser sort do account such knightly prowesses and giantlyke
strength, wherewith the reader is so importuned, to be but fables, yet the
more indiscreet, under so sweet a charm of words cannot forbear, but
remember some such draughts as are most conformable to their affections, to the
end afterward as occasion may serve to try them, thinking thereby to be more
active than others. True it is that sometime by the scoffs that they incur,
they are reclaimed from these errors. But we are not to permit them to
proceed to these experiences, but rather to propound unto them true documents,
and to hide from them the false, so to keep them from failing. When a man has
bestowed all his time in reading the books of Amadis, yet will it not all make
him a good soldiour or warrior. For to attain to be the one or the other, he
shall need nothing that therein is contained. I will not otherwise speak of
these mighty blows that cleave a man to the waste, or cut asunder a
Vantbrasse arm and all: neither of those shockes or falls that do a man no
harm, but that he may rise and leap again upon his horse back, as he were
become a leopard, neither of their continual combats of two hours long,
together with their foolish enterparliestneither of their imaginary valiancies
yt make one man to kill 200. because the matter it self shows it to tend
only to terrify women and children: yea, whosoever will loose so much time as
to read the whole story, may plainly see whether I do justly or wrongfully
reprove al these brave and magnificent follies. Howbeit among all that I have
here said, I do not comprehend those exercises in arms, which are the
pastimes of our nobility in time of peace, but contrariwise I do commend them,
in that they are besides the pleasure both honest and necessary. And every one
that list to call to mind how during the reign of good king Henry the second,
through the frequenting of the same, they grew more expert and valorous, will
endeavor to renew the practice thereof. Here might I allege many other
vanities wherewith these books are stuffed, were it not that I fear to bring
my self too far in liking with them, whiles I seek to bring others out of
taste thereof. Those which I have here traced may suffice to turn away their
minds, yt are any whi^ affected to honest and virtuous matters, from spending
their time in the same. For they polute themseluts, wening to reap delight,
and through loitering in reading of lies, do disdain those wherein the truth
does most evidently shine forth.

The seventh discourse.
That our over small consideration of the good things that we have, and our
over eager couetise of the good things which we have not, do multiply our
miseries.

I Will not extend this proposition to all sorts of men How great cause the
French Nobility have to content them selves.
as I well might: for my pen being weary cannot run into so many places. It
shall therefore suffice me to frame it to those of mine own profession whom I
wish to reform, because herein they fail more than any others. Neither do I
think that I shall need to bring in any great proofs: for the disquietuesse
of their minds, which force their bodies hither and thither, up and down, in
right and wrong, are testimonies sufficient.

Now I think our nobility have small cause of discontent, considering how God
has lodged them in one of the goodliest gardens in the world (more temperate
than the fortunate Islands so famous among the the ancients) wherein nature
does most abundantly shed forth her pleasures and delights. So as although
she has not so much wealth as Spain, who sucketh the golden paps of both the
Indies: though she have not so many Privileges as Pologne, which choseth
princes, and bears lordly dominion over her vassals: and although she be not
so ingenious as Italy which knows much dexterity and courtesy, yet all this
notwithstanding, she wants not wit enough to guide her, force enough to
defend her, or wealth enough to maintain her. If we behold the infinite
number of goodly houses, well contrived and provided of all things requisite,
which she possesses: likewise her honorable exercises both of wepons and
learning, the toles serving to make the bodies more nimble: her pleasures as of
hunting and music, with her secret conversation: finally, a thousand goodly
rewards of virtue wherewith she does often see her self crowned: we shall be
forced to say that she ought many times to lift up her eyes to heaven and to
yield thanks to God for so good a share: but it falls out that few do enter
into these general considerations, and fewer into the particular. To the end
also the better to perceive how the most part do ordinarily bear themselves.
Faults herein committed.
I will propound this example, namely of a Gentleman of 3 or 4000. frankes
rent, already well entered into his youthful age, and formed according to our
customs, which are but too easily larned. If he be in his own house, nothing
will please him, neither can he ever be quiet until he has set feather in the
wind to go see the world, which desire, if it be moderated, I do not blame:
but I mislike his taste of yt which he should taste better of. If he light upon
any court, where after he has a while trotted up and down, he has attained a
little fame and knowledge, he thinks it a small matter, in respect of other
stings that prick him and still make him to look forward, but never behind
him. Then coming to learn the use of his weepon, he still thinks his estate
over base, and so aims at ye uncertain. If he chance to return and play the
good husband at home, and that he have laid the foundation of a complete
family, he will not make so much account of his wife, children and revenues of
his house as he ought, as taking the first goods to be over common, and the
second over small. Having attained to old age, wherein he should after the
tediousness of so long a journey, take his rest and rejoice that he has
gotten so near to his end, then is the time that most cares, anguishes, and
fears do greatly torment him: so as few things delight him though many
displease him, and thus does he live miserably until be come to hide his head
in his grave. Thus do we briefly see a small portraiture of many men's lives, who
because they cannot well know the good they have therein, do enjoy such a
benefit but coldly and without commodity. Truly if every one would often
weigh the good whereof he may make account, he should find the same as weighty
as he thinks them to be light. But when he casts it at his heels, like unto
forgotten sins (as the proverb goes) it yields but small profit. The
Philosopher Remedies for these faults.
Plato said, that he thanked God for three things: That he made him to be borne
a Grecian and not a Barbarian: an Athenian rather than the citizen of any
other town: and in the time of Socrates: but for how many things more yt he
speaks not of, did he give thanks? And in thus recording his felicities, his
soul grew the more quiet and satisfied. The like ought we to do and that
often, to the end to banish our insatiabilitie and ingratitude, which without
misery do make us miserable. And whereas some do think that after some sort
they do acquit themselves hereof, yet if they look well, they shall find great
difference between yt which they do and that which they ought to do. For they
imitate not so much as Plato, in noting that which is common and general, but
do still address themselves to some particular thing that pleases them. He
that is skillful in the art of war; will think only upon that benefit
whereby he atchieueth praise. The lawier will likewise dwell within the bounds
of his knowledge, through the which he fills his coffers. Neither will the
Merchant esteem of any other thing in himself, then his dexterity and
diligence which make his trafick to flourish. Al which considerations are not
utterly to be reproved. But even as a banquet is not made with bread only
without any other thing thereto adjoined: so likewise to ye end the rather to
satisfy every man with his own estate, we are to set before our eyes all
whatsoever we can gather together, either the great or small blessings that God
has bellowed upon us. And the more plentiful that we shall find them to be,
the greater are we to account our felicity. When we look over our rentals, we
find written great rents due unto us, asalso a number of small of a halfepeny
and a farthing, which how small so ever, we nevertheless blot not out: because
that gathered together, they help to make perfect ye body of our revenues: no
more are we likewise to race out of our remembrance the least benefit that we
enjoy, because the thinking there upon makes our life the more sweet and
pleasant. The means therefore well to grave in mind both great and small, is
to steal from our selves, and to bestow one only half hour of the day in
the meditation of the same. For still we shall find so much new matter, that ye
same will inuit us cheerfully to labor in such abundance.

But in the observation of this rule, it may be there be some who
peradventure would think to deal with God as they do with men. For they are
loath to sift the pleasures that they have received, because so they become
debtors: likewise that they would imagine, their entry into such accounts with
him, (and these I rather term small and imperfect recordations of his
benefits, which we are as well able to number as the stones of a City) to be
an ouercharging of themselves with obligatio^s and an oppression of their
mistaken liberty. In these cases are their imaginations false, and themselves
have but small knowledge of the nature of God, who assuredly at such time as we
most turn over the book of receipts of his benefits, does then give us most:
because that our small preparations to acknowledgement do mightily move his
liberality. It seems that I have somewhat passed the bounds of my first
speech: but this digression is not amiss, since that from Earth we have
climbed into Heaven, which is the true spring from whence a whole Iliade of
goodness destilleth upon us, of the greatest part whereof, through our
sencelesnesse, we are utterly ignorant.

Now will I return to our Gentry before spoken of, who Continuation of the
rehersall of the good of the French Nobility to the end to induce them to a
true enjoying thereof.
straye farthest out of the way, whom also I would gladly bring back to the
right path: And this is it that I will say to them. Why do you thus vex your
souls with a thousand cares throughout the whole course of your life, upon
certain conceived fantasies that your state is imperfect and full of
blemishes? Open your eyes and thoroughly examine it, so shall it vanish and your
selves be better at rest. When you walk up and down the Palace of Paris,
and so go by the Painters shoppes, you can be content to stay two whole
hours to gaze upon some goodly piece of work there set to view, which
sometime moves you to commend both the work and the workman. Much rather
ought you so to deal with that goodly portraiture of your self, clothed in so
many ornaments, for fear least ignorance or inconstancy should cause you to be
accused before the sovereign Painter, which gives to every of his works the
comeliness that is proper and convenient to the same. And as it is he that
has formed the Kings and Princes whom the Communaltie adoreth, so has he with
the same hand molded all those whom poverty oppresses. All which
unproportionable diversity is no let, but that the earthen vessel is as
profitable for the base and mechanichall use thereof, as is that of the finest
and best wrought gold for the high and magnificent use of the same. Let us now
look whether he has been nigardly and not bountiful toward you. Truly you
shall find no: also that you must utterly abandon those your deceivable
thoughts: for they are the same which the ancient Serpent inverted to deceive
our first mother. But it is your selves that are to be convicted of
ingratitude, in that you are contrary to the covetous man whose heart and eye
are evermore in his coffers, where you never enter into the secret closets of
your own hearts, to the end to consider of so many kinds of benefits
enclosed: which if you would do, you should find your selves not so poor as
you ween for.

I will as it were by the way repeat some of those which I suppose A
recapitulation of some of these benefits.
you think least upon. And beginning with ye spiritual which are the
principal, I will end with the lesser, that are more subject to decay. If I
should now ask you upon your consciences how often in a week you think upon
the inestimable benefit of ye knowledge of God wherewith you are endued (for
in that you are Christians I cannot doubt thereof) you will peradventure
answer me that it The heavenly and spiritual.
were much if once in a month you should earnestly think thereupon: and yet
this knowledge, or rather faith, does teach and certefie you yt ye are fellow
burgeses of heaven, and that by Jesus Christ you have been plucked out of the
paws of yt great Pharao the devil, and the bondage of Egypt which is the
figure of Hell How the^ can you have so small mind of so excellent a benefit?
whereof David said:

Of thy precepts I will still muse and thereto frame my talk,
As at a mark so will I aim thy ways how I may walk.
My only joy shall be so fixed and on thy laws so set,
That nothing can me so far blind that I thy works forget.
For notwithstanding he had among ye treasures yt he had heaped together above
100. millions of gould, yet did he account those of Gods service much more
precious and took greater felicity therein. Imitate him therefore, and oftener
open the coffer of your understanding and hearts, to the end to contemplate such
riches which only suffice to make you happy. Next will I descend to moral
virtues, Virtues.
of some whereof I think you not utterly unprovided. And put the case you have
Fortitude, which signifies Prowess, which also is of great recommendation
among our Nobility: also Temperance which is familier with the good: Also I
mean that the portion which you have be graven in your hearts, rather then
printed in your faces. Even with this only may you be assured that you shall
not be degraded from your title, notwithstanding you ought still to labor to
obtain more. You will not account a Merchant of silks poor, because he has
in his coffers none but Crimson and white Ueluets, for you should do him
wrong: even so think of your selves that you are not poor in conditions, so
long as these two virtues do fructify in you, which also may serve to
engender more: Yea and the more are you to esteem of these benefits, because
no fury of contrary fortune can bereave you of them. I will also speak one
word of your Health, which me thinks ye Health.
cherish no more then ye do adogge, whom ye hazard against all sorts of
wild beasts: for many times you give it for a pray to most mortal diseases,
wherein you show your small judgments in seeking to heap together vain
things, and yet cannot preserve those that are necessary. Remember the
proverb: There is no treasure to health. And imagine a Prince groaning in his
bed, who offers all his wealth for the recovery of that which you contemn.
So will you peradventure confess that you are more happy then wise. As for
your revenues, your continual lamenting of your Riches.
want does show that you are not very well content therewith: And yet is your
rent perhaps twelve hundred crowns by year, with a goodly house, well
furnished, where as your father lived honestly and merely with the one half.
You will either tell me, or think with your selves, that when you have on your
gay garments you are an other manner of man the^ your father was. Truly I
grant it, and I think your fathers head was fraught with wit that could of so
small wealth keep his house furnished: Whereas contrariwise I suppose that
your understanding is troubled with six ounces of folly at the least,
considering that having so many commodities, your house is never but empty,
and yet I would wish you not to weep, for there be at the least four
millions of persons in this Realm that have not the tenth part so much as
you, and yet shed never a tear for it. You have but over much if you could use
it. What will you say of so many of your good Parents and Friends* And what
account they make of you where you have been conversant? Yea, what will you say
of your Liberty? which is a thing comparable to Life, through the which you
may take pleasure in the beauty of the seasons, and more in the conversation
of men. You must needs aduowe that the possessions of these only benefits
(notwithstanding you possess much more the^ I will note, as well to avoid
flattery, as not to be tedious to the reader) do suffice to make you bless
the giver, content your se ues with your estate, and rejoice with other men: to
which effects you shall atteyne by often meditation in the same. But if you
disdain this profitable counsel, and return to your accustomed neglecting
of that which is certain to the end to seek the uncertain, you will drive
me to appropriate unto you the deploration of the miser and to say of you. Oh
miserable man! who in the midst of so much wealth accoumpteth himself needy
and poor! I have said enough, it is your parts to think upon it.

But I would wish every man to know that this my admonition tends not to
puff up the natural pride of any that has The use of this discourse.
considered of himself, whereto many are easily led: but rather to reclaim
those that are too eager in the laboursome pursuit of superfluous goods, as
also from their delicate complaints, in which ways I will not deny but my
self have heretofore walked as far as others. But age, learning and sinister
experiences having stayed me in the meditation of such things as I have noted
and many more. I have thereby learned, first that Gods liberality abounds
toward us, which we nevertheless by contempt of his goods do abuse: and
secondly that it is not altogether unprofitable, when in the end a man by his
own errors does amend.

This Discourse is not finished.
The eight Discourse.
That the poverty of the French Nobility proceeds not so much of the wars
which have continued these five and thirty years, as of their own oversight
in the mispending of their goods.

WE shall not need any large discourse to show The state of both ancient and
new Nobility.
how far the French Nobility are fallen from the ancient wealth wherewith
their houses were adorned in ye days of the good Kings Jews the 12. and
Frances the first, as being a thing whereof few be ignorant. For if we list
to consider of them either generally or in particular, we shall see them
unfurnished and wanting of sundry necessary things, except it be some houses
which have lately risen, and a few others that by good husbandry, benefits or
covetousness have mainteyned and enriched themselves. And I dare affirm that
if all that bear this title were divided into ten parts, and nearly
visited, it would be found that eight of them have been decayed by the
alienations of a great part of their goods, morgages of their lands, or other
debts, and that only the other two parts have wherewithal sufficiently to
maintain their estate wherein is no correspondent proportion kept. I think I
should not do amiss though I declared that which might seem better to be
concealed. For as well our foreign neighbors do imagine thrice more then
there is and say, that we are so affected to our King, that we will according
to our callings imitate his liberalities and expenses. This therefore that I now
speak tends only to make us wiser and more ready to repair our domestical
decays, as well to eschew other men's scoffs as to expel sundry cares out of
our minds, and relieve those wants that oppress us.

Now, although it be so that all do agree in the confession of Original of
the poverty of the Nobility.
this poverty, yet when we come to show how it comes, there is a contrary
difference therein: For one says one thing, and another another: yea every one
seeks to accuse the vyolence of the long wars which as Monsters do devour
all, rather then them selves. Thus do we see how ready each one is to seek
starting holes whereby to clear himself of his fault, in liewe that he ought
with upright judgment to examine from whence such disorders do proceed. To
excuse a man's self is a very common matter, and such as every one is willing
to do: because the excuse seems somewhat to blot out the spots that may
blemish his good renown: But because to accuse brings shame, it is never put
in practice until it needs must, whereof it falieth out that that matter
lies long hid in ignorance which ought sooner to have been known. The
proverb falls out many times true, which says: That the evil which we
know well is as it were half healed. Let us Referred to the wars.
therefore seek the cause of our own, and that will be to us a ready way and
preparation to find remedy. Those that do attribute it to the ruin and
charges of war, do say that there be yet living many honorable persons that
have seen in what wealth and prosperity the French Nobility lived until the
time of Henry the second: For so long as we had peace there was nothing to be
seen among the Lords and Gentry but liberality, magnificence, visitations,
with other such honest expenses, ye witnesses of wealth. And yet all this
notwithstanding they sold no lands, as well for fear of reproach, as also
because of the moderation used in such things. Likewise, whenever there was
any war proclaimed, it will hardly be believed what goodly furniture every
one carried with him, as appeared in the voyadge into Germany. But as nothing
in this world is long permanent, so in the wars that were renewed in the
year 1552. between the Emperor Charles the fifth and King Phillip, which
lasted seven years, it was driven to great expenses, as well for the self
honor, as in respect of the love it bare to so good a Prince as was King Henry.
Then ensued the universal civil wars all over the Realm, comparable to
violent streams, which so increased the ruin thereof, that now all that the
Nobility is able to do, is to maintain it self, living miserably in it own
house. And hereof is grown the poverty thereof. These be their reasons, which
also I will not utterly reie^. For This poverty has other springes then the
wars.
I will still confess that these storms have bred part of our poverty, but
that it is wholly proceeded thereof, I do not aduowe: and I will hereafter
show that it had other helps of greater importance to set it forward. So as
their argument concludes but in part. Now let us examine what may have been
the ruin in the first wars. It was not great, for the Nobility that then
served were neither evil paid, neither destitute of honest rewards proceeding
of the Kings liberality. True it is that some perticulers being too forward
did in part vnfeather themselves, as also that the frontier Nobility encurred
some losses. But the greatest number continued in good state. In the civil
wars there fell out more losses, which nevertheless lighted not upon us.
Besides that in our petty peaces since concluded it had still means to
repair the breaches. Withal that France is so fruitful and well peopled,
that whatsoever the war wastes in one year is repaired again in two. Since
therefore such discommodities have still been accompanied with some remedies,
as also that they have assailed but the least part of the Nobility, we are
not to account this mischief either so universal or great. But, in my
opinion, the cause why all the blame is laid upon the wars, is first because
the same is by nature hurtful: secondly, that the vyolence that moves it is
horrible and terrefieth: and thirdly, because men are glad to have a shroude to
hide their evil husbandry, or else artificially to plead poverty as the
covetous do. A man that has had a long continual agew, being cured thereof,
will remember it a long time, and fear the like disease, and yet the
corruption of the humors whereof it proceeded did grow by little and little
through his intemperance of life, whereof he took no heed. The like do we
in things breeding our poverty. For some there are that we find out by and
by and they make us to lament: but others which are neither so common nor
agreeable with us, we let easily slip, as if we were insensible, and will
not know them. And I dare affirm that if the ruins of wars and martial
charges that so we complain of, have brought us four ounces of poverty, our
foolish and superfluous continual expenses which we do not greatly repent us
of, have procured us twelve.

In this proposition we are to consider that the French Gentleman does exceed
in any thing whereto he is affected, and will spare Superfluous and excessive
expenses in aparrel, the only spring of poverty.
for nothing. Then that most of them spend not in one thing only, but in four
or five, so diverse are their minds, and that is the cause that dries up the
liueliest springs of riches. Now, one of the principal things wherein they
ouerflowe is apparel, wherein they have neither rule nor measure: yea custom
has won so much, that a man dare not almost appear in any good company
unless he be guilt like a Challice: for thereby many persuade themselves to
be the more honored.

The Courtiers were they that brought in these inventions, who in the mean
time do sharp penance for their labors, in that there is no year but such
large expenses do send at the least one dosen of them into the Litter, who
for the pleasure of seeing themselves a few days covered with silk and
silver, must many months after bear the grief of finding themselves
houselesse, or so haled by Usurers, as they could not be worse in ye galleys.
Two other things there be besides the riches of apparel, which greatly
increase charges. The one, that men will have diversity: the other, that from
two years to two years the fashions do change and must be renewed, and who
so does not frame himself hereto is laughed to scorn. To be brief, either
the hand must still be in ye purse, or the land at gage. Next to the Courtiers
come the Gentlemen, who are not altogether so excessive as they, although they
take pains to imitate them. And as for those that never stir out of the
country, unless it be a few very good husbands, they likewise do so follow
the custom, that every one far exceeds his port. And yet is all this but
half charges. For the women also will have their share in so many gay
ornaments, which yet became them better then the men, who have larger means to
beautify themselves with virtue. Some are content with honest sufficiency,
others delight only in abundance: and some do so far pass the bounds of
reason, that their poor husbands may scratch their heads when they see
poverty come posting to them upon Indian stones, and Italian clothes of gold.

This custom began under Frances the first, and did mightily increase under
Henry the second: but since, their excess has been such, as to apparel their
Lackies and Pages in cloth of silver. Our ancestors were without comparison
far more moderate, yea our Kings sought to make their Majesty's venerable
rather by gravity, justice, wisdom, fortitude, liberality, and a train of
worthy and learned personages, then by any sumptuousness of apparel, which
also invited their subjects to the like imitation. Subjects and Provinces ensue
the manners of Princes. And until the great ones do begin to cut off these
superfluities, they will still continue to the great detriment of the Nobility.

Some man may say: Is it not decent that every one should go according to his
dignity? Yes truly, and I think it were great inciuilitie and an unworthy
matter to do otherwise. I reprove only the excess therein used, which puff
up our minds to vanity, and in the end breed destruction. Neither must we
imagine that our fathers went apparelled like Artificers: For when they came to
any Feasts or great assemblies, their garments were according to their calling:
and yet free from superfluity, and such as lasted long. Now, if in the Court
we see any man wear a garment of a year old, we say of him: We know him well
enough, he will not bite us, he is a two years bird: so that with such
scoffs he is forced to give it over. And it may be said that among Courtiers
the age of an ordinary garment is three months: and of an extraordinary,
six: and among the rest of the Nobility, somewhat longer time. For the new
fangles that do after ensue do make them ridiculous. To the end likewise the
better to know the diversity thereof, resort you to the Frippery at Paris,
where you shall find a most plentiful storehouse. So that if a man were
disposed upon this medlie to frame Antiques, there were no pleasanter devise to
be seen. This inconstancy in apparel argues a wonderful lightness of
mind, whereof ensues the purgation of the purse, and laughing sport to
strangers. For when we come into their country and they see our great Ruffes,
women's Verdugalles, men's long hear, and the sword at the back, they run
after them as the little children at Paris do after master Gonin. It is a hard
case to empouerish our selves with these peevish follies, and then to be
laughed to scorn too.

It may be replied that scoffs, the ordinary pastime of the world, are
mutually lent and paid again: also that our Nobility Against su^^ as scorn
foreign Nobility, for that it imitateth not their inconstancy.
travailing to Venice, and there seeing the Nobility covered with cappes like
the coffin of a pie and girt in broad girdles, even laugh outright. I deny it
not: but withal, this I will say, that when some of them do afterward come to
consider that the simplicity of their garments swells up their coffers with
treasure, also that wisdom and gravity shine in their Senate, and that their
Statutes are inuiolably observed: and contrariwise that we with our short hose
and long dublets have made our laws leap out at the windows, because they
speak too loud: also that our coffers are for the most part as void of gold
as the head of a passionate lover is of reason, they conclude that our selves
do better deserve to be mocked.

Let us now come to the second article of our vain expenses, Expenses in
building.
consisting of the immoderate affections that sundry bear unto stately
buildings. For although it has been so from the beginning, yet was it but
little in respect of our time, wherein we see the qualities of the buildings
and the number of builders far to surmount the old time. And especially our
Nobility have therein exceeded, rather upon vain glory then any necessity.
I suppose it is not much above threescore years since that Architecture was
restored in France, where before men lodged but grossly. But since that the
fair fruits of this art has been revealed, many have endeavored to put them
in practice. If none but great or rich men had employed only the abundance
of their Crowns upon such works, it had not been to be reproved, considering
they were ornaments both to town and country. But after their example the
mean wealthy persons, yea even the poor have coueted to set hand to the
work, and as it were at unawares have been forced to do much more then they
thought for: and that not without repentance.

The Lawyers likewise and especially the Treasorers have likewise increased the
desire of the Lords to building. For say they: How is this? These men that are
not so well grounded as we do build like Princes, and shall we sit still? So
as it were upon spite one at an other, we have a multitude of goodly houses
made and that oftentimes with the loss of the revenues, which are fallen to
other men, through that vehement passion that urged them to heap up stone upon
stone. How many have there been that having begun stately buildings, have
left them imperfect, as having learned to be wise in the midst of their
folly* In every Province we see but too many examples. It may be that some
when they have seen themselves so well clothed and spangled in gold, have
said: This cage is too narrow for so fair a foul, it must have a more
stately one. To which discourse some flatterer may have replied. Sir, it is a
shame your neighbor, who is no better then your self should be better lodged.
But take heart, for he that begins bouldly has finished half his work,
neither can a wise man want ability. Then he feeling himself clawed where it
itched, by and by in his mind conceived a purpose which he began with
pleasure, continued with labor and charges and ended with sorrow. So as it
has often fallen out, such a one has builded a house fit for a Lord of 25000.
Franckes rent, whose heir has not found above seven or eight hundred, and
being ashamed to lodge his poverty so stately, has sold it to buy an other
more fit for his living. And him that would not so sell, to be driven to feed
upon small loves, as we say, and when his friends came to visit him, to
entertain them with discourses of Architecture. When Friar John of Antomeures
(who was one of the pleasantest Monckes of his time) entered into any of these
so stately houses or Castles, finding but a lean kitchen, he used to say. Oh!
to what purpose are all these goodly Towers, Galleries, Chambers, Halles and
Closets, since the cauldrons are so cold and the sellers so empty? By the
Popes worthy pantofle, (for that was his accustomed oath) I had rather dwell
under a small roof, and out of my chamber hear the melody of the spits,
smell the savor of the roast, and see my cubbord garnished with flagons, pots
and goblets, then to dwell in these great Palaces, to take large walks and
pick my teeth fasting after the neopolitaine manner. I like of their opinion
that counsel that if any will build, it be upon condition that he sell little
or none of his goods: And who so does otherwise I refer him to the censure of
Friar John of Antomeures. I know that one of the singularities in France is
the stately buildings disposed over the fields, which is not else where to be
seen. But he that should withal reckon how many men these magnificencies have
sent to the wallet, would say it were dear ware.

The third article that here I mind to set down is a consequence of the
excess before going. For when a Gentleman has Expenses in moueables.
built a goodly house, it is not all: he must garnish it with mooueables
convenient: otherwise it were but as a body without a soul. So that if he were
earnest to have it finished, he is no less eager to furnish it within, and
ordinarily curiosity overcomes all consideration of things necessary. He
cannot rest till he has gotten Flemish hangings and millan beds: and thereto
will even his friend provoke him: respecting rather at unawares the beautifying
of his folly, then the bottom of his purse which many times is but flat.

In old time if a Gentleman together with his wives good huswiferie, at the
end of his days left his house well furnished to his Children, it was a great
matter. Now we are so hasty, that in two years we must have it decked up,
which impatiencie hurts much: as therein observing neither time, quantity
nor quality of things: but only noting what our neighbor does, and
satisfying our own desire without measuring of our habilities. Every man
delights to see a proper house and handsomely furnished: But it follows not
therefore that it is necessary to have such rich mooueables. For handsomnesse
consists in well disposing of those things that we have, conjoined with
clenlinesse. We do ordinarily see the houses of simple Burgeses and
Merchants, even in the low Countries, so handsomely decked up, and that with
little, that Noblemen might be ashamed to keep theirs so foul, and it is only
care and diligence (things of small price) that do breed this.

The Lord Marshall of S. Andrews was most sumptuous in precious moueables,
which caused diverse Princes, Lords, Gentlemen and others, to endeavor to
imitate him in such insupportable magnificence, to the end they might be
wondered at as he was, but some of their Children have bewailed their fathers
folly: and this complaint has increased when biting usury with her long
talents has catched even out of some Princes Castles such rich booties.

The fourth article that I have reserved to speak of, is the superfluity
Expenses of mouth and over great retenue.
of the mouth expenses, and the over great trains of most of the Nobility:
wherein rests no less disorder then in the rest. They whose minds do
somewhat aspire to (...) or do lone great traynes, weening peradventure that
he that rides with six horses must have more courtesies the^ he that rides
but with three. Others also that delight in good company, have a great care to
have their tables always well furnished. Now is there nothing wherein we use
less repugnance then in that contention which every one takes in himself to
use either the one or the other: Neither were it much to be misliked in the
Nobility in case they exceeded not the bounds of their ability, but it is in
them so easy a matter to fail of that, that of ten you can hardly find two
that can bridle themselves therein. Among those that mean to follow the Court
or Arms, there be few but eat up their whole revenues of one year, some in
six months, and some in eight, by reason of their great traynes and other
expenses. And although some maintain or enritch themselves in such places, the
number is but small: except those that be benefited by the King or Princes: or
those that in the wars do help them selves with the large privileges
thereof, yet all the rest do feel the discommodities, in respect of the
continual charges that they are compelled to be at. Which notwithstanding,
few do amend, but contrariwise still they seek some new occasion of
expenses. What has moved above three hundred Gentlemen yet living
importunately to sue unto our Kings to give them the order of S. Michell, save
only a desire to encurre new charges, to the end not to disgrace their new
dignity. Howbeit, there be above a hundred who finding that the continuation
thereof led them the hye way to the Hospital, have laid up their collers in
their coffers, and moderating their virtues have taken upon them again their
ancient course of life, and have found ease therein. Who so likewise will
count the Gentlemen of the Chamber, and of the body, the Escuryrie: the
Coronels and Captains, that likewise are more then we think for had, need to
study, Arithmeticke. But thinking that some of them are to their costs grown
wise, I will now say no more. Neither will I think but the seeking of offices
proceeds from some spring: Namely, from a desire that the Nobility has to
be well accoumpted of and to increase. But their judgment is amiss, to think
that a dignity may make a man worthy of honor, which is not truly achieved
but by virtue. As for those that for the most part do n(...)r stir out of
the doors, they have likewise so suffered themselves to be led away by
custom, that he whose father (who was far ritcher then he) kept but six
servants, has above fifteen. But to what purpose do so many gay garments,
with so large and well furnished a house serve, if a man have not also a great
train to make himself be termed My Lord? They may for their discharge say
that their fathers had not half so much rent as they, which is true. But
withal that which then cost but five souze costeth now twenty. As also it is
but an abuse to rely upon some small increase of rent, and to have no
consideration of other discommodities. An ancient man speaking of the
Romans, having noted the manner of their life, said: That they built as if
they should never dye, and in their almost ordinary banquets, fed as if they
should live but one day. I think that among us there be the like which put
the same in practice: but if the Civil war hold but a while, it will cure
them well enough of this disease. I might yet note many other excessive charges
that most of the Nobility is at, in matters breeding pleasure, yea I might
frame a fifth argument, but I will forbear, leaving to their judgments that
know what it is worth, how much money is so consumed. If now any be disposed
to argue and gainsay me as not being satisfied with that which I have
alleged, my Experience proves the former discourse.
desire is that he ask of the people as Tennisplayers do: then if he enquire
of Gentlemen that travail the world, their own experience will make their
tongues to testify well for me: For a great number of them do walk, some an
ordinary pace, others a trot, and others in post directly into the gulfes of
poverty: for custom and their affections concurring together, it is
impossible to hold them back. The advertisement of an ancient Poet is
excellent, who says.

Happy is he whom other men's harms do make to beware.
Yet have we not much used it: but how should we do it, considering that
notwithstanding we feel the mischiefs even upon our shoulders, we can hardly
be brought to amendment? It were enough to breed shame, that a Gentleman for
the least occasions of expense that happens should be driven to sell or
morgage his land, who then persuades himself that a small debt is but a small
matter. Which also I will grant him, but when he continues in doing it
again, as it often happens in ten years, he afterward finds that all
these small pieces gathered together do make a great hole. But bad husbands
will never enter into these accounts, because it grieueth them to see such a
heap of follies.

In old time he was accounted a need^e Gentleman, and one that deserved not to
be thought rich, that had not his house well furnished of necessary things,
and some good store of silver in his closet, for any sudden necessity, or to
succor some friend that were fallen into adversity: or to make any such
hasty journey as his honor should command him: for such accidents can bear
no delay. And because the Nobility in those days was always furnished of the
means aforesaid, they were ever able to accomplish their desires, where as we
through our folly and wasting do ordinarily fail in due debts. Thus we see
how evil husbandry makes riches as it were unprofitable unto some, when
good husbandry makes them most profitable.

The means to attain to the good use thereof, is to conquer Of the true and
right use of goods.
the monster called Opinion that lodges within us, and whence having expelled
Prudence (who is the guide of our actions) he handles those in whom he has
set foot, at his pleasure. There be two great proppes that hold him up:
namely, the example of the mighty and custom. But if we were well purged of
vanity he should have no such power as he has. It is too great oversight at
other men's appetites, in imitating them, to seek to buy discommoditie, and so
consequently poverty. Many account nothing to be more infamous to a Gentleman
then covetousness, and my self do confess it: Howbeit, to the end to
eschew it, a man must not ensnare himself in the nets of prodiga^itie. And
although that be a far less imperfection then the other, yet is it still a
ruinous mischief which must be eschued, otherwise it were, according to the
proverb: for the avoiding of the fever to fall into the who^ mischief. The
covetous person loves no man, because he hates himself: and indureth many
miseries in the midst of all his haboundance. But the wastfull and
superfluous man by ouerlouing himself runs into poverty.

The true way therefore is to guide himself in the mean, which The remedies
against the above said intemperance.
brings neither trouble of mind nor repentance, because it does expel
necessity out of men's houses, and replenish them with haboundance. It were a
goodly matter if men could suffer reason so to rule them, that they would yield
to the true exhortations to the^ made, as well by the writings of the learned
as by their friends counsayles. And truly it were hard but they that read
the brave books of the ancients, namely of Plutarke (which entreat of the
true use of riches, of thrift, of not taking upon usury, and how to exercise
liberality) and withal do consider ye examples of Epaminondas and Fabritius,
should be invited to eschew all superfluities. Secondly, the friends speeches
should be of some force. For when we imagine: This man warns me for my good:
for he is my kinseman: he loves me well: he is one that knows the true rule
Friends.
how to live: he is a man of judgment and experience: He must beof a very bad
disposition that will take no profit of such instructions. But the most part
are so disposed that what so goes in at one ear, comes presently out at the
other, and so they turn to their old lives. I will not deny but men must
frame themselves to their country customs, even in ordinary things, howbeit
with this condition, that they eschew all disorder and superfluity. Finally,
the best schoolem^ister that man can have is Necessity: for most are made
wiser by her then by any doctrine or reason. Of Necessity Necessity.
there be two so^^s. The one that haingeth inconveniences: The other that
threatens destruction. The first urges, the second forces amend. So as we
may say that until our own experience has persuaded us as well as the words
of the wise, all the miseries of fools stand us in small stead. Happy
therefore are those that can in so good time order themselves that they be not
afterward forced to keep a straight diet of ^iue or ten years long, for the
repayring of those breaches which their excess have made* (...) us speak
somewhat of those that are thought well to administer Of such as incline to the
extremity contrary to the former.
that which they possess. If we look well we shall see that many of them do
but appropriate their wealth to their own glory and pleasures, as having
small care of charity: and they do thus discourse with themselves. I am
neither covetous nor prodigal: but I sprud my goods honestly to my own
contentation and the increase of my house. Who then can blame me? Those that
thus govern themselves deserve some commendation: but to bestow all only
upon themselves is a defect, and that no small one. This proverb is rife in
many men's mouths: Charity begins with a man's self, neither must we unclothe
our selves to cover others. But these be such errors as extinguish al bounty.
Nobility ought to eschew them because they corrupt the integrity of manners.
And as the same is more bound then the common sort to exercise it self in
liberal actions, even so is it to make it self to shine (measuring affection
according to ability) as well for it own contentation as for the preserving
of good renown. But if we list well to examine the rules, of Christianity
whereto espetially we ought to submit our actions, many shall find themselves
far enough from the precents thereof. Yet are there but few that think
upon, and having thought of it once a week, it vanishes as does the image
when a man turns his glass: and so returning to their accustomed manner,
they conceive some imagination that to use riches according to the
commandments of the divine precepts, is as much as to deprive themselves of
the most part of the honor, profit, and pleasure that they bring. But it is
but a false imagination: for there is no perfect instruction that teaches the
true use of riches, but the same is therein described. He that sees himself
rich, should A certain rule in the use of riches.
often consider whence his abundance comes. And although that ordinarily it
seems to proceed from the parents labors, yet must we confess that it was
brought forth by the blessing of God, who as Solomon says is the author of
riches. The rich and the poor are met, and the Lord made them both. Moses
likewise upon this point gives us a very holy admonition, as well generally
as perticularly, Pro. 22.
saying: Let not thy heart be puffed up, neither forget the Deuteronomy. 8.
Lord thy God, that thou say not in thy heart: My power and the strength of
my hand have gotten me these goods, but remember the Lord thy God, that it is
he that has given thee this power. Now when we have this lively impression in
us, yt it is he that gives goods, we thereupon do conclude, that it is his
will they should be justly and truly administered. For our selves are but
stewardes thereof, And so often as we hear the poor cry in our ears, it is as
if God should summon us of our duty, which is, to succor the needy. But if
we stop our ears, they are as many condemnations against us: Which the rich
glutton well proved, who being plunged in a sea of delights, rejected the groans
of Lazarus. Hereby may we know that riches do so besot those that suffer
themselves to be maistered by them that they forgette what they ought to do.

Plutarke records that the Scithians in the midst of their A notable
advertisement to the rich.
banquets were accustomed to strike upon and make their bowstrings to sound,
so to reclaim their spirits which they feared to mollify and loose among the
diversity of so many delicates: even so likewise these worldlings that abound
with so many temporal blessings ought sometimes to make sound in their ears
this saying of Jesus Christ (That it is more easy for a Camel to pass
through a needles eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven:) so to waken them out of their deep slumber and want of charity
procured by the vapors of wealth. I know well enough that some of those that
set before their eyes nothing but worldly pomp will scoff at this
advertisement, and say that we must preach magnificence and valiancie to
young Gentlemen, rather than these small duties of piety, which are more fit
for old men that have not above some three or four years to live: which is as
much as if they should say, We in our youth will pass away our time in
delights and vanity, and when we grow into age we will take order for better
government. But to them I will make no other answer, but only advertise them
that to end well they must begin well, and that death does as soon catch him
that is but twenty years old, as him that is sixty.

The wise also will reject these scoffs, in consideration that it is no
vncompatible thing to use goods as a Christian and as a virtuous person: for
the one well fitteth the other, but the worthiest must march first because that
Evangelical precepts are to be preferred before those that proceed from
Philosophers rules. The one pulls down our charity even to the poorest, and
the other stretches out our liberality to our friends, and to those that
deserve it: wherein there is not so great difference as similitude, in that
every of the said actions are well done, which likewise ought to proceed of
hearty good will. These were good and profitable expenses, wherein the
nobility ought to imploie part of their abundance, Honorable and and
necessary expenses.
rather than in many unprofitable vanities, for so should they not be without
reward as Solomon shows saying: He that has pity upon the poor lends
unto the Lord, and it shall be paid him again. In respect of other
liberalities, I like of Alexander, when Prou 19.
one asked him where he hid his treasure. I commit it (said he) to the
custody of my friend: thereby signifieng that whatsoever was distributed unto
honest me^ was not lost, because the reward of perfect amity or loiall
service, which thereby he retained in their hearts, was far more precious
than the gold or silver that he distributed among them. But withal, we must
note that liberality must be used with discretion, in measuring the giuers
ability, and not profaning it upon unworthy persons. Who so therefore is
desirous to learn the good use thereof, let him read Seneca his treatise of
benefits.

The ninth Discourse.
That the Frenchmens great affection to foreine wars, is at this time more
hurtful than profitable.

AMong ye French nation, arms have been evermore Arms the exalters of the
French nation.
in special recommendation: and the common opinion is, that by the same it has
obtained that great glory that it has a^chieued, and according to the variety
of times is increased or diminished. Even the nobility which is abundantly
crept out of this innumerable a^^heape of people makes (as it seems) no such
account of any fame, as of that which has proceeded from the sword, which
nevertheless has cost both them and their neighbors dear, by reason of the
great wars that they have maintained. The Romans have above all nations in
the world exceeded in earnest desire to this exercise, Their use and abuse.
which they have greatly affected, to the end therewith to bring under the
yoke of their unsupportable ambition, those that gladly would eschew the same.
A most violent custom which since has had continual course. In the first
ages force was put in use to repel the injuries whereinto human malice was
over flowen: But in these days it serves rather to do injury than to defend
therefro. So far do all things by little and little decline to corruption.
Nevertheless no man looks so near thereto, for the most part do think
that as weapons, if they be not often made clean, do rust, so likewise they
must be often occupied, least men's courages through the rust of cowardnesse
should be daunted, as have been thoroughly tried among us within these 35.
years. Which notwithstanding, so far are some from being satisfied with
war, that yet after so many ruins and losses, wanting it in their houses,
they travail to seek it else where, far or near.

Those that among the rest are readiest to depart are certain soldiers and new
captains, who in ye civil wars having lived licentiously and upon the spoil,
and now are loath to return under the yoke of the laws which repress
insolency, and withal understanding yt their good mother Nurce is else where,
are yet desirous to go and suck her breasts. Some of them likewise are
allured by foreine pay: and others because they will not become artificers at
home, will live abroad like soldiers. These are the ordinary causes that
make them to take the field, although most of them pretend the winning of
honor. As also since the beginning of these divisions, orders have not been so
straightly observed as before time: for who so list, may depart and no man
takes any care thereof, as if they were evil humors that purged away.

Now these men that make account that they cannot live but in the wars, and
do so vow themselves thereto, that they make of that profession (which
should be as it were extraordinary) such The error of such as make the
bearing of arms a perpetual occupatio^
a perpetual vocation as they exalt it above all others, are greatly
deceived: as not knowing, or at the least, not willing to know that man ought
principally to shoot at peace and tranquillity, to the end to live more
uprightly. For so long as the same bear swaie, all things as well public as
private, are in far better order than when the confusions of war have as it
were reuersed all manners and laws.

In this my saying, I mean not nevertheless to condemn the lawful wars
whereinto necessity constrayneth men to enter for their defense: for so is it
no blemish to use them. Neither will I any whit contemn the ordinary bands
of Princes and common wealths: because they be the gardes of the land, who
also for the most part do live in rest. But they of whom I mind to speak
will never be in peace, neither do they care when they serve or wherefore, so
as they may find fat pastures. There is a pretty Spanish saying which many
times they be, and I have translated it thus. War is my Country, my
harness, my house,
I am ready at all times to fight for a souse.


What more could a bad Physician and a worse judge, which wish the City to be
full fraught with maladies, mortality, and strife, to the end to have good
doings, say? For these men likewise seek nothing but alteration of estates,
that they may gorge themselves with the destruction of the same. In this our
age wherein we live, it is impossible for any to exempt themselves from
war, because ambition, covetousness, and revenge, are as fruitful as ever
they were to engender the same: and when it comes, good men do swallowe it
like a most bitter pill. But to delyght in so troublesome a custom, is to do
as he that seeks to be tormented continually upon the sea: Whom a man may
judge to be very crooked and perverse.

Moreover, these perpetual warriors do (as much as in them lie) shake off
all such duties as are most requisite in a good Citizen, as that to their
Country, wherein they stay no longer than it is troubled, etc. to their
parents whom some do, after they are grown proud by arms, disdain because
of their poverty. Concerning the particular care, that every one ought to
have to the erecting of a family, to the end to leave children to his
Country, they never think of it, as seeking rather to have some bastard by
their gentle gossips that follow them, for whom afterward they take but small
care. These imperfections be the dependaunces of that choice of life, wherein
the most of those that have embraced it, do wrap themselves, and finally
after long labor, if they can attain thereto, they perish against some rock,
or upon some coast as a rouers ship.

There are, will some man say, some that rise thereby, true: but not one of
the fifty. And he that would gather a Catalogue of those that suffer
shipwreck upon that hope, must have a long roll. Another objection is this:
many being brought up ^ong in the wars, and scarce knowing of whence they
are, cannot but follow that trade whereinto they are fashioned. This were not
to be blamed, if having reaped some fruit of their labors, they would, as
some do, stay themselves when they are meetelie well: But incessantly to
run here and there, as ravens after carren that they have smelt, is, as a
man should say, to transform themselves into ravenous beasts or fowls of
pray. The French soldier ought in war to serve his king, and his Country,
and when peace comes he must seek, if he may, to get into the entertained
bands, whereto if he cannot reatch, he should not nevertheless upon a
desperate mind, cast himself headlong into inconsiderate enterprises, as if
the Realm were not able to keep him, or himself to find means whereby to
live in the time of peace.

It is a woeful matter to think upon the number of men that so cast away
themselves. For the petty piracies of Perow do swallowe up above five hundred
every year, and other foreine wars more, although the grounds be unlike:
so as in five or six years eight or nine thousand brave soldiers do
shrink away, who might better have served some other time (if they could have
had the patience to stay) the necessity of the common wealth.

I have heard that at the battle which Sebastian king of Portugal lost, he
had certain French harquebuts with him, as also that in the army of the
Moors that over came him, there were some likewise. Is not this a mad lusting
after war, to run so far to seek it, yea, and to serve under Infidelles*
I think when those men fall into any premeditated peril, they be somewhat
touched with repentance for their rashness: but it is then very late.

Those who for profit only do flitter about, like a bird at the Of those
that for money do run into foreign wars.
call, are more to be excused than they that I have spoken of. For when some
Captains have spedde, and the soldiers passed over their necessity, they
return home again, although it many times fall out, that as well the one as
the other are defrauded of their hope, in that the pay proves so small and
rare, that they are not able to hold out: yea, and in place where pay is
rifest, the soldiers taste but little thereof: It is only for a few
Colonelles and Captains, who being licorous of such food, do devour it,
and leave the soldiers in like case as Colliers and Smiths, who are all
black and full of sweat, while none but their masters that set them on work,
do gather the profit. Which custom is far different from that of our
ancestors, who appointed to the Captains the honor, and to the soldiers
the silver. But of all that profit by pays, none do so well help themselves
as the Reysters: And to say the truth, we are but clownes in respect of
them, though some think themselves more active: For they are so perfect in
Arithmetike, that they never ouershoote themselves in accounts.

Likewise they keep possession of the Privileges that they have obtained,
namely, high parlies, and will always be paid their old bills. And besides
all this, they are wondrous polytike to live in the field. But I pray you,
will some answer, do the French aduenturer sleep in his sentinel: does
he not play his part well enough? Truly we must confess, that he that is
an unthrift and corrupt, helps himself bravely, and understands it better
than most of the Priests of Lymosin do their Dominus vobiscum: But in deed
they can neither write nor read. Yet do they not come near these others, in
the understanding of this martial practice.

Now a word or two of those that had rather run always abroad, Of those
who having once borne arms will never do other work.
than return to their occupations, or serve: some there are that think such
delyberations to proceed of generositie. Which I cannot grant, unless to a
very few: for it is not unlike but among a great number of common people
exercising handie ceaftes, there may be some that are endued with a noble
mind, and well disposed to virtue. Setting aside therefore this small number,
I will speak of the rest, of whom I will say, that it is more lykely that
the ^ainglorie wherewith, after they have served a while, they be pus^ed up,
together with idleness and souldierlyke liberty, does breed their
unwillingness to return to their former trade of life. For they imagine that
such as see them travail and get their liuinges with their handie work,
especially after they have been Corporals or Serieaunts, will scorn them: but
withal they consider not that in seeking to eschew this imaginary shame they
do many times by a voluntary constraynt plunge themselves in robberyes,
deceites, and couso^nings.

Necessity, say some, do sometimes compel the poor souldior for his life,
to borrowe of them that have overmuch: yea, according to the law of Necessity.
But likewise according to the civil laws, if they be caught, they pay
dearly for it. It were more for their profit to imitate a great number of
other Soldiers, who after they have valyauntly handeled their weapons, do
not disdain their old accustomed vocations. And my self have known them in
Gascogne (whose stomachs are haughty enough) whom in the time of peace we
should see in Towns working in their shoppes, and yet in the time of war
had charge and command over companies. And the same is the practice in all the
Towns of France, especially since the civil wars began.

For in as much as during the troubles all the Townsmen have been in arms,
also that for their safegards so many took weapon in hand, it must needs
follow that all this multitude in time of peace should return to their first
trades, saving some few. But before it was not so, for it was some trouble to
furnish again those that had abandoned them.

And even at this time among such of the Spaniards as live in their bands, it
is a reproach to travail in Mechanical arts. Wherein they have reason:
because that they endeavoring to fashion, maintain and increase themselves in
footmen, and withal so continuing some twenty or five and twenty years
without any care of returning into their own Countries, it becomes them not
amiss.

I will also aduowe that among us he that has some long time professed arms,
delights in them, and is in the way to attain thereto, in seeking a place
among the standing companies, or some other good fortune, does but his duty.
But when such commodities fail him, he ^^ust not think himself dishonored
though he labor for the maintenance of himself and his family, if he have
any, as even to this day they do in Germany, Zuitzerland, and Flanders. All
these so common examples should rather induce those that be gone affraie to
imitate them, than to do as they do. But if any do think that the setting
up again of their occupations, does abase them, let them go serve the
Gentlemen. Which in my opinion they cannot refuse to do, considering how the
poorer sort of gentlemen can settle themselves to that calling: howbeit if
they be out of taste herewith, they must be let run, and tarry till time amend
them.

We likewise find some of the body of the Gentry, who moved by diverse
reasons do also set the feather in the wind, and go Of French Gentlemen that
go to serve in foreign countries.
to seek the like adventures. Among which the youth is most to be excused,
who driven by a certain desire to learn and to win credit, do go
wheresoever occasion may serve. They wanting judgment to discern which
enterprises are lawful and which not, so soon as the wind blows in the
sails of their desires, which are large, do spread them, and so are easily
carried away. It is pity so many are lost in such places, where being
neither known nor guided, they pass under the miseries of the multitude.
Those that have authority over them ought to be careful to counsel them well.

Others there are whom poverty drives from home: for being noble, the
exercises of Mechanical arts and traficke would turn to their reproach, and
therefore they must seek the liberal and honorable, among whom weapons do
walk. Nevertheless though this profession be convenient for them, yet must
they not abuse it as they that I have spoken of. For so are they the more to be
blamed, in that the noble Gentleman is straightlyer bound to live virtuously
than the peasant. What shall he then do, if you will not let him seek his
fortune? I answer, that in our France poor Gentlemen have no cause, as
desperate persons, to take diverse parts, considering what means they have to
attain to honor and wealth.

First the men of arms were instituted for the maintenance of these, to the
end their valor should not perish, but be reserved for the benefit of the
state. Then have they the Ecclesticall offices whereto they may ascend, as also
the iusticeship which in old time they exercised. The co^mendatories of Malta
do also relieve some: likewise the service of Lords with whom not only they
were brought up as pages, but also being men they have their maintenance is a
good refuge for them.

Finally, the bands of footmen do retain many. Wherefore the wise should
rather settle themselves to the best of these, than by thinking to profit
abroad to loose their lives. Some will say that death catches not so many as
we speak of, but they deceive themselves: for I have noted the number to be
greater than we ween for, and of mere compassion that I take of them, I would
that through good instr^utions or other remedies, the mischief might be
prevented. Yet do I not mean that orders should be so strict, that none may
go forth without leave. For in such a great populous kingdom as this, that
law cannot be established. And if there were but four or five hundred
voluntaries as well of the Gentry as communaltie, that of their own
particular motions would yearly go into the wars, as foul to their haunt,
it were but a small matter and not to be spoken of. But there go many more of
that sort as I have said. And many Gentlemen also of account and great
credit who are ready enough to march: and whenever they move, they incite
many other. Wherefore before they so do, it were their parts well to examine the
causes, which being unlawful, as being moved by nothing but their own profit
or honor, they show that they have small care of their friends, in counsailing
them those things that tend more to their own particular interest, than to
common equity. In this case men must be wise to choose rather than willing to
depart.

Now are we to look what fruit our Nation reap of these martial voyages,
which they take upon them rather of iolitie Of the fruits of these martial
voyages.
than any good foundation. I take it to be very small. First in* these days
most of them through the liberty of civil wars, being grown into
wonderful discordes, going abroad, do nothing but lay open their
imperfections, which they should seek either to amend or hide. Some are
blasphemers of God: others adulterers, quarellers, and dissolute persons, and
many disobedient to their Captains: of whom likewise some do either for their
own profit or through ignaraunce break good laws and order. So as when men
see that the effects be not answerable to the French name, they grow of
liking with them.

On the other side, those people that are driven to bear their insolences, I
mean of the lawless, not of the modest, (albeit evermore there be good and
valiant men mingled among the great number) do grow to hate the whole Nation
for the malice of some, thinking it incompatible: and in their hearts do power
forth continual curses against the same: so as although there be some
Captains, Gentlemen, and Soldiers, who through their good behauiours do
become agreeable unto them, yet are they not able to suppress the general
mislyke. And here is yet another inconvenience, namely, that if there happen
any mishappe in the war, rather through the strength of the enemy, than
any presumption or insufficiency of the Captains, either through the
disobedience or small valor of the soldiers, than do the peoples tongues
even tear in pieces those whom having begun to hate, they afterward
utterly contemn.

Now it is most certain, that in this counterfaite discipline losses are as
common as good success or rather more. Which truly should make these that
have charge to believe, that it is hard to escape stumbling in so rugged a
quarrie. Whosoever therefore purposes to go on warrefare in a foreine
Country, let him make great account of virtue, for according to the same he
shall be esteemed, and many times a little shall be accounted off. Whereas
contrariwise if men carry new vices, especially such as offend, no man will
receive them for servants, much less for Masters: and without affoording
them any thing, will laugh at them, and which is yet worse, they shall be
feared as much as if they were open enemies.

This together with the miseries before touched makes me to Arms ought
especially in a foreign contry to be accompanied with virtue.
believe that until that manners and martial discipline be in better state
among the French nation, they shall atchieue small credit and less good will
among our neighbors whom they shall go to serve. Truly it is in vain to
think that force only can work any great effects: for not being
accompanied with justice, faith, and modesty, it is imperfect. But by the
demonstration of virtue the heart is won, which is a sure and glorious
conquest, examples whereof the Romans have left unto us.

I know well enough that as well the Gentleman as the Soldier may obiecte
to those that set them on work many things worthy consideration: namely,
that they hazard their lives, receive bodily wounds, spend their goods, and
endure great pain for their service: all which will nevertheless loose their
grace and be of no account, if these deprauations continue. For the people
whom the Soldiers does oppress will not so much excuse them for defending
of them, as they will curse them for devouring them, as burying the remembrance
of the benefit in the smart of the evils. But those that perform their duties
to the best of their powers as well in fighting as in good life, they love and
excuse.

Some will say, in these foreine wars that they they go to seek, Answer
to certain objections.
they may learn much. I confess it: But withal we must note, that from the
siege of Mastricht, which was the notablest in our time, there escaped but
ten French Soldiers, and not four from that of Harlem, in which two Towns
there were enough, as I have heard.

I am not so ignorant but I know that the property of war is ordinarily
to devour at the least the fourth part of those that follow it: but when of
the five parts it catches four, as often times it does, is it not too
ravenous? This have I said to the end that those that go as unfeathered
boultes into places of great noise, may remember yt easily they depart, but
very hardly return again. Those that ween that when France has had peace
for two or three years, she should never have war again, do deceive
themselves. For if they consider what has passed since the year 1494. they
shall see that she has not been long in rest since.

To be brief, they that be wise (if they will follow my counsel) shall enter
into these voluntary purposes with leaden heels, yea, even the Gentlemen, as
calling to mind that to go rashly and put their lives in more dangerous than
necessary adventures, (which they should never do but upon good occasions)
is an argument of French rashness, an engendering of parents tears and a
weakening of the sinowes of the state. But when their enterprises are
underpropped with justice, and that the law full commandments of Kings
wealths do set in foot, who in respect of alliaunces do send help to
their confederates, and upon any other necessary occasion do succor and
relieve the oppressed: then must we not consider of any dangers or
discommodityes. For in doing our duetyes, whether we suffer, or whether we
perish, our labor or loss is always well employed.

Now will I discourie upon a certain polytike rule, usually alleged in
such like affairs as this. Which many very excellent An examination of the
rule of certain politics who are of opinion that a great kingdom should never
be with out war against some stranger.
persons both have and still do allow, to see how the same may agree with
us. This is it, A great estate replenished with warlike people, ought still to
have some foreine war wherewith to keep it occupied, least being at quiet
they convert their weapons each against other.

The maintayners hereof do allege the example of Scipio Nasica, who
counsayled it to the Romans. Concluding that Carthage ought not to be razed,
to the end still to have an enemy whom to fear and be always busied
withal: For (said he) if this fear and cause be taken away, they be in
danger to move one against another in their own land. Heereto they add, that
experience has taught, that when we have appeased our foreine wars, we have
entered into civil which have almost beaten us quite down.

Moreover, that our Nation being insolent in peace, impatient of tarrying long
in the house, full of generositie, and desirous of glory, must of necessity
exercise it self in arms, to the end to discharge so many conceits of the
mind, without the Realm, and not within.

Finally, that the badde humors remaining of our civil dissension (by these
humors meaning corrupted persons) had need to be purged, and therefore that we
should suffer them to go out of themselves, if we see them so displosed, or
else to force them forth by art, least they should breed any new disease.
And this has been put heretofore in practice at the end of our wars
against the English Nation. Truly I dare not deny but we are to attribute
much to the observations of antiquity, of things that have had good success
when they have been used in time convenient. But withal, I dare aduowe that
every time to apply the same to an estate, and not to consider the several
disposition thereof, is to mistake. Likewise the better to know how to apply
this unto us, let us look in what state it now stands. In truth it is so
evil at ease, that the ministering of so vigorous a law, in stead of a
remedy, were the way to weaken it more and more. Every man knows that our
troubles began above 24. years ago, which have been no wars, but butcherly
slaughters, and who so list to believe a book printed under the name of
Frumenteau, which lays open the chief desolations of our land, how can be
but wonder at so terrible destructions? Above half the Nobility is perished:
As for soldiers we must count them by legions, the people universally wasted,
the treasuries sucked The strange misiries of our civil Wars.
dry, debts increased, discipline neglected, godliness perished, manners
depraved, justice corrupted, men divided, and all things in sale. Be not these
brave preparatiues to build new purposes? It is as if a man in lieu of stones
should take clots of earth, and mire in stead of lime, and then choose a marish
ground to build a Castle upon: whom we might with good reason wish to renew
his wits, to consider the defects of his stuff, and to stay until he were
better provided. Likewise in that state wherein we now stand, to enter of a
iolitie into any great war before that four or five years have renewed our
youth, were it not as a man should say, as much as to let him blood again
that has already lost almost all his blood? And to undertake the same without
discipline, is as much as to build without rule. Neither is it any less
inconvenience to be unprovided of money. For sooner might a man make a ship to
swim without oars or sails, than prosecute a war without wealth. Who then
would be so far ouerseene as to counsel us to begin the thing that must
have a bad end, which necessarily will ensue of the defects aforesaid?

I am sure that Scipio Nasica aforementioned, never meant to wish them
voluntarily to begin an enterprise whereof they could reap nothing but loss
and infamy, neither would aduowe such a one to be profitable to a land
already half buried in miseries: For he feared not the Romans adversity,
but their prosperity, which brought with it pride and insolency. And this we
are to note, that four year after that Publius Cornelius Scipio had overcome
Hannibal, and made peace with the Carthegenians, the Romans grew so
haughty, seeing themselves crowned with so many victories and triumphs, that
their skins could not hold them. Then was not discipline any whit out of
frame. The common treasurlie was mightily increased as well with the rich
spoylos of Carthage as of Spain, neither had they any want of men. This was
the cause that moved the Senate to think it convenient to be doing with Philip
of Macedon which was a very wise practice of ye rule aforesaid. But what
conformity is there between our present state and the state of the Romans at
that time? As much as between a rich, sound, and well ordered man, and a
poor, sieke, and buruly person. Let us then first cure our diseases, before
we imitate their dooinges in their full force and strength.

Many do think France to be as well replenished with men as ever it was.
Wherein they deceive themselves. And in my opinion Whether France be well
furnished of men of war.
the matter that deceives them is, that they see the most of those that ga^^e
up and down make great bragges in words, habit and co^^tenaunce: For if a
cobbler has been a soldier but two years, he will think himself worthy
to wear a guilte swoorde (which our Fathers would have been loath to
permit to any under the degree of knighthoode) yea, and he will wear it if
he can come by it either by hook or crook, as also his silk neatherstockes,
which good King Henry the second never ware: whereto likewise his speech shall
be correspondent. For if this soldier do but look awrie upon a man, he
is by and by dead at the least. This is it that blinds such as take in
payment shows and looks, who peradventure applying to them the Proverb that,
One man is worth an hundred, do imagine that our France do ouerflowe with
men of arms and warriors. But my opinion herein is, that yet we have a good
number both Gentlemen and commons: These being well kept, and to them
adjoining the youth which six years may bring forward, we may truly say,
that it shall ouerflowe with such men as shall need no great pricking forward
to make them to stir. Less time can we not have to redress our warfare and
replenish our coffers, but especially to restore our virtues.

But, will some say, if any good occasion should fall out, shall we let it
slip? That is the masters part to judge of, and peradventure the Lady may
be so beautiful, that she may have a good Of wars with our the realm.
look. Yet will it be hard for us to like of any, until we have put on
again our ancient ornaments. As for the purgation aforementioned, meet to
cast forth the dregs which the civil wars have left behind them, I doubt
it will prove like to Antimonie, which expels both good and badde humors
together: As we may see by that which even lately we have to our damage
tried.

Our weakness longs rather after restoritiues, than those things that purge
violently. For, so to think that France cannot be pacified without sending
away five or six thousand disordered soldiers, is but to wink with one
eye. But let us stir them a little, and we shall see that we must go
farther, and that these little bells do not sound before the great ones have
rong out. We must think that most Frenchmen, yea, even those that follow
adventures are weary of suffering so many mischiefs, as the Romans were of
the slaughters of Marius and Silla: likewise that they mislike not of rest,
because they know it to be necessary for them, which after they shall for a
while have inioyed, they will afterward be but ouer-readie to imploie
themselves where a man list. But now had they no other enterprises in hand, yet
were it unlikely that any could prosper until the imperfections as well
public as particular, which bury our ancient fame, were banished, good order
reestablished, and virtue honored.

The tenth Discourse.
Of the three false opinions that misleade sundry of the Nobility.
First, that the chief mark whereat a Gentleman should aim is to become
valorous. Secondly, that the Gentleman which keeping home, trauaileth not
abroad to seek adventures, inioyeth small contentation, and is but base
minded. Thirdly, that although the Prince command things unjust to his subject,
he must nevertheless put them in execution.


THe Physicians do say, that old diseases are of hardest cure. Which the
politikes as well A general and meet preface to the whole discourse.
as they, may justly affirm concerning those errors that through long use
have taken deep root. For whatsoever is fixed in the mind, has, as a man
should say, more bands than that which is tied to the body: so as it is
needful to bestow whole years in the rooting of them out. And as the first
do temper sundry simples to apply to bodily iufirmities, even so should the
second out of the rules of wisdom draw profitable instructions to reform
the manners of those tha^t list to use the same. Howbeit, some would say the
Physician to be very presumptuous that should come to a Patients house unsent
for, but in the care of spiritual diseases and evil customs, he that sees
his Country afflicted and takes compassion thereof, may in my opinion,
freely discourse and write of the same, so long as he wayeth her disposition,
and has in himself any tender regard toward the subject whereto he would
apply it.

I will begin with the first opinion which has not sprung out of any bad
fountain, but from the universal disposition of the nobility, Examination of
the first opinion.
which time out of mind has meruailously celebrated deeds of arms, as worthy
instruments to advance them to great honor, but the same have by little and
little so exceeded that in the end, under the pretense of valiancie, she has
subdued and confounded the rest, as if one kind did comprehend them all in
general. This false opinion has attained even to our days wherein the said
pretense is worse used than ever it was. For now men seek rather to win a
little fame through that only, then a great deal by diverse joined together. I
think it no abuse to esteem of the thing that so deserves, no more then to
like of some pearl that a man has bought: but if any man's affection thereto
should be so addicted, as therefore to disdain all other precious stones, were
it not a token of a perverse judgment* The like is it with virtues, whereof
the least is so necessary, that we may say that the want thereof breeds
great discommodities. If a man might serve his turn with one of them as well
as with one garment, his life would not peradventure be so troublesome. But it
should likewise leese a great part of the beauty and commodity in being
despoyled of all the fairest ornaments. For as the more a garden or medowe are
planted and enritched with diverse kinds of fruit and flowers, the better they
are esteemed, even so should he be that has most virtues: without the which
his life is but obscure. Nevertheless, it is good that every one should
consider his own vocation, to the end to apply thereunto that which may be most
convenient for himself, the use whereof should also be to him most familier. As
to the politic man, discretion: to the Divine, humility: to the Lawyer,
justice: and to the Soldier, courage. But as for the Nobleman, whereto shall
we tie him? Especially him whose ancestors have been an honor to his age.

I am not of opinion that Gentlemen should stay upon one only That Gentlemen
should be adorned with sundry virtues.
virtue, but also grow in love with many. For such love is lawful and these
virgins are never jealous. Painters do use to shadow all the Muses in a
troop, as never habandoning one another: with like reason might they so do by
this worthy society, wherein the associates do greatly delight to dwell:
whereof we are to learn, since so willingly they walk together, still to keep
our doors open, that when the one enters she may bring in all the rest with
her. I know that Fortitude (by some named Prowess or ^aliancie) is an
excellent virtue, beseeming the best as well as the inferiors, without the
which their lives are of small valor, but the same being destitute of Justice
is hurtful to the good. If Temperance do not moderate her she will turn into
rage, and not guided by discretion will labor out of season. Wherein we see
there is a league between them, and each affords mutual aid to other,
which cannot be altered without particular prejudice to every of them. The
Martiners do not think one Anchor sufficient to stay and hold a Ship tite.
The like may we say of Nobility, who must have more then one virtue to
confirm their reputation: which is not unknown to those that are learned in
moral discipline, of whom the number is very small, by reason that the error
whereof we now entreat has made the greater multitude too partial: as
appears in the titles that many take upon them, as calling themselves The
arm of the country, the mainteyner of arms, and the terror to the enemies:
which titles I blame not, notwithstanding in my opinion the name Professor of
Virtue, would comprehend much more and yield them greater honor.

It is most certain that for the well handling of the weapon it The error of
such as suppose prowess only to be sufficient to the prosessors of arms.
were requisite to be endued with much boldness and generositie: as also to
such as have been furnished therewith have redounded much commendation, which
has caused many so to admire this profession: which nevertheless through over
much praise have bred this error, namely, to make small account of all other
virtues. For it is not unknown that in our grandfathers days, if a gentleman
had given himself to study the Greek tongue or Latin, his companions would
say that he must be made a clarke, also that a sword beseemed him not. Whereof
grew this proverb, that it was enough for a Soldier to be able to write his
own name, as if knowledge had been a hinderance to his valor. I think they
were of opinion that he that showed himself audacious, expert in his weapon,
and prone to quarrelling, was sufficiently armed for the attayning to riches
and honor: and ordinarily they that were noted to be such, obtained both. I
will not utterly reject these things, which bear I wot not what fair show:
yet will I say thus much, that not being accompanied (as is aforesaid) with
other good qualities, they be not so commendable as men think for. Howbeit,
although some one chance not to abuse this virtue of Valiancie, yet ought he
not to bury himself therein, considering that the use of the rest is more
necessary for him. If he fights once in a month, it is all, nevertheless,
if he list he may daily put in practice other good gifts to the benefit of
others and his own commendation. It is no small matter to be accounted a
Soldier, but when honesty is thereto adjoined it is much more. And thus are
we to make our particular profession to lean to the general vocation, that
is, to live well, whereunto all men are bound. And whosoever forgets this
universal rule to stay himself only upon the observations there upon
depending, it should seem that he is rather led by profit or(...)bition
(whereunto men of all sorts do aspire) than by any true affection to virtue.

Hanniball of Carthage was one of the most famous Captains Prowess destitude
of other virtues deserves of the name of virtue.
that ever were, yet being destitute of piety and faith, and withal a cruel
and deceiptfull person, it bred him the name to be a most wicked man. How much
greater commendation deserved Scipio Africanus, who was both an honest man and
as good a Captain withal: This never boasted so much in his valiancie, as to
despise the thing that made him not only a true Citizen but also a good
householder. For, to be just to his friends and terrible to his enemies, are
no such contraries, but that they may very well concur together, because the
original of them both proceeds from one spring.

Well, I will confess that in a man of war prowess is commendable, but in
the well borne Gentleman, his study, exercise and pleasure should shoot at
all the virtues, especially at those that are most to be preferred,
considering that Nobility is a participation in all those good things. I
think no man will gainsay but Piety, Truth, Temperance and Justice must march
before Fortitude, notwithstanding she also helps the rest. For the ungodly,
lying, dissolute or unjust person, whatsoever goodly cloak of prowess that may
be given him, is nevertheless eschued and hated, as being much more hurtful
to his friends then dreadful to his enemies, although he know never so well
how to help himself with his weapon. For this cause ought Noblemen first to
learn those things that are most necessary, and so by degrees to descend to
those that may better be forborne: so shall they escape this error which
stays them upon one simple prize, and hides from them many other more
precious, wherein they have no less interest.

It might peradventure beseem a poor Soldier, who having It becomes a
Gentleman to profess diverse virtues.
nothing, has by his weapon and desert has achieved means to live, never to
depart the bounds of prowess, but highly to extol it, as every artificer will
do his art. But the Gentleman to whom as well this as many other ways are
yet open, wherein to exercise himself and to atteyne to honor, yields
himself as it were prisoner, yea even guilty, in seeking to march only under
the one, since he is bound to walk in all.

I remember an answer to this purpose once made at the Court to one whose
continual talk was of war, yea even in the time of peace. When the wars
begin again, said one to him, you shall be set on work, but now seeing you
are destitute of civil and peaceable conditions, I would wish you to shut up
your self in a chest, so to keep you from rust until time serve: either else
to temporise at this time.

The former error is somewhat tolerable, because it may be amended: Against
such as abuse their force and valeancie.
and it is to be hoped that he which will endeavor to do one part of his
duty, being better taught will employe himself in the rest: but he that
abuses that one only virtue that he has chosen is wonderfully out of the
way. And whereas Gentlemen do wear their swords girt to their sides, first
they do it in the defense of their Country, and next to employ them under the
authority of the laws to defend the weak and innocent from the vyolence of
the oppressors: also to preserve their own persons from outrage: So far is
the practice now from following the said rules, that contrariwise many as well
noble as unnoble do use them to do more harm to their friends then hurt to
their enemies. This is a goodly valiancie that serves only to destroy it
self: and villainous are the Tryumphes which are erected of the spoils of
Peasants, also of the weapons and blood of neighbors and companions.

Some man will say, that Fortitude is an other manner of thing Wherein valeancie
consists.
and shines principally in the wars: I grant it, but not in these which
seem it to be imperfect in all places. Valiancie among other things consists
in vanquishing rather then to flee, and in sustaining of labor freely.
Concerning the first point what do we see: Losses ordinary, and victory
rare. And as for the second, there need but two days rain and four and
twenty hours want, to raise a w(...)egiment into a mutiny. Thus by little and
little many do wander and stray from this virtue, notwithstansta^ding they
aduow that they have ambraced it. And if the French Princes, Lords, famous
Capteynes, and Gentlemen which do well use the same do not endeavor to
restore it into the former dignity and to take away the abuses, they shall
many times find themselves as well at the Court as in the field far abused.
And our nation which heretofore has through true Valiancie gotten such fame,
shall behold it self slave to those that heretofore have obeyed it. This may
suffice to show that Nobility ought to aim at all virtues, and not at one
alone: Likewise that they must not pervert that virtue which ought to be the
pillar of their arms.

I would have made some description of this virtue of Fortitude Of true and
false valcancy.
(which cannot be too well known to those that exercise the same) but that
Aristotle in his Ethickes has largely discoursed thereof, whereunto they that
delight in reading may have recourse, especially well to understand the
difference between such as is true in deed and that which does but bear a
show thereof, only I will say this by the way, that he sets down five
kinds of counterfeit Fortitude. The first, that which is grounded upon hope of
reward: the second, upon fear of punishment* the third, upon experience: the
fourth, upon wrath: and the fifth, upon ignorance of danger. But the true is
when a man in the midst of the greatest dangers and most terrible things,
yea even of death, shows him self steadfast and without fear: whereinto he
hazardeth himself in a just and honest cause, and of these there be few, and
yet to be truly possessed with Fortitude he must be such a one.

The second false opinion is not so hurtful as the first, howbeit Examination
of the second opinion.
it molesteth many and to no purpose, in causing them to seek felicities
rather apparent then true, and to judge amiss of the condition of many. I
mislike not that men should commend that kind of life that any has chosen:
because it likes the chooser: but rashly to condemn other men's, argues a
little pride and want of consideration. Now, the cause why some do so greatly
commend travailing The spring thereof.
abreade, proceeds of a conceived opinion that ^iuilitie is better learned
abroad, as also that reputation and riches are obtained by haunting of diverse
places and keeping company with diverse persons. I would not greatly argue
against their opinions if they comprehended no more but this, yea my self
would counsel young men to go (as I have already said in an other discourse)
into places where any thing that is honest is to be learned. Likewise such as
are poor and have quick wits being capeable to serve either publicly or
privately, may seek their adventures through al places, and those likewise that
have met with them and are bound unto them by any bond of service, of office,
or of art to go near or far, ought not to fail in perfourming these
duties. But before I enter any farther into any other exceptions, I must
confess yt I mean here to excuse certain Gentlemen, who being already
possession of house, famelie and means, and withal are not to seek what
virtue and knowledge mean, are nevertheless despised (because they are
resolved to speade their lives at home) by those that make as it were an
ordinary occupation to be continually upon the public theaters of Courts,
Cities, Wars, and ^orrei^e Of those that cannot keep home.
lands. Of these will I speak one word by the way. That is, that some there
are that trot into all places only upon curiosity: others do also go to the
end aforesaid, namely to be better instructed. Concerning the first: They
having no other meaning but an outward and vain pleasure, reap nothing but
vanity and such a con^ontation as is of no continuance, as having no other
foundation but wind. Only they can pra^^le a little among simple people of
things that they take for wonders, in that they want knowledge, and that is
all. Likewise will I there leave them, because in their doings they bear no
other affection, but as it were to go see a Maygaine. But with the second it
is otherwise* for they learn goodthings and sometimes to increase, so as we
see the good (...) of their (...) appear. Butias the wood worm engenders in
wood, (...) happen (...), the more they have att^yned, them or (...) does the
^^rrogance en^tease* where of ensues contempt of their equalles that imitate
them not. Youth that has not yet experience of the several kinds of life
does easily stumble into these rash judgments until it be reformed: but there
are some whom neither age nor reason can divert from such imaginations:
where(...) they show that they have profited but little in strayings ^o (...)
from (...)* Also as (...) knowledge does never pass up it self, but makes
the person the more humble and lowly, so should virtue make it the more
discreet.

Now let us see wherewith they blemish the country common The reproaches of
these runnagates against the country and stayed life.
course of life. It gives, say they, small content, and extenuateth the force
of courage. They do likewise persuade themselves that those which are nothing
moved in the presence of great objects, neither stirred up by emulation of
their equals, must of necessity stoop to such actions as may be termed
seruise. Also the most of these having been brought up in these stately Courts,
do think that the excellency and beauty of virtue do never shine but where
it is best flourished out and with greatest traynes: so that perceiving it o^
clothed of those outward ornaments and in simple array, they do but wink at
it, as men of ^^^y do at their friends when they be fallen into extreme
poverty. And therefore marking those that never stir from home, but lie
still as it were hidden and without any show, they would thereby infer that
they want good qualities, as thinking that if they had any, the same would
force them forth as the sails do force, the Ship into the maine Sea: But
in their words they make many false consequences. For to say that that virtue
seems obscure which bears but her own simple show; likewise that he that
has enough; if he proclaymeth not abroad, I have virtue to sell, seems to
have but little: Also that contentment depends upon the knowledge, and favor
of the mighty and the multitude, is to be blinded with the appearance of
outward things, which bleare the sight of those that are inward. The
Philosophers do hold that true felicite consists in the participation of
virtue, likewise that the same may be found in all sorts of men and in all
places. Which is so true that none can deny it. We must therefore before we
contemn any kind of life, how base soever it seems, look whether no
portion of virtue shines therein. For if there do, we ought not to condemn
it at randon.

Well, the better to judge thereof, let us more nearly examine Commodities of
country life.
this manner of country life, and we shall peradventure see that it brings
forth very good and fair fruits both for it self and others. First, he that
has chosen it may in these some what solitary places more devoutly
exercise-the duties of Religion, and with less hindrances those of charity
then among the great societies, where Princes or vanities do for the most part
detain the minds in thraldom, and withdraw them from such meditatious as are
necessary for all: and when Godliness, which is the foundation of life, is
well understood and perfectly practiced, there ensues great contentation.
Next, the mind finds greater tranquillity in such places then in Courts and
Cities, where it is tormented with most vyolent verturbations: as ambition*
raging love, revenge, wrath, papine and envy. For in the country life those
objects that stir up inward rage does not commonly haunt. As for delight, it
is as much, in that there is no cause but a man may find as good relish in the
smallest things, the taste whereof is so far from those that are are
entangled among the civil multitude, that they do not so much as perceive
them. David although a great Kind did nevertheless sometime delight in these
small country ornaments, which are in the 65. Psalm very well described,
where he says.

In places plain the flocks shall feed.
And cover all the earth:
The vales with corn shall so exceed,
That men shall sing for mirth.
Now let us proceed to the commodities: which truly are of two sorts. For
first superfluity, the only sepulcher wherein many rich houses are buried, is
in manner unknown in the country life. Secondly, household orders are well
observed, and although the use of thrift be the ordinary rule, yet does
liberality shine in the midst thereof, and honest sufficiency who is still
neighbor to abundance never departs: the contrary whereof appears where
prodigality rai^^eth. For her followers do often times try the same that
Ships do in a storm, whom the waves do sometime lift up to the Clouds,
and by and by bring down to the bottom of the Sea. Even so they having made
stately cheer for the space of some eight days, must remain half a year
pinched with all kind of penury. As for the commodity that the others reap by
the presence and frequentation of that whereof of I speak, it is likewise to
be considered. For to begin with his famelie, there is no doubt but, according
to the proverb, Such master such man, if he be endued with many virtues, he
shareth them with his, especially with his wife and children, describing in his
private famelie the form of a well ordered Commonwelth. His subjects likewise,
what comfort do they also conceive in coming to try his a^^abili^ie and good
will* Entering farther into the course of his life, what an example is he to
make them the better? Finally, such a man's neighbors and kindred may among
their greatest commodities note this, that they may be ordinarily conversant
with him, and so to taste of sundry goodly fruits of learning and amity. Who
so list farther to learn the commendations of the country life, let him read
those books that are purposely written thereof. For my part it is enough that
I have in a word touched it by the way, as well not to bring out of liking
those that use it well, as also to show to others that disdain it, that it is
not destitute of virtue, honesty, and solace.

Now let us see whether it deminisheth prowess as some do Whether the country
life quaileth prowese.
suppose. For my part I think not in any in whom the love of virtue is not
quite extinct. For in whatsoever place they be, they still think it
convenient for a Gentleman to bear a man's stomach. On the other side, the
exercise of the Horse, the running at the Ring, hunting and the haquebut are
portraitures and instruments of war which waken the courages and maintain
them in force. But communication with our like does also greatly help thereto:
because the speeches both of the one and other do tend only to contemn
towardlike demeanours and to exalt the valiant: so as hereof we make a
counterpoize against that delicacie which by little and little is engendered in
those persons whose lives are free from danger. I know well enough that the
Nobility that houldeth residence a great part of the year in frontier
Garrisons, is (through continual exercise in warlike discourses) more stirred
up to the love of prowess, then that that keep home. But all cannot be there
maintained, neither do those that are deprived of that exercise, considering
the reputation of the rest, but make inwardly some small provision of that
which is the cause of obtaining the same. Moreover, it follows not that
because they are not so skillful in military profession as others, yt they are
therefore void of courage: For he that has good seed in him, with a little
custom makes it well to fructify. How many brave Capteynes have in our
fathers days been seen never to stir from home after the wars were once
ended? And yet when occasion served that they must to it again they were
nothing inferior to any of the rest. Thus much must I needs say that like as
martial exercise makes not all that practice it valiant, no more does
dwelling at home so daunt the courages of those that use it, but that they can
always be well enough disposed to do their parts when honor commands. As
for the rest who even burye themselves by perpetual keeping home in their own
houses, to the end only to stoop to effeminate pleasures and sloth, either
else to have the better opportunity to practice violence or covetousness. I
will say no more, but only wish that among the Nobility there were Censors
established as in the Roman Commonwelth: that through public shame their
faults whether secret or open might be corrected. For it is a shame for the
goodly title of Nobility to be made a cloak to unworthy actions. Now were it
not amiss to examine whether the felicity of those that go up and down to
seek it thus every where, and who ween to have more then others, be so great
as they say for: But I will not stay thereupon to the end to discourse upon
the third false opinion.

Many there are that reprove it, others also that put it in practice, The
censure of the third opinion.
either thinking it not to want a good foundation, or else because that by the
use thereof they reap profit and preferment. But how soever they list to take
it, they are not to be excused. For our opinions must agree with that that is
just, and our commodities be purchased without injustice: which even those
ought to know that make account to exceed the common people in dignity and
wisdom: to the end they by their example may conform themselves to fulfill
whatsoever the duty of all. And as it is an easy matter from liberality,
which teaches us the manner to give in place and season convenient, to fall
into prodigality which shows how to do the contrary: so without diligent
heed from true obedience we slide into false, which in counterexchaunge of a
matter due, makes us to do that that is not due.

This question have sundry learned personages at large treated upon, of whose
judgments we ought not to be ignorant; to the end always in our selves to
be resolved of a matter of so great weight. I will therefore (following their
steps) speak only two or three words according to my capacity, especially
using the instructions taken out of Gods word. The same teaches us that God
has set up the mighty that have dominion over the nations, to rule and
govern them in piety and justice: whom likewise he commands us to have in
singular honor and to obey, whereupon S. Paul says: Let every soul be subject
to the superior powers, for there is no power but of God, and the powers that
are, are the ordinance Romans. 13.
of God. This only place might suffice to enstruct as well the one as the other
in their duties. For herein are the superiors warned to remember the sacred
dignity wherewith they are adorned, that they neither abuse nor profane it by
cruelty, covetousness, or voluptuous lust. Likewise the inferiors to bow
their necks under those authorities as under the yoke of God, not only in
patience, but in joy also. For as S. Paul in the same chapter says. They
that resist the powers, do resist the ordinance of GOD. Whereto he afterward
adds, That the Prince bears the sword for the benefit of his subjects
whether for their defense or correction. Which reason ought to make us think
obedience sweet, because in yielding the same we both please God and reap
profit. If Princes would well consider the goodly titles and large
prerogatives that God gives them, they would amend and their commandments
should be more just. For by the mouth of his Prophet David he says: I have
said, ye are Gods, and children to the most highest* herein signifying that as
in them shines the image of Jesus Christ, whose Empire is both in heaven and
earth, so ought they to imitate him in well doing rather then in hurting and
destroying: but because the most part of them do neglect or contemn these most
worthy instructions, they grow to degenerate, in such wise that evermore that
estate has been most happy, wherein the most of those that have sit upon the
throne have beue vertuaus. The places likewise by me alleged ought to retain
the people from stirring not only in unjust causes, but also in such as are
vnnessary, when they contemn those who^ God has so exalted. Also when a good
and merciful Prince reigns, if his Subjects do through disobedience provoke
him, they make themselves guilty before God and man, and thus much I think
few can gainsay.

But the question is, of one that makes small account of the laws or justice
should command that thing that were wicked, whether The examination of the
principal question.
we ought to obey him. Hereto I answer that if this iniquity consists in
raising of taxes and tributes upon the subjects goods, (which many have often
tried) either in the increase of the labors laid upon their persons, (as
Pharao dealt with the Hebrews) in such a case we can do no better then to
humble our selves before God, and cratte of him pardon and deliverance from so
vyolent oppression. For notwithstanding it proccede of his cruelty and malice
that is author thereof, yet are we withal to mark Gods ordinance, who uses
such scourges to tame the imperfections of those whom he will amend. Why? will
some man say, what honor can he deserve, who from a just principality is
fallen into tyranny? who in liewe of shearing his sheep does flea and devour
them? Since also he so villanously peruerteth public order, is he not
unworthy that any should yield him reverence? God in his word says, that
notwithstanding he greatly dislike this oppression, which proceeds of man's
frailty and lusts, kindled by the devils malice, yet does it not abolish the
subjection due to superiorities and policies, wherein we must still mark the
footpathes of his decree. Otherwise were the saying of S. Paul in vain, that
the powers that are, are the ordinances of God. Neither should S. Peter have
any reason to command us to honor the King. But if any say that this had
relation to the good, I must answer yt neither of the^ were ignorant what men
Tyberius and Caligula were, either Nero, all which we might rather name
horrible Tyrants then true Princes. If therefore among these horrible politic
confusions they commanded us to look higher and to humble our selves, this
precept should admonish alpeople that suffer violence through the pride or
covetousness of their superiors, to think once or twice before they kick
against the prick. For undoubtedly God ordained the bad Princes as well as the
good, according to the saying of the Prophet Oseas: Osee. (...).
In my rage will I give thoe a King, and in my wrath take him away. Also
Esdras, I will give them children to be their Princes, and effeminate Esaias. 13.
persons shall bear rule over them. Likewise Job: He makes the hipocrite to
reign for the sins of the people. If all these goodly Job 34.
rules were well considered, many there are that would not be so hasty to
strive against the rod: for whenever the stripe comes, our first work
ought to be to have recourse to God, as is aforesaid, and to appease him: and
next to enter into our selves and amend. Thirdly, to seek lawful remedies
against the mischief, which if they fail us, then to wait in patience. And
having well discharged our selves in all ye aforesaid, then to have good hope
of wished success. If we are in any affayre to observe moderation and
wisdom, then in this especially. The precepts of Philosophers and ancient
customs of the Romans and Grecians, (the most civil and wisest nations
among all other) did grant more liberty to the oppressed then Christian
Religion does. For they did so hate and abhor tyranny that they could in no
wise away with it. Which notwithstanding it be even to this day most odious,
yet must Christians have more patience then others, because that he which so
strictly commands it, does withal promise in time convenient to provide for
their miseries: whereby we may see of what force and power the doctrine of the
Gospel is, to print in men's minds the law of obedience and reverence toward
the superiors.

This if some Princes were perfect in, they would not peradventure so readily
follow the counsels of diverse Churchmen, Against the violence of some Clergy
men.
which make them with all extremity to pursue the professors thereof. They be,
say these sollicitors, justly punished, for they be heretics. Truly my
masters your words are not receiuable. It is the old song which is now out of
use, since the Scriptures bewrayed your pot of Roses, that is to say, your
abuses, at the most whereof even some of your own men do make a jest and give
them no credit. Force them not then to reverence them least they answer you
with the Apostles: It is better to obey God then men. They deserve, will you
say, to be rooted out by arms, because they take arms. Acts. 3.
Such as be at their ease are soon angered and take small care or none for the
afflicted. See whether you be none of them. If any man had but pricked you,
you would fall out with him, yea and peradventure strike him too. And can you
not consider that the Protestants in France did patiently, for the space of
foreteene years, and the Flemings five and forty, suffer all sorts of
spiritual torments and bodily pains upon false accusations: and yet will you
not that they should seek any remedies to exempt them from such intolerable
and cruel miseries.

But now I think of it, I have degressed from my purpose, to Of duty.
speak of the furies used against the consciences. But I will say no more, but
return to my first path, again to confirm my former saying, that bodily
charges though heavy, should be borne. For as Samuel says: Kings shall
sometimes be very ready to oppress 1. Sam. (...).
their people, and although they cry out, says he, yet will not God hear
them. And this ought to admonish them to suffer so long as it shall please God
to withdraw his favorable hand from them. All that I have hitherto alleged
to exalt the mighty and their dignity, tends not so to puff them up that
through disordered license they shall exceed the bounds of justice. For if
they would, yet can God chastize them as he did Roboam and Saul, and provide
lawful remedies to deliver those that are oppressed. Neither do I believe
that there is any state but has laws to repulse oppressors when their
vyolences are over grievous or continual.

Now, in these corrupt Kingdoms many men there are that Of such as do
whatsoever they are commanded.
need no great compulsion to work wickedness, as thinking that their
obedience due to Princes covers all that is amiss in their actions. Yea some
that have public offices do take themselves to be double bound not to refuse
to do any thing that may be commanded them, in that they are not only subjects
but also officers. These presuppositions are the occasion that a mischief
conceived by a few and embraced by many has a more long and larger course.
They hold that if the great do command, they must yield and obey: for
notwithstanding the matter were unjust, yet is the executer thereof excusable
and the commander aunswerable. But these obsequious mates are much deceived in
covering themselves with a sack betymes, and leaving all the blame to their
masters. Others there are likewise in this miserable world, wherein
wickedness plays her last prize, that run yet faster, proclayming that
whatsoever the Princes will, is lawful for him. These second are unworthy to
haunt among the good, either to be their domestical servants, for that with
their extreme flattery they corrupt their souls. More meet were they to
have such masters as Pope Alexander the sixth, and Caesar Borgia, his Basterd,
who in all cruelty, dissolution, and infidelity were equal with the ancient
Sicilian tyrants, that they might entreat them as they did some of their
catchpolles: of whom when one under color of Justice and at their
commandment had executed all kind of cruelty in Romagnia, they cut off his
head. And whosoever had stolen too much, or met with any fair dame under the
defense of their favor, was many times forced to give them a share: wherein
they had but their due: for having either instructed or confirmed their
masters in this false principle of superfiuous power, rather then absolute, it
is but meet themselves should taste of the fruit thereof, as Phalaris dealt
with Perillus who had invented the brazen bull to please him withal. If men
would well consider that it is the part of good Kings to do and command
things that be just: they would thereby learn that the duties likewise of
good subjects or servants is to frame their obedience by this true rule. For
the will of God, who prescribes laws to all, tends to make us do; well and
eschew evil. How then can some excuse themselves for committing unlawful
deeds, under the pretense of commandment, since God forbids it? The
thrones are polluted and the minister of Justice is covered with reproach.

I suppose that none, except the slave of some Tyrant, dare aduowe A more
express explication of the former discourse.
that if a Prince should command some one of his subjects to slay his father,
to habandon his wife to the Stews, or to blaspheme God, but he ought therein
to deny him obedience, and the reason is, that the laws both of God and
Nature, whereto all men are subject, do prohibit such things. It follows
therefore that the inferior is not always bound to fulfill whatsoever his
superior commands.

But as these with other such like vniustices so apparently wicked are but
sieldome commanded, unless by some barbarous heart and mind, as also that
few there are but will abhor to commit them, so do the wilier sort cover
their mischiefs with a fair veil, even as men cover poison with gold, to the
end men should not spare to proceed farther: and therein it is that those
that will not contaminate their honesties, ought to open their eyes, least
under color of good faith they be deceived. Others there are who through some
vehement passion do command vyolent things, neither do either the one or the
other want fit men to put them in execution. And to this purpose I will
allege two examples: the one of a wicked Emperor, and the other of a good,
both Christians. The first was the Emperor Phocas, who ordained that the
Bishop of Rome should be called the head of the universal Church, where before
he was but a Metropolitaine. This wicked murderer through his ambition caused
the Emperor Maurice whose officer he was, together with his wife and children
to be slain, to the end to obtain his place, neither could that sacred
dignity stay his hands. Herein was agreement between the master and the
servants, who were the one as good as the other, neither did any of them say
that the deed was unlawful, but they did all yield voluntary obedience.
David would not do so: for although Saul 1. Sam. 24.
pursued him to have slain him, yet when himself fell into his hands, he
said: I will not stretch forth my hands against my Lord, for he is the Lords
anointed. Who then could command David to slay his innocent friend, since he
would in no case offend his guilty enemy?

The second example is of Theodosius, who in a frantic fury commanded that
the Thessalonians that had committed sundry ryots should all be hewn in
pieces, and to that end sent a whole legion of Soldiers who slew seven
thousand, that is to say, many more innocents then guilty persons. Whereof the
good Emperor was afterward most sorrowful and solemnly confessed his offense.
His indignation was too much disordered, but the cruelty of his ministers, was
no less, who might have mitigated the punishment: which correction of
punishment would afterward have rather liked then displeased their master, and
better satisfied their own consciences.

Hereof I mean not to infer that the subject ought to control How the
inferior is to consider of his superiors commandment.
his Lords commandment: But if it seem to import great injustice, were he
not better cunningly to excuse himself then to fulfill it? or to endeavor to
mitigate the punishment, rather then to defile his hands in blood, as the Sow
would do in the mire? To this purpose is the dealing of the second Pliny to
be noted, who through his humanity and discretion, notwithstanding he was a
Paynim, ceased the persecution which he was commanded to raise within his
Province. By the aforesaid examples such as are in subjection should learn not
to prostitute their obedience to such commandments as are manifestly unjust.
For so should they make the same adulterous in bringing forth basterdly
actions in liewe of lawful.

Two notable examples of two Paynims am I yet constrained to set down, the one
for a rule to the mighty, the other to the inferiors. The first is of the
good Emperor Traian who was termed What both the one and the other are to
consider.
the good Prince: He on a time delivering the Sword to one whose office
resembled a high Constableship, said unto him. So long as I minister justice,
employe this Sword in the upholding of my authority: but if I fall into
tyranny, vnsheath it against my self. How many Christians since adorned with
royal Dyadems have in liewe of so saying, done contrary* Among whom, some
peradventure would have amended, if that goodly pattern had often been showed
unto them. The second, which may be applied to particular persons is of the
great Lawyer Papinian, whom the Emperor Bassianus his master commanded to
write somewhat in his defense for killing his brother ^eta. But he refused so
to do, saying, that it was an easier matter to commi parricide then to excuse
it. Which although it cost him his life, yet has he left to the posterity a
testimony of his valiant heart, in that he chose rather to dye then to defend
and allow an execrable abomination.

The flatterers that ordinarily attend upon Princes, even upon those that be
endued with some goodness, do endeavor to persuade The fraud of flattering
Courtiers.
them that those men that would so bind them to virtue, do ordinarily
control and gainsay their pleasures and absolute authority, and thus with
their fair words they do at the first blind them: but I think that at
length some of them do find that those are their faithfullest servants which
accounting the royal dignity to be sacred and unviolable will not pollute
their souls or taint their hands in so unworthy service. And as for the rest
that are so ready to be ministers of all injustice, I wonder how sundry
Princes can repose in them such confidence. They might imagine that those men
that so rashly and commonly contemn God, being full gorged will not make any
great account of their masters.

This Discourse is imperfect.
The eleventh discourse.
Whether there be any means so to reform the order of the sters of France as
to reap any service of the same.

SUch mighty kingdoms as sometimes are A necessary consideration for France.
accustomed to handle their neighbors roughly, ought to have especial regard
that they suffer not their forces wherewith they have attained their fame so to
degenerate, as no part thereof remains in heart. For upon their decaie or
slothfulness, the others calling to mind what has passed, do the more
boldly attempt against those that did beat them, and oftentimes do terrify
and hurt them as much as themselves have been endomaged. Which having evermore
been so, ought to waken Princes and governors of common wealths, to the end to
provide that one arm at the least may always be stirring to serve when time
shall require. Truly I wo^ not to what estate I may better apply this
counsel, than to our France, which being at rest has played the pampered
kicking horse. But being afterward grown weak (as now we see it) has it not
sufficient cause to fear the readiness and diligence of those from whom it
has means sufficient to defend it self, if it list to do whatsoever is
convenient for the safety thereof?

Our neighbors sleep not, neither have they but too much intelligence of our
disorders, which as it seems, we respect not, letting Reasons for this.
pass even whole years without seeking any remedies, either great or small.
For we must not think that great and redoubted power of men of arms that we
had in the time of king Frances the first (wherein consisted the chief
strength of the Realm) to be still in force. It is since that time much
altered: neither are the footmen so good as in the time of king Henry. Now
they resentble, as a man should say, old garments, torn and half worn
away with the tediousness and violence of civil wars, and therefore stand
in need of peecing up again with new. Neither must we, besides all this, ^aue to
help our selves with al other forces yt we may, wherewith to hide our nakedness:
yt is to say, to keep yt stranger from coming eue^ into our bowels to foray
us as he has done and still threatens. The French power in old time consisted
of ye proper subjects of the realm, who served our ancient kings with all
loyalty. But within these 60. years we have begun to mingle stranger's among
us, and so long as money lasts, we cannot want them: whereas to the contrary,
if yt fails, we may be assured to have our men to seek: wherefore ye surest
way were to (...)nd yt which we have in our own land, to the end thereof to make
a sure post to trust to, and then to hope for what we can get from abroad. Also
in as much as in diverse respects it is impossible to redress both ye men of
arms and the footmen (which are the best strength of the state) at once, but by
little and little, we must in this necessicie as it were ^eed up new forces:
namely, ye same that have been utterly contemned, when the rest flourished. For
the more arches and pillars yt state up ye building, ye stronger it will be. By
these I mean the general musters of France, whereto may be Of the restablishing
of the musters.
adjoined the Legionaries: but my intent is not to treat of them in this
discourse, wherein I mean to show that those old relics of nobility which
we suffer to wallow in the dust, being a little reduced into good order, would
bring forth fruit, and peradventure more than we think. When a Gentleman has
spent the most part of his goods in riot, and that poverty approaches him, in
liew of his gay velvet garments that he was wo^t to wear, he goes to seek to
put on course cloth, whereto he so accustometh himself, that saving for his
fancy, he makes as much use of the last as of the first, and so may we do
with many things that are of no account, in making them through use both to be
esteemed of and profitable. It were very good, would some man say, if it
might be done, to make that thing profitable that is unprofitable: But what
likelihood is there to compass it in these musters which have been so little
set by, since the time of Charles the seventh, that they have been as it were
bannished the wars for their cowardlinesse* Hereto I say, that although they
have in respect of their imperfection ben much contemned, yet must nothing be
utterly rejected before all means have been proved to see whether it will serve
or no. For I suppose this has not ben earnestly dealt in, because there was no
great need thereof: but now yt we are put to take all kinds of wood in band,
like him yt new builds his house which the fire has half consumed, it were
a point of negligence not to seek among our old ruins, for some good stuff
yet remaining, to the end to apply the same to good use.

Before yt k. Jews the 11. hired strangers, the footmen that we That they may
be put in use.
used in our wars were of small effect: and as I take it, were termed
Francharchers or Franctanpins. Since we have seen how by exercise they have
fashioned themselves, so as if any man should bring in one of the ancient
Franctaupins in their kind of furniture, among these old and brave regiments
of our footmen in these days, who of them, unless he had even death between
his teeth, could for be are or abstain from laughter* And yet have both the
one and the other been gathered in one self field, as being all bred in
France: Eue^ so now if you consider the ordinary muster it is a poor thing.
But rule it and use it, and you shall see it grow into reputation. We have an
old French proverb yt says: In a hundred years a banner, and in a hundred
years a carter: which was invented to signify that every thing has his rising
and falling. Even se it happened to our musters: for having ben a long time in
great credit and force, afterward when the men of arms were instituted,
maintained, and ordinarily used, yt others were quite rejected, reserving unto
them only their ancient name with a very weak effect. Howbeit I will not
blame the institution of the men of arms, which have brought forth so good
effects, and still may bring forth more, nay rather I will allow it: but likewise
I wish to see a good order among all that deal with arms. The difference
between the^ consists not in ye men, for yt same nobility yt in time past
served after one manner, does now serve after another. The diversity rests
in the warfare which is changed.

The better to understand these changes, and to know the duties of Their
original.
service, we must take things farther of, and climb eue^ to their original.
Those that have written of the affairs of France, especially the L. of
Haillan do aduow that our fees were instituted under the first line of our
kings. By which fees he means a certain quantity of land which they gave (to
some more to some less) to such gentlemen and famous warriors as had served
the^ in the wars, to hold the same upon their faith and homage, and to come
and serve them a certain time of the year at their own charge. To the end also
that these noble and innobled persons should be the better able to maintain
themselves, they licensed the^ to let and demise their lands to the pesants for
rent and yearly pension. Moreover they granted the^ both high, mean, and law
justice over their men and vassalles, the appeals whereof were reserved to
their sovereign jurisdiction. Thus had the high Iusticer his law and
inferior Justices vnd er him, whom he termed his men of war, for they were
bound to wait upon him as upon the Lord of their fee, and the others he
termed peasants. These lands thus given upon condition aforesaid, such a fee
was to set out one man of arms, such a one an archer, such a one a third, and
such a one a fourth, who were bound to meet at a place appointed, so often as by
the dukes or earls (who were but simply governors of the provinces and
towns) or their bailiefes or stewards yt succeeded the^, they should be
commanded. These asse^blies were called Ban or Heriban, which after some
signifies cry or outcrie. This order seems to have been confirmed in the
time of Charlemayn, under whose posterity the fees and Lordships, which Their
order.
under our former kings were but benefits given for term of life, were
through favor continued from the Father to the son, and so grew to be
patrimoniall and hereditarie. Hereby it appears, what goodly privileges
have been granted to the nobility, but withal we are to consider that the
bonds are very strict. For they must always come armed in defense of the
Realm, and be ready to repulse the assaults and violences of strangers
abroad. These were the ancient strength of France, where with our kings for
the space of seven hundred years did many notable deeds until the year 1454.
wherein the men of arms were instituted.

But who so is desirous more perticularly to see their ancient The difference
of the members whereof they were com posed.
order, let them read Frossart, who describes the difference between the
Barons, Bannerets, and high Iusticers, as also of those that might bear
banners (which were square Ensigns) and of those that might carry but penons.
Likewise the arms of knights and manner of fight as well jointly as severed,
with the rewards and martial punishments: neither do I doubt but having seen
all this, he will judge our ancestors to have been brave fellows.

The Lord of Haillan like wise in his discourses of France, does show how fees
came to be alienated, which were not amiss to be Of the alienation of fees.
known. The first cause proceeded of our parents devotion. For they being by
the Clergy daily persuaded, that they that gave most to the beautifying and
enriching of the Church, had the highest places in paradise: such of them as
were able founded Abbeys, Priories, and Chapels, al well provided for, of good
rents, thereby thinking sufficiently to discharge themselves. Then followed the
imaginations of Purgatory, where they were told that for a mortal sin they
must burn seven years in a most violent fire: howbeit yt they might be
delivered therefro through abundance of messes and prayers. Whereupon he that
had but one hundred shillings of rent, gave twenty for singing and praying as
well for his own soul as for his kinsfolks and parents deceased. Thus came
above the sixth part of the fees of France into the hands of the Clergy. The
second cause was, the vioages vndertake^ for the conquest of the holy land,
whereat whosoever bare any valiant mind would not fail to be, the rather for
yt our kings themselves went in person. And because that some lasted three or
four years, the nobles sold part of their fees, so to get money to maintain
themselves withal. Besides all this, they also made their wills, wherein they
bequeathed (in case they died) a good portion thereof to be prayed for: so as
many dying in those dangerous and long iourneies, a great number of the fees
were still alienated to the Church. The third cause has grown of the
continual wars with the Englishmen, where through many Gentlemen have been
forced to sell their fees to the unnoble, who had permission of the kings to
buy the same, for with out such license they could not before have any
propriety therein. All which alienations set together, have pulled the third
part of fees out of the body of the nobility, whereby they are fallen as it
were into dead hands, that is, into their hands who cannot in person discharge
the ancient duties belonging to the same. Likewise since that time the
Lawiers, Receivers, and some Merchants have so well husbanded for themselves,
that they also have laid hold upon a good part of the said fees, so as we
may truly say that the nobility do not now possess above the one half.
Which notwithstanding our kings in the mean time have still had the use of
their Arrierbans: wherein were but few Gentlemen, who all almost ran into
place where pay, honors, and martial rewards were shared out, so as there
remain none but men of small experience: neither were they employed but in the
defense of those provinces that lay farthest out of the danger of war.

Moreover, many of all sorts of people both great and small have purchased
exemptions from the charges whereto their fees are bound, which have bred as
great weakening both in men and money. Our kings Frances the first and Henry
the second, seeing all these inconveniences, which they sought to redress,
made notable decrees for the reducing of the said Arrierbans into some order:
which for lack of well observing have not much profited. Thus much in brief
of the succession of these matters.

Some man may now tell me yt I labor in vain in giving counsel Whether it
be impossible to redress the Arrierbans.
to redress that thing which the experience of many years have taught to be so
weak and feeble, that it is impossible to raise it up again. This argument
has in deed some appearance, howbeit I will yet better examine it: then if
reason will me to yield I will be content. Shall we, having so long practiced
with our French Florentines, who through their subtle wits have been able to
wreast a quintessence out of the most unprofitable things, seem such doults as
to have retained no one precept of theirs? It has been already showed yt in
old time bailiefs and stewards were charged with ye levy and conduct of the
Arrierbans. It is their office even to this day. And in place where there be
none of the short roabe, they choose Captains (as in Britain) to gather their
men together after the proclaiming of the kings precepts: but because in such
offices there consists no great honor, none but such Gentlemen as never stir
out of the Country wi^take them, yea, and those rather for the benefit tha^ for
any other respect: they also, although they be honest and such as may be
employed, yet having for the most part but small experience in arms, take no
great heed of those that come to them: and to the end to pleasure their
neighbors and friends, do accept of all that are offered. Now is there great
difference between the troops, when they appear at the musters in the chief
town, and when they march whether they be commanded. For at the musters we
many times see Gentlemen well provided, who appear only to save their fees
from seazure, and as it were to say that they are ready to do their service:
but when the said troops are appointed to go forth, the^ shall we see yt the one
half of the^ are but great lubberlike boys, with a foot of beard, who will
daily devour half a matto^, and do march for their masters. Then say you
whether the king be not well served: So in a company that should contain at the
least 60. horse of service, ye shall scarce find ten that may pass. How is it
then possible that they should work any good effect, considering the
diversity of men so meanly armed. For we shall find ye spears, pistols, and
harquebuts on horseback very simple ones, and others, armed only with
brestplates: likewise crosbowes on foot, harquebuts, and others, armed only
with a shirt of maile and a rustie iaueline, whereof some will say they be men of
arms, others archers, but in deed few of them good soldiers. There is not so
expert a Captain but would find himself shreudly troubled to set the whole
generation of them in araie to fight: so as even they that command over them
may well judge that it is hard to get any good service at the hands of such
disordered troops. In ye time of k. Henry the L. of Iaille was made Colonel,
who in an expedition into the fontiers of Picardie, had so bad hap yt his men
fled (as it is said) before they came to battle, which brought the Arrierbans
into such contempt, yt every man laughed them to scorue. Since the L. of
Sanzlay has gotten that office, to who^ it should appertain to purchase
redress. In the mean time my self will grosely trace this purpose that
tends to the same end, leaving to him and others more skilful than my self
the adding of the draughts of perfection, as also the correction of any thing
wherein I may err.

In old time the Arrierbans were bound to serve the king but six Of faults
commuted in the (...) in question.
weeks, and only in defense of the realm, neither might he detain the^ longer
without pay: then also were wars short and commonly decided without battle. But
in ye decrees since made it seems ye time to be proroged to 3. months: as
well in respect of travailing to the place where the service is to be done, as
also for their so^ourning there: wherein there is some reason in respect of the
exte^t of ye realm. Now will I proceed to speak of the abuses, especially of
one yt is committed in the taxing of fees: wherein it is often seen yt a manor
worth 2000 franks rent, shall pay but 40. franks toward ye Arrierban, and others
less. Neither know I whence those errors should proceed, but only from those
yt are charged with the said taxes, who upon their particular consideration do
defraud the common. In these days most of those that owe the service, both
noble and unnoble, do acquit themselves with money. For he yt should set out 2.
or 3. men of arms, shall co^pound for some smalsu^me, and those are rare
fellows yt set forth meet men for service. True it is that when a small fee
owes but the 3. or 4. part of man, they must take money, but so should they
not for higher fees. Then all that money (as I understand) is afterward
committed to the treasorer of the Arrierbans, who disposes thereof according
as either the supertor or inferior Captains do appoint. Whether there be any
fraud used therein I wot not, but do refer it to ye judgment of others.
Notwithstanding al these defaults, yet when these troops are levied (whatsoever
mixtio^ there be) we still see some good portion of that old shipwreck, whereby I
deem yt if they might be purged and furnished again, we might reap some
commodity at their hands. I did once enquire what number of such men every
province was able to furnish, one with another: whereupon I was certified that
Britain, which is one of the greatest, might easily furnish 300 good horse,
then considering with my self of the rest, each according to the proportion
either for largeness or smalnesse, I gathered that all France by co^uerting
the kind of men into horsemen, was able to bring into ye field 2500. horse,
which is no small power. This ancient order is yet in practice in the Turkish
Empire. For there the most part of the horsemen are entertained of the lands
that are given to every horsman for his life time, which is called Timar, and
it is a tenure somewhat resembling our fees, exceyting the privilege of
Justice. And when the Beglierbei (who are governors of provinces) do send for
men, they al come to yield their service, as being thereunto bound in pain of
deprivation from the benefit received. Without the diligent observing of this
rule, the Turk could never be able to bring half so many horse into the field
as he does: neither to maintain wars so long. Whereby it appears that the
barbarous nations have better observed the consideration of their estate than
we. Frossart writes, that in a journey that K. Charles the 6. made against the
Flemings whom ye k. of England favored, at his entry into their country had
above 22000. spears, such a number as sufficiently testifies the plenty of
nobility theu in France: as also the good order to call them together, which
consisted in the Ban and Arrierban. But since the men of arms were instituted,
I assure my self there were never seen together 2000. spears, except at the
journey to Valenciens. This example have I alleged to the end to drive those
that know not of what strength and power the ancient things have been, from
finding fault with them.

Now is it meet that I discourse of the means how to restore these old
ruins, as men do such houses, as in process of time are almost fallen down:
but when they fall into a good husbands hands, he trimmeth up some small corner
of them, making it habitable: even so must we also, if it be possible, deal
herein, which were easy to do, if the master of the house would bend his
affection any whit thereto. For when our kings are willing and do but speak,
the disposition The means to restablishe the Arrierbanes.
to obedience is great. The first thing whereby I think it were good to
begin, were to create some Prince or Marshall of France, general of all the
Arrierbans of France. And notwithstanding at the first blush it seems
ridiculous to commit unto such great personages a charge accounted so
unworthy, yet is it all but conceit: for if it may be restored I will prove it
to be honorable: and we must think that the credit of the Captain is of great
force in this case: for whereas now a number of Gentlemen do disdain to march
under the banners of the Nobles, then would they willingly come in, if they
might see Princes or such other great estates be their guides and conducters.
And they likewise respecting their honors, would labor to iucite the better
sort of men to enter the same dance: neither is it to be doubted but their
motions and example would win many, considering the French honor which is
ready to embrace those things wherein there is any likelihood of winning
praise. Next it were requisite in every government that comprehends diverse
bailiwicks to establish one Captain to command over those persons that should
be therein taken. And where we have already showed that out of Britain might be
brought 300. good horse, which counteruaile three companies of men of arms, and
out of lesser gouerume^ts 100. at the least: are these to be accounted a small
charge? yea, I would who ever it were, that he were such a one as might be
thought to deserve it. It is most certain yt in every Province there be such
like that are unprovided for, and would be glad to take upon the^ such
functions, when they see themselves under the government of the mighty, and
withal would delight, each one in his quarter, to beautify their troops. So
would it follow that the simple Captains of bailiwickes would also amend,
knowing that their men should march in the armies and not be always tied to
keep the house. If therefore the Captains were such, the nobility would of
necessity gather to the^, as is aforesaid. And for my part I will never
dispute whether being well led they would not sufficiently do their duties. It
were likewise requisite to observe one straight rule, which is, not to admit
into the companies that are erected in Bailiwickes any other than shall be fit
for arms, and to reject those that being sent are incapable. For it is most
certain that abroad in the country there dwell poor gentlemen enough and other
brave soldiers that have but small living, and would be glad to be inrouled, and
when any of the aforesaid that ought to send one or two, should chance to set
forth some great lubber to serve in his stead for his own commodity, the same
should be rejected, and one of the aforenamed put in his place. For so do the
decrees of k. Henry as I remember, import. Yea, they exempt not the L. of the
fee from this personal service, but in case of sickness or age. But if we
should see some one unfit and not greatly affected to wars, the same should
be excused from marching: neither were he serviceable for ought. So did Scipio
when he passed into Sicil, for with the armaurs of 300. Sicillians that shunned
the wars, he armed 300. Romans yt did him great service in Afric: Neither is
it enough that the men admitted be and bear the face to be good, but they must
also have fit furniture, as horse, armor and pistols, for in these companies I
would not wish any but pistols, as well for yt those arms are more easy to
handle than the spear, as also to avoid the diversity of weapons now a days
brought in, which breed confusion. It may be said that it were a hard matter to
bring them to this order, considering there are many that are charged but with
an archer which cou^teruaileth an harquebut on horsback; others with a footman,
others with the 3. or with ye 4. part of a man of arms. The remedy herein were
to convert those duties into coin, wherewith to to hire and furnish such as I
speak of: but they that were bound to a whole man of arms should set him
forth at the full. But it is to be noted, that besides the pay, the furniture
must also be provided* for the duty is, a man furnished and paid, and not a
simple pay only. This difficulty may also be propounded, viz. that it will
be hard to find a sufficient number of poor gentlemen or notable soldiors to
supply the room of the others, because that so soon as war is once
proclaimed, every man straight takes a part: but they that make this
objection have not sufficiently considered the multitude of men in France: for
still we have enough that keep home, which my self have many times noted, and
therefore this need is not to be feared. Also order once set down, and that the
pistoller should have given him 30. crowns to arm himself, and other 30. for
his 3. months pay, we should see men enough ready furnished of horse or
armor, or both, come to offer their service. And better to have in a troop
but 25. good men than 100. so armed as is aforesaid, which ordinarily are good
for nothing but to skarre the peasants and devour victuals. Thus would I wish
them to be furnished: with black Corslets somewhat light (for the heavy do
but cloy them) Tases, Pouldrons, and Burgu^nets, than a good and long Pistol,
and the Bauldricke full of charges, but no cassocke, for the true Reister
should show forth nothing but iron and fire. Their march after the manner of
Reisters, that is, three and three, and to fight in squadrons, for who so uses
otherwise, is deceived. And thus should the bailie or steward order his men to
bring them to the Captain of his province. Likewise this order should be
observed: that every 6. score horse, or 100. at the least might raise a banner
and make a company. Of the use of well ordered A(...)bans and the means to
maintain them.
So that if in a bai^ywick there shall be but 20. or 30. than to join 3. or 4.
together, afterward to agree upon a lieuetenant and Ensign. Al things
aforesaid put in effect the Arrierbans would no longer be unprofitable people,
but grow to a power of horse composed of many Gentlemen and good Captains that
would not fail in their duties: whereof in ye armies but one half were to be
used for fear of vnfurnishing the provinces, and the same would amount unto
about 1200. horse. And in my opinion that Prince were far out of taste that
would disdain to command over such a company which upon necessity might seem
to sight in flank of a king in two great squadrons. Neither is it yet al to
have propounded this brave pattern and set down orders: for small fruit would
arise hereof, unless we should provide for two points of great consideration.
The one to make a more just valuation of that which the fees ought to
coutribute: the other to cut off unnecessary exemptions. Concerning the first,
many abuses are therein committed. For sundry do spare themselves, and burden
their neighbors, or favor others.

I remember that once I heard of a fee not worth above 400. franks by year,
belonging to an ancient Gentleman, that in his youth had done very good
service, rated at 80. franks for the Arrierban. And of another goodly manor
hard by it, worth 1800. which a (...) Advocate had scratched in with 4. hands,
rated but at 35. This is the goodly equality many times observed in such
affairs. Wherefore to prevent all such deceits, it were requisite in every
bailiwick to chose six men of the three estates, honorable and honest men
(because at this day the fees are divided among them) to assist at the taxing,
to ye end to draw the^ nearer to reason: so do I imagine that if we should take
but the tenth part of the said fees the king should be well served, and the
private parties have no great cause to complain. It were also good to have
regard to the persons: For there were no reason as much to charge him, who
after a sort serves the common wealth, or is virtuous, or that has been
employed in good service, as a great feed usurer, at whose gate the poor die
for hunger, or a petty fogger that continually troubles his neighbors. Thus
might men that would incroch fees be accustomed to abandon their evil manners
that hurt others. Answer to those that will have no reformation.


I know very well that upon this reuiew, sundry will cry out, and that
peradventure with sound heart, saying: What do ye seek to alter? My fee for
this hundred years paid but so much (which is peradventure but the thirtieth
or fortieth part) and now you ask me more, this violence is not to be borne.
If this plaintiefe be a Gentleman, he is one that either goes to the war,
or that tarrieth at home. If he be a warrior, he complains wrongfully,
considering that going to serve he is exempt from paiments. If he go not to the
war he is either virtuous or vicious: if virtuous, he will consider that if it
be a point of dishonestie to deny private bonds, much more dishonestie is it
to deny public. And then it is to be supposed, he will yield to reason. But if
he be one of them that does but bear the name of gentilitie which he
blemisheth with vicious actions, I would set before him the custom practiced by
our ancient Gauls, in the time of Julius Caesar, which was this. After the
precepts directed forth for the assembling of the nobility, he that came after
the time limited, not let but by his own negligence, was put to death in
sight of the whole army, thereby to warn the rest to be more diligent. For so
might he gather, that if in those days they did so severely punish their sloth
that were willing to serve: their ingratitude that will neither help in person
nor in purse deserves much greater punishment. As for the unnoble that have
fees, such as have any judgment, or are endued with any indifferency or
knowledge, either be put in office, should not murmr when they are called
upon to give some small portion to be exempt from personal service whereto
they are unmeet. Neither will they in any wise refuse so to do. But as for
those who as much upon an earnest desire to be called Lords, as for couetize,
do nothing but heap fee upon fee, and do neither serve the common wealth, nor
use charity, and yet would excuse themselves from discharging those most
ancient duties, which I doubt whether even the Kings can be excused of, ought
to be charged double, like the Ass yt has a strong back, to teach them to
be more willing. Should they not consider yt they are unworthy the
prerogatives and honors of fees, since they are incapable of military actions
which ought to acco^panie those yt do possess them? They that seek nothing but
starting holes, will yet say that the king raises subsidies of the people for
the pay of his men of arms, which shows that noble men's lands should be
quite discharged. Truly they do well fulfill ye rule of justice, making it to
yield to their own profit, and straining it to the overthrow of others. I
think if any man would even flay the people, they could be content, so
themselves might have some morcel of the skin. It is the commons poverty that
ought to be pitied, and not their abundance yt cannot be satisfied. One word
yet of exemptions, which in such a case as this that concerns the
preservation of the Realm, are but over common.

The harm is the kings who is still ye worse served. But as himself Of
exe^ptions.
is the cause of this diminishing through the lyberalities, which without
giving to him to understand the consequences, they force at his hands: so is
it his part also to enquire what may justly be granted, and to cut off
whatsoever is unnecessary. Wherefore it were requisite the Captain general
should be careful to obtain of him a declaration, for a rule in the Provinces.
For as these duties are no new matters, but very ancient and meet for the
upholding of the crown and maintenance of the French Nation, so must they be
diligently seen into before they be dispensed withal.

The Romans, who did but seldom oppress their subjects with great tributes
(had nevertheless, when any great war came upon them, especially against the
Gauls) no respect of persons, neither were their Priests, whom they esteemed
sacred, exempt from common contributions: so careful were they for the public
benefit. The like regard ought we to have of ours, and not to let those helps
that serve to that end run into decaie, which nevertheless we ought not to
use to the murdering of our selves, but rather to repulse the chief enemies
of this estate, who do but watch occasion to destroy us. For this cause ought
we of our poverty and necessity to make a virtue, least we be circumuented.
For if we suffer our selves to be beaten, our neighbors will say, that we
shall have wrong: but if we well defend our selves, as we may, (if we
redress the forces of our Realm) they will be affeard to come and assail us.

The twelfth Discourse.
Of the multiplying of private quarrels, with the abuses therein committed,
which greatly want reformation.

THe true spring and original whereof so many quarrels The original of
quarrels.
do arise, which are now more common among the French nation than ever
heretofore, are Pride and Wealth. Two most vehement passions that so far
transport them as to dissolve the bonds of amity and friendship which held them
united together. And not withstanding many do labor to restrain them, yet are
they in great force by reason that evil customs in liew of quenching do
kindle the fire of the same, whereby no man can well exempt himself from
injury: yea, eue^ the nobility which hitherto has always ben most ready to
all brave enterprises, is at this day the foremost in maintaining these abuses.
To them therefore do I direct my speech, to the end to assaie by some means to
divert them from pursuing the errors that molest them, and tend to their
confusion.

Many men of judgment there are that think so many braules and The objection
of such as thinck quarrels to be necessary.
quarelles as ordinarily fall out, to be necessary evils, which it were meet
somewhat to tolerate, so to avoid others far greater. For they imagine that
this heat being very natural to our nation must of necessity dissolve and
euaporate in small matters, least otherwise it prove an occasion to cast us
into civil dissension: yea, they affirm that process of law tend also to the
same end, because they be occupations, during the which the abundaunce of
choler wears away. This opinion truly ^auoureth somewhat of a paradoxe, in
being alleged Answer.
in such a season as seems no whit to favor it. Yet had it borne some
likelihood if it had been propounded in the days of our former kings. But since
such terrible civil wars have overtaken us, we have greater reason to think
that they have ingendered these particular disorders, rather than to imagine ye
same to have always been such as we now see them, either that they have been
accounted as preservatives against greater mischiefs. I know well in ought
that warlike minds are hardly restrained, also that it is necessary to
entertain them in some kind of exercise, whereby to alaie the heat of their
courages. But to suffer them to hurt, or by arms to assault each other, and
not to restrain them, we have very few examples, unless among the barbarous
nations. For so should we submit the laws, which are rather made to suppress
violence, to the imperfections of men. In Italy where are the greatest
politikes, the common Courtisans are suffered to dwell in every Town, to the
end through such liberty to eschew other more heinous lewdness: Whereof
notwithstanding, no good comes, but rather it seems that al intemperancie
does ouerflow. Such v^ces as in ye ^ight of God are abominable, as whooredome
and murder ought never under color of eschuing greater incouneniences, to be
permitted.

But some man will say, Are not combats forbidden in France? Yes, such as are
made with laws and publik ceremonies (which likewise Of Combats.
the Pope has forbidden so far as his dominion stretchech) and it is a good
law, howbeit that notwithstanding we are not yet at rest. For now all respect
being taken away, they appoint their co^bats without authority, and go to
fight whenever the toy takes them in the heads, as well against those whom
they hate, as against their own friends, as if all were good ware. And if we
should diligently account how many are yearly slain by such private braules, we
should find that there have been battles fought with less loss both of gentry
and soldiers. Those that consider but the present time, or Their original.
are but young as never to baue scene other, do peradventure think that men
have always so lived in this Realm, wherein they are greatly deceived. For it
is not yet forty years since quarrels were rare among Gentlemen, and who so
was noted to be a quareller, was shunned as a kicking ^ade: which proceeded in
that their manners were more pure, and the true points of honor better known
than at this day. Thus are the evils that in old time were small, toward the
end of this age wonderfully increased, so as we may say them to be rather our
sins than the sins of our fathers.

Some have imagined that our troubles have bred the^, by extinguishing The
diverse causes of Combats.
the ancient concord and exasperating the minds of ye French nation: which I
confess to be in part true: but my opinion is, yt many other occasions have
helped as much or more to procure the same. First a presumption yt many have
conceived of their own strength and dexterity, which have made them more
ready to do injury. For since ye exercise of fencing, which of it self is
come^dable, came to be used, also yt young me^ especially have found themselves
to be perfectly instructed therein, they have imagined yt they might brave it
out at their pleasures, and obtain reputation of valiancie, considering that
experience teaches, that he that is perfect in the use of his wepon, and
withal wants no courage, has almost always the better hand of him that is
ignorant, and in deed there is no doubt but the skillful has great advantage
of the unskillful. Thus are men entered into a foul abuse, in using such skill
as they have attained unto, to the wronging of others: which ought not to be
employed, but to the preservation of life, and that in case of necessity. The
2. cause is, the example of some Lords and notable courtiers, yt have been seen
fight both in the court and in the midst of the chief towns, whereby other
gentlemen (who are very diligent imitators of examples either good or bad) have been induced to cast off all regard of civility and to seek to decide their
controversies, as they see others do. The 3. is impunity. For seeing such
disorders to escape without punishment, it has emboldned them not only to
fight one with another, but also to put in execution most villainous reuenges.

The fourth has grown, because men have tied honor to the mangling of arms
and legs, and mayming or killing one of another, which ye nobility having
noted (as covetous of glory) have sought by such means to attain thereto.

Of all these causes, together with the had affections which these Of what
parts the monster named Quarrel does consist.
long civil wars have ingendered, is this hideous beast Quarrel formed,
which intruding it self among the nobility, does unperceived by little and
little devour the same. What a deed was that of the six Gentlemen of the
Court, who appointing to meet at the Tournels were so fleshed each upon other,
that four of them there remained, and the other two were sore wounded. There
were among them such as in time might have attained to great dignity, and yet
lead by extreme folly, chose rather to perish in the flower of their age,
which was lamentable. Diverse other co^bats there have been both in Paris and at
the Court, which have sent many valiant persons to the grave. In the mean time
throughout all the other Provinces every one have not been at rest, for some
of them have we seen disquieted and spotted with the blood of gentry. In this
state are we at this day in France, whereinto our own follies, together with
the tolleration thereof, have brought us. And unless the kings discretion and
authority do provide some remedy all will still empaire.

Now although I may freely reprove the corruption of our time, Of the ancient
Combats and those of our days.
yet will I not thereof infer that in time past men lived without quarrels.
For men are men and subject to wrath and revenge. But undoubtedly they had
very few, neither would they be moved without great injuries: where now a word
of nothing or in ^est brings the lie, a sharp look shall be accounted an
injury, and a slander or false opinion call for a combat: so ticklish and
pricking is our daily conversation, which proceeds of a false imagination
conceived, that true honor consists in surmounting others with force and
making them to tremble under us. A man may seek advantage and victory over
his companions by playing at his weapon, leaping, vaulting, running at the
ring, and such like exercises: but that he shall not be esteemed unless he
devour them, assaulteth their lives, or sheddeth their blood, it is a most
pernicious opinion? This have made men so incompatible, that haunting together,
they are forced to practice this proverb, To day a friend, to morrow an
enemy: Among all shames, nay rather infamies, this is not the least, that a
Gentleman, even upon a frivolous occasion, shall tain^ his sword in the blood
of his friends, with whom before he made but one bed, one table and one purse.
And yet if any would diligently enquire, he might find above a hundred such
examples within these twenty years: yea even near kindred cannot dwell long
together without braules, which after bring them to blows.

I think that these disorders are much increased through the Increase of
Combats in our days.
liberty of youth, which being crept into credit have rejected all fear of
laws and counsel of their elders, and taking bit in the teeth have bred
great abuse herein, which custom has but too much confirmed. But we are not
to find it strange that the first age which is accompanied rather with heat
then discretion does sometimes disorder it self. Rather should we wonder that
wise men and magistrates can closely consent and suffer such things as they
ought sharply to repress, to have free course. I have showed with what
inconstancy men use to make quarrels without any ground, also with what fury
they afterward fight head to head. But yet is not this all the worst, for
others, which are no less then these, do ensue. One takes amends with
advantage: an other takes cruel revenge: one procures the killing of his
enemy in treazon with the shot of some Dagge or Harquebut: others do make
great assemblies resembling petty wars: and many times one quarrel breeds
four, and twenty dye for one man's offense.

These are unworthy actions for Gentlemen, but among the The strange
confusions of the Combats.
rest, privy murders are detestable. But most of all I wonder at an other
abuse now in great course among the most gallantest, that being so pernicious,
it has so long continued. That is, that when any is disposed to fight, he that
is his second, as we term it, or his third, must also fight to extremity with
the second or third of the contrary part: yea they even strive who shall be
one. These men (in truth) may be termed scourges to themselves rather then
those who clothed in linen, with whippes in their hands, go up and down
with heavy cheer daintely striking their delicate skin. Can there be any
more fond folly then to see a Gentleman against his companion of Court without
any cause of hatred, yea peradventure having some ground of amity, and
sometimes his kinsman, yet through a certain bravery, go cut his friends
throat* In my opinion these do but badly know the true office of seconds in
a controversy of honor. For as I think, they should resemble the Judges that
are chosen in Combats: who are to assist their friends: first as pledges of
their faith given, as also to see there be no fraud in such an action, neither
on the one part nor on the other, whereof they are to answer. And next to be
witnesses of the valor of those whom they conduct: moreover to agree them or
part them in the field, as sometnmes it happens, after blood drawn. But now
in liewe of doing these duties and fearing to quench their heat, these men
do help to kindle them more and more, sometimes to their own destruction: a
most deserved penance for such an oversight. Some say these fashions are
brought out of Italy. I refer that to the truth thereof, but now the use is
ours, and if Justice were restored and royal authority better regarded we
should become more civil. But I will allege one example to prove the lewd
consequence of quarrels, which is that upon a controversy grown between two
gentlemen of the court, almost all the Princes and Lords with their fautors
took parts, so as the King was driven to send his guard to keep them asunder
and cause them to depart. Now if these had met I leave to your judgment what a
bloody folly it had bred.

It seems we have entered deep enough into this laberinth of How to remedy
the confusion of Combats.
mischief which has cost us dear, and brought too much disadvantage to desire
any more experience thereof. And as the gentry has been the greatest favorers
and nourishers thereof, so must it be the first that should help to destroy and
banish it, especially if it mind the recovery of ye good reputation which it
had in the days of ye great K. Frances. Then was it a goodly matter to see the
good agreement among the gentry. Then was applied unto the^ this Spanish
proverb: To the friend as soft as wax, but to the enemy as hard as steel. By
which enemies were meant none, but those that were so reputed in time of war.
The^ was there great modesty among the^: societies of sundry companions did
long continue, and friends observed the rules of perfect fidelity. If any
controversy did arise, they al ran to quench it, where now they fuffer it to
increase, to ye end to have the pastime of the combat. So yt when I think of
it, we must no more speak of those days, least ye vnlikelinesse of ours
thereto do make us to blush for shame. Such as by nature are given to peace and
withal are endued with any discretion, do find it very rude. For
notwithstanding they study to shun all contention, yet are they sometimes
entangled therein through other men's arrogance, which is so intolerable that
it overcomes all patience. Thus are they forced to follow the wicked custom,
least they should be altogether disdained. Albeit many times it falls out yt
they free themselves from such braules with as great honor, as their prouokers.
Well was it said of him that termed prowess and quarrels two bad beasts: for
worse are there none to be found. I have heard of a gentleman yt reported that
for The mischief by quarrels.
ten years space he was much troubled with 4. horrible mischiefs: from which
God had delivered him. The 1. a process in law, whereupon the one half of his
living did depend: the 2. a disease thought incurable: the 3. a bad wife: and
the 4. a quarrel grounded upon great injuries: among all which he affirmed yt
the quarrel had bred him most cares and disquiet, with continual torment,
where in the rest he had some respite and ease. And this may well be: for he
that persuades himself that until he be revenged every man skorneth and
disdaineth him, dare scarce show his face in any company. He is still in care
how to find means to have ame^ds of the injury that he has received. His
hatred to his enemy still stingeth his heart and the desire of revenge leaves
him no rest. Likewise when he considers the fortune of Combats, the fear of
infamy molesteth him. Finally, if he have any feeling of godliness or
religion, and that he think upon the evident danger of his soul, if his body
should perish in the pursuit of so mortal revenge, may not all these troubles
be compared with the furies that the ancients have so much spoken of? And to
say the truth, it is the very punishment of quarellers, whom Gods justice
permits to be continually molested, because themselves will not suffer
others in rest. Many mischiefs there are that light upon us, whereof we are in
small fault: but this our selves do forge and take up upon our shoulders, at
the least they that will not live without controversies. There be gentlemen
enough that having had 1000. or 2000. crowns rent, have spent it all in this
miserable exercise. If a man should ask of ye quarellers, What is it that so
troubles you, and causes you to encurre so many hazards and perils, and to
wast your selves in so great expenses? It is, will they say, the respect of our
honor. Truly that is such an honor as brings many miseries: where it should
rather breed content and pleasure. But I doubt if we should more nearly
consider hereof, we should find that the cause of this mischief consists
in our own errors and follies. The spring of the causes of such mischief.
And as the ambitious (as Plutarke says) to the end to hunt after a
fantastical glory, do habandon the true: so have we formed to our selves a
false honor, that is obtained by a certain valiancie (which yet were
commendable in war against our enemies) consisting but in braueries, bragges,
injurious speeches, outrages, stripes and murders, and all against those that
before were our companions and friends. This is a brief description of that
magnificent honor which is now adays so rife in our mouths.

Hereupon will some man say: Why must I bear wrong and stripes Of true honor.
and not revenge my self again? Hereto I answer, that my intent tends not
to will you to suffer all: but rather that you must in no wise commit such
injuries. What then is true honor? It is a goodly praise and commendation, by
good men attributed to some in respect of their virtue which by diverse good
effects they make demonstration of. And this consists in the use of wisdom,
justice, prowess, temperance, truth, courtesy, and such other virtues: whereof
it ensues that the ground of honor consists in the possession of virtue,
wherewith he must be clothed that minds to atteyne to the fruition thereof.
Those therefore are deceived that think themselves worthy to triumph of the
one, and have so smally profited in the knowledge of the other: for it is as
much as to seek to have the shadow without the body, or the bark without
the tree. I assure my self that the wise will choose to thrive by the ways
before recited, rather then by imitating the abuse of custom, wherewith they
should help themselves only in great extremities, as men do with corrosiues,
and not otherwise. For it may so fall out that a sober gentleman shall be so
grievously wronged through the insolency of an other, that he cannot brook
it: so is he after a sort compelled somewhat to frame himself to the custom,
until such good order be restored as men need not to encurre the reproach of
cowardlinesse or base minds. It was an old proverb, That men should flee a
hundred miles from an assault, and run a hundred miles to a battle: which
with greater reason may be said of quarrels, wherein there is less honor to be
gotten then in an assault. It is but small honor to set upon and overcome him
that is weaker then my self: but if I maime him that is taken to be a brave
fellow, every man will bewail his mishap and accuse my valor, as hurtful to
my own nation: likewise if it be my friend and I kill him, who will not
accuse me of inhumanitie? Wherefore, for my institution it were requisite that
all men should know that the aforenamed, did force me to proceed so far,
which circumstances do but sieldome happen. France has at all times had many
courageous gentlemen, of whom we have, even in our days, seen some show
wonderful proofs of valiancie in private quarrels: nevertheless they have not
been any thing so much commended therefore as for other their valor showed in
skirmishes, assaults and battles. In the wars are we to display our forces
and liberally to hazard our lives, which they that cast them selves headlong
into quarrels do seem to make small account of.

Here might I yet note other abuses in these cases committed, Of remedies for
the aforenamed mischiefs.
but they are so common and so well known that it would but breed tediousness
to hear the^ repeated. And more meet it were to discourse of the fittest
remedies, for the banishing or helping of the same: whereof if some had bin
sooner applied, they might have done more good: for the longer we delay, the
deeper root does the mischief take. Howbeit, it is yet curable, if we will
begin our cure rather by the causes the^ by the accidents. The manner has been
that if any honorable person had chanced in any quarrel to be killed in the
Court, by and by there were decrees and orders set down to prevent the like
inconvenience again: which was diligently observed for some months space, and
then all was forgotten. This was as a man should say, after meat mustard: or
when the man is dead, seek the Physician: as also the preservative was too
weak for the time to come. But we must remember that the mischief is
universal, and that the remedies ought also so to be: likewise that all the
parts grieved, both near and far should taste of the benefit of the
medicine. Sundry books have been published which being translated out of
Italian do entreat of injuries, amends, combats, etc. which also do teach
Gentlemen how to shun quarrels, and prescribe means when a man is in, how to
get out again without loss of honor: among yt which, Mutio does best deserve
to be read. Howbeit, all this put in one of the skales, the other containing
corrupted custom, has wayed it down, even as a Portegue should way down a
French crown: wherein it appears that custom is much stronger then the
written law. It is the Kings duty to undertake the conquest of this mo^ster
which glutteth her self with blood. For so soon as he begins in earnest to
set hand to the work, the Magistrates will do the like, and then shall the
inferiors be forced to obey. But since the question concerns the rules and
decisions of honor, we must not seek or admit any other then from the Court:
for whatsoever is there practiced, is received and allowed in all the other
Provinces. The first foundation of this reformation must therefore be there
laid, which cannot at the beginning but seem deformed, because this great
mischief is very hard to be pulled up but by discending through smaller
euilles, until men may be in state to embrace such good precepts as teach that
all these combats are not only wicked but also deuillish, invented to the
destruction both of body and soul, and therefore by no Prince to be lawfully
permitted.

But to proceed in my purpose: Concerning present remedies, Of particular
remedies.
this I must say, that it were good his Majesty, the Princes and Lords should
in their ordinary speeches which they use publicly, reprove quarellers, in
liewe of commending them after they have tainted their weapons with blood, and
withal give them to weet that they detest them as men that have no delight but
to rise by others hurts. That they should admonish all men to govern
themselves with modesty and discretion, and threaten the transgressors with
most grievous punishments. Then if at the Court any should so far presume as
to appoint place to injury other, the same should be severely punished and not
to spare any whosoever. For 2. or 3. examples of justice would correct above
500. And this is most straightly observed in the Court of Spain. Some are
emprisoned in Castles: others are banished for a certain time: others are
condemned to the wars of Barbary against the Moors: and others are forced to
make public satisfaction: yea if the offense be great, the loss of goods or
death do depend thereon. Since also in our France this noisome humor is so
rooted, it were meet the purgation were somewhat sharp, yet would it not
breed sedition. There are that hold opinion that it were good the K. would
refer the punishment and correction of these ordinary quarellers and
murderers to the Justices, and himself not to meddle therein: neither can I
mislike it so far as it tends only to most villainous wilful slaughters,
and such like as daily are committed. But since this matter concerns honor and
arms, likewise that either good or bad instructions are learned in the court
or in the wars, my opinion were that thence likewise should proceed order
and correction. To this end also it were requisite his Majesty should assemble
ye Marshalles of France, with the most ancient Capteines to make some good
decree for this matter, to order diverse things misunderstood and worse
practiced: and to show how they should behave themselves in points of honor,
which done, to publish the same throughout the Provinces, their every man being
advertised might contain himself in his duty: so would good examples,
conjoined with severe punishment, be no doubt of great force to suppress the
present confusions and errors. As also it were meet the same were carefully
observed in the Court, at Paris, and whersoeuer there is any body of men of
war: for the youth from all parts of the realm do draw thither to learn,
and if abuses do there reign, at their return home, they sow the same all
over: as contrariwise seeing good customs, they do imitate and make the^
manifest to others. The Governors likewise are to have express charge so
soon as any quarrel arises within their gouernme^ts to send for the parties
to seek to agree them, and if they be men of great calling and the matter very
difficult, to enjoin the^ without delay to have recourse to his Majesty to
the end he may provide therefore, as having great interest when his subjects
do live in discord: also if any should proceed to villainous outrages, to
pursue them stoutly and without respect of persons. And indeed I suppose that
neither the one nor the other will be so blind as to bear with wicked actions.
Some man will say: Has not the King published such commandments enough? Yes, I
confess he has: but they have no whit profited, for want of putting in
execution: and how should those that dwell far of obey them, when they see
them even in the Court utterly contemned. For there all sorts of injuries both
in word and deed, all trecheries, reuenges and set combats are openly
practiced even in every man's view, without any great reprehension. If we wish
good orders to take place, our Magistrates must be the first that must observe
them, and then cause others to do the like.

Something would I say of points requisite to be contained Order how to make
the remedies to serve.
therein, were it not that I might seem to enterprise upon those that should
be appointed to do it, whose sufficiency I imagine to be such as not to need
any instructions, since it is their parts to give the^ to others. Howbeit, to
satisfy the minds of the curious (who I think would be glad to see some) I
will propound only 7. or 8. which first come to mind: namely, That slight
injuries proceeding of sudden chollor or otherwise, must not be refelled with
the lie, in that the same is a word now too odious, but with some more modest
denial, whereto a man cannot reply with the lie. He that shall give it,
unless upon such an injury as being proved might breed to the gentleman that
shall have received it either infamy, or desert of death, shall be driven to
amends. He that shall without cause wrong any man in word or deed, shall be
forced to satisfaction. He that shall have received any injury, shall not
assign any place to his enemy, neither procure him to be challenged under
pain of most severe punishment, as well to himself as to the chalenger: but
shall come before the King, the Governor, or the Captain of the Province, to
crave leave to redress his wrong by arms: then if the party that offers
the injury appears not within the third summons of his superior, he shall
by public placards be banished the Court, the Armies and the capital
Cities: and the other restored to his honor, as well in respect of his
obedience, as for amends, and discharge of the combat, although the author by
secret means should labor to come thereto. And touching all such quarrels as
the Governors and Capteynes cannot agree, they shall not nevertheless have
authority for the decision thereof, to grant the singular combat, but shall
refer the parties, with straight prohibition not to hurt each other, unto his
majesty, to whom only belongs the grant thereof. Whosoever shall by
himself or by any other, strike a Gentleman with a^udgell, shall after
satisfaction be also punished by limited banishment or some other grievous
pain, because it is a boyish injury. If the party iniuried practice any
treachery for the recovery of his honor, the superior shall force him to
amends for his cowardlinesse. Likewise for those who in the Provinces through
their quarrels shall make any great assemblies, or with open force pursue their
adversary: because such are but sparks wherewith to kindle wars. Many other
such like articles may be hereunto added, which digested into order, would
bear some grace. But after some good resolution taken for their well
observing, they may soon enough be revealed. For this time it may suffice to
run over these small pieces, which I have laid together to awaken many good
wits that I know in France, to the end they may say better then I have
done, correct that which I have set down, and show the great ones that it is
their duties by all means to seek to reduce the Nobility into the way from
whence it has strayed: for so long as it shall remain wandering both in word
and deed, it shall still profane Virtue and Arms and wast it self, whereas
contrariwise if good discipline may force it to reenter into the carrier of our
auncesters, easily it may atteyne to the end thereof, where the crowns of true
honor are distributed.

The thirtenth Discourse.
That his Majesty ought in the time of peace to enterteyne at the least four
regiments of footmen, reduced into the number of 2500. men, as well for the
preservation of martial discipline, as to be always assured of a great body
of old Soldiers.

Worthily is King Charles the seventh commended, How necessary it is to have
footmen.
for his so profitable establishment of the men of Arms, whereof he was the
author. Neither does the great King Frances deserve less praise, in that
imitating the ancient discipline, he could find means among his own
subjects to form a mighty body of footmen, wherewith the more to furnish out
his warsare: For before there was but small account made of them, as is
aforesaid. But since the setting down of good rules, and that the exercise
thereof has ensued, they have fashioned themselves, and are grown more
obedient and valiant. Harquebuts came but little before into use, which have
made them very terrible and so necessary as they may not be missed. Since
therefore the experience of many wars have taught that it is not possible to
prosecute them well without a good number of footmen, were it not a great
oversight not to lay any foundation of them: Considering that a mean has been
found how to form so strong a one of Horsemen? For the same reasons that moved
our ancient Kings to ordeyne the one, may urge them that now reign to
establish the other. In old time the chief differences of war were decided
in the plain field: where now they consist in surprises, assaults, and defense
of Houlds. Wherein the Harquebuts and Pikes are not only profitable but also
necessary. Now, if we list to consider the number of Footmen that France
mainteyneth in the time of peace, they will seem to be few in respect of the
Horsemen, who in the time of King Henry the second were above six thousand
spears. For excepting the Garrisons of Citadelles and Castles which are there
to be settled, the rest is a small matter. But for the procuring of a well
ordered warfare it is requisite there be some proportion between the parties
and sorts of men of war whereof it consists, as there is between the
members of a man's body: For either superfluity or want do breed deformity.
And notwithstanding the men of arms do in dignity surmount the others, yet
does it not thereof ensue that they should in quantity so far exceed. The
arm is more honorable then the leg, yet is the leg as massiue and great as
it, yea and as profible in his function. In my opinion therefore it seems
there were some reason in time of peace to entertain four regiments of
footmen of six hundred in each, so to concur with the force of the
Ordinances, notwithstanding the same now consist but of 4000. Spears. I will
not stand to show what need France still stands Why France always stands
in need of any army.
in of an armed arm: for all men of judgment do sufficiently know that the
Eagles of Austrich would come and eat up her Chickens if martial order were
extinct. But many do think the French nation to be so well enured to wars,
that they need but stamp on the ground (as Pompey said) to bring forth whole
legions armed: Howbeit they are deceived, neither is there any trust to be
reposed in that: For if discipline and enterteynment fail, the more men there
be, the more is the disorder and confusion. Such as suffer themselves to be
abused with the noise of many Drums, with the sight of many Flagges wauing in
the wind, and with the view of a field covered with men, do not ween
themselves to be deceived, because they think that every one should be as
ready to do his duty as he is to make a brag: but at the proof we many
times find that a small troop of resolute enemies does overthrow all this.
Have not we also within these twenty years sufficiently felt the spoils
that a disordered multitude does work, even to their friends? All these
experiences might persuade us that a few old Soldiers do profit more then a
great sort of raw and unskillful.

I know that no man will say but we ought always to maintain That footmen
are necessary: also how to form them.
a good number of men of arms: but for Footmen some think that in time of
peace they may well enough be spared: because the Realm for want of ability
had need to spare many things. But I will say, that if the Realm be poor it
will be contemned: if it be contemned the more will practice against it: which
ought to move the mighty well to underprop it with counsel and force. I
will be advised how I will think our poverty to be such as not to be able to
maintain four thousand Spears and five and twenty hundred Footmen in
ordinary, besides the garrisons and warders of Castles. We might do more, but
when a little will suffice, a great deal is superfluous. Now do I wish that
the bodies of regiments should still be in force, to the end the art of
war be not forgotten, not in speculation but in practice: as also to
preserve many men of commandment. I have guided companies of 60. men, which
in my opinion would be sufficient in time of peace. For when occasion should
fall out to augment them, putting into every company the full number, they
will in two months, as well through the diligence of good Capteynes, as by
virtue of good orders, be trained to do good service. But so will not the
new leuyed regiments: For if the Colonel be a man of small experience, he
makes but bad choice of Capteynes and they of Soldiers. Then as well the one
as the other guyding them selves rather after their own phancies, then after
any good military order, it is not to be meruailed though such bad beginnings
have worse ends. The like may also happen to this warfare: for if the Colonel,
loving the Court will not remain with his companies: and the Capteynes do for
the most part keep home, likewise that as well the one as the other to the
end to furnish themselves do make their provision of half their Soldiers
pay, all will be corrupted. In a matter of such importance we ought to be very
diligent, and the more that abuses do multiply, the more severely are they to
be looked unto.

The four regiments before mentioned would I wish to be The Ordering of the
companies of footmen and the benefit that will arise thereof.
put in garrison in the frontiers of Picardy, Champagne, and others of
protection, there to serve as well for the custody of some places of
importance as Metz and Calais, as also to be Schools where young Gentlemen
grown from Pages, and other youth might go to learn the art of war: but
the chief end indeed, is to have always a storehonse of old soldiers
ready provided for every need. For so soon as war were proclaimed and the
King shall have commanded to increase the companies to their full number,
amounting to two hundred a piece: we should within some six or seven weeks be
able to bring forth into the field two thousand Corcelets and six thousand
Harquebuts, which joined with a part of the men of arms would bear a good
brunt, until the coming of the rest of our power. Now, if ever, it is
necessary to reform our footmen, since the civil wars have so corrupted them
yt either they cannot or will not almost obey: only breeding terror where they
march and scath where they continue. In these days when a young man comes
newly into a regiment of Footmen, I presume that he learneth some feats of
war, also to be the more courageous: but it is to be feared least in the
same School he get as great imperfections, which darken all the good that he
had learned, as I have showed else where. Where contrariwise these four
regiments would be as it were great springs from whence would flow none but
fair and clear water, which shedding it self all over the Realm would
clarify those that are troubled. For discipline being established and
observed, such as follow the same, showing themselves every where gentle to
their equalles, obedient to their superiors, courteous to the commo^s, and
stout against the proud, especially against their enemies, should cause all men
much more to admire them therefore, then for their big looks: besides the
fame of so brave an institution being spread abroad, all noble hearts will detest
the accustomed corruptions, and withal desire to submit themselves to the
same. Had I not heretofore seen the like effects proceed of the like cause, I
would not speak so boldly as I do. I remember that in the beginning of King
Henry the seconds reign, when certain Capteynes and Soldiers that had lain
two years in garrison in the towns of Piedmont returned into France, they
were greatly esteemed, because they showed them selves so civil, and
courteous, nothing injurious, and speaking so orderly of the exercise of arms,
which caused many young men to run thither in hope of the like instructions.
Yea, my self have seen the Earl of Charny (one of the most virtuous and
honestest Lords of this land) wear the Corcelet and go to ward as duly as
one of the meanest Soldiers, even in the time of peace.

Now may some good husband object that this multiplicitie of Answer to those
who under pretense of husbandry do hinder good orders.
Capteynes and Companies, will much augment expenses, which though they be
ordinary do nevertheless grow grievous in the end: also that it were
better to mainteyne but ten complete. To whom I will answer, that my intent
is not to form one full regiment: for always as affairs grow on, it shall
be but one regiment: but I look to lay the foundation of many, which being
good, all that shall be built thereon will take the like goodness, that is to
say, Valor. As also it would follow thereof that we should have thrice so
many men, which is one of the drifts that I tend unto. For, as has been
aforesaid, these four bodies should maintain eight thousand Soldiers, all
which being incorporated therein, might be termed old. They should moreover
be shops, out of the which we might fetch Capteynes for our footmen: for in
three or four years exercise, even in the time of peace, a man of any
capacity might grow worthy to command through often conference of the (...)
of war, and practicing the offices of those that deal therein, (...) also by
continual view of some image thereof before his eyes. As for the charge I
confess it would amount unto about four thousand crowns at the most by
month. But withal we should mainteyne a hundred or six score men of
commandment: whereof many might in time do such service as could not be
recompensed. What brave Colonels have the Infantery bred within these five and
twenty years* of whom I will name but a few, as Charry, Gohas, Causseins,
Sarlabous, Pills, Mounans, and the valiant Montbrun. It is to be thought that
this good order will raise us up more such. We shall do our master no hurt
in giving him counsel to spend a handful of money, to reap again so good
interest for it. The Colonels of these regiments being well and without favor
chosen, must also we subject to dwell four or five months of the year among
them: neither may the Capteynes have leave to be absent above three or four
months at the most. For when the officers be away, discipline is neglected and
obedience lost. Likewise were it requisite the assignations of payment were
certain, to the end the Soldier be not corrupted in being driven to seek
his living abroad. Thus would 15000. crowns by month suffice, which is such
a sum as our Kings sometime do give to some one man in one day. Likewise
where our Soldiers will now a days wear no Corcelets, the same To restore
the use of Corcelets.
might by this means be brought again into use and estimation: which is more
easy to be done then men ween for: but then the Capteynes must begin, who
have rejected the use of the Pike: for they must be enjoined to take it again
together with the Millan Corcelet. If they will they may also have the Sword
and Target of proof against assaults and skirmishes. In the Companies one
quarter should be Corcelets, (and that should never fail) and the rest
Harquebuts. And notwithstanding this were not a fit proportion which requires
to consist of as many of the one as of the other, yet must we come as near it
as we may. Also the better to bring our Soldiers into taste with the said
Corcelets, they should have those that should be well made and graven to the
end the beauty might allure their affections. Thus when they should see the
examples of their Capteynes together with the great pays thereto allotted, also
that the Gentry were brought to wear them, they would not look for much
entreatie. The Harquebut is good to train young men, and when they have gotten
some reputation and experience therein, they must be afterward allured into
the other degree which must be made as honorable as the first. It is in my
opinion a poor exscuse to say, The Soldier will not do this or that: for
although in civil war it must many times pass for payment: yet in a time of
rule and reformation it is meet to command with authority, so to make the
Soldiers more ready to frame themselves to whatsoever is convenient. The
Spanish Infanterie although it has stooped to the civil wars of Flanders
did nevertheless never habandon the Corcelet: and the third part of their
best men do still wear it. Besides it has always continued the observation
of orders: so as it deserves this commendation, that in Christendom there is
no better Soldier. But will some man say: What account make ye of the French
man? Forsooth I say yt being well instructed he yields to no nation, as
likewise for want thereof he seeldome does any thing worthy remembrance.

I would wish they would practice some of the Spanish customs, Goodly custumes
observed among the Spaniards.
which in my opinion are very good. One is that when any new Soldier comes
into their bands, the old do instruct him in his duty: if he transgresses
they reprove him: and if he be meanly apparelled they help him, least he
should be a dishonor to their nation: and he likewise takes these admonitions
as courteously, where we do the contrary. For if a young man newly come into a
company commits any folly, they all do laugh him to scorn: and if he have
any money, he is presently plumed either by play or some other practice:
whereby many through this bad beginning do start back again. Neither will I
here conceal an other fault of our youth: which is, when any man seeks
amiably to reprove them, they spurn at it, and take all in evil part, as if
their age were not subject to do amiss. Secondly, among the Spaniards ye
shall not have a braule in six months: for they disdain quarellers and
delight in modesty: so as if any do happen, they endeavor diligently to take
them up: and yet when they cannot be ended without blows, they discharge
themselves honorably. The French Soldier is much more diverse, and can hardly
live without braules, showing himself but over courageous against his
companions. Thirdly, if a Soldier among them be hurt, he that has but one
crown will give him half. Fourthly, if any one do any notable act, all his
companions will praise and honor him, and seeldome do they through envy
conceal any virtue. This likewise is good in them, that in their military
commandments even the brauest Soldiers and of greatest calling will obey a
simple Serieant: so pliable are they to their officers. As also when they are
called to have any charge, they do as well keep their authority. Finally, in
the body of their guard they will not suffer any insolency, but the same are
as Schools where their ordinary talk is of the duties of Soldiers,
Capteynes, Honor, and such like matter concerning Arms. More might be here
said: but this is sufficient in that such as go newly into the bands may know
that these be no custumes of Munckes, as the proverb goes, but of excellent
Soldiers. If the Capteynes of the regiments aforesaid would likewise take a
little pains, they might instruct theirs in like sort: and labor no less to
fashion them then a horse course^ does to break his horse: And it were a great
shame that we should not have more care of men then of beasts.

The humor of French youth, will some say, can hardly away Answer to an other
objection of some that would have no martial discipline.
with patience and modesty. Truly I had as liefe they should say that since it
is somewhat inclined to rashness and heddinesse, it must be let run. I
think no nation to be more capeable of virtue then ours, if it be taught, and
urged to put it in practice. And undoubtedly if Colonels and Capteynes would
grow to commend and advance these Soldiers whom they see well disposed to
follow their exercises, and to make no account of such as are given to their
belly and idleness, the most part would imitate the good. Ordinarily they
propound unto them riches, which I mislike not so that they first prefer
honor, for that is a bridle to hold them from stumblig, and a spur to stir
them up to valor. I dare affirm that of ^ower regiments ordered as aforesaid,
we may have more service then of ten such as they now be. For first we should
be sure of two reasonable battles of Pikes whereof our Infantery stands in
need: which is a great want.

I remember in the third troubles the Lord of Acier brought How necessary the
armed pikes are, and the sruict that may proceed of the order propounded in
this discourse.
18000. good and brave Harquebuts Protestants: but if they had met in the
field with seven or eight hundred Spears, I would weete whether they would
not have been all overthrown? More do think yea the^ nay. Howbeit if they had
had but five or six thousand Corcelets among them, a whole army should hardly
have broken them. To be brief, the Harquebuts without Pikes are as arms and
legs without bodies, which were monstrous. Secondly, if this small number
were thus trained: the soldiers would be more obedient; would not scatter so
much; would bear more, and would fight more cheerfully: which we may without
farther proof, easily judge. This order likewise practiced three or four
years would stand the new regiments, that upon occasion might be leuyed, in
great stead. For most of the officers being taken out of such a School, would
endeavor to cause those that had before but heard speaking of it, to observe
the same discipline: so as by little and little the use of pilferie with such
other bad customs would be suppressed. Oh what a goodly matter it were to see
the peasant out of fear of the Soldier, who is in these days a horror to the
Villages! Likewise to see humanity in such credit among them that they would
at their hosts houses behave themselves as in their own! These be none of
Platoes Idees, that is to say, imaginations, for the French men for certain
years practiced them in Piedmont. Hereof should the Capteynes reap honor and
the Soldiers both profit and content: for they should no longer be shunned,
as is aforesaid, but lovingly received, still finding plenty where now
sometimes they meet with poverty only and want: and withal his Majesty
should be much better served.

The foretenth Discourse.
Of the French Legionaries.

THE name Legion was in old time in The intent of King Frances, by
establishing the legionaris: also how necessary their reformation is.
great honor and credit. And a man may truly say that by those proud and
valiant bands all the world was subdued and the Roman Empire exalted to that
greatness whereto it grew. It used these orders and ancient names until the
barbarous nations overthrew it: for then were many things confounded and buried
up, even in the art of war. Afterward the bands of Soldiers were termed by
sundry other names, as yet they be. But our great King Frances desiring to
strengthen and establish his realm by all practisable means, devised to
establish legions, to the end, as occasion might serve, to have men always
ready, and not to be forced to beg for aid. The Lord of Langey says, that
in every Province he took order for one, consisting of 6000. men, who all
should once in the year meet severally to be mustered. Now as this mighty
Prince after the imitation of his elders instituted this brave order, according
as the disposition of his people and affairs could bear: so I suppose that
after his example we should seek to redress some small body of these old
and great relickes, fit to offend and defend as well in the field as
otherwise, whose maintenance would in the time of peace be of small charge:
for it were but a folly to secke in every point thereof to restore the
ancient institution, considering that France being so much weakened, cannot be
able to sustain so heavy a burden, and therefore. must have no greater
charge than it is able to bear.

If his Majesty would entertain four legions, and that after How many
legions do seem necessary at this time, also to wat end this order tends.
the ancient manner, I think it would be too much, as well in respect of the
charge, as for the oppression of the people: for one months wages for 24000.
men, would amount to 250000. frankes: besides that, their march to and fro at
the assemblies would (now that soldiers are so far out of order) endomage
the people a hundred and fifty thousand. To be brief, this warfare would
yearly amount to 400000. franks, which al would not make the men much better
than those yt are ordinarily levied when wars come on. Ho^ beit the sound of
this great number of people does at the first dazell men's eyes: but we must
not trust to them, better it were to practice the Spanish proverb, that says:
Poco y bueno, which is, A few and good. But I would wish we might have three
established, one in Picardie, one in Champagne, and one in Burgundy, each
consisting of 2000. men: and this establishment would be erected principally to
these ends. First to induce the Gentry to inroule themselves among the
Infanterie: secondly, to reestablish Corcelettes therein, and thirdly to help
to fill up the bodies of our armies.

Concerning the first point, experience teaches, that nothing has Whether it
be requisite some of the gentry shoul be enrowled among the Infantery.
more corrupted our Infanterie, than that our Gentry have with drawn
themselves therefro, disdaining not only to bear the harquebut and pike, but
also many times to take any charge. Where by are entered petty Country
Captains deuoid of all respect of honor, and such as seek to enrich
themselves with the general spoils of our wars. Yea, if any old regimentes
have observed some sort the ancient discipline, yet are there many disorders
crept in among them. The cause that makes the Spanish Infanterie at this day
to be in such estimation, is for that their Gentry are so willing to serve
therein, yea, rather than among the horse. For there will they serve out their
apprentishippe of war, to the end to attain to be Captains, which degree
they make as great account of, as we do of the Colonelship of a whole
regiment. It were therefore good to commit the charge of the companies to
notable Gentlemen, who likewise might choose to be their Liuetenants and
Ensigns, such other Gentlemen their neighbors of whom there be enough in the
Provinces, as might be capable thereof.

Thus through their credites they might bring in for soldiers other that
bear the same title of Gentry as themselves. The Lord of Langey witnesses
that the Captains of the legions of Normandy and Picardie were all men of
good houses, and names the Lords Bacque-ville, Cantelow, Mally, and Lanny,
with others bearing office. Wherefore to restore into honor such as we would
establish, it were requisite the Colonels thereof were of person valorous, in
war experienced, known in Court, and worth 12. or 15000 frankes rent, co the
end through their own estimation to bring the office into credit. And
although I hear yoke wealth with virtue, yet do I make it but as her
handmaide, for the exercise of liberality, which is necessary among
soldiers. We see that in the low Countries the chief Lords do not disdain
to take the regiments, as the Earls of Egmont, Arembergue, and Barlaimont, the
valiant Marquis of Renty, with the gallant Earl Charles of Mansfield.

As touching the second point for the reestablishing of Corcelets Of the
reestablishment of their elects and Pikes.
and Pikes, I have already showed that the Infanterie that is thereof
unprovided, is imperfect: howbeit that there are means to remedy it. Whereof
the most sovereign, in my opinion, is to bring men to it voluntarily rather
than by compulsion, which may easily be done if the Gentry through obedience
will begin to lead the way to the rest, who will not be behind when they
shall see their Captains which command them, take upon them the use of the
same weapon that they appoint to them. It were good also that the orders of the
said legions were such, as the third part of the men of whom they should
consist, to be pikes, and the fourth harquebuts, so should the three legions
contain 4500. corcelets, and 1500. harquebuts.

Now to come to the third point, I say that this number is sufficient Of the
composition of the bodies of the armies.
to make three battles, whereof eue^ one would withstand a regiment of
Germains: for although it should contain but 1200. corcelets, yet do I suppose
it ^urst fight with two thousand, considering the quality of the men therein
contained. Neither do I doubt but we should find 1050. Gentlemen in every
one, who being placed in the three first ranks, what man can say but they
would give a ^aliant onset. Such an opinion have I of the French Gentry, that
being lead by a good and skillful Captain, I assure my self they would pass
through fire and water. Thus would these three legions deserve to have place in
the right and left wings of the army, because their bodies would be both
big and strong enough to stand, Such as will meddle with war, especially in
the field, must not deceive them selves, but thinck that armies without
battles of Pikes are as arms and legs without bodies, which are most
necessary to bear up the said members. Now let us see whether this small
principle and order that I would lay in time of peace, may in time of war
make them as good as I have described them. For my part I thinck they will not
want much. Which nevertheless I refer to the judgment of those that have
more skill than my self, after they have seen the end of this discourse. They
are to remember that I fit the shoe to the foot, that is to say, the charge
according to our poverty: for if we were able to do more, I would not be
against it. But whatsoever our estate be, we ought still to provide instruments
wherewith to defend the Flower de luce, least some pleasant fellow delighting in
her smell, should pluck away the branches thereof.

His Maiestic having chosen for Colonels to the three legions, The means to
order well the Captains and chief members of the legions.
such men as I have described, (For virtue and authority are necessary in
such reformations) they likewise shall each of them in the Countries limited,
chose nine good Captains and themselves to make the tenth to govern the
companies, wherein they shall employ all their credit, to the end to install such
honorable gentlemen their friends or neighbors as shall be worthy. And no
doubt many seeing themselves requested by such qualified Colonels (whom they
do both know and love) will be ready enough to accept of the offices which
otherwise they would disdain. Yea, it may peradventure so fall out that some
Gentlemen of two or three thousand Frankes rent, (but valyant and courageous,
which is the principal) finding themselves conducted by a Captain that is
both their companion and friend. will not refuse to march with him. If any man
desire to know why I crave such fellows, it is to the end that by their example
and credit, other more mean and poor Gentlemen should join themselves to
the same body, as is aforesaid, as being assured when a good foundation is
laid, we may the more safely build thereupon, and our work will be the
surer. Then should the said Captains choose for their Lieuetenants and
Ensigns other Gentlemen skillful in the service of Infanterie, and withal
five others to be always in soldiers rooms, who were easy to be found.
These* are all that should make the body of a legion in the time of peace,
who likewise should be retained with some mean fee wherewith to bind them to
this vocation, and to dispose them to bear the rules of such a warfare. For it
were folly to think without expenses to make men subject, either that without
study in whatsoever, as well by speculation as practice, an many may grow
perfect. The Captains wages shall be five hundred Frankes by year, the
Lieuetenants three hundred, the Ensigns two hundred, and the five soldiers
each of the^ one hundred, which to every company would amount to 1500,
Frankes. Hereto might I a^de for the Colonels wages, and many other his
necessary expenses 500. Franks. Likewise for ten brave Serieants, whom I
think also necessary to be provided for, 1000. Frankes, and for a Serieant
mayor 300. so as the whole summed together, this entry and ground of a Legion
would amount but to 5600. Crowns by the year, and so all the three to 16800.
All which is but the pay of three score men of arms, and yet in the said
three legions we should have above 240. Gentlemen bound and sworn. Now as
this maintainaunce should not be given them to fat them up in their houses
(so it were lost labor) so likewise should they not be put to keep garrisons,
or to trot up and down whenever others list to send for them: but herein
they should use such a mean, that in receiving yearly all instructions
requisite, they might by little and little prepare themselves rather for the
service to come, that is, when wars should come upon us, than for the
present. Every year upon a day limited, the Colonel, Captains, and
Soldiers, should al meet in some great Borough near to the chief Town of
the Province, or in any other convenient place, to muster in armor, and
receive the pay above mentioned. Half the Captains pay to be employed to
the buying of fair Corcelets and Pikes, which should be always kept in the
Towns aforesaid, notwithstanding the property should rest in themselves;
whereby in four years every legion should have 80000, frankes worth of
armor, which would be a great help to the furnishing of them. The soldiers
likewise should leave their furniture in the same places, as well to ease them
of the carriage of it to their own houses, as also to keep it from
embeseling, for both going and coming they must lodge in hostries. Thus should
not the people be any whit molested: which were a matter both just in it self
and honorable to the King, which also would purchase a good name to the
Soldiers. So do I think that every man at his return home may have half
his pay clear, except the Captains that shall have bought the armor.

But, may some man say, yt remainder of this small pay will scarce Answer to
the common objection of those that shoot at profit rather then honor.
buy a pair of hosen, or make a man good cheer one day. In deed I confess
that gluttons shall find this shoe too little for their foot: But Gentlemen
nobly minded will account such maintenance, proceeding from the king, for an
acceptable benefit exceeding their pains and ordinary service. We must
direct our actions after the ancient orders that agree with reason, and not
after the manner of the depraved customs of civil wars. My self knew a
simple soldier, namely an Argolet that had not above fifty sous rent, who
had so well husbanded his small business, that he kept eight horses in his
train, a cart with three horses, twelve servants and six dogs, in all thirty
mouths, and yet when time served he was not too good to carry the Harquebut,
and had but one page.

But to return to my purpose. I think that it were enough for Continuation of
the ordering of Capteins and chief members of legions.
them to soiourne in the place appointed for the musters (where every one
shall be lodged by tiquets, and pay according as shall be rated) eight or ten
days, for I suppose yt in that time they may sufficiently know their men:
instruct the^ by the discourses and writings of skillful Captains in warlike
affairs: prepare them for time to come: exercise them, and by lively
exhortations print in their hearts the goodly portraiture of honor, to the end
afterward they might do things worthy their fame, and obtain the
commendation to have brought into estimation those orders that had been
contemned: likewise to breed love and confidence between them, which both are
necessary in a troop. To be brief, the Colonel ought to imploie his whole
mind and purpose with himself to bestow those few days in good
instructions, and not in vain riots, which I imagine would be of great virtue.
This done, every man to be licensed to depart until the next year, and so
should the rest be used. Now is the question whether through this small
discipline the aforenamed might grow more capable of their offices: Truly I
do no whit doubt, but as well the commander as the commanded should be the
better learned therein. For every man coming to this martial school would
bring in the best that he had collected out of the deeds of our ancestors,
which by continual conference, adioined to practice, would be both seen and
graue^ in memory. But the greatest difficulty consists in knowledge whether
when Answer to an other objection touching the whole body of the legions.
the legions should be perfected up to their full bodies, such persons as should
be added could in short time be trained. Heereto I say, that it is greatly
to be presumed that such wildinges as should be grafted into this free and
well pruned tree, by taking their relief therefro, would come in short space
to bear the like fruit. And like as good Pilots and ship masters do soon
make their Mariners fit for navigations: so, well taught Captains do soon
give their soldiers good instructions. Some will say that our legions cannot
be good for want of maintenance. I confess they might be the better, but we
must withal consider that it would cost above 900000. Frankes by year, which
is the revenue of a good Province, whereas after my rule set down they shall
not spend in time of peace above 16800. crowns, which to a king is but four
sets at Tenis, or the bad luck of two hours play at Primero. Well, war being
proclaimed, and the Colonels charged to fill up their number of men, they
should wish their Captains to put in as much Gentry as they might: and we
must think that by their credit many would be willing, yea, as many as I have
said, that is 150. to every legion. Afterward they should also choose other
good soldiers enough fit for the pike and Corcelet, and although many were but
so so, yet having so proud a head, they should show themselves wretches if they
would not follow so good guides. As for harquebuziers, they should never be
above fifty in a company: and we shall find of them thousands. It were also
requisite his Majesty should deliver to every legion flue hundred Corcelets,
for the which he to pay part of the money aforehand to the merchants, and
appoint payment of the rest at the musters. And so does the K. of Spain
sometimes when he Ieauieth any German regiments. For he provides the most
part of armor, otherwise the Captains should not be able to do it on such a
sudden. During the wars they should be maintained as the ordinary hands and
at their feet, as also they should obey the general of the Infanterie.
Likewise their Captains being men of honor and able to live, as also
sufficiently instructed by their Colonelles of the infamy growing of
disordered military proulings and pilferies, should study how to keep their
companies as complete as might be, and not excessiuely to rob them as some do:
yea, to help their poor soldiers in their greatest necessity: but withal,
when the war were ended, they should be paid their charges. If this order
might come to perfection the king could hardly be surprised by any euimie
whatsoever, for in 6. weeks the four regiments before spoken of, together with
these three legigions may be brought into the field, and their bodies furnished
with 14000 brave soldiers, whereof to make four goodly battles of pikes
which are so necessary. Also if part of the men of arms and light horse were
joined unto it, it would be a meetly sufficient army of our own nation to
defend our borders until strangers might be levied. I know some will
peradventure say that few mean soldiers will serve in such bands wherein we
look to have all chief officers taken out of the body of the Gentry: but
for preventing this inconvenience, I think it were not amiss to leave some
honors for the vnnobls, if by virtue they may grow worthy the same: as the
Serieant majors office, the Lieuetenantships of companies, and mean serieants
rooms. Thus may they be contented: But the Lieuetenant, Colonel, the
Captains and Ensigns should always be Gentlemen. Concerning the difficulty,
ordinarily propounded, which in deed is not small, how to induce the common
soldiers to take the pike: I suppose it would soon be decided, when they
should see (as I have said) the Captains and gentry practice the same weapon:
and upon occasion to fight, join with the body of the battle, saving such as
shall be appointed to lead the shot: as also to imitate the Spaniard who
allows the Corcelet greater pay than the simple harquebuze.

I have heretofore heard some Princes counsailours, who sought Answer to an
other objection.
to make their masters too thriftie, mislike the maintaining of many military
officers in the time of peace, and peradventure there be yet some of them that
may say that it were more meet to hyer one hundred good soldiers that might
keep a frontier town, than to enter into charges for that which I have
propounded. To these will I make no answer, but even refer them to the
Marshalls, Montmirencie and Biron, two old Captains of France, who
understand more of the art of war than my self, and if they condemn me I
yield: but I imagine that I shall not loose my plea: for even of themselves I
have heard that the good Captains make the good soldiers, because they be the
preseruers of good order and discipline, which others do soon neglect, yea,
even contemn, unless they be bound thereto. But, will some man reply; can
your self well perform the thing which ye tell others may be done so easily:
Truly I think that it properly appertains to those which now bear the title
of Colonels of the Legionaries, and are better seen in the art of war than
my self, to labor in it, and to reap the honor thereof. As also I believe
that in France there be 1000 Gentlemen more sufficient than my self, and can
better discharge it. Nowbeit, that they shall not think that I would set down
things that cannot be practiced, and like unto paradoxes, whereof I will
discourse (and yet are so strange) I say that if my King should command me to
try such a matter (notwithstanding I coue^ not any offices, whether great or
small) I would think within two years to form such a body, as therewith I
durst wrestle with any other regiment whatsoever, so it were of such a nation
as bear us no great good will. And I assure my self the Zuitzers, who help
themselves with the pike as well as any soldiers in the world, would be
glad to have the assistaunce of such a legion. This is my opinion. Wherein if
I ouershoote my self, let men consider that I am a French man, whose ears do
so gloe with hearing my nation set at naught, that I would wish it to do that
which I know it is able, if it were helped: to the end men might perceive that
industry and valor are not quite perished in France.

The fiftenth Discourse.
That the ancient manner of aranging the horse in haie or file, is now of small
use. Also that it were necessary they should take the use of squadrons.

THe Frenchmen, who are very ready to embrace Inconstancy of the Frenchmen.
novelties, and to abandon old things, have not always so observed that rule,
but that they have continued steadfast in some ancient customs which they
have accounted ineete to be retained. But growing to a more diligent
examination, it appears that as in some they have left the worse to embrace
the better, so in others, it seems they have contemned that which was rather
to be received, than the same whereto they have tied themselves. As also it
has fallen out that in one self thing they have be wrayed their good and bad
judgment. For when they might make some thing both profitable, fair, and
easy, they have been contented with the first, and in liew of the other two
have intruded uncomeliness and difficulty. Whereof Example of arms.
I will allege an example, in matters of arms. For where they had some
reason in respect of the violence of harquebuzes and dagges to make their armor
thicker and of better proof than before, they have now so far exceeded, that
most of the^ have laden themselves with stithies in liew of clothing their
bodies with armor. Likewise all the beauty of the horseman, is converted into
deformity. His head piece resembles an ^ron pot. On the left arm he wears
a great gantlet up to his elbowe, and on the right a pouldron, that shall scarce
cover his shoulder: and ordinarily they wear no Tases: also in liew of
Cassockes, a Mandilion, and no Spear. Our men of arms in ye time of K. Henry
made a far fayrer show, wearing their Sallet, Pouldrons, Tases, Cassocke,
Spear, and Banderol, neither was their armor so heavy, but they might
welbeare it 24. hours, where those that are now worn are so weighty, that
the peize of them will benumme a Gentleman's shoulders of 35. years of age. My
self have seen the late Lord of Eguillie, and the knight of Puigreffier,
honorable old men, remain a whole day armed at all assaies, marching in the
face of their companies, where now a young Captain will hardly continue two
hours in that state.

But having determined to treat of the order of horse, I have Of the manner to
arange horsemen.
dwelt too long upon this point. I say therefore that the order hitherto
observed in the aranging of them would be left, to the end to take another
which reason wills us to follow, as being the better. But I doubt some will
control this proposition, saying that old customs are not ras^ly to be
altered: also that when the men of arms most flourished, this was their manner
of fight. Likewise that since the late Duke of Guise or the late Lord Constable,
who were so excellent Captains, made no innovation therein, it seems that it
should be still so used. For if alterations in matters of state (as Plutarke
says) be dangerous: like wise the tha^nging of martial orders, brings
inconveniences. But when a man has by proof found the profit arising by the
new order, and the defects of the old, is it not high time to forsake the one
and lay hold of the other? The Romans, who may be said to have been
sovereign masters in the art of war did many times y^ like. Moreover, because
the men of arms have had good success when they were ra^^ged in a haie, does
it follow that now they should so range themselves? No, for many things have
since happened, that may compel us to change our fashions: as we have done in
fortifications since the invention of Artillery.

Froissart who in his Historic treats at large of the French wars, does
greatly commend the horsemen of his time, which was forty years before the
erection of the Ordonances. And by his discourse it seems that they fought in
file: he there describes the^ to be well armed, mounted upon mighty iades,
and having strong spears, whereby they might give a great push. I do also
suppose that they chose this order, because the same horsemen consisted only of
Gentry, so as every man would fight in front, and never continue in the last
rank, every one esteeming himself to be in valor no less than his
companion: as also it is to be presumed that in those days other Nations
observed the like order. Afterward when ye men of arms were erected they
follow the same, and so continued until the midst of the reign of king
Henry the second, with much happy success. But toward the end of his reign
our losses taught us, that in part they proceeded of the weakness of our
said order, and the firmness of that of our enemies. Then did the squadrons
of spears grow into credit, who (as I have heard) were so aranged by the
Emperor Charles, who meeting our files of men of arms did easily overthrow
them, which also the squadrons of Rheitres have sometimes done: neither is it
much to be meruailed that it came so to pass for natural reason shows it,
which wills that the strong carry away the weak: Also that six or seven
ranks of horsemen joined together overthrow one alone.

Some make this objection. That when a company is so stretched forth, they do
all fight, whereas being in squadron scarce the Answer to those that would have
the horse stretched forth in file.
sixth part do join, viz. so much as in the fore front. Hereto I answer,
that in the aranging of a troop, we must not care so much, that every one at
the meeting strike one blow with his spear: but rather that it may be able to
overthrow all that come against it, which is much brauelyer done when it is in
the squadron? It may likewise be replied that the squadron cannot overthrow
above fifteen or sixteen horse at the most of the troop that stands in a
haie, which is true, but those shall be about the Ensign, where the Captains
and best men are placed: which being carried away, all the rest shakes, and
although that part that has not been touch^ do close up the flanks of the
squadron, yet does it small harm, in that it cannot enter upon the men that
are thus in a heap united together: who likewise in their shockes do strike
those as well as the first, and break them.

Yea, although three or four troops of horse be araunged in a haie one at
another heales, yet shall a squadron overthrow them all almost as easily as
the boule does many ranks of scailes: So that there must be one force to
withstand another^. If a Captain having one thousand Corcelets to set in
battle araie should not make past two or three ranks of them, even the
soldiers would laugh him to scorn, because by reason every battle must
have his convenient thickness.

The like consideration almost is to be had of the horse, and I wonder it has
no sooner been spied: For if the two notable Captains aforenamed, had lived,
they would peradventure have taken order for it. It is not unknown to those
that were in ye kings army at Vallenciens that there were nere 10000 French
spears: also that coming before the forte where the imperial were
entrenched, I noted that a body of three hundred men of arms aranged in file,
took almost 1000. paces in length, and the rest of the horses kept an infinite
ground. But if the said 300. men of arms had been set in 3. squadrons, they
would not have occupied above six score paces in length, and the order had
been far better: for to the end to archieue some notable fear, the men must
be close, and the better to help each other, they must not be so sca^red a
sunder. Our men of arms have in our civil wars well perused the forces of
the Reisters squadrons: for notwithstanding they always gave the onset
courageously, yet could they never break them, for they are so thick that
there is no means to get through them. At S. Quintaines and Graueling they
were thoroughly: taught what great squadrons of spears are able to do, by whom
they were easily overthrown. All which proves may be sufficient to induce our
great ones to correct the imperfections of our orders.

Yet one example more I will allege the better to dis^^se the^ thereto: namely
the battle of Montcontour, where ye kings horse being brought into squadro^s of
spears, at their ioyni^s with the protestants, who were ordered in a haic and
without spears, might see how easily they were overthrown.

Yet will I better examine these matters, beginning with a squadron A proof
that the horsemen ought to be brought into squadrons.
formed of a company of fifty men of arms complete. He that list to make
seven ranks, his foremost shall contain at the least fifteen spears. Now is
it like that those whom we set foremost are choice men, and the second do well
second them in valor: and it is a miserable company that has not at the
least 25. good men in it. As for the rest who^ I presuppose not to be so
valiant, they be placed as it were in covert under the shadow of the former,
which makes them to follow the more cheerefullie to the charge, as knowing
that the head must bear all the danger and hurt, which if it break the
enemy, they shall be partakers of the same honor. So that it is a notable
sign of cowardlynesse, when a troop sobrdered dare not join. Considering
that the valor of the first should urge them to the onset, and the assurance
of the last to follow and thrust in. But when a troop is set in a wing,
although the good, which ordinarily are the smallest number, do march cheerely
to the onset, yet the rest that are not so willing to bite, (which feign to
bleed at the nose, to have a broken stiroppe, or to have their horse vnshooed)
do stay behind, so as within two hundred paces of way, we shall see glass
windows in that long file, and great breaches will appear therein, which
greatly incourageth the enemy: and many times among an hundred horse, scarce
25. do enter in: who afterward knowing themselves to have no supporte, when
they have broken their staves and stroke one blow with the sword, (if they be
not overthrown at their first coming,) do retire. And this shows what
difference there is between one kind of fight and another. When I consider of
what manner of people the companies of other nations do consist, and of what
people ours are full, I wonder that we pass them not in goodness. For if we
mark the Burguinion men of arms, which are in great reputation, we shall not
find much gentry in their companies. In the Italian and Spanish troops,
which at this day are the best, there be fewer: True it is there be very good
soldiers. But in one of our bands of Ordinance of fifty spears which
should contain about an hundred and fifty horse, we shall find
notwithstanding the corruption creapt in, above 60. Gentlemen, who respecting
their honors ought to do better than others of meaner calling: not that I
will affirm this rule to be always true, though for the most part. Now the
means thereby to furnish out our men of arms with Gentry, consists in
maintaining it as in time past: also to make it invincible, is to use it to
fight in s^uadrons. And for my part I suppose that 100. varlets armed, manned,
and guided, keeping this order, will overthrow 100. Gentlemen fighting in haie.

Some do think it to be a hard matter to bring our Nation to The means to
put this counsel in Practice.
use this order, which is true in respect of great Lords and wilful
Gentlemen, for that every man coueteth to be foremost in the march and fight:
But in one of the companies of Ordinance the Captain does purchase obedience,
either by love or force. And when this manner has been a little practiced,
every one will frame himself thereto. One thing we must note, that men when
they come to fight will never keep their ranks well, unless they be first
used to it in their ordinary march, for from the lesser men grow to the
greater, and he that is perfect in one is the readier to acquit himself in
the other. We see the Reisters and their varlets, who have no more devotion
than our French Gentlemen, religionsly observe this order. And to say the
truth, this manner of march is very commodious, and our selves do commend it
in them. But endeavoring to practice it, as a nouelty it does by and by grieve
us, as being too solemn. Which rises of our impatience, that never leaves us
one quarter of an hour in one state. But this may the Captains authority in
time remedy. Some will say that three hundred spears in file, makes a
greater show than three squadrons of the like number, which cannot be denied.
But for the fight (whereat we must chiefly aim) they are of no such effect.
And this is it that should be well beaten into warriors heads. For the
Captains ought by instructions to make them half soldiers, and by
experience to perfect them.

Let us now see whether the ancient order be in these days no whit to be
practiced. I think it may be used in two occasions. First when we send forth
twenty or thirty spears, for that troop being so small may better fight in
haie, where it makes most show. Secondly, when we come to charge the footmen,
it is good to divide a squadron into many small troops in file, which may
assail in sundry places. But except these two occasions, I would wish the
horse always to keep this order of squadrons. Besides, if we consider how
meanly many are in these days mounted, and how vncoward at the spear, we will
be ashamed to put them into a simple body, which were as much as to set them
to be beaten for the nonce. Now let all such as have had experience of the
wars judge whether the for^e that I have propounded, which the Spaniards,
Italians, Burguinions, and Germans do use, be not better than the old. Many
other questions might be demanded, as how many ranks should make a squadron,
what number it should contain, and whether 2. squadrons of 250. spears a piece
would counteruaile 300. as good as one of you? Concerning the ranks, I would
order the^ after the valor of the men: which the greater it were, the fewer
would I make, and the less the more. As for the number convenient for a
squadron, we must in part have regard to our enemies order. For if theirs be
great, ours must not be small, and in my opinion, except against the Turks
three hundred spears will suffice. And the third question is easily decided.
For two mean troops having good corespondence, and charging in season, are,
in my mind, of more importance than one great.

The 16. Discourse.
Of the use of Camarades, which among the Spanish footmen are of great account.

THe Lord of Langey in his hook of martial What Camarades are and wherefore
erected.
discipline makes mention of Camarades, which in our French speech he terms
Cha^berers, making them to confist of ten soldiors a piece, giving to one the
pre-eminence over the rest, and him he names Captain of the Chamber. Wherein
he imitateth the Romans, who in their bands termed Cohortes, whereof ten made
a legion, had their Decurions, yt is to say, their Tens with their Captains
over ten, which as I think they used for three causes. First for order, which
should be observed even in the least matters. Secondly, by their small
rudiments to instruct the soldiers in their commandments. And thirdly, that
by this continual conversation and participation in the same fire, table, and
bed, they might engender faith and love. Now the Spaniards do not erect these
small societies for any of the two first reasons, but for the third only, so
as that which the L. of Langey wills to be done especially for order, they
practice for the commodity only which therein they reap. And I think that
this kind of footmen, which is usually 150. or 200. leagues out of their own
Country, was brought to that custom through such great necessities, as they
are sometimes forced to fight against, for some remedy whereof they invented
this fit mean, which in truth is very good, for certainly there is no better,
or more assured succor, care, or comfort, than of a perfect friend or loyal
companion.

It had been peradventure more mee^e in speech to have delivered Why this
discourse is put in writing.
such ordinary, and (as a may may say) childish things, than to set them
down in writing. But the cause that moved me heereto, is my own knowledge of
the great want that our footmen have of the use hereof among them: for the
bringing of them in liking whereof, I thought good to make this small
description, which I wish should not vanish away with the sound. For if some
at the least by the contemplation thereof could well perceive the goodly fruit
springing out of these military societies, I should not think these my
imperfect labors (which have been the hidden pastimes of my long miseries) to
have been altogether unprofitable.

Among the Spanish footmen there be (so far as I can learn) two The first
kind of Spanish Camarades.
sorts of Camarades. The first are they whom the chief officers of the
companies do associate with themselves, whom they do defray with their
servants and horse, if they have any, so as costing them nothing, they have
their whole pay come freely in, and commonly a Captain will have 5. or 6. whom
he terms his Camarades, (for such are the customs of Spain) which do in the
armies seek means to maintain themselves worthily, and to grow to preferment.
These through their daily conversation with the Captains, who are grave,
modest, and discrete, do learn so well that in short space a man would deem
them worthy not only to bear the corcelet or harquebuze, but also to
command, as my self have thought of some of those whom I have seen. Their
love and regard to him that maintains them, is very great: as also for his
part he esteems of them almost as well if they were his own kinsmen. To be
brief, they always keep the Captain honorable company in his lodging, and
serve and stand to him in his affairs, being accounted as Shelmes, if they
should abandon him. Their Serieauntes, who among them are in far greater
estimation than ours have also for their Camarades, some couple of brave
soldiers whom they chose, who like wise do give them the third part of
their pay to help toward their own maintenance: and although they seem
thereby to be but as pencioners, yet do they bear them love and honor as they
ought.

The second sort of Camarades is the same which is practiced The second kind
of Camarades.
among the soldiers, a matter so usual among them, that he that keeps
himself long out of such assotiations is accounted as a stubburne jade that
cannot abide among his fellows. The least consist of two, and the greatest of
six, in every whereof we may see the goodly images of brotherhood to shine.
And this is so much the more to be esteemed as it happens among soldiers,
who might seem to seek discord rather than concord. Thus in the midst of
the general amity which the soldiers bear to their Captains and
companions, is formed this particular here spoken of, which is more lively
than the other: the original whereof proceeds of their mutual knowledge,
and increase of ordinary conversation, and the steadfastness and confirmation
thereof, of mutual benefits. And for my part I think it no small strength to
a company to have therein some duzen of societies of friends, or more, that
have care each of other. Plutarke discoursing upon the sacred bond of ye young
Thebans, which was otherwise called The band of friends, did judge it therefore
to be the more valiant. And in deed they all died one after another in the
battle.

Moreover, there grows great commodity in ordinary expense by living
together: for four soldiers may honestly maintain themselves with a small
matter, according to their callings, where one yonker having his several table
shall spend more than all they and not fare so well.

The Spaniards do use in their Camarades to allow to each his The Discipline
and commodity of the second sort of Camarades.
week to provide and keep account of charges, and he that best husbandeth
it, is thought the wisest, which is the thing that they most study for. For
they gape after praise even in the smallest matters as well as in the great.
Seldom do they incur any want, for still one of them either by hook or
crook catches somewhat, which he liberally imparteth to the rest, neither can
they abide that any of them should be badly clothed, rather will they fast to
apparel him. But one of the chiefest fruits of these societies appears when
one of them is sick, for such is their charity, that they will one help
another as brethren to their power. Thus much I will say more, that this small
private life is almost always pleasant, because of their domestical
conversation which finds them pastime enough. Neither is it cause of less
honesty, for one always seeing another, every man brideleth his affections as
well as he may, from doing any infamous deed, for fear least he should grow
into contempt and so be banished the company of those that esteem of honor.
And to say the truth, I find solitariness to be hurtful to many Soldiers,
who resemble Apes, which when no man sees them, are always about some
mischief: and so do they imagine to do. Whereto is to be added, that if any
of the said Spaniards be ignorant in this or that, the rest will instruct him
with as good will as he will receive not only their instructions but also
reprehensions. This is in brief the benefit that they reap of their
Camarades.

Now let us see how we may so practice the like custom, that The means how
to practice the like discipline in France.
we may gain any profit therein, whereof others do find so much. Concerning
the first sort, I judge our Captains cannot so well fit themselves therein as
the Spaniards, in respect that they must then break an other custom, which
has taken so deep root that it would hardly be extinguished. And that is,
that they have used to have their tables furnished according to their
abilities, sometimes for one and sometime for an other of their Soldiers, who
would think themselves contemned, if with that and such other like
familiarities they should not be enterteyned. For the French Soldiers are
persuaded that their Captain must not debar the^ either his table or good
countenance, since they spend their bloods for his sake, and he who for sparing
shows himself slack herein is accounted a Chicheface or niggard: for well for
to discharge himself herein, he must not spare expenses. So as if our Captains
should find three or four Camarades above their other charges, they were not
able to perform it without stealing from the Soldier unreasonably, which
would redound to their shame. The Spanish Soldier do not go so freely to his
Captains table, except upon great necessity, or that he be invited: as having
discretion enough to consider that they have other charge sufficient, as in
deed they have. For such there are among them as have in their families above
twenty mouths, and thirteen or fourteen horses. But their best comfort is,
that their King as they say, will never leave them poor. Thus we may see
things fit for one, which in diverse respects that make the difference will not
serve an other. But concerning the second, I am not of the same mind: for I
think it requisite that our Soldiers should put it in practice, yea that they
should be earnestly persuaded thereto, as well for the respects before
mentioned, as also to accustom them to grow more tolerable each to other.
Besides, that in some one of our companies we shall find that ordinarily the
third part of our soldiers shall in the first week have eaten up their whole
months pay, where if they were thus assotiate together they would learn one
of an other to line, and withal each enstruct his companion to shuune braules,
wherewith our Regiments are so sore infected that in some one day you shall
have three or four, whereas contrariwise the Spaniards do detest it among
themselves. I have heard some of the Captains of that brave Tertio, wherein
Peter de Pass does command, affirm, that in eighteen months they have not
had one, whereof nevertheless they were not exempt through any want of
stomach, for they have as much as any men, but they are endued with modesty,
and do know that their swords ought to be employed in fighting against their
enemies, and not in murdering one another.

This Discourse is imperfect.
The 17. Discourse.
Of the rewards ordinarily bestowed upon the Spanish soldiers when they have
done any notable piece of service: which they term their Advantages.

I Am not of the opinion of those men, who peradventure Whether Princes owe any
reward to the brave soldier.
flattering their Princes, do uphold that ye rewards which they use to give to
their soldiers do proceed of their mere liberality, and that thereto they
are no way bound. And their reason is: for that he has his pay for his good
service, so as whatsoever he gets more proceeds of favor. Truly they
peize the balance ^o much to the one side, which I would feign bring to stand
equal: and that may easily be done by putting as much wait to the merit of
the inferior as to the goodwill of the superior. But if we consider the
martial laws and customs, we shall find that in such actions there is more
of duty then of grace. And I hold that rule good which wills that as the
pay goes before the service, so the reward must follow the merit. Truly if
any men in the world do labor and encurre great hazards in service, the
soldiers do it. They must not therefore be defrauded of the rewards which even
the meanest do hope for and the greatest cannot be denied of. For their valor
showed has a certain attractiue power which wresteth praise and garlands out
of the mouths and hands even of the ignorant, of the couetouse, and of the
unthankful.

Now, these Advantages whereof I purpose to speak do consist Wherein these
rewards do consist.
in coin, and are small reco^pences, which the Catholic King or his
Lieutenants general do distribute to those that have done any valiant
exployt: The least are two crowns, and the greatest eight. Also this is
moreover to be noted, that if a soldier once rewarded does again any
extraordinary service, he is again recompensed. And my self do remember
that I have seen sundry that at sundry times had so gotten some twenty,
some five and twenty crowns Advantage, besides their ordinary pay, which in
my opinion is both a good help to the maintenance of a Soldier and a honest
token of his valor. Yet some do set down these rewards under the title of
profit and not of honor. But if they marked the cause which purchased them as
well as the quality of the thing purchased, they should perceive them to be
as honorable as profitable. Commonly the General does assign them, because
that being in place he better knows those yt are worthy then the King who is
far of. Likewise when any has given his ordinance, he may go where he will
so he serve among ye bands of footmen which are divided into diverse parts of
his Empire, still he shall have his pay: for such debts are woonderfully
privileged.

I could never learn when this custom began, but I guess the Their original
and comoditie.
Emperor Charles was the author thereof: for he being personally in many armies
and exployts, thought them necessary for the maintenance and increase of his
soldiers valor: and by the fruits which both have and do yet appear, we
may judge them to have been grounded upon good reason. Wherein is verified the
saying of one that said, that where much honor was sown, great virtue
springs up. For the soldier that sees his assured reward as it were before
his eyes, never fears, if occasion serve, to hazard himself to all perilles,
thereby to show his courage and desire of fame: whereof it also follows that
he is the better affected to form his life well. I have heard that honorable
old man Peter de Pas report, that to his Tertio or regiment, which consists
of 23. Spanish Ensigns, there were given monthly above 1200. crowns in
Advantages, which well testifies that the same was replenished with valiant
men.

It may be some severe Censor will hereupon exclaim and say. Is it not an
excessive prodigality to give away 14000. crowns by year Answer to such as
think the money to be evil bestowed in such recompenses.
extraordinarily unto one regiment? Might not 250 good soldiers be maintained
therewith? My friend, what stand thou so much upon the number? I grant thou
may have soldiers, but good ones I deny. For to the end to make them such,
they must be well used. I marvel thou can cast thy niggardly eyes so far
into the lawful rewards of other men's so long labors, and yet turn them
from thy self. For what else do thou but live delicately, taking no pain
but to stuff thy coffers with the riches of the Commonwealth, which do far
surmount that which thou think superfluous, and which thy self would
feign catch? Hold thy peace I pray thee, or else my counsel shall be to send
thee to view the first breach that shall be made. But if any man shall think
that I would seek out among foreign nations only all that is well ordered,
to the end thereto to give due commendation and proceed no farther, he is
much deceived. For having set down that which so deserves, I will stir up
our great men to imitate the order that yields such fruit to others, thereby
to encourage our footmen, who being well ordered and used, does give place to
none in the world.

When I call to mind the small order observed in the rewarding Of the small
order observed by the Frenchmen in respect of rewards.
of our French soldiers, I am ashamed that so much wisdom as we have among
us could never perceive that it was requisite to do more then we have done. I
know that he which shows forth his valiancie may climb to the degrees of the
companies. Likewise have I sometime seen that when some had done any notable
act, he was rewarded with ten or twenty crowns at a time, though but
sieldome. Wherefore it were good either to establish some more firm and
continual order, or else to accuse our recompencers of ingratitude. But dare I
speak of the ingratitude often seen when there is any question of the poor
maimed, or such as have grown old in our wars, which crave that we should
take some compassion of them? If ten of the hundred be gratified, it is all,
and yet how is that? With the room of a lay Monck in an Abbay, where after the
poor soldier is come in, before he has been a fortnight among them, the most
of the Monckes (as scorners of labor, danger, and stripes, and lovers of
idleness, and belly cheer) do so cross and molest him, that he is driven
to compound for some fifty or sixty Frankes pention, and so get him some
other where. These examples do discourage our soldiers and bring them to take
bad ways, which would not so often fall out, if the order here propounded might
be established among our bands.

But because our France has not at this day any such yearly A mean how to
establish this disciplines
fleetes out of both the Indies, as this great Empire which threaten it, it
were meet, though we cannot do so much, yet to do some part of that which were
requisite, so to make those that bear the pike and the harquebuze to defend it
more bravely and willingly. If to a regiment of ten Ensigns we should assign
only 4000. crowns by year for Advantages, which should not be given but upon
notable service, and in ten regiments would amount unto 40000. crowns, were
it so evil husbandry for the time of war? I think, to some small Duke it
were too much, but to a King of France, such a charge were to be accounted
small, in respect of the good that would redound thereof, which would appear
in that the soldier should grow both the better warrior and the better
liver, when he should see his labor and diligence recompensed. It is hard to
think what a bad opinion strangers have conceived of our French Soldiers,
seeing them in their journey into Flanders and wars in France; so disordered
in the field, and sometimes to fight so faintly, which although it has in
part proceeded of giving them the bridle too much and their bad pay, yet may
we withal say that the small recompense which they hoped for and has been
given them, have discontented them and caused them by all means to seek their
profit, since they were denied the rewards of honor. Let us therefore grow more
ready to amend our faults, and knowing our passed negligence follow good
order, showing to those that being commanded do so liberally hazard their
lives that we hold them in some estimation: so shall we both conquer others and
keep our own. I might here say somewhat of the great rewards and other
honorable apparent tokens that appertain to those brave Captains and gallant
Knights which atchieue brave enterprises: But I will forbear, because my self
am forced here to digest the bitter pills of an apparent likelihood of
perpetual emprisonment.

Four Military Paradoxes.
The 18. Discourse.
The first Paradoxe.
That a Squadron of Reistres should beat a Squadron of Spears.

THE learned do know that Paradores are sentences or propositions repugnant to
common opinion, and in old time there were Philosophers which propounded some
that they had gathered in the doctrine of the Stoickes, were it to show that
men might gather fruit of that which seemed unfruitful, or for exercise of
their wits. Howsoever it is, I have thought good, imitating their examples
(to set down to sundry brave Captains matter whereon to discourse) to
propound these, thinking that when they have been well examined, some may
peradventure give as much credit to them as to common opinion. Among those
that profess arms, it is so assured a principle that a troop of Spears
should beat and overthrow a troop of Pistols, that who so seems to doubt
thereof is taken to be but a meanly practiced soldier. The Spaniards and
Italians do also make less doubt thereof then the French. And although they
be such men as with judgment can allow or disalowe whatsoever is set before
them, yet do I think that herein they lean rather to some small experience,
then to any other ground of reason. But in this as in many others matters, it
oftentimes manifests such effects, that when we have thoroughly considered
their causes we find that they should fall out otherwise. The Reistres should
rather the^ any other, be the defenders hereof, for yt their reputation
consists herein: and peradventure if they had at all times showed themselves
firm and diligent to do it with their hands, they might now with less
difficulty have defended it with their tongues.

We must yet grant them the honor of being the first yt brought The Reisters
active with the Pistol: and what advantage they seem to have of the Spears.
the Pistols into use, which when a man can well handle I take to be very
dangerous. They are a descent come from the harquebuziers, and to say as it
is, all these instruments are deuilish, invented in some mischievous shop to
turn whole realms and kingdoms into desolatio^, and replenish the graves
with dead carcases. Howbeit man's malice has made them so necessary that they
cannot be spared. To the end therefore to profit by them it is requisite to
have a merueisous care, which no nation does approach any thing so nere unto, I
mean for Pistols, as the Germans, and that is the cause that I will speak of
the^, as of those who among all sorts of horsemen that use this weapon, do carry
away the prize. I will not stand perticulerly to describe all the sorts which
the Reistres use, for they are but too well known. It is enough to say that
the offensive are as good as the spear men's, but the offensive do far pass
them. For the man of arms uses his spear but for one blow, where ye Reistre
carries 2. pistols wherewith he may shoot 6. or 7. times, which if he do it in
season, does great hurt. Every man likewise carries his sword, whose effects
may be equal. Since then ye pistol can pierce the defensive arms, which the
spear cannot, we may conclude that the Reistre has ye advantage in the
offensive and is equal in ye defensive.

In favor of the spear man, it may be said that he is better horsed, What
advantage the spear seems to have over the pistol, especially head to head.
and has his seat surer then the other: also yt the spear, when it is seen
a far of with the banderoll wauing and shaking, does terrify: whereto I
answer, that the massiue and close order of the Reistres does supply the
weakness of their horse and stays. As for the terror of the spear, it is not
of so great efficacy as is the astonishment that the pistol brings at the
crack. Let us, will some man say, bring these two champions to fight one
against an other, and he that gets the better shall teach which of the two
Squadrons shall so be. This objection bears some fair show, but it may be
false. For herein particular reasons do differ from the general. It is as if
a man should say, that because in the field one harquebuzier may kill a pike
man armed with his corcelet, it follows that in pitched fields the
harquebuziers should overthrow the battles of pikes: which nevertheless
falls out contrary, for it is certain that for the most part those
battles do give the victory. But admit the spear man and the pistol do
join, the issue will be doubtful, although I think if the pistoler can keep
himself from joining head to head with the spear man he may have the
advantage of him, by reason of the great offense growing of his weapon. If any
man reply, that among the gentry it is houlden for a principle, that a good
man of arms may easily beat a Reistre, I will answer, that the Germans
think the contrary: namely, that a brave Reistre should s^ay the man of arms
that comes to assail him, and carry away his horse: for they must still
catch at somewhat. Thus we see that on both sides every one will keep his
honor, yea even to private combats.

Howbeit, the principal point consists in showing what the events Which of
the 2. Squadrons should have the advantage.
of them in gross should be. For the better judgment whereof, we are first to
consider of the valor of the men. Hereupon the spears will say, that their
companies being better furnished of Gentry then the others, must likewise be
more valiant: but withal we must note, that in the cornets of Reistres there
be some few gentlemen and a number of trained soldiers: and for the
Captains, because they have been often employed by diverse Princes, they must
needs be skillful in the art of war. Wherefore to make the quicker
dispatch, I presume that in courage, experience and number both the squadrons
are equal. Let us then see which of them best keeps order: for that observed
as it ought at the going to charge gives a great gird to the victory. Herein
we must say, that the Germans exceed all other nations, because they seem
to be not only close, but even glewed each to other: which proceeds of an
ordinary custom that they have to keep always in body, as having learned
as well by natural knowledge, as by proof, that the strong always carry away
the weak. Also the more to testify that they sieldome fail in this,
whenever they be broken, in their retire and flight they still remain
vnseperate and joined together: which the spears do not, but rather for the
most part even in the shocke do bring themselves out of array, which proceed of
that that they must have some small carrier to strike with their spears: but
they take it too long, especially the Frenchmen, whose heat is such, that when
he comes within 200. paces he begins to gallop, and within 100. to run
amain, which is an oversight, for they need not so much ground. Since
therefore that it is one principle that squadrons do break with the vyolent
shocke which they sustain, may we not thereupon infer, that those that keep
themselves closest and do strike with the whole body conjoined, do work the
greatest effect: It is hard to deny it: and who do better practice those
rules then the Reistres?

Many there are that will not grant this, but do object that if Answer to the
objection that the Reistres have diverse times suffered the spears to beat
them.
there had been so great virtue in the Reistres order, they would not have
suffered themselves to have been so often beaten. Hereto I say, that the fault
proceeded not of their order, but rather of some evil demeanor which some of
them, coming to the combat, have used. The first is, that coming within
twenty paces of the enemy they have turned their flanckes to them, and so
discharged their volee of Pistols upon them: for thus (say they) more may
shoot then if they run on front: And then if the enemy turns his back,
undoubtedly they use him badly: but if he abide it, they fetch about a great
circuit either to charge a new, or to take new Pistols. Whereof it has
often come to pass, that they have not had leisure so much as to turn their
heads: for their turns and returns have been taken for a flight: whereupon
they have been so hotly pursued that they have taken their carrier out right.
This Ouersights of the Reisters.
evil invented manner is more fit to play at base then to fight. And I merueile
that their leaders could never remember that the Pistol works almost no
effect, unless it be discharged within three paces: as also that the troops
do never break unless they be sharply assailed. An other custom by them
observed is, that when the first ranckes of the squadron begin to shoot, all
the rest does likewise discharge, and most of them in the air. Peradventure
they imagine their great noise should terrify the enemy, which perhaps it
would do if they were sheep or crows. But French men and Spaniards are not
so easily daunted. The inconvenience that rises hereof is this, that the last
ranckes which should thrust forward the first, seeing that they have discharged
in vain, do in liew of going forward, stand still, and are sooner amazed then
they that be at the head and in all the danger: wherefore it is nothing
strange that these evil kinds of fight have engendered evil success. But
who so list to mark the other Reistres that have joined as they ought, shall
find that they have made slaughters and overthrown the spears, whereby their
Captains have learned wit, and do now make them to keep better orders.

Now let us speak of the meeting of two squadrons: whereupon Of the effect of
two Squadrons when they come to charge.
I will say, that although the squadron of Spears do give a valiant charge:
yet can it work no great effect: for at the onset it kills none, yea it is a
miracle if any be slain with the spear: only it may wound some horse, and as
for the shocke it is many times of small force, where the perfect Reistres do
never discharge their Pistols but in joining, and striking at hand they wound,
aiming always either at the face or thigh. The second rank likewise shoots
of so as the forefront of the men of arms squadron is at the first meeting
half overthrown and maimed. Also although the first rank may with their
spears do some hurt especially to the horse, yet the other ranckes following
cannot do so, at the least the second and third, but are driven to cast away
their spears and help themselves with their swords. Herein we are to
consider two things which experience has confirmed: The one, that the Reistres
are never so dangerous as when they be mingled with the enemy, for then be
they all fire. The other, the two squadrons meeting, they have scarce
discharged the second pistol but either the one or the other turns away. For
they contest no longer, as the Romans did against other nations, who
oftentimes kept the field two hours fighting face to face, before either
party turned back. By all the aforesaid reasons I am driven to aduowe that a
squadron of pistols, doing their duties, shall break a squadron of spears.

It may hereto be replied, that the man of arms carries also one pistol
which he uses when his spear is broken. It is soon said, but coldly
practiced: for the most of them scarce caring to charge, do refer that to
their men, who have no greater use of it then themselves, and when they come to
fight the one half do fail, as has been often enough tried, or at the least
through evil charging do no hurt. He that will have any use of those weapons,
must be as careful of them as of a horse: whereto it is hard to bring other
nations, which account this a base and servile occupation. Some man may in the
favor of the men of arms say, that they may in such sort join the squadron
of Reistres that they may overthrow them. That is, that coming within 80.
paces they may send forth their three last ranckes of spears gallantly to
assail their flancke, so shall they open it, break the force thereof, and
bring such a fear upon them that-the squadron of spears may the better deal
with them. Hereto I answer, the observation is good, though not greatly in
use. Nevertheless, it is a matter common as well to the one as to the other.
For teach it to the Reistre, and he will pay you in the same coin, by sending
forth part of his troop to strike into your sides: so shall your inventions
be a remedy to him, and peradventure he shall prevail more therewith then
your selves. Now, notwithstanding whatsoever I have herein discoursed, my
intent is not to bring the French nation in dislike with the spear, which I
take to be wonderful proper weapons for them so long as their minds are no
otherwise disposed then yet they be. And until they have learned more
steadfastly to keep order, and to be more careful of their weapons, they will
never work the like effects with the pistol, as the Reistres. Such as imagine
the pistol to be such a terrible and offensive weapon, are not greatly
deceived: neither will I gainsay them, in case it come in valiant hands.

The end of the first Paradoxe.
The second Paradoxe.
That 2500. Corcelets and 1500. Harquebuziers may more easily retire three
French leagues in a plain field then 2000. Spears.

AMong all military actions accounted notable, this Why most men do reject
this Paradoxe.
has the first place as one of the most difficult, as also it is a great
testimony of the sufficiency of the. Captain that can compass it. And as
there are few willing to undertake it, for fear of failing: so peradventure
shall we find fewer that will believe that it may be done, because it is a
thing that happens so sieldome. Neither would I reprove their opinion if they
meant that in the weakness wherein our infantery now consists it were
impossible to attain to yt effect. For having no use of the pike and void of
discipline, I do not think that 10000. harquebuziers taken from thence durst
show themselves in the plain before 600. spears. But with the 4000. men of
who^ I mean to speak, all of our own nation and of no other, reduced into
good order and obedience, and in their ancient arms, I will vphould that the
retraict propounded may be performed.

Such as will gainsay (of whom there are many) will propound Proofs hereof
may be performed by the notable examples taken out of the stories of our time.
an argument gathered of experience, saying, that no Historiographer sets
down any such example, at the least none of those that have written of the
wars happened since the year 1494. hitherto, which have been very notable:
also that these proofs appeared only in the time of the Romans. Whereto for
my answer, since they beat me with experience, I will defend my self by the
same and say, that it makes no more against me, then with me. For regarding
what is past, we may note such happes as verify my proposition not to be
impossible. First I will allege The first example.
the brave retraict of Don Aluares of Sand in Afflicke. He had, as I have
heard, 4000. Spaniards, soldiers of great valor, and to come where he
purposed, he was to pass a plain of four or five miles, which (trusting to
his men) he adventured to do. But he was not so soon set forward, but
eighteen or twenty thousand horse of the Moors were at his heels, who
coueted to catch him in this bad advantage. He then having ordered his battle
and exhorted his men, went forward on his way where all these horse did five or
six times set upon him, but he bare their brunt and so bravely repulsed them,
that with the loss of 80. men at the most he brought the rest into safety,
and slew seven or eight hundred of the enemies. Some will say, that they
wanting armor did not pearce so sharply as do the Christian horsemen, who do
far pass them in courage. I grant ours are more valiant, but theirs did not
assail very slackly, or else they had not lost so many. And by this exployt it
appears, that footmen resolute and well led may pass any where. Guicciardine
also in his history reports a gallant retraict The second example.
of 2000. Spaniards after the Frenchmen had broken their army at Rauenna: for
being joined again into their body, although the horsemen did follow and
charge them, yet did they save themselves, yea and slew Gaston de Foix the
conqueror that pursued them.

In these retraicts here do appear great determination but small That such
restraites may be made when the art of war and in struction of the Soldiers
is joined with bold resolution.
art, which nevertheless is very necessary in such affairs: whereto I will
also add the instruction of the soldiers. For when all these three things
shall concur in one troop, I doubt not but it may work greater meruailes
then the former. Some will say, that the Frenchmen can at this day hardly help
themselves with the pike, which is true, neither do I merueile thereat: for in
delivering both it and the corcelet to any man, men look to no more, but
whether he has good shoulders, as if it were to carry some coffer like a
moyle: and as for the gentry they have quite given it over. This is the reason
why I wish the restoring of martial discipline, as also that they would again
practice the pike, wherewith to fight at hand and open, and to leave to the
youth and poor Soldiers the handling of the harquebuze, because that
therewith they ordinarily fight a far of and in covert: for the one is far
more honorable then the other. Captains in old time, venturing upon some
difficult enterprise, wished to have their Soldiers not only well ordered, but
also old beaten warriors, because their assurance is the greater. For it were
but an oversight to attempt any perilous adventure with new men. Now will I
come to Instruction, which is (as I have said) merueilously requisite in
extraordinary matters. And yet we now see that the Soldier contemns it: and
the Captain cares not for it. But admit a Soldier be valiant, and that
wheresoever he be placed he will do his duty: think you he will not do it
much better, or that he will not fight more resolutly, when before he has by
good reasons been persuaded that the horse cannot force a battle in the face:
likewise that for the flancke they must use such fortification as I will
hereafter set down, then if he were utterly ignorant and wist not what might
happen? I think no man will deny it: for certainly ignorance is in part
cause of the fear that many men of war do oftentimes conceive: For that
seeing the enemy in their faces, they think they should, according to the
proverb, even eat iron charets. I know that practice teaches to know the
true from the false, but there is much time spent therein, unless it be
helped by familier and ordinary documents, which those captains that seek to
have the best companies do diligently give to their soldiers.

Having the^ the number of Footmen before The ordering of the footmen asorenamed
to withstand the horse in the field.
mentioned, ready trained and instructed, they should be ara^ged in this
manner. I would make two battles of them each of 1250. corcelets, and 750.
Harquebuziers: If any man ask why two rather then one, I say, to the end the
one to favor the other, as may be seen in the figure hereto adioined for the
better co^prehending thereof.

The ordering of the footmen asorenamed to withstand the hotse in the field.

For marching but 80. paces asunder and coasting each other, it follows that
the head of the battle marked A can hardly be charged, because the side of
the battle marked 3 does flancke it, as likewise the said head does as much
for the said flancke: by the same reason also one of the heads of the battle
marked 2. and the flancke of the other marked D do also succor each other by
their harquebuziers, so as it is very dangerous for the horse to assail in
such places which enterflancke each other. But may some man say, although the
two battles cannot be assaulted but each upon two sides, why is it not as
good to make but one only, which cannot be assailed in any more places? For it
seems the resistance would be more gallant, because that force united is
much greater then divided. I am of opinion that in these actions, it is not so
requisite to look to the greatness or smalnesse of the battles, as to the
difficulty and hinderance when they find themselves assailed on every side.
For it is a great adventure but there will grow some disorder when one body
must make defense in four places: but when they need not to look but to two
sides, the men do frame themselves thereto with greater ease and much better
order. This reason shall content me for the verifying of my speech,
notwithstanding I could allege others.

Concerning the ordering of the battles, I would wish every Of the ordering
of the battles.
rank to conteyne fifty Corcelets, whereof there should be seven at the
head, which would make three hundred and fifty, then ten ranckes of
harquebuziers, and in the midst of them the rank of Ensigns, afterward for
the tail six ranckes of Corcelets, which in all make six hundred and fifty
Corcelets and five hundred harquebuziers placed in four and twenty ranks.
For the flanckes, wherein all the difficulty does consist, they should be
ordered in manner following. I would never place there any harquebuziers as has
hitherto been used, but make six ranks of three hundred Corcelets, in each
fifty men which should serve to make head on those sides. The enemies being
near, they should march otherwise then the rest, namely close and carrying
their Pikes upright leaning against their shoulders, which is now sufficiently
in use. Whereas at the heads of the battle, when any thing is to be done, in
their march they trayle them, which makes much distance between their ranks,

Now, these six ranckes when the charge is offered, after they stand shall do
nothing but make half a turn, and so continue in their array with their face
to the enemy, and by my advice, they should take but threescore common paces
in length, which properly should be the same which the battle being closed
to fight, may have open by the flanckes. Thus should they be armed to
withstand the horsemen, which cannot be well done but with Pikes: for the
harquebuze shot without covert will easily be overthrown. There remain yet two
hundred and fifty harquebuziers to be placed in the battle, counting the
Muskets whom I would wish to be distributed into four parts, in each
threescore and somewhat more to stand as it were loose before the Pikes, and
at the charge to arange themselves under those of the first ranckes on the
four sides of the battle.

Some will mislike I should make the heads so weak and Answer to the
objection against the former advice.
only of six ranckes of Corcelets, thinking them too few to bear the brunt
of a whole hand of horse. To whom I may say, that if there were ten it were
the better, but I have cut my coat after my cloth: howbeit, I think such
frontes sufficient to resist the horse, which may easily be done, if the men
have courage and will be sure to stand strongly, and few battles have we
seen overthrown by any assault of the horse at the head. As for the flanks
which I have described in such sort as before, they be as strong as the
heads, so long as they can keep their order. And this order I would wish them
to keep in their fight. First, while the horse were far of, it were good the
battles did go forward, but seeing them ready to charge, to stay to the
end the better to settle themselves in order and with good footing to bear
their first brunt.

The first rank of Corcelets to plant the ends of their Pikes How the
battles should bear themselves either to fight or to retire.
sure in the ground, and not to stir though a horse should goare himself
thereon: also to hold them about the midst, and under the foreends should
the threescore Muskets and Harquebuzes appointed, arange themselves, with one
knee on the ground to shoot the surer, as also to be somewhat defended. The
other ranckes of Corcelets to stand upright almost close with the first rank
and to make the body of the battle. Then the horsemen coming to charge, I
doubt not but they shall find themselves shrewdly anoyed by the Harquebuziers,
which shooting within twenty pa^es, just in the face of the horse, in my
opinion will mayme the whole first rank of the squadron: but if any think
them in small surety there; I will answer, that they can no where be better
placed at the head then here: for they must be where they may anoye at the
first brunt, and although the Spears or breasts of the horse do overthrow
some four or five on a side, it were but a small loss. For it is most
certain that when a Squadron of horse shall see nine or ten horse fall down
at the first coming, such as follow will have an eye to their consciences.
Thus after the Squadron shall have borne this sharp welcome, it must likewise
strike upon the Pikes of the first rank, or else moderate the first heat, as
also because the first gored horses shall be forced to stand, and so stay the
rest that follows. And although this defense might somewhat yield, yet should
they still find the body of the battle ready to bear their brunt, wherein
consists the principal force. And in truth I should think it impossible
(if the Soldiers would not be afeard) to overthrow such a bar: for we must
think that though the horses run with great force, yet a small thing lets
them, the smoke and noise of the Harquebuziers scarreth them, hurtes stop
them, men's conceived fears do make them to pull back, and the cry of the
battle has some effect, notwithstanding the greatest of all proceeds of
the resistance of the Pikes. Besides all this, some rank of Harquebuziers
placed in the midst of the battle might likewise shoot over the heads of
the Pikes, who bending themselves to the fight do somewhat stoop, whereby
part of the horsemans body may be seen.

Some peradventure will scorn hereat and say, that all these Answer to
another objection founded upon the impossibility.
small observations were more fit to be practiced in Dances and Maskes rather
then in the war, likewise the old custom have always been best, though we
trouble not our selves with so many impractiseable novelties. But I am not of
their minds, for they put me in remembrance of many of our fathers that
laughed at so many inventions for the fortifying of the Houlds, tearming them
Italian devises, affirming that one good great Rampire would suffice to warrant
men from the force of the Canon, upon the which they might defend themselves
Pike to Pike. And yet experience has taught us that then towns were taken
within eight days, where now we consume almost a whole season, so often must
we fight before we can win a Raueline, then the ditch, then the Rampire,
then the inward trench. For if in the should there be one ingenious person
and a Soldier withal, such a one as was Captain Bastian in Maistrict, he
makes them that are without to sweat water and blood. I would think that
that which I require in our battle, should not be so hard to practice, since
our new Soldiers when we train them, do make many more turns and returns
for pleasure. Why then should not the old Soldiers labor to learn any thing
that may breed their honor and safeguard.

Two other objections may yet be here made. The first: that the Answer to two
other objections.
flanks of the battle shall still be much weaker then the heads: because the
cover that I have given them, consisting in so difficult an order, it is easy
to be disordered. I confess that the said flanks should be too weak to
assail, because the battelles do still march forward and not sideling: but
strongly to bear a brunt I think that observing the same which I have set
down, they shall be able to do it, as well as the heads. To the end
likewise the conduct may be the better, I would wish to each flank two
Capteynes, with the pike; and of the notablest soldiers. The second objection
is that the four corners of the battle, though closed, do yet remain
somewhat open and weak, as it were for the space of seven or eight steps,
where the horse may get entry. Truly this consideration is not amiss, and
for the remedy hereof it were requisite in these corners to place seven or
eight of the brauest Harquebuziers, who should not discharge but upon great
necessity, as also to appoint the Corcelets of the 4. 5. and 6. ranks that
should be nearest thereto to turn their Pikes that way to bear the brunt when
they see the enemy approach. The greatest danger to all the said footmen
consists in the two first charges of the horse, which it is to be presumed,
will be brave: but being borne out, they may conceive great hope, in that they
have quenched the first heat of the enemy, and so march forward over the
field, casting forth some lose mosquets to keep the horsemen a loofe, but when
they see it come upon them then wholly to close. And bearing themselves thus, I
am verily persuaded they may make a gallant retraict.

The better to comprehend this matter, the Colonels who in A mean to prove
what assurance is in this paradox: also a remedy to the difficulty propounded
there against.
their regiments have many Pikes, should sometimes prove in feigned things how
this order stands with reason, and peradventure they shall find them selves
the better satisfied, when they see a picture and lively representation thereof
concur with that which they may have imagined, according to this report.
Some man will replye that the horsemen may so indiscreetly assail the footmen,
that they may indeed save themselves before them, but if they would charge
them in small troops (namely of one squadron of 300. to make 3. each of 100.
which might follow one after an other) it would much shake the battle. For
the Harquebuzery having discharged upon the first (as it cannot be denied, but
it will greatly endomage them) the two other squadrons following shall have
great advantage, in being exempt from that danger, and so there is some
likelihoode that they may shake them. Truly this kind of charge is very good,
but it may be provided for: for some of those Harquebuziers that should lie
under the first rank of the Pikes, may have charged again before the second
troop comes upon them, also from the two sides that are not charged, or from
the one, the harquebuzers may be brought to succor that which may be in
danger, as also some of those in the midst may likewise shoot which being
handsomely performed, the Corcelets shall still have succor from their
Harquebuzerie* for without this their defense would be but cold. To conclude,
I rather fear that we shall want occasion to attempt so brave a retraict,
either that we shall scarcely find any Captain that will be the first to
prove it, then that I doubt but it may be put in execution.

The third Paradoxe.
That it is expedient for a Captain to have sustained an overthrow.

PLutarke among his small works in a The general ground of this paradoxe.
treatise entitled, Of profit to be taken of enemies, does somewhat verify
this proposition, where with great art and eloquence he generally shows the
same which I pretend to describe perticulerly, though rudely: but this opinion
of mine I think many Captains (blinded peradventure with the appearance of
things which by nature are hurtful) will gainesay: howbeit when I have
discovered the fruits there under hidden, they shall, as I suppose, though not
wholly, yet in part be satisfied. And therefore without farther circumstance of
words I will come to the principal matter. The particular ground hereof.
Such as attain to military offices do ordinarily climb thereto by two
ways: The one called merit or desert: and the other favor. Some of those
that have trodden the first path, seeing themselves in authority do grow
proud: and others that have come by the second I do imagine to be ignorant,
which are very great imperfectio^s, as easy to be known in others, as hard
to be espied by those that are possessed with them. And as to diseases
engendered in men's bodies, the remedies must be applied according to the rules
of Physic: the like do these that are of the mind stand in need of. But
many times neither art nor counsel can prevail, but the accident, which
more properly seems to be hurt and destruction, then remedy. Howbeit, if
any do marvel how any profit can be found in things hurtful, let them
consider the Scorpion who carries in her both the sting and poison that
infecteth the deadly wound, and the medicine that cures the same. So also may
we say, that military mishaps do sometimes work the like effects. For by
bringing upon us an apparent calamity, they do thereby serve for an
instruction to heal the hidden evil that bred the other. This inward evil
whereof I purpose to speak, is Pride, which ordinarily breeds in those that
are endued with sufficiency and valor, and brings their souls as far out
of fashion as the Dropsy does the body: whereof ensues an unreasonable
selfe-estimation and contempt of others, which are two such errors as
oftentimes do cast those that follow them into most manifest destructions.
And as all men ought to beware of stumbling upon such great inconveniences, so
must they take in good part the unlooked for corrections, which make the^ wise,
to take heed another time.

The first example that I will allege of such as I think to Example of
Captains that have benefited by the overthrows that they have sustained.
have gained thereby, shall be of Gonsales Fernando a Spanyard and most notable
Captain, who having been under Ferdinand of Arragon the chiefest instrument to
tame and drive the Moors out of Granado, was sent into the Realm of Naples,
which that King challenged against the French men. Coming thither with an army
against them, he thought peradventure that the French, men of arms, would as
easily have been broken as the Moors Genetairies, also that his fame already
obtained, would terrify them. But he was deceived, for they ouerthrewe his
troops: And himself losing that field, which the Lord of Aubigny won, he
afterward showed that he had gathered instruction by such an overthrow: for he
guided himself with such art and discretion that he ouerthrewe the Frenchmen
in sundry encounters, and finally expelled them the Realm.

That great Julius Caesar, who in the art of war surpassed all An other
example in Caesar.
Capteynes that ever were, after he had driven Pompey out of Italy, and
enclosed him in Dirachium, waxed proud and contemned him, so as undertaking to
entrench a great country whereby to close him up the straighter, Pompey knowing
his advantage, came forth and flew the chief part of his army, and had like
to have won a full victory. This shrewd blow made Caesar so wary and
diligent, that he never after gave Pompey any opportunity against him, but with
his (...)ted policies brought him to the same point that he required, and so
overcame him.

These two examples, the one old and the other new, may suffice The use of
these examples.
to give to understand that the greatest, giving themselves even to the least
pride, do sometimes encurre an overthrow by this imperfection: but withal
they have this good thing in them, that having received of their enemies some
chastisement for their negligence or rashness, they will soon amend. Many
Capteynes therefore now living must not be ashamed to confess that in
prosperity they may be over seen, since those that have been endued with such
modesty have so far ouershot themselves.

The first cause of this mischief consists in our selves, and is The first
cause of presumption.
our had inclination, which corroborated by custume te^deth to exalt us above
measure, so as if an occasion falls out of a quarter long, it stretches it
to an ell. Which appears in all professions of art and knowledge, but
chiefly in the art of war, the professors whereof do make great account of
themselves, because they exercise the actions of Fortitude and Magnanimity.
Many times among the Spanish bands you shall hear a new Soldier of three
crowns pay, say, I am as good as the King: let us then think what a Capteyne
that has been in sundry assaults and battles will do: He will straight way
say, I am better then the Pope. Thus do we see military presumption swell
even above the thing it self. The commendations of friends are an other cause
that help to The second cause.
increase it: for they not able to forbear praising those whom they love, who
also do deserve the same, by pouring plenty of this liquour upon them, do
sometimes make them drink so much thereof that they be half giddie therewith.
Herein they that are too free in attributing do ouershoote themselves at
unawares, and they that are so curious in the receipt thereof are willingly
overtaken.

Flatterers also which follow such as are in authority as the The third cause.
shadow does the body, do greatly help to give to Pride her true shape. For
with their deciptfull and windy words they puff up the soul like a bladder.
If a young Lord does any valiant act, they straight compare him to Gaston de
Fax. If he be an expert Captain, they tell him he passes Bertrande du
Glesquin. And if they have any better hap, they make him equal with Scipio and
Marcellus. To him whom in hope of profit they would allure, they say, he must
proceed in his good fortune, since the mighty do esteem of him, the
Soldiers do love him and the people have him in admiration. Hereto they add
also that his fame is so dispersed among his enemies, that when they know him
to be in the field, they fear him as the Shepherds in Barbary do the
mighty Lion when he comes out of the woods. And that for their parts they
are glad to see him in so good a way to atchiue most worthy tryumphes and
means whereby to recompense those that are his servants.

By this sweet harmony of speech, this man who peradventure The effects of
pride enflamed through our own bad nature and the discourses of our friends
and flatterers.
before presumed enough of himself, now coueteth to presume too much, and so
to seek nothing but war and battle. Yea the most modest who mislike
flatteries, even in the rejecting of them, do still swallowe down some small
portion, wherewith to feed that little vanity that dwells in them. It is
not to be enquired what discourses they make in themselves, what they shall
do, or how high they shall climb, but to take these for extrauagants. In this
disposition nothing seems impossible, and the more boldness and experience
they have the more do their presumption increase, whereby they disdain their
friends, contemn their enemies, and refuse all others counsel in whatsoever
they undertake. These be the bad humors which this windy colic of
Presumption and Flattery do engender in a Captain.

I think no man dare deny but it were necessary to see them Remedies against
these effects.
purged. Howbeit, diverse do find my remedies to be very bitter and
troublesome: but say what they will, they are most convenient. For these
humors being too deeply rooted, the remedies wherewith to pluck them up must
be very strong. These medicines are of an other sort, then those that are used
against diseases of the body, whose property is to work to the good of the
party upon who^ they be ministered: For being considered in their own nature,
they are as has been said mere ruins of the body: but considered
accidentally, they may be termed drugges that heal the astonishment of the
mind. The Physicians also that minister these medicines, may be compared to
him whom Plutarke makes mention In his treatise of profit to be taken of
enemies.
of, who thinking to have slain his enemy, by thrusting his sword into him,
pierced an Impostume which he had within him, and so saved his life, that he
should soon after have lost through his secret sickness, if the other
mishappe had not happened, which was to him a healthsome remedy.

The wise Captain therefore that seeks to profit in the knowledge An
exhortation to Captains, with a description of the good which the virtuous do
reap whiles the viti ous and ignorant do empaire and confound them selves.
of arms, when he incur any mishaps, having disgesed the first bitterness
thereof, must seek to use the rest as the expulsive virtue of some Easterly
root, to expel out of his mind the proud vapors thereinto ascended: and the
greater operation that this works in any, ye less need has he of any other
medicine. As for the Captains that are furnished with ignorance, they likewise
do grow into presumption, whereto the good clawbacks, that follow the^ (as well
as the former) are a great help. But for the others, being better guided by
virtue, their losses do happen after a more valiant sort; where these
ignorant men do fall into mishappes accompanied with shame: Now to speak of
the estate as well of the one as of the other, they that amend, be happy in
mishap: but most unhappy are those that will never acknowledge their error,
but impute it either to others or to fortune, and so continue their pride in
the midst of their misery. For in ye end they remain engaged under the
burden of some great blow whether their want of discretion has led them:
which the first do shun by finding their imperfection in time, after they
have received some small one. Hereby may we easily judge that the adversities
which bring us into the path of wisdom, are better then the prosperities that
transport us therefro. I could allege the domestical examples of sundry of
our Capteynes, who to their friends have not denied but that they have reaped
commodity out of these extraordinary corrections. But since I imagine that
such as follow the wars may have tried somewhat, or heard others speak
thereof, I will forbear: only I will admonish them both sooner and nearer to
look to their own faults then to other men's: for so shall they learn to
ouershoote themselves but seeldome.

The fourth Paradoxe.
That daily experience have taught such means to fortify Holds, as are most
profitable in respect of the small charge thereof, and no less defensible then
such stately ones as the Ingeniors have aforetime invented.

THE Italians deserve the commendation Where to costly fortifications do serve.
of being the first inuenters of diverse sorts of gallant fortifications, which
since they have reduced into such an art as has been esteemed honorable,
neither has it been of less profit to those that have dealt therein. And
peradventure this last point has partly been the occasion that they have
persuaded Princes that such and so many things were requisite to bring a piece
of work to perfection and worthy them. Wherein they have not been altogether
untoward: for through great and long expenses the water is come to their mil. I
know it beseems great Princes to do great works, because they have great
means and therefore the small will not content them; but withal they should
prize them in the balance of commodity, least the dearness of the one
hinder the setting hand to the other. I seek not herein that To whom those of
small expense are profitable.
which is seemly for a few, but that which may be commodious and profitable
to all: Especially for their sakes who being weak, had need for their own
fafetie to fortify themselves, and yet through poverty are driven to spend
but little. I take that to be a fruitful piece of work which is performed
quickly, easily, and with small cost, and yet in goodness does counteruaile an
other whereto they cannot attain without contrary means. I mean not in this
my treatise to comprehend such places as are strong by nature, but only those
which may be so made by art.

The first place that here I will bring to view, shall be the Citadell of
Antwerpe, wherein we may say that nothing has been Forteresse which have so
much.
forgotten, either in wealth, diligence, invention or plenty of stuff: so as
in all Christendom a goodlier piece of work for fortification has no man
seen. But on the other side if we consider that the building thereof cost
1400000. Florins, and yet, had it been assaulted, would not peradventure have
held out much better then Oudenarde or Maestricht which were fortified but with
earth, it will make men somewhat curious to examine these matters more exactly.
Especially small Potentates and little towns are to look very nearly hereto:
for if they should measure their defense by the ell of these great Princes,
they should be peradventure empourished, yea utterly overthrown before they
could be half fotified. The Citadell of Mets cost above a million of Franks,
and I suppose that that of Turin drew near to 300000. Crowns. Which I speak
not as misliking that these great Princes should employ so much upon these
small Castles: for they wast much more unprofitably: but only to the end to
let men see that for the fortifying of such a town as Malines or Orleance,
which in greatness are alike, after that order the charge would amount unto
above five millions of Florens: also that for the furnishing of money they
should be driven either to sell one of their Estates or make peace for a
hundred years with their neighbors, that they might work at leisure.

Some man may say, it is but a small matter for the Kings, who Against those
that like of such expenses.
in the civil wars of Flanders and France, have each of them spent above 70.
millions of gold. But I will to the contrary conclude by the same reason: for
having wasted such innumerable sums, a little will be found to be a great
deal. If we shall look all France over, I think we shall scarcely find
(except a few Castles) any town half finished after the engeniors rules.
Some do bear themselves herein like unto certain Brides, who being persuaded
that a gown of cloth of gold will make them more beautiful then one of
taffatie; do thereby force their husbands to consent that half their dowry be
consumed in beautiful ornaments for their marriages: but afterward they have
sower sauce to their sweet meat, as being driven to a long penance for their
sumpteous vanity. It were much more profitable for both to know what were
meet, and to go no farther. When I compare the towns that were besieged in
the time of King Frances and his son Henry, with those that have been
assaulted in our civil wars, I am forced to confess that these last have
been better defended, notwithstanding they have been assailed with greater
art, and yet most of them were never furnished with any of these stately
fortifications: which shows that so many great expenses are superfluous, since
they bring forth no better fruit then those that are less.

The ingeniours will say that notwithstanding men fortify but How to help our
selves with the Ingeniors devises, and yet avoid excessive expenses.
with earth without any of their supporters of Stone or Brick, (which are no
less beautiful then necessary) yet still they follow their precepts. Whereto
I answer that in many things men may help themselves therewith: howbeit they
are rather to stick to new experiences which have taught very good kinds of
fitting and defending themselves. The first is the same that I have already
mentioned, namely fortification with earth: which cost ten times less then
great Masondrie, and is never a whit worse. For proof hereof I will allege
the town of Gaunt, which in two years was finished and furnished with
Rauelins, ditches and counterscarpes, (although it be of as great circuit as
Paris within the walls) and cost not above 300000. Florins: But if the King of
Spain should have made this fortification according to the written rules, he
must have spent above six millions and twenty years at the least. In diverse
places the towns have been taken, before they have been a quarter fortified
after these great platformes. The second thing which experience has made many
to allow of, is to losen the Bastions from the Courtines, yea and to carry
them without the ditch. For although they be not defended with the Artillery
from any low Casemates, yet do the Harquebuzery sufficiently shield them from
the Curtines which is a continual anoyance that cannot be taken away, where
the flanks of the Bastions may be pierced or broken when the shoulders are
weak. Also if one of those rarelines that I speak of should chance to be
taken, yet is not the place therefore so lost, but that the enemy may very
well be put back, where contrariwise it is a necessary consequence to those
that have joined them to the Rampires. The third is the use of intrenching,
which is a marvelous profitable remedy, though smally practiced in times
past, but in our civil wars, men have learned to use it very well. Though
they be weak and but ill made, yet do they preserve from being forced on a
sudden, and procure some reasonable composition. But if they be large and well
made, either they wholly preserve or at the least do give a months respite
(which is a sovereign purchase to the besieged, when the enemy must win it
by little and little) during which time they may light upon some favorable
accident for themselves. Hereto will I add one slight which practice has
taught, namely, to strive for a dry ditch after the Counterscarpe is won,
and so to defend a Rampire a few days, though the enemy be lodged in the
Parapet. For with sundry policies have men learned to fight each with other,
some more, some less: as has been seen in diverse Sieges both in the Low
countries and in France. All which inventions do consist as much in removing
the earth, as in any other manual defense.

Now will I show how I would the place which I propound An advise upon the
means to fortify with small cost.
should be provided for, presupposing ye situation to be in ye plain as are
the situatio^s of most of the towns in Flanders. First I would not have the
Rampire raised too high: For such as are so unreasonable high, as they are in
most places about Bruxelles, Tournay, Orleance, and Rochell, are rather
Mountains then Rampires, and be within as I think thirty foot high. For
herein they be hurtful, that being won, there is no more means to defend,
because the defendants cannot entrench behind to any purpose, when their
trench shall be so over awed. As for the ditch, I would wish it to be full of
water if it might be, so to eschew surprises, as also that it is more
troublesome to the assailant then the dry. Counterscarpes do after a sort
serve, and the covert way to them should be large.

Likewise I would think an other pathe to be profitable, which should be
behind or under the first, being six foot broad and as many high: Which
should serve to the end that when the Counterscarpe chanced to be won by
vyolence (as was that of Vulpian in Piedmont, where all the Soldiers were
drowned and slain) the defendants might save themselves. As for the Rauelins
they would be fitly placed without the ditch, and made so large that they may
bear a good entrenching. For so shall the enemy, although he have won the
point, have a fortnights work. But the inner ditch, if it were possible,
should be dry, to the end the Soldiers might in the beginning of the Siege
be kept there for issues: which I think to be necessary for the besieged,
as well to the increase of their courages, as in respect of ye great hurts
which the enemy shall thereby receive. For these are meetly safe enterprises
for a cunning Captain, and will amaze the assailants when they shall find
themselves assailed.

Whosoever undertakes to assault such a place, must of necessity The way how
to descend a place that is besieged.
begin with the Rauelin, which is a most assured warning that he will beat the
Courtine on that side. Wherefore omitting all other matter they must fall to
entrenching, whereby in time they may make as it were a new town, in case
they have people enough and a skillful Ingeniour.

I suppose that in a place where there are Soldiers a Rauelin should hold out
one month at the least, yea even against the Prince of Parma, who is the
skilfullest assaulter of towns that I know. The rampire and passage of a ditch
full of water will be as long: and the inner trench, being almost equal with
the height of the rampire that is beaten down may be kept as long or longer,
provided always, that it be made 60. or 80. foot from the Courtine. Now I
take this at the worst: for there be such weak assailants of Houlds, as shall
labor two months about the winning of a Raueline. There are that think it an
easy matter to keep them from passing the ditch, but for my part I think it
hard, for they will enter either by night or day. Thus when a frontier town
shall have stopped a mighty army so long as I have said, it shall have quit it
self well (for there be few towns inpregnable) and the Prince that may have
lost it shall have this comfort: That as the fencing of it had cost him little,
so his enemy shall have spent much time, many men, and money enough in the
winning of it.

Some Ingeniour may say that water vndermindeth the foundations Against such as
thinck water to be hurtful to rampires of earth.
of a Rampire, and that from ten years to ten years they run out: which
they do not if they be walled within. It is so indeed where the water is a
running water: but the repairing cost little, as also do the props that bear
up nothing but earth. Howbeit, I say that a man may fortify a whole small
town with earth with the charges of one enclosure to a Bastion made of brick
or stone with the countermynes thereof. This manner do I here allow for an other
respect: which is, that Potentates and Commonwelths are better able to provide
for the inward fortifications, which must accompany the outward, and do
consist in all kinds of necessary provision that want in many towns, though
not in whole, yet in part. And as many are lost through this default as for
lack of Bastions. They may likewise spare great sommes, which are spent in
these great works, and with the same maintain a sufficient army, through
want whereof the strongest places are taken, as has been seen in Flanders.
Many things more may be objected to beat down this our Bulwark, which is
much more profitable to the weak then beautiful to the mighty Monarkes. In
the mean time such as shall follow this construction, shall not find
themselves the worse thereby: as the future experience peradventure will teach
better then the passed.

The ninetenth Discourse.
That the continuation of the wicked proceedings of the wars of these days
do make a just cause to seem unjust.

PHilippe Comines in his remembrances reports that the Duke of Guyenne, The
Duke of Burgundy an Image of such as have no delight but in troble and
confusion.
the brother of King Jews the 11. joining with Duke Charles of Burgundy in the
war for the Commonwealth: when he considered the number of the wounded and
slain at the battle of Montleherie, with the spoils that the Soldiers made
all over the Country, was merueilously daunted thereat, and told Duke Charles
that it had been better never to have begun that war that bred such
mischief and ruin: who answered him, that those things were not to be
meruailed at since such were the natural fruits thereof: But being afterward
alone among his familiers, he scorned that young Prince which brought pity and
compassion unto the Theaters of Mars, where rigor and vengeance do hold
their sovereign Empire. In these days we hear some make almost the like
aunswers to many that curse our civil storms: for they tell them, It is the
war, and so do ween that that word being heard should make them to shrink
up the shoulder after the Italian manner, and provide to suffer worse matter.
But in my opinion such reasons are to be suspected, as proceeding from those
that having no other delight or sustenance but in other men's spoils, would
make men to account war to be a necessary evil, to the end they should not
be slack in giving to them that food which they do desire. Truly these men
are not altogether to be believed, least we confound cruelty and injustice
with equity and humanity, and so of an extraordinary accident make an
ordinary custume. Neither must we print in our fantasies the imaginations of
many others, who wish to see a war exempt from the things that of long time
have been proper thereto, and are as it were essentials, namely, rapine,
disorder and cruelty: for in these days wherein we live, virtue being tied
up and vice let loose, we cannot atteyne to this perfection.

What shall we then say hereof? For sooth, that to the end well The means
which do seem necessary to be houlde^ in the consideration of the present
estate of the Realm to restablish it.
to measure the matters whereof we now speak, we must take the old rules,
not of Iron, which cannot bend, but of lead, which are somewhat pliable, and
frame them to the crooked and difformed stones whereof our civil wars are
composed, that is to say, to our confusions: and then finding what is somewhat
^ollerable, as also what is to be rejected, to patch up again so well as we
may this house of bondage, wherein so many persons within these five and
twenty years have been tormented: or else quite to raze it to the foundation
by an assured peace, which were the better way. I mean not here curiously to
examine or way the right or wrong of those that are in arms, because I will
not offend any. Only I am content generally to say that such on either side as
love godliness or virtue, do for the satisfying of themselves either inwardly
or outwardly, underprop their actions with justice. Neither should any wars
be undertaken without that good faundation, least otherwise we be found
guilty before God, who will not that men use such vyolent remedies but upon
great necessity, neither guide them after their own disordinate affections.

Now in these controversies and public quarelles as well civil The miseries
of wars especially civil.
as others, furiously raised through man's malice, it often falls out that
all the right lights on one side and all the wrong on the other. Sometimes
that both parties are led by like malice: and sometime that he which in deed
has the right, does seem to have the wrong, and so to the contrary. As also
that sometimes in some one of the points thereof a man may be in the right and
in all the rest in the wrong, of all which differences I mean not here to
entreat. Only I would advertise the readers to note them in reading the
histories, wherein the diversities of so many martial purposes are lively set
out. But for my self I will proceed in discoursing upon my first proposition of
the evil behauiours which are to be seen in our said civil wars, together
with their consequences. I think they cannot be better compared then to an
over flowing brook, which with the vyolent force thereof not only destroys
the whole ^roppe of a plain, but also carries down the trees, buildings and
bridges where it goes, so as neither art nor diligence are able to prevent
it. Whosoever would walk through France and Flanders might see (even upon
insensible things) the footsteps of our daily furies, which are not
nevertheless the greatest domages, for those that wast our good and valiant
men, and corrupt particular manners and politic orders are much worse. Truly
we have great cause to wonder at our negligence: which on every side is such,
that no man labors so much as to qualify these so terrible furies, which
greatly offend all those that are beholders of our miserable tragedies. Yea
many of those that be upon the theaters hereof, and are endued with some
integrity, are no less offended thereat. Thucidides says, that in seditions
men may see the image all mischiefs, but in our wars men may say that even
the mischiefs themselves do come in post, to the end to fester them with
eternal reproach: Yea even the extraordinary ones which were hidden and durst
not have appeared fifty years ago, do now come to brag among us. No year
escapes free without some note of treason, treachery, murder, poisoning or
barbarous vyolence: yea sometime the terrible monster Massacre strikes through
and with the mighty blow of her talents smites those that think not upon
her. Oh what strange things are these!

A Spanish Gentleman reported unto me, that when the Forte Examples of these
miseries of War.
of Frezin Ferry was won from the French, there was a Wallon Soldier, being
found there, taken prisoner: and when the chief Captain commanded to put al
to the sword, the said soldiers own brother, serving in the Spanish Campe^,
stepped forth and showing a cruel countenance said: This wretched traitor to
his King must dye of no other hand but mine own. Neither was his wrath
appeased until he had diverse times thrust him through, notwithstanding he
pitifully kneeled to him. Had the dead man's offense been four times as great,
yet should he have abhorred to foil his hands in his brothers blood. We read
in the civil wars of Silla that a Roman soldier having in ^ight slain his
enemy, stripping him found him to be his own brother, who was on the contrary
party, which when he perceived, he was attached with such sorrow, and so
spited his unfortunate ignorance, that himself ran upon his own sword and
so fell upon the others body. And although that was a very corrupt world, yet
many commended that furious piety of the poor Paynim. But the deed that here
I have rehearsed of this Christian of our days (which is so far unlike to
the other and ought to be buried in oblivion) had not peradventure any fewer
allowers thereof. If this deed were true, it deserves to be yoked with an
other as bad or rather worse of a notable murderer of Paris, who, as some have
written, began his rage with two of his own niep^es of twelve years of age,
whom he slew while they embraced his knees and cried him mercy. I am ashamed
to speak of these parricides, which nevertheless these men were not ashamed
to commit.

But being entered this carrier I will perform my race, and reveal Other
miseries of civil wars.
yet one mischief which is but too well known, for I have touched others in
other my discourses. It is the villainous sacking of poor country people, yea
even friends and partakers: for notwithstanding their continual labor, as
well for their own sustenance, as to satisfy those whom justly we may
term warlike Harpies, yet do they not spare to eat the^ up, sometime all at
once, sometime by little and little with unspeakable boldness and contempt,
neither can they be restrained therefro by any consideration that they serves
ye same party, or that their devotion is tied thereto. Uyolence wrought against
the enemy breeds no wonder, neither needs any excuse, although there
should be a little measure observed: but these are inexcusable, as means to
destroy them selves, and to bring common hatred upon their superiors, which
out of the fields is sown in towns and cities. The said superiors should
remember that into this great troop the poor, the widow, and the Orphan
(whom God houldeth so dear) are in corporate, who in their sorrows have no
other recourse but to sobs and sighs which ascend into his presence, where
they are most favorably received. And it is a bad sign, when such as should
bless do curse, and even pluck down Gods wrath, and cast it upon those that
in outward appearance do seem to defend them, but in deed do devour and
eat them up. These are in part the exercices of our civil wars which daily
do empayre: which also are the occasion that many times the wisest, who do
imagine that they have the best cause, in seeing so many miserable manners of
proceedings, which teach to commit all mischief without remorce, do grow
into such doubts, as do in manner shake the foundations of the firmness that
they had leyed. If then they do sometimes totter or reele, think what the
simple shall do that use to allow or disalowe of the causes of wars
according as they be well or evil ordered.

If we speak of words, we hear nothing but Gods honor, The strange offense
of the most of those that bear arms in such wars.
the Kings service, Catholic religion, the Gospel, our Country. All which
goodly titles do bind the ministers of arms to endeavor that their works
may concur with their words. But when afterward we see the most part take a
contrary course, and as the proverb of the Tennis court imports, play at
bandy and scraping, yea and that rather upon the friend the^ upon the enemy,
that is to say, glut their vengeance, ambition, covetousness and avarice upon
whatsoever the war does make to stoop to them, we must not think that they
will be mumme that suffer all these things.

If such a peasant as he that dwelt upon the bancks of Danow, An exhortation to
those Frenchmen that are banded one against an other.
who was said to have come in the time of M. Aurelius to the Roman Senate to
complain, should now rise among us, I imagine his speech should tend to this
purpose. Oh ye Christians that do so cruelly devour each other like fierce
and angry beasts, among whom pity seems to be dead, how long shall your
rage continue? Why do ye grant no truce or release to the rest of your
miserable lives, to the end at the least to creep into your graves in some
quiet? What violent causes are those that stir you up? If Gods glory, then
consider that he takes no pleasure in sacrifices of man's blood: but detesteth
them and loves mercy and truth. If your Princes service, you must think ye
do them small service in slaying one an other, for so do you deminish and
pluck away the chief senowes of his Realm. If religion moves you, it
seems ye know not the nature thereof: for since it is all charity, the same
should induce you to meekness. If your Country, behold your fields are
almost all desert, your villages burnt, your cities sacked, your riches in
strangers hands, and your glory utterly lost. Seek then no more excuses to
lengthen your calamities: rather cut them off, then allege such necessities
as do impose other necessities. This were easy to be done if ye would
practice this sovereign rule of estate which excels the most excellent.
Give to Caesar that belongs To the Soldiers.
to Caesar, and to God the things that appertain to God. But when I remember
my self, how can you, you Soldiers fulfill this, who have forgotten the art
of rendering and can do nothing but take? Who sometimes do say well and
always live evil? What are your troops and armies in these days, but
shoppes of all vice, which where they pass do leave more horrible footsteps
than do the Grasshoppers where they live continually? Your enemies do hate
your cruelty, your friends do fear your sackings, and all people do fly
from before you as from the floods? Who will believe that your cause is just,
when your behauiours are so unjust? And although it were just, do not you yet
hazard it to all rebuke and slander? To be brief, learn to live better, or
think not much that no man believes your words, but cry out against your
deeds.

This truly were a very free speech, which nevertheless I think to approach so
near ye truth, yt I will not give it the lie, least they yt have To whom the
aforesaid calamities are to be imputed.
endured it should come in for witnesses against me, and so return my lie
upon my self. Out of this rank I will exempt the honorable and good mem that
profess arms, as well noble as others, of whom there be yet many abroad.
Neither must the whole blame of these disorders be laid upon the small, whose
wantes do oftentimes stir up their malice. For there be great ones, who
because they care not for moderating or suppressing them, must have their
parts: and those especially are most guilty, that had rather see whole rivers
of mischief than loose any part of their reuenges or dominion. If any man
ask the soldiers why they make such hauock, they will answer, that want of
pay compels them, which is a reason to be considered of. If they tell the
Princes yt these behauiors savor very evil, and must be taken away with
gold, they will say that all the Indias will not suffice for so many high
pays, and other subtle proulings. Which cause must be well waied. In the
mean time under these excuses the mischiefs do on both sides continue and
feed upon the unfortunate Provinces that bear the^, which cannot possibly be
eschued, so long as the mighty ones are so obstinately bent to make the wars
perpetual by keeping great armies all Winter and Summer in the field, whereof
it follows that in the end, most of the men become ravening beasts, the
country is disinhabited, the treasure is wasted, the great curse themselves,
and God is displeased.

If we should call to mind how in the wars between the French The state of
wars in old time condemn those of our days.
and Spanish, especially in Piedmont, we should often see a Cornet of spears
pass through a village where they might see banqueting and dancing, and the
people without any force come and bring them all kinds of refreshing. Again
within half an hour after another troop enemy to the former, to pass in
like sort, and to receive all kinds of courtesies. Also these 2. troops within a
while after to meet and beat each other well fauouredly. Then the conqueror to
carry into the said village the sore wounded, as well of the one party as of
the other, to be dressed and to lie all in one hostrie, the vanquished upon
their faiths, and the vanquishers in the custody of the aforenamed, unto their
full ^nre, when each ought to return to their Captains. Thus should we see that
these and such manner of proceeding purchased to both nations great fame among
strangers, and more amity than is now to be found among pareuts. This I say
being reported unto them, they would account for fables, because our present
customs are clean repugnant thereto. And yet if in any wars civil behavior
be to be practiced, than in these wherein fellow Citizens after they have been
together by the ears in their native soil do fall again into familiarity
and love one with another: which never happens with strangers: for the
controversies ended, they never lightly have occasion to see one another again:
yea, they ought to behave themselus herein as kinsmen, who among their hatred
and force do intermingle equity and honesty. Finally, such as do better note
policy and good order, and withal do show themselves most courteous, do
give the lookers on to think that they have the better cause, who therefore do
favor them with their prayers, and themselves likewise by their good actions
are the more satisfied and confirmed in their opinions, which make them the
bolder. Contrariwise, those who through their dissolutions do make their
war, (which of it self is terrible) utterly detestable, notwithstanding the
cause be never so just, God will not fail to punish for prosecuting it by such
sinister means.

The 20. Discourse.
That a king of France is of himself mighty enough, though he neither covet
nor seek other greatness than his own Realm does afford him.

ALL such as profess the reading and diligent examination The ambition of
Princes and common welths, cause of great calamities.
of histories, do with one voice confess, that most of the calamities and
miseries fallen upon diverse lands and nations have proceeded of the ambition
of Princes and common wealths, who have raised such wars as ^red the same.

To avoid all the doubts whereof, read but the lives of Philippe of Macedon,
Alexander, Pirhus, and Demetrius, with the wars of the Romans against the
Catthaginians: wherein ye shall find that nothing is more true. And although
time by little and little suppresseth the force of the strongest things, yet
could it never much extinguish the flames of so vehement a passion, which
passing from the Father to the son, heaping the former ages with mischief,
has reached even to ours. I will forbear to speak of things happened within
these fifty years in respect of so many people yet living, which may have
considered thereof: but of four score years ago Phillip Commines and Fran.
Guicciardine do yield such testimony, that we may say that the desire of
dominion have caused infinite disorders, which have disfigured the beauty of
politic government. It cannot be denied but ours have danced at the feast
among others, and peradventure oftener: but it has likewise soon after mourned
for it as well as ye rest, as having reaped no other commodity of the great
wars of Charles the eight and Jews the twelfth (which nevertheless were not
quite deuoide of all grounds of justice) but wast of money and consumption of
men. Which might admonish all Princes to undertake none but such as be
necessary, and utterly to reject those that contain no necessity.

I know they have a wonderful quick desire to increase, which Whar
considerations ought to moderate the desires of princes.
nevertheless they may moderate by a representation of the mischiefs and
difficulties of wars, were it not that they find themselves strengthened and
underpropped with the counsel of the young, together with custom: which not
only maintains it in force, but also does greatly increase it. For
assuredly the mightier that a Prince is, the more is he pricked forward with
such stings, as leave him but small rest until that he has changed other
men's minds: whereby he entangleth himself in many cares and wantes, which
he might well enough forbear. Howbeit those men are happy who in the midst
of such disordered broiles, false persuasions, and wicked customs, do guide
themselves by wisdom and discretion: for ordinarily they pass on the way
without stumbling and attain to such ends as breed their contentation. Our
good King Henry the second having practiced and tried the vanity of
covetousness and wars, was determined to pass over the rest of his days in
tranquillity, and content himself with that mightiness that to him remained;
which was not small, but it pleased God to call him. And although all things
have since greatly decayed throughout this Realm, yet I think our king has
cause enough (preserving and accommodating that which yet remains) to account
himself mighty and happy, though he never seek with iron, fire, and blood,
the forced dominion over his neighbors.

By this proposition I bring the ambitious into the listes, who Answer to the
objections of ambitions Counsailers.
say, That the enclosing of our kings hearts within the accustomed bounds, is
the way to quail their courages, and to deprive them of all trophies and
conquests, the goodly inheritances wherein their ancestors meant they should
participate: likewise That it is impossible when they consider the dominions of
Charlemagne, which as all good histories do testify, stretched into Italy,
Germany, France, che low Countries, and Spain, even to the river Ebro, but
they must needs blush for shame, thinking how themselves lurk at home and do
nothing. Truly these be high words, which in my opinion, do resemble the
furious Northern winds that stir up the great tempests: for by their often
blowing in kings ears, they provoke their minds, whereof do ensue the
torments of wars which drown so many people. If they could weigh the
dissimilitude between old and new virtue, they would be more stayed: For as
says Plutarke in his small works, it is as much folly to apply the
heroycall deeds of those that are past, unto men present, as to put upon the
head and feet of children of six years of age their grandfathers hats and
shoes. But men ought to propound things convenient to that age wherein a man
lives, so long as they be just and honest. We Frenchmen should think that
France is past her greatest grouth, and that we are come to the time of her
declination, wherein we shall do much if we can but keep her well, which we
should endeavor to perform, and not to feed upon her passed glory and
mightiness, because we are destitute of ye power, occasion, and good hap
that lead our ancestors thereto.

Some there are that think that a Prince cannot be termed Answer to an
other objection touching the mightiness of Prinses.
mighty or great, unless he join new Provinces to his estate, and make his
neighbors to fear and stand in awe of him, through his weapons, which do
encourage him to enterprise and threaten great things, wherein they follow
the common judgment, which as says Plutarke also, do admire the Thunder and
lightning, and make small account of the sweet Zephirus: for they making no
reckning but of whatsoever proceeds of force do leave behind them any thing
proceeding of justice, notwithstanding the one be to be preferred before the
other. Many Emperors and Kings there have been, who have indeauoured to
purchase fame through their conquests, and yet those that had been content to
take pains to be good, and so to make their people, and well to rule and
govern them, have purchased another greatness, if we judge uprightly, no less
tha^ the former, seeing it alwais profits, where the other does ordinerilie
hurt. Yet do I not mean that a Prince should tread armor under his feet,
or contemn it, for so should he but give himself to be a pray: but that he
should use it only to keep himself from taking of harm, and not to do hurt
to others.

I will therefore begin to show forth the greatness of our king Consideration
of the greatness of a king of France.
by the extent of his Realm, which in length contains above two hundred
French leagues: For from Bayone to Mets, it is more: and from Cales to Narbonne
almost as much. But from Morles in Britain to Antibe in Prouence it is at the
least 250. which is the longest way. True it is that from Roche^ to Lions
which is The extent of the realm.
a straightning made in the midst of France, is but six score leagues. But
be what it will, it is a goodly piece of ground and well The fruictfulnesse.
inhabited. As for the fruitfulness thereof, it is such as all things
necessary to man's life, do so abound, that only for Corn, Wine, Salt, and
Woad, transported into foreine lands, there is yeerelie brought in in
counterchaunge thereof above 12. millions of franks. This is our Peru, These are
our mines which never dry up: and peraduent ure from the West Indies which are
so rich, the Spaniards do not yearly receive much greater treasure. But the
principal that we are to consider, is the multitude of people wherewith it is
replenished: for turn which way ye will, the people do swarm as they did in
the County of Flanders before the last tempest wasted the inhabitants, their
wealth and stately borowes. The peasants The people.
are very simple and obedient, the Townsmen painful, industrious, and
affable: also the men that give themselves to learning both divine and human,
are most learned. The Nobility is very valiant The contry
and courteous, neither is any estate in Christendom so plentifully stored
therewith. More might I say, had I not spoken thereof at large in other places:
but this we may affirm, that universally they are given to rebellion: which
is the testimony that Caesar gave of the ancient Gauls. If any man should
doubt thereof, I would present him the devotion of our Fathers which have
engenderd above an hunderd Archbishops and Bishops sea^, about 650. Abbeys of
the order of Saint Barnard and S. Benet, beautified with good kitchins, and
above 2500. Priories. For then did the chief holiness consist giving to the
Oleargie. Neither were it any lie to say, that at this day they possess above
20. millions of frankes in rent. Who then can term that land wast, where in
one of the members is so great; fat, and plentiful.

Hold your peace will some foreign sensor say, and labor no more to Answer to
those that emblason and abase France because of her miseries.
exalt and set out that state which has neither godliness, iustace, weath,
concord, martial discipline, nor order. But have patience a while, will I
answer, until I make a reuiew of this great and old vessel which the storms
and tempest have cast upon the sands, then having showed unto your hat the
chief members there of which have been so tossed and seabeaten, have yet some
force and power, also that it is no hard matter to redress the whole, you will
peradventure be of another mind, and confess the very relickes to be great. I
will begin with devotion, Of godliness.
which, as I have said, our fathers (as they thought) did steadfastly embrace,
for the manifesting whereof they spared not their goods. The same by the like
reason should now be more lively; since for the defense thereof we spare not our
lives. These marks although they be good, be not the principal. For the best
and most assured in this point, wherein our do honor and service to God does
consist, is to yield to his holy will revealed unto us in the Scriptures. As for
ye other part of devotion, which has relation to our neighbors, our
co^tentions has wonderfully indomaged it: yet must we return to this pass,
that the Frenchman take the Frenchman not only for his fellow countriman, but
eue^ for his brother: and grieuing at his hurt, wish his good. I think that yet
among our dissipations there be many yt practice this rule: so as if peace
might govern any time, we should not find in all Christendom any better
Catholics and Gospellers than in France. Some there be yt cannot grant
thereto: for hearing any speech of Frenchme^s piety; they smile and say that ye
protestants know but little, and the Papists if they know it, do yet cloth it
with hypocrisy. But I will make the^ no other answer, but yt albeit our nation
be no longer the Popes minion, yet this old tree which in the time of
Charlemaine spread out such goodly branches alouer Christendom, may still ^^d
forth the like to ye benefit of many. For Justice, in no country in the world
is better established and known than Of Justice.
in ours so as the corruptions yt have infected her be^ing purged away, she
will shine forth again. And where are there at this day goodlier portraitures
of these ancient Senates and judicial courts than in our parliaments. The 3.
point concerns our treasury, Of the tresury.
(which is much subject to pinching) whereof we are thought to be half
spoiled, yea, eue^ of ye common. But it is an error to suppose that it may be
dried up in this realm. For besides our 4. sorts of A^ammant stones before
mentioned, there be many other smaller kinds yt continually draw them in and
make them to fleet upon the seas. So as, were it not that one part thereof do
afterward through a certain hidden attractiue power flow to Rome, and another
through violent pulls into Germany, we should many times see even great tides.
In the time of Henry the 2. the common treasury was such, as by ordinary
means he yearly raised upon his commons 15. milions of franks, part whereof was
since paid forth for debts, which not withstanding, our k. does at this day
gather as much. Now would I demand whether a king in ioying such a revenue may
be said to be beggered? The holy father yt lives in such glory and pomp,
and princelike commands over diverse states and provinces, has not 150000.
crowns reu^ of al yt his late predecessors good husbandry has purchased for
him: for of the patrimony of S. Peter he inioyeth but a net to fish withal,
and of S. Paul's, but a cloak. Those men therefore are misinformed that report
the k. of France to be at beggars door. For albeit he owe 50 millions of
fra^ks, they may be all paid in 10. years, by winning his subjects hearts, for
having ye hearts he has yt goods also. What shall Of the Frenchmens concord.
we say of concord, which is so great a help to ye increase of all estates?
Forsooth yt she was like to have gotten from us, and to have gone else where:
but now she begins to inhabit again, and to sound forth some ancient
agreeme^ts: which makes to us hope yt shortly we shall hear her perfect
harmony; in case we would abando^ foreign counsel, which under fair prete^ces
go about to kill her, as knowing well enough yt France cannot stoop to the^,
before it be divided in it self, and therefore they secretly thrust it into such
divisions, to yt end to overthrow it, whereby themselves may afterward fall upon
the spoil. I am assured it would be loath to bend the neck to their authority,
wherefore it were good to tell them in time, My masters never let your mouths
run on water after so dainty a morsel, for you may not taste of it: It is so
hot it will burn your lips, and therefore retire to your own quarters.

As for martial discipline we must confess that of late it has Of Martial
discipline.
been so sick, as to be driven to keep the chamber and not to come abroad:
but peace may by little and little restore it to health, and if her medicines
would work earnestly, it would soon be on foot again. Our Censors we speak
but too much of the absence thereof from among us, saying that our footmen
fight fair and far of, and our horsemen are very furious at the first, but
afterward can favor themselves well enough: yea, they ^oast that with three
thousand spears they will fire the Milles at Paris. I cannot deny but there
is much bad matter among us: but withal I will aduowe that there is some very
good. But those men are deceived that will assesse judgment upon the ordinary
and well ordered forces of a mighty state, by the extraordinary and
voluntary forces which the abundance Of the chief martial Capteyns.
thereof has upon occasion cast forth.

And since this speech forces me to lay open our wares, I say that of so
many our battles and combats, we have yet remaining six brave Princes, as
well of the blood royal as others, who have many times commanded whole armies,
of whom some have given great overthrows, and both defended and taken towns
of account. Next unto them shall come our Marshals of France, who have many
times ben employed, among whom the Lords of Montmorency and Biron may be
commended for the two best experienced Captains that we have. Twenty other
good Captains of the men of arms may we find, who having seen the wars of
Henry the second do deserve to lead an auantgard. How many other Lords and
Captains be there, who having seen but the civil wars, or part of them, have
diversely testified their valiancy and good conduct. Likewise from among our
great numbers of Captains of footmen, I suppose we may well choose half a
dozen good and worthy Colonels. Hereby it appears that we are not clean
destitute of men of command, which is the principal part of our warfare. I will
not speak of the rest of our nobility and soldiers: for lead them well and
they will show valor sufficient, neither can any war wear What means the
King has to defend him self against any Prince his neighbor that list to
assail him.
away either the one or the other.

If our king should perceive any neighbor ready to play with his frontiers,
I think he might easily make an army of 60. companies of men of arms,
twenty Cornets of light horse, and five companies of harquebuziers on
horseback, to whom he might ^ode three or four hundred Reisters, above 100.
Ensigns of French footmen, and forty of his good friends the Zuitzers, and
all this notwithstanding, the rest of the frontires to be sufficiently
furnished of men, as well to defend in the forts as to offend in the field.
This army being in the field, it would be some what hard to go burn the
windmils at Paris, and it may be, those that are of that opinion, will then be
so courteous as to be content with the firing of that at Catelet. So mighty an
army, will some oran say, would deserve the kings presence: neither should it
want if any other king should come to assail him: for he is no appre^tise in
matters of war, neither shall we at this day find any that with the sword
in his hands has been so victorious in two battles as he, or that in the
ditch of a besieged town has received the harquebuze shot, which makes me to
think that he will never suffer any upon presumption to curtall his coat.
Since therefore he is yet able to bring such a power into the field, there is no
wise man that will think him ready to play banquerout (as some men do make
account) but rather Of the restoring of order in France.
to be a most mighty Prince.

It rests that we speak of order which in many other matters is very
disordered among us. But the kings own hand must be the true mean to restore
it, which can as well do that as handle the sword: But he must have the
assistance of time and peace, without the which it is impossible he should
attain thereto: for adding to them both his own diligence and good example,
the work will be performed: in such wise that where now it is called France
decayed, it shall be termed France restored. I would extend my speech farther,
were it not that I remember I may be accused of cogging with strangers, and
flattering my own nation. Rather would I wish the first to know that as
strong bodies do through their own riot overthrow themselves: so likewise
by a certain hidden power in them they rise again, examples whereof we have
enough. For such considerations may make them wiser to judge of matters of estate
and of other men's, and not under the pretense of a few diseases to condemn a
man to death.

As for the second, I should be glad to see them affected to maintain
themselves united under the authority of this crown, whereof would ensue the
greatness and felicity of the same, which we ought as much to desire, as
heretofore we have tasted of the swetnes thereof: But if God would vouchsafe us
ye grace to see ye beginning of this goodly world, it would redo^^d to our
great co^tentatio^, and after we have wrestled against so many calamities, to
find our selves in the midst of our domestical goods, which were almost
vanished away, we should have no cause to waken our covetous desires, neither
to when our swoords to go with great labor to seek goods other where, for we
should find sufficient in our own houses. To conclude, we must not think that
true greatness consists in getting much land, but rather in possessing much
virtue, which is such a prize as when a king has coueted and obtained it, both
he and his realm may be termed mighty.

The 21. Discourse.
That aliances of Christian Princes with Mahumetists, the Capital enemies of
the name of Christ, have evermore been unfortunate. Also that we ought not to
enter any firm confederacy with them.

THe great Orator Demosthenes in one of his What the grounds of public
actions ought to be.
Orations, says: that Like as the master shipwrights going about to build a
ship, do lay strong and steadfast foundations thereof: so the principles of
public actions ought to be just and honest. This peradventure is not unfitly
alleged in the beginning of this small discourse, for the better representing
to those that govern great estates, those necessary rules whereby they ought
to compass their affairs. And like as for the most part those men do amiss,
who cleaving too much to their own opinions, do go from the lawful ways: So
do they seldom straie, who borrowing good examples of ye instruction and
wisdom of the elders, do follow the same. In the mean time whatsoever care
man may take to contain himself within the bounds thereof, yet can he not
always be exempt from transgressing the rules of equity through the
imperfection of his judgment, and force of his passions. Howbeit he must at
the least take heed of encurring those great faults that breed bad
consequences, as diverse Princes both before time and still have done and do,
whereby there have grown irrecouerable loss to their estates.

A Prince seeing himself oppressed and his Country in necessity, The ground
of confederaties with Turks.
deuiseth with himself, and has those that do also counsel him to seek all
means to preserve it: which peradventure has made men too free to make
leagues with barbarous Nations, the fruit whereof has nevertheless been so
small, that few there have been but have soon repented their rashness.

But before we propound any examples of these wretched confederacies, The
original of the Turks; their increase, behauiours and governments, as well in
respect of the souls as of the bodies.
I think it requisite in a word to teach the original of the Turkish nation,
their increase and terrible behauiours. John Carrion in his brief Chronicle of
the world faithfully corrected out of al histories, says the Turks to be
descended out of the straightes of the mount Caucasus. And that (as some
report) they dispearsed themselves out of the North into some small corners of
Asia about two hundred years before the coming of Christ, where they remained
almost unknown unto the time of the the Emperor Heraclius, who reigned in the
year 612. Then Orismada king of the Persians finding himself assailed by the
Sarazens, called to them for succor whom they assisted. But after his death
seeing the Sarazens had seized upon the Realm, the beauty and fruitfulnes of
the land so allured them, that they stayed about the Caspian sea, in that place
which in old time was called Hircanie, and finally so compounded with the
Caliph of Babylon; that he suffered them to possess and till the land where
they had stayed. There also they embraced Mahumets religion, and obeyed the
Caliph a long time. Afterward the Sarazens growing into dissension and wars
among themselves, the Souldan finding himself too weak to defend his party
called the Turks to his help, and expulsed the Caliphes. After this victory
the Turks demanding their pay, he denied it, which so prouaked them, that
they set upon him, overthrew him, and brave him out of his Realm. Thus did
they establish their dominion in both the Armenies, whereto they adjoined
Capadocia, Galacia, and Bithinia, which by little and little they conquered,
and this was about the year of Christ 1050. Shortly after the Tartarians took
away the Turks dominion, and brought them into subjection to them, until
that in the year 1300. they rebelled, and fortified themselves, destroying the
Tartarian Empire. Then (the other ancient families having through enmity and
domestical wars destroyed each other) bega^the race of the Ottomans to bear
sway. Under this race grew the Turks to that mightiness wherein we now see
them. Thus the name and Empire of the Sarazens decaying, this nation got the
dominion of all the rest. Carrion says, that this famely at the first was but
small, but through I wot not what destiny, it grew to this unreasonable
greatness with wonderful speed and prosperity, as a cruel people who^ God would
have to bear sway all over, to punish the sins of all other Nations.
Furthermore, the occasion that moved the Turks to invade Europe, as also of
the victories that they have obtained, has grown of the dissentions,
wickedness treasons; disloyalties, idleness, covetousness, rashness, and mistrust
of all states Christian; from the least to the greatest* And the reuoltes of
Christians have wonderfully increased the Turks. For many unthrifts from time
to time through the liberty of wars, seeing the flourishing estate of ye
Mahumetists, have forsaken the Christian Church, to cleave to their sect, as
well in respect that liberty is of it self agreeable to men's fancies, as also
because their wills do incline any way where they see things prosper well.

It will be needless here to number the Empires, Realms, and Provinces by
them conquered within these two hundred years: for such as have been conversant
in the world, or that have perused the histories will confess that they
possess much more land than all Christendom do contain. Their sect is
replenished with all impiety and blasphemy against God and against Christ
Jesus and his doctrine, and their government with the most horrible and cruel
tyranny that ever was: as being (as it seems) erected rather to overthrow
all laws, discipline, and honesty, than to maintain them. Thus much briefly
concerning the estate of the Turks, the knowledge whereof may tend greatly to
the opening of that which shall hereafter be spoken of.

The first Christian Prince punished for all such confederaties, What Christian
princes were the first that repented their confederaties with the Mahumetistes.
was Guy of Lusignian, the last king of Jerusalem. For he having a quarrel
with Reymond Earl of Tripolie, and finding himself too weak to follow it,
made a covenant and called to his aid Saladin the governor of the Sarazens,
who having overthrown Reimond, did afterward expulse Guy, and so overthrow the
state of the Christians in Siria, and finally suppressed the realm of
Jerusalem. And albeit the Sarazens and Turks are not all one, yet did they
concur in Mahumets law and all treachery. About six score years after John
Paleologue Emperor of Constantinople, being molested by sundry Lords of
Greece, whom the Bulgarians Ihon Paleoi^gue.
favored, determined to enter league with Amurathes the first, then ruler of
the Turks, and craved his help, which was granted.

Hereupon they passed into Europe, whereof insued the destruction of Greece.
For these Lords presumption being suppressed, the Turks remained in garrison in
the towns of Greece, and shortly after Amurathes allured by the beauty of the
Country came into Europe with 60000. men. and seized upon Philippopolly and
Adrionople, with other places, whiles Peleologue bewailed, and too late
confessed his fault that he had committed in entering a league with so
traitorous an enemy, whereby he saw his Country become a pray unto the^.
These unfortunate beginnings might have been a warning to other Princes their
successors, not to be over hasty of the acquaintance of such a nation,
according to the proverb which says: Happy is he whom other men's harms can
make to beware. But his next successors forsook not the same path, neither had
they other payment than he. For after that Emanuel Paleologue had made a
steadfast league with Bajazet, the tyrant bearing him no long good will,
besieged Constantinople, which when he could not win by force, he
determined to famish, and had so done, had not the coming of Tamberlane
prevented his purpose. Two or three other Emperors following were through the
errors and bad examples of their predecessors constrained, as it were, to
cleave to these barbarous people, until they invaded the Empires of
Constantinople and Trapizond, before in the possession of the Greek Princes.
Whereby we see that the thing which in the beginning was done of an
indiscreet free will, grew in the end to be followed of forced necessity. But
howsoever it was, we may say that the injustice of such actions has been
the cause to bring in great mishaps.

It may be objected, that within these three hundred years sundry Answer to the
objection of such as under coulor of covenants euel kept among some Christian
princes, do allow of con^ederaraties of Infidels, so as therein men be wise and
circumspect.
weak Christian Princes have made confederacies with such as have been strong,
thinking by the same the better to preserve themselves, and yet have found that
they have turned to their destruction, because the others have used those
occasions to oppress them: and thereupon would conclude, that only
indiseretion has been cause of their mishaps, when they have called to their
help, coueted to join neighborhood, or confederated themselves out of season
with such a one as has been mighty, or desirous to climb, for small faith
reigns in ambitious persons.

Heereto we may answer, that in truth in such deeds there is want of
judgment and consideration, and that the histories, though we set not down the
examples, do bear witness of many that have tried the hurt proceeding of such
follies. Nevertheless we must make a difference and have other regard when we
come to join amity with the Princes afornamed, either with tyrants, whether
to assail the Christian Princes, or to defend our selves from them. For when
a Prince through ambition or disloyalty uses confederacies to the end to
deceive, the infamy still ^^eaueth to him, and as for him that has been too
simple and so circumuented or indomaged, we do rather pity than accuse him.
But in all such leagues as we make with these destroiers and scourges of the
world, in whom treason, impiety, injustice and cruelty, have their
continual habitation, there is always error, especially if we exceed
certain bounds prescribed by reason, because it is in no case lawful to
confederate with them, except for matter of small importance, and such as
binds not the hearts with any strict amity, neither the persons in any
great bond. For what steadfast society What treaty may be made with Turks:
also what difference is between such treaties and true alliance with the
danger of steadfast consederaties with tirants.
can there be with those whose continual imaginations tend only to subdue you
to ungodly bondage, and so to destroy you. We cannot nevertheless here
infer that no man may enter any treaty with them, because sometime
necessity induces us to grow thereto with the most devilish enemies that we
can imagine: as to crave truce or peace, to agree controversies for Lordships
or territories, to demand amends for injuries, and to deal for trafick and
assurance for merchants. In these cases it is lawful to deal and and treat
with these tyrants. Who so therefore would compare these agreements with those
true and lawful leagues which are usually made between Princes, to the end
each to help other against all that seek their trouble, shall see a wonderful
difference between them. For these are grounded upon equity, and tend to the
preservation and maintenance of civil amity between them, whereas Princes do
use the other agreements upon necessity somewhat to bridle their rage,
whereof do grow some assurance to their subjects and their affairs.

The Wallachians, Moldacians, Transiluanians and Sclauons, have been forced to
proceed farther, as to submit themselves to the Turks, to the end to eschew
their furious cruelty, for want of means of defense, and of them we ought to
take compassion. Some would peradventure think that this proud nation would be
loath to enter amity with the Christians: But the contrary is most true: For
albeit they be barbarous, yet do they herein imitate the ancient policy of
the Romans, who under color of confederacies set foot in Greece and Gaul,
which afterward they subdued.

The like would these do if they might: but at the least in their haunting
among Christians, they discover our affairs, diligently considering our forces
and means, which afterward do the more kindle their desire to enterprise
against us, neither do our men through their conversation among them, reap
any other fruit than apprentiship of most wicked customs which do infect
particular persons with corruption and entangle the minds of those whom they
govern with tyrannous precepts.

I will yet allege other of the most notable examples of such as Other latter
examples of the danger that is in confederaties and trust to Turks
have abused themselves and found inconvenience in reposing too much confidence
in Turkish infidelity. One shall be of the last king of Hungary named John,
whom the Hungarians chose after that Jews was slain in battle against the
Turks. This king soon after his election did Ferdinand expulse under some
pretended title to the Realm: which forced him to have recourse and to put
himself into the protection of Sultan Soliman, who thereby had a good
occasion: For he waited only how through the means of the Christians, to get
access into those places where he sought to establish his greatness. Thus
having for the time restored him into his dignity, and beaten Ferdinandes men,
he kept not his promise long: for after the decease of John he dispossessed the
Queen his widow and his orphane, who had craved his help against Ferdinand,
that had besieged them: and ever since have the most part of Hungary continued
in the hands of the Turks. In this their deed the grievous injuries offered by
yt aforenamed, may to some seem to excuse their submissio^ to Soliman: howbeit
they were not free from blame, in that for their own particular interest they
were the cause on that side to advance the destruction of the Christians,
peradventure 30. years sooner tha^ it would have happened, besides that, they
ought rather to have summoned the Christian princes to take order for their
controversies, or else to have grown to composition with Ferdinand.

But how should these confederaties be other than mishaps to those Other
examples.
that put them in practice, since such Princes as have made them only to the end
to revenge themselves of, or resist their enemies have come to evil ends? Of
whom Alphons king of Naples is one, who fearing the power of Charles the 8.
king of France, did after the imitation of Pope Alexander the 6. who before had
done the like, sent his Ambassadors to Bajazet to crave help. As also Jews
Sforza, who to the end to molest the Venetians, sought to ye Turks of whom he
brought a certain number into Italy: but neither of the^ attained to their
pretenses, as being prevented by the subjection of themselves and their estates.

It is no marvel that shame and destruction do follow such deliberations,
and who so list well to consider the causes thereof, shall see that a vehement
desire of revenge stirred up these How many mishappes have been hatched out of
the confederaties of Christians wihch the Turks.
Princes to call them in. Is it not as much as if a man should go into the
woods to hier thieves to murder his kinseman or friend in his own house, for
some debate risen between them? Either to open the window to the wolf, and
so to bring him into the flock to devour the sheep? Those that were at the
first war in Hungary, when Soliman came in person, do affirm that in that
one only voyage there were above 200000. persons of that only Realm, either
slain or carried away captive, which violences together with innumerable other
more have been such pastimes as these horrible monsters have within these two
hundred years taken, to our costs. Who is he that reading or hearing of the
cruelties, villainies, and torments, which the poor Christians endured at the
taking of Constantinople, but will even faint for sorrow and pity: In this
shipwreck neither the greatness, nobility, and affability, neither the
tears nor lamentations of the old, young, women, or children could any whit
mitigate their cruelty, until that having glutted their desires and reuenges
with the blood, riches, and beauty of the youth of each kind, they granted
some small release to those miserable persons that remained of that fury, who
had been far more happy to have been swallowed up among the rest.

I could here add sundry other deeds wherewith to describe the fierceness
of this nation, but it shall not greatly need, because we The original and
occasion of the alliance of the French Kings with the Turks.
are to believe their proceedings to have been almost always alike, as if
their only drift tended to tread all mankind under their feet. Our neighbors
always have and still do think it wonderful strange how such learned wise
men as have continually flourished in France, could counsel our kings to enter
league with these, yea, and so long to persevere therein, considering how
unfortunate such confederacies have been. Some ancient persons have in this
sort reported the cause. That king Frances the first seeing himself still beset
with the Emperor Charles a mighty Prince, Henry king of England, and diverse
other enemies, who often brought his state in to danger, was for his own
saferie counseled to confederate himself with Sultan Seliman, to the end when
they should molest him, to oppose against them so mighty an enemy. And this
treaty was concluded about the year 1535. by virtue whereof we have often
times had succor from the Turks, which have greatly hindered those that
troubled France, and without the which it must needs have endured much more
through the ambition of them that ought not to have brought our Kings into
necessity to employe so terrible armies. All these accusations and
iustifications have moved me to peruse some histories, to the end to see what
profit or hurt we have reaped by their succor.

I have noted three or four armies by Sea brought into Christendom What
service the Turks have done to France.
at the pursuit, as they say, of the French men under the conduct of
Barberossa and other Admiralles, who have bred great terror. The most notable
of al their exployts, in my opinion, was the taking of Boniface in Corse. But I
have labored to learn of diverse ancient Captains and other skillful persons
both Italians and Spaniards, what their nations either thought or said of these
Turkish tempests: who all reported unto me that these barbarous people wrought
lamentable desolations, as having burned, sacked, yea and led into perpetual
bondage a merueilous number of poor Christians: for the most part, which was
worse, were forced to renounce Christianity and to embrace the false doctrine
of Mahumet, a most lamentable destruction truly of so many souls fallen into
such horrible gulfes of perdition! Neither is it almost to be imagined how
grievously these mischiefs have moved all country people both to speak and
write in the reproach of the French nation. What then might, said they, the
kindred and friends of those that were led into this miserable bondage do? One
lost his father and mother: an other his wife and children: this man his
brother, that man his cosen. It is very likely that their just sorrow have
wrested from them infinite complaints, tears and lamentations, which have
peradventure knocked at heaven gates. This confederacy seems to have been
the cause of the deminishing of the glory of so flourishing a Realm as France:
for even at the death of King Henry the second it was fallen from a great part
of that greatness which forty years before it did enjoy. And although other
causes might set forward this declination, yet do many think this to have
been none of the least. Yea, say they, if How ^ore this league has blemished
the glory of the French nation.
we should compare the commodity reaped by all this Turkish succor with the
only tainting of the French good name among all nations in Europe, we must of
force confess that the reproach does far exceed the profit. For what is
the winning of two or three towns to the reproof of so many people for
actions so universally condemned? Yea our selves can yet testify that at the
concluding of the peace between the two Kings of France and Spain Anno 1559.
the common speech of Germany, Italy and Spain was that one of the chiefest
causes of our misfortunes proceeded of confederating with the Turks, and
bringing in and favoring them to the hurt of the Christians. To whom I
answered: That they did too sharply taunt those things which in some respects
might be borne with, neither were so unlawful but that upon necessity they
might be used: likewise that the offense was in him that forced others for
their safeguard to have recourse to such means. But they replied: That it is
one thing to confederate with a Christian Prince though unjust and ambitious,
and an other with these barbarous people which are the instruments of Gods
wrath. Also that those which seek to excuse these errors, ought to show what
wisdom there is in backing our selves with the succor of such as blemish the
Princes fame and bring him into reproach. Moreover, whether it be not mere
blindness to pass the same way wherein we see every man encurre shipwreck?
Finally, that their opinion was, that no wise man endued with any conscience
could much gainsay so evident a truth, but would rather yield and grannt not
only to condemn that which was so unlawful, but also to abstain from
perseuering therein. These in brief were the reasons that they propounded,
which also I could not find to be much impertinent. Nevertheless, for my
better satisfying, I thought good to try the opinions of some Deuines which
came to visit me, whether Christian integrity were empaired by such
confederaties. To this question they answered: that Daniel in his prophetie,
speaking of the 4. Monarchies which should How far such confederaties do
prejudice christian religion.
be in the world, and describing them under the shape of 4. beasts, shows
that toward the declining of the fourth which was the Roman, there should
spring up a little horn, that is to say a kingdom, which should be more
mighty then the rest, also that this horn should have eyes and a mouth. That
the eyes signified a law craftily invented, and the mouth blasphemy against
God, also that this power should fight against the Saints and have great
victories. This did they affirm to signify the doctrine of Mahumet houlden
first by the Sarazens, and then by the Turks. That if we list well to consider
the Turkish kingdom, we should find it to be a terrible tyranny, whose
subjects were wonderfully enthralled: their wars destitute of all good
foundation: their politic government being well examined to be but a bare
name: their Ecclesiastical regiment to be none: but in liew thereof we should
see a wicked profaning of the name and service of the true God: their
household affairs subverted with Poligamy and other disorders which dissolved
all human society. And as for their treachery and cruelty the histories
together with experience and the matters before alleged do yield sufficient
testimony to make us to believe that prophetie to belong to them, as being
therein so figured as they are.

Now presupposing the premises to be true, say they, we would weete Whether
confederaties with the Turks be lawful.
how a Christian Prince can confederate or make any steadfast league with such
barbarous nations as are as it were marked and appointed to be the scourges to
Christians? For as we think, they can hardly be used without offense to
piety. In old time God expressly forbad the Jews to enter amity with the
Canaanites or Amorites, people whom for their abominable vice he did abhor.
Neither were the comparison amiss in setting the Turks down for the one, and
our selves for the other: whereof it must of necessity follow, that the same
defense ought to stand us in stead of a law to restrain us, least we pollute
our selves in their abominations. Then did I tell them, that I much meruailed
how so many Cardinals, Bishops and Doctors endued with great learning, of
whom France had no want, could brook this league, or made no means to break
it. Hereto their answer was: that many times Princes made the gowns to yield
to the sword, and the counsel of the Clergy to the necessity of the state.
And so we brake off our conference: which having since well considered, has
forced me to say: That these barbarous people are the same against whom the
Pope ought to turn his excommunications, and all Christian Potentates their
wrath and weapons, rather then against them selves or their Subjects, to whom
very rashly they impute Heresy, when they should have in much greater
abomination all Turkish infidelity. Against those should they draw their
Swords, not to convert them (for the Gospel takes no root in men's minds,
but by preaching and holiness of life) but to repress their cruelty and
tyranny: and these wars would be as necessary as our domestical be
unnecessary.

But there are some, who seeing the Turks prosperity to continue so long, and
to increase rather then deminish, are as it were Answer to an objection
grounded upon the consideration of the Turks prosperity.
confounded in themselves, and cannot think their dominion to be so
detestable, considering that God powers not his wrath upon them, but rather
his favor. I doubt not but such as want instruction in Gods providence, are
sometimes, when they enter into discourse hereof, even shaken: but they ought
to be assured that this power can have no perpetual continuance, which has
her bounds, as had the Saraze^s that is ended, together with their name, so
that these many years we have heard no news thereof.

These rods does the Lord entertain to the end only to punish and chastise
those who bearing the glorious title of Christians, do nevertheless through
their iniquities dishonor him, neither need we elsewhere seek the cause of
the Turkish prosperity then in our own sins, the continuance whereof do
thereto minister sustenance and strength: where contrariwise our amendment
would be an occasion that the Lord should pull it down. I would wish all such
as are familier with Princes, often to put them in mind that lawful
Monarchies, which ought to be supported with Piety and Justice, cannot be
preserved by any means repugnant to these virtues, so to resolve them the
more, not to seek any profit in actions utterly separate from honesty.

I know there may be some that will say that France is now so Answer to those
that think it no time now for the Frenchmen to break their league with the
Turks.
weak and brought so low, that it were not meet it should for sake those
leagues which seem to retain her enemies in any fear, who would peradventure
be easily enduced to set upon her so soon as the proppe, which is to them a
terror, shall be taken away. First the Germans would redemaund the imperial
towns: Then the Spanyard, who has sundry both old and new quarrels, would
allege some one or other: and it is to be doubted but such mighty enemies
would deal hardly with her. Indeed this requires consideration. But the
Germans will answer: That their nation is not so hot to entangle the Empire
in so great a war which they would not wish to be mightier then it is, least
it should gripe them as did the Emperor Charles the Duke of Saxony and the
Lantgraue. Neither would they advance the ruin of France, which they know to
be a good counterpaize for the inner side of Christendom, and a strong shield
for the outer side. The Spaniards do say that the long peace between their
King and France, together with his affairs in the Low countries, do
sufficiently declare that he intends not to molest her with wars: For it is
enough for him that she daily decays through her own civil dissentions:
whereby now he no whit fears her power, which aforetime has been a terror
unto him. So as it were rather to be believed, that if the Princes her
neighbors might see France for an universal benefit, to give over their
league with the Turks, they would like very well of so commendable a work
which they have long desired.

Howbeit, I refer my self to the matter as it is, and to conclude, The
conclusion of this discourse.
do say, that our Kings in old time showed forth their affection to the
rooting out of the enemies of Christendom: for them selves travailed
personally together with the flower of their Subjects even into Asia and
Affricke to fight with them: namely, Jews the young, Phillip August and S.
Jews: as also Godfrey of Bolein, with most of the Princes that accompanied him
in his voyadge to Jerusalem, were for the most part French men. Likewise long
before them what scourges were Charles Martell and Charlemaigne to the
Sarazens, who being the Lords of ye French nation obtained mighty victories
against that terrible people? Whereupon I conclude, that upon good occasion,
with condition and assurance sufficient unto our King that none would attempt
against his state, I think we should not find him to have any whit
degenerated from his auncesters zeal to wisdom and valor.

The 22. Discourse.
That the Christian Princes well united, are able in four years to expulse the
Turks out of Europe.

IT might better beseem sundry excellent Captains The excuse and occasion of
this discourse.
whom I take to be yet living, as the L. John Dorie the Italian, Lazarus
Schuendy the German, or the Knight of Romegas the French man, who have bin
employed in diverse wars against the Turks, to discourse of such means as
may best serve to suppress their power, then me who never saw their
streamers wave in the wind either by sea or by land, neither looked upon their
frontiers. Nevertheless, since yet they have laid open no part of their goodly
conceits in this argument (howbeit I cannot think but they have imparted some
to their friends) I have thought good as well for mine own content, as also to
instruct others, who peradventure have not employed their cogitations upon such
an hautie exployt, to speak somewhat thereof: and that the rather because I
suppose it to be most just and necessary to the universal benefit of all
Christendom. Yet not that I would men should think I would at randon put
forth any speeches depending only upon my own imaginations: for so might they
conteyne small assurance. But having read and over read the histories that
entreat of their wars, and therewith noted what has happened in our time, I
have accounted such a ground to be sufficient to bear up whatsoever we list
to build thereupon. Here might I have occasion to rehearse the original and
increase of this tyrannous and vnpitifull Turkish Empire: but since I have
already declared it in an other small treatise, I will use no repetition. Such
as are neighbors thereto do A brief Description of the Turkish dominion.
bat too much feel the weight thereof, neither ought they that be farther of
to be ignorant that it is a horrible scourge of Gods vengeance, which having
many years ago overthrown the flourishing Eastern Empire, and set deep
foot into the Western, does yet threaten the rest to bring it under the
intolerable yoke thereof. The consideration of the greatness of this perrill
which is so near might be sufficient to terrify, and waken especially those
that are in chiefest dignity, to strain themselves to provide for common
preservation. For the fire by little and little takes hold, and has already
consumed the suburbs of Christendom, namely Hungary, with all the great
coasts of the Adriatic sea, commonly called Sclauonia: So as by sea we have
these barbarous people at the mouths of our havens, and upon the land in our
gates. Certain it is that had it not been for the famous victory of Don John
of Austrich, a most valiant and noble Prince, together with the war of
Wallachie, wherein died 50000. Turks, and now their last with the Persian,
which has cost them very dear, we should have felt their forces. Al which
losses notwithstanding, yet do they hold the I Will of Ciprus as a glorious
monument of their triumph, having withal quite rased to the very foundations
the proud forteresse of Goletta in Afric. Herein do we see yt as they have
lost men, they are able for every one get 4. and where we have lost land, by
our usual proceedings it is almost impossible to recover it out of their
hands. Thus do their losses breed their commodity, whereas ours do lead us
to destruction. Now to those that know them not, they seem to be Of their
hatred and conspiratie against Christendom.
on sleep or let for a great while: whereas contrariwise they do but take
breath and provide, neither tends their delay to any other end but to gather
force whereby their first assaults may be the more furious. One of the first
solemn oaths that all these tyrants of the house of Ottoman at their entry
into the Realm, do make, when they take their usurped scepter, imports, that
they shall be irreconsiliable enemies to the name of Christ: also that by
continual war and all sorts of cruelty they shall endeavor to root it
out, wherewith as yet their effects have evermore very well concurred: which
course we are to believe they will still continue. I have heard of some that
have haunted among them, that if their Emperors should but a while surcease
their invasions against the Christians, they should encurre much reproach among
their Priests and men of war, who persuade themselves that the sword of
Mahumet must bring all the world into subjection to their Lord. These follies
do so puff them up and encourage them, that they ambitiously covet and
embrace as much as ever did Alexander.

It may be alleged that they suffer the Christians to live under why they
suffer Christians among them.
their dominions, which is true: But no otherwise then we suffer the Oxen and
Sheep to live in our fields, for the profit that we reap by them. Neither
make they any other account of them then as of bruit beasts, and so do use
them even in their most vile service, whereto they dare not gainsay: for had
they been willing to disenhabite the land, long since had it been desert. But
they are not so unadvised as to do that: albeit a valiant mind would prefer
death before the calamities and reproaches which they make them to endure. This
might be unto us a goodly portraiture, still to behold, to the end the horror
of so many cruelties might increase our care, and watching for fear least we
fall into the same estate: For our own danger conjoined with the compassion
which we ought to take of their miseries, will have the greater power to induce
us to seek all convenient remedies.

All this thoroughly considered, there is no fitter way then to unite The means
to suppress the Turks insole^cie also the cause why it is propounded.
all the Christian power together, and to go and assail those that are our
destruction: for of all wars, this is the most necessary. It should not be
made upon ambition, or desire of glory, neither in revenge of any small
injuries, but for the preservation of many thousand souls from the mortal
infection of Mahumets doctrine, and to set the bodies free from the most
horrible bondage that ever was. Likewise for the defense of laws, honesty,
virtue, knowledge and discipline, which the rage of these barbarous people do
pretend to bury in oblivion, and in liew thereof to bring in impitie, vice,
ignorance and thieuerie. This likewise reuealeth an other point worthy the
noting in all human actions, namely Justice, which ought to be the
foundation of them all. But it appears so clearly as none can gainsay it.
Hereto also I will add this word, that no act can be more just then in that
subdued part of Europe to purchase the redress of politic order, which in it
comprehends all kinds of Justice, public and particular. I suppose, if we
could either in eye or Image behold only two sorts of the vyolence (besides
innumerable others) which these barbarous wretches do practice against the
poor Christians, our sloth would be turned into zeal. The first, that yearly
in the Provinces that they have subdued, they pull away, even out of the
mothers bosoms, five or six hundred small children, whom they transport to
Constantinople, there to be instructed in their sect and arms. The second,
that yearly in their courses and roades here and there, they take at the least
twice so many poor Christians whom they sell again: whereby the father is
carried one way, the son an other, the husband into the East, the wife into
the West, there to be slaves all the days of their life, without hope of ever
seeing one an other again: such a separation as is made with incomparable
tears. Neither do I here comprehend the spoils of wars, which in some one
voyage swalloweth up 40. or 50000 souls. This is only the ordinary that I set
down, the continuance whereof in ten or twelve years will breed, if we
well note it, a great extraordinary.

Many there are that confess this to be true, and there settle Against those
that think the Turkish tirannie to be so far of as it can never reach unto
them.
themselves, without proceeding any farther, as imagining the mischief to be
so far of that it can never come near to them, and therefore do leave to
those that are nearer thereunto, the feeling that they ought to have thereof.
This is no small oversight, which shows that they regard only their own
interest, a matter at this day too common among most men: for there are so few
that take care either to pity others, or respect Justice, as humanity and
equity do seem to be utterly extinguished. In like error remained our
forefathers, I mean those that were near neighbors to the Countries now left
in pray: for through their retchlesnesse and small care to favor them, they
are lost, and have left their neighbors in perpetual fear of falling into
the like inconvenience. Also as every man is ready to seek goodly cloakes to
cover his faults, so are there some, who to the end to excuse their sloth,
would pers^ade us that the Turkish power is so limited with Seas, Mountains
and fortified Frontiers. that it can increase no farther. We are to pray that
it be so, but for the more certainty, to believe the contrary, for fear of
surprising: and I suppose that such as shall peruse the histories will scarce
cleave to these men's advice. For they shall find that in two hundred and
eighty years it has stretched one way from the Caspian ports unto Strigon,
a town on the hither borders of Hungary, which are almost four hundred
leagues of ground. Truly we must have very strong borders to stay those whom
neither the mountains of Armeny, the straights of Hellespont, neither the
great river of Danow^, could stop from their passage. Neither is this any
great matter in respect of the Empires, Nations, Realms and Armies that they
have destroyed in approaching unto us. It is then but mere flattery to
imagine that they will thus stay pitched in so fair a way, and a sign of
small judgment to think that under color that they are yet a great way from
us, we should be free from fear, and refuse to assist those that do
continually bear their impetuositie.

I know that sometimes a great power stays a time without How terrible the
Turks power is at this day and why.
doing any great exployt, as we see that for these forty years they have not
much encroched toward Germany, but likewise that not many years before they
conquered almost all Hungary and made Transiluany tributarie. And thinking well
thereof I find that they shall need so small success to terrify all
Christendom, that I do already apprehende that inconvenience. It is well
known that Sultan Soliman twice besieged the town of Vienna in Austrich,
which Charles the 5. succored. But if at this day Solimans successors making
the like enterprise should carry it away (for we must think it to be neither
impossible, neither uneasy, to those that can bring into the field 200000.
Horse, to force a town) what would follow but the forage and destruction of
all Germany, and the Turkish wars to be transported to the shores of Rhine?
As also for Italy, shall they not have a fair passage through the Alps to go
to ransacke it? Or what Army durst make head against such a multitude after
they have overthrown our Frontiers? We must confess that it is well with us
that GOD is our watchman and rampire: for had he not so been, we had already
felt that which we shall not fail to feel hereafter, unless we help our
selves with those remedies which GOD of his goodness puts into our hands.

Now let us see to whom it appertains to care for the universal To whom it
belongs to suppress the tirannie of the Turks.
good. We may easily judge that it is to the Emperors, Kings, Princes and
Commonwelths, under whom God has subdued the Nations to yield them obedience:
In respect whereof they ought to govern them in Iustie, and defend them from
oppression. And like as the Shepherd still watches that the woolfe surprise
none of his flock, so ought they by continual diligence to stop the horrible
(...) that this cruel nation continues against their subjects. If we look
well about us, we shall see that there are few countries crempt therfro: For
the borde^s of Poleland, Germany, Spain and France on the side of Prouence and
Languedocke, do often enough try how grievous the bondage of these barbarous
people is. That is the whole body of Christendom* The rest are but Isles, as
England, Scotland, Denmark and Sueden, What lets princes from thinking
thereof, also the mean to set this matter in hand.
which are in manner almost Islands, This does the more astonish me, that having
such warnings we still are so drousie. Now the matter that makes Princes so
smally affected hereto, is that they grow altogether attentive to their own
particular greatness, whereof ensues the forgetting to do things beneficial
to Christendom. Another cause, in part depending upon this first is fear and
suspicion that each has of other, which do engender such private mischiefs, as
make them to negle^^ the public calamities. Thus do we see how covetousness
and domestical malice do hinder honorable and profitable resolutions. And so
^eng as their hearts shall be thus disposed, it will be hard to enterprise
enterprise any matter of importance. It is therefore necessary for the
remedying hereof to seek means not utterly to pluck from them all these
hurtful passions, (for so must they be a^ewe cast again) but to deminish
them in them, to the end they afterward the more at their ease put on those
affections which they ought to hear to the common cause.

The best way to draw to this effect were, if they that bear greatest Who they
are that ought to begin to set the rest on work.
sway in Christendom could with lively persuasions and diligent
solicitations, showing to all men how near and sharp the Lions teeth and
talents are, open their eyes and unstop their ears: for that were a good
beginning to compass the principal point of remiting their wills. The first
person that should effectually perswad^ ought The Pope.
to be the Pope, whose dignity is in great reverence among Catholic
Princes, whom he should solemnly send unto. For they seeing him leave his
ordinary cry after them which he yet uses, saying: Cut the throats of such
of your subjects as will not acknowledge me, and that his phrase were ^ee^ed,
would be much persuaded by the virtue of these inductions, as Princes were by
other Popes in the first voyages for the recovery of the Holy land. The second
person necessary is the Emperor, for albeit his power The Emperor.
does not now concur with his title, yet ought that sacred dignity wherewith
he is clothed to be in great reverence among all Christian Potentates: whose
exhortations would likewise be of great eff(...) throughout all Germany. The
third person meet and The King of Spain.
necessary (...) the rest should be the K. of Spain, in respect of his
mightnesse and power, whereupon his word being builded, the very fear of his
evil will would make every one to be the readier to do well. These in my
opinion being well united, might easily lay the foundations of so stately a
practice. In old time mens-zeale was framed to diverse just matters, or such as
so seemed: for then one particular person endued with eloquence and experience
was able to stir them up, as did Peten the Hermit, who having discovered all
ye East countries led thither the first troops. But now that every man looks
but to himself, it is requisite to words to join authority and fear:
therein imitating Themistocles, who coming to certain confederates of the
Athenians to crave money at their hands, the sooner to persuade them, told
them that he brought them two Gods Love and Force. Even so who so desires to
do any good in this matter, must in laying open the necessity speak
Magistratlike, as we term it. Who so doubts that these three persons cannot
be linked together in this desire and pursuit, is deceived: for the state as
well of the persons as of the affairs does inuit them, rather the^ force them
backward, as we may easily see.

But in this which I am now about to say consists more difficulty, How other
princes may be induced to join with the three asorenamed.
namely in framing the other Princes to join with them, among which the most
Christian King is most necessary: for he being united with the rest, who would
afterward be behind, since almost all other Potentates are confederate unto
them? Or who durst do any thing contrary to their power, but should immediately
be oppressed? Whereupon I gather that if this particular league between these
4. were once well knit, the general would undoubtedly soon ensue. Now the most
Christian King cannot be hereunto bound before he be won to consent to break
his league with the Turk: which I fear will hardly be compassed without great
reasons and good assurance: for peradventure he will be loath to pluck down
the outward proppes which his father and grandfather of happy memory reared
up for the assurance of their estate, which hitherto have not been shaken:
besides that his Counsailors will fear in so weighty a matter to make any
rash alteration.

This therefore they may allege in this case, whereof I have briefly spoken
other where. Namely, that King Frances the first finding England, Spain,
Germany, the Low countries, and some Reasons for the leagne between France and
the Turks.
parts of Italy to be confederate against him for the oppressing of his
estate, whereof ensued the loss of the Duchy of Millan, with the denial of
his sovereign rights to Flanders and Arthoise, and therewith having the wars
oftentimes within the bowels of his Realm, fearing more hurtful losses, was
forced for his safety to have recourse unto extraordinary remedies: namely to
enter league with Soliman Emperor of the Turks, so to anoy his enemies:
likewise that the fear hereof has many times seemed to restrain them from
the execution of greater purposes against France. That his son Henry being to
withstand the like endeavors, did also use the same foreign favor, wherein he
had good success. That if the Realm when it flourished and abounded in all
things stood in need of such help, much more necessary is it now while it is
divided, weakened and poor; because the ancient hatred of those that seek
the abasing thereof may yet gather strength and force. This moves them to
fear perpetual reproach with manifest danger to the state, if they should
counsel their master to deprive himself of such succor, the loss whereof
may embolden the neighbors to more willingly the assail him. That they are not
ignorant but that the confederacy with the Turk bears appearance of
injustice: howbeit for counterpaize thereof, that the profit which it yields
is so great, that in these days wherein we live, which are replenished with
suspicion and surprises, it may without infamy be tolerated: considering that
the Catholic King, whatsoever regard he has to conscience and honor, makes
no doubt of confederating himself with the Persian, who is a Mahumetist as
well as the other: And who can tell, will they say, whether the most Christian
King, when under color of universal benefit he may have made of his friend
his foe, if he should be afterward assailed, be assured of the love of those
Princes with whom he has been at so great controversy* Without manifest
testimony therefore of a good reunion and assurance to his Realm, they would
be loath to persuade him to abandon his ancient confederaties. Moreover, yt
although al Christian Princes should unite themselves to assail the Turks and
atchieue great victories against them, yet is it likely that all the fruits of
their labors both by sea and land shall redound to the profit of the house of
Austrich, which already is clambred so high, that all the neighbors begin to
stand in fear thereof, and so should their master reap nothing but labor
and cost, which point is to be considered of. These, in my opinion, are the
chief reasons that our Kings officers can alieadge, which it Answer to the
reasons and allegations aforesayed.
were requisite to overthrow by better before we bring them to the league
aforesaid. I think if the Princes before named would proceed sincerely, and
unto words adjoining good demonstrations, this might be compassed. For besides
the equity of the matter, the desire of many good men which seek no more but
the exaltation of the name of Christ shall accompany them. But if they labor
with subte^tie (as men do many times) there will no fruit come of it, but
they shall be requited with subteltie. Howbeit, I will believe that they mean
very well: which if they do, there rests no more but to answer to that
which has been propounded, and so to decide the difficulties aforesaid:
whereof I will not speak, in that I can say little in respect of that which so
many heads as well in Spain as Italy are able to set down: neither do I
doubt but these Princes would grant to the most Christian King good assurance,
to induce him to enter into this confederatie. For if there arise any
controversy upon this saying: The assurance is not strong enough, or upon the
answer, we can give no other: the same were an evident token of a bad mind to
the common benefit, in him who^ we should see unwilling to yield unto reason.
For if it should happen such a King as he of France to be assotiated, it would
afterward be an easy matter to make all the other Potentates to enter into the
general union, yea even the King of Poleland now raiguing. And withal if any
one would be slack when he should see the whole body set forward, the same
should deserve to be forred thereto.

Yet were all this in vain and to no purpose, unless withal order That it is
requisite to unite Christian princes, before they meddle with the Turks.
be taken to appea^e all present wars, also to provide for such as may arise
as well between Prince and Prince, as between them and their subjects. It
seems that at this day there is small cause of controversy between them,
since the Duke of Anieow is deceased, who was at debate with the Catholic
King, having won for all his pains the only town of Cambray, which some
may think to be rather an occasion to breed discord between the two Kings,
of Spain and France: which nevertheless I cannot believe; for they will never
so far ouershoote themselves, as for so small a matter to hazard both their
Realms into charges, calamity and destruction. Neither (to speak as a
Christian) should any man wish two so mighty Monarchies to go together by the
ears. For so should they bring their confederates to partaking, and of a
private controversy make a general war. And no doubt the Turk would
thereof take occasion to work wonderful practices against us, which for want
of withstanding through our domestical dissentions, would breed our great
hindrances. Some man will add that the small Potentates will be glad the
great ones should feed each upon other: truly if the great ones should seek
to devour them, they might have great reason to wish it: but seeing them
willing to undertake to do that which may profit all, all ought likewise to
wish their good and to help them therein. The true means therefore to take
away the fear from some and covetousness from other some, were jointly to
employ themselves in these high enterprises.

As for the wars of Princes against their subjects, it were good Of the union
of princes with their subjects and the ceasing from all acts of hostility and
civil wars within their lands.
(if it were possible) to quench them: because they are sufficient to divert
them from all other intents. To which purpose I say that subjects are to
remember that their sovereign Princes are as the visible Images of God, whom
he has established upon the earth as his Lieutenants, to drive men to live in
Piety, Justice and honesty, and to defend them from oppression. In respect
whereof they are to yield unto them all honor, fidelity, service and
obedience, as also the Princes are to bear them like goodwill as a father does
to his child, and never to drive them into necessity, least they enter into
despair. Through the maintenance of this goodly concord, states do flourish;
whereas contrariwise the breach thereof hasteneth their destruction, as has
been lately tried to the great hurt of all France, and is yet in practice in
Flanders to the desolation thereof. It is a lamentable matter to see those that
worship one self Christ thus to pursue each other with fire and blood like wild
beasts, and the whiles to suffer these Mahumetistes to triumph over the lives,
lands, and spoils of the poor Christians of the East countries. For if this
alteration of the Low countries were ceased, all Christendom should seem to
be at peace. But this reconsiliation Of the necessity of peace in the Low
countries, and how the King of Spain may and ought to grant it.
will not be (...)y purchased: howbeit, al lets must be overcome, to the end
to creep out of these long miseries that make both the assailants and
defendants miserable. The Catholic Majesty, who, as it is said, is very
courteous, and thereof daily shows great proofs in most but my self, should
diligently look hereto: for all this bloody tragedy is played at his costs.
Now is there no question of state, but only for religion: whereof, albeit no
man asks my counsel, neither will believe me, yet I will speak a word or
two. The way were, in my opinion, to proceed by gentleness, not to judge by
foreiudgement: and to frame the laws according to the natures, and not to
lean so much to the reports of some, as to the just complaints of many
subjects: as being assured that consciences cannot be forced without
merueilous force. Finally, the success of things past may have taught that
those princes who by wars have endeavored to accompany the vehemency of
their Priests, have disfigured their dominions and deminished their greatness.
And what Jesuit is there, how skillful soever, that is able to persuade those
that be no Jesuits, that God delights in so much blood as on both sides is
shed? The people of the Low countries are of a free nature, the affections of
whose hearts are removed by clemency and unfeigned humanity: but by stripes
and injuries they be provoked and alienated. The surest counsel therefore were
to grant to those that are in arms the permission which they crave to serve
God, to the end they may yield also the obedience that man does require: for
it is to be supposed that if this be not willingly done, time will wrest it by
force: which may as well breed favorable accidents to the losers, as it has
done to the winners. The liueliest sting and sharpest prick to move the
Spaniards to peace, is the remembrance of the folly of France, whereby they may
say: We have escaped fair. This difficulty shall not let Upon what
consideration the enterprise against the Turk ought to be of great
commendation among all Christian princes.
me from proceeding in my discourse, and by diverse examples to show that this
enterprise against the Turks, ought to be unto us in great recommendation. Our
grandfathers had courage enough to assail their grandfathers even in their
own cities and fields, which they watered with the blood of these misereants:
which proves that the children are not invincible. Wherefore the better to see
those notable victories, we may read the history of Paulus Aemilius, who
treats of the conquest of the Holy land. It is merueilous to see how zealous
every man then was to employe himself in these foreign expeditio^s, wherfro
neither the dangers could terrify the young, nor the tediousness of the way
the old: but both sorts either sold or morgaged part of their goods to furnish
and set forth the^ selves therein. Even that excellent Prince Godfrey of Bollein
to ye same effect sold his Duchy to the Bishop of Liege: He was the first
Western Prince that gloriously tryumphed as well of the Sarazens as of the
Turks, in taking from them the realm of Jerusalem, and driving them away.
Many other vayages have since been made by diverse Emperors and Kings which
have had good and bad success: whereof I will speak in time convenient. At
this time it shall suffice to behold in these by oils the zeal of so many
noble personages: the consent of nations: the magnanimity of gentry: the
liberality of all men: and finally the high prowess and conquestes of so many
warriors, to the end by the motions thereof our affections now as it were
asleep, may awake and bustle themselves to ye same end which our auncesters
shot at. For it were a great sign of degenerating from the ancient virtue, if
we should not stir against these our terrible enemies that approach even to
our doors, since they travailed above 600. leagues out of France to seek them.
And yet are we to fear them much more then they, because their power is four
times as much again as it was then. This may be a warning to Princes (being
resolved to enter into this enterprise) to be the more careful to lay the
foundations so sure as they may not be shaken. For if through negligence or
haste there should happen any default, it would be somewhat troublesome to
redress, and it would fall out as to those that build a beautiful Bridge upon
weak pillars, who are afterward for the repayring thereof driven to break it
down again.

I have here before made mention of two foundations, consisting Having treated
of the fou^dations of this war, it is here spoken of the proceeding thereof,
and first of the general assembly for the entire resolution of the affairs.
the one upon the justice of the war, the other upon ye necessity: which both
are thoroughly to be considered, because by seeing the grounds to be good, we
conceive the better hope of the end which we pretend. Now it remains that we
proeeed in the rest, the principal whereof depends upon the will of the
Princes, whence the general union must grow. For yt is it which bears up the
whole frame and makes it to move. And in as much as the matter that may hinder
it is to be overcome (as we have seen) we are to believe that after diverse
negotiations and iourneys too and fro, the Princes may in the end grow to
resolution. This compassed, it were good to summon some notable assembly
wherein to deliberate upon the whole, and to swear to whatsoever may be
concluded. And since ye Emperor should be one of the chief dealers and withal of
greatest dignity, he to appoint the place (so as the Pope would not be ielous)
where the Ambassadors of the greatest Princes might meet, whether also the
meaner will come in person, for that the Emperor himself should be there. To
which purpose the town of Ausbourg (in my opinion) might well serve for them
all, where also with the advice of many other skillful Captains they might
better determine all matters.

Having formed such a confederacy, it were requifite to go on and to provide
fit means to continue the war at the least four years, Of the means to
continue the wars diverse years.
to yt end none might give it soouer over without incurring reproach and
displeasure of all the other Princes, either else not to enter therinto at all.
For to begin this war, and then to leave it unfinished, would breed too
great inconvenience, as having forced a mighty enemy to play double or quit,
wherinto being entered, he might peradventure attempt such devises as before he
never thought upon. True it is that it is hard so sure to bind those Princes
which depend but of themselves, howbeit, all that might be must be done: for
ordinary experience teaches, that only three or four leagued together, can
hardly long agree. And sometime before the first piece be performed, some one
shrinketh, who then wants no reasons nor excuses therefore.

Then must they provide for treasure, for foreign wars are never well Of treasure
to maintain this war.
conducted without abundance, and want does often make them to decaie. In the
first war against yt Mahumetists, the zeal and affection was so great yt most
men waged themselves of their own goods. Afterward they were helped with ye
treasure which through yt Croisats that the Popes published, was leauied in
sundry realms and provinces. This help, whether it now proceeded of the Popes
or of the authority of princes, and were termed either Croisade or
contribution, would be necessary to help the Potentates to defray their
charges. For having gathered among their subjects an extraordinary sum (yet
not immoderate) and thereto laying part of their ordinary revenues, it would
suffice to maintain great armies. Howbeit since in our small wars we still find
want of money, it were meet to lay a good foundation for treasure a year before
the enterprisiug of any thing: for being of sufficient ability before they
begin, they should afterward hardly incur any want. It may be said that to
threaten the enemy so far before hand, were as much as to give him time to
provide: but having well waied all, it were a greater inconvenience, according
to the proverb, To take shipping without bisquet. Besides, it is to be
imagined that their pride and glory is such, and they so much contemn the
Christians, that they will take it to be rather some brag to terrify the^,
than any preparation to assail the^. As for power, I think no man can deny
but that Christendom is at this day very mighty. For all Countries are full
of men these Of forces necessity for the execution hereof.
domestical wars have greatly exercised in arms. The art of war is also
better known than it has been these 150. years, whereto the knowledge of
histories both Greek and Latin, conjoined with experience, have been a great
help. We see likewise that their courages are no whi^ quailed, as we do but
too often prove to our great grief and loss. Of soldiers therefore having
both ^now and good, we must look for Captains, for they be the men who
thorough their wisdom and magnanimity are great helps to the winning of the
victories. In this point we of force confess that Christendom has not now
any of so great experience, as even in our days we have seen: as the Duke of
Alua, the Duke of Guize, the Constable of France, the Admiral of Chastillion,
and for the sea Andrew Dorie. Howbeit we cannot likewise say that it is
utterly unprovided* for although those that remain be but young, yet do they
follow the steps of the others, neither want they any thing but the subject of
a brave war, the more to display their virtue: besides that many times good hap
accompanies young heads, as appeared in Don John of Austria at Lepanto, the
Duke of Anguien at Serisolles, the Duke of Sanoy at S, Quintins, the Earl of
Aigmo^t at Graueling, and especially the Prince of Parma in Fla^ders. We are to
think that we live in a time wherein the large schools are open for Captains
to learn to frame themselves and grow good. Let us therefore content our
selves with those that yet live, and hope well of their conduct. I will name
none particularly, for they be sufficiently known, who in Spain, France,
Italy and Germany have purchased fame.

Now are we to look to discipline, whereof I will say thus much, Of Martial
discpline.
that without great care that it be diligently observed and kept, we are not to
look for any good issue of the war. We see how ye civil wars have quite
corrupted it, and the infection is shed over all nations, though over some more
than othersome. It were meet therefore at the first to establish rules which
may be put in practice, and thereto to ad both a punishment and reward: for if
we carry our accustomed disorders into these wars, we shall soon become a pray
to the Turks. Titus Liuius discoursing how ye Romans attained to their great
conquests, among other things attributes it to their good observation of order
and discipline. Yet do I not herein require as great perfection as in those
days, but rather to fit the coat to the body, and the laws to the virtue. I
doubt not but there is yet enough spread abroad among our Christian nations:
Whereof if a great part were gathered into one army, it would suffice to bring
forth good fruit. These Of other preparatiues requisite to begin withal.
be the principal preparatiues which the Princes should consider of betimes.
For the rest, which nevertheless are necessary, as wepons, vessels,
artillery, and munition, they are much easier to be gotten. Philip of Macedon
Alexander the greats father prepared for such things as he needed for his wars
a year or two before hand: but he died before he could begin, and his son
finished them: and yet it served his turn well, that he found all things ready,
but especially he made great account of five or six old Captains whom his
father left him. Another Philip the father of Perseus, purposing wars against
the Romans, made no less preparation, though his son employed it but
badly. And we are as greatly to fear the Turkish nation as they did the
others, for it holds at this day the greatest Empire in ye world. Many there
are yt being badly informed of their customs, Against those that think the
Turks easy to be subdued.
do take the^ to be barbarous people, given to cruelty, and wanting all other
good qualities, wherein they are deceived: for among all soldiers in the world,
they show themselves most sober, obedient of their Captains, and diligent. For
a while they had small use of the harquebuze, but now they can help themselves
therewt against us, and do begin to arm their horsemen with certain light
breastplates and morions to cover the foreparts of their bodies and heads,
although they retain the use of the bow and target: and it is a great marvel
considering how many Christian soldiers do daily go to them and deny their
faiths, yt they have no sooner taken our fashions which are better tha^ theirs.
Footmen with the pike and corcelet they have none, which in my opinion is our
advantage, as being a very profitable kind of soldiers. All this ought to
hasten us to prevent the^ before they conform themselves to us in things
wherein we exceed the^: neither is to be doubted but in time they will imitate
Pyrrhus and Hanibal, who brought their soldiers to take up many of the Roman
fashions both in wepons and discipline, as having by experience in their wars
against the^, found the same to be better than their own. I leave it therefore
to any good Captains judgment, if they should thus do (considering their
great numbers of people) whether it were possible to stand before them: if
they should arm but 50000. horsemen after our manner, surely the same would
suffice to fight with all the horse in Christendom: but they put in their
general armies well near 200000 which is an incredible matter.

I heard a French Gentleman yt was at Sighet when Sultan Soliman Of the great
power and ability of the Turks.
besieged it, say yt there he saw 150000. which ^raue him into admiration,
seeing all the earth covered with horse and men as thick as trees in a large
forest. When we in our small wars see 10. or 12000. horse, we think them
able to fight with the whole world, what then would we say if we should see
these wonderful troops? They have evermore used to march thus: yea, the
Sarazens whom they succeeded in ye law of Mahumet used mighty armies, though
not so strong in horse. I will not stand upon the description of the large
extent of their dominions, as being a thing sufficiently known, only I will
say that in Europe they hold more land than all France, Spain and Italy do
contain, from whence they take their best men of war, where also they keep
them, partly in garrisons and partly upon their conquered lands which they
divide among them, with charge to be always ready to serve upon any the
great Lords commandments, so as out of the said Provinces of Europe, they are
able to bring into the field near 100000. horse, which is a token yt the
barbarousnesse that we take to be in them, is not altogether deuoide of
wisdom and policy. They use not to fortefie many holds, for no man dare
enterprise to assault any of their chiefest, but he shall straight ways be
assured of a mighty power at hand ready to make him give over quickly. As
their land power is great, so is not their strength by sea any whit smaller,
which now they are more jealous to keep well than ever heretofore, through
the remembrance of their great loss received by the good hap and prowess of
Don John of Austria. They never empouerish themselves in wars as Christian
Princes do, for their warfare and order of pay does somewhat differ from
ours, and the coin that their Emperor takes out of his treasury at
Constantinople in the time of war, he supplieth again in time of peace. To
be brief, they be most mighty enemies: against whom whosoever shall deal,
he had not need to forget any thing at home (as we use to say) but do as
they that enter the liftes, who before they do come, look to increase their
strength and courage: to see to see their defensive arms sit, and their
offensive sharp, to the end either to overcome, or die valiantly.

Now are we to enter into the chief point of this matter, which is, of the
means how to assail these terrible enemies, in what places, Of the manner how
to assiuill the Turks: in what places and with what power.
and with what power, to the end within the time before noted to atchiue a
happy conclusion. And although in ye assembly before mentioned, whereat should
appear su^drie princes and Captains, they may argue of this point to ye end to
grow to some resolution: yet will I not let as briefly as I may, to say my
mind, according as I purposed at the first, always submitting the same to the
censures of such as are more skillful than my self, to correct the
imperfections thereof. My discourse te^deth rather to kindle ye affections of
valiant persons to enterprise, than to give any counsel in the proceeding in
so haughty a purpose, whose events may not easily be forseene, wherein the
chiefest Captains (whose poor scholar I shall account it an honor for me to
be) shall not be too sufficient to give advice. The better nevertheless to
behave our selves in such a war, I thought good to set down some examples of
but ancestors, who sundry times fought against the same nation, to the end
that what they wisely executed may be to use a rule, by fitting it to our time,
as also we may eschew and avoid their ouersights.

I will not enter into search of matters beyond Godfrey of Bolleine (albeit
there were great wars before between the Emperors of Constantinople and
the Saracens) in whose days the Christian Princes began to confederate
themselves against them. The first army that was sent went under the leading
of Peter the Hermit, who passed even into the lesser Asia, and at the first
acchieued a few valiant exploites: but he and all his men were afterward
overthrown by the Souldan of Nicee. Likewise two other armies as they marched,
were broken by the Hungarians, a nation which at that time had scarcely
attained the rudimentes of Christianity, and as yet did hold of the ancient
fierceness of the Hunnes: so as these first expeditions yielded small fruit
and great hurt. The cause of which disorders and inconveniences proceeded (as I
think) of the want of authority and experience of their leaders, who upon a
zeal, assembled al these troops gathered out of diverse nations, in whom
peradventure they found not convenient obedience, and wanting foundation both
in purpose and provision, could not long hold out, neither among their
friends, neither against their enemies.

The histories report that in the first expedition there were unless than
100000. able men. And the Hungarians overthrew the others (which were not so
many) because by the way they ^ell to spoil, which argues that they used
small discipline. We can therefore make no account of the greacnesse of a
multitude, if there be no order among them, which especially fails when their
Captains be either insufficient or want authority. Shortly after did Godfrey
of Bolein took upon him his notable voyage about the year 1086. toward the
end of the reign of the Emperor Henry the fourth. This voyage was better
looked to and ordered than the former, and had many more excellent Captains:
for besides himself, who was already a famous Captain, he had his two
brethren Baulduine and Eustace Earl of Flanders Hugh, Philippe the French
kings brother, Robert of Normandy, the son of William King of England, and
many other Lords and Gentlemen: yea, if we list to believe such as have written
the particularity, thereof, we shall find there were in that army above 40000.
horse and 150000, (...) al fighting men, a great part whereof (which was me(...)
about their own expenses.

So soon as they were assembled they marched forward, and so How long our
auncest^rs were in their war: also whether it be harder in these days then
in those.
followed their business, that they finished their conquest in 3 years over a
great part of the lesser Asia, Siria, and Mesopotamia. In this war they had
many reencounters, but the most notable were two great battles which they
woune, and two principal sieges Nice and Jerusalem, where they were the
conquerours. Many Christians were also once besieged at Antioch, but they
sharply repulsed yt Sarazens and Turks, with great slaughter. Finally, having
expulsed them out of the farthest Provinces, they established the Realm of
Jerusalem, where Godfrey of Bolleine reigned and his successors after him:
who so list now to consider the time that was spent in so great a conquest,
shall find it but short for the winning of more land than all Germany and
Scotland do contain. Great was the defense and assalt, but 2. great battles
and 2. sieges yielded the whole victory, whereby we may believe yt the hardest
enterprises are overcome with valor and good order. Neither will I let slip the
inconveniences of those long iourneyes: for the tediousness of the way, the
distemperance of the air, and the continual travail bred sundry diseases
among those great troops, which were helped forward by the excess of the
mouth too much used in these north parts. These brought the loss of many, eue^
of the better sort yt wanted no ability. Now have the Turks taken order yt we
shall not need to go so far to seek them, for they are come abroad eue^ to
some of our gates, others have them within fifty leagues of them, and the
farthest within an hundred. We shall not need to fear the hearts of Asia, for
our batable grounds shall be in as good a temperature as France: yea, even
Constantinople stands in the same climate as Strigon, so as we shall need to
fear no more but our enemies iron.

But to proceed, we are to understand that after the posterity of Godfrey of
Bolleine had inioyed the land above 80. years, civil What was the cause that
our forefathers lost the advantage they had of them, and were driven out of the
east.
dissension crept in among them, and some of them calling the Sarazens to their
aid, grew so strong that they drove out the rest. This afterward moved diverse
Christian Princes to join again in the recovery of that which was lost so as
in five or six score years they made six or seven notable voiages. wherein
went personally the Emperors Frederick Barbarossa, Frederick the second,
Conrade king of Germany, some kings of France and of England, whereof
nevertheless grew small profit. At the beginning the Christians had goodly
victories, but in the end they had the foil, and were never able to expel the
Turks and Saracens out of the lands that they had recoueres. All these later
losses proceeded of sundry causes, as of particular wars leauied by some of
the princes that stayed behind in their lands that were gone yt voiages: of
want of wine and other provision: of the small perseverance of them that were
leagued, of the pestilence that fell in the army: and finally, of such
hindrances as the Emperors of Greece did underhand work to the westeru forces:
envying, as it should seem, their generosity, and being loath they should conquer
the land which yt Sarazens had won from the said Empire. These are the
deformities of the former enterprises, which ought to be warily shunned for
fear of disgracing the present: for it is a double fault, to know the former
over sightes, and yet to fall into the^ again. Other princes yt followed the
aforenamed have but defended The wars of those princes that succeeded Godfrey
and others against the Turks.
and yielded to ye Turkish rage, which ouerflowing in ye family of the Ottomans,
has for these 300. years still increased to our great loss and destruction:
howbeit even in the midst of our disorders we have not wanted some excellent
persons, who with very small means have withstood the marvelous force of these
barbarous nations, and whiles life has lasted, ben a rampire to all
Christendom. One was John Huniades the Father of Mathy Coruine, chosen to be
king of Hungary. Another Scanderbeg Prince of Albania, who both were surnamed
The scourges of the Turks, because of the great slaughters that they made in
those battles that they won. Wherein we are to note Gods power and wisdom,
who with weak and small things can pluck down the pride of the mighty. They like
wise have held long wars upon the seas, yea, the Sarazens have been so strong
therein, ye oftentimes they have made great discents in the costs of
Christendom, and have taken land in sundry places, as in Spain, the most
part whereof they possessed a^o^t 780. years also in Sicil where they remained
above two hundred ^e^res. But the Turks great power upon the seaneuer appeared
so much as after the loss of: Constantinople: For having so commodious a
harborow, they thereof took occasion to think upon sea matters, showing
themselves terrible in the conquest of Islands and firm land, where they have
descended. The Christians always, so much as they might; withstoode them, but
in the end by little and little were through their great force oppressed, so as
for their more assurance they have been driven (...) them with the
Mediterranean and Adriaticke sea: abandoning unto them almost all that is
beyond the same.

Diverse are the reasons that lead me to think the time to set upon Why the
time is now convenient to set upon the Turks.
them as convenient now as ever. First the want of experience in their great
Lord, who is said to be rather a Philosopher than a soldier, as never
wearing armor as his grandfathers Selim and Soliman, the conquer^rs of sundry
countries did. For the Turkish nation having such leaders do notable things.
Then their losses in the Persian wars have much weakened them, whereof we are
to gather that their great prosperity which so long has accompanied them,
does now begin to droope. Thirdly, Don John's victory has eased us of one
error wherein we were, which is, that we thought the^ to be by sea
invincible, and withal taught us what advantage in joining we have over them:
wherein we should scarcely have been confirmed but by this experience. All
this together considered should the more incline us to take the occasion when
it is offered: for we must imagine that time alters things, and men grow into
experience, good hap returns, and inventions increase. I know our sins are
the chief causes that God uses them as scourges to smite us, but we need not
doubt but they have like wise fourefolde procured his wrath. And who knows
whether their time be not come to receive the same that they have inflicted
upon others? We ought to be assured that in his just judgments toward his,
he always mixeth his abundaunt mercy with his wrath, and they that be
vessels of his wrath, shall soon or late feel his vengeance without mercy.

To this purpose I will alleade a foolish Prophetie contained in their Alcaron
where I have read it, not that I think any truth Prediction of the Turks
Alcoran.
to be harbored in their false Oracles underpropped with lies: but because
sometime the wicked have at unawares foretold things that have afterward come
to pass: This it is. In the later days it shall come to pass, that the
Musulmans, that is to say, the Turkish nation, shall straie from the laws of
the great Prophet Mahumet, giving themselves to all iniquity: Then shall the
Christian sword arise and thrust them out of their Empire. Such as have been
conversant among them do report that their wise men do sometimes set these
speeches before them, and they fear them: as indeed they ought, since they
were never so corrupt as at these days, or so worthy grievous punishment.

I have been long before I could speak of the means to assail The means to
set upon the Turks.
these so mighty adversaries: and the rather because I have imagined the
former matters very requisite for the better understanding of that which I will
say. To begin therefore I will set to your view some counsayles of our
forefathers, out of the which we may gather good instructions, who for the like
causes have often been stirred up to frame brave purposes. Guic ciardine the
historiographer, who well noted such things as happened in his time, reports
that when Selim had conquered all Egypt, and obtained sundry victories else
where, all Christendom grew into great fear. His own words because they
deserve consideration I will set down. The Pope (says he) with all the Court
of Rome astonished at such success, Guicciard. lib. 13.
and to the end to provide against so great a mischief, showing that he would
first crave Gods help, commanded sundry devout processions at Rome, wherein
himself went barefoote: Then calling upon the help of men, he sent his
Mandats to all Christian Princes, admonishing them of this great danger, and
persuading them to lay aside all disorders and contentions, speedely to attend
to the defense of religion and their common safety, which was continually
opposed to great danger, if with courage and united force they transported not
the war into Turkey, and so invaded not the enemy in his own Country. Here
upon the opinions of sundry skillful men of war and others that knew the
Countries and disposition as well of the Princes as of the power of the Turks,
being taken, it was thought necessary to make great provision of money by the
voluntary contributions of Princes and an universal impostio be levied over
all Christendom. That the Emperor with the Hungarian and Polonian horsemen,
warlyke nations and such as were practiced in continual wars against the
Turks, as also with such the strength of Germany as might beseem so great an
enterprise, should sail along Danowe into Bosina in old time termed Misia,
and so into Thrace, and to approach unto Constantinople, the imperial sea of
the Ottomans. That the French King with the forces of his Realm, the Venecians
and other Potentates of Italy, accompanied with the footmen of Zuitzerland,
should pass from the port of Brunduse in Albanie, a very easy and short cut,
to invade Greece, a landful of Christian inhabitants, as well in respect
hereof, as for the intolerable yoke of the Turks, most ready to rebel:
That the kings of England, Spain, and Portugal, as well in their nauies at
Carthagene, and the havens thereabout should take their course with 200.
ships full of Spanish footmen and other soldiers to the straights of
Gallipolis, thence to make roads to Constantinople, having first seized upon
the Dardanes, that is, their Castles standing upon the mouth of the straight.
That the Pope should take the same course with an hundred great galleys. With
these preparatiues sufficient to cover both sea and land, the Turks estates
being invaded in so many places, who make their chitfest account of defense in
the plain field, it seems (especially adding thereto the innocation of Gods
name, that of so holy a war there could not be hoped but a happy end.

This deliberation of the most excellent Captains then living. I To what use
the former discourse of Guicards may serve, and what is to be altered in these
days.
find to be so well grounded, that I think we might borowe much of theirs but
had the execution thereof insued, we should the better have seen what it had been, howbeit the death of Selim coming on, assuaged the fear of these
Princes, and so consequently their desire to proceed, whereby they passed but
to words. Now as since there have followed great alterations, so are we to
frame our selves according to the disposition of matters, and somewhat to vary
from this platform, but rather in the particularities, than principal points
thereof.

First we may be certain that it is to small purpose to invade the Turks by
land only, or by sea only: for leaving them either of those gaps open, they
will thereby so molest us, as that they will turn us from the other, in
kindling the flames farther within our houses, than we can do in theirs. In
respect whereof it is requisite to set their whole estate in Europein
combustion, by following the wars in every part thereof, which is impossible to
be performed without a mighty power as well by sea as by la^d, which our ancestors
thought expedient, as also it is (as Guicciardine says) the perfect means to
abridge any war: for being strong, ye shall soon bring your enemies to reason
either by victory or composition: Whereas contrariwise when it is weakly
followed, it grows ruinous. When Caesar invaded Pompey, who had seized upon
all Greece and the Eastern Provinces he made himself strong both by sea and
land, wherein nevertheless his competitor exceeded him. The like did Augustus
against Mark Anthony, who possessed the same countries which now ye Turks
enjoy, and both of the^ had near 1000. vessels, and above 35. legions by land.
But because it is an easy matter to know, that for the well inuading of those
countries, both ye powers must be matched together, I will speak no more thereof.
As for ye partition of these princes forces, which Guicciardine mentions, it
is not amiss, nor the inuasio^ of 3. sides: albeit I think it were better for
us to stick to two. For I consider that ye whole defense of the Turks lands
consists in 2. great armies, the one upon the land, yt other upon ye sea,
neither hathhe any fortified places as we have, so as ye loss of one of these
props is ye opening of a gate unto us, which is ye reason why I would wish we
should make but 2. strong bodies wherewith to attempt our enterprises. Moreover,
if we should strike into Slauonia or Greece with a body of 18. or 20000. men,
they would ere we were aware, fall upon us with some 100. or 120000. whereby we
wanting assured places of retreat, this body would be quite over whelmed. This
other reason will I also add: that if both our armies as well by sea as by land
do shoot at Constantinople, and by winning little and little do attain thereto,
must it not needs follow, yt in performing this purpose, they shall seize not
only upon Slauonia, but also upon all the land of Romagnia, which shall be a
pray to toe conqueror.

The Christian forces would I wish to be thus divided. The K. of How to divide
the Christian forces, also to what number they should amou^t
Spain, as the mightiest prince Christian, to arm as many galleys and
galeasses as he were able. The Pope, ye Venetians, with other the potentates of
Italy to join with him, and I think, if they list to strain themselves, they
be able to set forth 300. galleis and 12. galeasses, besides other small vessels
for ye transport of victuals and horse, which be but the dependances of ye
camp. If any demand whether ye number may stay the Turks power by sea, I
think yea: for Don John had but 200 galleis when he wan ye battle against
the^. As also when the armies, whether by land or by sea do exceed a compete^d
quantity, ye rest do but breed confusion. The soldiers for the furnishing of
the said vessels might be levied in Spain and Italy, notwithstanding it would
amou^t to 30000. For ye land, the Emperor likewise should prepare a mighty army,
to invade through Hungary, consisting of the power of all Germany, the low
countries, Sueden, Denmark, Boheme and Hungary, thereto also adioining his that
now reigns in Pole. land, which united together would undoubtedly amount
unto 35000 horse, and 30000 footmen and 10000 pioners. The other part of the
land forces to come from the most Christian king of France, the Queen of
England, the king of Scots with the Suitzers and Grisons, who under some
notable Captain should join with the Emperor, and in my opinion, would amount
unto some 20000. footmen and 5000. horse. This power would I take to be
sufficient to obtain some brave victory, containing at ye least 125000.
fighting men, which seems to be a great number, but if we also consider all
Christendom, it is to be thought very small: neither do I think they will
be grieved with maintaining it four years, since so they may reap this
benefit, to enjoy forty in peace and safety. Charles the fifth only of his
own and part of the Empire brought before Metz 80000. men, and the army that
Maximilian lastly raised against the Turks in the year 1556. amounted unto
60000. so as we shall perform no new thing, but only in the continuance
thereof.

Concerning Captains over the Hungarians, the Emperor himself might command,
who cannot imploie his highness in any What Captains were meet to command in
the Christians army.
act more worthy his greatness, and he to be accompanied with his uncles and
brethren. The Dukes of Saxony, Casimire and other German Princes, Earls,
and Colonels, among whom he should find both prowess and good conduct. As for
the French and what should thereto be adjoined, we may easily find Princes
enowe to command: but I will name but two, whom I take to be most meet,
namely, the king of Navarre, who in desire of well doing and courage, gives
place to none: and the Duke of Lorraine, whose ancestors having been scourges
to the Turkish nation, it is to be presumed that their ancient good hap may
accompany his valor. So as it should rest in the King to appoint which of them
should have charge, or if he should commit it to them both alternatiuely, I am
sure neither of them should want a goodly train, as well of the one as of the
other religion. The navy likewise would have some mighty Captain. And in as
much as many do certainly believe that the Duke of Sauoy (a Prince of great
expectation and an imitatour of his Fathers magnanimity) will enter alliance
in Spain, it may be the Catholic king may honor him with that office: for
that authority is requisite to rule so much nobility and Gentry as should
there be found of both nations, who are not easy to be governed. Howbeit
considering what experience ought to be in such a head, I know none more
capable than the Prince of Parma, who justly deserves to be commended for the
best Captain in Christendom. But I fear that every man's desire to be
employed in this expedition, would moderate the iealousies of the first and
second places, also that such debates would easily be decided.

When I consider what Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, Captains Of the principal
members of this army.
and notable Soldiers shall be in these expeditions, I know not how such
power can possibly be beaten: For if in all Christendom there were any
virtue, discretion, magnanimity, art or industry, the most exquisite thereof
would undoubtedly be brought thither by those, who enflamed with a desire of
well doing, would liberally in so noble an assembly show forth whatsoever the
fairest of their perfections, one would seek by counsel, another by boldness,
another by diligence, each to outgoe his companion. The like shall we see
among our nobility: not coutentious enuies, but honest emulations, who might
be most notable in well obeying and better commanding. When ye have in an
army a number of such people as can lead the way to others, and take sure
hold without letting go, they make all the rest to fight well. Neither can I
think that there be many such among the Turks, who being for the most part
slaves do fight for fear of punishment, rather than for love of true glory.

These armies should be ready as well by land as by sea, to march At what time
the Christian power should begine their war and how.
wheresoever they shall be appointed at the beginning of May. But all the
difficulty rests in knowing how to invade, for we may proceed therein after
sundry manees. I would think that the Christians should wholly purpose at the
beginning of their war to grow to battle with these barbarous people: for
since their Empire consists only upon the good will of nations, we shall see
wonderful alterations, if at the first ariual they may in^ur^e any notable
overthrow: But it is a question whether they may be easily drawn thereto:
for commonly we see that if the enemy perceive his adversaries devises, he
will still seek to lead him to contrary purposes. This do I confess to be
often put in practice: but we are to hope with so mighty and proud enemies as
the Turks, that it will fall out as with a great Boar whom the dogs have
het: for what soever he first sees, man or dog, by and by he makes toward
it with wonderful fury.

We never found in writing that they have been slow to battle, for that they
still seek to uphold the reputation of their name and armies. When they hear
of the Christians preparation to wars, they proceed in like sort, and before
we can come within 50. leagues of their frontiers, they are so diligent that
they have sacked halte ours. Whereby we know that they would soon cover the
visard, as we say: and having thoroughly considered hereof, I find that it
would be a great advantage unto us: for the hear and fury of Northern
nations is at the first very forcible, but by delays quaileth.

Now let us see wherein the land army should consist, namely, in 18000.
Reistres, 10000. spears armed after the French and Italian The troops of the
army that should march by land.
manner, 2000. harquebuzes on horseback, and 10000. Hungarian and Polonian
spears to serve for light horsemen. For the power must be received, each after
the manner of his own nation. The footmen to be composed of 20000.
harquebuziers and 30000 spears, in all amounting to 40000. horse and 50000.
footmen, all fighting men.

Likewise for artillery for the field, twenty Canons, and twenty great
Culuerines, accompanied with the pioners aforesaid, and virtuall sufficient for
such an army. The thinking of all this makes us to rejoice, but when we
dream upon the expenses, it danteth us: for it will require monthly 800000.
Crowns, which rises to a great deal in a whole year. Furthermore, least
such an army if it should go far from the great rivers, or enter into the
land, should be much hindered for want of victuals and forage, it shall be
forced to keep along the river of Danow, and there to begin their first
purposes, so might they abound in all necessary provision, which should be
brought by the same. It is also meet to have a bridge of boats accompanied
with armed galleys to follow it, so to keep both shores of the said river as
well for forages as for the siege of such places as stand thereupon.

I think that Strigonia is one of the first places that the Turks Their first
endeavors.
hold: but neither it, nor any other that they possess are (as I understand)
of any strength: for when they doubt that any shall be assalted they put in 8.
or 10000. soldiers, and look for no other fortification: and it is hard
with ordinary means only to wreast from them any that is in their hands.
Wherefore whether they should fortune to be the first or the last in the
field, I am of opinion, to the end to bind them to fight, it were good to
make show and that in earnest, to set upon some places of importance, thereby
to make them to approach with their army, so as they should hardly escape
battle, when they are come so near with their carriage, footmen, and
artillery. For when they come but with thirty or forty thousand horse to
succor what so is besieged, they cannot by any means be overcome by reason
of the swiftenesse of their horse, which nevertheless does greatly molest a
camp. I would also like very well, that in ten or twelve days before
Their exercises.
the army should march, the Captains every other day should cast them
into several orders of battle, whereby to choose the best to help themselves
withal when need should require. For it do much better conceive the truth
of things by lively representations, than by forecast figured upon paper: And
by them is the general the better resolved in his conception, and the
inferior Captains to be the better provided to the practice.

Herein do we in our petty wars ordinarily fail, in that we never
look to the ordering of battayles until within two days before we must
fight: and then does the General set down a fair order in writing how
be will have it, which he sends unto the leaders of the regimentes as well
of the horsemen as of the footmen. For such ordering many times, as being
made over rashly and without ripe deliberation, proves very unfit. The
ordering thereof in war.


It is very requisite that a General be in mind very perfect in the order
which he purposes to observe as well in the large fields as in the
straightes, least he be amazed, or driven into much consultation when his
business comes upon him. For the chief grounds being well laid, if
through any accident the order be to be altered, it is easily performed.
There be some that will say, that in so doing we shall warn the enemy of
our order, whereby he may provide to prevent us.

I grant if we still use but one form, it may be so. But when we practice
sundry, we shall put all men in doubt which we will cleave unto, saving the
General, who is to reserve the best in memory. For the well ordering of this
army, it were good to have the advice of such Captains as having served in
Hungary, do by experience best know the most convenient forms. And since I
am entered so far into this point, I am content for the satisfying of those
yt be curious, to deliver my opinion concerning whatsoever may serve against
these barbarous people. In this case we are to consider of two kinds of
countries, ye one large, ye other straight. Concerning ye large or plain, as
we term it, which is the most part of Hungary, the battle may be so
aranged, that the enemies innumerable strength of horse (which will amou^t to
200000 at the least) shall not without great loss endomage them, and very
hardly break them.

The order were to dispearse the horsemen among the footmen, as Their order in
a large contry.
upon the like consideration the late Duke of Guize did at the battle of Dreux.
I would therefore make a strong body of my army consisting of eight
battayles of footmen, each comprehending 2500 pikes, so as the said ranks
should every of them contain ninety men, and be 28. men thick, besides the
Ensigns, and to the flanks would I join 1000 harquebuziers. They should be all
ordered in an equal front with sufficient spaces to set in araie 2000. horse in
four squadrons, each of them of five hundred men, and forty horse in front,
two somewhat for warder than the other two. These seven spaces might serve
them for places of advantage, and assured retraits to fall into order again:
for it would be too hot to come upon them into place where they should be so
succored by the harquebuzerie and pikes: yea, in my mind it were mere
rashness. Likewise in as much as the flanks of the battayles are not commonly
armed but with harquebuziers, which is but a weak defense against a great
army of horse, I would think it were good both the flanks of the two
battayles standing upon the wings of the army to be fortefied with some
other instruments like unto those which the Duke of Alua invented and used
when the Prince of Orange passed over Meuse or better, which might be easily
brought thither by two hundred pioners, and those should suffice for one of
each flanks: as for the rest they shall need none, as well for that the force
of this order shall supply that want, as also because it would be
ouercumbersome. On the right and left point without the battayles should stand
at each six thousand horse, every squadron of one thousand, and in two bodies
the one to support the other. And if any man ask wherefore I make them so
great, I say, it is because the Turks, as I have heard, do make theirs
(especially in any great combats) of five or six thousand spears, which
swallowe up three hundred horse, as a lion would do a mouse. And therefore we
must set strength against strength. Then would I divide my 5000.
harquebuziers into ten troops, placing six, as it were, for the adventurers,
at the heads of the battayles toward the wings, and the other four at the
tail. I would also place two thousand harquebuziers on horseback at ye head of
the horsemen upon the wings to serve in the first skirmishes. Thus do ye see
in this great body 28000. horse, 20000. Corcelets, and 13000. harquebuzes
aranged which as I think, will not take above 4000. common paces in length,
wherein there is no great disproportion: and I have thus stretched it out to the
end to debar the enemy from all hope of enclosing it. There would be
likewise in ye first rank of this great front almost 1900. men, which is
sufficient. The rest of the men I would thus appoint. I would make two small
bodies, which should be set in array 800. paces behind the two wings of the
army: because the first shockes do begin there. In either of them would I
place 4500. Corcelets in two battles and 2500. Harquebuzes: then in the
spaces and points 4000. horse in eight squadrons, which for the two bodies
would amount unto 22000. men: every whereof should stir when they perceived
any of the first troops to yield: for undoubtedly they should so make them to
hold fast. I would also place between these two troops and 500. paces
behind them 3000. horse in three squadrons, whom the Emperor, or in his
absence his Lieutenant should accompany when it were requisite to fight: And
this should be the Holy ancker, as we term it, which should upon great
necessity move forward. Yet do there remain 1000. Corcelets, 2000.
Harquebuzes, and 1000. Reistres or Hungarian horsemen, that should be appointed
to the keeping of the Camp, which the Pioners should fortify with small
trenches for the safeguard of the cariages: for if through negligence the
enemy, who might appoint twenty or thirty thousand horse to do the feate,
should peradventure be suffered to sack it, we should afterward be driven
through the inconveniences both general and particular to break up our Camp.
This army thus ordered were able in my opinion to stand in a plain field
against ye whole power of the Turks, who being destitute of Corcelets, Pikes
and armed squadrons, can hardly overthrow our battles. We see likewise how
our horse are surely provided for in the spaces: whereby I suppose that either
the enemy must be endued with an extraordinary valor, or our men show great
cowardlinesse if they lose the battle. This order have I not here set down
as the best of all: for other men may peradventure devise some more convenient:
but it is done to the end to inuit sundry Captains to seek what may be
more profitable.

The Christian army thus in presence of the Turks, they after a few Canon
shot I presume they will begin, both because they be Of the battle by land
between the Christians and Turks.
very proud, and also that they be ordinarily four against one, which
greatly embouldeneth them, and will peradventure come with some three or
fourscore thousand horse to charge gallantly upon the flanckes of our foremost
horse, yea even in the midst of the head: but I would think they should at
this onset be well beaten and repulsed with ye loss of some four or five
thousand horse: howbeit their horse being very swift, they will return behind
their maine battle to fall in array again. Then I imagine that having
discharged some two volees of their Artillery, whereof they have plenty, they
will give a strong charge with their whole body: whereof so much as should
strike into the battles or spaces would be handled God knows how. But
peradventure the horsemen on the flanckes may be overthrown: which so
happening, the other 2. small bodies appointed for their support should move:
who finding the victorers in disorderly pursuit (which always for the most
part happens) should so bravely invade them, as also should some of the
Squadrons, who stepping out of the spaces aforesaid, should come upon their
slanckes, that they should be quite broken. So should also their
Harquebuzerie, being joined with ours, bear the punishment of their rashness.
Nevertheless, the Christians should not indiscreetly pursue them, for they are
very skillful in rallying themselves, and would peradventure so do within two
Canon shot, and so enclose four or five thousand of the most eager upon the
chase, as their forefathers did D. John of Burgundy, and all the French
Nobility in their battle against Amurathes. Wherefore, it were requisite for
the whole Christian army to march and send after them some twenty thousand
horse by squadrons, each supporting other, except the Hungarian and Polonian
horse, who might go more dispersedly in chase. And it may seem enough to
chase them thus one league. To be brief, I suppose that in so notable a
journey they might be defeated of half their footmen, all their Artillery
and cariages, and above twenty thousand horse: but in case but one quarter of
such an exployt were at the first performed, yet would it breed great
reputation, and in the Soldiers hearts confirm a confidence to overcome. For
he who in war wins the first advantages, conceiueth a great hope of the
issue.

Now must we speak one word of the straight countries. It Of the ordring of
the army in the straights.
seems the army to be there in more safety then in the large, by reason of
the great numbers of their footmen: and there if the enemy should offer upon
them, they might alter their order according to the places, being still
diligent to keep their advantages of the Woods, Uallies and Artillery. But
especially they ought to beware of aranging their body in any such sort, that
the first overthrown should strike into the second: for that was the loss of
the battle of Poictiers, where King John had fifty thousand men, and the
English were but ten thousand. This so favorable success once obtained, no
doubt afterward (the rest of the great Artillery provided at Vienna being
caused to march) we might in three months take from them four or five of the
best towns standing upon Danowe, as Strigon, Bude, Pest and others, which the
enhabitants there about do better know. True it is there would be great
lettes, and the Turkish army, being refreshed, would not fail to favor their
places, where we might see brave skirmishes. In the mean time, we to keep
that earnest for our first years work: I leave to your imagination whether
all Christendom would rejoice, when they should hear of such a victory
obtained over those who for these two hundred years have but tryumphed of our
destruction. Yea even the small babes would sing forth the praises of such
valiant personages, by whom such notable exploytes should have been performed.

Now let us come to the Navy, which being so mighty must Of the exploits of
the navy.
not the whiles lie idely in the Havens, but make sail to execute matters
worthy thereof. My best counsel were that it should conform it self to the
land power, in trying to bring the enemy to a day of battle: which
peradventure might be easily done, as being of no less pride by Sea then by
land: so as seeing us draw toward Greece, they will by and by be upon our
army, neither shall we need to counterfaite the besiedging of any place to
bring them thereto. And since the battle of Lepanto has made them wise, the
Christians must also be well resolved in their inventions and other necessary
means to attain to the victory. There are other reasons, besides the equity
of a cause and urgent necessity, that stir up men to fight courageously: As
the presence of noble persons which detest cowardlinesse and exalt prowess:
secondly the Captains orations, wherein they exhort their soldiers to behave
themselves manfully in solemn journeys: Thirdly, confidence which increases
when we see men well disposed and the army well ordered: Finally hope of
reward, which is a good spur to such purposes. And above all other the
Spanish and Italian Captains are meetest to take order herein, in whom, being
accompanied with choice of valiant persons, we are to think that neither
order, courage, nor provocation shall want. I will forbear to discourse of the
putting of Nauies in array, as one not so skillful in Sea matters,
notwithstanding the order by Don John observed at Lepanto, I have always
thought to be most convenient and well invented.

Some too fearful or over circumspect person may say, that the That the
armies as well by land as by sea should invade, and how.
hazarding of all our strength at once is the way to bring all Christendom
into great danger. Whereto I answer, that he which voluntarily enters the
carrier, does purpose to run: and so he that shippeth himself in a war, as
the assailant, must adventure, otherwise all his former preparations and
threats are in vain. For it is a greater danger to suffer a man's self to be
by little and little devoured and to do nothing. An other as far too eager,
considering of all this power, would to the contrary that we should march
directly to Constantinople, and not to stay else where: but as this speech is a
token of courage, so is it a sign of small experience (at the least as I
think) because armies march not in post. Moreover, they do ordinarily meet
with bars and stops which they must first break. For undoubtedly the Turks
being certified of these great preparations of the Christians both by sea and
by land, will set against them three hundred thousand fighting men, against
whom they must march with leaden heels and Iron hands, and take as great heed
of oversight by rashness as by retchlesnesse, especially in actions of great
importance.

Now presuppose the Turks Navy do offer to fight with us: I must not think
our Soldiers to be by sea any whit of less discretion, courage and felicity
then upon the land: for I make certain account of their victory. But admit
these barbarous people purposing only to try our men should fight near to
their advantages, and then having lost twenty or thirty galleys should retire
to the covert of their Towns and Castles: yet should we so win great fame
and be thought bold that durst adventure to invade them even in the face of
some of their Houlds. Then if any man's courage so increased as needs he would
to Constantinople, we might tell him that besides the reasons before named, we
should be too far of, and that the Turkish army will still be as strong as
the Christian. Again, that although we had more favorable success, yet were
it too much presumption to think at once to win that proud City, without
any army by land, within two hundred leagues thereof: as also that if they
should perceive that we would take that course, they would presently thrust in
twenty thousand Soldiers, and bring as many horsemen into the field to
favor it, all which they might raise in Natolie. And hereupon we are to note
that Mahumet the second at the taking thereof besieged it with two mighty
armies, one by sea, an other by land: the Christians having at that time but
fifteen or sixteen thousand men to defend it. But our best counsel were to
bestow the time until the end of September in conquering of Moroca, inuading
the same at the head, namely by Coron and Modon, either by those Castles that
keep the mouth of the gulf of Leganto, to the end afterward to fortify it
after our best manner at the falling of that piece of an I Will where the famous
city of Corinth was in old time builded. The like enterprise made Andrew
Dorie in the year 1532. who by force took Coron, Patras, and Lepanto, places
which were afterward lost again for lack of succor. Having therefore left a
strong garrison of footmen in the conquered places, seven or eight hundred
horses, and provision of victualles sufficient with thirty galleys, whose
slaves might serve for Pyoners, the rest of the Nanie might be dismissed
until the spring. These through Gods great favor might be the effects of the
first year.

Now are we to discourse of the effects of the second year, when The
continuation of the war in the second year with the order to be taken as well
by sea as by land.
I think we should not find the Turk so proud as before: but much more
wary and advised: for experience teaches those things which otherwise we
neither would nor could know. The armies should be ready to march in the
beginning of May, with like purpose again to come to battle if the Turks
would offer it. But if they list to take a surer course and not to attempt any
thing out of season, then must the Captains show forth their brave policies,
whereby to force them to the combat without their Houlds, as Hanniball did,
who by subteltie drew the Romans to three battles, which he won soon
after his ariuall in Italy. The most ordinary means to be practiced to that
intent, is to besiege places of importance: for if this move not the enemy to
hazard himself, it is a sign of small courage and less force. I doubt not
but into those which they mind to use to delay us withal, they will put 8. or
10000. Soldiers, well victualled and furnished with all sorts of munition,,
whiles themselves will lodge their army some six leagues of to relieve them
as aportunitie may shall ser^is. And to say the truth such exployts will be
difficult, chiefly for any town standing upon this great River: But that must
be no let but that we proceed and with plenty of Pyoners, and instruments
enowe to set teme thousand men on work, we raise trenches both offensive and
desensiur, and build as many Fortes as may be requisite for the more
convenient assaulting of the besieged, and safe defense against the enemies
army, using withal whatsoever our bridges. And I think certainly that up
planting fifty Canons before such places as may be but weakly fortified, we
shall in four days see breach sufficient for a horse to go in at. Then
coming to haudie blows with them, we being strong and they weak, and
withal having the advantage of the quality and goodness of our armor, may
easily he we them in pieces, unless Christian courtesy list to spare any.
During these actions it will stand our horsemen on hand to be very
watchful, in going to safeconduct the bictuall and forage: wherein may be
brave enterprises, and either part may lay great ambushes, to try the
sufficiency of the Captains, together with the baliancie of the younger
sort. And if the first year we may reach to Bude; I think that, in the
second we may reach unto place where Drove falls into Danowe. This done the
imperial power should be placed in foam convenient ground to underprop this
new couquest, until the towns convenient to be kept for the assurance of
passage be fortified and made defensible: then to retire to their garrisons to
pass over the wiuter. Concerning the Navy, time of year coming on it should
set forward to the I Will of Negroponte, to put the Turk therefro: which if
their army should peradventure offer to let, then the same to be fought
withal: For in this expedition, the watch word should be Fight: but if they
lie aloof, then to go forward with their enterprise. But still this is to be
noted, that assailing the land, they must always be provided as if themselves
should be assailed by sea. Then having diligently fortifled the best Havens
with men, virtuall and vessels, the army might sco^^e some part of the
entries into the great Ocean, and so to rec^i^e to wintering.

Hitherto have I said nothing of the enhabitants of Greece, Of the nations of
Greece: the Turks bondmen.
who have long groned after their deliuexie, because I wot not what service may
be rea^ed at their hands* (...), as the boyce goes, their courages are so
quayled through the great tyraunie that mo^esseth them, and they so unprovided
of weapons and martial knowledge, that I dure not ad^owe that they would make
any great stir so soon. In all those Provinces; lying on this side of
Constantinople, which together are at this day called Romania, there be many
more Christians then Turks: and in many places for four Turkish families we
shall find above ten Christian: but they be so quayled and terrified, that
when they be laid on with slaves they dare not complain.

Some man will laugh at me sore for iudgeing the events of war, as if they
should fall out as I prescribe them: But I am not so presumpe^ous as to imagine
that men can forsee the things that are to them unknown. For I do only
discourse here upon by likely reasons, leaning unto certain rules and
experiences as men are accustomed in human affairs: as also I speak of
Countries, Towns, Rivers, and Passages; not that I have been there, but by
noting their ^^ituation in the Cards: and withal to cause the common forte to
conceiue-good hope in this enterprise, knowing well enough that in matter
concerning battles, men do ordinarily take counsel in the field, and it is
the proper duty of the Captains there present to deliberate upon such
matters.

The third year comining on, I think the like cheerfulness Of the exploits
and behauiors of both the Christian armies the third year.
as had moved so many brave warriers to employe themselves in the two former,
would still be of like force in them. And albeit the enemies Iron, their own
passed labors and sickness shall have taken some away, yet many other, who
hitherto shall not have stirred from home, being desirous to perticipate in the
common commendation, would go to supplye the empty roumes, so as there would
be no want of men. The time to take the field thus drawing on, the army by
land having passed Drove, should march to the river of Save, whether it is not
past twenty Hungarian leagues: here do I not think that the barbarous people
will meet with them in gross by the way, but rather employe their whole
studies and endeavors to stop their passages over the river, which is such an
advantage as (being good Captains) they will prevail of. Upon those terms
may a man see on both sides the practice of all sorts of brave policies and
inventions. But because experience has always taught that a mighty river can
hardly bridle a mighty army (for if they can not pass under the favor of
some commodious place together with their Artillery; they will do it by
subteltie, dallying in one part while they cast their bridges and doing their
endeavors in an other) I will speak no more thereof, saving that I am
persuaded that they may compass it in eight days. This done, the most
profitable exployt will consist in the assault of Belgrade, a famous town
standing upon the fall of Save into Danowe, neither have any action be(...), in
my opinion, of greater difficulty then this. For besides that we shall find
the-towne well provided for defense, we must also have an especial eye to the
Turkish army, which will not be far of: keep some great bridge upon Save:
have an other passage on the side of Danowe: make Fortes and Trenches: and go
safely on forraging with conducts, so as the taking of it were a notable piece
of work. And to judge thereof, may we not boldly say that those that are
accustomed to conquer, will surmount all these difficulties: This place once
won, must speedily be repaired and a strong garrison left therein: as being
the most convenient place to establish a great storehouse wherein to gather all
necessary provision. There about do there fall three great rivers not far
asunder into Danowe: namely Drove, Save, and Tibise, which springs about the
borders of Transiluania, which are as great at the Rhine or Mense, By these
four channels might we bring all commodities, in case we first take order
that the Turks remaining in some places in the heart of the country molest
not the boats. Also because we shall not have spent past half the year, the
rest may be employed in driving them forth, which peradventure may be easily
done.

Having thus spoken of the exployts of the land power, we must The exployts of
the navy.
likewise say somewhat of the Navy, which in the beginning of May should make
sail toward the conquered I Will of Negroponte: where if the Turkish were
desirous of battle, it should not be refused: but if it would not adventure,
but lie in wait for good opportunity, the best devise were to surprise and
force the town of Salonike, in old time called Thessalonica, which is in the
borders of Macedon upon the sea coast, and being but weak might soon be
won. Then by all means possible to devise how to make it defensible, because
it were good there to leave a strong garrison both of footmen and horsemen to
scour the country. Here it is to be noted, that whatsoever were to be left
in the conquered Houlds should be an overplus of men above the number: for the
armies both by sea and land should still retain their number furnished
according as is prescribed, to the end to be always prepared to the
battle. We might as well have enterprised upon the coasts of Sclauonia,
where the Turks do keep many towns, but by seasing upon these, which are
more easy to be taken, we shall come behind them, and so make them think as
well upon flight as fight. Having thus soiourned there one month or two, it
might scour the Isles of the maine sea, as well to the end to sack all the
Turks there to be found, as also to assure the Christian enhabitants. It may
be the Turks fearing the first heat of the Christians, may suffer our army
to try it self two or three months in the siedges of Forts, and then while
they be al occupied about some one place, to come upon them fresh and lustely
as they did at Gerbes where the Spanish forces were defeated: for the which the
Spaniards likewise toward the end of the siedge of Malta in part requited
them and ouerthrewe five or six thousand Turks. For this inconvenience I hope
the Captains will well enough provide for being surprised: and before our
army withdraw to their wintering, it were good to leave forty galleys in the
I Will of Candy, there to be ready upon need. In the winter time likewise it
were not amiss on the edge of Hungary to deal with the Walachians and
Moldanians, the Turks subjects, though his great enemies, in respect of their
remembrance of the injuries and mischiefs lately inflicted upon them, to
procure them to rise against them, and to send some choice of men waged to
join with the Christian forces, or to work any other profitable commotions.
As for the Transiluanians, the Turks tributaries, they will also be easily
stirred up: so as this supplye would stand us in great stead to withstand
the Tartarians, if peradventure the Turks should procure them to invade
Christendom, to the end to turn away our power from them. For 50000. Ducats
by month they can cause 50000. horsemen to march, who as Grasshoppers do make
innumerable waste. It were good also at the same time to practice with the
enhabitants of Greece to declare themselves at the next spring, when they
should see the armies both by land and sea set forward, and so fall upon the
Turks scattered and dwelling in those Provinces.

The effects of the fourth year which we have appointed for Of the exployts
and effects of both the armies in the fourth and last year of their wars
against the Turks.
the end of this glorious conquest, should be more notable then the former:
wherefore it were most expedient that the good union of the Princes should
continue, least necessary provision should fail. Neither is it likely but it
should persevere, considering that prosperity having always accompanied these
enterprises, every man replenished with hope would strain himself to attain
to the wished end. With greater courage therefore and the same men of other
years should the whole army by land take the field more tymely then
aforetyme. At Belgrade should there be already provided plenty of munition
for the Artillery, with a surplusage of two thousand horse to perform the
furniture thereof, and three hundred Chariots for victuals at the least: for
going from thence they must give over the rivers. Thus should they march to
perform their work toward the town of Sophy, which is the beginning of
Bulgarie: for that do the Cards show to be the direct way to
Constantinople, not past two hundred french leagues therfro. It stands in a
plain and is unfortified. It is likely the Turks will not there make their
head, but having gotten out the enhabitants, and either consumed or transported
the victuals, that they will leave quite empty and go to Philippopoli, there
to make up their whole camp. The same is a town of Thrace, and famous through
the battle that Brutus and Cassius there lost. It stands in a fruitful
soil upon a small hill, at the foot whereof runs a small river scarce
wadeable. This were a fit place and well chosen to make great resistance, yea
and to hazard a field: for it is not so near their Empire that by the loss
of a field they may being in fears be prevented, neither so far of but
that they may, if Fortune so far frown upon them, there gather up good
relliques of their army: wherefore I suppose they will fight there, yea and
their Emperor came thither in person: And how can he suffer us to invade him
even to his den and not defend himself after the examples of the noblest
beasts? Albeit also that this nation be replenished with all injustice and
cruelty, yet are they withal fierce and hardy, and such as make great
account of their reputation. The Christians likewise should have matter whereon
to increase their hope, considering there are no more great Rivers or strong
Houldes before they come to Constantinople: their only hinderance will be a
mighty army to resist them, whereat valiant persons do rejoice: neither is
there any other thing that troubles them but when they are forced to fight
against Hunger, Thirst, Sickness, great heat or extreme cold, because there
is no virtue but may be suppressed by such inconveniences.

The Christian army may, as I suppose, ariue at Philippopoli about the midst
of June, where if the Turks should be entrenched, and lodged in any ground of
advantage, it will be hard pulling of them forth: But because they have never
used so to do, especially their Emperor being present, I will rather presume
that they will after their wonted manner come bouldly into the field, as did the
first Bajazet against Tamerlane, notwithstanding his army were innumerable. I
think the Turkish power would amount unto 220000. men, and the Christians to
fourscore thousand: for some must have been left in the last wars in
garrisons, and some to safeconduct victualles, etc. And I dare assure that as
well the one part as the other will be well bent to overcome, because this
battle should be as it were a definitive sentnce of the whole war. Of the
order I will not speak, for if the same which I have before prescribed be not
good, they may devise of a better, and there refer the event to God, who (as
we are to hope) will favor those that worship him, against such as do
dishonor him.

When I consider with my self of this great war and stately Of what
importance this war against the Turk is in respect of all other wars.
armies, and confer them with our small ones in these parts, I remember the
answer of Alexander to Antipater, whom he left in Macedonia at his going to
the conquest of Asia. Antipater wrote unto him that certain of his enemies
were risen against him and had already brought into the field ten or twelve
thousand men, and therefore did desire him to send him succor: he returned
him this answer: All your small wars in Macedonia, now that I fight against
the mighty armies of Daryus, and am conquering of the great Empire of Asia,
do seem unto me to be battles between Cattes and Rattes, and therefore
resist them as well as you may.

Some man may say, that sometime in our civil wars we may note some brave
martial exploytes, albeit with small power, as at the battles of Dreux, S.
Denis, Montcontour fought in France, with the siedges of Roan and Rochell: also
seven or eight great overthrows in Flanders, with the siedges of Harlem,
Maistrict, Tournay and Oudenard: I grant it: howbeit they are no whit to be
compared to the battle of Lepanto which D. John won. As also I believe the
siedge of Malta which withstoode four score thousand Canon shot, and that of
Nicosia in Cyprus, which as some write bare out fifteen, are to be preferred
before the before alleged. The wars against Infidels are the same which our
brave Captains and soldiers ought to seek 100. leagues of, where they ought
likewise to flee 50. from the civil, which by their continual course do
devour and consume, and that with small husbandry the flower of kingdoms and
Commonwelths.

I need not to deseribe the manner of this great battle, for we must imagine
that in the former conflicts were never seen such Of the principal battle
against the Turks.
stomachs or so furious charges. To be brief, after three hours fight I
suppose they will leave us but a bloody victory: But such as may there
perish, shall build to themselves more honorable sepulchers than those that are
purchased by particular quarrels, wherein the souls do for the most part
encurre shipwreck. In this case shall their desire be just, and their cause
good, both which conjoined with that excellent courage that many shall have
here showed, will breed perpetual renown, which shall yet crown the
posterity of noble persons that still may remain. The Turks thus overthrown
and their camp spoiled, we shall be driven to soiourne eight or ten days
at Philippopoli, which after this great loss would make no resistance, to rest
our selves and provide for the wounded: and there were it requisite to hazard
sundry Greeks severally to go to carry news of this good success to
Salonike, as also to send the Navy word, to the end the same might draw
toward Constantinople: for it were hard to besiedge it without both the powers
togethers. The Turks loss in this battle cannot be such but he shall save
130000. men, of whom some may scatter over the country to see to the
preservation of their families which they may have left so abroad, but the
great body will draw toward Constantinople with their Emperor, there to make
their last resistance, for in the plain field dare they show themselves no
more. Because also the town is nothing strong, we must imagine they would with
all diligence raise fortifications of earth, make their planes, and erect their
spurs to plant their Artillery upon: All the victual also there about would
they take into the town, leaving for the defense thereof at the least forty
thousand men: but for their great Lord, it is to be presumed that he would
pass forward into Natolia, which is the lesser Asia, with all his treasure and
Concubines, there to provide for new succor.

Our power by land according as they could make their preparations, The
following of the victory.
should by little and little set forward, leaving a sufficient garrison in
Philippopoli to keep the ways. Thence should it pass to Adrianople, a great
City, which being very weak, would never make resistance: where also it were
good to leave some garrison, and there to lay up whatsoever victualles might
be gotten, whereof, through diligence we should never want. This order were
likewise to be observed, That the Soldier should never spoil any but of the
Turkish nation: also that all Christians should be exempt from pillage and
servitude: so would they bring you in virtuals from fifty leagues about. Also
good order and severe justice ought to be established in great armies,
otherwise through the multitude of wicked and unthrifty persons all would
run into confusion, were not their malice by such means brideled and
punished. During three or four days rest at Adrianople, we must cause our
Navy to set forward, whereto, hearing of this good success it will not be
very slack. It should draw toward the straights of Hellespont, where it is
likely the Turks remembering their losses and not willing rashly to hazard,
using the advantage of the place, will settle themselves to fight, where they
may be flancked with the artillery of the Castles: besides that they shall
have that commodity that they cannot be assailed without four score or an
hundred galleys in front.

The first day that our army should show it self to the enemy The exp(...)
of the Navy
in good order to behold their countenance they will discharge sundry Canons,
which must be answered with the like: and so to retire considering the
strength of the place. In the evening they should take counsel, and the
expert Mariners to give their opinions how to attempt nothing out of season.
Finally, the Captains should resolve to land some of their men and artillery
on the side of Europe to beat and take some one of the Castles, to the end to
displace the Turks from this advantage: considering they shall there find but
four or five hundred horse on that side, where on the side of Asia they shall
meet with above two thousand. By break of day they must put forth four
thousand Corcelets, six thousand Harquebuziers, and thirty Canons out of the
galleys, landed by the forsats or gallie slaves. While they shall thus march,
the enemies horse will come to provoke them, but the number of Musket shot
shall scatter them well enough: So soon as night is come they shall make their
approaches to the forteresse and the artillery bring planted, they shall by
break of day fall to beating of it. This will make the Turks to provide to
bring upon them twenty thousand men to cut them in pieces: or else with some
150. galleys to invade our Navy there to do the like, since they shall find
it unfurnished. But the Turks liking best of this second counsel, will seek
to put in execution. Which our army perceiving, they must go on half the way
with their furnished galleys, which may be about two hundred, and so each
army divided into three parts to join bouldly: but after a long hours fight
our men having the victory, scarce the third part of the enemies galleys
shall save themselves. The same time also may the Castle that our men shall have
besiedged, after the brunt of a furious assault be taken. Thus should we
become masters of this proud passage where Xerxes built a wonderful bridge
of vessels, and such as shall be escaped, amounting to some one hundred
galleys, may carry the news of their mishappe to Constantinople. Our men
having then soiourned there five or six days, as well to provide for their
wounded, as to take the other Castle, having put good garrisons into both shall
take the way to Constantinople, where they may ariue within two days after the
army by land. Then on both sides knowing of the arrival of their long looked
for and victorious forces, it is not to be demanded what joys there will be.

But we may in truth affirm this last deed to be more difficult then the
rest. For a battle, though well fought is but one Of the siege, assaults and
taking of Constantinople.
days work, whereas the forcing of so many men, covered with rampires and
provided of all provision to be achieved in two months, is a testimony of
the experience of the Captains and valiancie of the Soldiers. The land army
being come within two leagues of the town, the best Captains with 20000.
horse and 7. or 8000. Harquebuziers should go within half a league thereof to
discover the lodgings, and well to consider what may anoye or empeach their
safety. Neither is it to be doubted but they may thereby grow to a hot
skirmish: for the Turks being so strong in the town will show their
couragies and small astonishment. The next day they shall come to take their
lodgings betime, and to furnish themselves with some slight trenches at the
head and midst of the flanckes. To the end also the Navy may confer with
the land power, and safely send their provisions, it will be good at every
thousand steps to make small fortes with trenches for the safety of the
passages from the sea, about which works both the Pyoners and the most part
of the Soldiers may labor 7. or 8. days. This done, they should go nearer
to discover the town, whereon they must stay at the least four or five days:
for my self have ordinarily seen that of hasty and rash discoueries have
ensued great ouersights. Now must we look what way will be best to give the
assault, which I would wish to do but in one place: for separating the army
the guard of the trenches may prove too weak, and so not be able to bear
their sailies. I would not think it amiss to place 6000. Corcelets, and as
many Harquebuziers at the least, with 3000. horse upon the flanckes in some
place under covert, having also the whole body of the army to support them,
which should not be above a Canonshot of. The first trench should be made a
thousand paces from the Camp in form defensive, with convenient flanckers,
and two long wings of five or six hundred paces stretching toward the camp:
also to the end not to be easily environed behind by any sudden sailie, it
should be made large enough to take 10000. men. The second should come within
500. paces of the town, in form offensive, and at every 100. paces some small
circuit of Gabions for ye Ensigns to retire into, with a strong guard where
they may fight a whole quarter of an hour. Within 20. paces farther they
should place 25. Canons on three Gabions to shoot at the defenses, the same to
be defended by day with the harquebuzery of the trenches, and by night by some
small defensive trench on each side. Now think ye how many of their pieces may
be dismounted in 5. or 6. days from of their new fortifications made in have.
In this siedge it will be requisite to proceed with all diligence and force:
for when they give a mighty people time, the same does in one month build a
new town, having to work but the length of 500. paces. Being once sure of
the artillery within, they should begin to make the great battery, bringing
their pieces within 200. paces of the wall, and there planting them with all
possible assurance, they should make but two breaches, howbeit those to be
both large and reasonable, whereupon fifty Canons assisted with the favor of
ten long Culuerings having plaide some six days, it is likely that the horses
may pass. I will not speak of their saillies, skirmishes and other kinds of
combats ordinarily to be performed, as being generally better to be imagined
then perticulerly foreseen. Then ought the old to give counsel: the young
to adventure: and those of middle age to preserve: In sum, every man should
look for a share in the well doing. By Sea likewise other enterprises as well
great as small wherewith to surprise were to be dealt in, in such sort as this
mortal and bloody tragedy might be beautified with the diversity of so
many new actions.

forty years in this barbarous nations possession, shall be restored to the
ancient owners. Their Emperor Mahumet was 54. days about the winning of it,
and we shall not be much more than two months, not withstanding it were
defended with a far greater power. But he in his victory used all kind of
cruelty, insolency and v^lanie, which are utterly to be shunned: and to the
contrary we ought to use all gentleness and moderation to ward the people: as
wishing rather their conversion, and Jesus Christ honored in their temples,
than to see their bloody bodies scattered all over the streets, although it
be to be presumed, that many will be slain in the heats thereof: neither will
the soldiers be slack in gathering up so plentiful a pray, as in deed
they shall have deserved some recompense: but the valyant minds will never
stand thereupon, but be content with the honor and some faushion, or such
like thing to bring home and hang in their closets, that their children seeing
so honorable spoils of their parents conquest in so honorable a place, may
remember to initate their virtue.

The hystories do report that three days after the winning thereof, The
behauiors after the Conquest.
Mahumet went to the temple of Saint Sophie to give solemn thanks to his false
God: much rather ought yt Christians therefore to sing holy Hymns to the true
God whom they worship: and to sound forth the same, not in the temples only,
but also in the high ways and open fields for his favor in atchieuing so
triumphant and long wished a victory. Then order being taken to prevent all
mutiny among the nations for the pillage, and having limited the^ a time to
ordain thereof, the soldiers should be sent to lodge each in his quarter,
except such as should be chosen to keep the Town, and then should they also
take order for the enhabiting thereof with government convenient. In as much
also as great numbers of the Turks may be retired into sundry towns in the
inward part of the land, it were good to send two armies, each consisting of
fifteen thousand men, with artillery convenient to scour the same. Like wise
to send forth an hundred or six score Galleies to bring all the coasts under
the Christian obedien^e. The pioners al, so to be retained for the for tefying
of Constantinople, wherein it were good to lodge sieve regiments of footmen for
the guard thereof with two thousand spears, and to leave fifty Galleyes in the
haven.

Farther, if Autumn should be any thing begun, in which season it is no good
trauayling either by sea or by land, the armies should be divided into
garrisous in the most meet places in Greece, Thrace, and other Provinces:
neither were it amiss for the Emperors majesty there to keep his Winter
with the assistance of the counsel of the Princes confederate, to the end
their countenance might cut off such disorders and insolences as usually wait
upon prosperity.

These things thus executed, it were good (as is said in the beginning)
Partition of the Conquest.
to look to the partition of the land that shall have been conquered: and
according to the expenses of each Prince and common wealth in these conquests,
to adiudge to them their just desert. Like wise to reserve sundry places for
such brave Captains as may have behaved themselves valiantly and done any
notable service. But I think it were better to stay the division until we
have the thing, rather than now to discourse thereof in vain, ouely we are to
imagine, that if we agree in the conquest, we will not fall out in the
partition.

But some man may here scoffingly say, that I have discoursed bravely in
paper, and my self will confess as much: howbeit he cannot deny but such a
troop as I have here described, being in the field, would become it better,
and I am sorry we are not already come to it, that we might with the swoorde
perform that which I have now shadowed with the pen. My intent is only to
waken the Christians, and to beat it into them, nevertheless if in my
speeches I have strayed in some points thorough want of knowledge of the
places, fashions of the people, qualities of Potentates, or any other thing
meet for this or for that, I will never deny my fault, whereinto my good
affection has made me to fall.

To be brief, this will be in my mind, the issue of so just and The
conclusion of this discourse.
necessary an enterprise. And in case all Christian Princes had not so many
controversies among themselves, and withal would have taken more compassion of
the miseries of those that reclayme the name of Jesus Christ, long since had
we brooken off half the scorges which do now strike us. This war would
breed no remorse of conscience, neither should we see the mischiefs and
confusions wherewith ours are replenished: but every thing would be guided
by martial orders: and punishments, and rewards ministered according to
reason. Neither is it to be doubted but such a voyage would be as notable as
ever was Godfreyes of Boullein. The only fault why it is not put in practice,
rests in the Kings, Princes and Potentates that bear sovereign dominion
over the people, and much more profitable and honorable would it be unto
them, than to stand quarrelling with their neighbors, or to suffer so much of
their subjects blood to be shed under color of piety, and so make their
wars domestical and perpetual. I know we have some controversies in
religion among us, which notwithstanding, the Protestants and Catholics are
still brethren, and grafted upon one self stock Jesus Christ. But with these
profane Mahumetists, who worship an imaginary God, which is (as the
Scripture says) rather a devil, and do pollute al honestly and sack the
world, what conjunction or fellowshippe can we have? Against these enemies, the
rauishers of our goods, tormentours of our bodies and poisoners of our souls
are we to strive with our swoords. But among those that bear one self title,
all controversies ought to be ended in modesty and truth.

The 23. Discourse.
Of the Philosophers Stone.

AFter that through the knowledge of good Letters The fruits of learning.
(which by Gods especial goodness are dispearsed in sundry places in this
latter world) the arts and sciences had recovered their ancient beauty,
diverse men having seen the glimpes of this light, which for many years had,
as it were layen buried, have therewith helped themselves in the safe conduct
to the search of difficulte and hidden secrets: and according to the greater
light that each has received, so has he penetrated farthest into the deapth
of such wonderful secrets as are dispearsed throughout the whole world. Yea,
even at this day, who so list to behold any Country whatsoever, shall in
diverse persons perceive the like affection and diligence as have been in
their predecessors to find out the perfection of those things that other men
had in their days sought for. But as when many archers do shoot, few do hit
the mark, so are there not many that can atteyn to that that in their
imaginations they had conceived: which default is rather to be attributed to
the weakness of man's brain, than to any imperfection of the arts and
sciences, the which he that can well use and reduce to their true end, does
attain a great part of his desire.

Among those that are (but over curiously) given to the pursuit Of such as are
to curious in the search for gould by Alcumie.
of diverse objects, there are none that stand in greater need of admonition,
than such as profess with continual blowing to make their furnaces yield
forth great treasure, which they imagine their long proofs should reveal: for
we ought to take compassion of those whom we see in error to spend their
years and loose their labor, without reaping any fruit whatsoever, which have
moved me to give the^ this small advertisement, which they may vouchsafe to
take in good part: wherein I pretend by common reason easy to comprehend, and
according to my ability, to show them that they are deceived in those means
that they take to attain to their wished end. Afterward I will speak one word
to some learned Philosophical The sum of this discourse.
Alcumists, that prosecute the same object, as also show what is to be judged
of their so rare and unknown purpose. Finally, having confessed that there is
a true Philosophical stone (but rather spiritual than material) I will
declare what it is, also that being diligently sought, it may be found, and
found will bring incomparable treasure and contentation.

There be, as I take it, in these days three kinds of men which deal in
seeking for gold by Alcumistrie. The first, being poor, Three sorts of men
that deal Alcumie.
are through necessity that oppresses, driven to have recourse to this art,
hoping thereby to find remedy for their want. The second being learned, are
by the curiosity of their minds moved to search into natures principal
works, but thereto especially driven by lycorousnesse of profit. The third
are mighty Lords, whose desires (still tending to greatness and wealth) are
through other men's persuasions so stirred up, that for the compassing as well
of the one as of the other, they are disposed to use this art. Now by the
examination of the causes that move each part, we may judge who has the best
intent. But in the mean time it is greatly to be presumed that they all shoot
and draw at the devil of silver.

I have hard some of them discourse in this manner. There have been (say some
of them) in time past sundry learned persons as Mercurius Trimegistus, Geber,
and diverse Arabians, that have employed their time in the consideration of
both natural and supernatural things, who in their books have left written
diverse goodly instructions concerning the Philosophers stone or powder of
proiection, which is of so wonderful a virtue, that albeit their speeches be
very dark, yet are they of such sort, that sundry excellent wits have since
understood them, and plainly expounded their highest conceits, in putting in
practice that which others have been content to see into by speculation: for
both these conjoined they have by sundry proofs delivered to the view of the
sense that which in old time was co^prehe^ded only in imagination whence have
proceeded the discovery of wonderful secrets. Truly these speeches bear a
goodly show and are built upon the authorities of very brave personages, which
these puffing bellows do diligently note, to the end to set the better gloss
upon their merchandise. Neither can I tell whether I dare allege that which
one of their learned Alcumists did on a time tell me, namely, That they were
the heretics of their sect: but I refer my self to the truth thereof. Now
if the considerations of antiquity have been able as sparkles to kindle in
their hearts the desire which we see does consume them, the receites and books
written in our days of the like argument cannot but have greatly increased the
same, and experience most of all: in such manner as some do seem to be even
ravished in discoursing upon the excellency of this art.

Now will I proceed in the course of their reasons which are as do follow.
That God has not in vain endued man with the understanding, which he has giu
him to the end to consider of the greatness and beauty of his divine works,
and thereof reap so much fruit as should be unto him permitted, that
afterward he might yield to him all praise. That in time past he revealed
infinite, wonderful, and singular things: always reserving to himself
nevertheless sundry new secrets to disclose, by the variety whereof the more to
stir up every man to confess that the abundance of his works are
incomprehensible. That the West Indies which seem to enclose the whole
tresures of the earth, until, before unknown, were not discovered within
these hundred years. Likewise that in these later years the art of
transformation of imperfect metals into perfect, and the multiplying of the
quantity thereof, which barbarousnesse and ignorance had long buried, is as it
were revived again. Also that men have learned with fire to draw forth the
essence of sundry things, whereof they have conpounded most sovereign
medicines as well to preserve health, as to cure diseases. By which speeches it
seems the Philosophers stone to consist in such transmutation and
multiplication: and this do all the scholars of this art together with their
books affirm: A matter of sufficient admiration, which also ministers
argument sufficient to dispute upon. But first I must declare some of their
principles: They say Their principles.
that according to the opinions of sundry ancient Philosophers, the earth
has in her bowels enclosed a certain substance common to all mettalls, and
apt to receive whatsoever the convenient forms of the same. Also that the said
substance warmed with a certain heat, shut up in the same earth; does in long
process of time purge and wax lyquide, afterward that it congealeth and
grows hard. Thus having by little and little in this slow generation lost the
imperfect qualities, in the end it attaineth to this perfection, whereto nature
labors to bring every thing. This is their opinion of the ingendering of
metals; which from imperfect do afterward grow to perfection: among the which
Gold has the first place, and Silver the second. These foundations thus
laid, some speculatiue minds have imagined that it is possible by art to
imitate nature, and first that the matter requisite and necessary may be found:
next; that even in short time, with artificial fire that thing may be made,
which the earth is long about with her natural heat. With these goodly
persuasions have many as well in times past as now, made infinite experiments
whereby to find, as the Proverb goes, where the bean is hidden.

Truly such men are to be commended as do dedicate their labors Their
curiosity examined.
to the search of whatsoever may tend to the relief of man's life, and wherein
we do see the evident tokens of Gods wisdom to shine: but withal it is
very requisite that they which find that agilitie in their minds, do not
undertake to enter so far into the wilderness of so many unknown secrets,
unless for their guides they have upright judgment and discretion, least
wandering amiss they lose themselves as many have done, who through a desire of
knowing too much, being carried upon the wings of their rashness and soaring
too high, have fallen down headlong with Icarus. Experience has taught yt many
things have been invented as soon as sought for, as Printing and Artillery,
neither is there any mention yt they were long in devising. Others there be yt
for these 2000. years cannot be yet thoroughly understood: as the proportion the
diameter to the circu^fere^ce thereof, the cause of the saltnes with the ebbing
and fl^wing of the sea, and the reason of that high motion called Trepidation:
which may be a sufficient rule to stay us upon those things that are possible,
and to cause us to shun the impossible. Of which number our blowers will
auswere, y^ that which they seek is none, albeit it be a supreme secret.
Truly I confess it is a great secret, considering that no man could ever yet
find it out: but that it is one of the goodlyest ends of philosophy, as they
persuade themselves, I deny. And the better to know it, I will first divide
it: into moral and politic, and then into supernatural: afterward into that
natural, which has relation to all elementarie matters?

The first and second part thereof which concern manners and Of the parts of
Phillosophie also whether Alcumie has relation to any of the same.
policy, and celestial motions with the substances separate from al matters,
do import a far more worthy argument than this is. For no metal is any
whit comparable to the beauty of the heavens, or excellency of the virtues.
This being most evident, that part of Philosophy which has respect to
natural causes, must of force have but the third place, which notwithstanding,
if any man should ask thm whether the good that they labor for be not to be
accounted among the sovereign felicities, many will answer yes. Which what
else does it signify, but to place ma^s felicity in earthly things? Which is a
matter utterly repugnant to ye dignity thereof. For Gold is created to serve
man, not to hold his affections in ser^itude, as it does most of those that
take it for their most beautiful and profitable shoot anchor whereto they can
attain. In old time the like covetousness as we now see moved diverse to
search the dark caves of the earth, also to dig and pearce the same, to the
end to fet forth this metal, as yet they do in some regions: but these new
inventions to engender it in fornaces, do show the desire thereof to be now
more unreasonable than ever it was: so deeply rooted in man's heart is this
persuasion, that he which possesses plenty of gold is happy. Which opinion
experience has very well confirmed to be most false: for if we list to look
into ancient Empires and common wealths, we shall set that together with
Gold vi^e came in: also that virtue flourished so long as only brazen money
was in use.

Gold did by civil wars almost subvert the Roman Empire, That habundancie
and plenty of Gould has done more harm then good in the world.
and since through the superfluities and dissolutions that it bre^ overthrew
it. The Empires of the Assyrians and Medians were changed and extinguished,
when Sardanapalus and Darius swimming in Gold, conteinned the things which
they ought to have had in greatest estimation. When did the Lacedemonian common
wealth flourish more then whiles their money was of (...)? For it began to
decaie when Gold began to grow into use and eestimation. I know none that
will extol Caligula (who in two years spent above 67. millions) above
Fabritius, who having neither Gold nor Silver in his small house, was
nevertheless for his justice and valiancy the guardian of the Roman common
wealth. Who lived a more contented life whether Plato the Philosopher,
discoursing in his Academy, or Dyonisius the tyrant in the midst of al his
treasures? He it was who through his doctrine made men good, and not the other
who with his wealth corrupted them. Truly it has been always seen that Gold
has made more men miserable than happy: for few do know how both to get
and use it well. These examples one I not allege to bring. Gold into
contempt: but rather to give men to understand that to such as want discretion
it is hurtful, and that many other things are to be preferred before it. For
when men shall see that in all worlds it has been a fatal instrument, which
has so terriblie moved men's affections, likewise that it has hatched so many
mischiefs, they will be better advised how they subject themselves thereto,
considering it is made to serve or not to reign.

How^eit in commendation thereof I will also say that it is an Of the
commodity and use of gould, also of the mischiefs arising of the abuse
thereof.
excellent metal, endued with goodly qualities, and very necessary to help
with greater facility in the traficke of every thing, serving both for a
common price for whatsoever we list to exchange, and for an ornament to those
that are in greatest dignity. We ought therefore to esteem of it according to
the commodity that it yields, and to attribute no more thereto: but when
covetousness does so rage in us, that in liew of well using it in such sort,
we grow to excessive extolling thereof, it is converted into poison. For it
breeds murder, enmity, riot, and wantonness: It is also the occasion of
wars and ^illage, and for the most part infecteth men with vile avarice.
Heerevpon did Lycurgus banish it out of Lacedemon, and therewith also all vain
pleasures, the deadly plagues of common wealths. It may be replied in favor
thereof that when the ancients meant to commend the first age of the world,
they termed it, The Golden world: but we are to understand that thereby they
meant only the integrity of such as then lived, which they compared to the
pureness of Gold, as they did the days ensuing unto silver and brass. For us
it surpasses all other mettalls in perfection, so also were the first men more
excellent in all goodness, than their successors, who have and still do
degenetrate. But if any man were disposed to entitle our age with the crown of
the golden world, he might have some reason thereto. For Gold is now so
cherished and worshipped that by it all things are obtained, and without it
nothing is dove. He that has Gold shall be honored, but he that has none is
counted but an outcast. Yea, the mighty men are not content to be clothed
therewith, but their houses must also glister thereof: but if we consider the
manners of men we shall find them so far altered yt they may be trulier termed
manners of iron tha^ of gold. An ancient good Bishop complaining, says, When
the Church vessels were of wood, the Bishops were of gold, but when the
vessels grew to gold, the Bishops were turned into wood. This does sufficiently
testify what change it br^edeth in the possessers thereof, for in the end it
overcomes the owner, and plungeth him that has it in all pride and
iutemperan^ie, unless he be restrained by the bridle of good doctrine.

Some man may say that many other things may be likewise How dangerous the
abuse of Gold is, also in what estimation and use it is in these days.
abused, as Law, Women, and Wine, which are more necessary for man's life than
it, whose use (notwithstanding their abuse) is not forbidden. Neither will I with
Lycurgus conclude that it must be utterly forbidden, only I will show yt it is a
very slippery path wherein we may slide as soon as they that walk upon Ice.
And in deed Gold is the very Ise where upon our hearts do slide when we so
far let slip the reins of our desires that we cannot pluck them back again.
Many men hold opinion, that wealth, if it be not ^e^tified with plenty of
gold, is but like a cloud and too simple. In deed it cannot be denied but it
sets on a fairer gloss, but the same is likewise so course that it
peruerteth our judgments, in yt so highly it allows of superfluous things,
that it contemns those that be necessary. A man may have his house
plentifully furnished with all Of the mischiefs proceeding of those men's
vanity, who because they have much Gold do think themselves to be rich.
things meet and convenient for the use of his own family, the entertaining
of his science, and the relief of strangers: howbe it if he have no precious
vessels and moueables with other like superfluities he shall be accounted
poor: for custom has so far incroched upon men; that wealth is accounted
to consist in needles things rathar than in those whose use we cannot forbear.
How be it what ever men think, this great disco^moditie does gold breed, yt it
causes a man soon to overthrow himself: for if his mind longs after ye
follies of these days, he will wast 1000. franks re^^ upon one mask, two or 3
garments for himself, one banquet, some game, or in presents to his mistres;
before he be aware. Before yt gold was so plentiful, ye use of cloth of gold,
silver, and silk were unknown, and precious stones most rare, ene^ a prodigal
person could hardly in many years spend his goods. Now we have a thousand
vanities which lead vain persous to impouerish themselves in one day.
Rabelais reports that Panurge in his voiages into Italy learned above 78.
inventions to colne by money: but after he had a while haunted the Spanish and
French nations, he was perfect in above 100. gallant ways to spend it, which
made him continually to eat his corn in the blade, which good custom is yet
in practice among us. After yt the barbarous nations had invaded as well the
East as West Empire, and sacked all the treasurs of the same, gold and silver
were for certain ages almost unknown: but after that the Spaniards and
Portugals had discovered so many new lands, this mineral wealth and stones,
grew as a vehement storm to be shed throughout all the provinces of
Christendom, so as even to this day they do abound. And what is there grown
but a general flame of covetousness, with extreme avarice of some, and excessive
prodigalities of others, with so many superfluities which custom has brought
in, yt 1000. Hercules should have enough to do to s^ay all these monsters. To
be brief, all this gold and silver for ten men yt it has enriched, have
impouerished 10000. To what purpose then is it to attribute thereto the power to
make men happy? Plato and Aristotle entreating of goods, and whereto they ought
to tend, do not go to seek the^ in the bowels of the earth, as shall be
hereafter declared. These blowers therefore are to be reproved, in that they
endeavor to persuade the end of their are to be of such excellency, whereby
they lead many into error, who of themselves are already too much inclined to
seek their conte^tation in material things. The poor savages of Perow before
that our covetousness Gold has brought the barbarousnesse of savages into
Europe, and finally made the savages very wild men indede.
robbed them of their Gold, had so much, that they made all implements of
household thereof, esteeming it no better then of iron: for they never took
care or labored to gather, keep, or otherwise use it. But since that they were
taught, and that they perceived the imperfectious which we^co^^^it for Gold,
they grew as miserable as our selves, and have made, as a man may say, their
Gods of ye same stuff which before they troad upon their feet. When we first
began to traficke with them* they gave for a knife or any other cutting tool,
double or treble ye weight in Gold, making more account of the co^modit (...)
of that metal, which we esteem sal^ise, tha^ of ye other yt we think so
precious. And who so list to speak with reason, must of force confess that
iron, considering it is an instrument without the which few arts consist, is
much more necessary to the use of man's life than Gold. Howbeit pride,
superfluity, pleasure, and man's curiosity have bredde the extreme
admiration of Gold. which nevertheless, as I have said) is not altogether to
be contemned.

Now are (...)e to answer to their arguments, whereby they endeavor to prove
the means to perform their work to be both easy Answer to the allegations
of the Alcumists concerning the substance of metal.
and possible. They say there is a certain mettallicall substance ^it and
convenient to be transformed into perfect mettalls, which is the true seed
that yields the Gold, and the same (as the principal ground whereon they must
build) it is requisite to know very well. That in time past few men knew it,
but that now some excellent scholars in this art are nothing ignorant
therein: also that it is likely not to be so strange and unknown a thing,
considering that even mean men are perfect in the knowledge of the substance,
seed and virtues of plants, herbs, and fowls. Like wise that albeit most of
these goodly operations of nature be hidden in the deapth of the earth, yet is
man's spirit able to penetrate into such secrets, since it can also mount above
the heuens. To deny the substance that they search for I dare not, because we
see the effects: but to affirm that it is known, there rests the
difficulty: for although we know many, as the aforenamed, yet follows it
not thereof that we are able to comprehend the other, which has so long been
hidden, except by the discourse of our imagination, until experience has
taught us the truth of this matter. Some common Alcumistes have in their
pamphlets gone about to describe the said substance. One assures it to be
quick silver or brimstone: the other eggs or blood: and others have named
sundry other kinds, which have procured a thousand and a thousand experiments,
all which have proved false. Some of them do affirm that the true matter must
of necessity have in it a great vegetative power, and some similitude with
that substance whereinto it should be transformed. Concerning ye, vegetative
power their speech does stand with some reason for since nature must be an agent
and work in this action, the matter must likewise have the same property, and
not resemble a stone or a piece of wood. As for the similitude, it is likely
also that the substance that should yield Gold must have some correspondence
therewith: for it were a plain mockery to imagine that an egg should bring
forth a tree, or an acorne a bird. These two properties then are very
necessary for the matter which we speak of: nevertheless by ye only
discoursing upon things convenient thereto, it is not found, no more than is
the Philosopers wisdom, albeit they have in their discourses qualified and
formed it.

But admit I grant, they know the true substance (which nevertheless Whether
they can minister any form to the thing by them imagined.
is a deep point) yet are they to prove by what artificial means, that is to
say, by what regiment or help they can enforce their wished form, which is
not easy to be done: for albeit that art do imitate nature, yea, that in some
things it can even help her, yet dare not our common Alcumists affirm, that
it can grow equal with her. Heereto they reply that experience teaches that
the virtue of the art, duly fitted with the force of nature, does so help
it, that thereof insueth the bringing forth of the kinds in likewise as Nature
alone may have brought them forth. As in Eggs which are the substance whereof
fowls are bredd, a man may minister to them an arteficiall heat so temperate:
either in an oven or by other means, that we shall see them yield forth the
like fowls as nature would have ingendered: as also in the Salt pits we see
that art together with the sea water and help of the natural heat of the
Sun forms the Salt. If therefore in living things, yea even in dead things,
it has so much power, why may it not likewise work in the substance of
mettalls? Heereto I answer, that this is but a bad kind of arguing, of a few
particular examples in things known to make a general rule for things as it
were yet unknown: for that which may agree with one cannot agree with many.
We may easily see that there is great difference between the manner by
nature observed in the ingendering of metals, and the other kinds before
noted. For having made the seed of plants, herbs, and fowls so common unto
us, she also shows us the facility of their generation: But in mettalles it
is another case, for if their substance has been hitherto as it were hidden,
it is no marvel that their procreation is unknown. Who so list to consider
how a Wheat kirnell brings forth a fair and great ear, shall
nevertheless therein see but small help of art, saving some travail and
tillage of the ground with the sowing thereof, which cannot properly be said to
be the principal cause of the generation: for it is only nature, who having
received the seed into the ground as into a matrix, does heat and putrify it,
also it makes it to sprout, grow, and take that form whereto it is most
proper. The like effect is to be noted in the generation of metals, which is
performed by the only virtue and power of nature, neither can art work any
great matter therein. And whosoever should take the substance of them out of
their matrixe, wherein nature by hidden means works, weening through art to
make perfect the said mettalls, shall greatly deceive himself: for so would it
loose the whole force and become lame.

This might the Empirical Alcumists have thereby learned by so To what use
experience may serve the Alchumists.
many their false experiments made so long time: which nevertheless have not yet
utterly diuerted their minds from promising to themselves somewhat more: for
they affirm that this powder of proiection once performed, they may by casting
a little of it among a great mass of imperfect metals reduce ye whole into
gold. Now thy proceed thereto by degrees, saying that one once of this powder
is able to convert a thousand ounces of other metal into gold: and that which
is better purified will convert ten thousand: but that which is once brought to
perfection, will multiply, as they term it, from one weight to 100000. These
be the brave fruits which they make the trees of their garden to bear,
whereof the least will be worth 9000 crowns, and the greatest about 900000.
Truly if these effects were as true as the discourses of them are brave, we
shall see many gardens given themselves to the tilling of so fruitful a soil.

The common opinion of man does account this same to be a prodigious The
examination of the multiplication of their powder.
matter, yea, sundry learned men do marvel how so many can suffer themselves
to be lead away with such persuasions, of whom if a man ask how this great
augmentation can come to pass, they will answer that that should not seem so
strange, considering that daily we see as great matter as that after the same
manner: for (say they) ae candle once light is able to impart her light to
100000 more, and yet never diminish it self one whit: so likewise the virtue
of this power is so great, that it communicates the self substance thereof to
other metals apt to receive it. This similitude, in my opinion, is no great
proof hereof: for the transmutation of a mass of Lead into a mass of Gold,
which is a conversion of substance, does far differ from ministering unto fire
any matter that may nourish or maintain it. Yea, it does better appear in
this, that the fire having consumed ye matter ministered, they both do perish:
whereas by the alleged transmutation so perfect a metal must come of it as
may have a continual being. They must therefore bring in better reasons and
examples to verrefie this multiplicatio^. Besides, if this were so, it must
needs follow yt art should surmount nature, because in short space it should
work ye thing which nature is many years about. Thus much have I thought good
to answer to the common arguments which they ordinarily use in their
discourses and devises, whereby a man may judge what a small foundation they
have to build so high a work upon. Such as being sufficiently learned, list
to peruse their pa^phlets may be able with greater gravity and more at large
to dispute with the^, to ye end ye truth being disclosed, many may by
aba^doning their errors find profit therein. For my part I shall still think the^
to be deceived in Whether any of the (...) writers did ever find out this
secret.
ye ways yt they take, until experience has revealed yt whereof we are in
doubt, which is one reason yt we do many times lay against them, saying: yt since
it does not appear that any of the ancient Writers could ever with all their
furnaces find out this secret, why do they so obstinatly proceed in the search
thereof? But (say they) in old time many did know it, as Solomon, in whose days
gold was so plentiful, that all his palace was therewith adorned, and silver
as common as iron: which abundance could never have been such, had he not
practiced this hidden Philosophy, wherein through his great wisdom he was
most expert. Hereto do they ad yt K. Midas, who, as it is said, turned all yt
he touched into gold, was also skilful herein. Likewise yt the ancient Poets,
speaking of the golden fleece, meant thereby the Philosophers stone, which also
was not altogether unknown when the Roman Empire was in greatest pride.
Howbeit that ever since it has as it were lien dead together with many other
things until these later days, that some men searching among the pouders of
antiquity found out some small fragments of this wonderful treasure,
affirming that some have made demonstration thereof, as Cosme of Medicis, and K.
Edward of England, who received this benefit at the hand of Reimond Lully a
Catelaeunia: Others have concealed it as Arnold de villa noua, and Theophrast
Paracelse. To be brief, leuing a multitude of like examples, they account
themselves to be followers not of imaginary matters, but of things Examination
of the examples of antiquity with the Alcumistis do aleadge.
already practiced. Truly I should never marvel to see the nouices in this art,
yt have small practice in histories, sometimes to feed upon these vanities: but
when the masters themselves shall go about to persuade the others yt these
imaginatio^s are true, it cannot but breed pastime to ye hearers. Wherefore to
answer the^, first I say yt the aleaing of ye example of Salomo^ turns to
their disgrace: for David was he yt heped up most of his treasures, neither is
it written yt ever man had so much. The Scripture testifies, yt he left him
toward ye building of ye temple 100000. tale^ts of gold, and a milio^ of
silver: which amou^tech to 120. millions of crowns as Bude summeth it. But
almost all that treasure did rise of the spoils and overthrows of the
Canaanites and Amorrheans, whom David according to Gods appointment made an
end of rooting out. And as for Solomon, he was a King endued with perfect
wisdom, but he never used the same to their pretended effects, yea, in the
holy Bible we find whence he had his Gold and silver. It is said that his
ships sailed with the ships of Hyram king of Tire into Ophir, which some
interpret to be the Indies, to fetch and the number of Gold that they
brought did mount to six hundred sixty and six talents of gold. Now the
Hebrews talent of gold, as some do affirm, was worth seven thousand
Crowns, so as all this sum should rise almost to five millions of Gold,
which in those days was a marvelous treasure. But some of these men do
imagine that the gold of Ophir was the same that was fetched out of their
fornaces, which impudent affirmation deserves no answer. But I will use the
example of Solomon to prove their art to be false: for if he whose wisdom
was incomparable, who also was perfect in all whatsoever could fall into man's
capacity, never writ that he gate this secret by blowing: but contrariwise
sets down some of the means whereby he attained to his wealth, shall not
we presume that it is an evident abuse to leave to their experiences? Neither
is the example of Midas of any greater credit then the other. For in his person
the ancient writers purposed to set before us a covetous prince, whose treasure
through his own vice grew hurtful to him self. And by the golden fleece the
poets meant the veins of gold or silver which the Greek Princes fetched out of
Chalochos in the ship of Argos. Now let us come to the Romans. For it can not
be denied but the Empire of Rome ouerflowed with wealth: howbeit it proceeded
of the sacking of all the world, and not else where, as testify the histories.
The alleging of great Cosme of Medicis is but a little tickling to cause us to
smile. For he was a man issued from a very wealthy family, and with all
discreet, a great dealer and of much traficke, whereby he mightily increased
his goods, and afterward used very stately liberality and expenses as did
Lucullus at Rome and Cimon at Athens. Concerning Edward king of England, who
coined so many Rose nobles, no history reports it to have been done with
Raymond Lullyes philosophical gold, which makes me ye rather to think that he
dealt with minerals. As for Theophrast Paracelse and Arnold de Villa noua, no
man can deny but they were learned both in Philosophy and Alcumie, and found
out great secrets: but I am assured that in any their books it cannot be
found that the substance of artificial gould does resemble the same whereupon
our common Alcumistes do work, either that the form thereof is to be
performed in Fornances: besides, if we consider of their lives, we shall in
the same see the tokens of poverty, and not of abundance: whereby it is
likely they rather labored to find what were necessary for the health of
men's bodies, then to reveal any such matter as might increase their
covetousness. Besides, if either themselves or any other had been skillful in
this transmutation, I think they concealed it as well for their own safeties
and quietness, as also to the end to eschew so many inconveniences as such
plenty of gould might have engendered by falling into cruel and ambitious
hands.

I would therefore entreat those that are so hot in the pursuit Of the
mischiefs wherein the Alcumistes do plague themselves.
of these crooked ways, to consider how many rich men have within these
hundred years beggered themselves in these miserable experiments. May not so
many shipwarackes reclaim them: but they must needs run headlong after
their own fantasies: yea, they are so fleshed in this business, ye it will be
four times more work to withdraw them therfro, then to fetch a Massing hedge
priest out of a Tavern: so as we may say that in this art there lies a
certain hidden power which charmeth those that do exercise it. And it is
likely that such as so vehemently do hunt after these extraordinary means,
are thereto provoked rather by their own disordered affections, then by any
well guided motions of the mind. As also we see that for punishment to their
errors all their labors vanish in smoke. Neither is that all: for some
finding themselves in this extremity do coin counterfaite money: others trot
up and down to deceive those that are ready to believe their goodly motious,
which they make in seeking to catch them in the same s^are wherein themselves
have been taken. It seems to be a punishment of God laid upon those who
contemning so many honest exercises and lawful vocations, do thrust
themselves into such laberinths as they can never escape without their own
loss. Some man may say that every one that gives himself to this science
does not cast away himself, no nor take any harm thereby: for we see Lords
and Princes that have not sold one Crowns worth of land for it, but are
desirous only to learn, as it were in sport, whether the thing that they
imagine may be compassed. I grant they be wise in respect of the rest, but the
number of them is small: whereas of those that wast themselves in these desires
there be many. Truly he that could learn the goodly discourses that they
make to themselves what they would do when they had achieved their purpose,
should see mounts and meruailes. One would be a King, and an other a Duke: One
would make wars whereby to exalt himself, an other would build Towns and
Castles, and the most part would live in pleasures and superfluity. To be
brief, such as are the affections, such would the effects be. But I can never
think that any secret can be revealed to those that bear so bad minds.

Howbeit, if men would use this art only to attain to ye knowledge Of the use
of true Alcumie.
of diverse virtues and properties of nature, it were commendable in those that
would so employ themselves: but there are but few that keep themselves within
those bounds, and yet do they only reap the true fruit thereof that use it
to find out remedies for sundry inconveniences and diseases, whereof (as is
aforesaid) by fire men have found most singular. Ladies and Gentlewomen may,
when they are at home, occupy themselves in distillations of waters and
essences drawn out of all sorts of herbs, roots and flowers, as well for
their own domestical uses, as to impart to their poor neighbors and
subjects that may stand in need thereof. Were it not also an honest exercise
for Lords and gentlemen, who lose so much time, sometimes to recreate
themselves in such extractions, not of herbs only, but also of minerals and
other substances, out of the which they may draw such oil and virtue, that two
or three drops thereof may profit more then a whole heap of Apoticarie
drugges? How many other brave secrets may be found out by the use of fire,
whereof even the greatest Princes should not disdain to be skillful? Diverse
printed books do show of things yielding both admiration, delight and
profit. He then that list thus to use this art shall be free from repentance
thereof, whereto all those are subject which seek to make it by strange
devises to bring forth gould, which is as much as if a man for his own
appetite should seek to fetch Manna from heaven.

But admit a man should have converted all the stones about his Of the vanity
of those that aspire to have heaps of gold and Silver.
house into gould, what has he then done? Truly he may peradventure have
built himself a sumptuous sepulcher wherein to bury his virtues, or a proud
theater whereupon to display his vices, as it often happens those to do that
are stored with great wealth. Be those the documents which the Philosophers meant
to leave to the posterity? It is not likely: considering that they thinking
man's soul to have had her original in heaven, would never minister unto her
any object wherein to contemplate and depend upon that were unworthy her
self: neither does it appear in their writings that among the resolute and
perfect good they ever harbored this earthly felicity after the which many
do so hunt, even unto death. If we list to credit the saying of Aristotle in
his treatise of felicity, we shall find that he first places it in the
treasures of the mind than in those of the body: and lastly in those of
fortune, under the which he comprehends riches. Socrates and Plato do also
stir up men to virtue and spiritual things, and withdraw them from the
earth: which should move these poor deceived persons to follow the steps of
those who^ they account their great fathers, who through the observing of ye
precepts of good doctrine, have not gone astray.

Some there are so obstinate in their opinions, that all that may Who it is
that in deed co^uerteth metals.
be said is not able to dissuade the^ from the possibility of conuerfion of
metals. Truly to pleasure them I will believe the^, but in such sort as once
a scholar in that art at Paris told me: that the great Alcumists labored by
fornaces under ground. This poor apprentice herein was of my acquaintance, and
had in three years space blown away a goodly house of his own with some 1000.
or 1200. frankes rent, and kept no more but the skin and bones, yea the fire
had drawn away not only ye quintessence, but in a manner ye whole essence of
all the apparel that he ware. Which when I had considered: Well my young
master, said I you are now in good case to learn to fly, for you have
nothing to load you or hinder your lightness. Oh sir, said he, you should
rather take pity of those that unawares have made shipwreck. Truly so I do,
said I, since I see you so penitent, neither shall the help of my purse be
denied you to furnish you a new in some lawful vocation, but now show me
unfeignedly what light or certainty is there in your precepts? Our pamphlets,
said he, are full of ridles and obscurity, and our long labors and
continual expenses, do in the end bring forth but untimely birthes and
fantasies. Have you not, replied I, any example either old or new of any
that has found out the secret. I know, said he, but one that ever attained
thereto. I pray you, said I, tell me who that was? It is, said he, he: Who? said
I, for I cannot know him unless you otherwise name him unto me. It is he, said
he. Why, said I, do you then mock me? Well, said be, Then I must needs tell
you. It is the holy father, who has taught all our blowers that they are but
doul^es, which in many years do multiplye all their somewhat into nothing.
Where himself yearly in France only transformeth and multiplieth forty pound
of lead, which may be worth two crowns, into 40000 pounds of gold which may
be worth 600000. crowns, and then makes attraction thereof even to Room.
Truly, said I, I will give you ten crowns the more for breaking your mind
so plainly unto me: but I would wish you not to use much such speech in this
town, least our masters of Sorbonne immediately deuounce you an heretic of
seuentene Carects and a half: Whereupon we parted, and glad he was that he
had found some means to fatten himself again, for he was as lean as a red
Herring. And for my part I began to consider of the hidden property of this
authentical Caballe, and having thoroughly pondered thereof, I fonnd that my
jolly blower had better success in that which he had told me, then in all yt
he had done. But because the time was the^ too hot to rehearse this tale, I hid
it in a corner of my memory.

Having thus discoursed upon the falsehood that rests in this Of some
Alchumistes who ween under pretense of piety to attain to their purposes.
Vulcanist art, whenever it list to stretch to the forging of gold, I will
speak one word of certain Alcumistes or rather Philosophers, who being
consumed in Philosophy, do in their operations adioyne the power of nature
with the necessary aid of the art. I will tell you what one of them once
said unto me concerning the matter whereupon he had labored, which now I have
called to mind. He told me that the whole study and labor of man in the
search hereof was vain, unless God would reveal unto him things unknown.
Also that for the attayning to perfection in this art, it was requisite first
to be an honest man: secondly, to pray often to God to grant him light in this
darkness: thirdly, to gather knowledge of the art out of good books: and
finally having found out the secret, to keep it secret, and not to abuse
this treasure, but to employ it in the relief of the needy, or in very good
works. Whereto I replied, that I found it somewhat strange that he would seem
to work vyolence to nature, and submit Gods order to man's will, which was
unlikely to obey, because every man would give over the arts and sciences, to
the end idely to enritch himself in things superfluous and of best necessity
to man's life. He answered, that in this operative science, we could not
perceive nature to be any whit forced, but working with all facility, order
and power: which so much the more declared the wonderful power and wisdom of
God: likewise that he knew very well that in as much as this knowledge could
not dwell but in a contemplative soul not polluted with earthly affections,
few men were perticipants therein. Of whom the most contenting themselves that
they had hit the mark, were very scrupulous in the publishing of that which
rather by heavenly meditation then practice they had comprehended, either to
use the fruits thereby achieved, but in most necessary occasions. He, said
he, that is desirous to learn the art must mark what the Scripture says.
First seek the kingdom af God, and all things shall be given you. Also this
saying of the Psalmist. The Psalm 2^.
Lord declares his secrets to those that fear him. To this I answered, that
these places were meant of spiritual matters, and not of mettalles. True, said
he, such is their proper interpretation: howbeit we may sometimes see the
effects in things material, when the former blessing goes before: as appeared
in Solomon, who upon his prayer had the grant both of wisdom and abundance
of wealth. You believe then, said I, that it is possible to transform
mettalles, also that some men have attained thereto. They be both true,
answered he, for my self have seen most evident proofs thereof, and as I
think, there be some yet living which be skillful in the art, and to the
end to gather some taste thereof, I pray you read good books, for in them
you shall see not only beams, but even very lights which will show you not
only the errors of this blowing, but also the true likelihoodes of the
metallicall Philosophy. Hereupon I was blanke: for having final experience in
this doctrine, I was loath to answer impertinently, and being half dazeled
with so many goodly words, I thought it best to stay until by effect I might
see the truth of this affirmation, before I would allow or disalowe thereof,
which I yet wait for. Neither am I so frantic as to think that God cannot
as soon extend his liberality to a good man (albeit by extraordinary means)
to use it lawfully, as he could give to effeminate Sardanapalus 40. millions of
gould, also to the monster Caligula 67. by ordinary means, which they wasted
in all abominations.

Thus much have I thought good to speak of the material Of the true
Philosophers stone, taught by Solomon.
Philosophers stone: now will I proceed to that which I take to be the true:
for the knowledge whereof we can have recourse to no better writer then
Solomon, whom, in my opinion, we ought to believe, as him that was endued with
perfect wisdom, whose conceits and speeches were in many things guided by
the spirit of truth, and therefore the rather cleave to his divine sentences.
As also I think that all Alcumistes do give the most credit to his
testimonies, as of one who is often in their view, in respect that he saw and
had a taste of those miseries which they so much reverence. In some of his
books he has taught, that although man through his disobedience has here
below enthralled himself to many miseries, yet God who is goodness it self,
would not leave him so wrapped in mischief, but that withal he has prepared
and offered to him innumerable benefits, to the end that craving them at his
hands he might seek them, and by seeking euioy them, and so to reap such
contentation as may be had in this life, and to yield him praise for the same.
He deuideth them into two kinds. In his book of the Preacher he speaks of
such as are earthly and Eccle 3.
corruptible, affirming that notwithstanding their beauty, yet they that trust
in them do find more vanity then pleasure. I have, says he, built me houses,
and planted vineyards: I have made me gardens: I have had men servants and maid
servants, a great family and many flocks: I have gathered gould and silver,
with the treasures of Kings and Provinces: I have appointed singers, and taken
pleasure in the sons of men: and in wealth I have excelled all that have been
before me in Jerusalem. Neither have (...) forbidden my heart to rejoice in the
things that I had provided: but when I turned to behold all the works of my
hands, and the labors wherein I had swet, I found nothing but vanity and
anguish of mind, also that nothing under the sun is permanent. This may be a
good instruction to al those that six their felicity in things frail and
transitory, to admonish the^ moderatly to use the^, and to cast ye anckors of
their co^tentation upon solid substa^ces, which the change of fortune, as we
term it, cannot carry away.

Such are the second sort, mentioned in the book of Proverbs, That the true
goods are spiritual and incorruptible.
and deserve to be called, goods, for they are spiritual, incorruptible,
steadfast, and do yield perfect joy. They therefore that list to follow the
precepts of this great King shall not go astray, as the followers of the rules
of our common Alcumistes, so as the scholars that are willing to learn, be
endued with humility and docilitie, which are ye first preparatiues to yt
entry into this study. For Also the means to attain thereto.
he that with worldly presumption, puffed up with vain knowledge seeks to
submit this so worthy and pure a matter to his senses, so far is he from
reaping any fruit thereby, that he cannot so much as perceive the beauty
thereof. These be his words: Happy is the man that finds wisdom: It is
more precious then riches: and nothing P^o. 3.
that we can desire may be compared thereto. This is the declaration of this
secret, which many never seek for, and others do seek indirectly and by
crooked paths. He yt can know it and apply it to himself, may be assured he
has found the true Philosophers stone, that is to say, plenty of all goods,
which do as greatly enrich and delight the soul as the body. I doubt if some
of these blowers (mad to see his Answer to those that look only upon earth.
experie^ces vanished in smoke) should chance to read this, he would exclaim
and say: Oh, how are we fallen from a fever into a hot burning ague? since they
here propound unto us as great a paradoxe as they account our own to be! What
reason is there, since we be of earth, enhabite the earth, and live of earthly
things, that they should feed us with spiritual and invisible substance? Let
us first banish this terrible monster poverty, which continually tormenteth
us, and then we will see to the rest. To this man will I make no other answer,
but wish him to repair his broken fornaces, banish his wrath, and again sease
upon his right wits, which peradventure he had forgotten in some of his
Limbeckes, then will I teach him that the divine testimonies which I use in
this proof are as true as his transubstantiall imaginations are false. Let us
therefore hear Solomon, the image of perfect wisdom speak, who discourses
thus. The Lord has possessed Prouer. 8.
me from the beginning: before he made any thing I was ordained from
everlasting: before the earth, the seas, the hills and the rivers were I was
conceived and brought forth. When he prepared the heavens I was present: when
he environed the sea with her ban^kes and laid the foundations of the earth I
was with him, making all things: and I delight to be with the children of men.
Who sees not here that wisdom took her original in heaven, yea even in the
highest heaven, which is above all yt we do see? Notwithstanding, to speak
properly, she is without beginning: for since that by her we are to understand
the same of God, who is the eternal wisdom of the father, we cannot imagine
in him either beginning or ending. It is the word, whereby all things were
made, and which illuminateth all men. The most learnest contemplative
Philosophers, as the Academickes, which have been illuminated with some small
beams thereof, did know (and yet knew not truly) and in their writings
testify, that this wisdom whereby the whole world was created and formed and
in so good order governed, have of al eternity been reside^t in the divine
essence. To be brief, yt it is God, who through his divine wisdom has
declared himself unto men after sundry sorts: but wonderfully in the work of
restoration, when he converted the mortal imperfectio^s which man had
purchased into those perfections that he has liberally imparted and given unto
them. And albeit they had lost ye just possession of the land, yet has he
granted them the inheritance of heaven, whereupon Solomon says. That wisdom
is a tree of life to all that will take hold thereof, and happy Prouer. 3.
shall he be that can keep it. Truly the excellency thereof does shine in
that it abundantly excels in all things.

But because most men are so little moved toward that which is The excellency
of heavenly wisdom.
spiritual, in that that being wrapped in earthly things, their senses hold
them down to those that be corporal, let us now as it were visibly show it
them by the fruits and effects thereof, to the end they may the better
comprehend it. Solomon who has written a book in commendation thereof shall
perform this duty. I loved (says he) wisdom, and sought her from my
youth: she taught me Wisdom. 8.
the discipline of God and choseth his works: I preferred her before Kingdoms
and Thrones: and in comparison of her accounted riches to be nothing, neither
have I compared the precious stone unto her: for all gould is in respect of her
but gravel, and silver shall be esteemed as dirt. I have loved her above
health and beauty, and have purposed to take her for my light: for her
brightness cannot be extinguished: and all my goods are come together with
her, and wonderful honesty through her hands. She teaches sobriety,
discretion, justice and fortitude, which are things most profitable to the life
of man. If any man covet after plenty of knowledge, she knows things past,
and judges of such as are to come: she is skillful in the depth of speeches
and solutions of arguments, in the change of manners, division of times, the
course of the year and order of the stars, in the natures of beasts, the
strength of the winds and the imaginations of men: in the difference of plants
and virtues of roots: and of her I have learned all secret things, and those
that were never seen before: for wisdom the workmistris of all things has
taught me: for her sake I shall be wonderful in the presence of the mighty,
and the countenances of Princes shall marvel at me. When I come home I shall
rest with her, for in her conversation is no bitterness, neither is she
accompanied with envy, but with joy and mirth. Moreover, by her I shall
obtain immortality, and leave an everlasting remembrance to those that shall
come after me. If I could into seven or eight verses have abridged all that is
here described, I would have done it, but, in my mind, we should never be
weary of reading so high and true mysteries, which nevertheless are but a
small parcel of all that Solomon sets down. The Alcumistes do say that
one ounce of their power of proiection is able to convert a thousand ounces of
other metal into gould: what then shall we think that one grain of this
heavenly powder shall do? Between gould and metal there is some affinity
and correspondence: but between vice and virtue, ignorance and knowledge
rests a manifest contrariety: and yet is that the place wherein wisdom
does work, for it transformeth the wicked powers thereof into good, and as is
aforesaid, teaches those principal virtues which Cicero in his offices so
highly extolleth: But what man is so gross and senseless, as to compare even
the greatest mass of gould with the least portion of temperance or justice?
Plato the Philosopher says, that if with our bodily eyes we could perceive the
beauty of virtue, we would be ravished with perfect love thereunto: But the
veil of pleasure and ignorance so blinds us that we cannot see it. And I
like well ye judgment of Solon, who preferred the felicity of a poor citizen
named Telus, that was endued with wisdom and virtue, before the good hap of
K. Craesus, who flowed in power and wealth. Here must we stay, as having no
need to dilate upon the sayings of Solomon, considering how amply he
expresses the benefits proceeding of wisdom: and since she brings the
knowledge of heavenly matters, human actions, and natural effects, and
withal gives honor, riches, virtue, praise, health, mirth and fame, what can
a man say more?

Now, God imparteth not these benefies only to the mighty: How liberally God
does communitate this treasure to all men: also the use and abuse of the same.
for even the meanest do participate therein, some more and some less,
according as it pleases him to endue them with this sovereign cause: as being
assured that the knowledge of Mechanical arts, industry of Merchants, and
experience of laborers, are no other but the small effects thereof, which do
also appear in the order of the government of smaller families, and temperance
of the manners of the poorest. But who can make a better show of the
brightness of this light then the very discourses of the Alcumists? For
sometimes they wade into the depth of the earth, then do they consider the
operations of nature, and sometimes for the extolling of their art they climb
even to the spiritual substances: And what has opened their eyes to know
such difficult matters but that wisdom which after an excellent manner does
shine in their understandings? In the mean time, in liewe of suffering them
selves to be guided thereby they use it as a slave, in seeking continually to
enthrall it to earthly business, as in old time condemned persons were thrust
into the Mines. Thus do they recompense it badly, and seem to have small
knowledge of the virtue thereof, which tends rather to ascend then descend.
Those men also are in an error that account him unhappy that has any want of
the goods which we term of Fortune. And yet the poor man yt with patience
bears his poverty, is without comparison far more happy then the rich
man that burns in covetousness. To be brief, there is no estate that can
make him miserable that has any portion of this wisdom, which may be
termed a very fear of God, or true passion of virtue. To him therefore must
we have recourse, who distributeth so much thereof as is expedient to those
that by prayer, humility and perseverance do cra^e some such beam, as may
suffice to augment their contentation. Surely I take this to be a far more
precious felicity, then the knowledge how to multiply whatsoever quantity of
gold or silver: which the covetous and encroaching persons, can by wicked arts
do as well. It is therefore better to stay upon the search and pursuit of the
true Philosophical stone of wisdom, which enstructeth, comfort,
enricheth, contenteth and saves those that have found it, then to hunt after
the vain hope of our blowers in the search of things whereof they grow sad,
poor, and into decay, and yet can never meet withal.

The 24. Discourse.
Against those that think that Godliness depriueth man of all pleasures.

GReat is the number of those men that The subtlety of the Epicures.
at these days are enfected with this false opinion, which they s^ylie publish
in all places where they haunt: And they are, in my mind, such a kind of
people as we may well term Epicures and Libertines, who establishing their
sovereign felicity in pleasures, do endeavor only to contemn Christian
life, burdening it that it breeds nothing but continual sorrow, so to make
all such as list to hearken unto them unwilling to walk in the paths thereof.
Their arguments are wonderful plausible to those in whom sensuality bears
sway, which is the cause that many simple persons, yea and some of the wiser
sort do suffer themselves so to be led away therewith, as somewhat to favor
the said opinion: and thus do they with their malicious speeches turn many
from walking according as the duty of the name that they bear does require.
There is an old proverb that says, Evil words corrupt good manners: which is
often verified. Howbeit, if any man does doubt hereof, and wishes some more
evident proof, let him repair to the school of these doctors, from whence he
shall be sure to return far worse then he went: for as drops of ynke cast
into fair water by continuance do not only defile, but even black the same,
so young souls harkening to such instructions do gather a bad disposition,
which afterward enhabiteth within them.

Now in this age wherein we live, which is so plentiful in wickedness, How
dangerous they are: also how to beware of them.
it is hard to be conuerfant among men without hearing such speeches: In
respect whereof we ought to be furnished with good preservatives, as in the
time of the plague, to keep away the evil air. The same may easily be had
and without any great cost: For as well Christian as human Philosophy do
offer them for nothing to those that list to take so much pains as to cull
them forth, as they would in a fair medowe cull such flowers as they best
like. Howbeit, since all men will not find so much leisure, this my small
labor shall supply the default of those slothful persons: wherein they shall
find the flowers ready gathered, which are so sweet as no filthy stench
shall be able to offend them.

I suppose we shall need no particular mark to know these of How they may be
known.
whom we speak, for their own speech will bewray them as the fruit does
the tree: neither to note the places where to find them: only this shall
suffice, that although they be scattered every where, yet are there three
principal fields wherein they do most prosper: the Court, the Armies, and the
Towns: and so long as virtue was in estimation their number was but small, but
through contempt thereof, they have abounded. Neither is it any marvel: for
as thorns spring up among Roses, and darnell with wheat: so does vice intrude
it self where virtue does, or ought most to shine, to the end to blemish the
same. Among the three sorts of enhabitants in the places aforesaid, we may
peradventure find some difference in their discon^^es and manner of
proceedings, albeit they all shoot at one thing, as an Archer, a Crosbowe man,
a Crosbow man, and a Harquebuzier shooting all at one but, though with sundry
Instruments, yet in intent do agree.

The Courtiers are very delicate in their speeches and pleasant Of the Epicures
of the Court.
quippes, pouring forth their reasons so sweetly and with such a facility
that a man shall be caught ere he be aware. Neither do their countenances or
courtesies, which are great helps to persuasion, any whit vary therefro. Thus
with these goodly speeches they cover whatsoever is imperfect in their
opinions, not that they think them imperfect: for they do follow them,
wishing others also to embrace the same. The ordinary life that is led in
those Courts that are alienated from virtue, is in part the cause of increase
of corruption in these men: for seeing pleasure so highly esteemed, they are
the more enflamed to enjoy the same: also through long custom in wishing and
plunging themselves therein, they do esteem nothing else, and to the same end
do refer all their actions. Thus by little and little of scholars they
grow to be masters in an art that draws those that put it in practice into
destruction. Among these do I not mean to place the virtuous Courtiers, whom
I take to be as unlike unto them as gould is to lead. But I wish only they
were admonished not to permit their purity to be contaminated with others
corruptions. Albeit we are not to think pleasure to be such an outward
imperfection, as fasteneth hold upon us so soon as we come near to ye same.
For the seeds thereof are in our selves, where they redily do sproot and
fructify according as they be hett by such objects as presents themselves to
our senses, unless by the power of reason they be restrained. Whosoever
sends or councelleth a young man to go to the places before mentioned to
learn any thing, ought first to admonish him that there he shall find few
good men, but many bad: also that the first sort will coldly induce him to al
honesty, but the latter will continually solicit him to whatsoever is
dishonest, so may he prevent the danger and provide to resist the same. For
these subtle doctors have no better sport then to meet with such game, whom
they assure themselves of, if they but once give them the hearing. Howbeit,
although they hate true virtue, yet do they sometimes in words commend it,
to the end to daunt none, but by their deeds they show that they do not
much regard it, as having no care but to take their pleasures.

Their ordinary speeches to those whom they seek to draw to Their speches to
those who^ they seek to seduce.
their opinion are these. Man's life is short and replenished with diverse
troublesome events: we are not aware that it is at an end before we know how
to guide our selves to find any comentation. For some led by common custume
and others by ignorance, do entangle them selves in diverse miseries which they
might well avoid, and so do leave behind them many pleasures which they
scarce perceive: and without the which man's life is a weighty burden to him:
yea and repugnant to nature who by her secret motions procures all living
things to delight in their being, and to seek after that which may delight
them. That as among all other creatures, man is the most excellent, so has he
most privileges: whereof one of the principal consists in recreating
himself in the beauty and variety of whatsoever is scattered over the face
of the earth. That his mind is capable to learn and comprehend: but it many
times happens that all have not like good hap to meet with good schools:
which are to be found in the courts of Princes and good towns, the principal
seats of conversation, where the best polished minds do choose to enhabite:
howbeit that the Court only bears the name, as the place where not good
instructions only are to be had, but also all sorts of objects that may
delight do make their residence. That the country man who keeps home,
spends his days in hunting some beast, or in eating the wortes of his
garden, where as those that flow in abundance do continually be hold goodly
things, hear al melodies, and smell all good sauors: yea if there be any sweet
delights in the world the same are with them to be found. Likewise that
whatsoever may tend to the exercise or contentation of the mind, is there
more plentiful, as delightful company, amity, courtesy, honor, favor,
wealth, rewards, offices, dignities, commendations, tryumphes and all
magnificence. To be brief, which way soever a man turn him self, all do
laugh and rejoice: These are the things which we ought to seek in this life,
to the end to bury such heaviness as happen thereto by so many unlooked for
accidents: And whosoever takes any other course resembles the covetous
person, which having (as a man may say) all felicity in his coffers, cannot
enjoy it: but daily increases his cares and miseries: so far are his senses
out of frame. That it is great folly to prescribe to man's life (as many do)
such straight bounds to coope it in, as a man would do a prisoner: for so do
they make it like unto death, which is repugnant unto nature: and devotion do
bring it into that state. For we see some of these Protestants that make a
conscience to laugh: on the other side, the Charterhouse Munke dare not speak,
and the Nuns do nothing but weep. But if no man may without those passions
have place in the chambers and stately halles of Paradize, they are well
content to leave the preeminence unto them, and for their parts to take some
room in the small corners of the outer courts. That those men are too
speculatiue with in regard of things to come, do set themselves in the stocks
in this world, and reject so many present benefits which are not created but
to be used. These are the short sermons which these good Courtiers do preach
in good and polished speeches unto the nouices whom they purpose to entrappe:
neither is it to be doubted but they be drawn by this Epicurian doctrine,
which is in these latter days very plausible to many. All these words, with
many more delivered with a grace and dexterity in the midst of these
theaters of pleasure, unto those simple souls that yet do walk in the paths
of youthful innocence, are of wonderful force to restrain them from all good
motions, and certainly the most part are shaken and infected with the same.
Wherefore it is necessary in this our age to replenish the vessels of our
souls with all good liquours, to the end those that be poisoned and still
flow in many places may find no entry. Here would I answer the proposition
of the false Courtier, were it not that we must also suffer his companions to
utter their speeches, which are not much different from him and tend both to
one end: and then answer them both together.

Now let us bring unto the stage the enhabitants of the towns. Of the Epicures
and Libertines which enhabit the Towns.
One sort termed the careless children, which are a kind of people that
pass not their leg of mutton, their flagon of wine, and a game at scailes I
will not speak of: but I purpose to make mention of the other sort which want
neither learning, eloquence, nor civility: men worthy continual conversation,
were not their souls polluted with this vain Philosophy, which tyeth true
felicity to sensible and corporal things. They do some what differ from the
Courtier that spoke before, for he does not utterly reject labor, but
delights in diversity of actions, and does somewhat aspire to high matters:
whereas these men love idleness, which they term Tranquillity, seeking to
eschew all causes of grief, which is one of the priucipal fruits of the
Epicurian doctrine: who also do diligently observe the precept proceeded out
of the same school: Hide thy life. Now some of them being learned do easily,
by the subtletie of their arguments, draw to them many scholars. But their
strongest means is the practice of the delicious life that they lead. For so
soon as any have once tasted of the liquorous morcels that it yields, it is
a great adventure, but he even glutteth himself: And the better to induce him
thereto, they draw him in with these speeches following. That men for the most
part have been wrapped in ignorance, which is one of the chiefest diseases of
the soul: whereof it Their speeches.
has followed that many times they have taken the false for the true: yea even
in the choice of the life that is best for them they have been greatly
deceived: but that those whose minds have been illuminated with the documents
of Philosophy, have better perceived what were good for them to choose. That
in them they have learned that among all temporal things subject to the
sundry blastes of fortune, the meanest are the safest. For proof whereof,
that we see the highest towers and trees most beaten with thunder, likewise
the lowest meadows for the most part drowned with great floodes: but that the
meanest buildings are freest from all such inconveniences. Even so is it in
man's life. For such as trot after the greatness thereof are tossed with a
thousand passions, and oftentimes with sudden destruction: On the other side,
the meanest sort are subject to many oppressions and injuries: But those that
keep the mean, do without the envy of the one sort and contempt of the
other, best preserve themselves, and withal enjoy a sweet peace both in body
and mind, which consists in the use of all delectable things, and in the
want of such as may be noisome. That albeit they enhabite the great towns,
where they may see a vehement flowing and ebbing of wordly folly yet does not
the same toss this out corner of the world, where their navigations does lie,
and where it is almost always calm, whence they behold the motions of all,
and smile at the vain hope and disordered desires of the one sort, and
bewail the simplicity that circumuenteth the other, while in the mean time
they let the world slide, which passing in her wonted course, moweth down all
that has had being: wherefore the best counsel that a man can take is to
possess himself, and not to become a bondslaue to diverse things, which to no
purpose do bereave him of that small liberty that he has, which also he
should make so dear account of. That it is not in vain that this brave
speech, Too much of nothing has been had in so great reputation, as being a
sentence that cutteth off all excess in human actions, and not only the
bad, but also those which under color of goodness, do tend to
transformations against nature, such as many endeavor to persuade to
themselves, who but simply considering of the weakness and frailty of man,
do imagine that they can live here below as Angels, and to the end to
attain thereto, do endeavor to bind themselves to impossible rules and
observations, albeit their bodies be composed of the elements and subject to
the alterations that follow that substance: but they weening to advance them
selves do recoyle backward, as the hammer wherewith a man strikes too hard
upon aslithie. For, say they, what else are so many superstitious custumes, such
austerities, devotions, and propounded fears, but rauishments of joy and
recreation whereto man's affections do tend? adding, that in seeking to make
it perfect, they make it insensible, after the manner of the Stoikes, which is,
to destroy their own figure: That the best way therefore is to follow the
rules which agree with nature, who is to be guided without violence and left
free: also that who so uses it otherwise, burieth himself before he be dead,
which is a punishment that those men have well deserved that have so badly used
the goodly privileges of life. These be the first speeches that they
propound: and then when a man is grown into domestical familiarity with
them, they do more at large disclose the secrets that before they durst not
reveal: For (as says Plutarke, speaking of such Epicures) they fear the
people, and for a show do embrace the religion allowed, to the end to be
tolerated, although in corners they scoff thereat.

Let us now hear also those that are brought up in the wars, Of Epicures and
Libertines brought up in the wars.
for now is it their turn to speak. But first I will say thus much: that I
mean not to condenme the lawful professions whereto men apply themselves, but
only such corruptions as fall out. The great labors of these warriors,
together with the dangers whereinto they hasard themselves, do procure them
earnestly to long for pleasure, as a most sweet medicine for their pains:
also to eschew all sorrowful objects, as being but too much affrighted at the
images of death which they see so often. And when they have catched some good
booty, it is not to be demanded whether they study to make good cheer: for
both days and nights are too short for them. And this proverb which by the
scripture is applied to profane persons, is usually in their mouths, Let us
eat drink and be merry, for peradventure to morrow we shall dye. This is a
close approbation of the perishing of the soul together with the body, which
they will replenish with all earthly goods, for that they be ignorant of the
heavenly. When a young gentleman comes to learn the feats of war, they
fashion his soul after a terrible manner, if he cleave too much to them. Their
speech is not so much painted as the former, but as it Their speeches.
were enterlaced and full of jesting. The Soldiers (say they) must aim at
both pray and pleasure, and eschew all melancholy, which they return to the
covetous misers and Hermites, for covetousness and devotion can have no
abiding with the soldiers, the one making them to hate, the other to fear:
likewise that they must not feed delicatlie, for that quaileth their courages.
To be brief, that those which mind to bring into the Theaters where Mars
plays her bloody tragedies, fastings, portuaises, and contemplation, do but
put forth themselves for mocking stocks, considering that there is nothing to
be looked for but triumphs, rewards, and commendations, which are achieved by
contrary ways. These be the petty rudiments of their schools whereby we may
perceive how all three sorts do agree in the rejecting of piety, which is
the worthiest and most precious ornament of our souls.

I know such wicked speeches do deserve to be buried in silence, Why the
speeches of the Epicures are here set down: also the means to eschew the
infection of the same.
also that neither the mouth of man should utter them, neither the paper bear
them: but now other far worse are so common, that we need not to make any
doubt of revealing the^, so as we do it only to the end to warn others to
beware, and to show the means how. For as men set manifest marks in certain
places in the great streams where the rocks do lie hidden under water, that
the sailers may escape them, so having marked the places where these dangerous
shelues are harbored, I thought good to set down some small description of
their form. Many there are who being ignorant of these dangers do thrust
through the midst them: and these are to be moaned as much as the others are
to be blamed, who perceiving them, do seem to have a pleasure to make
shipwreck thereon, as taking their beginning to be very sweet, though the end
be sower. The best way to escape without scath, is to carry with them the
quadred, that is, wisdom, and the card, which are the goodly precepts to
discern the true from the false. For when the veil that covered this false
life is taken away, and that the filthiness thereof appears, that man is
very beastly that immediately flies not from it for fear of polluting
himself in so filthy a puddle. We have already scene the beautiful show of
this veil which shines in the painted and sweet speeches of these teachers:
and especially in those which they make to run down so sweetly in the
beginning: for men would think they should bring them to heaven: but when
they gather to their conclusions, they make a sudden stop, taking the way
not to any pleasant places of the earth, but even to the darkest dens therein.
And in the mean time their intermingling of the fair with the foul, and of
the good with the badde, do dazell the eyes of the simple, and dim their
judgments, whereby they cannot at the first perceive their iutentes, which in
deed they seek to cover, because they cannot catch the birds without
counterfaicing such pleasant calls.

But least we might be deceived, it is not amiss to show the fallacies of
their intangling arguments, reducing them into a more brief and manifest
form.

The Courtiers is this. The instructions of the Court, with the examples of the
quiokest wits do teach man to follow such things as minister A more brief
order of the discourses of the sundry sorts of these Libertines.
pleasure and contentation, as a benefit greatly to be desired in this life:
and contrariwise toteschue all such as are sorrowful and noisome, which also
make it miserable.

But devotion and the straight rules of religion do plunge it in 1000
anguishes, make it melancholy, and hinder it from attaining to this end.

We must therefore reject them, and ensue those that bring more delight.

The second argument gathered out of the Epicures speech is this.

The best rules to man's life are the natural motions of the soul, somewhat
helped with the precepts of Philosophy.

But the superstitions which transport man to imagined perfections, strange to
man's reason do turn it out of this way.

We are therefore rather to follow that which is according to nature, and
conformeth it self thereto.

The soldiers is this. Those things that effeminate the minds and daunt the
courages of the soldiers, taking from them their wonted cheerfulness which
they ought to have, do in no wise agree with their profession.

But the rules of religion which commend humility, forgetfulness of injuries,
and a fearful meditation of death, do work all these effects.

They are therefore inconvenient thereto.

By this abrigement of speech we may (as I think) better comprehend The
examination of the arguments or sophismes aforegoing.
the speakers meaning, as seeing it naked and clear from that which before
kept it disguised: neither do I suppose that any man, pare deaie that these
argument are grounded upon impietis and intemperancie: for as well those men's
purposes tend only to let go the bridle to bodily affections, to the end
to wallowe and glut themselves in all pleasure, and to reject the laws and
admonitions that labor to restrain them within the bounds of virtue. But if
we do more nearly mark their arguments, we shall see that all their
conclusions are false, as also are the most part of their propositions, which
must not seem strange, because that in the approbation of wickedness we
cannot proceed but by falsehoode and lying.

The principal thing that ye propound to dazell men's eyes withal, is that all
creatures do long after whatsoever may rejoice them, and eschew whatsoever may
make them sorrowful. This do I with them grant to be true, and that nature
teaches every reasonable soul the same lesson: howbeit with this condition,
that eueuerie one use it as to him shall be most convenient. In beasts this
appetite is ruled by certain instinctions which nature has given them,
whereby they order themselves: and usually we see them seldom change this
order: But man is endued with reason to guide his actions, whereto he yields
very small obedience: which also albeit it were much greater than it is, yet
could it not escape s^umbling and falling into things vicious: considering how
reason her self having been in a manner blinded by original sin stands in
need of a guide, so far is she from being altogether capable of the
conduct of affections: but is it possible to find any man whose affections
are so well ordered as to rejoice at nothing but that which is good? Such a one
must we seek in the other world: for in this, wickedness, vanity, and
delights, do please far better, even without comparison, than that which is
good: so as this universal desire (which in beasts is ruled after their being)
is very imperfect in those that have the use of reason, until it be after a
sort restored through heavenly humiliation.

This is their goodly foundation which takes more of the bad than of the good,
howbeit they nevertheless proceed to lay a great Confutation of the Libertines
argumet touching the pleasure.
building thereupon. For (say they) the delightful ought to be a most
sovereign felicity to man, since his own forcible desires are so lively bent
to such an end.

Heetevpon if a man should deuiand of them, what is the delight of the
intemperate person, they dare scarce be acknowen, for shame forbids them to
say impudicitie or gluttony: wherein we may brholde the beauty of their
brave Philosophy, which makes man's sovereign felicity like unto that of a
hog or goat. Neither is it to any purpose for them to reply, that they can
well enough shun such villainous excess: for experience does but to plainly
teach, that when man fixes his felicity in bodily pleasures, he does extremely
exceed in the use of the same: and herein does all the vice consist, when we
exceed the mean, whether in wishing or enjoying: besides that, whatsoever is
of it self wicked, we ought neither to wish nor labor for. The doctrine of
Philosophers teaches that there be three sorts of good, The pleasant, the
profitatable, and the honest. Also that as the profitable are to be preferred
before the pleasant, so the honest are to be esteemed above them both, as
far exceeding them in all excellency: and these do properly pertain to
man, who only among all creatures is capable of virtue. Who so therefore
prefers pleasure before and sets virtue which is the true honest good:
last commits a great error, and places himself among brute beasts, who
do respect no more but to satisfy their lusts. Neither will I forgette to say
that the good of pleasure comes behind the good of profit, but that which
accompanies the honest is without comparison the most perfect, neither is
there any falsehoode hidden therein as in the others, which for the most part
do breed sorrow and sacietie: whereas those which consist in the enjoying of
virtue are pure and clean, not subject to alteration, but continually yielding
content. This shows the blindness of our Libertines speeches, when they say
that pleasure is above (...) things to be desired, meaning of inferiors, for
they ough(...) add the honest to make their proposition the more receiueable.
The second part of the confutation touching the sorrow which the Libertines
doeco^demne.


Now let us speak of the other part thereof, which so earnestly persuadeth to
eschew whatsoever may breed grief or sorrow: for therein do they account the
greatest part of their felicity to consist. Heerevpon we may say that the
principle of such affection is bad, since it tends only to eschew the thing
that alters the temperature of the body, and breeds discommoditie to the
mind, because the same seems to be a perverting of the order of nature: but
they have other considerations. For as they refer almost all to the body, so
they think it a great inconvenience to suffer, whereof also insueth another,
which they think to be no less, that is, a hinderance from inioying of
pleasures: which their false opinions do minister unto them double torments. I
will not deny but he that professes wisdom, ought so far forth as he may,
to eschew all griefs. Howbeit when they happen unto him, he must not make the
accident greater than it is, but by the valyancie of his courage diminish the
same. Whereas these men to the contrary do imagine every word of sorrow to
be ten, such a delycate felicity have they forged themselves. They also show
themselves to be of small judgment in that they seek to shun sorrows and
griefs, and yet do wallow in all pleasures which draw them after them by
douzens. It is as if a man to keep himself from wet, should run up to the
chin into the river, whom we might well say to be besides himself. Whereupon
Erasmus very ^^tlie says, that pleasures at their coming do flatter, but at
their departure do leave us full of sorrow and heaviness.

The Town Libertines do incomparably fear these inconveniences The
cowardlines of those Libertines that enhabit the towns.
more than the other, because that having chosen the more effeminate life,
themselves have through custom grew as tender as the wax that melts
against the Sun, which in them is a great token of pusilanimitie so sore to
fear that which so many vile and base persons do bear with so great
facility. Yea, we shall sometimes see women and young children make so small
account of the griefs that prick them, that you shall not hear one
lamentable voice proceed out of their mouths, which are the goodly fruits of
constancy. But who should better know this than they that think themselves in
finenesse of wit and knowledge to pass all others? In respect whereof their
opinions in the ordering of their lives ought in soundnes and truth to pass
the common sort. They imagine that they have laid a sure foundation, in saying
that we Answer to their argument concerning the motions of nature: also
whether it be well done to hide their lives.
must follow the motions of our nature, whereto nevertheless they also add
the help of precepts, whereby they show that they account it imperfect. But it
were better for them freely to confess the great imbecilitie and weakness
thereof, than by extolling it so high, to put it in hazard of a greater fall,
and themselves do but too often try how much it is inclined to evil rather
than to good. Howbeit although it were much purer and sounder than it is, yet
would they through the bad sustenance wherewith they feed it utterly corrupt
it. And what manner of Philosophy is this of theirs, which seeks to straighten
crooked things by those that be more crooked: This is the occasion, in my
opinion, that they so love to hide their life, least men should perceive their
disordered manners. I will rehearse unto you the admonition of Plutarke to such
people, for the same will suffice. Plutarke in his treatise, whether this common
speech Hide thy life, be well said.
It is (says he) a point of dishonestie so to live as none shall know how
thou have lived: for if thou be endued with virtue thou ought to let it
appear. If with vice, to seek to have it cured. Whom then may this Proverb
Hide thy life profit? The ignorant, the wicked, or the fools? No. It were as
if thou should say to them. Hide thy ague, or thy frenzy, let not the
Physician know of it. Go creep into some dark corner where no man may see
thee or thy passions: Go hide thy self with the incurable and mortal disea^e
of thy vices: cover thy envy, thy adultery, and excess, as a hasty and
lof^ie poulse, least thou be showed and delivered to such as are able to
admonish, correct, and cure them: Let us also look what commodity the hiding
of a man's self, and not to let any in an know him, does breed to the
honest. It is as much as says Plutarke, as if a man should say to Epaminondas:
Take no charge of the army: to Lycurgus, Trouble not thy self about the
making of laws: to Thrasibulus, Kill not the tyrants: to Py^hagoras, Teach
not: or to Socrates, Make no discourse.

Hereby we may very easily comprehend that those which seek to persuade
others to live in these small corners, have no lust to make men to amend their
imperfections, or to serve the the common wealth, but rather that they seek to
glut themselves with all pleasure. But as for him whom we see so disposed,
and past amendment, we may well apply unto him the saying of the same
Philosopher to the brother of Epicurus. Go and hide thy self with thy harlot
Hedia and other thy yonckors, since that contemning all honesty thou placest
thy felicie in the pleasures of the flesh. Truly such ends are to be buried
in the darkness of the night, least their wicked example should stir up
others to filthy imitation.

The Courtly Libertine differs from these men in this, that he Answer to the
errors of the courtly Libertine.
seeks to live in more light and to be known: how be it he is so sly,
that he forgets no devise wherewith to cover that which he does well know
many will reprove. But he speedeth as well as ye woman, who to cover her
nakedness puts on a white, thin and fine lawne veil, whereby she may be
seen as plain as before: for even so may we easily behold the mudde that
is in the bottom of their water: and it is great pity he employeth not his
so many qualyties and exercises as well in the use of virtue, as of his
pleasures. But after a man has suffered himself to be by this sorceresse
bewitched, it is very hard for him to abandon her, so many hooks has she
to with-holde those that do follow her.

We have already seen how he alleges the example of Courts and finest
wits, fayning that as well the one as the other do all tend to that end.
But I deny it. For although men do there seek pleasant matters, yet are not
those their principal ends, but underlings thereto, and as it were, some
sweet refreshing to life, after it has been too much wearyed and toiled with
cares. For I think there be few (but their like) that will prefer the
pleasure of melodious music, before the goodly harmony of sundry
commendable amities there contracted: either glut themselves with a pleasant
banquet, rather then save their dear friend out of present peril, least so
should they seem to have but small regard to the contenting of their souls:
for their body being filled they are satisfied. Yea, they make it a
bond-slaue, says Plutarke, in forming the contemplative part thereof, not to
think upon any other thing but the body, which is as much as for to hale it
down with sensual concupisences, and because in his small works he has
eloquently discoursed against many other Epicurian opinions, I will refer the
Reader for his better satisfaction unto him.

Now must I say some what also of our warlyke Epicure, A refutation of the
errors of the Souldierlike Libertine.
who, as the nature of wary is to disorder all things, so would he bring
such a confusion upon the most profitable senses that remain in his soul, as
they might not keeepe him down, but suffer him for to follow his furious
appetites, whereas he is so euylly accustomed in these corrupted schools,
that nothing but the glutting of himself therewith can delight him, even as the
Fishers nets are haled into the bottom of the water with small morselles of
Lead thereunto fastened. He makes a goodly brag, as if he would tread under
foot whatsoever he thinks may seem to lead him unto fear and delicacie,
and yet he marketh not that most of his pastimes are of like nature.

For when he has suffered a little, what is his delyght, but to wallowe in the
puddles of Bacchus and closettes of Venus, until that grief, weakness, or
poverty do pull him forth again? O what a goodly mean he has to
maintain the virtue of Fortitude in strength, by nourishing it in dishonest
pleasures! Nevertheless to the end to moderate the rudeness of martyall
life, I will set down an argument clean contrary unto his, and conclude
that it is necessary many times to use such things as may mollify and
appease it: but with what drugges must it be done? With piety, humanity, and
temperaunce, which never quail the courage, whereas that meat wherewith he
feeds his soul does make it both dull and savage. Our aforesaid Libertines
in whom particularly there is small disagreement, do in general very well
agree among themselves to Whether Christian profession do banish joy out of
the heart.
contemn and reject the Christian life, as being persuaded that it banisheth
all joy out of the heart, and keeps man all his life time in as demure a
countenance as the same which a bride counterfaiteth for one day only. And
because they dare not openly speak evil of it, they revenge themselves by
slandering it secretly among such as are of their own fraternity. This
monstrousness of these later days might be thought berie strange, were it not
that I consider that the antiquity of the Jews engendered the Saduces who
denied the resurrection of the dead and immortality of the souls, which
makes me not to wonder so much at the imperfections of our time: for if we be
Gods people, so were the Jews: albeit we see yt as well yt one as ye other
have gone very far astraie. In Plutarks time, there were many such people: but
the same were heathen men blinded with ignorance and pricked forward with
their desires, to whom upon this point he speaks so parti^ently, that I
would take his speech to be sufficient to awaken and amend those that live in
our days.

These be his words. The Epicures do scorn the sacrifices and In his treatise
that by the doctrine of Epicurus no man can live merely.
ceremonies which we use to the God, saying that those that assist thereat, do
it not of any pleasure that they conceive therein, but for a certain fear
that they have of them, which is manifestly false: For in truth there is no
prosperity that more delyghteth good men than that which they conceive in the
temples, neither any time more joyful than those feasts, neither can they see
or do any thing that better pleases them than when they sing or assist at the
sacrifices to the Gods. For is not there the soul heavy or melancholic as if
it had to deal with some tyrant, but rather wheresoever it weeneth that God
is, there does it soonest put away all fear and care, and give it self to
mirth. Afterward he adds. Now says Diogenes, all belong the Gods, and among
friends all things are common, but the good are friends to the Gods. It is not
the^ possible but that the devout and such as are friends to the Gods: must
withal be happy, neither that the virtuous man, as he that is temperate and
just, can be without devotion or religion. Is not this very well spoken of a
heathen who never had but false instructions, to conclude that he, which has a
lively impression of religion can not be without felicity and joy* Let
therefore our Libertines of these days, who make themselves so blind in the
midst of all this heavenly light at the leastwise receive the instruction of
this philosopher (even they that so much esteem of profane writers) who did
see more clearly in those passed darknesses, then these men will do in the
perfect light. I am of opinion that who so list to read this his so excellent
a a treatise through, out of the which I have shredde these small morcels, it
will suppress in him a great part of these false opinions, by seeing them so
sufficiently confuted, which shall excuse me from repetition, referring the
readers to the original. We shall not need (as I think) any other doctors
then the Philosophers to confute these people which do thus falsely pollute
the purest principles of man's life: for it were too great an honor to the^ to
have the heavenly rules alleged against the^. Howbeit in as much as they dare
in their corners make their skoffes thereof, it is very requisite by the same to
disclose the filthiness of their disorders and return their atunts upon them
selves.

They imagine that they have gotten a great advantage of other The confutation
of the Libertines alligations against the terrors of hell.
men, in saying, that they be not terrified with the fantastical imaginations
of the torments of tell fire, which say they, are but devises invented to
restrain such as exceed and live against nature. But I would ask them,
(albeit their false proposition were true) to whom those propounded terrors
may better be applied then to them selves, who live as much against the nature
of men as conformably with that of beasts. Truly they cut their own throats
with their own knife: and also whatsoever countenance they bear to fear
nothing, yet we see no people that stand in more fear of bodily punishment and
death then they. And whereof may that proceed, but of a natural feeling
printed in their consciences, which under temporal corrections and calamities
do represent unto them the eternal pains prepared for such as flee and
revolt from God? And that is it which Solomon says, The wicked do flee when
none do pursue them, and unto them is death terrible. Have not the
philosophers also said that the most grievous and assured punishment of
wickedness is a continual remorse in the offender, which leaves him no rest?
The aforesaid things, which even they of whom we speak do try, are as it
were demonstrations and sensible approbations of Gods judgments after this
life. Some do endeavor so much as in them lies to have no feeling hereof in
themselves (because it is the continual diminisher of their joy) but they can
not possibly compass it. And they are far deceived to think yt good men be
so terrified with the remembrance of hell: for although they abhor it, yet
are they hereof assured, namely that there is no condemnation to those that
are in Jesus Christ and walk not according to the flesh that is which live not
as Epicures. Moreover, they know that hell, with all the power there of was
lead captive in the A consolation to the good against the apprehension of hell:
also how fore affliction tormenteth the Libertines.
triumph of our redeemers resurrection, and therefore cannot swallow up any of
those that are partakers in the benefit of this victory. Whereupon they
stand in no fear for themselves, albeit they take compassion of others whom
they see to take the way toward this gulf which is to them invisible. Let us
a little consider how the Epicures and Libertines whenever they suffer any
adversity, whereof they be not exempt, do bear the fame, as also what
consolations they use. We may say that they take them as unwillingly as
children do the rod: for since of the deprivation of sorrow they make a wished
felicity, it must needs follow that the presence thereof is unto them a very
odious mishap. Nevertheless they can yet comfort one another, saying: If it be
violent they shall be soon delivered from it, and that being reduced to
nothing, they shall no longer feel any thing: but if it be bu^ small, they
will seek to lay all the fault sometimes upon men, and sometimes upon the
elements, as if all creatures should be contributories to the preservation of
their bodily felicities: Al these consolations do far differ from those of the
true Catholics, who are instructed in the truth: for when they The comforts of
the true Catholics both in affliction and prosperity.
fall into any tribulation, their souls are not troubled, as knowing
assuredly that it is God that visteth them after a fatherly manner, for their
good and amendment, as not willing they shoud perish: assuring themselves that
after their humiliation, and calling upon his favorable goodness they shall
find such remedy as may be most convenient for them. Yea, although the
greatness of the peril, or vehemency of the mishap should even carry them
away, yet would they not sorrow without measure for abandoning a frail and
transitory life, for one fully replenished with all eternal goodness. Neither
do these men guide themselves otherwise in prosperity than in adversity,
measuring them according to the pleasure which they breed unto the bodies, as
also they measure the other by the ell of their bodily sorrow. But the Stoike
Philosophers whom they scorn, are sufficient to reprove them: for they say
that to speak properly, vice only may be termed mishap, because it
transfigureth man into a wicked devil or beast, which grief does not, for it
oftentimes makes them better: likewise that the true good which gives perfect
contentment, is that of the soul which consists in the goodly actions of
virtue, and the high searches of the truth.

But in as much as this is well enough known, I will persist no The abuse of
the Libertines in the use of the things that they feel after, and wherein
they ground their schcitie.
farther therein, but return where I left, pretending to show the abuses which
the Libertines do commit in those things that they seek after and delight in.
Let us put the case some good succession or other benefit be fallen to one of
them. The first thing that then he should do, if he were as he ought to
be, were to give thanks to God, as to him that is the author of all
goodness. Secondly, to rejoice for being freed from poverty, and being
better able to exercise tha^ before the actions of virtue, as charity and
liberality. Thirdly, to use this riches conveniently or honestly, as well to
the benefit of others, as to his own commodity and recreation: but what does
he, but refer all to himself, neglecting al acknowledgement to God, (of whom
he takes small keep) and his other duties, and then says to himself and his
coadiutors. Come let us prepare our selves to all The Christanmanes delight.
kinds of pleasures, since we now have means to enjoy them, and cast away
care: for the pleasures received will never be lost, and the remembrance
thereof is still pleasant. But the true Christian man's pleasure is far other:
for so soon as he receives any benefit, by and by his heart rises to
Godward, and he confesses and acknowledges that he has heard him, yea, that
of his bounteous liberality he has prevented him, or that although for his
ingratitude he deserved to be chastised, yet he has so far favored him as
to grant him all things necessary for his present life: and meditating upon
these things in his soul he rejoices, and with David sings: The Lord is my
only support, and he that does me feed. How can I then lack any thing
whereof I stand in need? He does me fold in coats most safe, the tender
grass fast by: And after drives me to the swarms which run most pleasantly,
etc.

In the court we may see many who when their master has given them any
reward, do never cease praising of him, saying: O what a good master we have,
that gives us such rewards? Are we not bound to love him heartely, and
withal fidelity to serve him? If men can then so delight in the
acknowledgement of humane benefits, what are they to do for divine?
Undoubtedly those that be well taught do delight much more in heavenly: for
they know that a Prince loves to day and hates to morrow: but ye God never
hates those whom he has registered for his in ye book of life, but loves
the^ with a most perfect love. Another pleasure also yt ensues this, is when yt
which a man has gotten he uses by rules of virtue. For if I be a magistrate
and have preserved diverse innocents from unjust oppression: that my prince
favors me, and I have reported the truth unto him: either that having had
wealth I have relieved those whom poverty was ready to thrust down into their
graves: will not all this be unto me an occasion of greater joy then if I had
used these commodities to hurt my enemies, to eat more delicate morselles, or
to be costly clothed all over to make men gaze upon me, as upon as upon an Ox
crowned whom men use to lead up and down the streets? I refer it to the
judgment of the wise. A Christian shall also find further occasion to rejoice
when by outward benefits as well his mind as body are freed from sorrow and
sufferance which proceed of the want of these goods: but this is with a
moderate joy which continues and resembles a calm and still running water,
whereas the joy of the Libertines does rather resemble the inundations of a
swift stream.

I dare affirm that even the bodily pleasures (I speak of such That the
pleasures of the body which the Christians do enioie, are more delectable and
firm then those wherein the Liibertines do plague themselves.
as are lawful) which they so storm for, are not so pleasant unto them as
unto those whom they take to be so entangled in sorrow. The first place will I
attribute unto those which they receive in taste and feeling, which are the two
senses that they seek soonest to satisfy, notwithstanding nature has placed
them further from the understanding then the rest, as those which are most
repugnaunt thereto. In this carrier do I already perceive some not only
running but even dying after one Flora or Lays: but in their such pursuites,
yea and enioyings, they shall hardly persuade me that their pleasures do
surmount their pains: for if there be any purgatory in the world, a man may
say that it is there. One cries out that he burns, another that he freezeth:
one will go hang himself, another will banish himself: thus do they pay
beer for such wares. Such loves will some man say, do not pierce so violently:
but I say yes. For unchaste flames do burn, where the shame-faste do but
heat only. Again, after they have enjoyed their purpose, what follows? two
very contrary effects, according to the diversities of humors. For we shall see
some not to love women, but even to worship them as Goddesses, submitting
themselves to such vile bondage, that easily they grow most vilely to
unworthy actions: Is not this then a worthy pleasure that makes the soul so
senseless and astonished? Others contrariwise, after they have once tasted of
this food do disdayn it: not to the end to taste no more, but to long after
change. Wherein they very well declare the vanity and shortness of bodily
delights. Yet is not the tragedy ended, the mischief whereof we may say to
consist in the Catastrophe. For most of those that have best played their parts
do find themselves rewarded according to their works, namely with debility of
members, gowtes, pockes, pains in the stomache, and which is more, their life
is shortened and their hearts and minds weakened. These be the fruits that
grow in this goodly garden of pleasure which these our masters do so honor:
where in the beginning they gather a few roses, but after they have a while
sported themselves, they step before they be aware into a Laberinth of
pricking thor^s, the coming forth whereof is perilous, and the torment
perpetual. Now let us match unto these such men as desire honest pleasures, so
shall we the better see the difference between them. When in their youth the
sparks of purest love have somewhat warned their minds they seek (...)eet
objects, using for their load star honesty, and for their quadrant the
remainder of their reason. Being thus guided they escape shipwreck, and
oftentimes have a very calm navigations, I mean those which lawfully do
labor after lawful things, have their pleasures not full of launchings
forth, but seasoned with sweetness, replenished with steadfastnesse, and such
as leaves behind it neither remorse nor repentance, as do the others. These
amities may also be termed the kirnelles, which bring forth the fair and
great families, whose end is ordinarily crowned with contentation. Neither do
those men that are taken with the furies of Bacchus govern themselves any
better than these disciples of Venus. For some there are whom a man cannot say
to be borne to live, but to live to eat and drink: others are not so deeply
plunged in this gluttony, but in lycorousnesse and delicacie. The first are so
disposed, that their belly seems to be a cauldron, and their stomach a turn,
for they be continually nailed and chained to the table, where they fill both
the one and the other, until the load be so weighty that it ouerturneth his
man, or carry him away upon all four. But who so should think them to be any
whi^ ashamed thereof, shall be greatly deceived: for they account it a great
glory after their long strife in so sweet a combat, to be carried away
triumphantly into a bed, where they recover new forces. And then they know
very well these two great Captains White and Claret to be invincible, also
that the brauest must of force stoop unto them, as a Pigmean might do to
Hercules. In opinion they consent with that good fat Abbot of old time, who
when his friends told him that such like exercise would shorten his days,
made them this answer: My friends take no thought for me, for as it is an
honor to a good knight to die in the battle: so it is an honor to an Abbot
to burst at his table. I will not speak of the pleasure that they take in
these continual and reiteratedtepasts, because they be but too well known,
especially to such as have trauayled some parts of the North countries, where
such excesses are more common than with us: albeit it might beseem those that
are endued with piety, and yet do practice it, to leave the abuse thereof to
the Libertines of whom we speak. The second sort are not so disordinate as
these, but do intertain themselves with much more civility and desicacy, and
in liew of swallowing down all that they eat and drink, they will only
taste of it, to the end thereof to have the longer delight before they be
satisfied. These men be somewhat careful to hide the filthiness of
drunkenness, but most diligent to seek means of diversity of all meats,
that by such variety their appetites may find more delight. If they can meet
with a good cook, he is better thought of among them than ever was Plato or
Aristotle in the Academy of Athens. All their meditatious consist in invention
of licorousnesse, and calling to mind their passed good cheer, and thus still
aiming at their first mark, they pollute themselves in the like puddle. But
they do it with more cunning, as knowing better how to enjoy bodily pleasures
tha^ ye others, also to cover their filthiness. As for their Bacchanalean
rewards, as well the one as ye other are partakers of them: and it is hard to
have continued that course long, but they shall feel the forerunners of
sickness who follow after, and are as perverse as the former alleged.
Likewise we may see what gain is to be gotten in serving a master that is so
liberallin all kinds of sorrows to those that choose to cleave rather to
their bellies than to abstinencie. Far other is the pleasure of those that
do moderatly use the gifts of God which he sends for our sustenance. For
taking the same in such sort, their souls are never endangered with abuse of
them: so that remaining free in the conduct of their sensuality, they sometime
give it the raines, and sometime restrain it neither more nor less, but as a
man would do when he walks a young horse in the fields. And in so doing as
well ye soul as the body do rejoice in the inioying of those benefits whereof
it only has the use, when she sees them fettered within the bounds yt she
has prescribed. But what more gracious and goodly a banquet can there be than
the same wherein as well the one as the other be satisfied* Whith is always
practiced among such as be adorned with piety and virtue. Yet do they not
disdain exquisite food, neither pleasant wines, but do esteem of the^ as of
other necessary things, which when they want, and have not even those things yt
are common to ye (...)er sort, they do nevertheless not storm or languish after
the^, as knowing that a small thing will suffice nature. But one of their
chiesest considerations is to make these means to serve for the inioying of
the conversation of their like, and more and more to knit up amity, and to
hear such good and pleasant speeches as do both instruct and delight. For as
Plutarke says, the proper work of Bacchus consists not in dronkennes,
Plutarke in the banker of the seven Sages.
neither in drinking of wine or tasting of delicious food, but in the rejoicing
affection and familiarity yt it breeds between one and other. For unto
diverse who before scarce knew each other, having as a man should say, mo(...)d
and steeped the hardness of their hearts in banquets, even as pron is mollified
in the fire, it has given the^ a beginning of commix^ion and incorporation of
one among another. Those men yt thus behave themselves I suppose to have much
more pleasure than the Libertines, yea, then they who can have but little,
except when they are invited to some stately feast, where they hear the sound
of the Cornets in a great hall, with the murmr of the troop there present,
and see every thing glister with rich furniture, with the diversity of dances
and masks. Truly all this dazeleth, yea, and brings on sleep the senses,
rather than rejoice the souls, even of those yt are well disposed, yet are
there many yt seed only upon such food. Now in the use of other temporal
goods we may affirm Of the contentation of Christians in the use of temperall
goods.
yt the man which professes Christian life takes like pleasure as in the
former. For since he confesses yt receiving of them at Gods hands who is the
same God of them, so does he grant him the joyful inioying of them. And how
should he not rejoice in the good, since the evil can never terrefie him as it
is written in the 112. Psalm. No tidings ill can make him quail, who in the
Lord sure hope does set: his heart is firm, his fear is past, etc. For when
they happen unto him, he receives the^ as merciful chastisementes, and
studieth to reap profit in the^. Whereto we shall hardly persuade these men yt we
now have to do with, until experience has given them some taste. As also our
whole speech tends only to give the^ an appetite to taste thereof: for if
these small delights, which perish almost as soon as they be borne, can so be
w^^ch their senses; what effects shall so many and sundry delectations, as
piety and temperance do bring forth, work in their souls, except to purge
and cleanse them from all those blemishes and errors, which almost ^^mme all
the brightness of the same* Let them therefore abandon this life that has but
over much affinity with brutishness, and embrace the same, which for want of
knowledge they reject: for they may already perceive by my former speech that
there is as great difference between these two, as between a handful of mire
and a handful of pearls. Concerning the point whereof they stand in most
doubt, which is, whether of the two is the more pleasant, it is already proned
to be the Christian: If they say that in the paths thereof they many times
find pricking thorns, with many small stones to stumble at, I must needs
answer, that that is but a small matter, since they have also the remedies at
hand. But in the ways wherein they walk, as well secretly as openly, let them
consider how many serpents lie hidden that bite them, and how many deep pits
they find, the falling whereinto is most dangerous, yea, and mortal. And the
most horible matter of all they come to in the end, viz. a most filthy and
abominable name, wherewith oftentimes: they hear themselves blased even
whilst they yet live, and afterward a headlong downfall into the eternal
gulf where is no redemption. And contrariwise they which have pity and
virtue, being a sweet savor to their like, are assured after the end of
their long journey upon earth to be worthily received into the celestial
habitations.

The 25. Discourse.
That every man according to his capacity and vocation may use contemplation.

MAny even in old time held opinion that Contemplation Against those that have
deprived most men of contemplative life.
properly appertained only to the Philosophers, whose number could then be but
very small, as also they did likewise meruaylouslie commend such actions of the
mind, yea, and that life which was destined only thereunto. The like do some
men in these days attribute unto those who being withdrawn out of the world
do live in Monasteries and Hermitages, in that being thus separated they may
the better tend to spiritual exercises: which do in quantity far surpass
the others. And they be in part induced thus to judge, because they imagine
that the common sort know not almost what contemplation means: and withal
that they see many wise men disdain it, as if it were some unpleasant or very
difficult mystery. Moreover, they hear the Munkes, who brag that they have
taken it upon them, say that it does belong to them only. All this has caused
them as it were inseparably to unite such actions unto those lives which seem
altogether freed from earthly cares. This so goodly and high a matter would
deserve that we should begin more gravely to discourse thereof: but I would
not (neither peradventure could I) as wishing others to go seek to be
instructed therein, in the writings of the learned where they be perfectly
examined, as my self have done: Wherefore my intent is to speak meanly
thereof according to my ability, so to help those that fly no higher then my
self. And this is it that has caused me first to set down common opinions,
that afterward we may with the more ease climb to the truer. Now as we
account him a spoyler which appropriateth that thing to himself that ought to
be common, so is it a kind of usurping, when by over free judgment many are
made unworthy the benefits, wherein they may have part, and the same adjudged
to a few Munkes under color that they attribute it to themselves only. We
must not therefore do either the one or the other, but rather endeavor to make
all persons capable of some portion of this spiritual benefit. Experience
teaches That all men are capeable of co^templation.
that the gifts which we term to be of nature, are distributed with as
merueilous indifferency as is observed among mettalles. In the mean time,
when by good doctrine we are taught to prevail of whatsoever is in us, we may
reap such utility as may be profitable to every man's condition. For, to
speak by similitudes, they whose minds are as it were gould or silver, may
lift them much higher than they that have them but of copper or iron: Albeit
that when the most bases^ substances are polished, they also yield some
beauty. Every man will confess that among men the country clown is most
abject and of least account, and yet he that list to studyvpo^ it may make most
of them by little and little to comprehend that there is an eternal deuinitie,
which has created the world: that there be immortal souls: and that after
this life there shall be a more happy life for those that have believed in
Christ the Son of GOD. Then they afterward coming to think and meditate
upon these things, what else do they but enter into the paths of the highest
Contemplation. No man therefore ought to think himself utterly unworthy: for
he shall make himself a brute beast by thinking that he can not participate
therein.

But what shall we say of those who being endued with good wits (as many
gentlemen and others) do a many of them in liew The misery of many (...) sake
their part of this privilege and reprove it.
of lifting up their minds, bow them down and captiuate them to earthly mix,
rather then make them walk at liberty through the heavens, there to behold
the diversity of beauties that do rejoice the soul which is a prisoner in
this mortal body? Truly we are to mourn for them, that they are ignorant
of this goodly privilege, either if they be not ignorant, that they make no
accomp^ of it. Some there are which term Contemplation a high folly and the
vizard of Mouckish idleness, and scorn the same as they use to do diverse
other good things which they reject, even as the man that is out of taste
rejects good food, No man need to wish them any other punishment then they
inflict upon themselves in denying the enjoying of a benefit which they will
not know, and yet do contemn it as some mischief already known.

By this that I have said, it appears that the use of Contemplation is not
tied to that life only which seems to be wholly vowed thereto: for there be
many Monckes that fall to riot, and many Artificers which contemplate: and
without this benefit which few seek to enjoy, human miseries and
continual cares would take from us the greatest part of that felicity which
we labor for. This may be a beginning of answer to the before alleged
opinions: for in my mind it is more available to declare what this
contemplative power is and the true objects thereof, to the end we may the
better know how to help our selves therewith, and the need that we have
thereof.

The reasonable soul (to speak familierly) consists of two parts: the one
which is exercised in the base things of this world, Of contemplative power and
the true objects thereof.
which being in manner innumerable may happen after sundry fashions in respect
of the mutabilitie of the substances, variety of appetites, affections and
operations of men: And they which bear themselves well in these matters are
termed ^^creet and wise men: But the other part which is the same whereof I
now mean to speak, seeks higher then these bodily eyes can penetrate: for
it comprehends the substances, notwithstanding the same be spoiled of all
matter: then sporting it self in the meditation of things which daily do
fall out, it stays upon yt that is divine and eternal: The participants
herein be termed learned men and of great knowledge, because yt thereby, as by
a sure guide, this most noble part of their soul, which is endued with most
perfect intelligence, is led into those places where it may somewhat comprehend
those things wherewith it has some correspondence and similitude: for that
which is spiritual delights in spiritual things: and herein consists the
excellency of the creatures that participate in reason, above all other mortal
and earthly creatures: that they can from far though imperfectly discern
things immortal and heavenly. This ought to solicit them not to stifle in
them that natural power which is given them to be well employed. As for the
objects: the most sovereign of them is God, beyond whom no man can look,
because he is the end of all ends and the cause of all causes, and that in
him all fullness of perfection does abide. But there be many other inferior
as the Angelical natures, the heavenly motions, and whatsoever is immutable in
the order of nature, wherein is a very large scope to exercise the same
faculty, which by continual use grows the more perfect.

To see therefore how this may be put in practice, we are Of such persons as
may entend thereto.
to consider of what persons every politic body is composed: which I will
divide into three orders. In the first shall come the Noble men and Gentry: In
the second, all that bestow their time in divine or human learning: And in
the third, all other the dwellers both in town and country. As for the first,
they seem to be borne with more quick and plyant inclinations then The
Gentry.
the others: because their fathers having atteyned to honor through virtue as
well intellectual as moral, as it is to be presumed, have left unto them
some small seeds thereof (as near as nature can form them) meet to spring
again, so long as their bringing up be no hinderaunce thereto: for
confirmation whereof we do many times see the children of Princes, Lords and
Gentlemen at seven years of age show forth even petty miracles of the
soul. She brings them forth in place where she finds the agents which she
uses to be best disposed: even as we see in a Lantern that the brighter the
glass is, the more does the inward light thereof appear, and being dim,
small brightness may be seen. These therefore having so good grounds do
want but good instructions to bring them to the knowledge of the dignity of
man, which consists in the lifting up of his mind unto the author of all his
good. Whereto also their noble calling ought to exhort them. And as in the
active life that they lead, they keep it ordinarily occupied in diverse honest
and profitable things, so should they go forward and thence ascend to
spiritual: for he that is deuoyde of such apprehensions makes his condition
very bad.

If any man says: Why, are not we present at the religious ceremonies: Answer
to a common objection touching contemplation.
It is but a cold excuse, because the most excellent part of religion
consists in the inward man. And this does the scripture teach us, when it
says that God is a spirit and will be woorshipped in spirit and truth. And
how may it be possible to cast of the heavenly mysteries, if this speculatiue
power should not bend as a bow to the search of so high trueths, more
necessary for the sustenance of the soul then bread is for the body?
Howbeit, there be but few of that degree that are very hot herein: whereof it
comes that many are ignorant of that which they ought especially to know,
and are skillful in that which they ought rather to be ignorant of. For proof
I will allege only one example of a neighbor of mine, who in certain
company talking of religion said: These Hugnenots would seem to be great
doctors, but know no thing. If you dispute with them, they presently deny
Purgatory: but then deny you the Trinity and you never see men so amazed.
This, I suppose, he said thinking to have said very well: howbeit it is a
lamentable case to see that he that ought to have taught others, had need to
have gone to school to learn the first principles of Christianity and
Godliness, since in matters of civility he was sufficiently seen. The bodily
exercises which tend to honesty are very convenient for gentlemen, but they
droope toward the ground if they be not sustained by the soul, which being
devout, does between times estraunge it self from this element. Hereof are
we admonished in the fourth Commandment of the law, wherein God declares
that it is his will we should rest the seventh day, that is to say, that we
should forget all worldly cares, and apply our whole minds to meditate upon
his wonderful works, as well of our creation and conservation as redemption.
Wherein we see that contemplation is a common duty, whereto we may aduowe
those to be most bound that have received most kinds of benefits.

Now to speak of the second order which proceeds from the Of the
contemplation that beseems Student^ Lawiers and Churchmen.
first and third order, namely the Gentry and Communaltie: We may well say
that many of them are thrust forward voluntarily to learn the sciences, as well
through a desire they have of knowledge as also to profit others. But there
are also and that the greatest part whom profit and necessity do stir up.
Among these some there are whose only contemplation has regard to their
coffers: which the first sort regard not, as aiming at better ends. And in
deed the chiefest duty of a Philosopher is to whet his wictes to the
knowledge of whatsoever exquisite things in the whole world: whose
contentation, the higher that the spirit penetrateth, the greater it is. As
for divine knowledge which they that have the Ecclesiastical offices do
perticulerly profess, the same does require a soul free from worldly bonds
and lettes, because that in so high an argument it is to employ whatsoever the
agilitie thereof. And to them more properly then to any does contemplation
appertain. Not that I mean that they ought continually to be therein
occupied as a quadrant to behold the sun, for so in vain should they be in
office, if they discharge not themselves to the benefit of those that are to
receive the usury of such spiritual talents as GOD has imparted unto them,
namely, sound doctrine. Thus do we see that active life ought not to be
severed for ever, or any long time from the contemplative. And this did the
best Philosophers well know. Also that great Divine S. Augustine well allowed
this orderly composition of the one and the other. For although the spiritual
actions are more worthy then the corporal, yet must they not be separated.

I know very well that the Munkes, especially the begging Answer to the
objection of such as imagine the contemplative life to belong only to them
selves.
Friars and Charterhouse (for those of S. Bennet and S. Bernard are somewhat
better companions) will gainsay this, affirming that the continual
contemplation which they have chosen, not being interrupted by mortal cares
makes both soul and body more perfect. Truly it is a goodly matter to seek
to attain to some small perfection according as man's frailty can bear: But
since S. Paul (who attained to so high holiness) with his high and profound
speculation, continued neruerthelesse in continual action to the edification
of the Church, I am driven to aduowe that it is better to stay upon his
example, then of any of the rest. And to the end the better to lay open this
matter, I will set down the lives of the ancient Munkes who lived within
four hundred years after Christ, in such manner as a very learned (...)has
gathered them out of the writings of S. Augustine. Contemning, says he, all
worldly delights and pleasures, they do together lead a most holy and cha^^
life, passing their time in prayer, readings and conferences, without puff of
pride, contempt, debate or envy. No man houldeth anything in proper, neither
is any man burdensome to his neighbor: with their hands they do such labor
as may maintain their bodies, and not hinder their minds from attending unto
God: Then do they commit their labors into the hands of those whom they call
Deanes, who of the money which they make thereof be accomptable to him that is
called the father among them. These fathers are such persons as are not only
holy in life, but also excellent in the doctrine of God, and having
pre-eminence in virtues as well as in power do govern their children without
any pride: and as they have authority to command them, so are their sons as
ready to obey them. Toward evening every man comes forth of his cell, and
yet fasting do meet together to hear their father, which done, they take their
bodily refectio^, as much as is requisite to maintain health: Every man
restrayneth his lusts, so to use it in all sobriety, yea even the food that
is set before them, which is neither much, nor very delicate. The overplus
above their sustenance (for they leave much, as well in that they labor
diligently, as also in respected of their sobriety) is distributed to the
poor which care not greatly for earning it: They force not of abou^dance, but
care only to reserve no part of their superfluity. In this austeritie of
life, says he, no man is forced to a heavier burden then either he can or is
willing to bear, and him that is weaker then the rest do they not therefore
condemn, for they all know the commendation of Charity, as also that all
meats are clean to those that are clean. Their only industry consists,
not in rejecting any meats as unclean, but in taming their lusts and
maintaying themselves in good love together. As for bodily exercise, they know
the same to profit but for a while only. Charity do they especially observe,
framing thereto their food, speech, apparel and countenances. Every of them
do conspire in one charity, and do abhor the (...)olation thereof. He that
resists this is expelled, and who so contrarieth it, stays not one day
among them.

Thus far the words of S. Augustine, who there makes a Whereto Monasteries
did in old time serve.
goodly description of the ancient kind of Monasteries, which then stood the
Monckes in stead for a preparation to a more excellent estate. For their
Colleges and assemblies were as it were nourceries to furnish the Church of
good ministers, and out of the same were Gregory Nazianzene, Basil,
Chrysostom, and many other notable persons called to be Bishops. It appears
therefore that their lives were as well active as contemplative. For although
most of them lived in solitary places, to the end the less to be diuerted
from their studies and moral discipline, yet did one of their principal
purposes tend to make them meet to serve in that body whereof they were but
small members. Then being admitted into Ecclesiastical functions, it was
lawful for them to marie: Of Monasteries of our days and of Moncks
contemplations.
neither was marriage in those days forbidden. Howbeit, although this ancient
manner of Monastical life, when such simplicity of rules and hearts reigned,
did bear a goodly show, yet may we, and that truly, say that it was
grounded rather upon the inventions of men then any examples taken out of the
scriptures. But all these things are, by little and little, altered and
corrupted: as by comparing them with our days we may easily perceive. For if
we mark well what most of our Monckes have studied within these threescore
years, we shall find it to be nothing but this, Hang and burn, whom: Even
those men who by brotherly admonition wished them not to stoop unto so many
corruptions as were crept in among them, and did not allow of their new found
devotions.

Thus are their chief contemplations converted into fire and blood, which even
to this day do bear great sway, though rather in will then effect. Rabelais
who in his writings mentions sundry brave Monckes of his time, does paint us
them out more moderate and tractable: for so far were they from sclaundering
and hurting, that contrariwise they sought to be merry and make good theere
with all men. Among the rest he speaks of Friar Bernard Lardon, resiant in
the good town of Amiens, whose like was not to be found again in 36.
Monasteries. His superior contemplations, says he, remained in the
autenticall raunges of the same town, and his inferior in the deepest sellers
in Laon in Laonoise, which were best furnished with good wines. Moreover, this
good Friar was always merry and lively as a pretty untamed Ass, and as
learned as his portuise could extend.

This is the fruit which these late worlds have brought forth, namely, to
have changed the integrity of old time into the impuritie of these days.
The first Monks of whom I have spoken, being replenished with charity did
good to all: most of them that have succeeded them within a few ages, bearing
more affection A comparation of the old and new Monckes.
to their bellies then to the holy scripture, caring for none, have had regard
but to themselves: But many of those of our days, abandoning themselves too
much to hate and revenge, do hurt many. Yet will I not say but that among that
multitude which swarmeth al over the world there be many, who groaning under the
burden of so many traditions, do wish the reformation to the ancient
observations endued with great moderation. Yea my self have in my imprisonment
known many courteous persons of them. I pray to God for them that he will
vouchsafe so to strengthen them that they may in mouth sing, and in deed
practice this Psalm of David. I did in heart rejoice, to hear the peoples
voice, in offering so willingly: For let us up say they, and in the Lords house
pray: Thus spoke the flolke full lovingly, etc. Well, leaving these abuses, we
must confess that they which dedicate themselves to heavenly things, do
choose an excellent matter, as says S. Paul, if they well discharge it: and
they may think their contemplations to be fruitful and true, if thereby they
feel their souls more devout toward God, and their hearts more redily bent to
help their neighbors. But as for such as delight only in the solitariness
of the deserts, few there are of them but are infected with hypocrisy.

I will now speak a little of human sciences which I have too Of the
contemplation of the Students in human sciences.
long ouerslipped: Truly such as apply their minds to them, have a large
field wherein to walk their spirits, albeit not so worthy as the other: For
the Divine is the mistress, and these are her inferior handmaidens, the
professors whereof have had contemplation in honor, whom they have affirmed to
be the mother of wisdom. Neither have they been therein deceived, for it is
very difficult to penetrate into high and deep mysteries but by daily
meditation. The Platonistes have highly magnified this contemplative faculty
of the soul, whose operations they have thought to be most worthy in respect
of themselves, as proceeding from a perfect cause, and embracing most perfect
objects, the highest whereof was God. Plato also speaking of the sovereign
felicity said, that it consisted in a similitude and conjunction of the soul
thereto: which it did in part attain, when abandoning all transitory
matters, it stayed upon the consideration of the supreme beauties who afterward
ravished it into so great felicity. But this matter is unto us Divine rather
then Philosophical, wherefore I will speak no more of it, but only commend
these poor souls, who so zealously sought a felicity which they could never
find by any natural reasons: and accuse our own blackishnesse, who having it
before our spiritual eyes will scarce vouchsafe to look upon it. But the
Philosophers studies tend to baser matters: and I well like some men's deuisions
thereof, namely into reasonable which teaches to speak well and increase:
into moral, which instructs how to live well, which also comprehends the
political: and into natural, which gives us knowledge of nature and every
thing that has being. Who so therefore li^^ to profit in all the said
doctrines, must use often meditation, to the end the better to perceive the
perfections of the same. For whatsoever it be which the mind does but lightly
pass over, it is but a touching of the mind: but when it stays upon it, it
penetrateth through the thickness of the wood even to the marrow. He that
shall consider of speech which is proper to man only, will think nothing to
be so common and familier: but if he ascends to the inward word, which is
the conceit of the understanding, in which receptakle a thousand images
perfect and imperfect, true and false be resident and pass to and fro, which
afterward be revealed by the sensible speech, he cannot but wonder at Gods so
wonderful workmanship. Thus ought we from terrestrial matters to ascend into
celestial, and again from the highest to return to the lowest. For what else
is the composition of man but celestial and terrestrial, which by a most
excellent and inimitable workmanship are conjoined together, whereof we gather
this instruction, that the contemplative and active life do very well agree
together: and to seek to divide them is as it were to force nature.

Some may say, that although Contemplation beseems the Whether contemplation
beseems Princes, Soldiers, Lawiers and those that have the care of bodily
health.
Philosopher, yet the Prince, Captain, Judge and Physician ought rather to
labor, for that at their hands we are to expect only good effects. Hereto I
answer, that effects proceed of consultation and consultation from
discretion, whereto we first attain by experience, then by meditation. When
he that possesses the royal dignity shall often think with himself that
mercy and truth do merueilously preserve the King, and that his throne is
vphoulden by gentleness, as Solomon says, will he not be more diligent in
his duty then he that thinks himself to be set up as a painted Image upon
an Altar, to be admired and magnified? Those also to whom is committed the
administration of Justice and regard of health, in liewe of employing their
whole minds in the filling of their purses; should then not do better
sometimes in the (...) to occupy themselves, the ^udges in meditating upon*
this goodly saying of King Iehosapht, who said, to those of his time. Consider
2. Chron. 14.
what ye do, for y^ exercise not the judgment of man; but of the Lord: And
all your judgments shall redound to your selves. Also the Physicians in the
saying of Ecclesiasticus. The sovereign has given knowledge unto ^^on to be
honored in his merueiles. For by often consideration of these admonitions they
will grow more duetifull to men and obedient to God, whose ^^ttie instruments
they are to make those virtues which he freely bestows upon them, which
nevertheless they sell full dear, to shiue here upon earth. But ambition
which is properly termed an honorable torment, and covetousness which is a
shameful hell, do withdraw as well the one as the other from so high
thoughts, whereof ensues confusion in politic order.

Concerning the third order, which is termed the third estate, I will divide
it into two parts. The worst whereof is the country Of contemplation meet for
the commonoltie both of the town and contrie.
people, who seem to be led as much by affection as by reason, and is so
gross that although it be taught, yet a man would say that it either
contemns or is utterly ignorant of the superior exercises of the soul, and
that the same are no more convenient for it then is Magnificat for morning
prayer. But charity should make us to judge that God does nothing in vain,
also that having given them a like substantial form as to the highest, he
has in no wise forbidden them the use of whatsoever may make them partakers of
the benefits which are offered unto all and consist in the knowledge of him.
And if we well note what the Scripture says, we shall find that he reuealeth
himself to the lowly and is hidden from the wise. Math. 11.
Hereof we should learn to be modest in the judgment of this matter, since
faith, which is a supreme contemplation is not denied the veriest clownes:
wherein we see Gods wonders, in that he makes many of them learned to
salvation in a science which seems utterly unlearned. The town dwellers are
more capable of instruction, and besides their devotions do also apply their
minds to the arts, whereof sometimes grows such perfection of workmanship,
that many are driven to confess that the boisterous hand could never have
performed them, had not quickness of wit been the guide. And whereas the soul
abaseth it self in the matters which we touch (which is much vnworthier then
that that is material) yet does it not so before it has been long stayed upon
the consideration of the forms wherewith(...) ^othe it, also upon the meere^
to attain to such an (...) to invent the instruments necessary thereto.

Cobre (...) by the deduction before said we see, first that it is The
conclusion conjoined with a notable aduertisment to such as give themselves to
vice and pollution.
mee^e for all men to contemplate more or less in divine mysteries. Secondly,
that it may also in part be applied to inferior things. Thirdly,
that(...)member our selves from civil society, and (...) stable or live
aparte, to the intent the better to attend thereto: for in all (...) private or
public he that has leisure and will, has also use thereof. But before I
end this discourse, I have thought good to use this small admonition to those
that care so little for submitting those noble parts of their souls not to
works of small account, but even to horrible vice, and to set before their
eyes the saying of David. Man being in honor Psalm 42.
has no understanding, but is compared unto the beasts that perish and is
made like to them. For when they disdain to enjoy the goodly privileges
granted unto them, and choose rather to bury this light in earthly pleasures,
as a man would do a precious diamont in mire, then do they as a man should
say, transform them selves into beasts, which is a just punishment due to
their ingratitude and blockishnesse. I will also advertise others which are
quite contrary to these, because of the quickness of their understandings, not
to soar over high beyond the limited bounds: But to remember what God said to
Adam touching the tree of good and Gene. 3.
evil, Thou shall not eat thereof, for in the day that thou shall eat
thereof thou shall dye the death. Hereby should they learn to content
themselves with that wisdom which he has vouchsafed to impart unto the^ as
well concerning divine as humane causes: which is (if we take it right) most
wonderful. Least contemning the person of so excellent an Apostle as S. Peter,
we transform our selves into a Simon Magus, or disday^ing an Aristotle become
a fantastical Stoike.

Thus much of Contemplation may suffice me to have spoken who never went to
Monckish school, and he that lists to know more, let him repair thereto,
if he so think good.

CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS OF DIVERSE THINGS HAPpened in the three first troubles of
France. Together with the true report of the most part of the same.
The 26. Discourse.
The first Troubles.
That the Protestants, but for the late accident at Vassie, had been prevented
in the beginning of the first Civil war.
FRance, notwithstanding the agreeing upon and concluding of the Edict of
January The beginning of the first troubles.
in the presence of the King, by the advice of a very notable assembly of the
wisest politics of the Realm, who thereby intended to provide some remedy
against the diverse and universal co^motions thereof, and to conform it to the
common laws, was not yet brought into tranquillity: as well by reason the
Protestants were so earnest to establish and confirm themselves in that
liberty which they had obtained, as also through the general fear of the
Catholics, who could not endure such a novelty. Some of the Princes and
Lords that held this part being greatly agrieued at the sight of such
increase, did make a secret League to suppress it. And whiles some of them
were on their way to Paris, where they purposed to join to their general
body fell out the disorder at Va^si^, where many being at the sermon were
murdered, which deed being by other Historiographers already described, I
will meddle no farther with. For my intent is only to note not so much ye grief
that it bred to the Protestants, as the instruction, which they took together
with the fruit that unto them did redound thereof. The Lord Prince of Conde
was at Paris about the establishing of the public exercise according to the
Kings Edict, when this news was brought him: which made him to grow into
consultation with the wise^t Lords and Gentlemen of his company, who judged
this small storm to be an assured forewarning of a greater, and therefore
wished to look farther then to things present. Immediately he gave notice to
some of the chiefest in the Court of that that had happened, who thereof took
an alarm and counseled him to seek some preservatives and remedies for
himself and the estate. He also warned all the French Churches to look to
themselves: of whom the most part imagining to have already obtained some
assured rest, were more ententiue to the building of Churches, then to think
upon Military provision for their own defense. This brute did wonderfully
waken the gentlemen Protestants abroad in the Provinces, and made them ready
to provide horse and armor, waiting what would be done at the Court and how
Paris would take it.

Shortly after there arrived the Lord of Guize, the Constable, The Princes
retire from Paris.
and the Marshall of S. Andrews, also the King of Navarre whom they had drawn
to their League, who forced the Prince of Could to retire into the town of
Meaux with a good train of Nobility and Gentry. Being come thither, with all
speed he sent word to the Lord of Andelot and the Admiral, that not want of
courage but of strength had driven him to forsake Paris, wishing them with all
diligence to march toward him. For Casar had not only passed Rubicon, but was
even seized of Rome, and his flagges began to wave abroad in the fields.
Which presently they did with all their friends and furniture, howbeit not yet
manifesting their arms as the League had done. There stayed they five or six
days as well to deliberate of their affairs, as because of administering the
supper, which was to be celebrated at Easter. The Lord Admiral, no nouice in
matters of estate, foreseeing that the game waxed warm, showed that it was
requisite either in all diligence to strengthen themselves with men, either else
to take them to their heels: yea that he was afraid they had already stayed
very long. But whiles they stood upon those points, many gentlemen came in
from all parts unlooked and unsent for: so as in four days they were abont
five hundred. This refeshing caused them to resolve upon their departure, and
that for two purposes. The one to try whether they might win the Court, and
so enstall themselves about the King and Queen, or, not able so to do, to
s^^se upon Orleans, there to form a maine head, if they chanced to be driven
to come to handie blows. Having therefore in six days gathered a greater
troop then they looked to have gotten in a whole month, they took their way
toward S. Claud, where their troop was refreshed with three hundred good
horse, where also they were advertised that the Lord of Guize and his
assotiates had seized of the Court, which diligence falling out well for them,
brake the Prince of Condees first purpose, who meant to have done the same and
so to have authorized his doings under the Kings favor for the preservation of
himself and the rest of the Protestants. From S. Claud they marched toward
Chastres and Angeruile, and by the way met five or six troops of gentry.
This bred some astonishment to the contrary part, when they began to consider
the sudden increase of our body, which consisted not of less then a thousand
gentlemen, who made 1500. good horse better armed with courage then Corcelets.
Then drew they toward Orleance, which was taken in such manner as the
Historiographers do set it down. This we must note, that if the Prince of
Conde had at that time had but a small power, he had been oppressed or
besieged: but when they perceived him to be so mighty as to keep the field
in subjection, also that he spoke as boldly to his adversaries as coldly to his
King, they were not very earnest upon him, whereby he had opportunity to
prevail in sundry attempts. This profit did he reap of being strong in the
beginning.

Some men have imagined either that these things were long Occasion of the
assembly of his troops.
before premeditated, or else to have so happily fallen out through the
dillgence of the Captains: But I, as one that was present and made curious
search into the causes, dare affirm the contrary. True it is that most of the
Nobility, hearing of the slaughter at Vassie, partly of a voluntary good
will, and partly for fear, determined to draw toward Paris, imagining (as it
were at adventure) that their protectors might stand in some need of them. Thus
did the most renowned depart out of their countries with some ten, some
twenty or thirty of their friends, secretly armed, and lodging in Hosteries
or Uillages, where they paid truly for every thing, until they met both with
the body and cause together. Many of them have assured me that this only
reason moved them: and I have heard my Lords the Prince and Admiral many times
confess, that had not this benefit happened, they had been in danger to have
taken a bad course.

Hereby it appears what fruit is sometimes gotten of hurtful things, which
at the first blush appearing ruinous, do nevertheless A notible consideration
upon the former discourse.
after the event give us to weere that they bree our good instructions. Men may
also learn, yea even the best Captains, not to attribute too much to their
own wisdom in the conduct of affairs either public or private: For ableit
it be a most necessary instruction, yet sometimes it is as it were vayled, so
as among many ways and proceedings they can hardly tell which is the best to
lean unto in such unlooked for storms and troubles. And this falls out to
the end to humble them, and to make them from else where to seek the cause of
good success. Silla, with whom no man now living dare compare for military
knowledge, gave out that himself through the benefit of fortune had been
saved and exalted. And yet are there some at this day that will say that the
fortune of the ancient heathen (which was vain) and the order that God takes
in the conduct of inferior matters (which is assured) are but cloakes
where-vnder men do shroude their ignorance: also that man himself, according
as he guides his doings either well or ill, breeds his own mishap or
felicity, albeit sundry experiences be thereto repugnant. They ought therefore
to purge their minds of such opinions, and to persuade them selves that
notwithstanding man imagines and purposes, yet is it God that gives
accomplishment to his enterprises.

Whether the Lord Prince of Conde in the first troubles committed so great an
oversight as many have given out, in that he seized not upon the Court or Paris.
I Will not deny but many skilful persons were The Princes intent in these
beginninges.
and peradventure still be of that opinion, as also my self was a while: But
after I had thoroughly wayed and considered what happened at the beginning of
this tragedy, as also what fell out afterward, I was reclaymed to the
knowledge of those truer matters which shall appear in the progress of my
speech. The Lord Prince of Conde seeing how his brother the King of Navarre was
by little and little slipped into a delicious kind of life, and had suffered
himself so much to be abused by the vain and rich promises and apparent
honors of those that skorned him, that he was grown so far as to give over
his party, whereof ensued a wonderful quailing to many which both openly and
secretly seemed to favor him, and as great an encouragement to the leagued to
withstand him: did not think it good to lean to so rotten a foundation, but
rather to lay a better else where. In as much also as the Court and Paris are
the two great lights of France, the one resembling the Sun, the other the
Moon (yet both subject to eclipse) he imagined that having some light from
the one, he ought to seek for the light of the other: and therefore endeavored
to plant the preaching of the Gospel in Paris: to the end the same knowledge
which before was hidden, and lay as it were buried among the innumerable
multitude of people, might bring forth abundance of fruit, as soon after did
it appear: for sometimes ye might see at the assemblies thirty thousand
persons. These goodly beginnings caused those of the Religion to seek means
to establish it, wherein nevertheless they showed themselves somewhat
negligent. But when the effects of the League brake forth, they evidently
perceived that it was meet to do that which through over much forflowing, was
not now easily to be done: whereabout nevertheless they somewhat employed
themselves, albeit with very small hope.

Having more narowlie examined this matter, I find that as the execution of
this purpose to any profit was in the beginning nothing easy: so in the end
it was most difficult. I will first therefore spoke of Paris, and show the
lettes therein to be found. Every man knows it to be the seat of Justice,
which is of meruaylous authority, and as the favor thereof would have stood
the Protestants in great stead, so would the mislyke have bredde wonderful
damage. Now all the Senate with their whole train, except a very few, did
always show themselves their capital enemies

The Clergy of that City being most mighty and in great reverence, were
even mad to see those things common which touched them so near the quick,
and under hand wrought a thou, sand practices there against. The body of the
Townehouse fearing alterations, which they imagined to proceed of diversity
of religion, endeavored to bannish and drive it away. To the same end tended
the most part of the University, and in manner all the inferior and common
people, with the favorers and servants of the Catholic Lords and
Gentlemen. Neither do I yet speak of such as might happen to have recourse to
the City out of other places, but only of those that were then present. As
for the assured strength that the Protestants made account of, it consisted of
three hundred Gentlemen, and as many trained soldiers, four hundred
scholars, and a few voluntary Burgeses of no experience. And what else was
all this against in manner an infinite number of people, but a small fly
against an Elephant? I think that only the nouices of the couentes, together
with the Priests wenches, coming suddenly upon them with faggot sticks in
their hands, had been able to have withstoode them: and yet notwithstanding
their weakness, they set a good face upon the matter until that the open
force of the leagued Princes and Lords did constrayne them to give ever.

But had they buckeled in the Town (as considering the secret driftes of their
enemses, they should soon have been forced) could the Protestants have
been able to fight three days, as they did at Tholouze? Truly no, nor three
hours as I think: neither had there been any way to maintain them, but
the presence of the King to favor his Edict. Some will say that the Prince of
Condie abandoning Paris, committed the like error as Pompey: But if they mark
it well, they shall find that Pompeyes oversight was without comparison
greater than his: For he had all Rome at his beck, where the Prince had
scarce a handful at Paris.

Before we apply those ancient examples to the deeds of these days, we
must consider of the lykelyhoode between them. All the aforesaid difficulties
do persuade me that the endeavoring to establishe the exercise of religion
at Paris, was a haughty and valiant attempt* but without the help aforesaid
to confirm it, it was impossible, as that which has since fallen out, has
well declared.

Now let us look into the disposition of the Court. It is well Why he could
not possibly be the stronger about the: King and court.
enough known that at the conference at Poyssy the doctrine of the Gospel was
propounded withal liberty, whereupon many both great and small began to have
a taste thereof: But as a fire of straw makes a great blaze, and is by and by
out again for want of substance: so after that that which they had received
as a novelty was a little grown old in their hearts, their affections
thereto quayled, and most of them returned to the former course of the Court,
which is more fit to procure mirth and pastime and to breed wealth: yea, even
some Huguenots turned their coats and followed this path.

The Court we are in general to take for the true image of the Prince: for as
he is, so is his train. If he be wise, so will it be: but if he delyght
in folly, it will also imitate him. And in case a householder through use
shapeth the manners of his children and family by the pattern of his own,
what shall a King do, in whom it lies to raise and cast down? Heerevppon
the Courtiers seeing the King, his Brethren and Mother more inclined to Romish
religion, also the King of Navarre revolted, conformed themselves to them,
which redounded to the great disgrace of the Prince of Condie, and those whom
he maintained.

Besides that, if he had come first, he could not have soiourned there long
without incurring much hatred: for if to a Court you propounde reformation,
take away vain pleasures, and entangle it in business, it will hate you even
unto the death. Finally, having many enemies therein and more abroad, he
could not but have very small assurance. This makes me to think that the
fouudation of the Court was not of any more certayntie than that of Paris.
Howbeeit he attempted another devise, (but it was not put in execution) in my
opinion of more apparaunce: which was his moving of the Queen mother, to go
and carry the King to Orleance: and some writers do say that it was motioned
to her when she feared the motions of the league, also that she hearkened
thereto: but all vanished away in smoke: nevertheless I suppose that if the
effect hereof had ensued, all their weapons had been sheathed up again.

For had the Court been in place where it could not have been surprised, in
respect of such force as might have been brought, and where it should not have
been forced, for no man durst have discharged the Canon against the walls
that environed the King, they might have parleyed and dealte on horseback
until the affairs had been somewhat reestablished according unto the Edict
of pacification: not withstanding even to imagine that this remedy could have
utterly extinguished the wars, I dare not presume: only it had sufficed if
it had but delayed them for a while.

Of three things which I noted that happened before the armies took the
field. The one pleasant, the other arteficiall, and the third lamentable.
THE Writers of great Histories, who are to That Historiographers cannot
possibly note all perticularities.
represent more matters than there be leaves upon a spread Oak, cannot
always express and note every the perticulars that accompany them: for if
they should bind themselves thereto, for every volume that they publish,
they should be forced to set out four, and therefore it is enough for them
to declare whatsoever is most notable. Wherefore my self, if in reading things
past I meet with ought either much or little, whereupon a man to the end to
bring it into taste or reap any profit, might dilate, do somewhat delight
so to do, especially in those things whereof I have been an eye witness,
which also may peradventure somewhat serve to the understanding of the story,
which is the rich storehouse, whereto they that covet goodly ornaments ought
to have recourse: for that which I here set down is but a Pedlers pack,
containing wares of mean price, albeit unless I be deceived, not falsefied
or counterfeit.

The first matter that I mean to show, is in what sort the Prince How the
Prince of Conde seized upon Orleance.
of Conde and his troop arrived at Orleance. The day before he came he sent
the Lord of Andelot to take the Town, who coming unknown, perceived there
would be some let* whereupon he sent word to the said Lord to make
speed to assist him, for he was lykelie to have some bickering. Now the
whole company being loath to loose so good a morcell desired not to trot, but
even to galloppe, which was no sooner said but it was done. For six leagues
off began the course: The Prince having with him as well in masters as
servants about two thousand horse, taking the great galloppe, the whole
body did the like, and so continued even to the very gates.

Innumerable were the people that they met by the way going to Paris, who
beholding the mystery of this course, and withal, that none asked them any
question, did for the most part at the first think that all the fools in
France had been there assembled, or else that it had been for some wager:
for as yet there was not any noise of war: Howbeit thinking better thereof,
and considering both the number and nobility, they grew into great
admiration, yet so as they could not but laughe at so forcible a motion, which
did not bear down the trees as the winds of Languedocke, but seemed rather
to bear down it self: for ordinarily by the way they might behold servants
cast down, horses shouldered and tired, and sumpters overthrown, which bred
continual sport even in those which did run.

But they that the same day were thrust forth of the town did Catholikly
bewail, their dispossession from the staple of the pleasantest wines in France.

Concerning the second point, the matter is of more gravity, as consisting in
both general and private accusations, defenses, reasons, Of writings
published for the taking of arms in the first troubles.
and other policies to persuade: which were the weapons wherewith so many
great Captains for the space of two months fought together, as also to
comfort and hearten their confederates and partakers. For in these so new and
extraordinary alterations of estate, it was very requisite to abolish all bad
opinions out of the minds of those that knew not the drifts of the
enterprisers: and as the assault was great, so was the defense forcible, as may
appear by reading the actions as well of the one part as of the other, which
are inserted into the Annals. Some there are that ween if their cause be
good, that it will so show it self to all men, and therefore will not publish
the truth thereof: wherein they ouershoote themselves. For albeit just and true
matters do in time show forth their light, yet is it in sundry occurrences
meet to anticipate them, and that men should betimes know that that will at
length appear, though not with so much fruit. Also as weeds do many times
for want of pulling up, choke the good herbs: so if the slanders which the
adversaries do ordinarily object against such things as be good, be not
refelled, they would no doubt many times thereby be suppressed, besides that
we are the more supported when (in whatsoever case) we have proved that we
walk upright and labor with an even hand.

To be brief, in this world men are so slothful in public duties, that
without continual calling upon, they remain immovable. But they that have
but a bad cause in hand, have more need of arteficiall speeches to cloak that
which being reauealed will bring it out of favor: neither do I think them to
be tongue tied, whereby we may perceive that eloquence resembles a two edged
knife: but whatsoever men say, it is a hard matter to disguise falsehood or
blemish the truth.

The third point consists in the parley near to Toury in Beausse, Of the
parlie between the Queen mother and the Prince of Condie.
between the Queen Mother, the king of Nauare, and the Prince of Condie, to
devise upon some means to appease the controversies fallen out. Many did
imagine that the presence and conference of the greatest would be of more
efficacy than the sundry embassages from part to part: and albeit euteruiewes
be sometimes dangerous, yet was it concluded, the rather at the Queens
instance, with the limitations ensuing: That on each side they should bring
one hundred Gentlemen with armor and spear: That no troops should come within
two leagues of the place appointed: That thirty light horse on each part
should six hours before their meeting discover the field, which was as
plain as the sea: That at the appointed hour the Queen and King of Navarre
should be on horse back in the place appointed, where the Prince and Admiral
likewise on horseback should mee^e them to entreat together of the publyke
affairs.

In the mean time the two troops consisting of choice men; and for the most
part Lords to houer eight hundred pates asunder: the Marshall de Anuil
commanding over the one, and the Earl of Rochefoucault over the other. Having
thus beheld either other for the space of half an hour, each coveting to see
one his brother, another his uncle, cosen, friend, or old companion, they
^raued leave of their superiors, which was hardly granted, in respect that
at the first they were forbidden to meet for fear of iniuryes and affrayes.
But so far were they from quarelling, that contrariwise there was nothing but
salutations and embracings of such as could not forbear ye demonstration of
amity unto those whom parentage or honesty had united unto them:
notwithstanding the contrary tokens that they bare. For the King of Nauarres
troop was clothed in cassockes of crimson velvet and read scarfes, and the
Prince of Condes in white. The Catholics imagining the Protestants to be
lost, exhorted them to see to themselves, and not to enter obstinatlie into
this miserable war, wherein near kinsmen must murder one another: heereto
they answered, that they detested it, howbeit if they had not recourse to
their defense, they were assured of like entreaty as many other Protestants
had received, who were cruelly slain in sundry parts of France.

To be brief, each provoked other to peace, and to persuade their superiors
to hearken thereto. Some who a part did more deeply consider of these things,
bewailed public discord as the spring of future mischiefs: Then waighing with
themselves that all these greetings would be converted into bloody murders,
upon the least token of battle that the superiors should give: that the
^iseardes being shut and ready, fury having ^ayled their sight, one brother
would scarce pardon another, the water even stood in their eyes. My self was
then among the Protestants, and I may truly say that on the other side there
were a douzen of my friends: whom I accounted as dear as my own brethren,
who also bare me the like affection: In the mean time as well conscience as
honor bound each one not to fail in the one or the other. Private amity did
as the^ live, but since these great calamities had course, and conversation
discontinued, it is even dead in many. The Queen and Prince of Conde having
conferred two long hours together, when they could grow to no agreement,
departed, each very sorry that they had no better succesie.

Of the Prince of Condies promise somewhat rashly made to the Queen mother
that he would depart the Realm of France, and why it was not performed.
AFter the ariuall of a great number of the ordinary The approches of the two
contrary armies.
bands and part of the old infanterie at Paris, the King of Navarre, the
Constable and the Duke of Guize, who contemned the Protestants as rebels,
thought themselves strong enough to make them afraid, and in battle araie
marched toward Chasteaudun. The Prince understanding hereof craved the advice
of such Captains as accompanied him, what were to be done: who all with one
consent declared, that since they had hitherto as well in deeds as words set
so good a face on the matter, if now they should at the beginning of the
war suffer themselves to be shut up and besieged in a Town, it would be
some testimony of cowardlynesse, and greatly disgrace the Protestants affairs
as well with foraine nations as with such of the Frenchmen as took: heir
parts: withal considering that their power already grew well toward six
thousand footmen and two thousand horse, also that by the report of the spies
the enemies were not yet above four thousand footmen and three thousand
spears: to whom notwithstanding they were not so well armed, they were no whit
inferior in courage: that nothing ought therefore to let them from taking the
field with all speed, and fighting with the enemy, if occasion might so serve:
for they could never have them at a better advantage, considering how their
power would from time to time increase.

Upon this resolution ehey encamped a league and a half from Treaty of peace.
Orleance, whether the Queen sent new Ambassadors to enter parley: for both
sides did greatly fear the universal desolations ensuing of war, if once it
were begun. At the two first meetings they argued sufficiently, though to small
resolution: only it was agreed, that the Catholic and leagued Lords and
Princes should depart each to his own home, and then would the Prince of
Condie obey whatsoever the king should command for the wealth of the Realm.
Soon after they marched to Chasteaudun and no farther, which the Protestants
presumed to be but a dissimulation. Some will say, that in the said parlies
the Prince of Conde hazarded himself into over great peril: but he was still
stronger than the enemy, and his men too wary to be deceived, albeit in one
point they ouershoot themselves upon simplicity: which was in delivering to ye
king of Navarre when he came to ye parley the town of Boisgencie (which was
nothing worth) for his fafety, but was never restored them again: this did
greatly chafe them, as perceiving that thence forth they must talk with the
bridle in hand. Now as daily there came some from the Queen to the Prince of
Conde, to persuade him to peace, which he seemed greatly to desire, among the
rest was employed the Bishop of Valence, a man in learning and eloquence most
excellent, when he list to show forth either the one or the other. He with his
fair speech so qualyfied the Prince, that he increased his desire of a good
accord: and finally told him that in as much as many reproched him to be the
author of the war, it were his part to make evident his justification by all
good offers and brave effects: also yt if at the next enteruiew he would tell ye
Queen yt rather than to see ye real me hazarded to fire and sword, he would be
content with his friends to depart the same, she could have nothing to
answer, much less his enemies who had promised to return to their
habitations* likewise that of this motion might ensue some good resolution that
should stay all wepons, which being laid down, all things might after ward be
easily reestablished. This said he departed, leaving in the Prince (who was
loath to be constrained to fight against his own nation) and certain
impression to follow this counsel, which he imparted to some that were
desirous of peace, and therefore gainsayd it not.

It was agreed that two days after he should meet the Queen Of the Princes
offer, made to the Queen.
a league and a half thence, so to prove if any thing might be determined,
which he did. There after many speeches the said Prince did in the end make her
the offer aforesaid, namely to depart the realm, so to testify his zeal to
the quiet thereof: which she took hold of before the word was out of his
mouth, telling him that that in deed was the true means to prevent all
mischiefs feared, for the which all France should be bound unto him: also that
the King coming to his maioritie would bring all into good order, whereby every
man should have cause to be content. Now although the Prince was a man that
would not be easily danted, neither wanted his tongue, yet was he at this time
astonished, as not thinking to have been taken so short: and because it waxed
late, she told him that in the morning she would send to know what conditions
he would demand. Thus she departed in good hope, and the Prince returned to
his camp laughing (but between his teeth) with the chief of his Gentlemen
which had heard all his talk. Some scratching their heads where they itched
not: others shaking them: some were pensive, and the younger sort gybed oue at
another, each one devising with what occupation he should be forced to get his
living iu a foreign land. At night they determined the next morning to call all
the Captains together to have their advice in so weighty a matter.

In the morning they entered into counsel, where the Admiral The counsel
and advice upon this matter.
propounded, that in as much as this matter concerned all, it was in his
opinion, good to impart it unto al, which was done, and the Colonels and
Captains were sent to demand the advice as well of the Gentry as footmen:
But they imediatly answered, thatsith France had bredde them, it should also
be their scpulture, likewise that so long as any drop of blood rested in them,
it should be employed in defense of their religion. With all they requested
the Prince to remember his general promise that he would not forsake them:
This being reported to the Counsel ha^ted the conclusion of those that were
there to deliberate, who considering of the general disposition of all, were
the rather confirmed in their opinions, which did concur with the same* neither
were there above three or four that used any speech, the matter being so
evident: and I do yet in part remem^er the particularities there deducted. The
Lord Admiral declared unto the Prince, that albeit he supposed that the Queen
in accepting of his offer meant no harm, as one that desiring to deliver the
state out of misery means convenient(...)ot that he thought those which had
weapon on hand, did circu^^ent her to the end to betraie him: that he neither
ought, neither could perform that that, was propounded and himself, had
promised, in respect that before he stood bound in stronger bands: and
besides all this, that if he should now absent himself, he should utterly
loose his credit and condemn the cause that he had taken in hand, which
besides the equity thereof, being authorized by the Kings edict, ought to be
maintained even with hazard of life. The Lord of Andelots speech was this: My
Lord the enemies power lies but five small leagues hence: if it perceiue^^
among us either fear, breaking up, or other alteration whatsoever, it will with
^^^ord and spear drive us even into the Ocean sea. If you none should forsake
us it will be said that ye do it for fear, which I know never* harbored
in your heart. We are your poor servants, and you our master, divide us not
then, since we fight for religion and life: so many parleyes are but snares
laid to intrappe us as appears by the effects else, where: The best way
therefore to come to a speedy agreement is, that you will vouchsafe to bring
us within half a league of those that, wish us to depart the Realm: so may
we peradventure within an hour after grow to some good resolution: for we
can never be perfect friends before we have skirmished a little together.

Then stepped forth the Lord of Boucarde, one of the brauest Gentlemen in the
Realm, whose head was fraught both with fire and Lead. My Lord (said he)
he that either gives over or puts of the set loses it, which is more
true in this matter now in hand than in the tenis court: I have already seen
fifty years, in which time I may have learned alittle discretion: I would be
loath to walk up and down a foraine land with a tooth picker in my mouth, and
in the mean time let some flattering neighbor be the master of my house,
and fatten himself with my re^^newes. God willing for my part I will die in
my Country in defense of our alters and hearthes: I beseech you therefore my
Lord, and do wish you not to abandon so many good men that have chosen you,
but to excuse your self to the Queen, and imploie us with speed while we are
willing to bite. Little more was there spoken, except a general approbation of
all men.

Then the Lord Prince began to speak, and for the justification of his offer
said, that he made it, because they went about covertly to tax him, with the
cause of the war; as also for that if his absence might breed their peace he
would think himself happy, as not respecting his own particular affairs:
lyke^^se that he did well perceive seeing the enemies power so near, and
their resolution, that they would impute his humility to cowardlynesse;
whereby it should breed no rest but rather destruction to the cause that he
maintained: and that in consideration thereof he was resolved to follow their
counsel, and to live and die with them. Thus said, they all shook hands in
confirmation thereof.

At the breaking up of the Counsel Theodore Beza with others of his
companions made unto him a very wise and pi^hre exhortation to comfort him in
his resolution, alleging unto him the inconveniences* ensuing the departure
from the same, and so besought him not to give over the good work he had
begun, which God, whose honor it concerned, would bring to perfection. About
the same time came the Lord of Frense, Robertet, Serr^tarie of the
commandments, whom the Queen had sent to know, upon what conditions the
Lord Prince would depart: Whose ^unswere was, That it was a matter of
weight, neither was he yet resouled thereof, in respect that many murmured
thereat: but when it was concluded he would either send or bring the Queen
word himself. But Roberter by some particular speeches perceived that matters
were altered, and so returned to the Queen, whom he certefyed that she must
have more than paper to thrust him out withal, who afterward went her way.

Hereby may Princes and great Lords learn in matters of Observations upon
this matter.
importance not to bind themselves by promise before they have thoroughly
consulted thereof with the wise: for albeit their meaning may be good, yet may
a man after some forte stumble, because the sodainnesse of the matter may make
him neglect diverse circumstaunces therein to be considered* Yea, although one
should think upon all that were requisite to be noted, yet may many do it
much beter. The worthiness also of the matter in hand may be such, and the
number of confederates so great, that even the cheifest must have respect as
well to the one as to the other, As likewise they must imagine that they to
whom they promise, although things unreasonable, will nevertheless upon want
o^ performance find themselves grieved, and complain thereof.

By what occasion the war did first break forth between the two armies.
DUring the parlies before mentioned, there The Princes resolation to set upon
his enemies.
was as it were a truc^ between both armies, which caused that there was
nothing enterprized at Paris or Orleance: But when the Prince of Conde and his
associats did well per^eiue that words were to weak to remedy the present
alterations, he determined to add effects, and so immediately after the
resolution upon the offer made unto the Queen, he called aside ^eauen or
eight of his cheifest captains, and consulted upon the most convenient means
to buckle with the enemy, for the truc^ was ended the day before) who all were
of opinion that they must be prevented by diligence, considering that they had
two aduauntages: the one that the Duke of Guise, the Constable, and the
Marshall of S. Andrews were then absent, and so none but the king of Navarre
with the army: the other, that the companies of men of arms were lodged
scattering from the maine battle: That if they should march forward by day,
their light horse or forragers might give them warning, and therefore it were
best to use great diligence in the night, and so come upon them in the
dawning: for thus might they undoubtedly be surprised: likewise that because
they had not ordinarily used any camizadoes, they might now the more easily
put this in execution, while the enemy least doubled any such thing. As for
the way, it was most easy, as being al plain fields between them.

About one hour after the camp departed, and came betimes to Fe^te, where the
Generalles opened their intents to the Captains, willing them to cause their
soldiers to put on shirtes, and resolve them to bear themselves manfully in
this so valiant an enterprise. By eight of clock at night the troops were in
the field, who after public prayer (as was then used among the Protestants)
began to march with such a courage, as I may in truth affirm, that in
soldiers I never see greater. Before the departure did a gentleman commit a
most villainous act, in forcing of a maiden, whose calling together, with the
shortness of the time were causes that it could not be punished. This did many
take to be a bad sign in this enterprise. Presuming to find the enemies in
their lodginges, the order to fight was this.

First the Lord Admiral marched foremost with eight hundred spears, to
overthrow whatsoever horsemen he should find in arms: then followed 1200.
harquebuts in four troops, with charge to assail the watch of the enemies
footmen, and thence to enter their quarters. Next marched eight hundred
harquebuts, supported with two great battayles of pikes, to seize upon their
artillery: after all came the Prince of Condee with one thousand horse in
four squadrons, and the rest of the harque buzerie: Now are we to understand
that considering at what time they set forward, they should by all reason have
reached to the enemies lodging by three of the clock in the morning: for the
way lay over a plain field, neither was there any straight passage, but that
the footmen might march a whole league in an hour and a half: but when they
had gone two leagues, the guides perceived that they went wrong, and thinking
to recover their way, they strayed farther out, remaining as men amazed, and
not knowing where they were, to the no small discontent of the Captains. To be
brief, having thus trauayled until one hour after day, they found
themselves a long league of from the enemies lodgings, whose scoutes descried
the head of the Princes army, and so returning with all speed gave a great
alarm. Heerevpon took they counsel what was best to be done: but in the
mean time they heard the Canon discharged in the enemies camp, for a warning
to call in their horsemen, which brake their devise for passing any farther, as
well for that they we^e descried, as also that they had yet a great way to
go, albeit if they had been within half a league, they were resolved to have
gone forward and fought. Thus was this enterprise which in ontward appearaunce
seemed very certain was utterly broken of.

I have asked the opinion of sundry good Captains then present in the
adversaries camp, what success might have followed if Now this enterprise
might have succeeded, and what happened the next day.
the Protestants had come in time, who all affirm that they would have
fought, albeit they were prevented by their separation from their most
affectionate Captains, and the greatest part of their horsemen. The Lord
Marshall of Anuille, a watchful and very skillful Captain, was with his
light horse lodged at the head of the Catholics army, woe told me that he
waked and was in arms almost all the night, nevertheless if our whole power
had come in time, their army had been in danger, which is not in deed to
be doubted: for albeit the hazardes of war be uncertain, yet the
advantage of a surprise, does import apparaunt loss to those that suffer
themselves to be so far overtaken. All the fault was laid upon the
guides, who to clear themselves said that the Lord of Andelots putting the
footmen in araie at the departure from the lodgings made their march the
flower: but I think this excuse more subtle than true, considering there was
neither bush nor hedge to stop them. In deed if the Country had been
straighter, it might have had some likelihood. Both armies, albeit somewhat
asunder stood in araie until two of the clock afternoon. Afterward the
Prince of Condie went to lodge at Lorges, a small league of: and the King of
Navarre with all speed certefied the Lord of Guize and the Constable, who
lay at Chasteaudun of all that happened, who immediately came to him. Then
fearing to be assailed by night, because the Princes army was strong in
footmen, and their own lodgings very unfit for horsemen, they made at the
head of their battle ground upon the coming in, five or six great heaps
of fagots with straw enough under them, to kindle if they were assaulted, to
the end by the light thereof to discharge three or four vollees of
artillery, which would have greatly annoied the assaylauntes: There are that
disdain such inventions, albeit they may sometime be to good purpose. In the
morning they fell again into araie, but see not one another, neither did any
but the light horsemen skirmishe. The Captains of both sides perceiving that
it was hard to surprise one another, also that their lodgings were very
discommodious, and moved by a certain kind of necessity to get some towns
which might stand them in great stead to continue the war, as Bloyse and
Boisgencie, did in the morning send away their carriage and artillery, and
in the afternoon followed, parting after this sort without bactaile or loss.
An accedent favorable to the Princes enemies.


Here will I declare an accident which happened two hours after this
separation, which if it had fallen out when they were together, the Prince of
Condie had been in danger to have been overthrown. It was this: There fell
such a horrible rain and tempest, continuing almost an hour, that I am
assured that of his four thousand harque buziers, ten could not have
discharged: besides that, most of them sought to the covert, which was such an
occasion of victory to the Catholics, as well in that they were strong in
horse, as also for that the wind and rain so beat in their enemies faces,
that even the fiercest had enough to do to withstand the rage of the weather.
This is the truth of all occurrences among the Protestants in this expedition:
but the particularities of the King of Nauarres army are they that were
present, and so may have known them, to describe.

Of the good discipline which for the space of two months only, was observed
among the Prince of Condies troops both of horsemen and footmen. Also of the
original of Picoree or prouling.
IN the beginning of this war the Generals The causes of good discipline.
and Captains had yet fresh in their remembrances the goodly martial
discipline observed in the armies of King Frances, and his son Henry, which
sundry Soldiers also had not forgotten, the memory whereof did somewhat
contain those that now took arms, in their duties: howbeit the continual
exhortations of their Preachers, who admonished them to beware of oppressing
the poor commons, together with the zeal of religion where with most of them
were led, being then in strength were of greatest force in working this
effect. Thereby were al men without constraint voluntarily brideled from
committing those actions which often times horror of punishment is not able to
restrain: but chiefly the nobility in this beginning showed themselves
worthy their name: for marching over the Champion Countries (where they have
without comparison greater liberty to spoil, than in the Towns) they neither
spoiled nor misused their hosts, but were content with a little: and their
heads and most of themselves that had brought any wealth from home paid
honestly for all things: Then should we not see any running out of the
villages, neither hear any cries or complaints. To be brief, all was a well
ordered disorder. If any one in any troop had committed any offense, he was
imediatly banished, or delivered into the executioners hands: yea, his own
companions durst not excuse the offender, so much did they detest mischief and
^oue virtue. In the camp at Vassadoune also, near Orleance, where the Prince
of Conde soiourned a fortnight, the footmen made demonstration how they were
touched with the same feeling: they were lodged in the fields, and consisted
of six and thirty Eusignes at the most.

Then did I mark four or five notable accidents. First, among The notable
perticularities of the same.
all this great troop ye should never hear Gods name blaspheamed: for if
any rather rather of custom than malice chanced to do it, he was sharply
reproved, which greatly repressed the rest. Secondly, there was not a pair of
Dice or Cards, the fountains of many braules and thefts, walking in any
quarter. Thirdly, all women who never use to haunt such places, but for
dissolution, were banished. Fourthly, no man forsook his Ensign to go on
forraging, but were content with such victualles as were distributed among
them, or the small pay that they received. Lastly, evening and morning at the
setting and raising of the watch, they used public prayer, and the Psalms
sounded in the air. In these actions might we perceive Godliness in those
that are not much troubled therewith in the wars: and albeit Justice was
severely executed, yet did few feel the rigor thereof: for there were but
few disorders. Truly many wondered to see them so well disposed, and my late
brother the Lord of Telignie and my self discoursing thereof with the Lord
Admiral, did greatly commend it, whereupon he said unto us: It is in deed a
goodly matter if it would continue: But I fear this people will power forth
all their goodness at once, so as within these two months they will have
nothing but malice left: I have a great while governed the footmen and do
know them. They willfulfill the proverb, A young saint an old devil. If
this fail we may make a cross upon the chimney: we smiled hereat, but took
no farther ^eede thereof, until experience taught us that herein he was a
Prophet.

The first disorder happened at the taking of Boisgency which The beginning of
disorders.
the Prouincials won by two holes that they mined in the wall, where they
practiced more cruelty and spoil against the Protestants there dwelling that
could not get forth, then against the Catholic Soldiers that held it
against them: ye^ they even forced some women. This example became a br^^ge to
the Gascoynes, who soon after showed that in playing with their hands they
would not be surmounted. But the Lord of Y^oyes regiment consisting wholly of
French men, did skirmish herein ^^eter then the t^o former: as if there had
been any reward allotted to the worst doer. Thus did our footmen lose their
virginity, and of this unlawful conjunction ensued the procreation of Lady
Picoree, who is since grown into such dignity that she is now (...) Madam:
yea, if this civil war continue I doubt she will become a Princess. This
perverse custom immediately crept in among the Nobility: whereof part having
tasted the first delicates here administered, would never after eat any other
meat. Thus the particular mischief grew general, and still wo^ne more and
more into the whole body. Sundry remedies did I see ministered, in The
remedies applied.
hope to restrain the malice of this humor, which albeit they somewhat
profited, yet were they not strong enough altogether to expel it. Among
others, the Lord Admiral took pains therein, who was a fit Physician to
cure this disease: for he would not be entreated, neither were the frivolous
excuses of the guilty, which he esteemed not of, able to breed their escape.
In his journey into Normandy he heard of a Captain of the Argoulets that had
sacked a Uillage, whether he presently sent, but could catch no more but the
Captain with four or five soldiers, who immediately had their condemnation,
and were trussed up booted and spurred with their cassackes on their backs and
their clout for an Ensign, where also to the enriching of the monument, he
caused to be laid at their feet their conquered spoils, as women's apparel,
sheets, and table clothes, entermixed with hens and gammns of bacon: which
was a warning as it were written in great letters to all others of the same
trade, to beware of the like behavior. Never did you see wiser men then the
rest were for a moves after: but then they returned to the practice of their
good customs, which without severity will not be forgotten. As also in favor
of the Catholics this I will say, that at the beginning they likewise were
well ordered, and did not much anoy the commons, whose nobility did also shine
among them: Howbeit, I cannot well tell how long they so contiuued: but I have
heard that they also did by and by spread their sails and took the same course
as the other. Thus albeit our disorders may sometimes procure sport, yet have we
greater cause to weep when we see so many of those that deal with arms,
through their bad behauiours, deserve the name of thieves rather then soldiers.

Of the reasons that moved the Prince of Condees army to break up after the
taking of Boisgencie: also how he converted that necessity into profit. And
of the purposes of the King of Navarre.
THE principal Captains and such as were best practiced in worldly affairs,
Coffeehouse in the Princes army.
did well for esee that their army would not long continue whole, because they
did in part want the necessary foundations thereof, so as they feared this
dissipation, as men fear least the fall of some great Dake shaken with ye
winds should light upon some wall and cast it down, or upon a number of small
plants bearing fruit: which caused them to give counsel while it was in
force to hazard the field, whereof they missed. Now after the taking of
Boisgencie, when they see the contrary power placed at Bloys which stands
upon the river of Loyre, and that the war grew long, their first heat began
to cool, as also at the same time began their treasure wherewith to wage
Soldiers (who had already cons^med all that they had gathered as well a^
Orleance as else where) to fail.

This necessity opened the gates to diverse discontentmens, whereof the most
part had but simple foundations, albeit the principal motion proceeded of the
natural impatiencie of the French nation, which if it by and by see not the
imagined effects, do grow out of liking and murmureth. Neither will I conceal
but that some even of the chief of the Nobility, too much affected to their
goods, either endued with somewhat an ambitious hope, or else over delicate and
tender, endeavoring to hide these defaults, did call the equity of the war
into question. This being known, they were requested to depart, least their
speeches should alienate the minds of others. As for the greater part of the
Nobility and Gentry, which could not be maintained or placed in the nearest
Garrisons and might serve else where, it was thought good to employe them in
their own countries, where debate began to break forth betweeene the
Protestants and Catholics, especially in Poictou, Xaintogne, and Angolesme.
Thither sent they the Earl of Rochfoucault: to Lions the Lord of Soubize: and
to Bourges the Lord of Iuoy with his regiment. Also seeing the Germans,
Sui^zers and Spaniards, did already enter into France in favor of the
Catholics, they sent the Lord of Andelot into Germany, and the Lord of
Briquemaud into England to seek for help and succor: By this means did the
town of Orleance remain freed and safe from that which would most have
molested it: foreign negotiation well established: and the preservation of
those Countries, from whence they had succor provided for. Thus were the
difficulties that happened among the Princes party, determined, so as the hope
of the success of this war was not much deminished, whereof I do not much
marvel. For since in extremities, wise and valiant persons can find remedies,
why should they despair in such as are not so far grown* In the mean time
in matter of war, want of money is no small inconvenience, neither is it any
loss to have to deal with voluntary persons; which is a burden of it self
hard to be borne, whereby a man is soon oppressed, and this does none so well
know as he that has proved it.

The King of Navarre and his assotiates considering that it was not good to
lose time, which ought to be precious to those that Of the taking of Burges,
and the counsel to besiedge Orleance.
have power at command, increased their camp as well with French men as
Strangers, and besought the Queen to bring the King into the army, to the
end the Hugueno^s, who (...)ned it the King of Nauarres, or the Duke of
Guizes, might be forced to call it the Kings camp, as also the more to
(...)horise the war that was prosecuted in his name, which she did: And they
met at Chartres where they resolved to set upon Bourges, before it were
fortified: for, said they, so mighty a city, not past twenty leagues distant
from Orleance, did but too much benefice the Princes affairs. Thither they
marched and assaulting it found no such resistance as was looked for, whereby
it fell into their hands. Then being with this so sudden victory, which, said
they, was the cutting off of one of the Protestants arms, puffed up and very
joyful, they entered deliberation of their affairs. Many were very earnest to
besiege Orleance, whose reasons were these. That the two chief heads that
moeued all this body, namely the Prince of Conde and the Admiral were there,
so the same being taken they might easily make the rest of the body
immovable. That the strangers that looked up and even tickled to come into
France, when they should but hear of the siege thereof, would not be very
willing to set forward. That they had men enowe to begin the siege: for placing
and fortifying two thousandmen in the little gate to bridle the town on that
side, they should still have ten thousand footmen and three thousand horse,
who might suffice unto the ariuall of other their power that was marching.
Finally, that the town was but weak, as being neither well flancked, nor well
diched, and having no counterscarpe: Only there was a rampire wherein thirty
Canons would in six days make a breach of two hundred foot. But, said they,
if ye give those Huguenotes any respite to finish their fortifications, wherein
they labor already, we shall not be possibly able to win it. That they
should remember that that town was no small thorn in the foot of France, but
even a very great darte which pierced the bowelles thereof and kept it from
breathing.

Others of the contrary opinion did thus reply. That by their intelligences
The reasons of those that counseled the fiedge of Roan, rather then of
Orleance.
in Orleance they were assured that the two regiments of Gascogns and
Prouincials amounting to above 3000. soldiers were in it: Also five or six
hundred other soldiers of those that had been in Bourges and were now retired
thither. Moreover four hundred gentlemen: Then the townsmen able to bear
arms being no less then three thousand persons. All together above seven
thousand men, besides such as hearing of the siege, drawing thither, would
likewise enter thereinto. That a town furnished with so many men and great
store of victuals was not easy to be taken. That in consideration aforesaid,
it were to no purpose with twelve thousand men to pitch their camp against it,
considering how many several camps for the well enclosing thereof they must
make. Moreover, that to undertake such a piece of work without at the least
two hundred thousand of poulder, twelve thousand bullets, and two thousand
Pyoners, all which the Kings whole power was not able to gather together in one
month, were as a man should say, to take shipping without Biscuit. That they
had elsewhere more easy work which was requisite to be provided for: namely,
to take from the enemies the town of Rcan whilst it were yet weak, for that
the Englishmen being by them drawn thither might there frame a great army, to
go afterward where they list, in respect whereof that arm must be speedily
cut off. As for whatsoever power the Lord of Andelot might bring in, if they
would send there against 1500. horse and 4000. shot, the same under the favor
of the countries, towns and rivers might suffice either to stop or cut them
in pieces. Then having achieved all this, they should have a very fit time,
without danger of empeachment to plant a notable siege before Orleance,
wherewith to win it either speedily by maine force, or at the length, by
mines and sap, or finally by building fortes round about it. This last
counsel took place and was followed, and to be plain with you, I take it
was the better: for in the town there were for the defense thereof above five
thousand strangers, besides the enhabitants: store of munition: the Rauelines
begun and the fortifications of the Isles almost finished. True it is the Lord
Constable said that he would have nothing but sodden Apples to beat them down
withal, but when he was brought to see them he confessed that he had been
misenformed. Our Captains did often grow into communication of the siedge:
but the Lord Admiral laughed at them, saying, that to a town able to furnish
three thousand men for an issue they could not approach without danger, much
less bring their artillery. Likewise that the examples of Mets and Padoa
where two mighty Emperors in assayling such bodies as were too strong from
them, had the foil, were goodly mirrours to all such as would go about to
besiedge places well furnished.

That but for the foreign aid that the Lord of Andelot brought in, the
Protestants affairs had been but in bad case, and many men's minds shrewdly
daunted, as well through the taking of Bourges and Roan, as for the overthrow
of the Lord of Duras.
GReatly did it grieve the Prince of Conde from time to time to hear of the
The taking of Roan.
voyadge of the army against Roan, for that he had no mean to succor so
principal a town whose apparent loss he plainly perceived: for he took it to
tend greatly to the empayring of his credit: neither could he do any more
then send word oftentimes to the Lord of Andelot to hasten his return, but
especially to beware that the power which waited for him did not surprise him.
Howbeit, as all negotiations in Germany are long, so much time did wear away
whereby the adversary had opportunity to prevail against him, namely by the
taking of the said town, which being courageously assaulted was as obstinatly
defended. The great Captains who before had taken such strong towns as
Dauuilliers, Mariembourg, Callais and Thionuille did imagine that so weak a
place, so greatly commanded and having no fortification of any account, would
quayle at the first noise of the Canon: but by the resistance which the forte
of S. Katherin, that defends the hill, did make, they found that they should
have somewhat to do to drive all the Pigeons out of that Douecoate. Therein
together with the Earl of Montgommerie were seven or eight hundred Soldiers
of the old bands, and two Ensigns of Englishmen under the government of
Master Kiligree, who very well discharged their duties, notwithstanding the
Artillery that played in Courtine did greatly molest them: for upon the day of
the great assault, the defendants did thereby lose above four hundred
Soldiers, which was a great number. There was also a fierce assault given
without any order, but at the third it was won. I have heard that the Duke of
Guize commanded their leaders that albeit they forced the Rampire, they should
not nevertheless run scattered here and there wheresoever the spoil of so
rich a town might draw them, but to march in sundry troops of two or three
hundred men a piece straight to the Market place: which if they found abandoned
then the Soldier to seek his adventure: for he doubted that those men who had
fought so courageously, would there yet work their last spite, which
nevertheless they did not, albeit it was a wise foresight. For it has been
seen in other Towns, that when the assailants have pierced even to the Market
place, they have been driven back beyond the Rampire with great slaughter of
those that were scattered abroad about pillage. It is also said, that the
spoil lasted but three days, which is such an order as ought to be taken
with whatsoever towns a man list to preserve: namely, one day to gather the
booty, an other to transport it, and the third to compound. Howbeit, in these
affairs the superiors do lengthen or shorten the term as they please, or
as they know that they may procure obedience: and this obedience does much
sooner appear in poor and small houlds, then in great and rich towns.

This was one of the principal acts of our first tragedies, and so much the
more notable in that there was a King slain, four thousand men on both sides
either slain or wounded, and the second City in France for wealth, abandoned
to the spoil of the Soldier. This was heavy news to the Prince of Conde,
namely, in respect of his brother, as also he was greatly grieved at the
hanging of three persons famous in arms, Law and Deuinitie, viz. Decroze,
Mandreuille and Marlorate: which reproach so provoked the Protestants likewise,
that they endeavored to be revenged upon other prisoners whom they had taken,
of whom one was a Counsailor in the Court of Parliament of Paris, and the other
an Abbot. The King, said the Catholics, may hang his rebellious subjects:
whereto the Protestants replied, that his name shrouded other men's malice:
wherefore according to the proverb, they would make such bread such brewisse.
Albeit in the mean time we ought to be sorry, yea even ashamed of such
rigorous reuenges: and much more shameful is it for ye satisfying of
particular wrath. to make an entry to new cruelty. But ours were no civil
wars, if they should not bring forth such fruits.

Shortly after the Prince of Conde heard of the overthrow of Of the overthrow
of the Lord of Duras troops.
a small army of Gascognes which the Lord of Duras was bringing unto him,
containing at the least five thousand persons, defeated by the Lord of Mouluc,
which increased his care, notwithstanding in all these adversities he quayled
not either in courage or countenance. This mishap, as I have heard, light upon
the Lord of Duras, through two especial reasons. The one, that to the end to
bring with his troops two Canons he marched heauely: the other, that upon the
commodity of this ordinance he stayed by the way to beat certain Castles
replenished with great booties. Thus had his enemies opportunity to overtake
him, whose strength consisting in horse did by and by overthrow him: for such
as are to bring any succor must always free themselves from combersome
carriage, and crown their expeditions with diligence.

During these affairs I remember I once heard the Lord Admiral, The execution
of the Prince of Condes purposes stayed through the succor that the Lord of
Andelot brought in.
talking of these matters, say unto the Prince of Conde, That one mischief
follows an other: howbeit that he must yet expect the third adventure,
meaning his brothers passage, which would either lift them up again or quite
cast them down. As in deed if it had miscarried they looked to have been
besieged, which so happening, they were very secretly resolved that one of them
should have gone into Germany to have endeavored there to have yet raised some
power, being of opinion that the Prince of Conde, in respect of the greatness
of his family, should be the best able to persuade the Protestant Princes of
Germany to assist him in a cause wherein themselves did partly participate.
Howbeit, all the difficulty consisted in the conueying of him thither safely:
whereupon some gentlemen there present did evidently declare that going from
one of his partakers houses to another, and always marching by night, and
resting all day, he might easily pass with twenty horse and no more. But he
was not put to that plonge: for within ten or twelve days after they had
news that the Lord of Andelot having passed the chiefest difficulties of his
journey, was come within thirty leagues of Orleance: which was also supplied
with a second comfort, viz. that the Earl of Rochefou^ault accompanied with
three hundred gentlemen, and the remainder of the Lord of Duras army would
very shortly join with him. Whereupon the Prince of Conde said: Our enemies
have given us two shrewde checkes in taking our rookes (meaning R^an and
Bourges) but I hope that now we may catch their knights, if they take the
field. Neither is it to be demanded whether every man rejoiced or was glad
at Orleance: for commonly the Soldier the more opportunity that he has to
hurt and molest his enemy that iniureth him, the gladder he is, such sway do
wrath bear among the^. And how should not their affections be sometimes
alittle spotted with blood, when many Clergy men's are so red with the dye of
revenge, in whose hearts should nothing but charity be harbored.

Of the Prince of Condees purposes when he saw his foreign succor approach,
and how he came before Paris, from whence after he had there soiourned eleven
days and done nothing, he departed toward Normandy.
IN as much as good counsels are the fountains The Princes army marched
toward Paris.
of good exploytes, and increase of force the instruments to atteyne thereto,
the Lords Prince of Conde and Admiral finding their succor to be at hand,
devised with themselves upon the choice of some good purpose: Finally, with
their most trustiest they resolved to march toward Paris, not meaning to force
it (for they doubted that the enemies would immediately thrust in their army
thereinto) but only to terrify the Parisians whom they accounted the bellows
of the wars and kitchen that fed the same, as imagining that they seeing
their country houses forreyed and burnt and so many insolent Soldiers lodged
even within their town, would either urge the King and Queen to hearken unto
peace, or else so quarrel with those that should be so enclosed within their
walls, that they should even force them into the field, where they might find
opportunity to fight with them, and so recover that advantage that they lost at
the skirmish of Tally: and that in the mean time they would send into
Normandy, to make ready the hundred and fifty thousand crowns which (as the
voice went) were borrowed of certain English Merchants, and upon good pawnes:
for thereupon did their only hope to wage the foreign army wholly depend: as
also because necessity constrained them to cause it to live out of their

Thus did spite and shame resolve them to attempt a difficult matter, which
before upon ripe deliberation, when it was more easy, they A Camisado
enterprised against the suburbs of Paris, also the retreat of the Princes army.
accounted unprofitable: and the like have I seen happen many times, even
among many good men of war. At night therefore order being given out, every
man armed himself and marched by by ways toward the side of the Suburbs of
S. Germain, where they understood that the trenches were small and the guard
weak, which was true. Now the Lord of Guize had some inckeling of this
enterprise, that it should be performed at midnight: whereupon he kept all his
horsemen and footmen in arms all the night long in the trenches every one in
his quarter appointed: But when the clock had stroke four in the morning and
that they perceived no noise from our camp, they all said that it was but some
false allarum, and that the Protestants hearts would not serve to set upon
them, also that it was to no purpose (considering the extreme cold) to freeze
them up a whole nights space upon a simple suspicion, peradventure without any
ground. To be brief, one after an other they all returned each one to his
lodging, so as there remained no more but ye ordinary guard. The Protestants in
the mean time fetthing a great compass for fear of descrying, lost
themselves, so as they could not come near the place that they should assail
before broad day: whereupon perceiving themselves discovered and the alarm
great, they retired: but had they come three quarters of an hour sooner, it
was likely they might in that place have forced the trenches. In this
enterprise we may see how some men's impatiencie had like to have put them to a
great foil, also how the small foresight of the others in the conduct of their
men made them lose the occasion that they had undertaken, and so remain a
scorn to their enemies. I have heard that the Lords of Guize and Constable
did fear the forcing of those Suburbs rather for the shame then for the hurt,
as affirming that the same would have been the destruction of the Protestants
if they had taken them. For whiles they had been dispersed about the spoil,
they made account to have sent forth at sundry ga^es and other places four
or five thousand Harquebuziers, and two thousand Corcelets to fall upon the^,
who surprising them would have slain a great part and put the rest to flight.
We did so far ouershoote our selves as three days after to purpose the like
again, and I believe we should have been well beaten. But at the change of
our watch one of our chief Captains retired to ye Catholics, which stayed
the execution thereof. The first day he was much made of: The second they
laughed him to scorn: and the third he repented that he had forsaken his
friends. The Prince of Conde fearing least he should bewray the wants in his
army, departed the next morning, wherein he did wisely, for the Lord of Guize
(whose Spaniards and Gascognes were now come) was determined with his whole
power the next morning by break of day to have set upon him if he had stayed
but one day longer: And considering of the manner of his purposed proceeding (as
I have been informed) I suppose he would have brought us into a bad case by
reason that we were lodged too scatteringly being so near to them: which is
one bad custom engendered by these civil wars. The Prince thus departed,
directed his course toward Normandy for the purposes before mentioned, and
within two days after the Kings army followed, still coasting of him until
they came to the plains of Dreux where both the armies met.

Of six notable occurrences in the battle of Dreux.
AMong all the battles fought during our civil A notable battle.
wars in France, was there none more notable then the battle of Dreux, in
respect as well of the experimented Captains there present, as for the
obstinacy in fight. Howbeit to say the truth it was an accident worthy
lamentation, through the pouring forth of the blood of above five hundred
gentlemen of both sides into the bosom of the sea* together with the loss of
sundry Princes, Lords and sufficient Captains: but since things are so fallen
out, we are not forbidden to apply them to our instructions, albeit it were
better never to return to the like folly, that cost so dear. Now, many things
there happened, which every man did not peradventure note, and that is it that
has caused me to set them down, to the end that such as over slightly do
pass over the notable feats of arms without consideration of whatsoever may
profit them, may be more diligent hereafter: for that is the way to learn to
be a Captain.

The first thing that happened, albeit it were not of any great 1 The
countenance of both the armies.
importance, may yet be noted as an extraordinary matter. That is, that
although both armies were above two long hours within a Canon shot each of
other, as well to put themselves in array, as to comtemplate their adversaries,
yet was there not any skirmish small or great before the general battle,
albeit in many other battles that have been fought the same have been the
for(...)mers, as at Cerisolles, Sienne and Graueling. Nevertheless, she may
not say that the battles must of necessity begin by such actions, but for
the most part men are led thereto by the quality of the place, either when
they find themselves strong in shot, either to try their enemies, either upon
some other consideration. There every man stood fast, imagining in himself
that they that came against him were no Spaniards, Englishmen, or Italians, but
Frenchmen, and those of the brauest: among whom were their companions, friends
and kinsefolkes, as also that within one hour they were to s^ay each other.
This bred some horror, nevertheless without quayling in courage they thus
stayed until that the armies moved to join.

The second notable matter was the generositie of the Suitzers, 2 The
Generositie of the Suit^ers.
whom we may say to have there made a worthy proof of their valor: for the
great body of that battle wherein they were, being at the first onset
overthrown, and their troop shrewdly endomaged by the Prince of Condees
squadron, yet stood they fast in the place where they had been aranged, albeit
they were alone and that their horsemen had forsaken them. Yea a pretty way
from the auantgarde, three or four hundred of the Protestants Harque^uziers
seeing them so fit, set upon them and flewe many, and yet could not make them
give place: A battle of Launceknights likewise did assault them, whom they
ouerthrewe and followed beating upon them above two hundred paces. They were
afterward also beset with two Cornets of Reistres, whom they withstoode, and
lastly with one of Reistres and Frenchmen together, who made them to retire,
albeit with small disorder, toward their men that had been behoulders of their
valor. And notwithstanding their Colonel and almost al their Captains were
left dead in the place, yet did they by such resistance purchase great glory.

The third act was the Lord of Guizes long patience, whereby 3 The Lord of
Guizes patience. cause of his victory.
he attained to the victory: for after the body of the battle which the Lord
Constable led was wholly overthrown except the Suitzers, and himself taken,
the said Lord stood fast, waiting whether they would rome to set upon him: for
as yet the Prince of Condees footmen had not fought, whereto also part of his
horsemen still gathered into array besides those that yet houered: but this
auantgard thus setting a good face on the matter, the Protestants durst not
bite: In the mean time some of them stayed to charge the Suitzers, as is
aforesaid: others to pursue those that fled, and many to spoil the cariages,
wherein they spent an hour and a half. Sundry even of the Lord of Guizes
part seeing him stand still so long while they that were overthrown were
pursued, wist not what to think of him, as if he had been beside himself: and
I believe some accused him of cowardlinesse, as the Romans did Fabius Maximus
almost in the like case: even some of his adversaries began already to cry
that the victory was theirs: but I remember that I heard the late Lord
Admiral answer: We are deceived, for by and by we shall see this great
cloud dissolve upon us: And it so happened soon after, whereupon ensued the
change of fortune. Hereby did the Lord of Guize well show that he did but
watch for opportunity: and could patiently behold the disordering of the
Prince of Condees great troops (which at the beginning being joined again
might have troubled him shrewdly) about these small actions before rehearsed:
But after he did see them so scattered, he marched with such a bold
countenance that he found but small resistance. We are not therefore suddenly
to judge of the entents of these great Captains: for the effects do afterward
discover their considerations to be otherwise then many would imagine.

The fourth thing worthy memory was the long continuance of 4 The long
continuance of the battle.
the battle: for ordinarily in battles in one hour we see al won and
lost, yea that of Montcontour lasted not so long: but this beginning about one
of the clock after noone lasted until five: yet must we not imagine that
they fought all this while, for they had many pawses, and sometimes gave small
onsets, and sometime great, which carried away the best men, and this continued
until dark night. Truly the courage on both sides was wonderful, as the
great number of the dead did sufficiently testify, which as many men say,
amounted to above seven thousand men, of whom the most were slain rather in
fight then in flight. But the chief cause of the prolonging of it was as I
think because the Kings army was strong in footmen, and the Prince of Condees
in horsemen. For the one could not break the great battles, neither the
other drive away the horses. If we do well consider all battles that have
been fought since the Suizers battle, which fought again the next day, we
shall find none comparable to this, yea the battle of S. Laurence was ended
in half an hour.

The fifth accident was the taking of the two Generalles of the 5 The taking of
the two generalles of the armies.
armies, a rare matter, because that they ordinarily do never fight but in the
end and upon extremity: and many times a battle is almost won before they
came to this point. But these stayed not so long, for in the beginning each of
them endeavored to set his men an example not to dally. The Lord Constable was
first taken and sore wounded, having likewise been wounded in seven battles
that he had been in, which is testimony sufficient of his courage: and the
Lord Prince was likewise taken toward the end and wounded also. Hereupon may
grow a question, whether a General ought to adventure so far? Whereto it
may be answered, that this is not to be termed aduenturing, when the maine
battle marches to the charge, and so he depart not out of his place:
Besides that these having good seconds, did the less fear the danger of
their persons: for the one had the Lord of Guize, and the other the Admiral,
who both also were far enough in the conflict.

The six^ was the manner how both the armies parted, which many 6 The retraite
of both the armies.
times happens otherwise then there it did. We lightly see that the end of a
battle is the flight of the party overcome, which is withal pursued two or
three leagues, and sometimes farther. But here we may say was no pursuit, but
the Protestants retired an easy pace and in order, having yet two battles of
Reistres and one of French horsemen, in all amounting unto about 1200. horse.
But the Lord of Guize, who was weak in horse, not willing to abandon his
footmen, was content to have followed five or six hundred paces after them.
Thus as well the one as the other being weary, the night coming on parted
them. He took his lodging in the field where the battle was fought, and the
Admiral went to a Uillage a long league of, whether his footmen with all his
cariages were retired. Some hold opinion that the battle was not lost
because the losers were not quite disordered, but therein they are deceived. For
he that gets the field, wins the Artillery and takes the footmens
Ensigns, has tokens enowe of the victory: albeit it may be said that it was
not at the full, as if plain flight had ensued. If any man should reply that
often times they had seen the two armies retire each from other in good order,
as at Roche-abeille, also the fridaie before the battle of Moncontour: It is
true, but then had they not had any maine fight as here, but only great
skirmishes, wherein either part kept their advantage of the ground. There are
yet living many Gentlemen and Captains able to remember what was there done,
and still to deliver some observations thereupon.

Finally, I thought good to set down yet one thing above my How the Lord of
Guyze entreated the Lord Prince of Conde.
number, as also it happened after the battle, which was the courtesy and
honesty that the Lord of Guize being the conqueror used toward the Lord
Prince of Condie his prisoner, which most men of each part did not think that
he would have done: for it is well enough known how odious in civil watres
the chief of either faction is, as also what things are imputed unto them, so
as if they fall into their enemies hands, after many reproaches which they are
forced to bear, their lives also are in danger. Howbeit here it fell out
contrary: for being brought before him, he spoke reverently unto him, and
with very modest speeches, wherein he could not gather that he meant to
gird or checks him. Also so long as he soiourned in the camp, he oftentimes
did eat with him: likewise because upon this day of battle they could
have but few beds brought, the rather for that the carriages were half rifled
and scattered, be offered him his bed, which the said Lord Prince would not
accept, but for the one half. Thus did these two mighty Princes being as it
were capital enemies, both in one bed, the one triumphing, the other a
prisoner, take their rests together. It may be said that the Lord Marshall of
Anuill^ having him in custody (for to him he yielded himself) would not
suffer him to have any injury offered, because his father was also a prisoner:
I confess he would have done what in him had lien, but surely if the Lord of
Guize would have hurt him, his credit and reputation was then such as no man
could have let him. Such brave actions are not, in my mind, to be buried
in oblivion, because that all that profess arms ought to study to imitate
them, and to abondon all cruelty and unworthy deem a^^res whereinto in these
civil wars so many do fall for that they either cannot or will not bridle
their malice. To the enemy that resists we are to show our selves haughty:
but being overcome honesty wills that we show him curtesy. Some man might yet
cross me and say that he might well enough show him this curtesy,
considering what he had before procured at Orleance against the said Prince:
To whom I will answer that hear I mean to commend the beautiful actions
of virtue when by chance I meet with any; but not to speak of other's which
are not to my purposes: so that when I see them shine in what man so lower, I
will honor them.

Of the (...) Lord of Guizes laid to O^leance: also of the (...) Admiralls
journey (...) Normandy.
GRem hope had the Duke of Guize now The foundation of the Duke of Guizes hope.
(...) what a go^dly victory he had obtained, albeit (...) cost him dear: as
having taken the General of his adverse party, and did remain without
companion, having the whole government in himself. Neither was he slack in
publishing it abroad, as also he took good order to refresh his army,
whereto he said himself constrained. In the mean time all his imaginations
tende^ to the preparing of all sorts of engines and provision to assail the
town of Orleance, giving out that the den whereinto Foxes retired being once
taken; they might afterward hunt them all over France. Neither had the Lord
Admiral less need to rest his people, who grieuing that they were beaten did
many times find cause of mutenie. Wherefore he passed over the river of Loire,
as well to refresh them as to furnish them a new at the charges of diverse the
enemies small towns, but meanly defended, and a good quarter pay, where the
soldier had the ^rdle somewhat at will, to the end in part to recover his
losses. This en^^^ase of liberty encouraged them a fresh and put them in
better hope. Heereto he condescended, partly by counsel, and partly upon
necess^ite, so to avoid mutu^ie, even of the Reisters, whom the Catholics
did with great promises under hand labor to retire: as also he feared the
retrai^t of some of his French soldiers, who in adversities were ready
enough to turn their coats.

After this he came and pitched at Iargeau, a town standing upon The Lord
Admirals resolution, the Siege of Orleance and the notablest perticularities of
the same.
the river of Loire, having a bridge, to the end so to have a free passage
over, and thence resolved to march into Normandy, there to receive the money
that was already come out of England: for his Reisters threathed to take him
prisoner. His cariages were left at Orleance, to the end to make the more
speed, where his brother the Lord Andelot was left to govern. The Duke of
Guize perceiving this departure, came and pitched his camp before the town and
his first attempt was to win the suburbs at the foot of the bridge, commonly
called Portereau, so to stop all saylies on that side. The Lord of Feuquiers
had entrenched it, as meaning there to have safely lodged the Germans and
French footmen that escaped from the battle of Dreux, until they had been
forced away, and it might have been kept four or five days against all
handie blows, so as there had come no ordinance. In the mean time while it
was assaulted there felt such a hap that the town had like to have been taken
(so wonderful are the events of war) but especially through the default of
the Lancek nights. The Duke of Guize minded not that day to force it, but
rather to mark the countenance of those that were within: Howbeit as a wary
Captain he came furnished both with needle and thread as we say, not only to
be provided for every occasion, but also to frame occasions whereby to
prevail. Wherefore he committed to the Lord of Cipiere an excellent Captain
one thousand and two hundred French harquebuziers, two light Culuerines, and
six Cornets of horse, and marched after him self with another small troop. At
their coming (which was upon the Gascognes quarter) they found them abroad
at the skirmish, and their trenches and barriers well furnished: but while they
held them play there, certain straglers abroad certefied them that the
Lanceknights quarter set no great countenance on the matter, whereupon they
sent four or five hundred harquebuziers together with some horse to(...)e that
corner.

As the same instant the Lord of Cipiere discharged his artillery into the
barriers of the French: The Launceknightes at the moving and sound thereof
were astonished and giving over their guard fled, at which time the Catholic
soldiers entered the suburbs, and so came behind the French men who defended
themselves bravely: by this means went all to wrack, neither is it possible
to imagine greater disorder then was there: for ye bridge being pestred with
the stuff that they were conueying into the town, they that fled could not
get by; Neither could they shut the turn pike gates, or lift up the draw
bridge, whereupon the most part fell to swimming over the river. Thus through
iron, fire, and water above eight hundred men were lost: But the fear that was
brought into the town was greater than the hurt, and it was openly said that
the Isles which they had fortefied were won, yea, that they fought at the
chief gate, which daunted even the boldest. The Lord of Andelot (who was a
knight without fear) seeing such a confusion and fear said: All that be
Gentlemen follow me: for we must either drive back the enemy or die for
it. They can but one way come to us, and there but ten men in front: with one
hundred of ours we may beat a thousand of theirs. Be of good cheer and let
us go. As he went he beheld the fear, slight and disorder, he heard a
thousand lamentable cries, and had as many aduices given him: In the mean
time without any fear he passed the bridges and came to the turn^ pike very
glad that the enemy was no farther forward: but likewise it was time for him
to come, for they were at the draw bridge ready to enter amain, which
nevertheless was drawn, and the gate shut with shall loss. Now it is to be
noted that it was a long half hour from the enterprise against the suburbs
and the coming of the Lord of Andelot thither, all which time the gate stood
open and no man to keep it, which not withstanding the Catholics entered not,
whether it were that they stayed to spoil and kill, either else that they
wanted some valyant Captain to guide and lead them. But undoubtedly if in the
beginning they had made a general head against the town, they had won it, so
great was the fear and so small the remedies: At the least they had been sure
of the Isles, which had been as much as to have had the town within fifteen
days after. I have since demanded of some good Captains of the Catholics how
it chanced that they perceived our astonishment no sooner: But they told me
that themselves were also amazed to see that they had so suddenly conquered so
much people. But that they thought that a certain brute raised among them
that we had purposely forsaken the turn pike, which was filled with powder
wherewith when a great number of them had been passed, to have made them to
leap, did state them. Thus did the Catholics loose a brave occasion, and the
Protestants escape as great a danger. These extraordinary events ought to
quicken up the foresight of the defendants, and to provoke the assaylaunts to
diligence, to the end the first put not off that which ought to be done this
day until to morrow, and the other remember to accompany their troops that
give the onset with such Captains as can readily perceive, and speedely take
advantage when it is offered. Of so good success did not only the Duke of
Guize, but also his whole army, which exceeded twenty thousand, conceive
great hope. Whereas contrariwise many of them that were within were shaken with
as sh^^ude an a^^aint, and would gladly have been content that the Lord
Admiral could have flowen back unto them: but by little and little the Lord of
Andelot cured the feebleness of such apprehensions with haughty and persuasiue
speeches.

Long time was afterward spent in assaulting the turn pikes, The wou^ding and
death of the Duke of Guize whereof ensued the pacification of the first trobles
also what the Lord Admiral did in Normandy.
(which since were surprised through the negligence of some of those that were
within, and in playing upon the defenses of the Isles. The Duke of Guize
determined with twenty Canons to pla^e two days upon them and to give a
fierce assault, and in respect of their weakness in my opinion, he would have
won them. But in the mean time there fell out a chance unlooked for, no
less strange and rare than the former, which troubled the whole feast: which
was the wounding of the said Duke by a Gentleman named Poltrot, and his death
within a few days after. This quailed their o^rages and hope of all the
soldiers in his army, to see themselves deprived of so notable a General.
Insomuch that the Queen being weary of so many miseries and notable
slaughters, undertook the treaty of peace: and thence forth was there
nothing but patleyes on either side, until it was concluded wherein the Lord
Prince of Condie and the Lord Constable were the chief instruments and
dealers. Now let us speak of the (...) Admiralls expedition, who fearing the
forcing of Orleance ^e solued wholly upon diligence, as also in six days he
marched (...) (...)ie leagues with his power of horsemen, who consisted of two
thousand Reisters, five hundred French horse, and one thousand ^^arq^ebuziers
on horseback, as also they had only one thousand and two hundred horses,
but no cart for their carria(...)

In this sort we used such diligenee that sometimes we prevented the fame of
our coming in diverse places where we arrived. The said Lord Admiral being
come to Cane, assaulted it with the help of certain English men, whom the
Earl of Warwick and Beauois la Nocle, who were in Newhauen, had sent him. The
Castle being furiously beaten did yield upon composition. Therein was the
Marquez of Elboeuf, to whom we used all courtesy. Our Reisters also received
their pay, which they liked better than the Normandy Cidre: and as we
prepared to return to suc^our Orleance, the Prince of Condie writ to the
Admiral that the peace was concluded, which news converted his desire to fight
into another desire, namely to visit his house. This was the end of the first
civil war, which had continued a whole year: A term that seemed rather
long than short to the natural impatiencie of our nation, which in some places
ouerflowed in cruelties more mee^e for barbarous people than Frenchmen: whereof
the Protestants did endure the most part. And this peace did many good men like
of a great deal the better, because it ended all these inhumanities.

The second troubles.
Of the causes of the taking of arms in the second troubles. Also how the
purposes where upon the Protestants had built themselves proved vain.
MAny are the writings that have been published in justification of the leauie
of The causes of the taking of arms in the second troble.
arms in the year 1507. as also others contrariwise to condemn them, whereof
such histories as entreat of things passed have at large discoursed, to the
which all such as gladly would exactly search the particularities of all these
public actions are to have recourse. For my part I am content briefly upon
this point to touch some such as are as true as the same that have been
published, which I have learned of those that on the one side had in part the
conduct of the affairs. The edict of pacification concluded before Orleance
had greatly satisfied almost all France, as well in appearance as in effect,
because thereby all miseries ceasing, every man inioyed rest with safety of
body and liberty of mind. Howbeit the hatred and envy of some, as also the
mistrust of others was not quite extinguished, but lay hidden and unperceived.
But as time does commonly bring all things to perfection, so these seeds
together with many worse, brought forth such fruit as returned us into our
former discords: the chief of the religion who looked to the safety as well
of themselves as of other made a general collection of all that was wrought and
still practiced against them, affirming that undoubtedly their enemies
endeavored by little and little to undermine them, and then even at once to
give them their deaths wound. Of the causes that they alleged some were
manifest, and some secret. Concerning the first, they consisted in the razing
of sundry towns, and the building of Citadels in the places were they had
their public exercise: also in murders in sundry places committed, and the
slaughter of diverse notable Gentlemen, whereof they could have no justice. In
the ordinary threats that shortly they should not lift their heads so high:
and especially in ye coming of Suitzers, albeit the Duke of Alua was already
passed into Flanders, under a cloked fear of whose passage they were leauied.
And for the secret they propounded certain intercepted letters coming from
Rome and Spain, wherein the purposes that should be put in execution were more
plainly discovered: The resolution concluded with the Duke of Alua at Bayon to
root out all the Huguenots in France, and the Rogues in Flaunders, whereof they
were advertised by such as were not doubted of. All these things with many more
that I omit did greatly waken those that were loath to be taken sleeping: and I
remember that the chief of the religion met thrice at Vallery and Chastillon,
whether came 10 or 12. of the notablest Gentlemen to determine upon these
present wars, also to seek some lawful and honest means of safety among so
many terrors without proceeding to the uttermost extremities. Howbeit rather by
the counsel of the L. Admiral than of any other, every one was desired a
while to have patience, for that in so weighty affairs as these, which
brought with them many mischiefs, men ought rather to be drawn by necessity,
than to run headlong upon will: withal that in short time they should see
more. But at third meeting which was within a month, their brains were
better heat as well upon the considerations aforesaid, as thorough new aduices
given them, namely one which the Prince and Lord Admiral did affirm to
proceed from a Courtier greatly affected to the Protestants, who assured them
that there had been a secret counsel holden, wherein it was determined to
seize upon them two, the one to be put to death, the other to be kept prisoner:
at the same time to place 2000. Suitzers at Paris, two thousand at Orleance,
and the rest to be sent to Poictiers: Then to disanull the Edict of
pacification, and to make an other utterly contrary thereto: and not to
doubt thereof. This was easy to be believed, and the rather for that already
they see the Zuitzers, who they had been so often promised should be sent
back, march toward Paris. Whereupon some more sensitive and impatient than the
rest grew into these speeches* What? shall we tarry until they come and
bind us hand and foot and so draw us unto their scaffoldes at Paris, there
by our shameful deaths to glutte others cruelty? What advice shall we yet
expecte? Do we not already see the foraine enemy march armed toward us, and
threaten to be revenged on us, as well for so many injuries done to them at
Dreux, as also for those harms which in our defenses we have done to the
Catholics? Have we forgotten that above three thousand of our religion have
since the peace endured violent deaths, for whom (whatsoever our complayntes)
we can have no redress but frivolous aunsweres and fraudulent delays? Yet if
it were our Kings will we should be thus iniuried and contemned, we might
peradventure the better bear it: But since we know that all this is wrought by
those who shrouding themselves under his name do purpose to debar us all
access unto his person, and to alienate his good will from us, to the end
that being destitute of all aid and supporte we may remain their bond men,
and be a pray unto them: shall we bear such insolences? Our Fathers did
patiently for the space of forty years and more suffer, upon whom they
made proof of all sorts of punishments for the name of Jesus, which cause
our selves do also defend. And now that non only families and boroughes,
but also whole towns have under the authority and benefit of two royal
edictes manefestly declared their faith, we shall make our selves unworthy
these two goodly titles Christian and Gentleman, which we esteem to be most
honorable ornaments, if thorough our negligence and cowardlynesse in loosing
our selves* we suffer such a multitude of people to perish. Wherefore we
beseech you that have taken upon you the common defense to enter some speedy
resolution, for the matter will hear no longer delays. Other assistaunts at
this counsel were moved, not so much at the vehemency, as truth of this
speech.

But as there are always some full of consideration, the same did reply that
they perceived the eminent danger, howbeit that the safeguard was from them
hidden. For if we will (said they) fly to complaints and supplications, it is
most evident that the same do rather provoke those to whom they be exhibited,
than procure any remedy. If likewise we take arms with how many reproaches,
slanders, and curses shall we be overwhelmed by those who imputing unto us the
blame of the miseries ensuing, when they cannot discharge their rage upon us,
will ease their choler upon our poor families dispearsed in diverse places?
howbeit in as much as among many mischiefs we must always choose the least,
it seems there is less inconvenience in suffering the first violences of our
enemies, than in beginning with the^ and so become guilty of a public and
general co^motion. Then spoke the Lord of Andelot and said: Your opinion my
masters that spoke last is grounded upon some discretion and apparent equity:
But the principal physical drugges, meet to purge this exceeding humor
which now abounds in the universal body of France, namely Fortitude and
Magnanimity do therein want. I would therefore weete of you, if you carry
until we be banished into foreign Countries, lie bound in prisons, lurk in
forests, ouerrunne by the people, contemned by the soldiers, and condemned
by the authority of the mightiest, (all which we are not far fro) what will
all our passed patience and humility stand us in stead? What profit can we
reap in our innocence? To whom shall we complain? Or who will vouchsafe to
hear us? It is time to see that we be no longer deceived, and to have
recourse to our defense which is as just as necessary, neither to care though
they term us the authors of the war: for themselves are they that in so
many sorts have infringed the public agreementes and covenants, and that have
brought even into our bowels six thousand foreign soldiers, who in effect
have already proclaimed it against us, so as if we give them such advantage as
to strike us first, our mischief will be past remedy.

Small speech was there afterward, other than an approbation The resolution to
take arms, also the difficulties in the beginning.
to take force in hand, so to prevent the imminent destructition. Howbeit if
there were any difficulties in the rosolution hereof, so was there no less in
learning how to proceed in this new approach. Some wished the Captains to
seize upon Orleance, and confederate town, and then to certefie their
majesty's that perceiving the approach of ye Suitzers, they were thither
withdrewen with their friends for their safeties: also that by returuing them
home, they would likewise depart every man to his own house. Hereto it was
answered, that these men had forgotten how that at Orleance there was a great
gate fortefied and kept by a sufficient number of Catholics, whereby they
might always let in men of war into the town: also that now it was time to
defend themselves with iron and steel, and not with words or writing. Others
thought it good abroad in the Provinces to seize upon as many towns as they
might, and then to stand upon the defensive, whose advice was not admitted
neither, because that: (as it was said) in the first troubles of a hundred
that the Protestants held, within eight months they had not twelve left, for
want of power to succor them. Finally, they concluded to take arms, and in
the beginning of this war to observe four things. First to seize upon few
towns, but the same to be of importance: Secondly, to frame a Iustie army:
Thirdly, to cut in pieces the Suitzers, under whose favor the Catholics
would always be the masters of the field: Lastly, to endeavor to banish
the Cardinal of Loraine from the Court, as him whom many did imagine to be a
continua salliciour of the King to root out the Protestants. Great difficulties
were there propounded concerning the two last points. For, said some, the
Cardinal and the Suitzers did continually march with the Kings person, so as
assayling the one, and endeavoring to terrefie the other, every man would
affirm their enterprise to be directly against the royal majesty and no
other: but they were decided by this answer: That the event should discover
their intentes, even as they gave testimony of King Charles the seventh, who
being but Dolphine took arms, but neither against his Father nor the Realm.
Moreover, that it was well known that the French in body had never attempted
against their Princes person: Finally, that if this their first success fell
out favorable, it might cut off the course of a long and ruinous war, in
that they should have opportunity to open unto the King the truth of matters,
which yet was concealed from him, whereof might ensue a new confirmation of
the ediots, namely, when they that purposed to prevent should find
themselves prevented.

This was the resolution taken among those men that were then present, who
albeit they were endued with great knowledge, experience, valor, and
discretion, yet all that they had so diligently forecast and examined, when it
came to effect, was wonderful wide from their expectation, and other things
almost unthought of, as accounted either to sure or difficult, redou^ded to
their greatest benefit. Whereof it follows that we may hereby perceive that
good success does not always follow good deliberatious. Howbeit all this
have I not here spoken to the end to control those that I have named, of
whose virtue I have evermore greatly admired, neither to cause men in their
affairs to neglect discretion or diligence, but only to advertise them that
the accomplishment of any our works consists not in the purposes of man,
but in Gods disposition.

Now let us mark the success of these enterprises. For the first Of the
success of the Princes attempts.
points which concerned the towns it was determined to surprise only three,
viz. Lions, Toulouse, and Troy, and that for the commodity in diverse respects
ensuing of the same. But the purposes of those that undertook the charge of
seazing upon them fell out to be in vain. Concerning strength of the field,
the Protestants were in the beginning stronger than the Catholics, but within
a month and a half after the taking of arms the Catholics were the
mightier, whereby they forced them to have recourse to strangers whom they had
called to their succor. The execution of the Suitzers had as bad success, as
well for that this purpose was discovered, as through want of power. Now rested
no more but the fourth point, which being of smallest importance was brought
to pass, and that was the parting of the Cardinal of Loraine from the Court,
who notwithstanding was of as great authority there as before time. But
thereof grew another inconvenience to the Protestants. Which was, that they
stirred up the Kings hatred and indignation against them, in that by their
occasion he was forced with fear and speed to retire to Paris, so as ever
after he bare them a grudge. This had been but an unhappy beginning of the
war unto them if other effects had not recompensed the first defaultes:
which nevertheless happened rather by the motions of diverse particular
Gentlemen, together with the disposition of sundry the inhabitants of towns,
than through any the great deliberations before me^cioned, whereof ensued the
seazure of sundry both good and had, of which the nearest were Orlea^ce,
Auxerre and Soisso^s. True it is that secretly they were warned to shirre upon
one prefixed day, albeit there was no great account made of other than the
before rehearsed.

That the Prince of Condies attempt of three things for a proud face upon the
beginning of his enterprise, whereat the Catholics at the first were astonished.
Man's courage urged by necessity does increase, The first. A general taking
of arms upon one self day.
as also his former apprehensions being some what quailed, he stands in the
less fear to hazard himself unto whatsoever difficult and dangerous
attempts, as it then happened to the Protestants. For they seeing the naked
sword threatening of them, resolved to save themselves rather with the arm
than the leg and therefore winking at sundry respects thought it best
valiantly to begin. Their first and principal act was a general taking of
arms upon one self day, which bred great astonishment even to some of their
own part, who were ignorant of the matter, and much terror to the
Catholics, who peradventure (...) if they had begun first, have dealt more
rigorously tha^ ye Protestants did: nevertheless in the mean time it grieved
them to see so many towns taken, which they dissembled: albeit some of them
said, The brethren have now taken us tardie, but the day will come that we
shall have our revenge, wherein they showed themselves as good as their words:
For before the year was over, they gave them to weete that they had, said but
the truth. Some held opinion that so many aduertisementes as were to be given
to the Provinces, would breed the discovery of the enterprise, ho wheit that
happened in few places, nevertheless in those of most importance: much more
impossible is it in these days so to proceed in respect of man's
indiscretion, the which is such as it can conceal nothing. We may note in
ancient time examples in manner much like unto this (except that the one did
^ende to offend, the other to defend, as when Mithridates within his dominions
upon a like day procured the slaughter of forty thousand Romans. Likewise
when three score towns of Greece were by a certain day appointed by the
Roman Consul seized and sacked by his legions without any fore knowledge or
perceuerance of one or other until the very time of the execution thereof.
But such actions happen but seldom, by reason that they which have once been
caught and escaped again, do grow so vigilant and suspicious that even the
wagging of every leaf does waken them, and each shadow make them to start.

The second notable action consisted in that with less than five The second.
hundred horse, they durst adventure upon six thousand Suitzers, and make them
to retire. True it is that according to their platform Their courage in
setting upon 6000. Suitzers.
they should have been more, viz. a certain number of harquebuziers on
horseback, who failed them, not in coming into the field, but of coming in
time to the place appointed, so as in respect of their small power the
Captains of the Protestants stayed and duist not adventure upon a general
charge against this great troop which seemed a forest. Moreover, their great
race that they had run, had almost tired all their horses, and yet have I
heard them affirm that had their troop of Picardie which consisted of an
hundred and fifty horse come in time they would have hazarded the field, in
making their harquebuziers to alight, and charging with their squadrons on
three sides. Howbeit although they had so done, yet had the event been
doubtful. All passed in skirmishes, wherein some of each part were slain and
wounded. I have heard that this great battle set a countenance worthy
Suitzers: for without any fear they stood fast a while, and then retired close
still turning their head as does the wild Bore whom the hunters do pursue,
until that seeing no lykelyhoode to force them, they gave them over.

The third deed was the occupying of the town of Saint Denis, and two other
small villages at hand which the Prince of Condie The third. The taking of
Saint Dennis.
caused to be entrenched, where he planted himself with all his power to lay
siege to that side of Paris. All these effects coming into consideration even
of the best Captains of the Catholics, they grew astonished, as imagining that
the Prince did spedely expect some great force, and had very good
intelligences as well in Paris as in the Court. Otherwise (said they) being so
weak, he never durst come so boldly to lodge so near us, neither would the
Admiral (being a most wary and good warrior) without some hidden grounds
have counsayled it. This made them to forbear until they had assembled their
power. Diverse there were that thought it hard (considering that their strength
was good as consisting of almost ten thousand men) to suffer this small
handful of people by their daily and continual skirmishes to face them even
to their gates, thinking it a great shame that an Ant should bes^ege an
Elephant. But in my opinion the others considerations were the wiser, who
affirmed it to be a manifest token of folly, by a battle which is uncertain
agayust fools (for so they termed us) who now have no counsel but
despair, or treasure, but their horse and armor, to hazard the whole body
of the state, which is as it were enclosed within the walls of Paris: also
that having in their hands so sacred a matter as the kings person, they must
do all things surely: and that shortly they should perceive most honorable
fruits proceed of this advice. Thus between the wisdom of some and the
rashness of others, there was as it were a discordant concord between them
for a few days, yea, even until the great game was playde, which was so
rude, that the Protestants were forced to forsake their lodgings: He therefore
yt upon this example should go about to build auie great or aduenturous
purposes might peradventure commit an incurable error: For the matters which
we would compare do not always in every part resemble: besides that these
accidents are such as it is much if a whole age brings forth two or three.

Of the most notable occurrences happened at the departure from Saint Denis.
IT does many times fall out yt (...) mighty Captain The Prince of Condies
first intent to force his adversaries to harken to accord.
albeit he cannot attain to his purposed intents, does nevertheless in his
proceedings show forth such valor, yt men cannot but commend him as they did
the Prince of Condie for his brave exploits during his aboade at S. Denis. Due
of his purposes tended to bring the Parisians into such want of victuals, and
other wise so to mo^est the^ yt as well themselves as such others as were
thither retired, should he forced to hear^en to peace, Here of grew the
enterprises of Charenton bridge, S. Claude and Poyssy, whereby to bridle the
river, which neuerthelsse were to small purpose, and was like to have bred the
destruction of the Protestants. Some would metuaile how such excellent
Captains, who could not be ignorant what great armies had before time
(w(...)ning to perform the like attempt) lost their labor, as did that of
Duke Charles of Burgundy, which I think they had not quite forgotten, would
undertake such an enterprise. But they did it, as finding themselves in place
where occasion invited them to attempt that which the common voice cried upon
them to do. Moreover, they supposed that to lie still and enterprise nothing
would be a great diminishing of their credit: besides that, seeing their people
so well disposed; they accounted most difficult enterprises, easy to be
compassed.

The Prince of Condies second intent was to draw the army that The second and
third content.
layin closed in Paris to battle, in hope that the same being won the war
would be at end, which his purpose spedde no better than the former. As for the
third, he made account that albeit he were forced to abandon S. Denis, yet the
towns which should be seized as well upon the river of Marne as of Seine,
might faour and support him in the placing of his power until the coming of
his Germans who^ he had sent for for to assist him. But this purpose also in
respect they could surprise but two, viz. Lagny and Montereau, as the rest
vauished in smoke. The L. Constables attempts were brought to better effect.
His first purpose was after the refreshing of his power to force the
Protestants to battle thinking that he must needs overcome them in respect of
the advantages he had them at, which he had almost done. He also made account
to disappoint them of their lodgings, and to send them farther from the
Parisians, who had no great onlight that such good husbands and so diligent to
clear them should look to their accomptes: But death debarred him that
benefit: and to say ^roth if he had lived and had his health, he would have
made them to have made more have than they did. Truly as well the one as the
other bare themselves as great Captains but tending to diverse ends, viz. to
defend and offend, their actitions likewise were in part different.

It well be seemed the Protestants to be often on horseback, to The Lord
Constables purposes.
enterprise sometimes to some purpose, sometimes desperately,

him that their hearts or hope were not yet daunted: and therefore bringing
their small army well resolved into the field, they showed themselves before
the suburbs of the city, burning a village and some windmilles within view of
the town, so to testify them that all the Protestants were not all dead:
also that there was yet some exercise provided: but no man issued by reason (as
it is to be presumed) of the loss of the Lord Constable. This the Protestants
brag preserved their credit: how be it perceiving that their soiourning there
would be their overthrow, the next morrow they raised their camp and marched
toward Montereau, whither they sent for the rest of their power that Iay at
Estampes and Orleance, to come to them, which greatly increased their army.

Of the voiages of both the armies toward Lorraine, but to several intents.
SO soon as the French power which ye P. of Condie expected were joined The
means that were practiced to overthrow the Prince and his army.
with him the contrary army whereof the D. of Aniow was general, daily
increasing, followed him at the heels. Diverse Catholics my good friends have
assured me that upon any fit occasion he meant to have fought: for the old
Captains that counsayled him thereto, very well foreseeing that if the
Protestants should join with their Reisters (who were already setting
forward) the war would grow long, or else they must fight an uncertain
battle, were upon these considerations earnestly princked thereto. But
withal when they beheld the importance of their Generals person who rested
under their weapons, also the despair of their adversaries, the same did
somewhat stay them. They used two cunning policies as well to stay them as to
surprise the^: for in war such subtilties are allowed, at the lest they are
practiced: The first was a parley of peace, wherein ye most notable of the
Ptotesta^ts (as the Car. of Chastillon) were employed: which still cooled the
heat of the battle. The other was two abstinences from wars each for 2 or 3.
days, to the end, as it was said, the better to confer of the articles
propounded. The one was near to Montereau, the other by Chaalons: but the last
had like to have been very prejudicial unto ye Protestants, by reason the P. of
Condy stayed in a very bad lodginge and sore scattered while the Catholics
army did approach, and had it not ben for the County Brissacks enterprise
against certain cornets of harquebuziers on horseback who^ he overthrew, the
said Prince had still soiourned there 2. days, where undoubtedly he had been
fought withal, and peradventure surprised by his adversaries who were very
strong, the rather through the ariual of 1500. Burguignion speres, who under
the conduct of the Earl of Arem bergue, one of the famousest Captains of the
low countries, were joined unto him. But when during the abstinence he see such
slaughter, he thought it no great safety to trust to words, and therefore
in 3. days space marched above 20. leagues through the rain, and so bad ways,
that it was to be wondered how the carriages and artillery could follow, for
there was nothing lost either in the one or the other, so good was ye order and
so great the diligence. Monsieur his army seeing this departure pursued no
farther: yea, some of them boasted that they had driven the Protestants out of
the realm: others having better foresight perceiving that they could no longer
be stopped from joining with their Germains thought it best to let them go and
then to seek how to keep them from coming in again. But there were some
likewise, and they no small number that laid great fault in diverse of
Monsieurs counsailors for suffering them so to escape with out battle, saying
that the Admiral had secret intelligence with them, which was a very false
imagination, whereat himself used to scorn, and many times he assured me there
was no such matter, nevertheless he would endeavor still to maintain the^ in
ye suspicion.

Now will I rehearse some stirs and follies of the Protestants during their
small abode in Lorraine: as also the voluntary liberality The behauiors of
the Princes army in Loraine.
whereof they made demonstration in the midst of all their poverty that
there environed them: an action which I take in these days to be
vnpractiseable. Many were persuaded (as also the voice so went) that they could
not set foot in Lorrain but they should hear the Reisters cocks sing: but
having there soiourned 4. or 5. days they had no more speech of them than when
they were before Paris, which bred sundry mutinies, eue^ among some of the
nobility, who in their ordinary speeches did somewhat rudclie gird at their
Generals: so great is the impaciencie of our nation: But they understanding
hereof endeavored to remedy it. Likewise as men can hardly abandon their
natural inclinations, so the persuasions which their heads used were
different: for the P. of Condie being of a pleasant disposition did so
conveniently gird these chollerike and busy persons that he made even those
that most exceeded either in the one or the other to laugh. On the other side
the Admiral with his grave speeches did so shame them that in the end they
were forced to appease and quiet themselves. At the same time my self asked
him of his best counsel in case Monsieur should follow us? We would march,
said he, toward Bacchara, where the Reisters should make their assembly: also
that it were not for us to fight without them, and that after the enemies first
heat was somewhat quailed: But, what if the Reisters were not there, would some
man say, what could the Protestants then do? I think they could have
blown their fingers, for the weather was very cold. Now was all the Town
soon converted into mirth when as they understood certainly that Duke John
Casimire, (a Prince endued with all Christian virtues, and one to whom the
Protestants are highly bound) did march and was at hand. Then was there
nothing but singing and leaping, yea, they that had most cried out did leap
highest. These their behauiours did very well verefie the saying of Titus
Liuius, that ye Gauls are soon angry, and so consequently soon merry
again, which passions if they be not, after the imitation of the sages,
moderated by reason do easily exceed.

The Prince of Condie understanding by his agents in Germany that the Reisters
looked upon their joining with him to A notable history.
finger at the lest 100000. crowns, was in greater care than before he had been
for his men's mutinies, because he had not 2000. There was it expedient for
him to make of necessity virtue: and as well himself as the L. Admiral being
in great credice with the Protestants, employed all their cunning, credit, and
eloquence to persuade every man to depart with whatsoever his ability would
bear toward this so necessary contribution, whereupon depended the
contentation of those whom so diligently they had waited for. Hereof
themselves gave the first example in giving their own silver vessel: The
ministers in their Sermons exhorted heereto, and the most zealous Captains
prepared their men: for in so extraordinary a matter they had need to use all
kinds of instruments. There did sundry of the Gentry show a great
readiness to discharge themselves loyally: But the chief brunt of this
battle appeared when they came to urge the scholars of Lady Picoree, whose
property it was to be ready to take, and slacklie to forgo: howbeit partly
by love and partly by fear they quit themselves better than men looked for:
yea, this liberality was so general, that even the soldiers lackies and
boys gave every one somewhat, so as in the end it was accounted a dishonor
to have given but little. Some such of these there were as made the Gently
ashamed in parting more voluntarily with their gold, than they had done with
their silver.

To be brief, the whole being gathered together there was in money, in
plate, and in chains of gold above four score thousand Frankes: which came
in so good season, that without it they could hardly have appeased their
Reisters. I know that many of them were urged to give by example, shame, and
persuasions, but certainly a great part did it upon zeal and affection, as
appeared in that they offered more than was required of them. Was it not a
deed worthy wonder to see an army unpaid, and unprovided of all means, who
thought it a marvel to part with their small commodities for their own wants,
now not to spare to furnish others therewith, who peradventure did give them no
thanks? Now would it be impossible to do the like, for that all Gentlemanlike
actions are almost out of use.

Of the return of the two armies toward Orleance and Paris: also of the course
that the P. of Condie took in victualling, marching, and lodgiug of his men.
AFter the joining of the Reisters there needed A mean to attain to peace.
no long consultation to know what were best to be done. For the general
voice imported to transport the war to Paris. This did some desire
peradventure the rather to the end to see their own houses, but the most part
knew it to be the best way to attain to peace: neither were the Generalles
ignorant that to continue the war, their armies could not miss artillery,
powder, money, and other commodities that are to be wreasted from the merchant
and the artificer, whereof unless they drew toward Orleance (which was their
nource mother) they should be deprived, which made them to yield to the common
desire. In this good mind did the Protestants return, being of opinion that
the enemies army would coast them, as well to debar them from dismantelling
diverse small and weak Towns, as also to spy occasion to intrappe some one
of their troops. Then did France abound in all sorts of virtualles, and yet
were they to use great art and diligence to feed an unpaid army of above
twenty thousand men, whom the Country favored not as they did the other,
being but meanly furnished with munition. The Lord Admiral had an especial
care above all things to have expert commissaries, and to cause them to have
carriage according to the Protestant want, and was wont when so ever there was
any question of forming the body of an army, to say: Let us begin the
shaping of this monster by the belly.

Now because our horsemen did commonly lodge scattering The Lord Admirals
care for the entertainment of the army.
abroad in the good villages, the said commissaries besides their ordinary
carriages kept still in every cornet a baker and two horse of burden, which
came no sooner to their quarter but they fell to making of bread, and so sent
it to the footmen. All these small helps proceeding from forty cornets (for
there about we then were) being gathered together, amounted unto a great
deal: yea, and thence sometimes they sent both flesh and wine, whereto the
Gentry were so affectionate that from their lodgings they would not spare
their carriages for conduct of whatsoever was requisite. The small Towns that
were taken were reserved for the munitionaries, and they threatened the rest
that kept no garrisons to fire all a league round about if they sent in no
provision: whereby our footmen who lodged close were ordinarily well provided.
I do not here speak of the booties which as well the footmen as horsemen
won from the adversaries, neither is it any doubt but this denouring animal
passing through so many Provinces, could still find soul pasture where with
was sometimes mixed the poor man's garment, yea, and the friends to, so sore
did necessity and desire to catch incite those that wanted no excuses to
color their spoil. Of these fruits were many provided of those things which
besides food the soldiour is to buy, as garments and weapons which are most
ne^essarie things.

Now must I speak of the lodging of the army which they were Of the lodging
of the army.
forced to scatter abroad, and that for two principal reasons. The one for
the commodity of virtuall, the other that it might be under covert, whereby to
be defended from the injury of the winter: for without this help it could not
consist. I know this to be a very bad kind of lodging: also that in imperial
and royal wars men would beware of committing such over sights, least they
might be straight ways surprised: But in civil wars both parts were forced
and accustomed so to do, at the least in France. The footmen were lodged in
two bodies, viz. in a maine battle and an auantgarde, and the horsemen in the
villages next to hand. Upon any earnest allarum the horsemen drew to their
quarters: likewise if one several lodging were assailed, the others went
straight to the rescue.

Among the Cornets there were many harquebuziers on horsback, and when they
were come to their quarter, all the ways were very well fortefied: and many
times they provided themselves in the Churches and Castles, so to hold out two
good hours until they might have succor. I have sometimes seen one of the
Generals march with five or six hundred men and beat back the enemy that had
assailed some lodging. Howbeit notwithstanding whatsoever watch on all sides,
yet there happened many surprises, albeit the ways were beaten both night and
day. Many times we had our best advice from the Picorers, who buzzing abroad
like flies did ordinarily meet with the enemy, and so some one brought in
word, for these men to fly are as swift as hares, and when they go about some
booty they even fly. The head toward the enemy who had light horsemen did
commonly consist of five hundred good horse, and as many harquebuziers on
horseback, with small store of carriage, except horse of burden, which was
done to the end to keep the enemies busy, that they should make no
enterprise, also that the army might always have warning.

Concerning the order of the march, all the troops had their meeting nominated
at a certain hour in place convenient, for the The march.
division of the lodgings: and thence they repaired each to his quarter, as
also they used great speed when they were to travail sundry ways. One
inconvenience there was in marching thus scatteringlie, namely, that
oftentimes they did use many false allarums. Nevertheless it was never noted
that the Prince of Condie had ever any notable surprise. Neither would I that
any man should build any rule upon these examples which necessity
engendered, unless upon the like reason as then bare swaie: for so may they
be used in accomodating them to time, place, and persons. But the surest way
were to reform our customs by the ancient military rules, wherein is more
perfection than in those which we now a days do practice. Yet must we not
say that these great Captains ought to have done otherwise than they did, for
they never failed in ought that either could or should be done. As also their
most notable actions are since their deaths vanished away.

Of the new forces out of sundry Provinces that met at Orleance, which invited
the Prince of Condy to undertake the voyage to Chartres.
IN the first civil wars most of the Into what Difficulties the Protestants
were reduced during the civil wars.
Protestants, namely their heads, took this for a principle: That it was hard
without an army in ye field to make any honorable war or profitable peace.
In consideration hereof they exhorted their partakers to help to make a brave
power, the benefit where of should redound to the whole body, which was the
reason that made so many ready to come in. But they found an inconvenience in
abandoning to this effect such good places as before they held in the
provinces, for afterward they had no place of retreat, as also they have
sometimes failed in the other point, viz. by keeping over many. Wherein we may
learn to avoid all extremities. Which notwithstanding, yet were not the
provinces free from war as well in the first troubles as in these. Yea, who so
list well to consider the dealings of the Baron of Adrets, and other the brave
exploites of sundry Captains both Catholics and Protestants, recorded in the
histories, shall see miserable matters valiantly and wisely executed. But
because I have tied my self to speak of no more than I have either seen or
learned in good places, I have abstained from entering the carrier of unknown
Countries for fear of stumbling. Now the Prince of Condie being informed that
his forces out of Gascoyne and Daulphine amounting near to six thousand men
were arrived at Orleance thought it good to imploie them, and therefore sent
them word to be ready, as also to provide powder and shot with three or four
bad pieces of artillery that were left: for albeit the Catholics accounted the
Protestants fiery people, yet were they always but meanly provided of such
instruments, neither have they, as themselves, any Saint Anthony, whom men
say to be president of this element. His intent was before his enemies knew
his purpose to have environed the town that he meant to besiege, whereof he
thought none so commodious for his affairs as Chartres, which being taken he
purposed to fortefie, so to keep a continual thorn in the Parisians foot,
and under the favor thereof somewhat to preserve his Countries which were
behind. To The beginning of the siege of Chartres.
this effect being above twenty leagues of he sent three thousand horse to
enclose it, which diligence turned to no great profit, for a regiment of
footmen which lay but four leagues off did nevertheless enter thereinto,
which was the safeguard of the town. The L. of Ligniers did command therein,
who had in all two and twenty companies, neither did any man spare for all
remedies for fortification, which are usual in such low places as are
prevented. The assailants also for their parts noted those places that seemed
most assaultable, which on every side were so bad, that it was hard to say
which was worst, and having discovered a mountain which commanded upon the
flank of a Courtine, without farther consideration they took it, and at the
first blush it promised much, howbeit the remedies there against were easy:
For the Prince having but five field pieces and four light Culuerines, what
were they able to do against so many men of defense and labor as were therein.
And in two days and two nights it was so crossed and entrenched, that they
durst not enter upon them. The French man is so sudden, that he will immediately
discover yt which cannot be found without long search. And through this
readiness I have seen the discouerers of places commit so many over sights,
that I think it a most profitable rule to look twice, yea thrice upon a thing
before we resolve or settle our judgment thereof. After the breach was made,
we knew that to give the assault on that side was to loose our men wilfully:
and as we were preparing for a new battery in some weaker place the peace was
concluded, which overthrew all military actions. True is the Proverb, that
there is no well to the good men, for the place must be very bad wherein they
cannot find means to accommodate themselves. Men should never keep any long
siege against such places, in deed to let an army lie before it 3. weeks or
a month it may be done, whiles another is leauied in favor of the besieged.

During our abode there the Lord Admiral attempted a brave A counter
enterprise of the Lord Admirales during the seege.
enterprise, which was determined in manner ensuing: The contrary army being
beyond the river of Sein, durst not (I wot not why) approach the Princes maine
power, yet would it not omit any opportunity to favor the besieged. And to
the same effect was the Lord of Vallet a famous Captain, sent with eighteen
cornets of horsemen to surprise one of our troops in their lodgings, to hinder
our forage, to break off our victuals, and to keep us in often allarums. He
approached within four leagues of the camp, and lodged very close, from whence
he began greatly to molest us: The Lord Of Chartres.
Admiral haere of advertised, took upon him to provide remedy thereto. And
using commonly to march strong, for fear said he, of want of game, he took
3500. horse, and departed so early, that by the Sun rising he was in these
horsmens quarters, of whom many, notwithstanding their good watch kept in the
field, were overtaken, so as there were four cloutes taken but few men
slain. The Lord of Vallet who lodged in Oudan gathered together four or five
hundred horse, with whom albeit a thousand of ours did follow, he retired in
good order, often making head against us, as indeed he had both skill and
experience. Hereby we see that it is not good soiourning long in the face of a
strong power of horse unless a man be as strongly lodged. For before he be
aware he may be surprised as it were with a sudden storm: and the same may be
upon him in manner as soon as his sentinels, scoutes, or discouerers: for it
marches assured, seareth nothing, and still says to the foremost, On, charge
and follow all that thou find. In such affairs the wisest and most
circumspect are sometimes overtaken.

The second peace concluded at Lon-iumeau.
THroughout the whole troubles in France we The second peace, cause of more
mischief then the war it self.
have still seen it fall out that they have spoken of peace in the midst of
all the war, so willing was every man to show himself to like of so health
some a matter: as also there have been diverse concluded, but none worse to the
Protestants than this. The treaty hereof was again begun while the Prince lay
before Chartres, who sent the Cardinal of Chastillon with other Gentlemen, to
meet with the kings deputies at Lon-iumeau, where they so followed it, that the
articles were agreed upon which were sent some to Paris and others to Chartres,
there to decide the chief difficulties arising therein. Now as a good peace
was not only greatly desired, but also as necessary, so were there few that
stayed to consider what manner of one this was: but as if ye very name had also
brought the effect, most of the Protestants were fully resolud, yt it must be
accepted: And to speak plainly that was it that forced the P. and Admiral, who
saw such readiness even in the nobility, to condescend thereto and to accept
of it. It was as a whirle wind which they could not resist, but that it
carried the^ away. True it is that the P. was of himself somewhat inclined
unto it, but the Admiral still doubted of the observation thereof: for he almost
perceived that they meant to be revenged of the Protestants for ye injury
received at the journey of Meaux. Yea, even then some such of the Catholics as
could conceal nothing, gave out openly that shortly they would have a day. One
of our agents also for the peace, sending word that he had often heard such
speeches, and perceived great indignation hidden in some of their hearts with
whom they did confer, wished it might be looked unto, as noting some singular
event. Some likewise even of the court, who sometime stole speeches out of the
closet, sent their friends and kinsmen word yt undoubtedly they would be
deceived unless they wrought surely: which might have sufficed to wake^ those
yt slept so soundly upon ye sweet pillow of peace: but notwithstanding al
advice, ye brook which already ouerflowed could not be restrained. It may be
meruailed yt these Captains being of such credit with their partakers, could not
persuade the^ to that which was so profitable: howbeit if we consider what
these voluntary persons were, also the violent desire to visit a man's home,
we shall perceive yt the anchor of apparent necessity being broken, the ship
that is driven with such vehement winds cannot be stayed.

Sundry whole Cornets and diverse particular persons even before the raising of
the siege from before Chartres were departed Part of the Protestants causers
of their own mischief.
without asking leave toward Xantoigne and Poictou. This humor also took
place among the footmen, even those that dwelte farthest off. Many also said
that since the King offered the last Edict of pacification, it might not be
refused: Other of the Gentry gave out that they would retire into their own
Provinces for the preservation of their families whom the enemies cruelties
oftentimes murdered: The footmen complained of the want of pay, and that
ordinarily their victuals failed them. Thus might not the Generals of the
Protestants cleave to such aduertisements as they received, and so reject the
peace, least they should have remained over weak. Heerevppon they sometimes
discoursed in this manner.

That the most of their French forces abandoning them, they should be driven to
stand upon their defense: but it would be a great disgrace unto them, in that
it now was the time of year that armies used to take the field. To part with
their Reisters whom they should distribute in their towns they would not do
it, for so they should devour themselves: likewise to lodge them in a
fortefied camp, that remedy would last but a while. To be brief, that they
must try the hazard of a peace. Then could they have wished to have had some
towns for the assurance thereof: but when they requested any other pledge than
the edicts, oaths and promises, they were dismissed as men that did despise or
contemn the authority royal, which caused them to accept that which was
usually offered. Thus did the Protestants dismiss their strangers, retire
into their houses, and every man perticularly lay away their weapons: weening
(at the least the common sort, that the Catholics would have done the like: who
were content only to promise it, but in effect to perform nothing: but
remaining still armed, kept the towns and passages over the river, so as
within two months after they had the Protestants as it were at their
discretions. Yea, some of them that insisted most upon peace were forced to
say: We have committed folly, and therefore must not think much to taste
thereof, albeit this drink be like to be very bitter.

The third troubles.
Of the Protestants diligent retrait in the last troubles: also of the Lord of
Martigues brave resolution when he came to Saumure.
HUmane affairs are subject to many alterations, The notable revolution of
these wars: also of the Princes retrait.
for the better representing of the inconstancy whereof, the Ethnikes have
figured a turning wheel whereon things are sometime up and sometime down: and
who so list well to note the dissimilitude of the ground of this war with the
former, shall perceive the same. For in the former the Protestants did prevent
and proudly assail, where in this they were prevented, and retired upon
shameful necessity, abandoning those Provinces and Towns which before had
served for their preservation. When they see ten companies of footmen brought
unto Orleleance, they well knew that their business went amiss: but most of
all were they moved to depart the Provinces about Paris because the Prince had
like to have been besette in his own house by sundry companies of men of
arms and footmen that easily approached toward him. Himself also having
given advice hereof to the Admiral and other his nearest neighbors, did
together with them and their families retire to Rochel by wading through the
river of Loyre at an unaccustomed food. Likewise he warned the Protestants
farther off to take arms, and saving themselves so well as they might to draw
toward him, seeking passage over the river by foord or boat: The Catholics
scoffinglie told him that he needed not have taken so hot an allarum, also
that they had practiced nothing against them, whereto he answered, that he had
rather leave them the neasts than they should have caught the birds: also that
if he had well remembered their promise to be revenged for Meaux, like wise that
they would make the brethren ru(...)e when their turn came, he would have
departed sooner that he might have gone an easier pace. These were their common
speeches: for the grauer matters on either (...) are written in the histories:
I know that war is miserable and with all brings many mischiefs: but this
vile small peace that lasted but six months was far worse for the
Protestants, who being murdered in their houses, durst not defend themselves.
These and other matters provoked and disposed them to seek their safety in
assembling together.

The Lord of Andelot being in Britain was advised to assemble all the power
that he might, and to march into Poictou: whereupon he gave them order to
meet him in Anieow, which was The Lord of Martigues brave resolution to get
to Saumure.
done: and when all were come together, his troop consisted of no less than a
thousand good horse and two thousand harquebuziers, wherewith he turned his
head to the river of Loyre, to the end to seek some commodious passage. But
the same day that be came to the shore thereof, there fell out an unlooked
for adventure wherfro the Catholics escaped with honor. He was lodged very
scatteringly, as having no great allarum of enemies, and had given the
Captains of his troops charge, after they were arrived in their quarters, to
seek for some foorde or wadeable place, but two hours after they were lodged
the Lord of Martigues who was going to the Duke of Montpensier at Saumure, was
advertised that a number of Protestants (without naming of any) were come to
lodge in his way.

Now he having already passed a small river called Sorgne by boat, thought it
to late to retire, and therefore yt it was requisite he make way with the sword
whatsoever sh(...)ld happen, his cariages he had sent away on the other side
of Loire and his troop consisted of three hundred spears, and five hundred
harquebuzieres. Also in as much as he was driven to march a long a bank of
earth which kept in the river, where there could but ten men or six horses
pass in front, he placed at his head an hundred Gascogne harquebuziers of his
guard, and two bundred others: his horsemen in the the midst, then the rest
of his footmen behind, and fifty spears for scourers.

This done he said unto them: Companions and friends, the Protestants are
upon our way: we must either go over them or be lost: for fly we cannot:
Let every man therefore prepare to fight well with his arm and march
gallantly with his feet to win Sanmure, we have but eight small leagues
thither, and shall not be in safety before we come there.

This said, they all promised not to fail in their duties, and in this
resolution they marched on. The two first troops that he met were two
companies of horsemen that were taking their lodgings, whom he easily
scattered, and Captain Boisuert was slain in the fight: There he heard that
the Lord of Andelot was at hand, whereupon he hasted the more to prevent
him: But not withstanding whatsoever his diligence, he found him horsed with
a few men, as having had the allarum by some runawayes. There was given a
brave charge, wherein the Lord of Martignes lieuetenaunt was slain, and the
Lord of Andelot forced to permit him free passage. He suffered not his
soldiers to spoil the carryages that stood in the ways, but made them to
march on. Within one league of the same place he met a company of Captain
Cognees horse marching, whom with harquebuze shot he sent back a pace:
again a quarter of a league from Rosiers there met him two hundred
harquebuziers whom the Lord of la None sent toward the allarum to succor
the rest: but the Lord of Martigues footmen being all old soldiers and
the others new, did so disorder them as they were forced to abandon the
village, and leave him free passage.

Finally, within two leagues of Saumure he found yet another company of
footmen lodged in a Church, whom he forced and took their Ensign, and so
at the shutting in of the evening came safe with his men well wearyed with
fighting and marching, having lost but twenty of them, but slain four times
as many of his enemies, and scarred above a thousand.

This exploit did I think good to set down, as seeming to be replenished
with a brave determination: albeit it was ^o marvel that the Lord of
Andelots troops entered not within them: for they were suddenly surprised,
being all scattered a sunder, besides that the horsemen were in too straight a
room to fight well, and although they had been gathered again together* yet
were the enemies already in safety. Thus do we see how much it stands a
body in hand both to march in order and to be well determined: and this is it
that causes those small troops that are willing in valor to supply their
weakness, ordinarily to overcome.

Notwithstanding this check, yet was not the Lord of Andelot past hope of
passage over the river: having therefore closed his men in two bodies, he caused
them to try every where: In the end they found a foord as it were
miraculously, where no man had in man's memory passed: and the next morning
both he and all his being very glad that they had met that which they hoped not
of, he passed over unto the other side. Remaining in these vncerteynties, I
could him that it were good for us to consider what we had to do if our
passage were stopped: whereupon he answered. What can we el^ do but take
some extreme party, either to dye as Soldiers, or to save our selves as
Soldiers? My opinion is, said he, that we all join and so retire seven or
eight leagues hence into the open country, and thence to advertise the Lords
of Montpensier and Martigues that we be fled and are scattered, every man
seking to escape the danger, which they will soon believe. In the mean time
we will encourage and prepare our men to overcome: Then if they approach near
unto us, as undoubtedly they will (rather to spoil than to fight) let us
valiantly set upon them, so shall we b^eake them, and afterward will no
troop for one months space be so bold as to come before us, thus may we
easily get into Germany, or up the rivers.

This ready and courageous counsel of so gallant a knight, is no more (in my
opinion) to be concealed than the brave determination of the Lord of
Martigues, two personages undoubtedly worthy the best military offices. The
last wo^ne far greater honor in his passage, and the first much more
profit, as getting him and his into safety: For within eight days after he
joined with the Prince of Condie, which was a great strengthening unto him.
This the Protestants so badde a beginning and enterie into the war by such
headelong retreates was a foretoken, that they would use these remedies in the
continuation thereof, which also came to pass, albeit in the former they had
but very seldom had any such hap, whereof if there be any that desire to
know the causes, I will set them down.

It proceeded of the contempt of discipline, and the multiplication of vice,
the which does breed great disorder, and engenders boldness in many (not
in all) who under color of necessity do take upon them too much liberty.

That the respite which his Majesty gave to the Prince of Conde, without
sending any army against him, was a means for him to prevail of a great
Province, without the support whereof he could not have continued the war.
THE Protestants whole refuge in these last What help the town of Rochel was
to the Prince and his, who thereby became masters of a large country.
troubles co^sisted in retiring to Rochel, which having embraced the Gospel
and rejected the doctrine of the Pope, rested already at their devotion. The
town is reasonable large and well seated upon the sea coast in a soil
abounding with victuals, full of rich Merchants and good artificers: which was
very profitable for the preservation of sundry families, and the reaping of al
commodities necessary for the Soldiers and whole army, both by sea and by
land. Now, after the Lord of Andelots arrival, the Captains were advised to
lose no time: so as having taken some artillery out of Rochell, they assailed
the towns of Poictow and Xantoigne, which then were but weak and meanly
provided of garrisons, and so became masters of as many as they might: as
Nyort, Fontenay, S. Maixant, Saints, S. John d'Angely, Ponts, and Coignac.
Afterward they took also Blay and Angolesme, some being won easily, others
with battery and assault. To be brief, in less then two months, of poor
vagabonds, as at the first they were, they had gotten into their hands means
sufficient to continue a long war. In all these places they lodged about
thirty companies of footmen, and seven or eight cornets of horse, which was a
great ease to the country, and so formed a brave politic and military order
as well for the Frenchmen as for the guiding of the army. Herein do I consider
how necessity being followed by occasion the Protestants could help
themselves with both. Being oppressed with the first, they laid open all
inventions of the mind and strength of body to eschew destruction. And when
the second came in place they found themselves ready to embrace it. I sometime
heard the Lord Admiral apply the goodly saying of Themistocles to the state
of the affairs of that time, viz. We were lost, if we had not been lost:
thereby meaning that had we not fled, we could not have recovered that good
spring, which was far better then the same that we had before. I know not
how it fell out that the Catholics did no sooner know that they whom they
had driven from about them did settle themselves a far of, and so send
remedies there against, for undoubtedly if they had it might have cut off half
our conquestes: but I think that at Paris they were so glad to see those
Provinces and Towns which before had made them so sharp war abandoned, that
many of their hearts were so puffed up, that afterward they disdained the
Protestants effects who thought Rochell only able to resist them, wherein in
three months they might be shut up. These be the forecastes of man after some
favorable accident.

The Queen of Navarre perceiving these stirs, was very diligent The arrival
of the Queen of Navarre and her children in the army: also of the troops of
Daulphine.
to draw to those quarters, bringing with her her children and some good power,
which served as well to authorize the cause as to strengthen the army. She
feared least staying in her own countries she should be forced as well by the
commotions of her subjects as by other power to let her son go to the Court,
where undoubtedly at the least in outward show he should be driven to change
his religion. In consideration whereof she made no difficulty, for the keeping
of their consciences unspotted, to leave her country for a pray. A most rare
example in this world wherein wealth and honor are in such account, that unto
many they be even a domestical God whom they serve. Now likewise, a marvelous
increase unto the Protestants army were the troops which the Lord of Acier
brought out of Daulphine, Prouence, and Languedoc. The Prince had before
written as well to him, as to others the most notable in the said Provinces to
send him some good power to succor him and to withstand the army Royal which
came upon him, least so many Princes and excellent Captains should encurre so
great disadvantage as to see themselves besieged in the towns: Whereof so
far were they from fa^^ing, that it seemed they had dispeopled the places;
they came from: so many men did they bring: for they were not less then
eighteen thousand bearing arms, who under the conduct of the Lord of Acier
marched. But as the same was one way the (...)ole support of the army, so on
the other, it was the loss of sundry places which the Catholics after their
departure seized upon. And many times I have heard diverse Colonels report
their departure in such numbers as if they should have gone to seek new
habitations: for had the half only come yet had they been too many.

These could not nevertheless join with the Prince of Conde The overthrow of
the Colonels Mouuans and Pierre-gourd
without a great inconvenience that befell them: for two of their regiments
were overthrown by the Duke of Montpensier: the cause arising (as I have
understood) of that the Lords of Mouuans and Pierregoord finding some
discommoditie in lodging so close as until then they had been forced, would
needs scatter, weening that having two thousand harquebuziers no less then an
army could serve to offend them. The said Mouuans was as brave a soldier as
any in the Realm, but his great valor and experience brought him to attempt
that which turned to his destruction: which is it also that many times breeds
the loss of both Captains and troops: He tought valiantly, and both he and
his fellow with two thousand of their men dyed in the field. The Catholics
have reported unto me one course that they then took, which I like well of:
That was, that fearing least the Lord of Acier, who lodged but two leagues of,
should come to the rescue, they did at the same time that they charged upon the
said Mouuans quarter with their whole footmen, send into the Lord of Aciers
quarter eight or nine hundred spears and many harquebuziers on horseback,
with a great sound of Trumpets crying Battle Battle: which they did, to the
end to make him think that their drift was against himself. Thus did they
linger him while they performed their enterprise, wherefro they carried
seventeen flagges. This loss grieved the Price and his partakers: howbeit,
the coming in of so many other regiments did soon blot out his sorrow. For the
man of war even during his action against the enemy, endeavors to abolish
the memory of all sorrowful accidents, least the same should deminish this
first fury which being in him does sometimes make him terrible.

Of the first progress of both the armies, when being in their prime they
sought with like desire to fight.
AFter the overthrow of Mouuans the Catholic Of the power of both the
armies, which albeit they desired it could never have opportunity to join.
army retired to Chastellerault, fearing least the Protestants being so
mighty would come upon them in some bad ground. There was also the Duke of
Anieow who brought other power very resolute in that their Captain to whom
they bare great honor and reverence was such a Prince. And in my opinion there
had not of long time been seen so many Frenchmen in both the armies. The
Prince of Conde his places furnished, had in his eighteen thousand
Harquebuziers and three thousand good horse: and I take that in Monsiers were
at the least eighteen thousand Soldiers and four thousand Spears, besides
the Suitzers: so as on both sides might have been found above five and thirty
thousand Frenchmen, all trained, and peradventure as bold Soldiers as any in
Christendom. The Protestants finding themselves strong would have sought to
join, and came within two leagues of Chastellerault: But the Prince having
advice that the other camp was planted upon a strong ground almost environed
with a small marish, whereto was in some places adjoined a slight Trench, meant
not rashly to attempt any thing, but sought means to draw them forth to
battle. Hereto was he enuited by the heat that he perceived in his soldiers:
likewise by his great number, for he doubted that such an army wanting pay
would not long continue great, as also that the sharpness of winter would
soon deminish it. It may be that in the Catholic army some of these
considerations might likewise take place. But there was a good uniformity in
this, that both the generals were touched with equal desire to join and like
purpose each to go live upon his enemies land, so to preserve his own from
the extreme spoil which whole armies do make.

Thus they both raised their camps and took their way to Lusignan, The Duke
of Ani^ous army lost a brave opportunity to overthrow the Lord Admiral an
d(...) Andelot.
near whereto was a small quarter of land, good in all perfection, where each
intended to lodge: and albeit they were both near together, yet could neither
hear news of other, which is not very strange, for we see it many times come
so to pass. Both parties therefore having appointed their general meeting at
a great borowe named Pamprow, plentiful in victualles, the Marshals of both
the camps came thither much about one time with their troops, from whence
they beat each other forward and backward twice or thrice, so desirous was
every man to catch that bone to knawe upon, which in the end was given over.
Howbeit, either of them knowing very well that they should have support, stood
stiff, and would not flee but retired a quarter of a league of, where they set
themselves in battle array: Afterward came the Lord Admiral and d'Andelot
with five Cornets of horse only, and on the behalf of the Catholics came
seven or eight hundred Spears. It is now, said the Lord Admiral, no speaking
of lodging but of fighting: and with all speed advertised the Prince, who was
a long league of, to set forward, in the mean time he would set a good face
on the matter. He commanded them to stand in array upon a small rising, so to
take from the enemies the view of a valley least they should discover him: and
this did he to the end to make the^ think that we had some great power both of
horsemen and footmen hidden therein. Being thus in array within a Canon shot
each of other, he willed a Captain of harquebuziers on horseback to set
forward five hundred paces, and to stay near to a hedge, which he did: But as
these people albeit they can discharge running are not nevertheless skillful
soldiers, so had they not stayed there six paternosters while but half of
them moved to skirmish, and after marched their whole Cornet to support them:
The enemies seeing this, imagined they would have comen to them, which made
them to close themselves and with three or four great troops of Spears begin
to set forward. Truly at that time I saw these two Captains very sorry that
they had not foreseen the folly of that fool, but more because they wist not
what counsel to take, seeing their enemies much stronger then themselves:
Howbeit, when they came to conclude, each of them concluded otherwise then his
nature or custom did import. The Lord of Andelot who never found any thing too
hot, said that they ought to retire the pace: that the enemy being the
stronger would give us the foil: and that we should not respect the shame,
considering that he that scapeth the peril, besides the profit that he
reapeth does also enjoy the honor. The Lord Admiral, a man of great
consideration, was obstinatly bent to abide, saying that it was necessary with
a good countenance to hide our weakness, and immediately sent to revoke the
harquebuziers, whereupon the enemy stayed.

Now, albeit this counsel was profitable, yet was the Lord of Andelots the
surer and to be preferred; at the least in my opinion, Advice upon the
aforesaid adventure.
who thought it good to rehearse this small action somewhat at large, to the
end that such as would be instructed in deeds of arms may reap this
fruit, viz. When any action of importance comes in question to remove the
Argolets out of the front, and in their place to commit some wary Captain
accompanied with good Spears: For he that has this place is a guide to the
rest; and upon his advice they all do move, and who does otherwise does err
as he who marching in an unknown country do commit the conduct to such a
guide as knows not the way. Herein we may also note that albeit there be no
ielouzie between Captains, yet, even in a very evident, matter we shall see
contrariety of opinions. But herein my most wonder is that each of them
contraried his natural disposition and usual manner of proceedings. For the
one being as active as a Marcellus determined very wisely: and the other slawe
and very consideratiue as a Fabius did give a very aduenterous opinion. To
report the cause hereof I cannot, except that upon sudden motions men do not
always observe the order accustomed in their actions. We may also see how
boldness sometime stands us in stead: But according to the proverb, These
things may well be done once, but it is not good to use them often in respect
of the danger. I did since ask the Lord of Martigues, who commanded over this
troop of spears, whether be knew that the Lords Admiral and Andelot were
among these five Cornets* He told me no, for had he known it it should have
cost them all their lives but they would have had them quick or dead: and that
they took them to have been the Marshals of the lodgings troops, which also
they would have charged, had it not been for a doubt least they had been
supported by a maine power of harquebuzerie, which to their seeming appeared in
a village behind, who in deed were but varlets that attended the coming of
their foo^men.

Within one hour after each part looked for a greater game: The Prince lost
the occasion to overthrow the enemies Auantguard.
for on all sides they might discern the Footmens Ensigns come in^arthing on
with the squadrons of horsemen, and it was late before all were come, so as
there was nothing done but a great skirmish; which the night brake of. There
was but the Catholics (...)ntguard who seeing the match but evil made of them
only against the Protestants whole camp used a proper policy wherewith to
make us suppose that their maine battle had been there: for they caused the
Drammes of their French Regiments to strike up after the Suitzers manner: which
confirmed our opinion that their whole power was present, neither was there any
speech but of battle in the morning. As also they charged that none of their
bands should straggle forth: likewise that they should in fight stand only
upon the defensive, least by the taking of any prisoner the truth might be
revealed: all this if we had known they had been set upon the same night.
They struck up the watch and caused to make great fires, but having taken
their repaist with small noise they departed, some to Iasnueil where Monsiere
was lodged with the battle, and the rest to the Borrowe of Sansay which is
but a league of. At three of the clock after midnight was the Prince
advertised of their departure, and at fine followed upon their tail with his
whole power, doubting that all theirs was not come thither. Thus do we in one
day see two brave occasions lost, the first by the Catholics, the second by
the Protestants, albeit neither of them are greatly to be blamed, as being
hard to be discovered at the instant, and in two or three hours they were
past. True it is that some advice would have bewrayed them at the full, but
this is a benefit of good hap which depends not upon the sufficiency of
the Captains.

All that I have reported of the former day is yet but a small Of the journey
of Iasnueil.
matter in respect of that which happened the next day at Iasnueil, and it
seems yt the guider of all things purposed for certain days to laugh to
skorne so many excellent Captains there present: for many things which then
happened and fell out were rather by chance and in a manner vnlookedfor, then
through any counsel. The Protestants were determined to follow the enemy
even into ye body of his army, also to fight with him whersoeuer they might
find him. Herevpo^ the L. Admiral followed their steps which were evident
enough, and the Prince marched after. But where as there were two ways, the
one leading to the borowe of Sansay, the other to Iasnueil, the Prince through
a mist that arose before break of day, strayed and took the way to Iasnueil.
The forefront which being strong, the Lord Admiral had set before him, about
eight of the clock in the morning came upon the borowe of Sansay, where five
or six hundred horse were lodged, who were forced to retire more then the
pace, lost all their cariages, and were pursued very far. In the mean time
the Prince continuing the way that he had taken, after he had marched two
leagues lighted upon the forefront of Monsiers army, not hearing any news of
his aduant-guard. Then seeing himself beset, he thought it best to set a good
countenance, and seeing the country was strong, he placed his Harquebuziers,
who were above twelve thousand, foremost and began the skirmish: he also sent
word to the Admiral (albeit he wi^^ not where he was) that he had been forced
to make as if he would fight, seeing himself so near the enemy, willing him
with all diligence to return to him. Before the messenger was in the midde
way, the Lord Admiral heard the Canon rore, whereupon he doubted of that which
was happened, and marched toward the noise with all that he could gather: but
when he came to the place the Sun was going down, whereby they could have no
time to consult, discover, or enterprise any matter in gross: But al went away
in great skirmishes as brave as any that had been seen of long time, which
somewhat amazed Monsiers army by reason it stood upon a very discommodious
ground, which notwithstanding it still set a good face on the matter. They see
not one an other, as being hidden with hedges and small valleys, neither was
there any but the loose Shot perceived. I could well note that our men were
full of courage, but the conduct was not alike: for they discharged as it had
been for salutation and remained too close together, yea a whole regiment
assailed at once, where contrariwise Monsiers came scattered shooting slowly
and marching in small troops, so as two hundred harquebuziers could keep a
whole regiment of Protestants occupied. Howbeit, they could not keep some of
ours from entering even into the first tents, which their heat cost them dear:
for the Lord of la Valette twice charged them with three hundred Spears, and
slew some hundred and fifty. Now may some man ask, if the Princes whole
army had come with him what would have ensued? I am of opinion that the other
would have been shrewdly shaken, for their battle ground was so straight that
they had not enough to have set them in array: when they should have come to
fight we might have cast upon their flanckes (which was al upon a strong
ground) ten thousand harquebuziers, supported with one thousand horse: Then
with the rest of the footmen and above one thousand and five hundred horse have
charged upon their front, who could hardly have borne it. The Catholic
Captains there present, if they list to say the truth cannot greatly gainsay
this, for they never were so, pestered as then, as my self have heard even of
the best, who have not concealed it from me. The night coming on the Prince
went to take his lodging at Sansay, which was but a league and a half of.

One thing worthy laughter which then happened I will not A pleasant chance
which troubled many.
suppress: and it was this. While we houered, all our footmens carriage came
and stayed along a woods side not far from the tail of our men of war, and
there provided them selves, weening they should have pitched in that place, and
making above 4000. fires they perceived not the retiring of the army by reason
of the night, whereby many masters had but had suppers. Some of the
Catholics watch have confessed unto me, that seeing so many fires and hearing
such noise they took it certainly to be our army and expected the battle in
the morning: whereupon they were the more diligent in fortifying all the ways.
The late Captain Garies also could me that himself offered to go and
discover what it might be: but they would venture nothing against those brave
Soldiers. About midnight the Prince was advertised that all the cariages were
as it were enclosed and it was accounted lost, nevertheless, he sent four or
five Cornets to get it away, and an hour after commanded one thousand horse
and two thousand harquebuziers to go to the rescue if the enemy followed. The
first comers found our masters the ^arlets and lackies camped very orderly,
warming themselves, singing and making good cheer, yea a far of men would
have thought them to have been 10000. men, neither were they any more afeard
then if they had been in some strong town: They began to laugh at this
rascaldrie, which for the most part is as fearful as a Hare even in place of
assurance: and yet there in the midst not of great danger only but even of
death, was nothing but mirth: for they had very well supped with their masters
victuals. They came to the head of this brave camp where the valiantest
lackies and boys had set their watch and sentinels, who from as far as they
could perceive any, albeit a hundred

began to play into the squadrons which sometimes it ^^^^maged. There might a
man see above 40000. men (the most French) in array and not far asunder, their
courages as fierce as their countenances brave, and many of them did but wait
for the token of battle.

Now must ye understand that vetweene the two armies there The extreme could
kept the 2. armies from executing their pretenses.
was but a plain field without any advantage, which may make some man
marvel why they joined not: But on the other side ye must weete that there
had not been so sharp a winter seen in 20. years before, neither was it only
a hard frost but withal there fell so terrible a sleete that a footman could
scarce march without falling, much less the horse, for it was so slipperie
that a horse could not pass a bancke of three or four foot high. And whereas
between the two armies there were many such made for partition of lands, the
same were as good as trenches: so as who so had attempted to assail must of
force have been wholly disordered. This caused them to stand fast each looking
who would first begin this hazard or rather folly. No man would try the
passage, only there was some small skirmish, and one hour before night they
retired each into his quarter. The next morning they set themselves again in
battle array discharging their artillery as the day before: some also that
went to skirmish, either brake or put their legs or arms out of joint, and
more there were hurt by this inconvenience then by any harquebuze shot. The
third day they showed the like countenance, but could find no means to join
without falling into great disadvantage. But the fourth day Monsier retired a
league of, not to refresh his men (as we use to say) but to warm them under
covert against the injury of time, for they were no longer able to bear the
cold which killed diverse as well of the one as of the other. It is a manifest
abuse obstinatly to labor to overcome the sharpness of the weather: for since
even the hardest things are thereby broken, much more must man who is sensible
give place: as also that which followed teaches that we ought not, but upon
great necessity, to make the soldier bear more then he may. For within a
few days such violent and lanquishing diseases seized upon them, that in one
month I am assured there dyed above three thousand of ours, besides those that
retired home: and I have heard that on the other part there were as many or
more that took the same course. Every man's desire to fight, together with the
presence of their Generalles, made them to bear even to extremity: howbeit,
if I should not lie, Monsiers part endured most through want of the covert and
victuals that we had. Some Cornets of horse of both camps were lodged within
halse a league or three quarters of a league each of other: howbeit when they
returned to their lodgings they were all so sterued with cold that they had no
minds to molest their enemies, not so much as to give one alarm, as if there
had been some perfect truce between them.

On the morrow after the departure of Monsiers army there The Lord Admirals
enterprise void of his pretended effect.
fell out a brave occasion, which the Lord Admiral had before foreseen, and
was reasonably hotly pursued, which nevertheless had not the hoped success.
He gessed that the Catholics, who the days before were lodged half along the
hedges, would (being gotten a little aloof) scatter into the good villages,
which in deed they did, so as in the body of the army there remained none
but Monsiers own person, the artillery, the Suitzers, three or four hundred
horse, and about twelve hundred harquebuziers. The rest were some one league,
some two leagues of. Now, about nine of the clock in the morning, so soon as
the Princes horse were arrived, they sent forth twelve or foreteene thousand
harquebuziers with four small pieces, determining to set full upon the body
of the enemies army, which was but a small league and a half of. They knew
well enough that there was a small brook with diverse foords over it, which by
the report of their guides they took not to be very difficult: also having
over night discovered and tasted the guardes thereof they found them forceable.
Thus they marched making a brave head: and when they came to the passage which
was within a quarter of a league of their camp, they found it kept by some
footmen, who doubted no such matter. The same did they charge very lively, but
could not force it, and so stayed there upon the skirmish. Their camp having
hereof taken a very hot alarm, began to shoot of Canon after Canon to call in
their scattered people, and very certain it is that at the beginning they were
greatly astonished: then their Captains provided for the reenforcing of the
guard of this passage: howbeit, within a good quarter of an hour after the
Lord Admiral set upon an other passage which was also as well defended: but
could they have been won there was some likelihood that their army might
have been overtaken: For before they could have had the succor of a thousand
men, we should at the first coming have set in their faces 1500. horse and
6000. harquebuziers, which would have shaken them shrewdly. About two hours
after, being increased they planted some pieces upon a rising: and after some
shot on each side the cold caused every man to retire.

As well the gentry as common Soldiers on both sides did The retract of both
the armies through the extreamitie of the cold.
much murmr against their Captains, in that without any profit they were
made a pray unto the frostes and cold, as also they complained that famine
assaulted them, so as if they would not provide for them in safe and fortified
places, they being no loger able to endure such extremities, would place
themselves. Hereto was there no contradiction, for their Captains entents did
concur with their desires. The Catholics went to lodge beyond Loyre, about
Saumure: The Protestants returned to Montreuill-bellay and Touars. In this last
action I consider that many good occasions do fall out when the armies are
lodged scatteringly, which should dispose their leaders to watch diligently for
fear of trying one unfortunate hour. At the least ought they to labor to be
able with Alexander to say: I have slept soundly, for Antipater has watched
for me. Some there are that think that the readers can gather but small
instruction in the view of things not performed, which they term imperfect
works: but I am not of their mind. For whenever any action together with
the circumstances thereof is truly set down, albeit it reaches but half the
way, yet may there still be some fruit gathered thereof: even as men may take
some examples by such as live but to the third or fourth part of the common
course of man's life: for virtue will somewhat appear in all parts of man's age
or actions, and this shall cause me yet to set down here one bold attempt,
which albeit it came not to effect, is nevertheless worthy to be known.

The County of Brissack was the dealer and attempter thereof The Earl of
Brissackes bold enterprise and what came of it.
during the aboade of both armies. He was bold, and for his age very wise: but
his excessive desire of glory did even ravish him to high and difficult
attempts. The Lords Admiral and Andelot were lodged in the town of
Montreuill-belay with their cornets which were great. In one of the suburbs at
hand was there also two companies of footmen in the rou(...)e of a simple
watch, as well before their lodgings as at the gates. The gentlemen did only
keep the rounds every hour about the walls, and this seemed to suffice. For
by reason that upon the way from Saumure there were in a great suburb beyond
the river six or seven regiments of footmen, the town was covered on that
side: On the other side there were great marshes a league about, which could
not be passed but in certain places, also nine or ten Cornets of horsemen
lodged in the villages on the hither side, who beat the ways both night and
day. All this so assured the town as there was small likelihood that it could
fall into any danger. Now as in these civil wars men have always had good
aduertisements, by reason that the secret enemies are still hidden in the
parties bowels, so the said County was first advertised of the small watch
kept in the town: secondly that by going two leagues about out of the high way
he might come, without the danger of our horsemens watch. Howbeit he would not
trust hereto: but for his better assurance requested a French Captain and an
Italian by night to go and discover the truth. One of them did assure me that
they came to the foot of the wall, and with a long pike and a cord with an
iron hook upon it, they gat up (for it was but low) and about nine of the
clock at night came even to the Lord Admirals lodging, and returned again
vndescried. He understanding of this facility was very glad thereof, and
thereupon laid his purpose aforesaid in manner following. Himself would with a
thousand chosen and nimble harquebuziers and five hundred horse depart in such
time that he might come to Montreuill-bellay by three of ye clock in the
morning, so to have at the least two hours of night to favor his retraict if
he should fail of his purpose: but in case he did compass it he should have
made great fires about the Castle, so to advertise the Catholic army which
was at Saumure to march with all speed to his succor, as assuring himself
not to be forced without the Canon, neither is it to be doubted but in six
hours they might have been there. So doing he should take two notable
Captains in the midst of their assurance, and 100. gentlemen of name:
moreover he should disperse this aduantguard there lodged, which would never
have abidden the coming of the Catholics succor, so sore would they have
been astonished, yea and peradventure other inconveniences might have ensued. I
for my part who was then there and have well viewed both the inside and the
outside, also the state of the affairs do not think the execution thereof to
have been impossible: But as it is requisite that God should watch over the^
that sleep and upon the preservation of cities: so when the County was upon
his way to perform his enterprise, he light upon an unlooked for mishap which
overthrew all his intent. For having to yt effect see forward with 12. ladders
and his men well resolved, being within two good leagues of the town, by
chance he met with two hundred Protestants horsemen that were going to beat
about who seeing this great troop of horsemen and footmen in the field, did
suddenly return and give the alarm both to the town and to the other
quarters of the horsemen, whereby the County was forced to retire. Afterward
the Lord Admiral caused greater watch upon the ways and to beat the fields
oftener, albeit he never knew of this enterprise nor my self neither, until
after the peace concluded. Truly I do greatly commend this valiant enterprise
of this young noble gentleman, to whom the only daring to attempt it was an
honor. Howbeit, I marvel not that the Lord Admiral never doubted any such
matter, for he must, as a man should say, have foreseen it by inspiration.
Nevertheless, it is good for a man when he is near a great power and such
resolute Captains to have a double care, and to think that the desire of
honor will furnish them of wings.

Of the death of the Prince of Conde at Bassac.
THE Protestants having in the former What happened before the battle of
Bassac.
days endured much, found the more sweetness in their aboade in Poictow,
whether they were retired: where they were advertised that Monsiers army was
in the field, marching toward Angolesme. There were newly come to him two
thousand Reistres, and as I suppose to the end the sooner to end the war he
purposed to force his enemies either to fight, or else to shut up themselves in
the towns. In the one he had the advantage: in the other he deminished their
reputation. The Prince and Admiral upon this advice caused their men to close,
determining to keep themselves along the banckes of the river of Charente, so
to behold their countenances, but to hazard nothing: as also to favor their
Houlds for the furnishing whereof with men they must diminish there army. There
was nothing done worthy remembranee until the Catholics came to Chasteaunueuf,
which stands upon the same river, where at their first coming they took the
Castle which had but a bad keeper: And because the bridge was broken in two
places, the Admiral himself to the end to discover their countenance and the
passage would needs come thither with 7. or 800. horse and as many harque
buziers, having the river still between the^, where he began a skirmish with
some people who^ they had sent over either by boat or upon some plankes
sodeinly laid, which lasted not long: In the mean time it might be easily
perceived that they would labor to pass over there.

The Lord Admiral desiring as much as he might to preserve The evil keeping
of the passage and their small diligence to join together cause of the
overthrow shortly ensuing.
his credit, and to give his enemies to understand that he would not give them
ground: foot by foot that he purposed to stop their passage yet for one day:
and in the same place appointed two regiments of footmen to lodge within a
quarter of a league of the bridge, and eight hundred horse a little behind.
This done, with the rest of the auan^gard he retired to Bassac, which was a
league of, and the Prince came to Iarnae which is one league farther, but his
commandment was not performed: for both horsemen and footmen seeing that in
the places appointed there were few houses and no virtuals or forage, having
quite forgotten the custom of the camp and wanting of provision at home, took
their quarters else where. Thus most of the troop departed to take their
lodgings, so as there remained but few upon the place who setteled themselves
half a league from the passage: whereof it ensued that the guard was very
weak, neither could it approach near enough to hear or give allarum to the
enemies guard from time to time according as was devised, so to have made them
believe that our whole auantgard had been there lodged. The Catholics who were
resolved, albeit our whole camp would have let them, to seize upon this
passage, through the diligence of the Lord of Biron not only repaired the
old bridge, but also made a new of such beats as are ordinarily transported
in armies royal, which was also finished before midnight: and then they began
to pass over without any noise both horsemen and footmen.

The Protestants that watched there did scarce perceive their passage before
break of day, whereof immediately they certefied the L. Admiral, who
understanding that most of his men were lodged scatteringlie, even on the same
side that the enemies came, sent them word of their passage, warning them to
draw to him withal speed so to retire together, in the mean time that he
would houer at Bassac: he also commanded the carriages and footmen to retire
which was performed. Now if then, yea an hour after his whole troops had
been come together, they might easily have departed, even a soft pace. But the
delay of time being at the least three hours, while he stayed for them, was
the chief cause of our mishap: neither would he loose such troops
containing eight or nine corners of horsemen, and some ensigns of foote-men,
whose captains were the County of Montgomery, the Lord of Acier, and Colonel
Pluuiault.

In the end being all joined with him except Colonel Acier The battle of
Bassac with the taking and cause of the Prince of Condees death.
who took the way to Angolesme, the enemies that still passed over wear waren
so mighty, and come so near unto us, also the skirmish so whot, that it
appeared that needs we must fight. Hereupon the Prince of Condee, who was
already a good half league upon his retraict, understanding that they should
be forced to buckle, having the stonracke of a Lion would needs have a share.
When to the end to retire we forsook, a small brook, which could not be
passed but in two or three places, the Catholics set forward the flower of
their horsemen under the conduct of the Lords of Guize, Martigues and Brissac,
who overthrew four cornets of Protestants, being upon the retraict, where my
self was taken prisoner: then did they set upon the Lord of Andelot in a
village, who bare their brunt well enough: having ouerpassed him they perceived
two great battles of horse, among whom were the Prince and Admiral, who
seeing themselves beset prepared to charge.

The Lord Admiral gave the first onset, and the Prince the second, which was
fiercer then ye first: at the beginning they forced al yt came to turn their
backs, and truly it was well fought on every side. Howbeit in as much as the
whole army of the Catholics, still came on the Protestants were forced to flee
after they had lost in the field, about a hundred Gentlemen, but especially the
Princes own person, who being borne down could have no succor, and having
yielded himself to the Lord of Argences, there came a Gascoigne Gentleman
named Montesquion and discharged a pistol through his head whereof he died.

His death bred wonderful sorrow among the Protestants, and as great joy to
some of his adversaries, who supposed they should soon overcome the whole
body, now that they had cut of so good a head, howbeit, as some did greatly
blame him, so others there were that commended his valor. As also this
commendation The praise of the Prince of Conde: also what happened after his
death.
may justly be given him that in boldness or curtesy no man of his time
excelled him. Of speech he was eloquent rather by nature then art: he was
liberal and affable unto all men, and withal an excellent Captain, although
he loved peace. He bare him self better in adversity then in prosperity. His
greatest commendation of all was his steadfastness in religion. My best is, to
hold my peace for fear of saying to little, albeit I thought good to speak
somewhat, least I should be accounted ungrateful to the memory, of so
valiant a Prince. Many a worthy person both Catholic and Protestant, whom our
civil storms have carried away, are to be lamented: for they honored our
France and might well have helped to increase it, had not discord provoked the
valor of the one to the destruction of the valor of the other. After this
blow the Protestants army was wonderfully astonished, and it fell out well for
them, that the country whereinto they were withdrawn was all full of water:
for thereby were the Catholics restrained, and they had time to recover
themselves* Having achieved such a victory the Catholics imagined, that such
of our towns as were not very strong would be amazed: But the Admiral had
placed in them the most part of his footmen, thereby break this first fury:
so as when they set forward to assalt Coignac they well found that such catts
were not caught without mittens: for therein were four regimentes of footmen,
but as when they had sent three or four hundred shot unto the parkeside to
disceuer that part, they that were within sent forth 10, or 1200, who sent
them so quickly away that they came no more: as also they had in their army but
sour Canons, and as many Culuerines. Monsieur contenting him self with his
victory, and perceiving that he could not perform any great matter, in his
tender youth triumphing over most excellent captains, as also he had good
counsel and assistaunce of other worthy Captains that accompanied him,
retired to refresh his men.

In this action we are to gather that in whatsoever weighty and dangerous
attempt, it must not be followed to halues: for we must either quight leave it
off, or else employ whatsoever our senses and force. Moreover, this is to be
noted, that when armies are lodged scatteringly, they incur viuerse
inconveniences which the sufficiency of the best Captains is not able
withstand.

Of the notable passage of the Duke of Aipont from the borders of Rhine, even
into Aquitaine.
MAny that shall here see it set down as it were for a marvel that a
foreign enemies army could pierce so very far into the realm of France,
will not peradventure think it strange: because that considering other
examples, namely that of the Emperor Charles the fifth, when he came to
besiege Saint Desire, they will not take such expeditions to be so
extraordinary as we would make them believe for. Howbeit if they list well to
weigh the length of the journey, also the mighty and continual lets and
hindrances that this had, I doubt they will be of another opinion. Yet will I
confess that civil wars do greatly favor the entry of our neighbors,
who otherwise without the support of one of the factions never durst have
enterprised the same. But when on the one side the favor is small, and on the
other side the resistance great, we are the more to admire the deeds of those
that have so adventured.

Touching that which is alleged of the Emperor Charles, I will answer in
few words. First, for his person he was the mightiest Captain in
Christendom: then for his camp it consisted of fifty thousand men: lastly,
that at such time as he came in the King of England had already taken
Bollein, which caused King Fraunces, who would not adventure any thing
rashly, to leave the passage more free. Now the Duke of Biponts case is far
otherwise: for notwithstanding he were a valiant valyant Prince, yet did he
not any thing near approach the military sufficiency of the other: and a
great help and ease it was for him that he was accompanied with the Prince of
Orange, County Lodowicke, and County Wolrad of Mansfield, besides other brave
French Captains, and two thousand footmen and horsemen of the same nation that
joined with him. His number of Germans was five thousand Lance knights and
six thousand Reisters. With this small army did he pass forward in purpose
to join with the Princes power.

The King understanding that he prepared for their succor, did The lets to
keep the Duke of Biponts army from ioining with the Princes.
immediately appoint a small army under the leading of the Duke of Aumale to
withstand him: and doubting of the weakness thereof, he also joined thereto
another under the government of the D. of Nemours. These two bodies united did
in footmen exceed the Duke of Bipont, but in horse were inferior unto him.
They determined not to state his coming into the realm to molest them, and
therefore marched even into the borders of Germany, and toward Sauerne
overthrew the regiment of one named Le Coche, composed of certain straies
gathered together who meant to have joined with him. Nevertheless he entered
into France on the side of Burgundy, whether they came to coast him, and
until he came to the river of Loire which was little less than four score
leagues they never gave him over, but still were either on his flanks or
tail, yea, many times the armies were in sight each of other, and had great
skirmishes.

I have often heard the Prince of Orange report that he meruayled in so long and
difficult a way that the Catholics could never find any fit occasion to
their advantage, for sometimes they had fair offers by reason of the
pestering with store of carriages. Neither can I omit this, that besides the
brave forces of the Kings army, they had other advantages which were not small,
as the favor of the towns, Countries, and rivers, yea, and one point more was
to be noted, that is, their notise of the enemies purposes which consisted in
making of way and winning by power or policy some passage over Loire. For
albeit both the Dukes of Nemours and Aumale were brave Captains, yet
notwithstanding all their policies and endeauours this army gate to the said
river. Some Catholics report that the discord that fell between them
hindered diverse brave enterprises which they might have executed if they had
still agreed. I wot not how it was, but if that were true it was no marvel
that they fought no^, or rather that they were not fought with all* but thus
(...) I have learned, that the enemies had small notice of their braules. This
great bar, the river of Loire might also have been a second and very great
difficulty to stay this Dutch army, in that so low it was not wadeable,
besides that all the towns standing thereupon were enemies: but the passage
over was in necessary for them, that it so doubled the diligence, rashness,
and inventions of the French Protestants that they assailed the town of
Charity which had a goodly bridge, and finding it but badly furnished with men,
they pressed so sore upon it, that what with countenance and threats, before
any succor came they had carried it away, which was unto them a wonderful
joy. For had not that been, they were in a very b^^ case and must have been
forced to have sought the head of the fai^riuer, which would have lengthned
their way 60 leagues, and which was worse, taking that course they should have
pestured themselves in a hilly and wood Country where their horsemen could have
stood them but in small stead.

I have sometimes heard the Lord Admiral discoursing hereof among his
familiars, account this passage of the strangers almost impossible For (said
he) we cannot help them by reason of Monsiers army which lies in our way,
and as for them they have another upon their arm; also so difficult a river to
stop their course, that it is to be feared that they shall not well void this
inconvenience without shame or loss. Again albeit they had passed it yet the
2. armies joined together will have overthrown them before we can come near by
20 leagues to succor them: but when we hard of the success of La Charity,
also yt they were determined to try al dangers to ioyn with him, he grew into
better hope and said: This is a Princes good prognostication, les us by
diligence and resolution perfect it. This caused the Lords, Princes of Navarre
and Conde the same, who had allowed and received leave for generalles of the
Protestants to march toward the marches of Limosin, so to draw near the army
of Monsieur, and to keep it still occupied: and to say the truth we were
daily as it were in a four waiting when we should hear that two such mighty
armies had oppressed our Reisters: but it fell out otherwise: for they watched
their opportunity so ^itlie and speedely, that being guided by their French
troops, wherein the Lord of Auy bare Of the ioining of the Germans with the
Princes.
himself most valyantlie, they out went them and drew to the place where the
Lord Admiral had sent them word that he would meet them with ten thousand
harquebuziers, and two thousand and five hundred horse.

Thus did these two armies join with great ^^a^ulation. I will not here ^axe
the Generals and brave Captains of the Catholics for suffering them to
pass, because I (...) not what reasons they had to divert them, neither will I
extremely command those that passed, but rather must think it to have been a
great good hap for them, the like whereof do sometimes appear in military
action: where in great Captains in their war are to learn in their greatest
extremities not to abandon all hope: for one only favorable accident which
commonly follows the diligent and shunneth the slothful, may suffice to free
them. Both the armies being then very mighty (for there were in the Kings
camp above thirty thousand men, and in the Princes full 25000.) were forced
for their better commodity of virtualles to sever themselves (for the country
of Limosin is but barren) but they drew together ward again about Yries La
Perch.

The Lord Admiral perceiving that the barrenness of the The occurrences
between both the armies at Rochell.
Country forced them to lodge sc^^teringlie also that being craggie and full
of wood, the places for the armies were oftentimes very discommodious,
determined rather to prevent then to be prevented. Wherefore he counsayled
the Princes to go and surprise the Catholic army which was not far of at a
place called Roch-labelle. They set forward before break of day, in purpose
to give battle, and came so fitly that before any allarum taken, they were
within a quarter of a league of the enemies front, who were lodged strongly,
and the Lord of Stossy at the noise coming in with five hundred harquebuziers
to support three hundred of his men who kept watch at the chief entry, found
the skirmishe very hot. And we may well say that he bare himself very
valyantlie: for he held four thousand Protestant harquebuziers play a long
hour, which time stood the Catholic army in good stead to set themselves in
order.

The Lord Admiral meruailing that they could not force the passage, sent
thither Captain Bruel a skillful man. He by and by perceived that our shot
endeavored to overcome the others rather by multitude than by art, wherefore
to make short work, he spoke to the Captains, and having ordered the
troops, assailed their flanks, and withal setting forward four Cornets to
sustain them, he began a sharp onsette wherein our men having broken
certain casemates that covered the enemies did so disorder the^ that soon
after they fled, leaving diverse of their men^ dead with 22. of their officers:
also their Colonel prisoner, who that day had done Monsieur good service: for
had it not been his resistance the Protestants had come without le^te to their
ordinance: But because it rayned all the day, and the Catholic army was
placed upon the advantage, they could not work any great effect and therefore
retired, having showed themselves too rigorous in their execution, for they
took very few prisoners, wherea^ the Catholics were ^ore provoked, and
revenged themselves intime and place. It is a commendation to fight well, but
it deserves no less praise to b^ genele and courteous to those whom the
first fur^e of our weapons have pardoned, and into whose hands our selves may
another time fall, unless there be great cause to the contrary. And in
skirmishes skill and policy is in my opinion as necessary as violence, which
experience does (...) coufirme. For if the land be somewhat couerd, a man may
use sundry advantages, which the Spaniards and Italians can very well
practice, as being ingenious people: but it is always most profitable to order
their men in small troops, to assail on the flanks ere they be aware, to
place the troop that bears the brunt very well, and finally to come
resosolutely to the sword.

The siege of Poictiers.
MAny enterprises do men attempt in the The purpose of the Princes army before
the siege of Poictiers: also the taking of Lusignan.
wars, which were never premeditated, as also they give over others long before
thought upon, which proceeds of the alterations which time brings forth:
and as it is a sign of valiant^e well to execute, so is it also a token of
wisdom well to deliberate, both which parts are necessary in a Captain:
albeit there be none so perfect in this art, but that sometime they err and
stumble, especially in civil wars: which may the rather excuse the error
that the Protestants are said to have committed in besieging Poictiers. Thus
stood the case. After the departure from Roch-labelle either army both needed
and were alike desirous to refresh themselves in some fatter Country than
Limof^n, to which general disposition their Captains were forced to yield
(for in civil wars some time the cart goes before the horse) and therefore
recoiled drawing toward those quarters that had not ben ea^e^. The Lords
Princes and Admiral considering that in their absence the County of Lude had
assailed Nyort (which through the diligence of the Lord of Thelignie, who
transported his forces thither, was rescued) and being grieved that any man
should come to molest their Province from whence they had all their
commodities, which was to them of as great importance as to dry up their milch
cow, did determine to purge it and seize upon Saint Maixant, Lusignen, and
Mirebeau (making as then no mention of Poictiers) to the end the said Province
might monethlie yield them 60000. franks, all garrisons paid, besides the
profits of the sea, which also amounted to a great deal: the same to serve for
the strangers who cried continually for money. This performed they went to
take Saumur, which stands upon the river of Loire and is very weak. The
same did they purpose to fortefie to the end still to have one passage assured,
and the rest of Summer and Autumn to transport the war toward Paris which
they supposed would never incline to peace until she felt the scourge even at
her gates. Being returned into their Country they thought that Lusignen which
was but a castle would not so long withstand them as Saint Maixant, wherein was
an old regiment under the conduct of Onoux: besides their desire to have six
Canons which the Lord of Lude had left in the said Castle, did the rather
inuit them to assault it, as they did, and in few days carried it away. The
town of Poictiers, hearing the ordinance walk so near, furnished it self
with men: yea, the Lords of Guize and Maine came in with five or six hundred
horse, rather as it was said, to molest the Protestants army, then thinking
to be besieged.

The Protestants about the same time chanced to surprise the The cause of the
siege of Poictiers.
town of Chastelleraut, which cheered their hearts and caused many to incline
to the siege of Poictiers, for that on the most dangerous side, the same
covered those that should besiege it. Two meetings were there for resolution,
and sundry misliked yt assailing thereof, namely the L. Admiral who wished them
to prosecute his first platform: alleging that it was too well furnished
with men of calling, that ordinarily such great cites are but sepulchers to
their armies: and that it were best to return to Saint Maixant, which might be
forced in eight days. But the chief Lords and Gentlemen of Poictou labored
them earnestly as well in the counsayles as else where, not to loose so brave
an occasion, affirming the town to be very weak: that the more people therein,
the more booty: that they should not want artillery: that taking it, they
should fully obtain all that rich Province, and put the Catholic Gentry,
which by continual roades troubled all that we possessed there, from their
place of retreat. To this opinion did the chief of she counsel condescend,
who peradventure had not sufficiently considered that every man is not only
affectionate, but also passioned to set his own Country free: as also it was
added yt the taking of the Lords of Guize and his brother, two great Princes,
and rediest to molest us, would be a brave prise. To be brief, in this
deliberation were at large set down whatsoever the fruits redounding of such
a conquest: but of the inconveniences which, ensuing hereof, we should encur
there was no mention, as in deed that string is s^arch touch when men will not
be diuerted from their purposes. Afterward they sent with all speed to Rochell
for powder and shot, and so departed to close up Poictiers. This siege being at
large described by other historiographers, I will not stand upon to recite:
only I will note a few particularities which peradventure shall not be
superfluous.

The first touching the s^ituation wherein we see one thing that The notables^
perticularities of the siege of Poicters.
greatly anoyeth the town, and another that benefiteth it as much. The
annoiance are the mountains which in many places do inuiron it, and are so
nere that a man can scarce be in covert, but that he shall be descried and
hurt, as well in head as courtine, not only by the artillery, but even by
harquebuze shot: for in some places they lie not above four hundred paces of.
The benefit are other mountains within it which serve for large platformes,
also the rivers that inuiron the walls: so as still they have that great ditch to
pass, which is a very sore let, and were it not for that, I had rather be
without with 4000. men to assault it, than within with as many to defend it. In
sum, it is a very bad place and worthy to honor the defender. The
Protestants destruction was their small draught of artillery, munition, and
pioners, for when they assailed it in one place, they were not able thereby to
prosecute the battery or other affairs, but giving the Catholics two or three
days respite, they prepared fit remedies: and then they must begin new
batteries in other places, where they had the like success. In my opinion it
were the P. of Parmaes part to assail forts and the Protestants to defend
them: for so do they oftentimes perform their parts most valiantly. I wot
not whether I shall be believed if I report a kind of assault and defense
propounded by the besiegers and besieged when they beat upon the Abbess meadow
side. The Protestants had won the breach in the wall, and the Catholics had a
very small trench within 300 paces of it, and behind them a great void space
of one thousand paces long and five hundred paces broad, all under the command
of a mountain. Our Captains meant having with 400. Gentlemen and eight
hundred harquebuziers, who might easily have forced the ordinary guard, driven
the Catholics from that trench to have sent after them two hundred horse under
the Lord of Mouy to take the field, which they must needs pass before they
came to the houses: then should also their main power led by the Lord of
Briguemaud, Marshall of the camp have followed. This counsel was taken upon
a certain advice which they had that the Lord of Guize had appointed 200.
spears to that place there to fight: and already in the former allarum, we
had seen diverse spears there: But this camisado was not performed by reason
the day came upon us, and so we were discovered. Howbeit howsoever the matter
had fallen out, had it not been wonderful in an assalt to see the horsemen
fight among the footmen on either part? There also happened another matter
contrary to that which ordinarily chances in towns not forced: that is,
that they within lost more than they that were without: nevertheless such as
were lost it was with great commendation, for we might plainly see them come
boldly, and assuredly present themselves with the Canon and harquebuze shot.

In the end Monsieurs army did the Protestants great honor, Upon what
occasions the siege was raised from before Poicters.
in coming to assail Chastellerault. For the same was to them a lawful
occasion to raise the siedge, with nevertheless they would have raised,
because they wist no longer of what wood to make their boultes, and I believe
that the besieged were no less busied. Concerning the siege of this town,
thus much I will say, that the captains do easily yield to any high
attemptes, for having great stomachs they aim at obiectes of the same nature:
howbeit the surest way is to rely upon the proverb, He that gripeth too much,
straineth but little. The D. of Guize and his brother purchased great fame in
keeping so weak a hold, considering their youth. Some made no less account of
this act the^ of yt of Mets Others said yt the Admiral he stayed there purposely
to catch those* Princes whom they presumed to be perticularlie his enemies:
but himself has often told me that if the town had been taken, so far
would he have been from suffering them to be any way misused that
contrariwise, he would have caused them to have been honorably entreated
according to their dignities, as he had done their uncle the Marquis of
Elbeufe when he fell into his hands at the taking of the Castle of Cane, and
my self do remember that at the capitulation he sent me, because I knew him,
into the Castle to assure him from having any harm, which was observed.
Monsieur seeing our army, fraught with spite, rise to come toward him,
having in vain attempted one assault against Chatellerault where the Popes
Italians, who were nothing slack in their duties, were received according to
that good affection that the Protestants do bear to their master, did
retire. We followed weening to have constrained him to buckle, but still he
kept a river in our faces to cool our heat. When an action tending to
diuersion fails in the accessaries, and is executed in the principal, it is
not to be complained of: for the great fruit of the one does sufficiently
recompense the small loss of the other: as also we are to note that we ought
to study thrice or four times before we undertake to besiege any great town
once.

Of the battle of Montcontour.
SOme will say that this battle was a consequence of the siege of Poictiers,
because the Diverse causes of the overthrow of the Princes army at Montcontour.
Protestants power was much weakened before: which in troth happened rather
through sickness and the retiring both of Gentlemen and soldiers then by any
violent death. Indeed this was one of the causes of our mishap, but there were
others, as our seiourning at the borough of Fay La Vineuse, while the army of
Monsieur grew strong at Chinon. Whereto we were all forced, because then all
our draught horse for our ordinance were sent away to carry to Lusignan part
of that artillery which had been employed at the siege of Poictiers, and had
ever since remained in a Castle, which returned so just, that had they stayed
but one day longer, we should have been driven to have forsaken ours by reason
of the approach of Monsieurs army to London, which was within three leagues of
us. Also because we were in a devoured soil and but badly seated, the Lord
Admiral thought it better to go lodge at Montcontour, where the lodginges were
commodious and victuals more plentiful: and I believe that as well he as many
other were deceived, in that no man supposed that they whom we had forced to
so long a retreat and that in the night, from before Chastelleraud, could so
soon have been ready to seek us. Thus on the fridaie he departed, sending
his carriage one way while himself with the army went another.

Now near to a village called Saint Clear, the one hearing in The charge and
s^irmishes about Saint Cler.
manner no noise of the other, the head of the Catholics army led by the Lord
of Biron met with ours as we marched, almost upon our flank: he seeing
opportunity with one thousand spears gave a charge upon the Lord of Mouie,
who was upon the retreat with 300. horse and two hundred harquebuziers on
foot. These he overthrew and put to flight, and there were lost the most part
of the said shot, and about forty or fifty horse: This happening suddenly
and at once with the sound of four Canons that were discharged, bredde such a
terror among our men, that without telling who had won or who had lost,
every man at the only noise they heard behind them fled as half afraid.
One thing I will aduow (not that I will speak it to our reproach, but rather to
show prevention to be a cause of great disorder, also that the hazards of war
are dangerous) that is, that had it not been for a passage which was found in
time, where there could but twenty horse pass in front, and so stayed the
Catholics, our whole army had been overthrown at this first encounter. The
Lord Admiral seeing this, showed himself to his men and gathered together his
troops, so as at this passage, there were given two or three great assaults
and repulses of 1500. or 2000 horse at a time: and whosoever passed over, was
soon driven back: there did County Lodouicke and County Wolrad of Mansfield
behave themselves very well. The two armies planted themselves in battle array,
the one on the one side, and the other on the other, within a good musket shot
together, where ours was somewhat in covert, neither did I ever see any so
near together, and not to fight a maine battle. No man durst adventure any
more over the passage, in respect of the danger thereof, for sundry squadrous
would have oppressed that which should have adventured. But the Catholics
having their ordinance there, and ours being already at Mon^contour, they used
it and therewith slew about 100 men in the squadrons, who nevertheless set a
good countenance, and had not the night come on under the favor whereof every
man retired, we had had more hurt. That at S. Denis, and this came well for us.
In the morning Monsieur caused to discover ye lodgings at Montcontour, and to
taste the Protestants, but he found them very well fortested in the suburbs,
having no other coming thereto, where was a skirmish both of horsemen and
footmen.

The same time it happened that two Catholic Gentlemen straggling came and
spoke to some Protestants in place where there A notable advertisement given
before the battle but not followed.
was a ditch between: My masters, said they, we wear the badges of enemies,
albeit we hate neither you nor your party. Warn my L Admiral to beware that
he fight not: for our army through new supplies is wonderful mighty and
very resolute, wherefore let him forbear but one month only, for all the
nobility has sworn and told Monsieur that they will tarry no longer,
howbeit if he employ them in that time they will do their endeavors. Let him
remember how dangerous it is to iustle against the French fury which
nevertheless will suddenly be over: Thus if they have not speedy victory now,
they shall upon diverse considerations be driven to peace, and the same to your
advantage. Tell him that this we have leanred in place of credit, and were
desirous to advertise him thereof. Thus they departed, and the others
immedlatly came and made report hereof to the L. Admiral who liked it. They
also told it to others of the principal of whom some thought it not to be
rejected but wished it to be followed: but the most part took it to be a
policy to astonish us, saying moreover that albeit it had some appearance of
goodness, yet in that proceeded from suspected persons, accustomed to use guile
and deceit, it was not to be esteemed of. This was another cause of our
mischief, in yt we to much neglected ye thing which ought to have been noted.

Then did they meet to learn what were best to be done: some propounded to go
and win Eruaux, and so to put the river between us and ye enemy, also to
depart about 9. of ye clock al night, and so to march al night to get safe
thither, because we were so near the^: but others replied, that these night
retreates do print a certain fear in those that mark them, deminishe their
credit, and embolden the enemy, The Counsels and difficulties in the Princes
army whereof ensued the means to the adversaries army to assail them.
so as it were better to depart at break of day, whose opinion was followed.
Now was the Lord Admiral sore troubled, as fearing least the Reisters should
raise any mutiny for want of pay, also ye 2. or 4. regiments of his own
dwelling far off, who already had asked leave, should forsake him: he knew
also that sundry gentlemen of the countries in our possession were already gone
home: wherefore to the end to contain the army in duty, as also to refresh it,
he had requested the Lords Princes, who lay at Partenay, to come to the^, which
they did and brought with them about 100 and 50 good horses. In the morning we
were on horsback by break of day, to march straight to Exuaux, every man with a
white shirt, the better to be known if we should be forced to fight: But our
Launceknights said they would not march without money: a quarter of an hour
after five cornets of Reisters said as much, so as it was above an hour and a
half before this tumult was appeased, whereof followed that we could not reach
into a place of advantage which had been discovered nere unto Exuaux where we
might have sold our skins dearer, neither was this any of the least causes
of our loss. Having gone about a quarter of a league we perceived the enemy
coming toward us, so as we had no more leisure but to order our selves and
get into a little close under covert from the Canon. An other inconvenience
also chanced us in yt when the L. Admiral perceived The battle fought and
won by Monsiers army
ye Catholics auantgard make straight toward him, which was so strong (for it
contained nineteen cornets of Reisters in two squadrons) he sent to County
Lodouicke, who led our battle to succor him with three Cornets, he did so:
but himself brought them and at the same instant began the fight where he
remained fast tied: for hereof it came to pass yt the said body wanting a
leader, wist not how to behave it self, and it is thought that if he had
been there, he would have done more, considering that being without both
captein and order it had nevertheless almost shaken Mounsiers. The fight lasted
somewhat more then half an hour, and all the Protestants army was put to
flight, the Princes being yet young, were retired a little before. Almost all
our footmen were cut in pieces, the artillery and ensigns taken and County
Lodouike chased almost a league, who made a brave retreat with 3000 horse in
one body, neither was the L. Admiral there, for he was wounded in ye beginning.
The slaughter was great, for the Catholics were fore fleshed through the
cruelties used, said they, at Roch-labelle, but especially for the death of
Saint Columbe, and others slain in Bearn. Many also of our prisoners did they
dispatch for satisfaction. My self likewise in the heat had like to have gone
the same way, had it not been for the humanity of Monsieur, who was an
instrument of Gods blessing for the preservation of my life, which in my
opinion I ought not to conceal. By this exploit we may see that the same
royal army which we caused so swiftly to retire from before Chatelleraud,
and that in the night, was able nevertheless within three weeks after to
overcome us, because we made some difficulty to retire by day: also through
staying upon the maitainance of our reputation in show, we lost it in deed,
which is one point sometime to be thought upon by all soldiers as well young
as old.

That the siege of Saint John d'Angelie was the springing again of the
Protestants.
AS the siege of Poictiers was the beginning of the Protestants mishappes, so
was that of S. Over sight of Mo^sieurs army after their victory.
John d'Angelie the stay of the Catholics good fortune. And had they not
stayed therevppon, but pursued the relikes of the broken army, they had
brought it to naught, considering the astonishment thereof and difficulties
falling out. The Princes and Admiral retired with all that they could gather
together over the river of Charent, and in the mean time took order in have
for the keeping of the towns in Poicton, which lay next to the battery: But
five of them were at the first abandoned, viz. Parthenay, Nyort, Fontenay,
Saint Maixant, and Chatelleraud, and the sixth which was Lusignan at the sight
of the Canon yielded. This so puffed up the hope of the conquerours, that they
imagined in short space to get all those Provinces, except the capital town
which they took to be Rochel. Whereupon they still marched forward, imagining
that all other towns after the example of these would have yielded. They
directed their course toward Saint John d'Angelie which was not much stronger
than Nyort, but being summoned would not yield: for the Lord of Pills being
entered thereinto with part of his regiment was desired to fight.

I have heard that at that time the chief Captains that accompanied Monsieur
were called to know what was to be done. Some A notable counsel houlden by the
chief Captains of this army, and so their resolution.
said: Since that all the Princes footmen were cut in pieces, and so they had
none but horse and most of them Reisters, who also were discontent and half
marred for loss of their carriages, their advice was to pursue them hotly, so
should they come to one of these two points: either quite to overthrow them
or else to force them to parley for their return into Germany, which might
easily be compassed by giving them two months pay. We also (said they) know
the Admiral to be one of the most politic Captains in the world, and most
skillful in winding himself out of adversity if he may have any leisure: He
will repair his power, and thereto adioyne more out of Gascogne and
Languedock, so as in the spring we shall see him appear with a new army
wherewith he will harrie our Princes, molest us, and burn even to the gates of
Paris. Moreover the Princes of Navarre and Condie coming among these conquered
people will by their presence by little and little cheer them up again, and
waken many other flomackes as yet daunted in diverse places, unless with
diligence we take from them almeanes to prevail of the time. They concluded
that Monsieur with the two thirds of his army should follow them, for so he
might undoubtedly in short space force the Captains for their refuge to enter
some weak hold, which might finish the war.

Others being of another opinion, said that they now reaped one of the
principal fruits of their achieved victory, in the conquest of these
towns, whereof they had already won six in ten days: that now they should
set upon and get the rest considering in what fear they now were, that the
Protestants would never be quiet so long as they had any places of retreat,
which being taken from them they would have no great desire to stir: that
there rested no more but a few towns in Xantoigne and Angonlucis in that
quarter which could not above two months hold out against the force of their
victorious army and Monsieurs good hap: that afterward Rochel seeing it self
naked of all couerture would quake. As for the remainder of the conquered army
wherewith the Princes and Admiral had saved them selves, the same did fly and
would scatter of it self howbeit to hasten it thereto they might send after it
a thousand horse and two thousand

Two leagues within the sea there lie certain Isles which favor her: the
inhabitants given as much to war as traficke: the magistrates discreet and
all well affected to the reformed religion: as for the fortifications experience
has taught what they are, and therefore I shall not need to say any more of
them. Well, I will confess that Orleance to him that is strong in the field is
a place more proper to assail: but if it be for defense Rochel is far more
profitable: some there are that note the inhabitaunts of rudeness, but how
ever it be, they be loyal: the same may be spoken of the people of Namure, who
are with their rudeness loyal. And when the imperfections of a man or city
are much less than the good qualities, they may be borne well enough.

The succor which the Princes had thence in this third war, do
sufficiently testify it to be a good shop and well furnished: neither What
help Rochel has ministered to the Princes and their warlick affairs.
do I allege this to the end great towns should be puffed up with pride,
but rather to provoke them to praise God for those plentiful commodities that
he has bestowed upon them. (For he that exalts himself shall be brought
low either early or late.) Among all others that they had thence this is to
be noted, that she furnished and armed a certain number of vessels which
fetched them in sundry rich prizes yielding great treasure to the general
cause: for albeit they then took but the tenth for the admiralty, yet did the
profit thereof amount unto above 500000. frankes. Afterward in the next wars
which began in the year 1574. necessity constrained them take the fifth, and
it was thought that this would have restrained sea faring men from seeking
their adventures in such hazard: howbeit this exercise was so pleasant unto
them, that notwithstanding this excessive tribute, they could not desist
therefro: albeit oftentimes it happened that in those booties which their talents
had griped, the nails of the land Picoree or prouling gave terrible pinches
whereby we may see what wealth the sea war does minister to any Country.

Now if the land war be just, so ought this also to be: howbeit when we come
to examine diverse the particular actions thereof, Commodities of wars by
sea: also the abuses therein committed.
we shall therein find wonderful abuses at the least among us: for most of
these adventurers do make small difference between friends and foes: and many
times the poor enemy has had favor when the rich friend has been robbed
and committed to the streams by them that presumed through cruelty to
conceal their coueteousnesse. But heaven having both eyes and mouth seeing
these secret inhumanities, reuealeth them openly, and with all more justly
casts some of the co^mitters thereof headlong into the gulfes wherein they had
unjustly buried the innocent merchant. But be this spoken without injury to
those that do behave themselves lawfully in their vocation: for my speech I
direct only to such as are disordinatlie affected to rob the whole world. I
have heard of the Spaniards who were at the overthrow of the Lord of Strossie
that half his army consisted of pirates and rouers, who forsook him at his
most need, suffering him even in their view to perish, together with such
brave persons as accompanied him to the battle: also that they meruayled that
of forty sail that went with him there fought not above six or seven, but
as they commended the valor of these, so did they blame the cowardlinesse of
the rest, notwithstanding it redounded to their profit. This teaches us that
the affections to spoil, and the affections to fight do work contrary
effects. For my part I shall still bewail this valiant Captain, my very good
friend, who both in his life and death was an honor to our France.

That in nine months the Princes army marched almost three hundred leagues
compassing in manner the whole Realm of France: also what success they had in
this voyage.
FOrce it was for the Lords, Princes, and Admiral after their overthrow to go
By what means the Princes army was restored.
far enough from the victorious army, as well for their own safeties as upon
sundry other respects before, as it were by the way, mentioned, which counsel
redounded to their profit through the folly of the Catholics, who suffered
this small snowball without let to roll so long, that in short time it grew as
great as a house: for the authority of the Princes stirred up and gathered
many: the L. Admiralls foresight and invention compassed profitable things, and
the body of the Reisters which amounted to 3000. gave credit to the army.
they endured much until they came into Gascogne where they strengthened
themselves with shot, whereof they stod in great need, especially for the
warranting of their horsemen from surprises by night which in those quarters
through the neighborhood of both towns and castles are very common. They
dispearsed them among the cornets of Reisters and other French troops, so as
as well in the open as close Country they were still ready to defend
themselves. He that gives a notable Captain respite to bring forth that which
his imagination has conceived, he does not only heal up his old wounds,
but also ministers strength to his languishing members, and therefore he
should rather endeavor still to divert and combet him, so to break the course
of his purposes: The longest abode yt this half army made in any place was
about the quarters of Again and Montauban, where it spent almost all the winter,
and through the good entertainment that it there had, it was restored as it
were with new men's bodies. Heereto ought all such as have any military
offices to have regard, and not to do as the covetous laborers, who granting
no release to their lands do make them barren: for when for the increase of
their own glory they do even tier their soldiers for lack of refreshing,
they do utterly overthrow them. Also if the North wind together with the
moisture of the Moon, do even wear the stones, how much sooner will the
delicate body of a man be worn out with such labors and rigorous toils*
Wherefore the best rule is infayre weather to emploie themselves well, and in
foul to take some rest, except extreme necessity constrayneth to the
contrary. In this voyage they very well followed the rule of Hanniball in
Italy, which was to give the enemies Country to be a pray to their own men,
so often as occasion required that they should be contented: for who so list
to adventure wanted no commodities: such plenty reigned in those Provinces.

The first power that joined with the Princes was the County of Montgomeries,
who returned victorious out of Bearne, which Of the forces that joined with the
Princes.
truly was a brave exploit and is at large set down in the histories: for
through his diligence he prevented the power of the L. of ^erid who besieged
Nauarrins which already was tired with his long abo^de therabout, neither is
it to be demanded whether he was well welcomed at his coming. About the end
of Winter they marched toward Tholouze, where began a kind of most violent
war in respect of the fires permitted, howbeit only against the houses of
those that belonged to the Court of Parliament. The cause hereof was said to
be for that they had evermore been most sharp in burning the Lutherans and
Huguenotes, as also for the beheading Captain of Rapin a gentleman Protestant
who brought them from the king the edice of peace. They found this revenge to
be very hard, howbeit it was said that it might be a warning for them to be
more moderate afterward, as in deed they have so showed themselves. This
company is one of the most notable in the realm, and many learned men
therein, albeit they might have used more clemency. The L. Marshall d. Anuil
was then in the said town with a good power, and was bitten by slanderers who
reported that he had intelligence with his coosen the L. Admiral, and yet
throughout all that voyage no man warred so sore upon the Princes army as he,
for he overthrew four or five companies of their horse. This report was
undoubtedly false, and that I well know, notwithstanding whatsoever may since
have fallen out. The army The voyage of the Princes army.
went on even into the County of Roussillon, where albeit it belonged to the
Spaniard it used some some sacking. Thence it marched along Languedocke, and
coming near to Rhosne County Lodowicke went over with part of the army to
assail some holds: But the chief intent of these Captains tended to get
some footmen out of Daulphine to the increase of their body, as also they
thought to have done out of Gascogne and Languedock, which desire could not be
brought to any good effect: for when the soldiers understood that it was to
march toward Paris and into the heart of France, withal that they considered
the miseries which themselves* and their companions that had bidden by it had
endured the last winter, every man fled from it as from a deadly downfall,
desiring rather without comparison to stay and follow the war in their own
countries, nevertheless they gathered together above 3000. shot determined to
pass any whether: which were distributed among the regime^ts, but they were al
on horsback. Necessity forced the^ so to do in respect of the tediousness of
their journey and sharpness of the winter: and albeit it sometimes bred
pesturing, yet came there profit of it, in yt as occasion fell out their
footmen were always Iustie and fresh, neither was there much sickness among
them in respect yt they were ever well lodged and entertained. The L. Admiral a
man of great experience in such affairs well perceived, albeit there were some
treaty of peace, that yet it was hard to purchase any good unless they did
approach to Paris, and therewithal knowing that beyond the river of Loire, he
should find great favor and help, did hasten the voyage: but the
difficulty of passing the mountains of Sauenes and Viuarets were some stay,
but more his sickness that took him at S. Steuens in Forest, and was like to
have carried him away: which if it had fallen out, peradventure there would
have ensued change of counsel: for having lost the henge where upon the whole
gate was turned, they could hardly have found such another. True it is that
County Lodouicke was a brave Captain and well thought of among the French,
howbeit he was not yet come to the authority and experience of the other,
neither dare I affirm, if he had died, whether they would have proceeded in
their carrier or not. In the end God sent him health to the great contentation
of all men: after the which the army marched so swiftly that it arrived at
Rhene le Duc in Burgundy. There had like to have been given a terrible sentence
for the peace, which nevertheless was but good for the setting of it forward.

The L. of Marshall of Cosse governor of the kings army was The meeting of
both armies at Rhene le Duc.
expressly charged to keep the Princes army from coming nere to Paris, yea to
fight if he see the game fair, whereupon he coasted it in full deliberation so
to do: Finding it placed in a reasonable strong seat, he thought with his
artillery, which the other wanted, to take away the advantages thereof, also
by skirmishes of shot to make them forsake certain passages that they had.
Only one ditch did they at the first abandon, where happened great charges
and recharges of the horsemen, wherein either part when their turn came were
pursued. The Captains which on the Catholics part gave the first onsette,
where the Lords of La Vallette, Strossie, and Chastre who bare themselves well,
and on the Protestants side those that bare the first brunt were the Lord of
Bricquemaud Marshall of the field, the County Montgommerie and Genlis: and in
this action did the Princes (albeit as yet very young) in their countenaunces,
show their desires to fight, whereby it was thought that in time they would
prove most excellent Captains. In the end the Catholics seeing how hard it
was to force their enemies, withdrew to their lodginges, as also did the
Princes who having considered that their stay might be hurtful, as also that
they wanted powder, marched by great ionrneis unto La Charitee and other Of the
third peace.
towns their partakers there to furnish themselves anewe with all commodities
necessary.

Shortly after there was a truce taken between both armies, which grew to a
peace, whereupon every man laid down his weapons. It had been very noisome
lieng so long in the field, in heat, in cold, in bad ways, and almost
always in the enemies land, where the very peasant made them as sharp war
as the soldier, which inconveniences many times troubled that great Captain
Hannibal when he was in Italy. It is therefore a brave school point to mark
how men can fit their counsayles to necessity: such labors are in the
beginning so odious, that they make the sculdiours to murmr against their
own Captains: but being a little accustomed and hardened in these painful
exercises, they begin to grow into a good opinion of themselves; when they see
that they have as it were overcome yt which terrefieth so many, and chiefly
the delicate. These be the brave galleryes and beautiful walks of the
soldiers, and then their bed of honor is the grave wherinto a harquebuze
shot may have overthrown them. But in truth all this is worthy reward and
commendation, namely when they that tread these paths, and endure these
labors, do maintain an honest cause, and in their proceedings show
themselves replenished with valor and monestie. Of the behauiors of the Lord
Admiral during the three first civil waries.


Now if any man in this woeful war labored sore both in body and mind, we
may say that it was the Admiral: for the waightiest part of the burden of
the affairs and military labors did he with great constancy and facility
bear, as also he bare him self as reverently among the Princes his
superiors, as modesty with his inferiors. Godliness he always held in
great estimation, and bare great love to justice, which made him to be
esteemed and honored of all that part which he had taken: he never ambiciously
sought offices or honors, but in eschuing them was in respect of his
sufficiency and honesty forced to take them. When he dealt with weapons he
showed himself as skilful in them as any Captain of his time, and always
courageously hazarded himself to all dangers. In adversities he was noted to
be endued with magnanimity and invention to get out, and showed himself
always free from glosing and dissimulation. In sum, he was a man worthy to
restore any weak and corrupt estate. Thus much I thought good by the way to
say of him, as having known and kept his company, yea, and profited in his
school, and so should do him injury if I should not make true and honest
mention of him.

The causes of the third peace. The comparison thereof with the former: also
whether the same were necessary.
NOne of the three civil wars lasted so long as this, which continued two
whole Sundry causes of this mention of him: this third peace, as well on the
one side as on the other.
years, where the first was ended in one year and the second in six months,
and many doyet think that had not ye Protestants drawn toward Paris it would
not have been done so soon: of which experience they have gathered this rule,
that to purchase peace war must be brought beer this mighty City: which I
also take to have been one of the chief causes to help it forward, for ye
stripes which threaten the head do greatly terrefie: the Catholic strangers
having also wasted innumerable coin, had left such want that they knew not how
to furnish pay. Ruin and robbery was rife every where. Moreover, good hap
seemed to begin to raise up those that had been wearied. For the Princes army
had made a brave head against the Kings at Rene le Duc. Gascogne, La^guedock
and Daulphine held sorer than war before: Bearne was recovered: and in Poictou
and Xantoigne the Protestants had spead well in overthrowing the two old
regiments and taking sundry towns. Al these things gathered together, which
other secret and particular oceasions disposed ye King and Queen to grant to
the peace which was published in August. The Protestants also desired and stood
in great need of it: for having never a crown wherewith to satiffie their
Reisters, their necessity would have driven them to abandon the Princes, as by
the County of Mansfield they gave them to understand. Likewise seeing them
near their own Country, it was to be feared least they would have resolved
so to do, which falling out would have been the overthrow of their affairs.
Many other discommodities which I omit urged heereunto: among the rest the
misrule of our soldiers was such as it could not be remedied: Insomuch that
the Admiral who loved good order and hated vi^e, did many times since say
that he had rather die than fall into the like confusions again, and to see so
many mischiefs committed before his face. To be brief, the peace was
accepted upon tolerable conditions, also for ye assurance thereof was added,
that which in the former they neither durst demand, nor could obtain: namely
four towns.

The beginning of this communication was after the siege of S. When they
begin to break of peace, also what is to be noted therein.
John d'Angelie, wherein were employed the Lords of Thelignie and Beaunois la
Nocle, gentlemen endued with diverse virtues, who faithfully discharged their
duties: and if before when the Protestants affairs were at a latter hand, the
Catholics had offered smaller conditions, I think they would have been taken.
But when they saw that they would not grant them any exercise of religion,
but only a simple liberty of conscience, it brought them into such despair,
that they made of necessity virtue. And as time breeds alterations, so those
that ensued turned so far to their favor that their courages were raised and
their hope corroborated. The best time then to treat of peace is when we have
the advantage in war. But that does ordinarily so puff up men that they will
not hear thereof, howbeit either early or late the king did wiser to grant
it: for the continuation of war deprived him of his pleasure, supplanted the
love and obedience due unto him, for^aied the Countries, sacked the treasury,
and consumed his power. But may some man say, the king of Spain has not done
so in Flanders. Truly may another answer, he has not won much, and per
adventure in the end, for the ceasing of these troublesome tragedies he will
follow the same counsel that his neighbors have done.

Now albeit peace was necessary for the Protestants, yet have Consideration
upon these th(...) pacifications of the civil wars.
this ^shap almost ever ensued, that the same have not continued, neither so
much as been established according to the covenant. I will speak first of that
which was framed before Orleance, and lasted four years and a half, and was
nothing near so profitable for them as the edict of January: howbeit it
follows not but that it was at that time acceptable: for their affairs were
not in state to refuse it, and time discovered the fruit that it yielded.
Concord, good manners, and obedience to the laws were al^eadie in so good
forwardness throughout France, that it seemed to be wholly restored, but
discord with her secret driftes troubled all. Concerning the second it was a
peace, but no peace: neither had it any more than the name, for in effect it
was secret war: It may be termed The reward of the Protestants folly,
because that not withstanding all aduertisements that it would be very bad, they
would nevertheless receive it.

The third was much desired in respect of the ruins past, the necessity
present, and that every man was weary of labor and trouble: for as the
Frenchman is impatient, so does he fit the war to his own humors. And in as
much as the conditions were equal, or rather better than the former, it ought
in my mind to be tolerable to the Protestants, considering withal yt there
was no means to have any better. Like wise for the two years that it lasted
few can complain, except at the very breach thereof, which was in such
horrible sort as it deserves to be quite buried up. Now who so ever shall
consider all these peaces in their just observation, he will as I suppose,
judge them to have been a profitable and necessary remedy unto all: but if
he have respect but only to their ends, he cannot choose but name them
dissembling peaces. And this has made some so time rous that they believe that
still there is some poison hidden under the fair gloss of this gold. In
France we have already had six general, like as we had in the civil
wars of Burgundy and Orleance, and as well the one as the other were
infringed: but the seventh which was concluded at Arras was durable and help
to restore France: by which example it may be inferred that our seventh
should be good: albeit it were to be wished we never came to those terms:
for to wish to be sick that we might recover health may seem impertinent. I
beseech God to provide therefore according to his good pleasure: Truly every
man seeing the Realm flaming in wars ought to set before his eyes Gods wrath
and displeasure, and the same against himself rather than against his enemies:
where now some do say These be the Protestants who through their heresies
do strrre up Gods wrath against them: Others do reply: They be the
Catholics who with their Idolatries do provoke the same. And thus in these
discourses no man accuses himself. In the mean time the first thing that we
ought to do is in these universal calamities to examine and accuse our own
imperfections to the end to amend them, and then to look upon others men's
faults. Likewise when we see a short and counterfeit peace, we should say yt
we deserve no better, because yt, according to the proverb, when we are over
the bridge we mock the saint, and most of us return to our vanities and
accustomed ingratitude.

Howbeit it is a commendable affection which desires peace, I mean a good
peace (for ye bad are very cut throats) because thereby The diverse affections
of those that long after war and how they have been provided for.
piety and virtue does seem to revive: whereas contrariwise civil wars are
the shops of all wickedness, which good men do abhor. The time has been
that of both parts their have been diverse that took no great delight in hearing
peace spoken of; of whom some said, That it was an unworthy and unjust deed
to make peace with rebols and heretics who deserved grievous punishment: yea,
they persisted in their speeches until their disease were cured on this sort.
If they were warriors they were enjoined to march foremost at an assault or in a
skirmish, so to kill up these wretched Protestants: of which punishment by that
time they had twice tasted, they soon changed opinion. As for the rest which
were either clergy men or of the long robe, by telling them that they must
part with half their rents to pay the soldiour they consented to the peace.
To be brief, whatsoever their pretense were, whether piety or justice, sure
their passions were cruel. Other there were even among the Protestants which
did no less reject the peace as tearming it to be nothing but treason, but
had it been never so good they would have said as much, because the war was
their nursemother and rising. One good way to reduce them to reason were to
propound (in respect of necessity thereof) the cutting off of their paies, or
the leauiing of some lones of them, so would they long after some good end: For
take from many of these people their profits and honor, then will they judge
more sincerely of matters. Also for counsel in weighty matters we ought to
choose those that serve God and are endued with greatest discretion, for they
still prefer the common wealth before their own commodities and affections.

I will likewise speak of another sort of people who indifferently Against
such as like of every peace and mislike every war.
do like of all kinds of peace, and mislike of every kind of war: who if
they might be assured in quiet to eat their wortes and lay up their crops,
could well enough let every time slide, yea albeit at every of the four
quarters of the year, they should have half a dozen good bastonadoes. These
have in my opinion, locked up and hidden their honors and consciences in the
bottom of some coffer. The good Citizen ought always to bear a zeal to the
common wealth, also to look farther than to live in shameful bondage. To
conclude, in these affairs reason ought to be our guide, which does admonish
us never to enter wars unless a just cause and great necessity constrains
us, for war is a most violent and extraordinary remedy, which in healing
one wound makes more, and therefore is not to be used but extraordinarily:
whereas contrariwise we are always to wish for peace: I mean not such peace
as may be presumed to be steadfast and not unjust: for the false ons do not
deserve ye title but rather to be termed traps and snares, as was the same of
the second troubles. The rest, may some men say, were not much better, because
they lasted not long, but I am not of that mind, for A do think that until
they were broken they were most pros^table; and so does experience give us to
understand, neither is that any better argument then to say: This man was
naught, because he linen but fifteen years: but I will argue and plead to
the contrary: saying, they were good, because men would not suffer them to
last any longer: for had they been noisome to the Protestants, they would have
^et them have had their course. God grant so good a one to France, now torue
with ruins, and destitute of good manners. that she may renew in beauty, and
be no longer the fable of all nations, but an examplary of virtue.



INPRINTED AT LONdon by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Cadman and Edward Aggas. 1588.


