Of predestinacion and election made by John^ Lamberd minister of the church of
Elham. Anno M.D.L.

Non mortui laudabunt te domine.
Sed nos qui viuimus benedicimus domino.
I write unto you babes, how that your sins are forgeuen you for Christ's
sake.

And now babes abide in him that when he shall appear we may be bold, and not
be made ashamed of him at his coming.

To the reader.
O Most dear reader mine intent is not to Judge any man, but that, when he has
red this little treatise, he may consulte or counsel with his own conscience
and so examyne the same, whether he do live like a reprobate or one that is
elect of God to salvation, for the deeds of a reprobate are manifest. Also
likewise the deeds of the elect are not hid. Therefore my council is that no
man dyspute with God why he has ordained the vessels of wrath to da^pnacion,
if he do S. Paul does make him an answer. (Because says he that he might
declare the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy which he had preparyd
unto glory) for the reprobates are mynysters unto the salvation of the elect,
which are Gods workemanshyp created in Christ Jesus unto good works, unto
ye which says saint Paul, God ordained us before that we should walk in
them: He says more over, by grace ye are made save thorough faith that
works by love the which faith is the gift of God, and as many as have the
same gift of God have cause to praise the father and the sone and the holy
ghost to whom be all honor and glory. Amen.

Of predestinacion
GOd has no beginning nor never shall have ending, Gene. 7.
he may do what he will and none but he. The bryghtest angel that ever was,
was ever in Gods sight before he was: The foulest devil that ever was, was
ever in Gods sight before he was.

To conclude all things good and bad were ever presently in the syghte of God
or ever they were: For God did see thend or he did begin any thing. Also he
did know by his prescie^ce who should goo the broad way that leads to
perdicion. And who should goo the strayte way that leads to eternal life.
Math. 7.
The Blessed and elect people of God, Ephe. 1.
be and ever were in the syghte of God, before the world was laid and
predestinate thoroughe Jesus Christ to be heirs unto him self. Also the
reprobates such as should be despisers of gods lively word, were in his
sight or ever they were borne, and or ever the world was laid, which are
called the vessels of wrath ordained to dampnatio^. Roma. 9.
The elect does humble him self like unto the puplicane referring all things
to the mercy of God. Saying these words. I poor sinner do believe justly that
Christ dyed for me and for as many as with aliuely faith do confess him to be
the son of God, and none that believe in him perish but have eternal life. Is
it possible that the reprobate may have this lively faith? No, but only ashew
thereof as Esau flattered with Jacob to his face, but seeking means to destroy
him i^ his heart. Gene. 27.
Likewise Judas kyssed Christ with his mouth, Abdy. 1.
yet he bare him a false heart. For such is the manner of traitors and
reprobates.

The Pharyseys in like manner asked Christ if they were blind, speaking to
him yroniusly mockyngly. But Christ said unto them if ye were blind ye
should have no sin. That is ye see the works of God wrought by me, yet ye
believe me not and will not see, the cause is why, Ihon. 1^
ye do not believe, you be none of my sheep. So the reprobates may see
carnally, and not lively, because they be the children of perdicio^ and
destitute of Gods grace, 2. Cor. 2.
for Gods word hinders and hurts them for it is unto them an odoure of
death. But the elect are sure to have this lively faith, for they hope to be
saved by the passion of Christ only and brings fourth the fruytes of faith
as they have bynne taught by Christ and his word. For Gods word unto them
is a odoure of life. 2. Cor. 2.
For unto them was Christ sent in to the world to be their Savior. For the
passion of Christ can not save a reprobate, that is he that refusteth the
truth and always does strive against the holy Ghost, whose dampnacion is
just and true. For such are da^pnable creatures known of God before the
world was laid and are called the vessels of wrath to declare Gods glory
on the vessels of mercy. For these dampnable creatures that do persevere and
continually do strive against the truth turn Goddest truth in to a lie which
is blessed for ever. Amen. Roma. 1.


Deus creauit Angelos quos sciebat ruituros. Augusti.
Quare deus creauit illos quos sciebat esse dampnandos. Respondeo, Bonaue^.
quia si nullus creatus fuisset nisi saluandus, credidissent homines se saluari
ex necessitate non ex diuina gratia.

Inquit, Aug. de ciuita. 22.
melius iudicauit deus de malis ^i^ere bona quam mala non sinere.

The elect also was predestinate of God to be saved, but yet was not Christ
promised to be their Savior, unto such time as Adam and Eve had offended god
by disobedience for after they had transgressed gods commandment god said
to the Serpent.

Gene. 3.
Inimiticias ponam inter te et mulierem, et semen tuum et semen illius, ipsa
conteret caput tuum, et tu insidiaberis caltaneo eius. That is, I will put
enmytye between the and the womam, between thy seed and her seed the same
shall break thy head and thou shalt tread on his heel. Here Christ was
promised to break the Serpents head for he was the very seed. Therefore if
Adam and Eve had not tea^sgressed Christ should not have dyed, now saying
they did offend they and all their posteryte were infected with that
contagyouse poysin of sin. There was no remedy but Christ must needs dye,
or else we should have been dampened perpetually. Here may we se^ that Adams
disobedience dampened us all, Roma. 5.
yet we our selves wrought evil. Therefore seeing we were the causers of
Christ's death god might have dampened us Justly, although he elected us before
the world was made. Gene. 2.
But god will be found true and all men liars. For Christ's obedience saves
us all, Roma. 5.
yet we our selves work any good. Therefore now are we bound and doubble
bound to give God all honor and praise and to love him above measure, because
God first predestinate us and elected us in hi^ before ye world was made yt we
should be saints, Ephe. 1.
for Christ was predestinate to be the Son of God. Peter. 1.
And than being lost thorough sin, yet god knowing by his prescience such
things would come to pass.

Ephe. 1.
Saynct Paul says God ordained us before thoroughe Jesus Christ to be heirs
unto him self according to the pleasure of his will. Here God has given us
Christ to redeem us by whom we have redemption thoroughe his blood even the
forgiveness of sins. He has quickened us also that were dead in trespass and
sin. Ephe. 2.
Now shall you see that it is necessary the elect such as believe in Christ
with aliuely faith should not blame God because he has predestinate some to
be the children of perdicion, unless they would be sorry for their own
salvation, he ordained some to be punyshed according to their deeds. The
elect are punyshed many times with ye fire of aduersytye to try them and to
purge the^, that they may bring fourth much fruet although they fall be
frayltie, John. 15.
as none can live without sin, psalm. 107.
yet are they punished with mercy, John. 1.
but the reprobate that does evil of purpose and will show no mercy therefore
he shall have justice without mercy. Sala. 12.
James. 2.
Who should have been ministers unto death of such a kings son as he was
but such as were castawayes ordained of God to be the children of perdicio^ and
mete for nothing else. John. 16.
What should a carpenter make of rotten wood, or ye potter with brutle clay
that will serve for no other thing but be cast away or to be put to some
other vile purpose? Who can let the carpenter or the potter to use such
things as them list. Notwithstanding such as we named reprobates before were
minysters unto our salvation, that then were, is now, or shall believe in
Christ with aliuely faith. Likewise Pharoes heart was hardened to show the
glory of God and his mighty power to all the world, that were sythes that time,
Exo. 9.
and is to come, for in every age god has showed his wonders because he would
be knowene that there is none like unto him. Now if they had not put Christ
unto death we had not been redeemed. But how may we know the reprobate now
from the elect. These things do I speak unto those that profess Gods
truethe, which are forbidden to company with fornicators, and specially from
such a brother that is a fornicator an extorsionar, or couetouse, a reiler, or
a drounkarde (Saynct Paul says) with him that is such see that ye eat not.
In this place. 1 Cor. 5.
S. Paul doethe separate the one fro the other, to thentente we should put
away from us all evil, for them that are without God shall Judge. So I in
like case here, have set up a glass to thentent if any look thereon espy
difformitye upon himself it may give hi^ an occasion to wash hi^ self with
the water of life, yt is to examen his conscience with Gods lively word whether
he live according to his profession or like a reprobate. The reprobate has a
sl^^^ ^^^nge spirit, and is full, o^ ^^^^tye excedyng enuiouse, (...) ^^^e,
never confirmable to honesty, Gene. 4.
without repentance, ^ohn. 10.
presumynge to much on gods mercy, always inconstante, ^ob. 15.
repungnante against the truth, Mat. 26.
full of blasphemy a fauorat of mammon as one that is never satiffied but
always poor and nedy in his heart and so dies with nothing. All these
things happen to them that God gives up to do their own wylles; for with
this plague innumerable have been castawaye. These are the very tokens of a
reprobate, and with such we should not company nor eat, so long as they
persevere in that wicked estate. Likewise the elect are known by their fruits,
for they are Gods workemanshy^ ^^^^ted in Christ Jesus to good (...) unto the
which God ordained them before, that they should walk in them. Therefore it
is impossible that the elect should be dampened, now seeing that God will not
forsake his elect such as have a lively faith in Christ his dear son,
and a sure hope to receive his promisis, bringyng forth the fruits of faith
that works by love: That is we labor not for reward to the entente he
might make us his heirs for that is ours all redye if we believe his promisis,
but we must be servants to al men that be our brothers in Christ, and
minyster unto them the fruytes of faith in all their need. Like as Christ
God and man mynystred unto us when we had most need, and look what trybulacyons
or myseries they suffer, whether it be hu^gar, cold, poverty, or any other
adversity, let us think it to be ours, and so to bear the cross of
Christ patiently to gethers.

Now let every man consulte or counsel with his own conscience, and examyne
him self whether he have this lyuelye faith or not, if he have that gift of
God, it is a very sure token that he is the very elect of God. Therefore never
clymbe any higher or search any further, why God has predestinate some, to be
ye children of perdicion, whereby they might put any blame in God, and think
that he lacks charytie, whose justice and judgment can never be done but
with love, John. 4.
for he is very love it self. But rather let us praise his holy name because
he has called us to so blessed an estate, and moreover because he is Just and
holy, and knows best what is to be done for us. Also let us give hartye
thanks to Christ for our redemption: And let us sing joyfully to the holy
ghost yt he may give his clear light to such as be desyrus to know the truth
of Gods lively word, to whom be all honor and glory Amen.

Give praise to God that works all, in all.
The Author.
I Have declared my judgment which is but small, concerning predestinacion
and the foreknoweledge of God. Therefore gentle reader accept my good will, and
where as you se a fault in my building that frames not to your mind, accept
my meaning I pray you, and cauyll not, for I am not obstynat, but willing to
know the truth: And as nyghe as I can Gods lively word shall be the
foundation whereon I entende to build at any time. Every good gift, and every
perfyte gift, is from above, and comes down from the father of light.
Therefore let us always think that the goodness that we have or shall have
comes of God and not of our selves to whom be all honor, and glory.

AMEN
Non mortui laudabunt te domine: neque
omnes qui descendunt in infernum.
Sed nos qui viuimus benedicimus domino:
ex hoc nunc et vsque in seculum.

Prynted at Ca^torbury in saint Paul's parysh by I. Mychell.


