MANASSEHS MIRACVLOVS METAMORPHOSIS:

Representing to every Sinne-loaden (if Sinne-loathing) Soul, 1 A Conduit of
Consolation. 2 A Comfort against Desperation. 3 A Cond^ct to Devotion.


A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE thrice-famous University of Cambridge, at Great
Saint Mary's, September. 10. Anno Dom. 1620.

By GEORGE LANGFORD, Master of Arts, Preacher of Gods Word, and Chaplain to
the Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of EXCETER.

MAT. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. LVKE 5.32. I come not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance. AUGUST. in Psalm. 144. Misericordia Dei dat veniam peccatori, spem
Justificationis, charitatem in qua omnia bona facias, dabit vitam aeternam, and
societatem Angelorum. AUGUST. in Psalm. 130. Debet vnusquisque nostrum videre in
quo profundo sit, de quo clamet ad Dominum. LONDON, Printed by G. Eld for John
Clarke, and are to be sold at his shop under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1621.

TO THE HONORABLE, and much Honored Knight, Sir Humphrey May, Chancellor of his
Highness Duchy of Lancaster G. L. wishes the confluence of all external
prosperity in this life, and the affluence of eternal Felicity in the life to
come.
Honorable Sir:
IF Saint Paul's Books and Parchments long since fell into the hands of Carpus,
2 Timothy 4.13.
what may I expect in this curious, this censorious, this critical, this
carping age, but to be scoured and scourged with the maleuolent tongues of
Momus and his mates? (...), Thucidides, lib. 1.
says Thucidides: Hearing and Reading have a prerogative not to be liable to
account; but Preaching and Printing cast themselves upon the rack of censure.
For are there not in the popular sort as many heads as hearts? Quot capita tot
sententiae, quot homines tot humores, quot humores tot mores, says Lipsius:
Lipsius.
The many headed multitude is so divided into faction and action, Bellua
multorum capitum Seneca.
that Diogenes himself, with all his Lantern and candlelight, can scarce
find two in this noone-tide of the Gospel, quibus vna vox aut votum, of one
mind or mould. There were diversities of tastes among Horaces guests, so that
that which one deemed dainty, seemed unsavory to another. Dianaes Temple was
burned by Herostratus the same night that Alexander the great was borne; One
more namelesse then Herostratus said: It was no marvel, for Diana her self,
protectresse of that sacred Monument, was then absent as midwife as so great a
childbirth: Cicero de natura Deorum, lib. 2. Plutarch in Alexandro.
Tully commends this for a witty conceit; but Plutarch condemns it at a
witless jest. The like unlike censures I look for of this Sermon: for though
the reverend and learned presence wherein I preached it, was not like Hannibals
army, Linius.
Collunies omnium gentium, as Liuy calls it, a Miscellany of all Nations; yet
was it like S. Peter's Audience, Act. 2. consisting of men of many Countries,
For it was preached upon Sturbridge Fair Sunday.
and they (it may be) of contrary Languages: Cato, me thought, called on me to
plead for peace, Pompey for war; the Soldier cried, Arma virumque cane; the
Merchant, Da pacem Domine: But I followed Ciceroes counsel, Seruiendum
tempori, though Lentulus thought it the voice of fawning flattery. But how? I
discoursed of Prayer, which is not only Medicina vulnerum, Bernard.
as Saint Bernard styles it, but is far more sovereign then the Physicians
Catholicon, it is a medicine for all maladies. Were my Auditors Students in the
abstruse mysteries of Arts and Sciences? Behold, Prayer is their Oedipus to
resolve, to dissolve their doubts. Were they Merchants that traded for the Gold
of Ophir? behold, Prayer sanctifies their profits; hence Constantine writ a
Prayer about his coin. Were they manual Artificers, or such as lived by
retaile, and tradition? behold, Prayer is, clauis diei, and It is not dura
sera, as Tibul. But firmasera, as Ovid: Yea, ferrea sera, as Plautus.
sera noctis, it is the Key to open, and the Lock to shut up their shops. In a
word, were they Deuteronomy. 28.3.
blessed in the City, and blessed in the field? behold, Prayer is their
Ambassador to praise their God, and give him thanks.

What then I spoke in the ear, Quia lucem aliquam tenui huic and per se
obscura scriptioni conciliare conatus sum a luce vestra: Lipsius, ad Praetor.
Consul. and Senate. Reip. Vltraiectinae.
I am bold to put under the shelter of your Honors protection, presuming to
win some luster unto this poor Paper-present, from your judicious and
learned Patronage. Your fidelity in Court imploiments, your eminency in
Natures endowments, have moved God and the King to promote you, and all men to
congratulate the amplification of your Fortunes. In your Honorable seat of
Judgment you are like the Philosopher Zenocrates, Aelian. lib. 13. cap. 31.
into whose bosom the sparrow fled from the tallents of the Hawke: which does
ascertaine me, that Manasses, after the Deluge of his tears, shall not be like
Noah's Dove, Genesis 8 9. Aelian. (...).
finding no place to rest in, but that with Noah you will put forth your hand,
and receive him into the Arc of your protecting acceptance. Thus with Sinaetas
in Aelian I presume to present you with a fist-full of water, distilled from
the Limbecke of Manasses his sorrowful soul: Seneca de Benefic. lib. 1. cap.
8.
or rather, with Aeschines in Seneca, seeing I have no meet present worthy so
great a Person, I will gratify you with my self, who will ever pray that your
good name and fame MAY long flourish on earth, Bonum nomen, bonum omen.
fenced and defended from the Theonine consumption of Envy, Dente Theonino
rodere, Horat.
till your consummation in glory.

London this present June 4. Anno Dom. 1621. At your Honors service I rest ever
in all duty devoted, GEORGE LANGFORD.

MANASSEHS MIRACVLOVS METAMORPHOSIS.
2 CHRONICLES. 33.12. He prayed to the Lord his God.
IT is fathered upon that ancient Father S. Jerome, that he was endited before
the Tribunal Seat of Gods Sacred Majesty, not for that he was an excellent
and eminent Enditer, or that his tongue was as the pen of a swift and ready
writer (O let me admire these ever to be admired gifts!) but, Quod
Ciceronianus, non Christianus foret, for that he was not so exact a Christian,
as an eloquent Ciceronian, too frequent in his Esse videatur. Therefore I call
heaven and earth to record, that I come not this Holy day to hang golden Jewels
in the itching ears of any vainglorious Israelite, Exodus 32.3.
such as he may pluck from himself to make a molten Image. I desire not
Nazianzens (...), (...).
a filed and flexible tongue, if by it he understand a defiled and flagitious
tongue, ever speaking sonantia verba, sed non sanantia, making a mere sound,
but never ministering any sound comfort and consolation. I cannot but detest
Saint Paul's frivolous though fraudulent hucksters, 2 Cor. 2.17. Cauponantes,
Erasmus, Beza. Adulterantes, Calvin.
(...), sophisticating, adulterating the Word of God: For, what other thing do
these chanting and enchanting Iuglers, these impotent and false Imposters, then
(...), steal away the erring eyes of the ignorant; which frye are like Labans
flock, led by the eye, and violently posted away to admiration. The silver
Trumpet of that Watchman of Israel, carefully keeping Ward and scentinell in
the house of his God, Mr Ward of Ipswich.
should ever sound shrilly in the ears of his brethren the sons of Leui, who
tells us that this hyperbolicall kind of teaching turns sound preaching into
a sound of preaching, tickling men's ears like a tinckling Cymball, feeding
them (...), spoiling the Plaine-Song with Descant and Division.

Thus having stayed you a little in Atrio Templi, speedily let me lead you in
Sanctum Sanctorum. In this present Chapter, Mat. 13.52.
Ezra, Gods sacred Secretary, (...), that Scribe taught unto the Kingdom of
heaven, summarily compriseth, comprehends the Life and Death, the Acts and
Monuments of those two Kings of Judah, Manasses and Amon.

First, he blazeth Manassehs arms, Manassehs harms: he points at him with an
Ecce hominem. Behold the man: behold him falling and sinning, behold him
entangled in the snares of Satan, who is not unfitly resembled by the ancient
Fathers to that mighty Hunter, that apostaticall and rebellious Nimrod: Genesis
10.9.
For he has not only his hounds, Phil. 3.2.
Phil. 3. but also nets, snares, toils, (...), so Saint Paul has styled them,
1 Timothy 3.7. 2 Timothy 2.26. Mat. 22.15. Mark 12.13.
1 Timothy 3. with both these, as once he laid for the Messiah, so here he lays
for Manasses: with his hounds, (...), that they might take him; with his nets,
(...), that they might entangle him; with both of them, (...), that ruthlesly
they might murder his immortal soul.

Psalm. 137.1.
The sweet Singers of Israel may now sit by the banks of Babel, and pour out
the cataracts of their compassion, empty the floodgates of their affection
upon this King of the Jews, the subject of my Text. For, cecidit, cecidit
Manasses, Manasses has caught a fall, Satan has given him the foil, both
have exceedingly bruised him: Job. 10.17.
changes and armies of sorrows are against him, the worm of conscience has
stung him, 2 Cor: 12.7.
the messenger of Satan has buffeted him; Sin, Genesis 4.7.
that ever arring and barking Bloudhound, whose teeth are as spears, and whose
jaws as arrows, has ceaz'd upon him. In a word, he has traveled from
Jerusalem to Jericho, Luke 10.30.
from mount Zion to port Esquiline, from the city of God to the suburbs of
hell, he has fallen among thieves, and is sore wounded; cecidit, ah cecidit
Manasses, Manasses is down, but shall he rise again?

Yes doubtless, this downfall is not unto death; John 11.4.
for as he fell by sin, so did he rise by Repentance: as he fell low into
misery, so did he soar aloft to the seat of mercy. His fall was his rise,
he fell to rise: he fell into prison that he might fly into Paradise. His
fall was his rise, he fell to rise, he was a prisoner in Babylon, that he
might be a free Denizon in Jerusalem: happy, thrice-happy souls, Queis datur
Elysium sic habitare nemus, who are thus enfranchized in the freedom of heaven.

Suppose we then Manasses to be like bi-fronted Ianus, Supposed to be Iapheth,
Noah's eldest son, who saw the ending of the old world, and the entrance of
the new. Can: 5, 2, and 6, 8. 1 Timothy: 3.15.
with two faces, the one looking toward Beth-auen, that sink of sin, the house
of vanity, the other beholding beautiful Bethel, that house of God, the
Church of the living God, Columba vnitatis, Can. 5. Columna veritatis, 1 Timothy
3. Christ's Love, his Dove, his undefiled, the pillar and ground of truth. For
first, we see Manasses sinning, and his sin we see is aggrauated from the
second verse unto the 11. But as Manasses sinned, so Manasses sorrowed for
sin, and having gone awhoring after other gods, prostituting his soul to
sacrilegious Idols, so he now acts the return, takes the Rod into his own
hand, enioynes himself a kind of Penance, he returns to God by true
repentance.

The which his repentance is here expressed by the three parts or members of
it: 1. By his Confession of mouth. 2. By his Contrition of heart. 3. By his
Conversion of the whole man.


His confession is implied in that word, prayed: His contrition is implicitly
enfolded in those words, He humbled himself. His conversion is brancht out
into two seuerals: 1. In terminum a quo: What he turned from. 2. In terminum ad
quem, what he turned unto.


Thus you see the near Neighborhood, the conjunction that these words have
with the other! Now were it usual to give names to Texts, this might not
unfitly be styled, The Mirror of Gods mercy in Manassehs miraculous
Metamorphosis; if you will, The Royal Exchange of the Merchant Royal, Mat:
13:46.
who having found a pearl of precious price, went and sold all that he had,
and bought it. He has sold his Idolatry, to buy Piety; He has sold his
Avarice, to buy Liberality: He has sold his Pride, to buy Humility; He has
sold his Luxury, to buy Frugality; he has sold his Cruelty, to buy Amity: In
one word, he has sold all Iniquity, to buy a state of Perpetuity, and being
plunged in adversity, he sends up his perfume of Prayer to the God of Mercy,
for so says my Text; He prayed to the Lord his God.

Gen: 2.10.
Which like that River of Eden, Genesis 2. may seem to divide it self into four
heads: 1. is an Agent. 2. is an Action. 3. is the Object of that Action. 4. is
the Application of that Object.

1. Is an Agent, [He.] 2. Is an Action, [Prayed.] 3. Is the Object of that
Action, [The Lord.] 4. Is the Application of that Object, [His God.]
He,] an Agent. Prayed,] an Action. The Lord,] the Object of this Abiects
prayer. His God,] The Application of the Object, in the Supplication of this
Abject, who prayed to the Lord his God.

And now Well-beloved, in the Best-beloued Christ Jesus, lend me your listening
and attentive ears, while of all these I speak severally, though of some of
them summarily: and first of the first part, namely the Agent, [He.

We need not now with the Eunuch ask any Philip, 1 Agent. Acts 8:34.
Of whom speaks the Prophet this, of himself, or of some other man? this
Capital Sinners name, is writ in such Capital Letters, that he that runs
may read it is Manasses.

It is Manasses, he that did evil in the sight of the Lord, verse. 2. It is
Manasses, he that went back and built the hie places, verse. 3. It is
Manasses, he that built Altars in the house of the Lord, verse. 4. It is
Manasses, he that caused his Sons to pass thorough the fire in the valley of
Benhinnom: that gave himself to Witchcraft, and to charming; that did evil,
yea, very much evil, that did evil in the sight of Jehovah, and that to angel
him, verse. 6.

It is Manasses, one of Sins greatest Associates, one of Satan's greatest
In-mates; an open opprobrious and flagitious sinner; one who had drencht his
soiled soul in the gall of ungodliness, Act. 8.23.
in the gall of bitterness with Simon Magus: One, who Spider-like, out of his
own bowels had spun a fair thread, and weau'd the Web of unrighteousness; it
is ipse, he, he it is that prayed: He prayed to the Lord his God.

A less, fond deathling he, how durst he veil his guilty, teare-drowned eyes
to Heaven? how durst his fainting knees and faultering feet approach before
Gods awful presence? He prayed indeed, obsequiously he did implore for pardon,
oh pardon, pardon mine outrageous sins: But why rather with Belshazzar, Dan.
5.6.
was not his countenance changed, his thoughts troubled, the joints of his
loins loosed? why did not his knees knock one against another, and his eyes
fail him for fear? Nature would deem that in this deluge of distress, he
should rather prey upon himself, casting his confused soul into the Chaos of
horror, and horrible confusion, then pray for himself, whose exoticall sins so
hideous, whose exorbitant sins so heinous, might seem to have built a Babel of
confusion, to have erected a wall of separation 'twixt him and his God. But
ecce hominem, behold with attention, look upon Manasses with admiration; he
has both form and beauty, when you shall see him, you must needs desire him,
you must needs admire him! He is despised indeed and neglected of himself, for
he is a man full of sorrows, and has experience of infirmities; Can. 1.5.
but regard ye him not because he is black? because the parching Sunnne of
original pollution, and the perpetration of actual transgression has looked
upon him? Virgil Eglo^^.
Alba ligustra cadunt, vacinia nigra leguntur: Vzziah the Leper, 2 Chronicles. 26.19
Ier: 39.18.
though white as snow, shall be excluded the host, when Ebed-melech the Black
Moore, shall not remove one foot. For now behold Manasses (that Transcendent
sinner so superlatiue) coming from Labanon, and looking from the Tower of
Babylon, Can: 4.8.
from the top of Amanah, Shener and Hermon, from the dens of the Lions, and
from the mountains of the Leopards. Behold him going about in the City, Can:
3.2.
by the streets and open places, seeking him that his soul loves, he sought
and found him, or rather was found of him. For, which may strike our senses
with astonishment, he that suffered him to be led captive, has had compassion
on him, he has made a light to shine into the prison, he that sat in the
shadow of death has seen the Sunshine of life. God has appeared unto him,
Acts 17.20*
Ipsa vita qua viuimus, quam viuimus, who is the life which we live, by which
we live. He, he smote Manasses on the side, Acts 12.7.
as that delivering Angel did blessed Peter, Can. 2.4.5.
his chains fell off, he raised him up, he delivered him out, he brought him
into the wine cellar, and love was his banner over him; he stayed him with
flagons, and comforted him with apples, for he was sick of love.

Can. 1.11.12.
Now therefore, seeing the winter of Manasses woe is past, the rain is changed
and is gone away, let his voice like the voice of a Turtle be heard in our
ears. Pliny not: Hist.
Turtur non canit sed gemit, says Pliny, the Turtle sings not so much as
sighs, Genesis 8.11. Ol^e pacales Ovid. 2 Chronicles. 33.6. Mat. 2.9.
yet let Manasses be the Dove to bring an Olive leaf, (true Emblem of
trucefull peace) into the Arc of Noah. Let this star-gazing Doctor be our
conductour, leading us like that star to the Babe at Bethlehem. Let him be
the messenger to bring these glad tidings of great joy to all Repentants: That
so endless is the Ocean of Gods liberal mercy; so boundless the sea of his
unlimited bounty toward man, to ( untoward man,) that abject thrall, that
enthralled object of misery, and subject of all iniquity, as that an impious
and flagitious sinner, may become a religious and repentant convert, as that a
Manasses may be Metamorphosed; as that a Son of Satan, one of the brood of
Belial, a brat of fathomlesse perdition, may become a natural son of mother
Sion, a sacred Saint and Citizen of Ierusalen, an heir apparent to the
Kingdom, to the crown of Heaven, inheriting eternal, aye-enduring beatitude
and felicity. Well might the sighfull Psalmist so shrilly sound that devout,
though doleful ditty; Abyssus abyssum inuocat, Psalm. 42.7.
one deep calls another, Psalm. 42. Well does that worthy saying of that
famous worthy Saint Austin, Augustine.
suit and sort it self with our present purpose, Abyssus miseriae inuocat
abyssum misericordiae, a deph of misery, calls for a depth of mercy: here Mercy
and Misery are met together, Misery and Mercy, kindly do kiss, embrace each
other.

Our God is not like Saint Basils Magistrate, Basil.
(...), without the bowels of commiserating compassion, of compassionate
commiseration: Hos. 1, 6.9.
He loved thee Lo-ammi when thou wast Lo-ruhamah; deserving nothing but
desertion, he deferred the sentence of condemnation. When he displayes the
bright beams of his Bounty, he comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his
Chamber, Psalm. 19.5.
and rejoices as a Giant to run his race: But spreading the Sable colors of
his Severity, coming to write us a Bill of Diuorcement, to give the Devil a
Capeas Corpus, and Tophet an Habeas animam, Suetonius in vita Neron. Clau^^
Cas: Sect: 10: quam vellem nesure literas.
oh then with Nero in Suetonius, he seems to wish, Vtinam, o vtinam nescirem
literas, I would I had no cause to subscribe to the execution of this
Malefactor. With Bias that Judge of Greece, he never gives sentence of death,
but seems to sorrow. The Sword of his Justice (unlike to Ioabs) is willing to
be contained in the sheath of his Mercy! Is he enforced to draw it? his bowels
are rolled and turned within him: Is he enforced to draw blood with it?
himself is wounded at the very heart. Isa: 1:24.
He will ease him of his enemies, and avenge him of his adversaries. Esa. 1.
But it comes with a Sigh, with an Eheu, Ah, or Alas, I will ease me of those
that disease me: Exonerando me magis onero, as Bernard speaks in another case,
may the Lord upon this occasion, The punishing of Israel for his sin, adds
sorrow to the God of Israel: For alas, I must ease me of those that displease
me. (...), O the inexhausted treasury of Gods Mercy, Rom: 11:33. Fons vincit
sitientem, August.
the infinite Fountain of his neuer-failing favor, the head of whose
euer-streaming torrent, is more unsearchable then that of Nilus, 2 Samuel: 23:15.
altogether past finding out. Oh that one would give me to drink of the water
of the well of Beth-lehem, was David's desire, but these Crystal Currents,
this celestial Nectar, Psalm: 42.1. 1 Cor: 13.
is that my heart brayeth for, is that that my soul pants after. Yet had I
the tongue of Men and Angels, tipped with the choicest and chiefest luster of
humane eloquence, I could not shadow in mask of words, or plainly portray with
any pencill, this abundant, this euer-streaming torrent, this super abundant,
this ouer-streaming Current of Gods Mercy.

Lift up then thy head thou drooping soul, do not despair thou drousie
spirit, qui dilexit pollutum, deseret politum? He that loved Manasses
wallowing in the blood of his sons, can he loath thee washed with the blood of
his Son? from whose side issued those two Sacramental rivers, Blood and
Water, Ambros* in Luc.
Aqua quae diluat, Sanquis qui redimat, says S. Ambrose: Water to cleanse thee,
blood to redeem thee. Have thou with Lot committed incest? Have thou with
David committed adultery? Have thou with Peter denied Christ? Have thou with
Paul persecuted the Church? Have thou with Marcellinus sacrificed to Idols? Yet
wade not in the gulf, walk not in the way of desperation, this Almighty,
this All-sufficient Physician, healed Lot of his Lethargy, delivered David
from his Leprosy, purged Peter and Marcellinus for their shaking palsy, cured
and recovered Paul out of his Apoplexy. He forgiues Manasses, as well as
Hezekias, he forgiues a thousand talents as well as one penie: He gives a Sea of
Mercy as soon as one drop, he gives many Ephas as soon as one Omer. Decet
magnum magna facere, says Aquinas: Aquinas in Mat: 8.
By this Almighty God, all mighty things are wrought, are brought to pass! He
delights to blaze his bounty, which most appears in great iniquity; the
Diamond shows brightest on the blackest lead; Stars shine clearest in the
darkest nights: Pearls show rarest on the basest rings: so Gods bounty like
the Diamond, his mercy like the Star, his pity like the Pearl, shows
brightest, shines clearest, seems rarest, on the blackest, on the darkest, on
the basest sinner. God is more incomprehensible in mercy, then it is possible
thou can be in sinning, the value of his bounty so infinitely surpasses
thine iniquity! Hierom.
Hence is it that Saint Jerome confidently affirms, that Judas sinned more
hainously in despairing of his Masters pardon, then in betraying of his Masters
person. His Master indeed is Sponsus sanguinum as Bernard styles him, Bernard.
Exodus 4:26.
a bloody husband as Zipporah called Moses, yet a husband for us, bloody for
us, celebrating here his contract, his espousals; and hence his marriage, his
sacred Nuptials. Could he then cry with the Believing thief, Domine memento
mei, Lord remember me, Luk 23:42.
then like that blessed thief he might steal the crown, coeleste furatur
imperium says Chrysostom of the thief, he took the Kingdom of heaven by
violence. Chrysostom: Hom: 2: de latr. Tanlerus: Med: cap. 43.
He came to the cross besmeared with the blood of others, but is washed with
the blood of Christ, and who then can despair?

Who can despair of pardon when he sees his Savior triumphing upon the
Cross, bowing down his head to kiss the sinner, spreading abroad his arms
to embrace the Prodigal?

Who can despair of pardon, when he does remember, that those wolves who shed
the heart-blood of the Lamb of God, should be washed from their sins by the
blood that they shed?

Who can despair of pardon when he shall consider, that where Adam was buried,
there was Christ crucified? as Epiphanius affirms. Epiphan: apud Kemnit: de
trad Jgnatius Epist: 12. ad Roman. Can: 2:14. Bernard: in can. Ser: 61.


Christ is crucified, (...), says Ignatius, Jesus my Love, my life, is
crucified, that in his wounds, the holes of the Rock, the Dove may build her
nest; as sweetly Bernard. Oh then suffer not the surging billows, the stormy
Euroclydons of despair once to appal thy mind! Christ's head was harrowed with
thorns, that thine might be hallowed with the Diade^ of glory. Christ's face
was besmeared with filthy spettle, that thine might shine brighter then the
Sun in his beauty. Christ's eyes were darkened with the fogge of death, that
thine might behold the Beatificall Vision. Christ's ears were filled with the
scoffs of Satanicall malignity, that thine might be ravished with Angelical
Harmony. Christ's lips were scornefully wet with macerating Vinegar, that thine
might carouse the Nectar of Eternity. In Christ's hand was clasped the Reed of
reproach, that as a King thou might sway the Scepter of Felicity. Christ's
feet were nailed to the Footstool of the Cross, that thou might trample on
the powers of pitchy darkness. In a word, Christ's piercing incision, his
bitter potion, his insufferable passion, his unutterable compassion, his
unsupportable, and vnsupposeable temptation, affliction, persecution,
prosecution, were all for thy sake, that thou for his sake should shun the
dangerous shelfe and gulf of desperation. Bern: in can: Sermon: 61:
Quod ex te tibi deest, vsurpa ex visceribus Domini, this was Bernards
practice: Stand we in want of Mercy? let us not be wilfully wanting to our
selves, in standing upon our own merit! works of Supererrogation, are no
small derogation to Christ's all-sufficient satisfaction. Merits of condignitie
(defended by the Cenuenticle of Trent) offer the Cross of Christ, a gross, a
great indignity. Council. Trident. Se. 6. cap. 11. Erant haec duo non legitima
christianorum concilia, sed tyrannica Antichristi conuenticula. Whitakerus de
Synod. Florent. and Trident. Yet they call this Absolutissima Trident. Synod.
Posseuin. Biblioth. select.
What incongruitie must there needs be, between our works of congruitie, and
the sempiternall Crown of felicity? Surely no more proportion is there, then
between Stillam muriae Tullie.
and mare Aegaeum, between a drop of the sea, and the maine Ocean. Pater
terrestris terrestrem te generauit, regenerauit coelestis: Wast thou defamed?
yet then thy God advanced thee. Wast thou deformed? he then reformed thee.
Wast thou quite degenerated? he regenerates thee. Nascimur homines, renascimur
Christiani: We are not borne Christian, but brought to Christianity: yea,
then oftentimes, when we persecute that way unto the death. Has not God met us
in our journey to Damascus, running our selves out of breath, or breathing out
slaughter against the Disciples? Yes doubtless, yet then, Et donauit bona sua,
and condonauit mala tua, then did he give us grace, and forgive our graceless
aberrations. O tune not then the doleful ditty of accursed Cain, say not, Genesis
4.13.
My sin is greater then can be pardoned: Mentiris Cain, mentiris, I dare give
thee the lie, for where Sin abounds, there Grace superaboundeth, Romans 5.20.
Romans 5. Turn thy feet from Iudasses banefull Labarynth say not I have sinned
and there stop, go a step further, I have sinned, Mat. 27.4.
but with the Lord is Mercy; Psa. 130. with the Lord is mercy, Ps. 130.
the Manna of the fainting soul; with the Lord is mercy, the Sovereign salve
to cure the sore, the malady of Sin: with the Lord is mercy; the Lodestone
that draws, the Load-starre that conducts to life: This mercy has Manasses
found; finding it, enioyes it; enjoying it, enioynes thee never to despair of
boundless mercy.

Secondly, is the greatness of Gods ineffable love so incomparable? Is the
graciousnesse of his inestimable bounty so boundless, so incomprehensible, as
to pardon a Manasses? a Manasses, one that had almost sinned vnpardonably, 2 Chronicles. 33.6.
and like an unskillful, or rather wilful Pilot, made shipwreck against the
Rock Christ Jesus? Then hear my voice ye brood of Lamech, Genesis 4.23.
and hearken to my speech ye Sons of Belial; you that for the least disgrace
would slay a man in your wound, and for a puff of wind a youngman in your
hurt: Genesis 49:6.
you that with Simeon and Leui, in your wrath would slay a man, and in your
rage dig down a wall: O cursed, cursed be your wrath for it is fierce, and
cursed, thrice cursed be your rage, for it is cruel. The Lord does sit in
heaven and laugh you to scorn, the highest God will have you in dirision: with
Cain he will make you vagabonds upon the earth, Genesis 4.2.
with Ioab he will take you from the horns of the Altar: he will not suffer
your hoare head to go down to the pit in peace, nor your gray hayres to the
grave in plenty: for you have put the blood of war upon your girdles, and in
your shoes the blood of woe.

But you my Brethren, beloved and longed for, my joy and my crown, into their
secrets let not your souls come: my glory, be not you joined with their
assemblies. Let Christ's action be your instruction, though not for the
equality of perfection, yet for the equity of imitation. Does Judas come with
a kiss (like a fawning foe) to betray him? Mat: 26.50. Acts 2.
he salutes him by the name of Friend, Mat. 26. He suffers the rays of his
compassion, radiantly to shine upon those, of whom he suffered his Passion.
He cures and recouers those, of whom he is wounded. He gives life to those,
who took life from him. Be followers then of God as dear Children; though men
offend him, he will seek to save them; though men work mischief, he will
seek to win them; though they turn aside like a broken bow, Ezekiel. 33.11.
he will strive to turn them; Turn you, turn you from your evil ways: for
why will ye dye ye house of Israel, Ezekiel. 33.11.

And hear my voice ye Tribe of Leui, hearken to my words ye sons of Aaron.
Exodus 28.34.
Let your Bells be heard often, often your Pomegranates smelt; for he that is a
Manasses to day, a Saul, a Sheol, enlarging his desire as hell; may be an
Hezekias to morrow, a Paul, Paulus quasi parnulus Christi, as S. Austin
alludeth; Augustine confess. lib. 8. cap. 4.
he that is a great one in the Kingdom of darkness, may at the least become a
little one in the Kingdom of happiness. Qui non est hodie, cras magis aptus
erit: The Egyptian Pyramides, Artemisias Mausoleum, the Roman Capitol were
not perfected in one day, nor was Zeuxis his Helena portraid with one Pencill.
Ierichos walls must be compassed seven days, Josh. 6.15.20.
yea seven times the seventh day, before they be leuel'd with the ground.
Sleepy Samuel must three times be roosed, 1 Samuel 3.10.
before he can say, Speak Lord, for thy Servant hears. Christ proceeds not
to that cutting sentence, Luke 13.7.
Cut down the fig tree, Luke 13. till three years he had come and sought
fruit upon it: which three years, were either those of his Ministry; or as
Saint Gregory expounds them, Gregor. Homil: 31. in Euangel. Theophylact. Basil.
those three times, Before the Law, Under the Law, After the Law. Or as
Theophylact and S. Basil do extend them, they are the three Ages of man; his
Childhood which is a dream; his Youth, which is a Frenzy; his Old Age, which is
a sickness* The Servant is not better then his Master, nor is the Subject
above his Sovereign; Let us therefore follow him into his Vineyard, and three
years seek for fruit, though finding none we sow in tears. John 5.4. Mat.
20.6.
Stay not to step into this Bethesda, till an Angel does stir the water;
Quid statis hic otiosi? Go work to day in Gods Harvest, though even in it
that envious One has sown his tares. Be instant in season, and out of season
instant; Give attendance to reading and exhortation, to teaching and
dehortation: Cry often, and cry aloud, lift up your voices like a Trumpet
often, often show the people their sins, and the house of Jacob their
transgressions; but as much as may be, in reproving, in reprehending, put on
the bowels of tender Mercy.

Many indeed, of whom I tell you weeping, do give their exhortations
earnestly, their redargutions vehemenly, but they omit that other, that vnum
necessarium, to a bruised soul, Like those Angels, Reu. 8.
they deal not mercifully. One blows his trumpet and fire follows; Another
blows his trumpet and hail ensues: A third is clothed with a cloud, and the
rainbow is on his head, he roares like a Lion, and seven thunders utter their
voice.

That prejudicial aiming at the persons of men, too evidently declares; Leu.
10.1.
that our Nadabs and Abihus take not their fire from Gods altar. That pleading
of judgment, to the plunging of souls too deeply in the pit of desperation,
manifestly demonstrats, that they care not to come in that still voice, Kings
1.19.

1. King. 19.
But what shall we say to those cursing Balaams, those Bedlems of Babylon? to
the ceremonies of terror used by them at the time of Cursing? to their fiery
torches? to their flaming candles cast from on high, as though the fire of Gods
fury was pressed and ready at their command? That Brand of hell Pope This
Hildebrand had so much modesty as to be ashamed of his name, and would needs
be called Gregory the seventh.
Hildebrand, whom for honors sake here I mention even as Pilate is in the
Creed, this monster as Cardinal Benno describes him, was not more horrible in
deluding the people with Cum vellet, manicas suas discutiebat, and in modum
scintillarum ignis dissiliebat. Card. Benno in vita Hildebr.
fire from his sleeves, then are his successors terrible in execrating those,
who refuse to receive the mark of the Reu. 13.16.
Beast in their right hands. All these are impostors, not pastors; or if
pastors, not David's but Doegs, not Simon Peter's but Simon Magusses, in the gall
of bitterness; not Alexanders but Ariusses, Aeriusses, Eusebius Nicomed.
Constable. was a persecuting Arrian heretic about the year of Christ 342.
Eusebiusses, (of Nicomedia not of Caesaria,) shepherds they are that never
whistle, but ever let loose their dogs: shepherds they are that feed their
sheep with wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall: Paul's milk is
taken from the Lambs, his stronger meat from greater sheep: Virgil. Eglog 3.
Et succus pecori and lac subducitur agnis, Menalcas complaint of false
Damaetas.

Contrarily, let us consider, that Chrysostom. Miscenda est lenitas seueritate,
faciendumque quoddam ex vtraque temperamentum. Greg. Moral. lib. 20. Seueritas
exercenda est in peccata paucorum, and (si quid minamur) cum dolor fiat.
August. Epist. 64. Discite subditorum matres vos esse debere, non dominos:
studete magis amari, quam metui. -- matres fouendo, pa^res vos corripiendo
exhibeatis. -- Suspendite verbera, producite vbera. Bernard. Super Can. Sermon.
23.

Omnia remitto, multa dissimulo colligendae fraternitatis studio, delictis
(plusquam oportet) remittendis pene ipse delinquo: vt fraterne de scipso
Cypriani^, lib. 1. Epist. 4


Minister medicus est, is curat vulnera non ipse verberat, as Chrysostom has
it: we are Physicians for the soul, we must not wound, unless it be to heal.
Plutarch.
Aqua guttatim lapsa lapidem cauat, by frequent drops the stone is made hollow,
and by fervent admonitions the hollow heart is made holy. The softer lead, not
harder iron cuts the marble, and sweeter phrase, not harsher language does
sometime pierce the stonier heart. Let us therefore add precept unto precept,
line unto line, here a little and there a little, in mercy let us exhort with
iterations, compassionately let us iterate our exhortations, Manasses is not
dead but sleeps.

Lastly, this reproves our prying critickes our envious Momes, our censorious
Genesis 49.17.
Dans, serpents by the way, and adders by the path, sitting in judgment,
passing and pronouncing sentence upon every notorious malefactor; a sentence
according to the Dan. 6.8.
law of the Medes and Persians, which never alters, never changes. What
would these men have said of Manasses, had they seen him in the valley of
Benhinnom, causing his sons to pass through the fire unto Molech? What of the
Luke. 15.13.
prodigal, had they seen him among his harlots, quaffing and carousing,
mispending his goods upon miscreant varlots? What of Act. 9.2.
Saint Paul, had they seen him in the high Priests house, desiring letters
Dimissorie to Damascus, to persecute the Disciples? What of Saint Austin, had
they seen him addicted to gluttony Romans 13.13.
and drunkenness, to chambering and wantonness, to strife and envying? Surely
they would have cast them upon the rack of censure, dashed them against the
rock of despair, and excluded them from any hope of future amendment, of
fruitful recovery.

Could Manasses have disrobed himself of his robes of royalty, and consulted
with some censurer as Saul with the witch at En-dor, 1. Sam. 28.8. Irenaeus
aduers. Haeres. lib 3. cap. 3.
asking him as Marcion did Polycarpus, Agnoscis nos? do thou know who I am?
Doubtless he would have answered him as roundly (though not as truly) as
Polycarpus did Marcion, Agnosco primogenitum Satanae, I know thee to be the
firstling like the first borne son of Satan: but blind had been their
censure of uncertainty, and ever, o ever, may such falt-finding carpers, such
falt-minding and censorious cauillers be deceived. Let us not then curiously
pry into the sacred Arc of Gods secret predestination, let it suffice us that
we are of Gods Court, though not of his counsel, for I say to every one that
is among you, (...), that no man presume to understand above that which is
meet to understand, but that he understand according to sobriety. We may
pronounce of the barren fig tree, that it has no fruit growing thereupon,
Mat. 21.19.
but only Christ may say, cut it down, or never fruit grow on thee
henceforward. For God has left even in the wicked, some relics and
remainders of his image, like the roots of Nebuchadnezzars tree; Dan. 4 11.12.
some stampes thereof are yet to be found, even in nature unregenerate, like
the stumps of Dagons hands, 1. Sam. 5.4.
which like Jobs messengers, may bring these sad tidings of great woe, we only
are escaped alone to tell thee, that we are the ruins of a sumptuous edifice.
True it is, that Adam by his fall did bruise this image, so that now we may
make that Quaeri with our Savior, Mat. 22.20.
whose image and superscription is this? but yet the breaking thereof is not
like that of Ieremies bottell, Ier. 19. broken it is not like a potters
vessel, Ier. 19.10.11
that can never be made whole again. He that had given Satan an Indenture as
a ceisure of his soul, M. Fox Martyrolog. Iunii vita.
at the request of Luther was set free again. Iunius was once an irreligious
Atheist, yet after writ Divinely of the Deity. Heroical Luther was once a
superstitious Friar, enueloped in the cloud, environed in the fogge of
Egyptian, of papal and palpable darkness, yet after became a champion,
marching courageously against that Hydra-headed monster, lurking in that
septi-montiall This Septimontiall City is Rome, that seat of Antichrist, Reu.
17.9. which has seven hills: Septemque vna sibi muro circundidit arces. Virgil.
Georgie. lib. 2. and Aeneid. lib. 6. Septem vrbs alta iugis, toti quae
praesidet orbi. propert. lib. 3. Eleg. 10. Eutropius, Victor, with diverse
others do name these seven hills. they are thus called, Palatinus, Capitolinus,
Auentinus, Esquilinus, Caeli^s, Quirinalis, and Viminalis. Eutrop. Hist. Publ.
Vict. in Descript. vrbis Romans
City.

Which first meets with our cold friends that gad and go astray to Amsterdam,
with the unjust judgment, of the Ouer-iust sect of our black mouthed
Brownists, our English Nouatians, Luciferians, Donatists, Seperatists: These
upon a supposall that our mother is black, think that for ever she has lost
her beauty. They cry out with Israel, we would have cured Babel, Ier. 51.9.
when as England may twit them with Isreal's proverb, Physician, heal thy
self. Their ingredients are vehement purgers; the vomit they have prescribed,
will cast us out of the Church, if once admitted, if once administered: Their
colloquintida, vertit amorem in amarorem, Bernard.
as speaks Saint Bernard, it has turned their love into lowering, and makes us
cry out, Mors in olla, death is in the pot, is in the potion. 2 Kings 4.40.


It is remarkable that their first founder Brown, has found the way into our
Church again: even he that held we had no Church in England, is now Pastor
at a place called A Town in Northampton shire.
A church: Bonum nomen, bonum omen, At quantum mutat us ab illo?

Sed hinc illae lachrymae, We need not sail to Amsterdam, to find out
incensed and censorious foes for our Church of England, (...), It is thou my
Adopted son, says our Mother Zion, my companion, my guide and familiar,
which delighted in consulting together, and went into the house of God as
companions: It is thou my familiar, whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread,
and suck of my breasts, thou have lifted up thy heel against me.

I speak not here of Heretics, those foxes, qui conantur corrumpere fidem,
but of Schismatikes, those crafty cubs, those sharpe-phanged Satyrists, Non
verenda retego, sed inuerecunda refuto: vtinam nobis reliquerint moderni Noe,
vnde a nobis possent aliquatenus operiri, Bernard Epist. 42.
qui conantur disrumpere charitatem. Such these are, as Leo ad Paleast.
Leo speaks of, Ecclesiae nomen tenent, and contra Ecclesiam dimicant: Such
these are as August. de Ciu. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 51.
Austin aims at, qui sub vocabulo Christiano, doctrinae, I may say disciplinae
resisterent Christianae. Furious vapors they are, who being restrained shake
the very earth for vent. Such were the Donatists in Africa, such are the
Anabaptists in Holland, such are the Anticonformists in England, who threatened
to introduce their Discipline, that Trojan horse, not as the Grecians with
quaffing and feasting, but as the Germans with quarreling and fisting. Ex
Bullinger. Vdal. Penri.
So possessed are they with an ouer-weening conceit of their own worthless
worthiness, as that they dare condemn the present Discipline of the Church of
England, as grossly idolatrous; but Pigmaleon-like they fall in love with an
Image of their own caruing, for needs will they be their own caruers. Not
unlike are these unto those of whom Iren Aduers. Heraes. l. 1. cap. 1.
Irenaeus writes, who were so besotted with an opinion of themselves, that
they accounted their own writings to be Gospels: like they are unto the
Augustine.
Manicheis, who derived their name of Manna, as if Manna-like their doctrine
had come from heaven: or like those who tearming their Sectaries Haeretici
quidam sic dicti ob insignem eruditionem quam sibi vendicabant: Hen. Stephan.
contra quos Irenaeus.
(...), accounted themselves to be ignorant of nothing.

Yet our chiefest Sectaries so censorious of us, cannot fully agree in the
maine points of erecting this their Discipline. Master Knox and others compiled
a Book of Discipline after the Geneua fashion, but it was rejected of the
Disciplinarians, and tauntingly termed, A devout Imagination. Another Book
called About 1587.
Disciplina Ecclesiae sacra, verbo Dei descripta, was yet by them corrected,
altered, and amended; so that this tumult is like that which Demetrius raised,
Acts 19. wherein the most part know not wherefore they be come together.

Some, when ambitiously they cannot exalt themselves, grow mosse-growne in
Schism. Arrius coveting the Bishopric of Alexandria, Donatus the Bishopric
of Carthage, Nouatus a Bishopric in Italy, S. Austin ascribes this to Acrius
for a Heresy, in that he held, Pre byserum ab Episcopo nulla differentia
debere discerni. And Epiphanius says that this opinion is stultitiae plena:
Epiphan. lib. 3. Tom. 1. Heraes. 75.
Aerius a Bishopric in Pontus; all these repulsed, grew turbulently
censorious against the Senators of Sion. Sir George Paul in the life of John
Whitgift Lord ArchBishop of Canterbury. p. 7.
Cartwrights first coffeehouse grew from that, for that he was neither
regarded nor rewarded by Queen Elizabeth for his Academicall disputation,
correspondently to his expectation.

Another banefull seed of censorious Schismatickes is Avarice. Theod. lib. 2.
Paulus Samosatenus fell into Schisms, being allured with preferment, which
he expected of Zenobia the Queen of Arabia, says Theodoret. Theodoret. lib.
2.
And why do so many affect the Geneua Discipline, but to fill their greedy
mawes with the ruins of Cathedral Churches?

But above all, the contempt of Ecclesiastical Authority, is the greatest
breeder of this Schismatic antipathie. Vnde Cypr. ad Pupianum.
Schismata and Haereses ortae sunt, nisi dum Episcopus superba praesumptione
quorundam contemnitur? says S. Cyprian. Hieron. cont. Luciferian.
If Bishops had not this authority, tot in Ecclesiis efficerentur Schismata,
quot Sacerdotes, says S. Jerome. All the ancient authenticke Fathers believed
that the calling of Bishops was Iure Apostolico. Iren. contra Haeres. lib. 3.
c. 3.
Irenaeus calls this, The ancient Tradition of the Apostles thorough the whole
world. Cyprian. lib. 4. epist. 9.
S. Cyprian says, that the Bishop is honored by the acceptance of God. Chrysostom.
hom. 33. in Act. 15. Hieron. de script. Eccles. Ambr. in Gal. 1. Aug. cont.
Crescon. l. 2. c. 37.
S. James the Apostle was Bishop of Jerusalem says Chrysostom. Saint Gregr.
lib. 6. epist. 37. Eus. Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 24. Hier. ad Euagr.
Mark the Evangelist was Bishop of Alexandria, says Gregory. Orig. hom. 6. in
Lucam. Hieron. descript. Eccles. in Ignat. Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 2
Saint Peter was Bishop of Antiochia, says Origin. Cypr. Epist. 10.
Cyprian teaches us, that a Bishopric is an Apostleship, and an Apostleship
a Bishopric. Aug. in Ps. 44.
S. Austin expounding that in the forty fourth Psalm, Instead of thy fathers
thou shall have children, shows, that our Bishops inherited the Apostles, as
children their fathers. Who then not transported with prejudice, dare
censoriously traduce this tradition Apostolic? who not violently censorious
would say with Bern. contra Abail. epist. 190. Thus you see by all consent of
authenticke Antiquity, that Bishops (whom our Nouelists censure as limbs of
Antichrist,) are ordained by divine institution, and Apostolic tradition.
Indeed Jerome says that Bishops are greater then Priests, rather by the
custom of men, then by the constitution of God. But 1. this is the private
opinion of S. Jerome. 2. He was no great friend to Bishops, because he should
have been elected Bishop of Rome, but by reason of his emulators had the
repulse. 3. He says Bishops were set over the Church when those Schisms
began, I hold of Paul, I of Apollos, I of Cephas. Comment. in Tit. 1. But did
not this fall out in the Apostles days? 1 Cor 1.12. 4 He so magnified his
Priesthood, to quell the pride of diverse insolent Deacons, who compared
themselves with Priests. 5. He in sundry places of his writings declares
himself against the paritie of Ministers, as lib. 2. contr. Iouinian. Jn
comment. in Esa. 19. in Ier. 6. In Epist. ad Rusticum Monachum.
Abailardus, Omnes Patres sic, at ego non sic? the tide of opinion seems to
glide that way, but we affect to strive against the stream, and extremely to
cross the current of Antiquity.

As these are thus troubled with a swelling spleen, so our Enemies at Rome are
much molested with an ouerflowing gall. These Catilines think our case
desperate, that there is no Room for us, no mansions in our Fathers house.
Hence is it, that their great Cham the Pope, (worshipped might he be) upon the
Evening before Good Friday, in great solemnity curses us all to hell, whereas
In one of the prayers appointed in our Liturgy for Good Friday. Ier. 8.22.
we for recompense the next day, pray for the conversion and salvation of him
and his as being Heretics. But is there no Balm at Gilead, to recover the
health of the daughter of England? What Scythian cruelty is this, to deny that
to Christians, which they grant to mere Pagans? Does not their Leaden-Legend
report ( fides sit penes Authorem, believe it who list,) that the souls of
This former fable is to be seen in the Revelations of S. Bridgit: A book
allowed by the Pope: And Alphonsus Cia^onus a Spanish Friar has defended this
opinion.
Traianus and Damascen relates both these Lege^ds. Damasc. orat de defunct. but
he concludes, At nos definimus nihil, tantum fraternitatis studio ratiocinamur.
Falconella were both of them rescued from hell, transported into Abraham's
bosom, the one at the prayers of Did God ever the like?
Pope Gregory, the other of Tecla? And may not much more flagitious sinners
(suppose we were such) become religious Conuerts?

But surely, the Romish malignancy would extenuate our sickness, would we
exenterate our Mother and change the air: but alas, the infection is there too
gross, nor could it be any better then a furious frenzy, to resort to that
Romish Mountebancke, having at home such approved Physicians. And be it that
they may boast of their Aer, yet sure I am their fountains are sealed up: The
Nobles (as Ier. 14.3. Iuel. Apolog.
Jeremy complains) have sent their servants to the water, who came to the
wells, but returned with their vessels empty: which may more justly constrain
us to remove from Rome, then the failing of the Conduits compelled the later
Romans, to descend from the seven hills and inhabit the Plain.

John 6.68.
Our Church has the words of eternal life, whither then shall we go? It is
the Arc of Noah, the Vine of Solomon, the Spouse of our Savior, producing a
fruitful progeny, reducing many fruitless run-agates, many renegates, as here
Manasses, who being converted turns unto the Lord by prayer. He prayed to the
Lord his God. And thus much of the Agent, [Hee.] Now follows the Action,
[Prayed.]

Hitherto you have seen Manasses, not with Lots wife, 2. The Action. Genesis
19.26.
tra^sform'd into a pillar of Salt, but with the Poets Amphion^ wife.
Niobe, into a weeping and waimenting stone: now shall you see him with an
humble and lowly heart, raising his ruined soul, deprest with sin,
deprostrate for sin; lifting up his bleared eyes, streaming with tears,
swelling for sorrow: you shall see him roose up the one, and raise up the
other, from the center of the circled earth, beyond the circumference of the
heavens.

Behold therefore this penitent Publican on bended knees with a broken heart,
behold his hands beating and thumping his flinty and obdurate breast: look well
upon this huge Whale, as one styles that Whipster, Dr. Worship.
Luke 7. behold in him a modest boldness, and bold modesty, an acting
passion, and a passionate action; look into the grates of the Prison and you
shall find him praying: even him who had tired himself in pursuing vanity, and
attired himself, not with Tertullians Christian-like cloak, Tert. lib. de
pall. Romans 13.14. Reu. 6.11. Genesis 37.31.
Saint Paul's wedding Garment, or Saint John's White robes, but with Joseph's
Parti-colored coat besmeared with blood: even him shall ye find retiring to
God by praire, with cheeks impearl'd with tears, with hands wringing for
sorrow, with an heart rieuing with sighs, with a breast breaking with sobs, for
he, he it is that prayed: He took unto him words, as the Lord exhorted
Israel by Hosea, Hos. 14.3. Isa. 38.14.
he turned to his God with his father Hezekiah, he chattered like a Crane, he
mourned like a Dove, and fixing his eyes upon Heaven, that Starre-spangled
Canopy, he poured out a torrent of melodious Harmony.

I list not here largely to dilate upon the definition or description of
praire, whether it be an elevation of the mind to God, as one: whether it be a
communication of man with God, as Calvin: whether it be either of these, or
both these. Calvin. Instit.
Nor need I macerate my self about the distribution of praire, blessed Saint
Paul has exquisitely and excellently expressed the kinds thereof, 1 Timothy 2.1.
Tim. 1.2.

1 (...)
First, there be (...), deprecations against evils to be avoided.

2 (...).
Secondly, there be (...), petitions for good things to be obtained.

3 (...).
Thirdly, there be (...), Intercessions for others, to whom we are obliged.

4 (...).
Fourthly, there be (...), thanksgiuings, for the avoiding of evils, the
obtaining of benefits by our selves or others. I dwell not in these, but post
on to this proposition, extracted from the propounded pattern of this our
Manasses, namely,

That it is the constant practice of every penitent convert, to pour out his
prayers to prefer his Petitions, to send up his suites and supplications to his
God Let Ananias seek in the house of Judas after Saul of Tarsus, Acts 9.11.
and behold, he shall find him praying, Act. 9. Hear you not the
Pythagoricall harmony of reuerting Israel, sounding so shrilly their De
profundis, Psalm. 130.1.
Out of the depths have I cried unto thee O Lord? Psalm. 130. And surely,
August. in Psa. 130.
valde in profundo sunt, qui nec clamant de profundo, as says Saint Austin,
Those are stifeled in the depths, who cry not out of the depths. A Tennisball
percussus surgit, the harder you strike it, the higher it rebounds: The Lords
obedient children, the harshlier they be entreated, the heartilier they entreat
and sue for pardon: Ier. 29.12.
stiff necked Israel, being humbled by the yoke of Babel, Shall go and cry
and pray unto their God, Ier. 29. Therefore shall every one that is godly make
his prayer unto thee O God, Psalm. 32.6.
surely in the floods of great waters, then, even then shall they come near
thee.

Ier. 9.1.
But, oh that my head was full of water, and mine eyes two fountains of tears,
that I might weep day and night, for the neglect, for the contempt of this
duty.

How many Children of Israel are either tongue-tyed, or which is worse, possessed
with a dumb devil? they are not able, or not desirous, obsequiously to
implore the all-preuailing power, the powerful presence of the God of Israel.
It is a legal verity, that if the Child did never cry, it was never the Kings
Subject, it was never capable of any right, of any inheritance: yet (see their
palpable absurdities) these dumb men think to get in possession the fruitful
land of celestial Canaan. The Turks account dumb men Santones, that is,
Saints. Mr. Will. Biddulph.
The Turks may canonize their Dumbe-men for Saints or Santones, but sure we
are, these are incarnate Devils.

Others there be who plead simplicity, their unpolished rudeness, makes them
that they dare not press into Gods awefull presence! But necessitas docet
arts, extreme exigencie, will make the dumb man speak most eloquently; Even
rusticke clownes will play the Rhetoricians, rather then starve for bread.

A third sort there are, with whom God can never be acquainted, but in their
extremities: such as are the Cimbrians, who hold their idols in account, only
when they are encountered with a tempest. When Sheth had cause to call the name
of his son Enosh, sorrowful Enosh, then men begun with alacrity to call
upon the Name of Jehovah, Genesis 4. When Israel is in bondage, then are they free
of speech, Ex. 2. They sighed and cried for their oppressing slavery. Exodus
2.23.
When Amalck comes to skirmish with the Hebrews, Exodus 17.11.
then look for Mosesses hand to be held up These Ionah-like, sleep in the
ship, Ion. 1.5. with 2 2.
but pray in the Whales belly.

But did you never hear of a horrid, and strange misshapen monster, called the
Christian Atheist? he posts over this duty of praire to the Priests; 1. Cor.
9.13. 2. Chro. 26 16
they are (...), they serve at the Altar, and he with Vzziah, will nor usurp
the Priests office. He may fetch his descent as far as Pharaoh, who would
not trouble himself to call upon God, but intreates so much favor of Moses
and Aaron, Orate vos, pray ye unto the Lord, Exodus 9.28.
Exodus 9. He is something allied to Jeroboam, who besought that Prophet whose
blood he sought, 1. King. 13.6.
to pray unto the Lord and make intercession for him, King. 1.13. Had I not
styled him a Christian Atheist, I might have called him an Atheistical lew:
Abba Saul lib. Sanhed. cap. Helec. ex San^erdo De Descensu. lib. 1. sect. 9.
for like at the Jews will not suffer that Name of God Jehovah to be
pronounced, but only of the high Priest, and that only once in the year,
when he enters the Holiest of Holyes; so these; but I spare to apply it.

Polycarpus, says Vnamque ab illis horam ad orandum, etc. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl.
lib 4. cap. 15.
Eusebius, begd one hour of his persecutors to spend in praire, but we will
not redeem our days, our weeks, our months, our years from vanity, to
employ them, in deploring our sins, in imploring the assistance of our God.
If every one was forced to publish to the view of the vulgar, a Chronologicall
history, an historical Chronology of their own exploits, then should we see
to the shame of mortals, how shamelesly we shuffle off our mortal days. So
much time spent in nothing but hunting, Vir qui venationibus magis, quam
orationibus vacabat: de Johan. 13. Carranza in Sum. vit. Pontif.
says our voluptuous Esaw. So much time spent in courting our Delilahs, says
our amorous Sampson. So much time spent in coffering Mammon, says our
auaricious Nabal. So much time spent in painting our faces, and steeling our
foreheads, says our gorgeous Iezabel. So much time spent in gormandizing,
says our licencious Libertine. So much time spent in quaffing and carousing,
says our barbarous Scythian. Scythia bred not one learned Sage, save only
Anacharsis. For as temperance in wine is a whetstone to the wit, so excess, is
a millstone to it.
So much time spent in gaming, in carding and in dicing, says our penurious
prodigal, but so little, so none in praying, so little, so none in calling
upon God. Tully Orat. in Catilinam.
O tempora, o mores, Oh the times that we are fallen into, Oh the manners of
men, or rather of brutish beasts, of men more brutish then beasts, then Nu.
22.28.30.
Balaams Ass, for she spoke twice to her Master in one day, but these will
not bid their God good morrow or good even, though Act. 17 27.
by groping after him they might have found him, as Paul the Apostle of the
Gentiles, once bespoke his schoold Athenians, Act. 17.27.

I could suggest unto these, that rare and admirable are the effects of prayer:
if we look upon the elements, prayer is a controuler, if we look up into the
heavens, prayer is a co^mander; Chrysostom.
Est oration vis Deo grata, says Chrysostom, a gracious prayer, is the most
grateful violence we can offer to God.

2. Kin. 1.10.12
Eliasses prayer can fetch down Fire from heaven, 1 Samuel 12.18.
Samuels prayer can cause the Aer to thunder, Exodus 15.25.
Mosesses prayer can sweeten the embittred waters, the Acts 4.31.
Apostles prayer can shake the center of the senseless earth. At Josh. 10
12.13.
Ioshuahs prayer the Sun must stay in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of
Aialon. It climbes the battlements of Olympus, and with Ge. 22.24.26.
Jacob wrestles with God till it get a blessing.

Socrat. histor. Eccles l. 5. c 25.
Theodosius obtained that victory against Eugenius, not by his power and
prowess, Praeparatur ad bellum non tam telorum quam orationum subsidij^^de
Theodosio Ruffians Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 33. Tam in pace qua^ in bello diuinum
anxilium semper pelijt Theodosuis, and nunquam illo frauderetur. Theodorit.
Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 34.
but by pouring out his prayers to the Lord of hosts. Ferunt fulmen
subsequutu^, quod hosts in exitium impulerit, and imbrem ad refocillandu^
exercitu^. Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 5.
When the Camp of Marcus Aurelius was oppressed with thirst, the Christian
Soldiers by prayer obtained, not only a shower to refresh the Army, but
thunder also to affringht the Enemy. Horat.
Sed quid terras alio calentes sole mutamus? Why do we wade into a world of
wonders, to find out the wonderments wrought by prayer? it rescued Manasses
from the jaws of Hell, and restored Manasses to the joys of Heaven; for not
S. Peter with his cross keys, but Christ with the key of his cross, and
Manasses with the key of his prayer, made passage to the Throne of Grace: He
prayed to the Lord his God.

Time and desire challenge our attention, to the third member of our present
division, which is the Object of the Action, [Iehovah] the Lord. Chrysostom. hom. de
Prisc. and Aquila, sieve de colendis Sacerdotibus.
Studiosos arbritror ne laturos, says Chrysostom, vt verbulum aliquod in
sacris libris, conte^ptim praetereatur. Christ says that the least Iota, (...)
that the least Hebrew point shall never fade till all be fulfilled, Mat. 5.18.
Luke 16.17.
Mat. 5. Here therefore I might play the Rabbin, and give a reason why the
great name of God is (...), as here in the Hebrew, so almost in all tongues, 3
The Object.
it is wrttten only with four letters: the Egyptians, Thewt; the Persians
Syros; the Arabians Alla; the French Dieu; the Germans Got; the Jews Jehovah
in Hebrew is written with four Letters.
Jehovah; to import that in the four parts of the world his name is known,
and that he has his Church in every quarter.

And here might I deplore the dangerous dotage of Multos deos Manichaeus
colendos esse admonet. Socrat. hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 22. Duos affirmauit esse
deos. Clemens Recog. lib. 3. Which opinion went current almost three hundred
years, as Nicephorus writes: Niceph. Eccel. Histor. lib. 5. cap. 31.
Idolaters, who multiply their Idols according to the Idaeas of their seduced
phansies. In Calicute they adore the devil; In Persia, their King: In Egypt,
the Crocodile: In Siam, a Province of India, they worship the higher Elements.
The Magi worshipped the Sun, the Ophitae, the Serpent; the Petilianists, Judas!
The Papists honor the whip that scourged, the Spear that pierced, the Nails
that fastened, the Soldier that goared our Sauious side. Danaeus in explicat.
Orat. Dominicae.
Danaeus dares to say, that Vna cum Rocho, canem; cum Iosepho, Asinum; cum
Agnete, agnum quoque colunt: That together with Saint Roch they worship a
Dog, together with Joseph they worship an Ass, and together with S. Agnes
they worship a Lamb. According to the number of thy Countries are thy gods, O
Babylon! S. George for England, S. James for Spain, S. Denice for France, S.
Patricke for Ireland. And as they make them Patrons for Kingdoms, so they
create them protectors from diseases, from disasters: The blessed Virgin, from
Ship-wracke; S. Roch, from the pestilence; Raphael, from sore eyes; Apollonia,
from the toothach. They worship for Saints such as never were men, as
supposititious Christopher; or such as were the worst of men, as treacherous
Inter Magistros Parisienses quaestio erat, Damnatusne sit, an seruatus
Beckettus. Hu^rf.
Becket.

Whatsoever has the highest pitch of our affections, that is our God. Auarus
colit Mammona, and Haereticus dogma quod finxit. -- Vertunt in Idolu^, etc.
Hier.
Haereticus colit dogma quod finxit, says Jerome: the Heretic deifies the
defied popularity of his opinion. Midas worships his Mammon, that god of rust,
who like a cancred god at last will consume him. They idolize Diana at Ephesus;
Lais at Corinth; Mahomet at Constantinople; Antichrist at Rome; Machiauel at
Florence; Arius at Alexandria; Aerius at Pontus; All these at Amsterdam.

Here also might I mightily torment the tortured Ghost of Simon Magus, whose
Statue pointed, Simoni deo sancto: the Ghost of Who yet in sleep and lust
perceived himself to be a mere animal. Yea, though living he affected to be
styled a god, yet being dead, he could not get a grave to bury him in,
according to his mother Olympias lamentation in Erasmus: o fili; tu qui
studebas coeli particeps esse, huc toto impetu propera^s; ne iis quidem potiri
valuisti, quae sunt mortalium omnium communia, terra ac sepultura. Eras.
Apophl. li. 4.
Alexander the great, that great desirer to be styled a god: But with 1 King.
22.31.
Arams Captains, I will fight neither with great nor small, save only against
(...), the King of the bottomless Abyss, the profane zeale-scoffing Atheist,
that black bratt of fathomlesse perdition, brauing the Deity with a brazen brow.

Nulla est tam barbara natio, nulla gens tam efferata, cui non insideat haec
persuasio, Deum esse. Cicero de nature. Deorum. lib. 1.
Never was there Nation so rude and barbarous, says Tully, but has been
persuaded that there is a God. Orpheus lived about that time in which Ehud and
Shamgar judged Israel, More Chronol.
Orpheus (that I may point at some of their learned Sages) confessed that
there was (...), one begotten of himself, by whom all things were made. Their
ancient description of a principle agrees only to God, (...), said that ancient
Philosopher, the first Principle is made of nothing. (...), said Anaxagoras, it
is without generation! The same Anaxagoras is commended by Arist. de Anima.
lib. 1.
Aristotle, for that he held that there was an immixt and most simple
understanding, which knew all things: whence the Platonists called him (...), as
being the Seer and Beholder of all things whatsoever.

But because the audacious Atheist, with a brazen and iron forehead,
blasphemously Psa. 14.1. and 10.4. and 53.1.
says in his heart There is no God, holding the Scriptures to be but fables,
coined for current only to awe the world, I will, though very briefly, prove
that there is a Jehovah to whom Manasses prayed, [Hee prayed to the Lord his
God.

First, the excellency of the Angelical nature shows that it must proceed
from a more excellent cause then is it self. These heavenly Hierarchies could
not compose or frame themselves, therefore were they formed of some other
cause, which must needs surpass them in dignity, according that received
Maxim in the School, Propter quod vnumquodque est tale, illud ipsum est magis
tale: That which gives excellency to another, must needs in it self be far
more excellent.

Secondly, those Heroical instincts in the mind of man, whereby
extraordinarily great exploits have been achieved, must needs euince, that
some superior power has prospered these undertakings, and produced them to
their several issues and events. How could either the pupil Aexander, so
speedily have overrun the world, with his warre-like, and more then
Tragical Tropheis? or his Tutor Aristotle, so successefully sounded the depth
of so many Arts, and polished so many Sciences, had not some higher and more
powerful hand aided them in the accomplishing of those weighty enterprises?

To speak of the latter. Entis a primo Actus est (...) primi entis (...).
Is not the whole (...) of the Arts, the energeticall and operative wisdom of
the first Being? Does it not as firstly spring and arise from him, so lastly
return and retire to him again? Herein like the lesser rivers, which as they
receive their particular currents from the Maine, so do they at length repay
their due tribute to the Deep.

Thirdly, consider that if some Infinite Being be not the repose and center
of our minds, we are all like toyling Leanders in the boiling Hellespont,
easelesse, restless, wretchlesse, a very burden to our selves, never
satisfied with any terrene, or transient, or triuiall contentment. We are all
sick of a direful dropsy, like selfe-soothing Narcissus, of whom the Poet,
Ovid.
Dumque sitim sedare cupit, sitis altera creuit:
In vain Narcissus seeks to quench his thirst,
Since it was less insatiate at the first.


If with Alexander we could never so successefully subdue the Universe, yet
with Alexander mounted on the Stage of encroaching arrogance, we would
burst-forth into bitter tears, grievously lamenting that there remains not
yet another world for us to conquer.

Fourthly, look upon those horrors of Conscience, which ceaze upon the mighty
men of the earth, though in regard of their supereminent place, their eminent
power, their puissance, their prowess, their prosperous events, they need not
once shrink at fear 'mid chiefest brunts of battle. Is not this then some
superior Judge, who thus makes them veil the glory of their vanting plumes?
Is not this some superior Power, who showing them their heinous guilt, thus
dolefully dismayes their dauntlesse minds? And to conclude, is not this some
superior Potentate, who declaring his dreadful vengeance, thus heralds unto
them Deaths pale and trembling triumphs?

Dan. 52.
Witness Belchazzar King of Babylon, behold him well, and whuishtly view his
feature, he cannot keep his countenance, but is like unto the Image of Diana
in the Island Chios, which on the one side being looked upon seemed to smile,
but on the other to frown: So has he two faces, the one sweld like Aeolus,
and puffed up with drinking Wine; the other ashy-pale and meager, with looking at
the handwriting on the wall. Pale trembling Coward, Dan. 5.5.
what need'st thou fear? why is thy countenance changed, thy thoughts
troubled, Dan. 5.6.
the joints of thy loins loosed? why do thy knees smite one against another?
what? blurring and crying to see the Palm of a hand? Dan. 5.7.
Remember man the former power of thy martial arm, Remember that thou art
guarded with a thousand of thy Princes. See, here is plenty of the Red liquor
of the grape, Dan. 5.1.
which is like lapis Alchymicus, the Philosophers stone, converting a leaden
passion into a golden, sweet, contenting contemplation. But of all these he
might truly say as Job once spoke of his Friends, Job. 16.2.
Miserable comforters are ye all! For indeed, Job. 6.4.
the arrows of the Almighty are in him, and the terrors of God, Job. 10.17.
yea changes and armies of sorrows do fight against him. Now be it spoken
unto thee O King, that there is a King of Kings, that the Lord is a man of
war, his name is Jehovah: Exodus 5.3.
He esteems thy darts as straw, Job. 41.20. Job. 12.18. Job. 12.21.
and laugheth at the shaking of the spear: he loses the collar of Kings, and
guirdeth their loins with a girdle. He powers contempt upon Princes, and
makes the strength of the mighty weak. What should I speak of that common
contemner of God Caligula? Qui Deos tantopere contemneret, ad minima tonitrua
and fulgura conniuere, caput ohuoluere, ad vero maiora, proripere se a strato,
sub lectu^que condere solebat. Sueton. in Caligul. cap. 51.
who notwithstanding would wink at the least lightning, and cover his head. I
will not now disease this timorous Tyrant, who creepes under the bed, and
runs into a benchhole, hoping so to escape from heavens reuenge-full thunder.

Shall I sum up all in a word? then thus. There must needs be some
ouer-ruling Deity, establishing all rule and regencie. There must needs be
some thought-sounding and superior Judge, punishing the mighty Nimrods, the
Gods of the earth. There must needs be some Infinite Being, satisfying the
vast minds of us mortals. There must needs be some supreme power, prospering
all high and heroical events. There must needs be some excellent cause of the
Angelical nature, surpassing in excellency the excellency of them, who
excel in excellency all less excellent creatures. This ouer-ruling Deity,
this superior Judge, this infinite Being, this supreme power, this first and
excellent cause is no other, can be no other then a God, than this God to whom
Manasses prayed: He prayed to the Lord his God.

Solus Deus ipse, quoad se, seip sum nouit, God only knows himself, as
inhabiting (...), a light vnapproachable, inaccessible, (...). 1. Tim. 6.16.
Tim. 1.6. Cicero de not. Deorum.
Tully tells us that Simonides after three days study how to describe God, was
in the latter end more remote from any resolution, then when he first began!
See, here is Simonides, with the Genesis 19.11.
Sodomites stricken blind, so that he is weary with seeking the door of this
knowledge. And might not that so much to be admired Aristotle, with Act. 13.11.
Elymas, go about to seek a man, to lead him by the hand! For to say as the
truth is, the best Philosopher is in this regard (...), Juliam. in Caesaribus.
as Julian spoke of Traianus, vaunting of his Parthian tropheis before the
gods; He is but as sounding brass, or a tinkling Cymball. 1. Cor. 13.1.
The most renowned Orator attempting this, Verborum minutiis rerum frangit
pondera, as one speaks of Seneca: He should sooner want a world, a Sea of
words, then a drop of worthy matter.

Exodus 33.23. Job. 4.16.
Yet has the Lord in mercy manifested unto us postica eius, his Backeparts,
Exodus 33. So that as that Tyrian -- Caeteris in Orientem spectantibus, solus
Occidentis regionem intuebatur. Justin. Histor. lib. 8.
Strato proved in the end the wisest, who concluding with his consorts in the
Evening, that he who first could see the Sun in the next ensuing morning
should be King, looked not toward the East, where first he arises, but toward
the West where his radiant rays did first display themselves: So we, not being
able to look God in the face, at the resplendent brightness of whose glory,
the very Seraphims covered themselves, Esa. 6.2.
Esa. 6. must behold him as he himself has been pleased to display himself
unto us: Exodus 33.20. Ioh. 1.18. 1. Ioh. 4.12. Deuteronomy. 29.29. and 4.1. and 5.33.
and 30.19.
Further we may not see, and live; neither need we see further, that we may
live.

This Name of God Jehovah est nomen essentiae, Essentia est qua per se, and ex
se absolute Deus est, and existit. Trelcat. Jnstitut. lib. 1.
says Iunius, a title typing out the essence of God unto us; nothing has a
Being but he, nothing in comparison of him. Excellently the Prophet Esaias, All
nations before him, are as nothing, and they are counted to him less then
nothing, Esa. 40.17.
Es. 40. Let not us then poor worms exalt our selves against this infinite
Being: Let us not dare to conceive or speak any thing which is unworthy of so
great a Majesty, seeing nothing can be spoken worthy of God, which is not
therefore unworthy, because it may be spoken.

We are now almost come ashore ready to cast anchor, 4. The Application of the
Object.
for there remains only the Application of the Object, [His God] Nonne si
fluctuat fides, inanis est and spes nostra? Bernard. in Epistol Cont. Abailard.
says Bernard. It not that Academicall opinion of miserable doubting, a
doctrine full of danger? the Forge of despair? the Gulf of hell? A poisoning
Brazuto? a stabbing Ioab? A perfidious Catilin, noting us with the eye, and
designing us all to the infernal vault of pitchie Acheron? yet see and wonder,
the Council of Trent defines it, Council. Trident. sess. 6. can. 12. Bellarm.
lib. 3. de Iustif. cap. 3.
Bellarmin defends it, to be an assertion, worthy to win our worthiest
reputation.

Here could I wound them with their own weapons; Sed satis est potuisse. O my
soul, surcease with settled resolution. If any of the Sons of the Prophets
will here send to seek Manasses, answer him with the tongue of men and
Angels, quid quaeritis viuentem inter mortuos? Why seek ye the living among
the dead? Why seek ye Manasses in the valley of Ben-hinnom? he is ascended
into heaven, the valley of Vision! Why seek ye Manasses in the High Places?
or rather why seek ye not Manasses in the High Places? for surrexit, (...);
He is ascended into heaven, he is transported by the Angels into Abraham's
bosom. He is entered into that figurative and mystical Paradise, that
pearlesse place of endless pleasure, that sacred Sanctuary of a sinner, that
renowned receptable of the soul, wherein he now enioyes eternal bliss.

He has abridg'd the way to heaven, and made a short cut to the land of
Canaan, Canaan the Greeks call Phoenicia, of (...), which signifies a
palmetree, which was the special cognizance of Phoenicia, as is apparent in
many old coins which now are extant. Vespatian, for a memorial of his taking
of Iudaea, stamped upon his coin a lamenting woman, sitting with her back to
a palmetree, which this Inscription, Iudaea Capta.
that land of Palmetrees, where carrying triumphant palms in his hands after
many conflicts and tribulations, he now keeps a continual Sabbath, an
endless Halleluiah, an eternal Iubile.

And as for you, my attentive Auditors, let Manasses this day read you a
lecture, not of late but speedy repentance. Of all that we possess only time
is ours, and of all times only the time present. Austin for the gain of many
worlds, would not be an Atheist for half an hour. Basil to wade in wealth,
would not presume for half a moment. Basiliscus the Martyr to save his life,
would not recant for half a minute.

Tempus senex est, Time is Older then Methushelah, Genesis 5.27.
he lived nine hundred sixty and nine years, yet then he dyed; but time has
been five thousand years and yet he has still a being. Tempus senex est,
Time is as ancient as the brightest Angel, yet is he like 2 Samuel 2.18.
Asahel, as light on foot as a wild Roe. Tempus senex est, Time is older then
Natures fabric, yet he wears a fore-top; but take heed, post est occatio
calua, he is bald behind, take hold in time, time present is only ours.

Security, sins Circe, luls us in the lap of delight, and sings a requiem
to our souls: with Suetonius.
Suetoniusses Crow she stands upon the Capitol and proclaims an Omne been,
all will be well, though you repent hereafter. But the Lord with Gellius.
Socrates, that Athenian Eagle, looks upon this Sun. With Zachary, Zach. 9.12.
Hodie annuncians, to day he does declare it, Turn you with Manasses. Psa.
95.7, 8. Heb. 3 8.9.
To day then hear his voice, and harden not your hearts as in the provocation.

And thirty days liberty he granted to malefactors, to pass betwixt the
sentence and the execution, Vt intermedio tempore, ira Imperat^ris nonnihil
mitigaretur, et misericordia locus aperiatur. Sozomen. Hist. Eccles. li. 7. c.
24.
Theodosius gave his foes ten days liberty, before he showed the least
extremity, but if these ten days were ten times multiplied, there is not the
least here but has had them offered. The Lord has given us time to turn, and
we must return a reckoning how we spend it. Omne te^pus nobis impensu^
requiritur a nobis qualiter sit expensum. But we with the evil servant have hid
this talent in the Earth, with Pericles we do not think so much to make up
our Accounts, as how to make no reckoning up at all. We say as Phocion said
unto the Athenians, If Alexander be dead to day, he will be dead to morrow; If
we have time to turn to day we shall have time to return to morrow.

Thus is tempus duratio rerum, God does give us time to turn, but we are
hardened in heart; with will not turn. With Julius Caesar, we wear the
slow-sliding Snaile upon our Ensign, ancompast in a mocking motto, Lent
festinandum. With Callipedes in Suetonius, Suetonius.
We spend our days in moving, but go not forward one cubit. We slug in
sloth, and languish in delight, we give our selves the raines of raging
appetite; we cut too fast the triple front of Time, and think to repent as
seriously as Manasses when we list. But alas, our lives are not our own
fee-simple: our bodies are houses, but of dust: our selves are all but living
clay; Our souls are tenants but all will; we may not, we must not promise to
our selves a day. The Lord indeed is our Landlord, but we have no leases of our
lives. We grow like grass, in the morning we flourish, but in the evening fade
away. Luke 12.20.
This night shall they fetch thy soul was Diuesses doom. Mihi hodie, cras
tibi; to me to day, to thee to morrow, is the dead man's dole.

Non potest in morte videre vitam, qui non vult in vita praeuidere mortem: If
Sion will not repent while she has time, and England return while grace is
offered, Sion shall split her heart with grief, England shall mourn and not
be comforted: Her Cities, shall be wasted without inhabitants, and her houses
without a man. Esa. 13.21, 22.
Zijm shall lodge within her Towns, her Temples shall be full of Ohim: Iim
shall cry within her palaces, Dragons shall creep into her pleasant places. For
Nebo and for Dibon shall Moab howl, Esa. 15.2.
for Nebo and for Heshbon shall Medeba weep: Ieremies head shall flow with
water, Esayes eyes shall flood out tears, because their people will not turn,
because they return not in time with good Manasses.

With good Manasses seeing we return not speedily to the Lord, the Lord has
made our heaven brass, and our earth as iron. The Elements are up in arms, and
all the creatures turn our foes. The Fire deuowreth many houses, and the flame
consumes many towns. The Aer has been infected with the plague, pestilence
afflicted many people. The Water has roared, and swelled, and ouerwhelm'd the
firmest ground. The Earth has quak't to view our vanity, and groans to bear
the burden of our villainy.

Turn therefore now ye house of Israel, turn you with Manasses from your
evil ways. Think not to conne the Psalm of mercy, when Christ the Judge of
all flesh, shall ride in circuit to put a period to thy days, shall sit in
judgment to cut shorter thy thread of life; but now while thou have time to
turn, turn to God; turn to God a toto, a tanto, a tantillo; from all, from
the least, from the greatest sins, turn speedily with Manasses.

Deuteronomy. 28.3. etc.
Thus if thou do turn, blessed shall thou be in City, and blessed in the
town. Blessed shall be the seed of thy body, and the fruit of thy field.
Blessed shall be the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep. Thy
land shall flow with milk and honey, and thou shall wash thy paths in butter.
Thy rocks shall power out oily Rivers, and thou shall wash thy cloak in Wine.
Thou shall be blessed here on earth with great felicity, and triumph with
Manasses for all Eternity. Then shall thou reign in Heaven, where is Voluptas
sine moerore, tranquilitas sine tremore, amoenitas sine terrore: where is joy
without terror, ease without dolor, health without horror. Thou shall reign
in Heaven, Cujus Rex est Veritas, Lex est Charitas, Pax est aequitas: Whose
King is Verity, whose Law is Charity, whose Peace is Equity. To the which he
bring us, who, when we were lost in sin with Manasses, so early sought us;
who, when we were sold to sin with Manasses, so dearly bought us, Jesus, the
Son of God, the Lamb of God, God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, God blessed
for ever. Amen.

Ternae and aternae Trinitati, ascribatur honor omnis, gloria, dignitasque, in
saecula saeculorum. Vox audita perit, litera scripta manet.
FINIS.

