A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE NOTORIOVS LIFE OF JOHN LAMB, otherwise called
Doctor LAMB.

Together with his Ignominious DEATH.



Printed in Amsterdam. 1628.

A DESCRIPTION OF the Life and Death of John Lamb, otherwise called Doctor
LAMB.
THis Lamb commonly called Doctor Lamb, whose Scandalous life has been a
long subject of discourse in this Kingdom, and whose tragical and unexpected
death of late happening, has given cause of a sad Example to all such wicked
persons.

To pass by his Childehood, and to come to the beginning of his life* after he
was at man's estate, was for the most part spent in the houses of diverse
Gentlemen, whose Children he taught to write and read the English tongue. The
first step that ever he made toward that wicked course, which he was
afterward accused for, was the profession of that noble and deep Science of
Physic, (a color which many base Impostours have used to lewd and iuggling
practices, as the best things are subject to the greatest abuses.) Whether this
Doctor Lamb, for so we will now call him, had any ability of learning in him
or no, I will relate the judgments of some honest and able men, which have
talked with him. he seemed to them (how ever he would talk highly to ignorant
people) to be altogether unlearned, and silly of discourse* or else to affect
that way of speaking as a color of his mischeuous pra ctises* and rather to be
thought by them an Impostour, whom the credulous ignorance of the common people
had raised to that Fame, then to be truly and guiltily learned in those wicked
Mysteryes. But whether he were truly the man, which the people conceived him
to be, or not, I refer you to the proofs upon Indictment at Assizes against
him and those other stories of him justified by men and women of credit. He
began within short time after he professed Physic in the Country, to fall to
other mysteries, as telling of Fortunes, helping of diverse to lost goods,
shewto young people the faces of their Husbans or Wives, that should be, in a
Crystal glass: revealing to wives the escapes and faults of their Husbands,
and to husbands of their wives. By which means, whether truly or falsely told,
he wrought so much upon their credulity, that many mischiefs and divisions
were wrought between married people. But his fame was never truly great, till
he came to be questioned by the Laws of the Kingdom at Assizes and Sessions.
For the condemnation of his lewdness in those ass^mblies of Justice, did raise
an opinion of his ability among people, no less then some unlearned and
foolish Books in our time have gotten credit among the people, only because
Authority has censured them bad, which in steed of hurting the Authors, has
blown them up with a vain pride, and honored them in the judgment of their
ignorant admirers. The first trial in a Court of Justice against Doctor Lamb,
of any note, was at the Assifes at Worcester, In which he was found guilty of
two several Inditements; one for unchristian and damnable practices against
the person of an Honourble Peer of this Realm; and the other for damnable
invocation and worship of evil Spirits* as will in the following discourse
more at large appear.

And because I would not trouble every unlearned person to find out such as
are learned to expound Indictements. Therefore for the better understanding of
all persons, I have herein set down the true effects of the said Indictments
in English.

An Indictment preferred against John Lamb, otherwise called Doctor Lamb, at
Worcester.
Worcester. ss. The Jury for our Sovereign Lord the King do upon the holy
Evangelists present: That John Lamb late of Tardebigge in the County
aforesaid, Gent. not having the fear of God before his eyes, but by a
Diabolical instigation being moved and seduced the 16. day of December in the
year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord King James, of England, France, and
Ireland, King, defendor of the Faith, etc. the fifth, and of Scotland the one
and fortieth. At Tardebigg aforesaid, in the said County of Worcester, certain
evil Diabolical and execrable arts called Witchcrafts, Enchantments, Charmers
and Sorcerers, in and upon the right Honorable Th: Lo. W. Deuelishly,
Maliciously, and Feloniously, did use, practice, and exercise, to the intent by
the same evil, deuillish, and execrable Arts, to disable, make infirm, and
consume the body and strength of the said Th: Lo. W. And further the Jury
aforesaid, upon the said holy Sacrament, do say, that by the said evil,
deuillish, and execrable Arts, and by force and pretext of the same evil,
devilish, and execrable Arts, by him the said John Lamb as aforesaid, used,
practiced, and exercised the foresaid Th. Lo: W. the said 16 day of December in
the years aforesaid, and at diverse other days and times afterward, at
Tardebigg, in the said County of Worcester, in his body and strength was
greatly wasted and consumed* conrary to the peace of our said Sovereign Lord
the King, his Crown and dignity. And also against the form of the Statute in
this case made and provided, etc.

Upon which Indictment he was arraigned several times, and pleaded not guilty
to the same, but was found guilty of the same by proof there made. But
Judgment was suspended.

After which Indictment so found, the said Doctor Lamb was again Indicted
upon another Indictment then preferred against him, for inuoking and
entertaining of evil Spirits. The effect of which Indictment follows in
these words.

Woreester ss. The Jury for our Sovereign Lord the King, do upon the holy
Sacrament present that John Lamb late of Henlipp, in the County of Worcester
aforesaid, Gentleman, not having the fear of God before his eyes, but by
Diabolical instigation being moved and seduced, the thirteenth day of May, in
the year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord James, by the grace of God, of
England, France and Ireland, King, Defendor of the Faith, etc. the sixth, and
of Scotland one and fortieth: and at diverse other days and times as well
before as after at Henlipp aforesaid, in the County of Worcester aforesaid,
unlawfully, diabolically, and feloniously against the profession of the
Christian Faith, and holy word of God, certain evil and impious Spirits, did
inuoke and entertain with the intent that he the said John Lamb by the same
impious and wicked spirits should follow the evil determinations by him the
said John Lamb, unlawfully, maliciously, and diabolically then determined, or
from thence to be determined, to the great Displeasure of the omnipotent God,
and to the manifest peril of his souls health, and to the evil and
pernicious example of all other the Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the
King, in such case to be delinquents, And contrary to the peace of our said
Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown, and Dignity. And also contrary to the
form of the Statute in this case made and provided, etc.

Upon this indictment, he pleaded not guilty, but by the Jury he was found
guilty, but Judgment was stayed.

Here follows some particulars of the proofet against him upon this last
indictment.
That Doctor Lamb did meet with one master Wayneman by chance, and entering
into some discourse with him, he told him, that although he never had seen
him before, yet he could tell him what secret marks he had on his body, and
what Acts he had done in his life; which he did: and also told him, that he
upon sight of any man or woman could do the like to them.

And did practice to draw the said Mr. Wayneman into the Deuillish Art of
Coniuration, and told him that he had the command of spirits, and said he would
presently show to him an Angel. Which Master Wayneman for curiosity sake was
content to seet.

Thereupon Doctor Lamb took out of his pocket a round Crystal Class, and
set on the crown of his Hatt upon a table, and then he kneeled down on his
knees before the same, saying I addure thee ( Benias) Whereupon Master Waineman
answered, should you not say I admire thee? No, quoth Lamb: Then Master
Waineman said to him, sure you would not say, I adore? Yes, said Doctor Lamb,
otherwise he will not appear: and although I said to you, it was an Angel, I
would show you, I did deceive you* for it is a Spirit I use to call upon,
whereupon Mr. Wayneman did depart.

And at another time he met with Mr. Wayneman and persuaded him to the said art
of coniuration, and told him that he could do strange things, as intoxicate,
poison, and bewitch any man so as they should be disabled from begetting of
children.

And that he had 4. spirits bound to his crystal but said ( Benias) was his
chief spirit.

All these Mr. Wayneman proved against Doctor Lamb.

At another time a gentleman of the County of York, was present with the
sons of the right honorable the Earl of Moultgraue, a few days before
their death: where Doctor Lamb was showing of tricks at which there was great
laughter, amongst whom the Lady Fairefax being present, and sister to the said
Earls sons, did at the said tricks laugh very heartily, whereupon Doctor
Lamb said to her, Madam, your Ladyship is very merry and pleasant, but within
this few days your heart will ache, by occasion and accident of water, and
within three days after the said Earls sons were all drowned: and upon his
Examination in other matters laid to his charge, he confessed that he knew of
this accident before it befell by their complexions and the Planets which
governed them.

This was confessed upon his examination taken before Mr. Justice Daniel.

Doctor Lamb being at a gentleman's house in the County of Worcester playing of
Iugling tricks, and diverse persons being with him: he fell into discourse with
some of them, and left his crystal ball upon a table; a gentleman called Mr.
Anthony Birch took up the same, and the shape of a hand appeared in it; and
looking still on the said ball, he see a shepherd with a sheepehooke and
tarbox on his back, whereat Master Birch being amazed did presently ask what
that was he did see in the crystal, and Doctor Lamb seeing him have the same
in his hand, snatched it away in great discontent, and put it up in his pocket.

This was proved by the same gentleman, by all which it manifestly appears
that the said Doctor Lamb was an absolute Witch, a Sorcerer and Iugling person
absolutely given over to lewd wicked and diabolical courses, an invocator and
adorer of impious and wicked Spirits.

By his Art and skill in coniuration or rather by the information and
instigation of his diabolical spirits, he would undertake any difficult thing,
and did very often discover and bring to light goods and chattels although they
had for a long time been lost.

He could also tell by the view of any person suspected for witchcraft,
whether he, or she were a witch or not.

He could tell the disease of any although he never see the party, and this
was discovered by a Seruingman who coming amongst diverse others to see Doctor
Lamb, told him, that his Masters Daughter, did then languish of a certain
disease which he then punctually related, and told him her complexion: which
gentlewoman he did never see; neither was he asked any question concerning her
disease. This was the Daughter of one Mr. John Atwood.

There was amongst diverse other Gentlewomen that resorted to Doctor Lamb
whilst he was a Prisoner, one Gentlewoman, that was very earnest with him to
know who should be her husband, and Doctor Lamb after he had delayed her
diverse times with promises to show her what she desired, appointed her a
peremptory day to come to him, on which day she accordingly came, and
enquired of the keeper for him; and he directed her to the chamber where he
lay, where when she came, she called Doctor Lamb? who answered her, and bid
her draw near to his bed (upon which he was with his wearing apparel on) when
she was near him, he bid her look in his Crystal which he laid on the
ground; and asked her if she did see any that she did know: she answered
that she did see diverse of her acquaintance there (there being then none in
the Chamber but them two) who vanished away and the Crystal being clear
from any further object she turned her face toward Doctor Lamb, and told
him that then there were no other sight she could see in it: whereupon he bid
her pervse the Crystal again, and thereupon she casting her eyes toward
the same, she said to him, now I see a Gentleman all in green, he bid her
mark him well, for that same party within a short while would come to her
Fathers house, and although his coming thither should not be with any intent
to become a suitor unto her, yet there so it would fall out that before his
departure he would have cause to express himself, and that he in the end
should be her husband: she thereupon answered that she did not know the
Gentleman, nor did ever see any such man, before that apparition in the
Crystal; he answered, that it was not material; it would come so to pass
as he had said. Whereupon she at that time departed reasonably well
satisfied; and coming home some of the Gentlewomen knowing of her being with
Doctor Lamb) enquired the news, and (as Gentlewomen are often inquisitiue and
very earnest especially to know such rarieties) she thereupon did make all
known what had passed, and did describe to them what apparel and of what
stature and complexion the party was that she had seen and was informed by
Doctor Lamb should be her husband: and not many days passed after this
discovery but the Gentleman whom she had so descrybed, came to the
Gentlewomans Fathers House, being a Counselor at Law as a Client, and having
had his advise, and taking his horse at the door, something did affright the
horse as the Gentleman was getting up, which caused the horse to rear and
kick in that sort as the Gentleman was taken up for dead, and there being no
Inn near that place he was conveyed into the Lawyers house, where he
continued until he recovered his former health, in which time he fell in
love with the Gentlewoman: and she with him, and in the end they were married
together.

Here follow some exploits done by Doctor Lamb during his Imprisonment in the
Castle of Worcester.
THree Gentlemen came upon a time to see Doctor Lamb in the Castle of
Worcester, while he was there Prisoner, who desired to bestow some wine on
him; but the Keeper told them it was not a seasonable time to send for wine; it
being past Eight of the clock in a Summer evening; at which time the Castle
gates were of custom to be locked up, and the Tavern was half a mile
distant from the Castle. Upon which the Gentlemen gave over their purpose of
sending for wine. But Doctor Lamb asked them what wine they would choose to
drink; and when one of them answered Sack, he called for a Wine-glasse, and
immediately a pottle of Sack stood before them upon the Table, the Gentlemen
were fearful to meddle with it; but the Doctor began to them, and they upon
his encouragement pledged him. They asked him then from whence he had it; he
told them from the Globe Tavern, and the sign of the Globe was upon the pot.
The Gentlemen afterward parting from Doctor Lamb, and going to their lodgings
in the Town, enquired of the Tauerne-keeper whether any body had lately
fetched a pottle of wine from thence, or no. The man answered them that a
little boy in green had since eight of the clock fetched so much for Doctor
Lamb.

Another.
Doctor Lamb being merry at the Castle with diverse of his acquaintance,
espied a woman not far from thence walking toward them, and told the Company
he would make that woman take up her coats above her middle. And immediately,
to the wonder of the company the woman began to take up her clothes, and by
degrees lifted them up above her middle. Some women that beheld her, called out
alowd, and asked what she meant by so shameless a behavior, she answered them
that she meant to wade through the water and save her clothes, imaginging (it
should seem) that there had bin a poole, where it was dry land.

Another.
A Gentlewoman hearing the fame of Doctor Lamb, came to the Castle with other
of her Friends, expecting some strange sights from him. And when she was come
into his room asked a friend of hers softly in his ear, which was the Witch?
The Doctor came to her, and told her he knew she had called him witch, and
because she should know, he could understand secrets, he told her aloud,
(which was truth) that she had two bastards; and named their ages, and the
places where they were both brought up. Upon which the Gentlewoman wonderfully
abashed, quitted the place.

Another.
There was a man that dwelt besides Tewxbury, whose name was Wheeler. He was
warned to be one of the Jury at Worcester upon the Trial of Doctor Lamb. He
coming before to the Castle to see the Doctor, and standing amongst the crowd
of people in the chamber; Doctor Lamb came to him, and falling down upon his
knees asked him blessing. The people wondering at the reason of it, Doctor
Lamb told them that he should shortly be one of his twelve Godfathers. Wheeler
being a bold fellow and nothing abashed at it, told him it was true; but he was
now come to see, whether he could do any such strange things, as he had heard
of. Doctor Lamb bid him pluck off his garter, and tie it about his middle as
fast as ever he could; which Wheeler accordingly did, and tied it in twenty
knots. Then Doctor Lamb bad him pluck it off again; he told him he could
not unless he took time to untie the knottes. Then Doctor Lamb taking hold
of the garter, plucked it with ease from him, and in such a manner as it seemed
to all the company, and to Wheeler himself, that the Garter came out of his
very body; upon which Wheeler was much affrighted, being not altogether sure,
whether he were wounded or not.

After his arraignment at the Assizes of Worcester, the High Sheriff, the
Foreman of the Jury, and diverse others of the Justices, Gentlemen there
present, and of the same Jury, to the number of forty dyed all within one
fortnight; upon which the Country (how ever that sad accident befell)
affrighted, and suspecting the damnable arts of the said Doctor, and observing
many other lewd practices of his, during the time of his imprisonment, became
petitioners for his remove from thence; upon which he was removed to the Kings
Bench at London. In which place he lived in great plenty of money, and much
resorted unto by people of several conditions. Where at last he was arraigned
for a rape upon the person of a girl of eleven years of age, as shall more at
large appear in the following discourse.

Here follows the effect of an Indictment preferred against Doctor Lamb at
the Kings Bench Bar, for a Rape by him committed, upon the body of Joan
Scager, of the age of Eleven years.
THE Jury for our Sovereign Lord the King, upon the Holy Evangelist, do
present: That John Lamb, late of St. George in the Borough of Southwarke in
the County aforesaid Gentleman, not having the fear of God before his eyes,
but by a Diabolical instigation being moved and seduced, the tenth day of
lune, in the year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord JAMES by the grace of
God, of England, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc* the 21.
and of Scotland the 56. with force and arms, etc. at the Parish of St. George
aforesaid, in the Borough of South-warke aforesaid, in the County aforesaid,
upon one Ioane Seager a virgin, of the age of 11. years, in the peace of
God, and our said Sovereign Lord the King then and there being, an assault
made, and her the said Ioane against her will, then and there feloniously and
violently did ravish, deflowre, and carnally know, against the peace of our
said Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity: And also against the
form of the Statute in this case made and provided, etc.

Upon which Indictment he was arraigned before the Kings Majesty's Justices of
his Highness Court, called the Kings Bench, and was there found guilty of the
said Rape, and had Judgment to die, but by his Majesty's especial Grace he
was pardoned.

Here follows the effect of the proofs produced against him concerning this
Rape.
Concerning the rauishment of Ioane Seager, of the age of 11. years, done by
John Lamb prisoner in the Kings Bench.

The Examination of Mabell Swinnerton, wife to William Swinnerton Bricklayer,
dwelling in St. Martins Parish, near unto the new Exchange.

WHo says, that Elizabeth Seager, the mother of John Seager came to her house,
she then dwelling in South warke on the Friday in Whitsun-weeke, and in a
pitiful manner wringing her hands like a woman ouer-whelmed with extreme
grief, crying out and saying, I am undone, I am undone: I then asked her how
her husband did, for at that time he was a prisoner in the Counter upon an
Execution, and at that time lay very sick to all such as saw him there,
thinking him no man for this world: She answered me and said, her husband was
very ill and lay very hardly; but that was not that matter of her grief as
then, for it was a worse sorrow then that! O Lord said I, what more sorrows
then these you have already, yet whatsoever they be; desire God to give you
patience, for nothing can happen to you, but by Gods fore knowledge: but I pray
said I, tell me what sorrows these are that thus distract you, she still
continued as before wringing her hands, and said, she was not able to tell me,
for she was undone, at last with my importance she said Ioane was undone, and
she said she could tell me no more she was not able, but prayed me to come
home: so foorth-with I shut my door and went with her, and by the way I
demanded the cause of her, she told me it was that villain Doctor Lamb had
undone her child, and said she could say no more her grief was so great, but
ask the girl said she and she will tell you: so coming to the child, I
questioned with her, but she being much abashed and ashamed, was long before
she would tell me: but at the last she told me, that on Whitsun-Euen, Lambs
women being all very busy at her mothers house, there was no body to carry a
basket of herbs over to the Bench: but she, who when she came to Doctor
Lamb, his man was in the chamber with him scraping of trenchers, and Doctor
Lamb took her herbs of her and set her to play on the Virginals, and then he
sent out his man on a message and locked the door, and then took her and led
her into his Closet and made fast that door, and took her upon a
Ioynt-stoole, and put his tongue in her mouth to kiss her, but she was
wondrous fearful of him, and striued with him as much as she could, but he
would not let her alone, but strove with her.

There are certain passages which are upon the Records which for Modesty sake
are here omitted.
I Asked her why she told it not at the first, she said she was afraid her
Mother would have beaten her: but then at her mothers entreaty, I took her
home and dressed her, but when I opened her to dress her: the place did smoke
like a pot that had seething liquor in it that were newly uncovered, and I
found her to be very sore, and could not abide to be touched: but I perceived
that some body had dressed her, and I asked her if any body had meddled to dress
her, she told me Lambs maid Beck had brought her a thing in a dish, and had
dressed her, but there was a little specke of the venomous substance of it, that
stuck upon the inside of her thigh, and when I pulled it away, it had festerd
the place where it stuck, as if one had touched it with an end of Iron, so
vilde and venomous was that base substance. So by the entreaty of goodwife
Seager, I went over to Doctor Lamb to show him what indeed he knew before
which was on the morrow after we knew of it: which when I came, I saw the
chamber well fraught with women, and not past three men in all, and I saw the
Doctor (not indeed knowing what he was) very busy foulding of linen, shaking
of them bettwixt him and another, and a white cloth pinde about him, and white
sleeves up to his elbowes, and as nimble as a Vintners boy setting every one in
order. I demanded of his woman to speak with the Doctor, they told me, that
was he in the white aperne: so at last he went into his closet and called to
me, and asked me if I would speak with him, I asked if his name were Doctor
Lamb? That is it said he, marry said I, I am come to do a message unto you,
that I am both sorry and ashamed to do, sorry said I in respect of the child,
and sorry for you, that you should offer to do such a thing, for you have
undone an honest man's child, for well she may recover her health of body
again, but never her credit, for it will be a stain to her reputation
whilst she lives: so many strumpets in the town and to seek the ruin of a
poor child, I would to God said I you had not done it: With that he railed
upon my Lord of Winszor grievously, with many base words, and said, he did
more good deeds in a week, then my Lord of Winszor did in a year: I grant
you may do so; but this one ill deed has quite put out the light of all them
good deeds, and still he railed* on my Lord of Winszor: but I made answer, I
did not know my Lord of Winzor, he was an Honorable gentleman for ought I
know: but this concerns not him at all, but you, for you have undone her: then
said he? let her come to me, that I may see how she is, Nay said I, she has
bin too late with you already, she will come no more here, he said he would
have her searched with 12. women, you may do as you please said I for that
matter: I will have her searched to see if she be torn, nay said I, she is
not so much torn* for I will wrong no body for a thousand pound: but in plain
terms you have burnt her, either you have a foul body, or you have dealt with
some unclean person, besides I told him he had sent his maid to dress her,
for the dish was at home still, and so I left him.

And this is the truth, concerning this business with many appurtenances
besides apertinant to the matter.

After his repriue upon the rape, he hired a house near the Parliament
house, where he lived about the space of a year and a quarter, in such a
course of life, as differed not at all from his former practices. Upon Friday
being the 13. of June, in the year of our Lord 1628. he went to see a Play at
the Fortune, where the boys of the town, and other unruly people having
observed him present, after the Play was ended, flocked about him, and (after
the manner of the common people, who follow a Hubbubb, when it is once a foot)
began in a confused manner to assault him, and offer violence. He in affright
made toward the City as fast as he could out of the fields, and hired a
company of Sailors, who were there present to be his guard. But so great was
the surie of the people, who pelted him with stones, and other things which
came next to hand, that the Sailors (although they did their endeavor for him)
had much ado to bring him in safety as far as Moore-gate. The rage of the
people about that place increased so much, that the Sailors for their own
safety, were forced to leave the protection of him; and then the multitude
pursued him through Coleman-street to the old Jury, no house being able, nor
daring to give him protection, though he had attempted many. Four Constables
were there raised to appease the tumult; who all too late for his safety
brought him to the Counter in the Poultrey, where he was bestowed upon the
command of the Lord Mayor. For before he was brought thither, the people had
had him down, and with stones and cudgels, and other weapons had so beaten
him, that his skull was broken, one of his eyes hung out of his head, and all
parts of his body bruised and wounded so much, that no part was left to
receive a wound. Whereupon (although Surgeons in vain were sent for) he never
spoke a word, but lay languishing until Eight a clock the next morning, and
then dyed. This lamentable end of life had Doctor John Lamb, who before
prophesied (although he were confident he should escape Hanging,) that at
last he should die a violent death. On Sunday following, he was buried in the
new Churchyard near Bishops-gate.

FINIS.

