A uery brefe treatise, ordrely declaring the pri^cipal parts of physic, that
is to say: Things natural. Things not natural. Things against nature.

Gathered, and set forth by Christopher Langton.

Anno dn^i. M.D.XLVII.

Wylm^ Baldwyn*
Who so desires health got, to preserve:
And lost, to procure: ought chefely to know
Such natural things, as thereto may serve:
Great knowledge whereof, this book will him show.
Which small though it seem contains as much
Of art to be known of them that are wise,
As byg mighty books agastfull to tuche,
As well for the wayght, as for the heavy price.
Read it therefore all ye that love your health,
Learn here in an hour, else where in a year
Scarce red, the which Langton willing our wealth
Has englyshed brefe, as it does appear.
To whom the free geuer of your so great gain,
Yield thanks and praises, a payment for his pain.
Consule valetudini.
The contents of this Book.
The first book.
OF what kind of arts physic is. Cap. i. Of the sects in Physycke. Cap.
ii. The parts of physic. iii. The distribucion of Physic in to three
fourmes. Cap. iiii Of the number of things natural. v. Of Elements. Cap. vi.
Of temperamentes. Cap. vii. Of Humors. Cap. viii Of the parts of man's body.
Cap. ix. Of powers or faculties. Cap. x Of Actions. Cap. xi. Of Spirits. Cap.
xii.
The second book.
OF the number of things not natural. Cap. i Of Air. Cap. ii Of meat and
drink. Cap. iii Of exercise, and rest. Cap. iiii Of Sleep and watch. Cap. v
Of Fullness and emptiness. Cap. vi Of the perturbations and sudayne mocions of
the mind. Cap. vii
The third book.
OF the number of things against nature. Cap. i Of the causes of diseases.
Cap. ii Of diseases. Cap, iii Of Accidents, Cap, iiii
The fowerth book.
How to judge of any disease. Cap, i Of Urine, Cap, ii Of the excrementes of
the belly, Cap, iii Of the Spettel, Cap, iiii Of the Pulses, Cap. v
Finis.
To the right high and mighty Prince Edward, Duke of Somerset, Protector of
the kings may. realms and dominions, and gouerner of his most Royal
person, Christofer Langton wyssheth health and encreace of all godliness.
Physic has been so afflicted and clogged with ignorant writers (it were to
tediouse to rehearce either their names or their opinions) that before
Gallenes days, none knew which was the truth. And though Gallen wrote orderly,
yet by the iniurye of time, the best part of his works be lost, to the great
hynderaunce of all such as shall be students in Physic: Yet if but half that
that remains, were englysshed, I would then think yt we should have al
things in Physic a great deal the playnar, to the great profit and wealth
of the realm diverse ways. For first it would save great exspence of money,
which unlearned strangers daily carrye away. Than it would be the safegarde
of many men's lives, which might be able to do the king otherwise right good
service: And finally it would cause a great increase of wisdom, which passes
both gold and precious stones. Wherefore I considering the wealth of the
greater number, have taken upon me to write orderly of a great peace of
physic which I dedicate unto your grace not that I think it worthy so noble
a Prince, but partly because I judge you a man much desirous to know such
things as be here set forth for the bodyly health, and partly for that I
trust your noblenes will further al godly ententes: which if ye do, ye shall
not only encorage me (which am but a lernar, and as yet a young student in
Physic) but other also (which are already perfect in the works of Physic)
daily to set forth such things, as may profit many, and hurt none. Thus I
pray god grant to your grace in all your affayers, most prosperous success,
and after this tra^sitory life, joy without end. Amen.

The first book.
The first Chapter. Of what kind of arts Physic is.
Seeing that I have taken upon me, to write a brief treatise upon Physic, for
the alonlye commodity of ignorant and unlearned students in the same, I
think it very necessary and expedient to open and declare, both plainly, and
brefely what physic is, which in Latin is called Medicina, and in English
word for word, Medicine.

Hyppocrates in his book de flatibus, which is as much to say, as in his
book of Spirits, or blastes, affirms that Medicine or Physic, is nothing,
but the adiection of that that lacks, or the subtraction, or taking away,
of that which is superfluous, and redoundeth: the which declaration or
definition, Gallen allows in many places, and truly not without a cause: For
there is no part of phisike but it is comprehended in this finition. Auerroes
in the.vi. book, and the.i. Chapter, of his gatheringes does define physic
very fetely, in these words folowinge. Medicina est ars factiuarum vna,
ratione, et experimento inuenta, que tum sanitatem tuetur, tum morbum depellit.
which is as much to say in englysh, as Phisike is one of those arts which
does make things invented, or found out by reason and experience, and the
which partly defends health, and partly beteth away disease, and siknes.

Herophilus would have defined it, after this fashion. Medicina est scientia
salubrium, insalubrium, et neutrorum.

Which in english is as follows. Physike is a science of things wholesome,
and unwholesome, and of neither of both: Gallen uses this finition, in his book
yt is called ars medica, not because he does so greatly allow it, but because
yt serves his purpose, which is easy to be known of that, that follows:
where he says that this word scientia, must be taken in that place,
according to his common significatyon, and not as it signifies properlye:
wherefore phisike is an art, and no science, and seeing yt is an art, I
think yt well done, to show in what kind of arts it is: For there be many
differences of Arts, but especially.iiii. One is called in Latyne,
Contemplatoria, which has his end only in the seeing and beholding of
things, and may well be called contemplacion or knowledge, such is
Arithmetic, Astronomy, and natural philosophy, for there is none of these
arts that does any thing but is only ended in contemplacion and study.

There is an other which is called in Latin, Actiua, in Englysh practice, and
consists in doing, as dawnsyng, and harpyng, with other like.

The third in Latin may be called Factiua, which beside the practice and
study, leaves behind his work, as payntyng, and buyldyng, and of this
kind there be two arts, for some make the works them selves, as weuyng and
tanning, and some correct and amend the things, when they be made: as botchyng
and clowtyng of old garments houses, and other things The fowerth in Latin is
called comparans, which in our tongue may be called a gettyng art, for it does
make nothing, but by study, and industry gets certain things as fysshynge
and huntyng, these truly do make nothing: but their study and labor is to get
somthyng. And to be brefe, Physic as Gallen says, is a kind of those Arts
which restores their works now already done, and corrects the same, and
not of them which make their works new. For Physic of her self makes not
her examples, as the art of buyldyng, knyttyng, and weuing does. But as that
art that mendeth old houses, and piceth old garments: so phisike does amend
the evil constitution of man's body.

The second Chapter. Of the sects in phisyke.
YT is now alredye showed, that phisike is an art which restores health
being absent, and defends the same being present, but how this art may be
gotten yt is not agreed upon amongst all men, for some think experience
sufficient to the gettyng of this art, and do call them selfs thereof
Empericos. These be they that have there first respect unto the heap of
accidents, and begins their cure of them, without any knowledge either of
the disease, or the cause, and they call the forsayde heap of accidents in
Greek, (...), the which in Lattyn is called Congeries, and concursus, and in
English a heap, and concurryng, or runnynge to gether. Secundarilye, they
observe, and mark, in the cummynge to gether of Accidents, Medicines which
they know to be mete for the disease, only by use and experience. Thyrdely
they learn remedies of the history, of such as they have before proved:
Fowerthly they go from like, to like.

For what soever remedies they have proved by experience, in many men, and
often times (but always they prove them in the same and like measure, orelles
by chance, and as a man would say unlooked for, they mark and observe them
to be like, and to have one effect) the same they use boldly* nothing curiouse
in the inquyryng what faculty or nature they be of, that is to say whether
they be hot or cold, dry or moist, and they believe and credit the old
auncientes, which has left in writing, such things as they have noted and
observed by experience, and that yt the^ selves have observed and marked, they
call in Greek, (...), which in Englysh, may be called their own inspection,
and look what they have observed, and marked by chance, as if a man by
falling from high, be wounded, or hurt, or else if a man being sick and
following his appetite, dri^ke cold water, the which has either done good or
evil, they call (...), which is to say an obseruacion made by chance. But
when they learn that that is marked by other, they call it in Greek, (...)
which may be called the observation of other.

They use also to go from like to like, whiles they intermedle with such
things, as they have not yet proved, although they be of one kind, and this
is called of them in greek, (...), which in englysh is going from like to like,
and by this rule they transfer one medicine to diverse euyls, and from one place
affected to another and from one medicine which they knew before, to an other
of the same kind unknown.

If the natural egestions be holden to long, then the party has a byndyng
disease they say: but if they run to much, that they call an open disease:
And if a man be both bound and lewse together, than they call that sycknes a
combynation of both the fornamed euyls: as if the eye should suffer a flux,
and an inflammation together, of the which, the inflammation is a sycknes that
byndeth, and the flux an open disease: then their remedy in such a case, is
to bind that that runs, and to open that that is bound, as if there be any
inflammation in the shoulder or arm, what is their rule? what, but without
deliberation, or consideration of the place affected, straight to lewse the
bellye, and if it fortune both the forsayde euyls to chance at one time, in
one membre, then what do they? utterly necglect that that is of the least
danger: and these be they which reprehende Hyppocrates, because he says that
physic is a long art, and that man's life is but short, for they say
that it is not so, but rather clean contrary. For as they say, if all that is
superfluous were cut out, physic might be easily learned in.vi. months.
The begynner of this sect, was Syrus, Asclepiades scholar: after whom came
Thessalus, Proclus, and many other.

Moreover there be other which be called Dogmatici, because they ground all
their doings upon reason. These do learn diligently the nature and
co^stitution of all such bodies as they take in hand to heal: and do mark
very dilygently, every day, the alterations of the same, beside this, they
say, that yt is every honest Physician his part, to know, and consider well,
both the nature of the air, waters, and wyndes, and the place also where the
sick abydethe, and his accustomed diet, as well in meats, and drinks, as
bathes, exercises, and other things, to the end, that he may have a sure
knowledge, both of the causes, and remedies, of all diseases. They will also
that he be such an one, that he be able, to prove by reason, what nature any
kind of medicyne has, and that he be able to apoynt, (though he never saw yt
before) what yt is able to do, and they counsel every Physician, to begin
his cure, according to the strength of the sick, and not as ye disease
paraduenture shall will him: And they do not deny, but that experience is
necessary, howbeit they deny it to be sufficient to cure all malledies, and
to find, and search out, all things. And also they say, yt without reason,
experience can hardly be come by. The first author, and founder of this sect,
was Hyppocrates Lous, without dowt, the most learned, and noble Physician,
that ever was, after him came Diocles, Praxagoras, and Chrysyppus, with many mo,
no less learned, then famous.

The.iii. chapter. The parts of physic
THere be.vi. especial parts of physic, the first does considere the
constitucion of man's nature, and body. The second defends the body from
sycknes, keeping it in health. The third inquireth the causes, and accidents,
of sickness, and diseases. The forth conteyneth the knowledge as well of
things past, as also present, and to come. The fifth shows an order, and a
way, how all diseases, should be healed: and this part, is divided into three
other parts. The first of the three, techeth the healing of sicknesses, by
diet only, and therefore it is both the chief, and most noble part of
physic, and without the which, the other parts, which serve to the helyng of
diseases, can not be: and hereof it is, that Hippocrates wrote three great books
of the remediynge of all fervent diseases, by diet only, in the which book, he
proves euydently, that of a little faut or error in the diet of such as be
sick, follows death without remedy, the which thing if it be true, as
undoubtedly it is, what be such Physicians worthy, as do utterly necglect
the same, and think that they have done a great feat, when they have written a
byl or two, to the appoticarie, taking no care in the mean time, what manner
of diet, the sick keeps.

The second part, heals by medicines inward, and outwardly taken. But there
be medicines of.ii. sorts, that is to say simple, and compounde, and first to
the parfit curyng of the disease most necessary is the knowledge of the simple
and this care which is a great charge, is committed to such, as be unlearned,
yea and in many places (more is the pity) to folish, and ignorant women: I
would rather wish, the handlynge of such Iuelles, to be in the hands, of ye
best learned, and wysest Physicians: For as it is a thing to be laughhed at, if
a Paynter know not his pensill, or a coblar his nall, or a tannar his lether,
so think ye that a Physician is not to be laughed to scorn? if he know not the
matter of that art, which he professes? But now adays he is most set by; and
had in the gretest estimation, which knoeth ye least, and which can make one
medicine serve a thowsande diverse diseases, which is as like to be true, as
one shoe to be mete and sit for so many feet. And as for medicines, they be not
worth a vile straw, except they com out of Ethiop, Arabi, or India, whereas for
us english men, there is non so good, as our own English simples: For it can
not be proved, yt nature ever brought forth any where living creatures, where
as she left nothing to feed them with all, and likewise as she has provided
meat, so has she medicyns also, but the suttylties of men, for their own
gain, and private Lucre, has browght to pass that al thing is out of order,
both in the shoppes of the appoticaries, and other places else where. The
third part is Surgery, which is wrought by man's hand, which Gallen commends
hyghly, in many, and sundry books.

The.iiii. chapter. The distribution of Physic in to three forms.
QVre forfathers have distributed, and divided Physic, into three forms, or
orders, and that for no other purpose, but that young students of Physic,
might learn diligently, and a great dele the better remember, what so ever they
had red, in the monumentes of old writers. The first order is of those
things, of ye which, man's body is made of, and it has plesed the foresaid
elders, to call such things, as our body is co^pact, and made of things
natural, because to the perfection of man's body they be necessary.

The second order, is of those things, with the which, our body is
nourished, that yt may remain in health: and these things be called not
natural, not because they be utterly against our nature, but because if they
be given without discrecio^, they may make such alteration in the body, as
may extinguishe and abolishe utterly, the life.

The third order, is of such as hurt, and harm the body, and corrupt it, and
therefore, they be called, things against nature, be cause they be clean
contrary to nature.

The fyfth chapter. Of the number of things natural.
Now it is time to speak of the first part of Physic, which entreats of
the natural co^stitution of man's body, and this part of Physic, is not
put first, without a cause: For no man can do any good with a medicyne, which
is ignorant in the constitution of man's body, therefore the things natural
whereof man's body is conpact and made, be seven in number.

1 Elements: as the fiere, air, water, and earth.

2 Temperamentes: as hot, cowlde, moist, and dry.

3 Humores: as blowde, fleume, chollar both yelow and black.

4 Parts: as flesh, bone, brain heart, liver, heed, and hands

5 Faculties: as Animal, vital, and natural.

6 Actions: as Animal, and natural.

7 Spirits: as animal, vital, and natural.

These things I entend (god willing) to express so well as the sterillite of
my simple wit, will give me leave, beginning first with the Elements.

The sixte, chapter. Of the Elements.
TVlly ye eloquent Romain, counsels very well every man, first of all and
before he make any far procedynge, to defyne the thing, of the which he
pourposeth to entreat, to ye intent that every man may perceive what it is ye
is spoken of therefore according to his counsel (I will first define what an
element is: wherefore an element, (as Galen says in the.viii. book of the
decrees of Plato, and Hyppocrates) is the lest part of that thing, of the
which it is an element, and of these amongst the hole nature of things, there
be but four in number, which is the fire, Air, water, and earth: and as of
these all things natural, have there beginning, so at the length, they shall
be resolved into the same again. For Hyppocrates says, in a book, which he
entytelleth the nature of man, that after the soul is once dissolved from the
body, every thing, whereof the body was of first, is returned in his own
nature again, as look what in the beginning was dry, that is turned in to
dry, and what was moist, becomes moist again: and likewise heat is turned
into heat, and cold, becomes cold again, but after these elements be once
mixte in the body they can no more be called elements, that is to say pure,
and simple bodies, and that ye is made of them, is a body mixed, and
corruptible.

Therefore as Gallen counsels in the first book of elements, go not about
to search out or to find in any natural body, any thing that is simple, and
not mixed, or compounded, lest thou lose thy pain, but be contented if thou se
a member that is could, hard, and dry, and a another that is moist, rare, and
fluxible, to think the tone to come of the earth, and the other, of the
water, And likewise when thou considerest with thy self, in thy mind, the
nature of a spirit, then remember the air. For seeing that the elements, be
the lest parts of owre bodies, it is not possible that they should be
perceived by any sense. If these elements were not mixte all together, nether
man, nor no other living creature, could be made of them, for what part of
the body they should towch, they must of necessity, corrupt the same. For there
is no part of the body that can abide safe without hurt, or damage, the
towchynge of any thing, that is either extreme hot or extreme cold, moyest,
or dry. And hereof it is evident that these elements be not mixed in man's
body, as wheat, or barley, is mixed in a hepe, for of the grain there is no
alteration, seeing after the mixture it remaynethe hole, but the elements be so
altered, and changed, that after the mixture, there remains nothing, but
only a signification of their qualities, the which qualities, whiles they be
in the elements, altering the substance subject to them, do cause the mutual
alteration, of ye elements. Yt is necessary for a Physician, to consider
exactlye, and diligently, the nature of the elements, to the end that he may
know, how health is made of the temperature, of heat, cold, dry, and moist,
and of the distemperature of the same sickness.

The seven chapter. Of temperamentes
Amongst things natural, the temperamentes, have the second place, a
temperament is no thing else, but a complexion, or a conbination of ye four
elements or else of heat, could, dry and moist: of temperamentes there
be.ix. differencis, of ye which one is temperat, be cause it excedeth in no
quality, the rest be all distemperat, of the which.iiii. be simple, as hot,
cold, dry, and moist, and.iiii. be compounde, as hot and moist to gether, cold
and dry, hot and dry, could, and moist. The ix. difference, which I said
before was temperat, may be taken.ii. manner of ways, either temperat simple
and absolutely, or else temperate in every kind of things: look what is
temperate simply, and absolutely, that in the respect of all things, is
temperat and in it the elements be equally mingled, and such a thing must be
known by cogitacion only, for other ways it cannot, as Gallen is a manifest
witness in the first book, that he writ in the defense of health.

And that is temperat in every kind, in the which, is the same mediocrity of
contrary elements, as is convenient to the nature, not only of man and best,
but also of trees, and plants, and this temperament is in all them that be
hole according to there nature, and it may be known of his functions, and
officis, who is hole according to his nature.

For he that can do every thing well, which he is apt to do naturally, is as
hole as nature made him, whether it be man or best or it be tree, or plant: as
an apple tree is very well, or hole, according to his nature, wha^ he bears a
great number of good apples, and likewise an horse, when he runs very swift.
Therefore this is not the temperament, which is mesured by weight, wherein there
is as many degrees of heat, as of cold, and of dryness as of moisture, for
that is no where, nor can not be known, but by cogitation, as is a foresaid:
but in this temperament which is in every kind of things the elements be so
mixed, that the temperament which comes of the mixture, agrees both to the
nature of me^, bestes, and plants. Therefore it is called a temperament,
according unto justice, which mesureth to every man, not by weight, but by
dignity: wherefore what soever thing exceadeth this temperament, either in
heat, could, drynes, or moisture, ye same is not temperate: and of the same
that redoundeth it takes ye name, as if it be hete that is superfluous then it
is called hot, and look what thing has more hete, then cold, that same is
hot, and contrary, if it have more cold than heat, it is called could, and
likewise that that has more moisture, then drines, is named moist: and again,
if it have more drines the^ moisture, then it may be called dry: and here of it
comes ye summer is called hot, because it has more hete then could, and
winter is called cold, because it has more cold then heat: furthermore if a
thing excede in heat and moisture to gether, or in cold and dryness, or in
hete and dryness, or in cold and moisture, then it must take name, of the
qualities which excedeth: as if heat and moisture excede, then it must be
called hot and moist: if cold and drynes, cold and dry: and so of the other.
And hereof it is evident, that sumtyme one temperament is equal and temperate
in one opposicion, and distemperate, and not equal in an other.

For if it be not necessary, for that that is hot to be dry, but may be moist,
then it may also be temperate, because the mean is nygher to the dry
temperature, then is ye moist: and likewise an other temperature that is cold
if it may as well be dry as moist, may be temperate also: because the mean is
nigher to the moist temperature, then the dry is.

The same answer may be made of dry and moist, that before is made of hot
and cold. Therefore it is no maruayle, though there be sumthinge temperate in
the one half, and not temperate in the other. But here thou must take heed, if
thou be axed of what temperature a man, an ass, or an ox is, that thou
answer not symply and absolutely: For to that that is spoken diversely, and is
diuerie also of it self, no man can make absolutely and simply a direct
answer: Therefore before thou make thine answer, you must bid him, show yt ye
man, the ass, or ye ox, whereof he douteth: then if he dout of a man, thou
must have a respect to the perfect man, which (as Gallen says in the first
book of his te^peramentes) is neither hot, nor could, and as he differs
from him, so make answer, saying either that he is hot, or otherwise as thy
judgment shall led the: but if he doubt of a best, then thou must have an eye
to the hole kind of men. For all other kinds, compared unto it, are
distemperat, and as he differs from mankind, either in hete, or otherwise,
so shape him an answer. And that thou be not deceived, in making thine
answer, thou must understand, that heat, could, dry, and moist, be taken
diversely: For first they be taken absolutely, and simply, that is to say
without any admixtion of other bodies: and of this sort, the only elements be
hot, could, dry, and moist: secondarely they be spoken by excess, as when
there is in one thing, more hete then could, more dryness, then moisture, or
other wise: and of this fassion blood, fleme, wine, oil, and honny, be called
hot, cold, dry, and moist: and that, that is called hot, cold, dry, and
moist of this sort, is spoken yet.2. manner of ways. first absolutely, that is
compared to no one alone, but to the hole nature of things, and of this
fasshio^ a dog, simply, and absoluetly taken, and not compared to any thing
alone, is dry: otherwise that is to say not absolutely, but compared to sum one
alone, may be moist, as to a pismyre. And moreover, there be.iii. diverse manner
of comparisons, the first is betwyxt two of diverse kinds, as a man to a
beast. The second is when ye distemperate is compared to the temperate of the
same kind, as a man compared to the parfit man, whereof we spoke before. The
third is, when.ii. distemperate of one kind, is compared together: as one man
to an other, one lion to an other, one horse to an other. Whosoever does
diligently examine these things, may easly judge of what temperament the iiii.
times of the year, that is to say ye spring, summar, autumn, and winter, be.
For every one of these by him self and without comparison, may be called hot
cold, dry, or moist, and of this fashion the spring is without all excess,
because there is not as is in winter, more cold then heat: nor as in summar,
more heat the^ cold: likewise there is a mediocritie of dryness and moisture,
and therefore Hippocrates says, that it is the most holsumest time of all the
year, and a time in the which there chau^seth no deadly sickness. For ye most
part of the diseases of the spring, happen by reason that all the evil humors
be driven from the innar parts, in to the skin. Wherefore the diseases be
rather to be imputed to the body, then to ye time of ye year. For what body so
ever has good homours, that body remains still in health, so long as the
spryng lasts: paraduenture it does not so in summar, autumn or winter,
because these times bread or encrese evil humors: as summar increases
chollar, and autumn melancholy, and winter fleme and watrish humors. It is
possible, that sum man will reprehend my sayings, obiecting the beginning of
the spring to be could, according to winter, and the latter end hot, as in
summar. In deed I confess no less, then ye beginning of the spring, to be a
little could, and the latter end, a little hot, but not in excess, as it is
either in summar, or winter. Wherefore it can not be called hot and moyest, as
su^me do suppose, because it can not be hot and temperat, both at one time. As
for summar by the consent, as well of the Philosophers, as of physicians, is
hot and dry, because there is in it more heat then could, more dryness, then
moisture. Autumn simply, and without exception, can not be called cold, and
dry, as su^me hold opinion, for it is not could, because there is as much
heat as could, seeing the middle of the day is much hotter, then the morning,
and evening. Therefore it is found to be distemperat, in heat, and could,
and so mixed of both, that it can nether be called hot, nether could.
Therefore it is full of perilouse diseases because it is distempered both in
heat, and could: and because it has more dryness, then moisture, therefore
it is called dry. As for winter it is moist, and could, not because it is more
moist and could, then ye other times of the year, but because there is more
moisture then drines, more could then heat. Now that I have so brefelye (as I
could) declared the temperamentes of the times of the year, it is mete and
convenient, to show in as few words as I can, the temperamentes of the iiii.
ages, which are chyldehode, youth, man's state, and old age: Chyldehode is
from the chyldyng the space of.xv. year next following, and it is hot and
moist, and that is easy to be perceived hereof, that the first constitution of
the child, is of seed, and blood, the which both be hot and moist. Youth
begins where chyldehod ends, and continues.x. years: in this age there is
more firye heat, and less natural heat the^ is in childehode as Gallen
witnesses in his second book of temperamentes. Man's state begins at.xxv.
and continues to.xxxv. the which time is hot and dry: Old age begins
at.xxxv. and continues the rest of the life, though sum do reckon it but
to.ix. and forty year, and it is cold and dry. Ye shall find in other
places, mo differences of ages, howbeit I think these sufficient, for such as
be not to deynty, and exquisite. Whosoever thinks him self not satisfied, with
this brefe exposition of temperamentes, let him read diligently Galenes.iii.
books of temperamentes, and I dout not, but he shall be satisfied. For I making
haste to better and more profitable knowledge, cannot find in my heart, to
tarry any longer in this disputation, yet whosoever ever shall dilygently examine in
his mind that that is written before, may easily (if he be not half folishe)
gather ye rest which wants without a techer, or an instructar.

The.viii. chapter of humors.
HVmours be four in number, that is to say, blood, chollar, flewme, and
melancholy: of the which, blood is hot, moist, and sweet. Flewme is could,
moist, and unsavory, like unto the pure water: yelowe chollar, hot, dry, and
bittar: black chollar, or melancholy, could, dry, sour, and stipticke.

These humors be called hot, could, dry, and moist, because they be so in
power, and not in act, and there is great difference betwixt things that be
hot of power: and things hot in act. For that thing is hot in act, which is
hot already, and that is hot in power, which is not hot already, but may, and is
apt to be hot afterward, and so we call bryne, or vinegar dry, though they
appear to the eye to be moist, yet experience has proved them dry, because
they consume the superfluous humors, both of flesh, and also other things.
When these.iiii. humors reserve their forsayde qualities, then the body
wherein they be, is hole, and without disease, and the before named humors, be
called of the Physicians, natural. The receptacles of blood, be the veins,
and pulses, but the blood, that is contained in the pulses, (as Gallen says
in his first book, and first chapter of affected places) differs from the
blowde of the veins, in that, that the blowde of the pulses is both hotter,
thynnar, and yelower. The well of the blowde, is the liver, and not only that,
but also the first instrument of man's body and the natural and true color
of the blowd, is red: which Galen affirms in many places. Where blowde
redoundeth the body is feat, fayer, merry, and plesantly disposed. Flewme, of
color is white, which at the length by ye means of natural heat, may be
turned in to blood: and therefore saying it is a nowrishment but half
boiled, nature has provided no propre, or peculier receptacle for the
pourgynge of it. For flewme engendered in the stomach or mawe, be cause it is
carried together with the juice that came of the meat and drink up in to ye
liver, is at length by much alteration turned into blood, and that which is
carried together with the blood in the veins, may skant be spared, because it
mittigateth the great fervent, and outrageous heat of ye blood: therefore it
has morenede to tarry still and be altered, then to be pourged, and carried
away, but yt that remains behind in the guts, is pourged, and carried quite
out at the fundament, by reason of the chollar cu^mynge fro the liver (as
Gallen says in the.v. of his books, of the use of the parts of man's body.)
The excrement which falls from ye brain in to ye mouth, can not properly be
called flewme but rather muck, or sniuil: flewmatick bodies, be slothful,
slepy, fleshye, and soon horeheared. Yelowe chollar has his name, of his
culour, and nature has provided a proper place for it, which is ye blather
under ye liver: for it was necessary for it to be parted from the blood, lest
at the length ye hole body, should becumne yelowe, as it does in the yelowe
Iawndies. Choleric men be angry, sharp wytted, nymble, and quick in all
their affayers, inconstant, and lean and good digesters of their meat:
melancholy is the dregs and filthe of the blood, and therefore it is black,
as it appears in the name: it were great danger, for it to be left in the
liver, therefore the splyne is provided of nature, to receive it, the which
splyne if it draw less then it should do, then the melancholy, or black
chollar, is left with the blowde: by reason whereof the body gets a black
color, or at the least a fever quartayne. Men that be melancholy, be sottell,
couetouse, great frettars with them selves, unfaithful, sad, and careful,
envious ferfull, and weak sprited. The use of these forsayde humors, is such in
especial as follows. The blood serves to the nowrishment of the hole body,
flewme helps the mouyng of the joints, yelow chollar cleanses the intestines
of of their flewme and filthe, melancholy healpeth ye action of the stomach,
(as Gallene writes in his v. book of the use of the parts, of man's body) by
reason yt it draws the stomach together, whereby the natural heat, is
increased: and the concoction of the meat, made much the more parfit. Soranus
an Ephesian borne, writes: that these humors rule the body by course, each of
them.vi. hours to gether: as blood begins at.ix. of the clock in the
night, and rules until.iii. of the morning, yelowe chollar begins at.3. in
the morning, and governs until.ix. of the morning, melancholy begins
at.ix. and continues to.iii. in the after noone. Flewme begins at.iii. of
the after noone, and lasts till.ix. of the night. These humors, sumtyme lose
their natural qualities whereby they hurt the body, and be called not
natural. Blowde becummeth unnatural, either when it putrifieth in the veins,
be cause the pores be shut, or else when it is mixed with su^me other evil
humor, as in the dropsy, where it is mingled with water, or finally, when it is
mixed, either with over much chollar, flewme, or melancholy, whereof it takes a
new name, and is called either choleric blowd, flewmaticke, or melancholy
blood: For it is never natural, except in the mixture, it have the rule and
dominion. Of unnatural flewme, there be.iiii. kinds, (as Gallen wytnessyth in
his second book and.vi. chapter, of ye differences of fevers). The first is
watrysh, and of the cullar of molten glass, whereof it has to name citrine
and is very cowld. The second kind, is that which after ye hawking out, has a
sweet taste, and is called sweet flewme. The third is sour of taste, and is
not so cold as the citrine, and cowlder then the sweet. The fowerth is salt,
either by ye mixture of su^me salt humor, or else by putrifactio^, and is
called salt flewme. Of unnatural yealowe chollar, there be.v. kinds. The
first is yelowe, like unto the yolks of eggs, and as Gallen says is
engendered in ye veins The second is colowred like lead, or garlic and is
bred in ye stomach or mawe. The third is of a rusty color, and it also is
bred in ye stomach. The forth inclines sumwhat toward grene, and is
engendered in the place beforesayd. The.v. is of the color of the sea, and
grows in the stomach also. Of mela^choly, or black chollar, there is but one
kind unnatural, and it is sumwhat brown of color, and so sharp and sour
that it eats, and fretteth the body, where it goethe.

The.ix. chapter, of the parts of man's body.
THe first division of parts of man's body, is of those, that ye latten men
call similares, and dissimilares, which in english, may be called like, and
unlike* For similares be such parts as be like unto them selves in all
things, which when they be divided, or parted in sonder the least of them
keeps the same name that the hole does, whereof it is part: and dissimilares,
be such as are unlike them selfs in all things, which when they be divided or
parted a sunder, none of them can be called by the name yt the hole is, as in
example. No part of the head, can (if it be separat, and parted, from the head)
be called an head* no more can any part of the hand be named an hand, nor of ye
foot, a foot: nor of the eye, an eye: yet every part of water is called
water, and every part of blood, is called blood, and every part of bone,
bone: and every part of flesh, is called flesh. Therefore these last rehearsed
be such as the laten men call similares, and the other be the self same, yt be
called dissimilares, or instrumentales. Gallen says, yt the same parts,
which the latyns call similares, be the first elements, and begynners of
man's body, although the self same, be common to brute beasts also, for
there is nether ox, horse, ne dog, but they have pulses, veins, senewes,
tiinges, gristilles, skins, and flesh, yet not in all points like unto man,
and beside these, other that man has not, as horns, bylles, spowres, and
skales: of these, the other which be called dissimilares, or instrumentales, be
made, as head, hands, feet, and such like. An isntrumental part, differith
from the instrument, because that su^me of the same parts, before is called
similares, be instruments, and yet may not be isntrumental parts. For every
part (as gallen says) that brings forth a parfit actio^, is an instrument:
whereof it comes that the pulses, veins, and senewes, be instruments, and no
isntrumental parts. Of ye isntrumental parts, there be three called chief,
or principal: ye brain, heart, and liver. There are sum, which adds unto
these, ye privy parts, because they conserve and keep ye kind.

There be belonging to these, iiii. other, as to ye brain, senewes: to the
heart, pulses: to the liver, veins: and to the pryuye parts, the sparmaticke
vessayles: beside these, there be certain other parts of the body, which
nether rule other, nor yet be ruled of other, but has a faculty of them
selfs, whereof they be governed: as bone, tiynge, skin and flesh. All ye
parts of man's body, have need of pulses, and veins, to the keeping of there
substance: veins, to the intent yt they may be nowrished, and pulses for the
keeping of natural heat in good temper. Hitherto I have spoken generally of
the parts of man's body: whosoever is wyllyng to have a particular rehersall of
all the parts, let them seek Gallen, or Vesal^us. For they have written hole
books, and great volumes of them: and as for me, I have written of the same,
in an other place, so well as my wit, lernyng, knowledge, and the sterilitie
and baraynes of the english tongue, would give me leave. Therefore if that I should
write the same again. I should both be over tedious to such as showld hear
me, and also I showld break my promise, because I have promised, to write a
brefe, and a short treatise, upon Physic.

The.x. chapter, of powers or faculties.
A Faculty, or a power, is the cause, from whence the action procedethe. There
be.iii. faculties, or powers, diverse each to other, which governs the body,
and be called Animal, vital, and natural. The animal power or faculty,
cummeth from the brain by the senewes, and gives both mouyng and feeling, to
each part of the body, and is author of the senses, and all voluntary actions.
The vital power cummeth from the heart, and is carried in the pulse throughout
the body, whereto it gives life: whereof it is evident, that the heart is the
well of lifely heat: the natural power, comes from the liver, and is carried to
every part of the body, by the veins, and serves to the norishynge of the
same. This power, or faculty, is divided in.iiii. other powers, the first is
attractiue, the second is retentiue, the third concoctiue or alteratiue, the
fowerth expulsive. The attractiue power, is the same, by ye which, every part
of ye body draws to it, such juice as is mete and convenient to norishe it,
and that juice, which is sooneste made like, is most convenient for
nowrishment: therefore this power, seeing that it prepares matter, to the
norishment of every part, serves to the power alteratiue, or concoctiue. The
retentyue power holds ye same which is al ready drawn, until it be altered
and changed: and this power also, serves unto the alteratiue, or concoctiue
power.

The alteratiue power, has name of his action, for it alters the juice, and
at the length, makes it like to the part, that is norished. The expulsive
power or faculty, separateth the evil from ye good, lest with long tariynge
together, the one should mar the other: and this as the other, serves to
the alteratiue power. These.4. powers, be in every part of every natural body,
as Gallen witnesses, in his books, of powers or faculties.

The.xi. chapter, of Actions.
AN action, is an actual mouyng, procedinge from a faculty, and therefore the
faculty is always the cause of the action, wherefore when the power perishes,
there follows no action at all: That which the action has made and finished,
is the work: as blood, flesh, and bone, and as ye may call every action a
certain work of Nature, so ye can not call every work, an actio^: as flesh
is a work of nature, and not an action. There is in ye body.ii. manner of
actions. One is called Anymall, or voluntary, which proceeds from the
synowes, and muscules, and this is such an actio^, yt when it is, it may be
seized, and when it is not, it may be raised, as a man lists, as in example.
The head, arms, and legs, may be moved, or holden still, as it shall plese
the dody, that has them. This action is parted in to three. The first is of
feelynge, which is divided in.v. as in to the action of saying, hearing,
felinge, smelling, and tastyng. The second, is the action of voluntarye
mouyng. The third, is the action, of the cogitation, memory, and reason, which
of all the rest, is most noble, and excellent. As for respiration, is a
voluntary action, because it is in our will to hold our breath: or to let it
go, which is evident of the servant (that Galle^ speaks of) which held his
breath until he dyed. Wherefore it is evident, that su^me voluntarye actions, be
free: and sum, serve the affections of the body. For to walk any whither, or
to speak with any body, or to take any thing, be fre actions, but to ease the
belly or to make water, serve the necessity of the body. Yt is possible for a
man, to hold his peace (if he have so constitute with him self) an hole year
to gether, but to hold his excrement, or his water.ii. months, or.ii. weckes,
it is not possible. For they provoke so often, and grieve a man so much, that
oftentimes, they will not abide, till they may be conuenientlye let forth, and
like unto these, is respiration, or the actio^, of brething. For whosoever
has his brethe stopped, but a very littell time, it is a great doubt, if he
dye not fourth with all. But the natural action, which is not voluntarye,
cummeth of the veins, and pulses. For let a man do what he shall, and yet
they will do their office, without any let. Amongst the natural actions, be
reckened, generation, Auction, nutrition, Formation, Alteration, appeticion,
attraction, concoction, retention, distribution, excretion, and such other. But
as for generation, it is not one simple natural action, for in it is, both
alteration, and formation. The amplyfycation, and increacement, in length,
bredeth, and depenesse, of all the vttar parts of the body, is called
auction. Nutrition, is the assimilation, or making like, of the nurishment to
that, that is nurished: to the which, apposition, and agglutination or
adhesio^ be necessary. For after that the juice, which afterward shall nurish
every part of the body, is once fallen from ye veins, it must first be put to,
and then joined or glued, and last of all, made like. It is very mete and
expedient for every Physician, entending his pacientes health, diligently to
consider all the actions, as well the animal, as natural: because of them,
the constitution of the body, is easy to be known.

For what body so ever is in health, the same has all the actions parfit and
sownde, and what body is sick and diseased, it has clean otherwise. Moreover
the action for the most part, declares the place affected. For there can be no
action hurt, but that part or instrument, wherein it is, must be affected also.

The.xii. chapter, of spirits.
A Spirit is a subtyl, thynne, and bright substance, made of the finest parts
of the blowd, that the power may be carried from the principal parts of ye
body, to ye rest: whereby each may do his duty and office. There be in
number, only.iii. spirits: the animal, vital, and natural. The animal
spirit, has his place, in ye brain, and being dispersed in the senewes,
gives the power of mouinge, and feling, to each part of the body: It is made
of the vital spirit. The vital spirit, is in the heart, and is carried in the
arteries, throughout the body, being the very cause of all natural, and lively
heat: It is made of the exhalations, or the dryest, and finest parts of the
blood. If there be any natural spirit, it is in the liver and veins, and in
deed to say the truth, there is no great need for any spirit, to carry any
power of nowrishing through the body, seeing yt every part draws his
nurishment, even as the adamante stone draws iron: and beside this, the liver
has no such matter, as any spirit can be made of. For if there were any
matter, whereof the natural spirit might be made, that must needs be the
vital spirit, of whom the animal spirit also, is made: but seeing that the
vital spirit is engendered in the heart, and by the pulses carried through the
body, it had been necessary, that there should have been great pulses, from the
heart to to the liver, which might have brought so much vital spirit, as
should have suffised to have made natural spirit. Howbeit it is evident, yt
there cummeth no arteries to the liver, but such as be with the smallest for
such a purpose, and then there is no such cauitie in the liver, as is in the
brain, or heart, where any generation of the natural spirit, may be. Moreover,
there is no vessels prepared of nature for the carriage of it, except a man
should say, that it is carried with the gross blood in ye veins, which is
not like: saying the veins, have but one cote, and that of no great thickenes,
nether (and if that were true,) the veins should beat, as ye arteries do.
Also there is no way or entrance for air, whereof it might be nowrished as
the animal and vital be. And again, the blood of the liver, is so gross,
and mixed with other humors, that it is not mete to make any spirits of.
Therefore, saying that there is nether any end, wherefore it showlde be made,
nor matter, whereof it could be made, nor nourishment to preserve it, nor a
convenient place, to make it in, nor finally any way or conduite, whereby it
might be brought in to every part of the body: I may justly, and not with out
a cause, doubt of it, although it be a common opinion amongst ye phistions,
that there is a natural spirit.

The end of the first book.
The second book.
The.i. chapter, Of the number of things not natural.
Things not natural, be.vi. in number.

1 Air.

2 Meat and drink, or any thing, i^wardlye taken.

3 Exercise, and rest, both of the body, and parts.

4 Sleep and watch.

5 Excretion, and retention, or fulness, and emptines.

6 Affectes or perturbations of the mind.

These be called things not natural, because they alter our bodies, and if
they be not discretly taken, utterly abolish health: on the other part, if
they be wisely and soberly used: they do not only defend health, but also
strengthen nature in all her works and actions. Therefore they be in yt part
of physic, which defe^deth health And to the end that no man, be ignorant in
ye use of them, I pourposse brefely, and in as few words as I ca^, to declare
and show the uses of each of them alone by himself.

The.ii. chapter, of Air.
QF things not natural. Air is most necessary to be considered, because ye
natural heat, can not be kept in temper, without it, and because, we must
needs receive it into our bodies, be the weather never so foul, and finallye
there can neither health be defended, nor disease cured, or remedied without
it. Therefore it lies us in hand, to take especial heed, and diligent watch,
that we minister it in due time and season, that it may be as it should be, a
cause of health, which no doubt it shall, if first we mark well the substance
of it, whether it be pure and clean, or gross and thick, or cloudie. That is
ye best and most holsume, which is purest, not infected with no standinge
pooles, nor no marrishe grounds, nor with the carren of bestes, nor with the
putryfactio^ of herbs, fruit, or grain, and such like.

When we have well considered the substance of the air, then we must mark
well the quality. For as to temperat bodies, the most temperat air is
holsumest, so to bodies distempered, air distempered in a contrary quality,
is most holsum: as to such as be cowlde: air that is hot, and to such as be
hot, cowlde: and to them that be dry, moist: and to such as be moist, dry.
But if it happen so, yt the air be not contrary of quality, then it must be
prepared and made for our purpose by art: as if the disease or sickness be
hot and dry, then we must by sprinklynge of cowlde water on the pauement or
floor, and by strawyng of herbs and be setting up of such boughs as be
cold and moist, prepare ye air and make it could, and moist: On ye
othersyde, if the disease be cowlde and moist, then the house must be perfumed
with such things as be hot and dry, until the air also be made hot, and
dry. In long diseases, there is none so good a remedy, as to change the air:
and thereof it came, that so many going to saint Cornelis, were healed and
cured of the falling evil: by changyng of the air, and not by miracle, as we
poor fools thought, kneling, and creping, to saint Cornelis horn: but
thanks be to the omnipotent, and ever living god, and to our noble king,
such most vile abominable ydolatry, is now well left here in this realm.

Of meat and drink. The.iii. chapter
I Would counsel every man, as well the hole as ye sick, to take good head
what they eat and drink: For both the goodness, mesure, quality, custom,
delectation, order, time, hour, and age, must be considered. Therefore he that
purposes not to be sick, nor to have a sickly body, let his first care be to
eat such meats, as make good juice.

For there is nothing so apt to breed sickness, as is the evil habit of ye
body, which is gotten by feadyng of meats, that make evil and noughtye juice.
That is always good meat, which is light in digestyng, and thynne of
substance, and the which also bredeth good juice: and that is evil, which is
contrary unto it. His next care ought to be, that he eat no more at one time,
then is sufficient to serve Nature, and so he shall bring to pass, that either
he shall never or else very seldom, fall in to any perilous disease: Howbeit
ye Physician should give great diligence, in dieting of the sick, For a
litell to much sumtyme, though the meat be never so good, makes a fault
incorrigible: and a quick or sharp sickness, and a sickness that is long and
slow, may not be measured both a like. For a sharp, and a short disease, must
have a thin, and a slendar diet: and a long disease, a more fullar. Therefore
the Phisicio^ in prescribing of diet, must mark well the strength of his
pacient: and first according unto his strength, and then according to the
nature of the sickness, prescribe ye measure of his meats and drinks.

After the measure the Physician ought immediately to mark well the quality of
the meats: For such as be hole, to the end that they may keep their health,
must be fed with meats of like, and not of contrary quality: and such as be
sick, ought to be fed with meats of contrary quality: As they that be sick
for hete, must be remedied by meats that be could, and they that be sick of
cold diseases, must have hot meats: and in diseases that be moist, dry
meats: and in dry diseases, moist meats. Therefore such as have moist bodies,
as children, must be fed with moist meats: and such as be sick of dry
diseases, as of fevers, must also be fed with moist meats, the tone to keep
their bodies moist still, and the other, to amend and correct their dryness:
and likewise of the rest. Such as be hot of nature, must eat hot meats, yt
they may keep their heat still, but if their heat once wax unnatural, then it
must be brought in temper, by ye healp of such things, as are cold: and if
they be over cold, by heat: and if they be over moist, by dries: but if their
heat, cold, dryness or moisture be natural, and excede not, then it must be
cherished still with meats of like qualities, as I said before. Next the
quality consider the custume, for that ought not to be broken, except there be
great cause why, seeing that such meats as a man has accustomed him self
unto, although they be worse, hurt not so much as the other do, of the which
he has not accustomed to eat of. Therefore in diseases, the Physician may not
be to busy, in pluckyng away their pacientes from their accustomed meats and
drinks: but if it happen so, that of necessity there must be a change, then
it may not be done rashely, or all at ones, but fair and softly, and by
little, and little. For all sudden mutations, be dangerous. And it is mete
for the Physician to observe, in what meats ye sick deliteth most. For such
as he has pleasure of in the eatinge, the same the stomach enbraseth more
gredely: and digesteth or alters much sooner, and therefore they must be taken,
and preferred before better, though they be worse. Furthermore he must take
heed what order his pacient keep in his diet, for it is a preposterous ordar,
to begin with quynces or orynges and end with sallades, made of herbs, and
oil.

Take this always as a general rule, that that meat which is most easy to be
digested, should be eaten before that, that is hardar: and that also that is
moist, before that that is dry: and that that is leuse and slipperie, before
that yt is hard and byndinge. Amongst other things, the time of eating would
not be forgotten.

They that be hole, should exercise the^ selfs before they eat, and should
not eat against their appetite, nor abstain when there appetite provoke them:
and they that be sick, should utterly forbear, until there fittes were in
the declination, or full finished.

Howbeit the disease may be such, and the pacientes strength so weak, yt it
shall be needful to feed them, both in their fittes, and out of their fittes:
howbeit I leave that to the discretion of the Physician. And I think it but
well done, to put you in remembrance, what your diet should be, in the.iiii.
several times of the year: In winter, more meat and less drink, and meats
and drinks that be hot and dry, as roasted meats, and wine then may safely be
dronken, without water. In the spring, we should eat sumdele less, and
drink a little more then in winter, and eat also more of flesh, and change
from roasted to boiled: In summar we must endeuer our selfs, yt our bodies
may be soft, and cold, and therefore we must eat less, and drink the more,
and eat for the most part boiled meats, and such as is cold. In Autumn we
should eat sumthynge more then in summer, and drink less, and of byggar
drinks be sumthinge more bolder then in summer. And as the time is to be
considered, so is the age also. For children must be fed, with moist meats.
And such as be not yet at their groeth, because their bodies be more temperate,
must have, more temperate meats. And lusty men such as is alredye paste their
groeth, because their bodies be hot, and dry, should have like meats, that is
to say such as is hot and dry: old men because their bodies be over cold and
dry, must be fed with meats, that be hot and moist.

The.iiii. chapter, Of exercise, and rest.
EVery soft mouynge, is not an exercise, as Gallen says, but yt that is
su^thing vehement, as lepyng, coytyng, runnyng, tennys, footbale, shootyng, and
such like. Exercise has many notable commodities but.3. in especial: the
hardness of the instruments, the encrese of natural heat, and the more
vehement and quicker mouynge of the spirits: and each of these has his
peculier, and particular commodity. The instruments by means of their
hardness, may endure to labor the bettar, and also perform their actio^ more
easily. The encrese of natural heat amendeth the alteration, and concoction of
the meat, whereby the body is much ye more luckely nurished. The quicker and
vehementer mouynge of the spirits, healpeth to pourge the excrementes, both
by the raynes, skin, and guts. Exercise brings these commodities to ye
body, if it be taken in due time, or else it hurts more then it profitteth:
for if it be taken when there is either any cruditie in ye stomach, or veins, it
will fill all ye body full of evil humors, by reason that ye crude, and raw
iuyse, is plucked in to each part of the body. Wherefore exercise, should
either be taken before meat, or else after that ye concoction of ye stomach and
liver is ended: and ye parfit knowledge of this time, is taken of ye vryne. For
when the concoction of the liver is done, then the vryne waxes yelowe.
Howbeit the very best time of exercise is when yesterdayes meat is thoroughly
digested: as one time for exercise, is better the^ an other, so one kind of
exercise, profits ye body more then an other. That is ye best kind of
exercise, in the which every part of the body, susteyneth like labor and pain,
and yet in the same there may be committed many errors and faults: for it may
be to much, or to littell, yet of both, less hurts to little. Therefore the
exercise, would continue so long, until the body swellethe, and waxinge
read, begin to sweet all over: and when any of these tokens chances, then
the exercise would be seized incontinent, lest the good juice be expelled
together with the evil, and so the body shall be made leaner, and dryer, which
will hinder the groinge. As exercise, if it be discretely mynistred, preuayleth
much to the defense of health, so rest and quietness, if it be not taken in his
time, fills ye body full of sickness: For it causes cruditie, which is ye
mother, and root in manner, of all dangerous sickness. There be many good
times for rest, but the very best time, as Hyppocrates witnessith, is wha^ the
body is weried with labor, and exercise. For then he says, that ye rest
takes away the werinesse.

The.vi. chapter, of sleep, and watch.
Sleep is the rest of ye animal power, or as Aristotell says, the privation
and taking away, of the senses, which cummeth of a profitable humor, falling
from the brain in to the senewes. Of sleep the body receives many profitable
commodities.

For whiles the animal power rests, the natural power laboreth most
strongly, by reason whereof the meat is well digested, and ye body luckely
nurisshed.

There be.iiii. things, which in sleep, would by earnestlye looked upon.

The first is the sleping time, as the night, which for sleep of all other
times, is most convenient: both because the night is could and moist, and
because that then, all things is quiet without any noise. I would counsel no
man to sleep on the day except he feel either a great weariness in all his
body, or have not slept ye night before, and yet then it would not be taken
upon a full stomach neither, but rather fasting, and empty.

The second is the quantity, for sleep if it continue to long, beside other
inco^modities, it lets the pourginge of excrementes.

The third, is the lyinge a bed, for thereby the disgestion may be either
furthered or hyndered. Wherefore first it is best to lie upon the right side,
and then upon ye lift, that the meat, and drink, may go low enough, and the
mouth of the mawe shet the better.

As for lying upon the back, it is utterly condemned of all men, for it is the
cause of many perilous diseases, as the apoplexy, and such like.

The fowerth thing, which must be considered in sleep, is the nature of the
dreams: for by them the Physician shall have a great guess of what quality the
humor is, which redoundeth and is superfluous. The Physician ought to be as
diligent, in the ministration of sleep, to them that be sick, as to them yt be
hole. For as all other things, so sleep, if it be not well ordered and taken in
his time, may hurt very much. It hurts them most, which have any of their
innar parts inflamed: wherefore such must be kept from sleep, lest the
inflammation be encresed withal: and moreover in shaking fevers, the sick
ought to be kept waking, whiles the cold shaking endures, lest the natural
heat, and blood be drawn in to much, by reason whereof, the fever will be
much ye more stubberne to be cured. Such as be hole, and without sickness,
must beware of over much sleep, lest ye good temper of their brain be quite
marred, and their strength also clean resolved: and of the other side if they
watch to much, their bodies shall be filled with raw humors: therefore it
must be used, nether to much, nor to little, but moderatlye, and in a mean. Of
sleep and watch, much more might be written, howbeit, this may suffice well
enough, at this time.

The.vi. chapter, of fullness and emptiness.
GAllen says yt there is.ii. kinds of fullness. The tone is when the
qualytie alone excedeth, and the other, when the humors be grown to much in
quantity. There is also yet an other kind of fullness, which is called
repletion, and that is properly of meat and drink.

Howbeit Galle^ makes.ii. kinds of repletion, the tone is, when the veselles
be so full, that they can not receive easylye any more, as wha^ a man has eaten
so much, that his bellye seems to be extended withal: and the other is when
ye power is loded to much, though the veselles be not half full, as when a
man eats more meat then nature or the power that governs his body, can
digest. Yet the abundaunce of humors, is divided in to mo kinds, for when all
the humors do abound to gether, it is called of ye greeks, (...) (...), and of
the latins plenitudo, and in english, it may very well be named fullness: So
when the blood only redoundeth it may be called fullness, because it is not so
pure, but that there is both chollar, flewme, melancholy, and water in it: and
this fullness is mente.ii. manner of ways, as when the holowenesse of the
veins is filled, so that the veins swell withal: or else when the power
that makes blud, is not sufficient to alter or digeste that that is contained
with in.

When the body is filled, either with yelowe chollar, melancholy, flewme, or
watrish humors, then it is called Cacochimia, which in English, is as much
to say, as evil, and naughty juice.

I could never nether in Gallen, nor in any other notable author, find any mo
differencis of fulness, then is before rehearsed: therefore saying that I have
brefely, said all that I can concerning the differences of fullness, or
repletion: it remains behind to show my mind concerning the differences of
emptiness, or euacuatio^, which may cum many ways: as by lettyng of blood,
pourgyng of ye belly by medicyne, by the setting to boxing glasses, by
fasting, by slepynge after hungar, by vryne, by drawyng out of the spettill,
by bledynge at the nose, by bringing down of wemens flowers, by the
Hemorrhoides, by carnal copulation, by insensible euaporation. Of the which I
entend to speak of each in his ordar. The body, has most need of blood
lettinge, when the veins be so full, that they be extended withal: For than
it is a present remedy, and how much the more a man fealeth him self heuyer
then he was wont to be, so much that kind of fullness which is referred to the
strength, is increased: but then the vessels, are thought to be full, when
the body is much extended with prickynge pains, and then the Physician may be
bold to open ye veins, so that ye pacient have co^petent strength, but the
other kind of repletion, may not always be remedied with blood letting, but
sumtimes other ways, as by fasting, pourging, and such like, and it is as
necessary to open the vain, when by means of su^me stroke, or for su^me
great pain and grefe, or by the debylitie of su^me part, the blood is
inflamed, as it is in the kinds of fullness, or repletion before named: to be
brefe when so ever the disease is outragiouse, if ye strength serve, there is
nothing so necessary as to let blood. Amongst al other things in lettyng of
blood, the age must be considered: for children before.xiiii. years be full
complete and ended, and old me^ after they be past lxx. years ought not but
upon great considerations be let any blood: Howbeit, if in this age they be
full of blood, and have good strength, and if the time of the year also serve,
and the disease be such, that it requires blood lettynge, the Physician may
boldlye open the vain a little. Therefore the number of the years are not
only to be considered, but the complexion, or the habyt of the sick man's
body also. For su^me at.lx. years, may abide more, then other su^me at.l.
wherefore when the strength serves, and the sickness requires the taking
away of blood, the phisitio^ may boldly, and at one time, take away as much as
shall be co^ueniente, to the curyng of the disease: but in case the strength of
the paciente be feeble and weak, then the blood would not be taken away al at
one time, but rather at twice, or thrice, as the sick, may depart withal.
In extreme burninge fevers, if the strength serve, the best remedy is, as
Gallen says, to let blood, until the body waxes faynte, and swoune with
all, for the coolynge of the body, will extinguishe the fever, and in many,
both lose the bellye, and also provoke sweat. In letting of blood, the
natural constitution of the body, must be well looked upon, for they that have
great veins, and be nether to lean, nor to white, may spare more blood, then
they yt be very lean, and white, and have but small, and litell veins. The
region, may not be forgotten nether, for such as do dwell in regions which be
very much diste^pered either with heat or cold, may not abide the taking away
of much blood, because that their bodies which dwell in the cold region or
contrye, losing much natural heat with their blood, wax afterward to cold: and
the strength of their bodies which dwell in ye hot country, is afterward
dissolved or dissipate, with ouermuche heat: and by this reason, nether summar,
nor winter, be convenient to let blood in, but the spring only, because that
it is temperate. As concerning what time, or hour of the day, Gallenes
counsel is, that theye that be hole, in the morninge, within an hour after
that they be risen, and they that be sick, at all hours, both of the day, and
night (so that their strength and sickness do so require.) The Phisitio^ ought
before he let any vain be opened, to inquire diligently of his formar life,
and diet: For if he have lived ydellye, and have been fed with such meats as
nurrishe much, he may take boldly and without fear ye greater quantity of blud,
howbeit if he have been a great riottour, and a common drunkarde, then Gallen
says that it is mere foolishenesse to do any thing at all, for such by their
intemperat life, will fill as fast as they be emptyed. In blood lettyng, the
especial care ought to be, of the vain. For saying that there is.iii. veins
in the arm, ye innar vain, which is called of the Surgiens, basilica, and is
the liver vain, should be opened, for all swellynges, or pain under the
neck. But the utter vain, which is called cephalica, and in english the head
vain, owghte to be smitten when the parts about the neck be troubled, as ye
head, and face. The middell vain, which is called Mediana, would not be meddled
with, but there as the other veins, appear not. There be veins also at the
knees, and anclees, which when ye disease liethe low, is most meet to be
opened. The last care, and charge showlde be, of the stintyng of the blood: For
how much the better it runs, so much the soonar it would be stinted, or
stayed: but after that ye vain is ones smitten, it should not be stayed,
until either that the blood, or pulse were changed. The second way of
emptiynge the body, is by medicyne received in to the stomach, which should not
be used but wha^ the body is replete with evil, and corrupt humors: wherefore
such as be in health and have good and sweet humors, Hippocrates would in no
case to be purged, by any medicine, for fear of dissoluing their power. But
such as have need of pourgynge, must first make them selfs apt and meet for
the same, by bathes and eating of moist meats: for so they shall deliver
their guts from obstructions. Howbeit if the humors be thick and clammy,
then they must be made thin, and subtell and apt to run, by such
decoctions and syrupes as do incyde gross matter. But if ye humors be thin
and subtell, the^ they have no need of any preparatyue, and the Physician ought
always to observe, that he pourge no humors which be crude and raw, except
for their multitude they swell the body, then without any more delyberation,
they must forthwithal be taken away with a pourginge medicyne: lest the
strength of the body be dissolved, or the fyerye heat of the fever encresed, or
finally the humors be driven to su^ principal part, whereby Nature shall be less
able to deliver the body: For if nature be not helped before that time, she
shall be in such a rage, that nothing can be done well or orderlye in the
body. The next care is what humor should be pourged. Therefore the Physician
should take heed that he pourge no moo humors, the^ be hurtful to the body:
As if fleume do redounde and hurt ye body, it only is to be pourged: if
chollar, either yelowe, or black, offend the body, then he should utterly
abstain from fleume and likewise when water abounds, it only should be
taken away: for as Hippocrates says, if such humors be pourged, as ought to
be, it profits the body, and is done, without gryefe or pain, but else
it is clean contrary. Beside this, the time of ye year would be considered,
as well in pourging as in lettyng of blood. For there be sum times of the
year in the which it is very madness to lewse ye belly: For in winter, when
it is frost or snow, or in summar, when the heat is outrageous, whosoever is
pourged shall be much the worse for it: and yet of both times, the less mete
for pourgyng, is the summar. For then the body is so adust, with heat of the
wether, that it is not well able to bear the sharpness of the medicyne, and
nature also being made weak with the heat of the summar, is more weakened of
the medicyne: insomuch that many being pourged then, fall sick of fevers, and
be quite destitute of their strength. Therefore the spring time, of all other
times of the year, is most wholesome, both to powrge the body, and to let
blood.

In pourgynge the body, the region also must be considered. For if it be very
hot, it lets the workinge of the medicyne, because it draws the humors in
to ye skin, and the abundance of heat healpeth to dissolve the strength. The
age may not be forgotten: For children because they be not yet at their
grows, be nothing mete for pourgations: likewise old me^ when they wax
weak, should not be troubled with any medicines. And as in all euacuations, so
in pourging of the belly, the strength of the sick must be earnestly looked
upon: For so long as the sick, may abide easilye the taking away of his
humors, he may safely be pourged, and no longer though all be not gone.

In leusyng the belly, vehement and strong laxes, be utterly to be abhorred:
for besides that they weaken the strength, they hurt maruelously the stomach.
Last of all in pourgyng of the bellye, the excrementes would be taken heed
to, of the Physician, because he may divine diverse things both of their
substance, quality, and color. The third way to cleanse the body is by
vomit, whereof Nature has much good: For they that vomit often, for the most
part be always hole. For there is euacuation made as well of flewme, as of
chollar: by means whereof, the stomach is not filled with evil humors and the
head finds much ease. Vomiting is most profitable for them that be
choleric, having large breasts, short necks, and wide mouths, it profits
also to such as by means of great eating and drinkinge, reserve crude, and
raw humors in their stomakes: yet he that will be hole and pourposeth to be
old, let him not be to busye with vomittynge: For the much use of it causes
deafness, and hurts the eyes, it breaks ye veins of the breast and
lunges, it offends the teathe, and causes head ache. Therefore it is ye
Physicians duty to declare, who is apt to vomit, and who is not. For such as
be not apt to vomit, should be pourged dounwarde, and in no-case constrained
to vomit: such as be not apt to vomit be they that be betwixt fat and lene,
having their breasts narrow, and their necks long: and such as be lean,
slender, and have wide breasts, and short necks, be apt to vomit. In
vomittyng the excrement must be looked well upon, for the sight of it, shall
amend the conjecture of the Physician. The forth way of emptying ye body, is by
boxyng: which (as Gallen says in his book yt he wrote of boxing) does not
only make euacuation and draw out much matter, but also eases the pain,
and diminishes the swellyng, dissolueth wind, and styrreth up appetite where
it was almost lost, confirming the strength of weak stomakes, calls again
life in swounes, and fayntynges, it draws also swellynges and fluxes, from
one part to another, and stinteth bledyng, and stays wemens flowers. There
be.2. kinds of boxing, on is without any scarifiyng, which preuayleth most
in drawing back of humors, as in ye drawing back of wemens flowers wha^ they
ru^ne to much, and these be light boxing glasses, which be used without
scarifiyng. The other is with scarifiyng, which is used in hard swellynges,
cummynge of melancholy, or when ye parts be troubled with the flux of any
sharp matter, which must be drawn from one to another: and in sharp and
quick diseases, whereas ye pacient may spare no blood: scarifyinge profits
watryng eyes, and also pains, both of head, breast, and back The.v. kind of
emptying the body, is by bathe, and here ye must mark that there is.ii.
kinds of bathes, one is natural, and an other artificial. That is called
natural which springs of his own accord, without ye healp of man's
invention.

Of natural bathes sum be hot by the mixture of niter, salt, allume,
brimstone, chaulke, lyme, yro^, copper, goulde, silver and tin, which either
lies in the bothom of the bathe, or else in the rocks, or hills from whence
the spring cu^meth, whereof water takes his quality: and by this reason, ye
bathes which be in a town, called Bathe here in England, be hot: to the
great admiration of all ignorante people. These kinds of bathes be good for
such as be diseased in their joints or have crude, and raw matter in their
bodies, and be diseased either with pockes, pyles, or emeroides: but for men,
that be in health, and have sweet humors they be nothing mete, yea and the use
of them, is very perilous. Artificial bathes, be made by man's wit,
therefore they be not in all places like: But here in England they be nothing
so commendable, as in Germany and other places. For here there is but one hot
house, and therefore the subtell part of the humor is drawn out, and ye
gross is left behind. But in Germany, and in other places, they have diverse
houses, first one, where they put of their clothes and an other where they be
anointed and rubbed, and in the third house they sweat and be washed: the
forth house is not so warm as the third, and the fyfthe is sumwhat cold:
now that I have declared the parts of the artificial bathes, which were
used in the old time, and yet be in many places, I purpose to show in as few
words, the commodities of the same, beginning with the first part, which is a
warm house prepared with fire, or with warm water and sweet herbs, to the
entente that the littell pores of the skin may open easilye, and the hole
body with all the humors, be sumwhat warmed. The next house being sumthynge
warmer, stirs up the spirits, and dissolueth the gross humors, and the
rubbyng with the annoyntynge, corrects and amendeth the hardness of the
senewes, joints, and loins: the third house by his great heat, dissolueth
mightilye the gross humors, by means, whereof nature pourgeth the body of
them: and the luke warm water, moysteth the hole body, and takes away
werynesse, if there be any in the utter parts: ye fowerth house, because it is
sumwhat coldar, reducethe nature by litell, and litell, to here pristinate
state. The fifth by means of his cold, shuts again the pores of ye
skin, which beats the natural heat in, and causes good concoction,
amendyng the action both of the stomach and liver. The sixth kind of those
things which lewseth the body, is sweat: and it ought to be provoked when any
evil humors, is in the innar parts, as in fevers and pestilent agues.

It may be provoked diversely as by the heat of dry bathes, hot stones, and
yrons, or by sweet herbs and warm water, either in pottes or in blathers. But
in all vehement, and sharp diseases, and especially in hot agues, the
Phisicio^ should take great head of the sweat, markynge very dilygentlye which
is good, and which is evil: For by them he may conjecture much of the cause
of the grefe, but as Hyppocrates says, those sweates in fervent and hot
diseases, which comes in the iudgyng days, and do end the fever, be best
and most holsume: and it is not evil when the patient sweateth in every part
of his body, so his pains wax less withal: but wha^ ye body sweateth much,
and the pains increase, it is not good: Howbeit it is worst of all, if the
sweat be cold. And when the face, head, and neck sweat only, if it be in any
hot ague, it declares death whichout any remedy. In prouokyng of sweat, the
Physician should take heed, that it be not to much, for fear of dissoluyng of
the strength of his pacient. The seventh kind of euacuation is exercise,
whereof we spoke before in the fowerthe chapter, of this same book. The.viii.
kind is abstinence, or hungar, which does not extenuat nor make euacuation of
him self, but by means that that is not restored which with abstinence or
fasting, was wasted. Fasting or abstine^ce may be taken.ii. ways either
utterly to forbear both meat and drink, or else to take so much, as is
sufficient to keep the soul and the body together, and no more. There is
nothing, that so much profits either the sick, or the hole, as does
abstinence, if it be taken in due time and orderly: and therefore Pliny, (none
of the worst writers of Physycke) commends sobriety in meats and drinks,
saying that it is very profitable for all men to be temperate in their diet.
And the very father of Physic Hyppocrates, affirms moderate eating and
drinking, to be the castle of health, and many times such as be diseased and
sick, be cured only by abstinence. In prescribynge of abstine^ce, the
Phisitio^ should discretly consider who may best bear it, for as Gallen
says in his.2. book of temperamentes. They yt have small veins, have but
little blood, wherefore they can not fast without hurtyng their bodies, and
they that have great veins, have plentye of blood, wherefore they may the
better away with abstinence, without any decay of their bodily health or
strength: of such as be sick, they yt be full of crude, and raw humors, be
least hurt with fasting, yea the best remedy to all such is abstine^ce: but to
be brefe none should be commanded to fast of the Physician, but such as be
strong, or else be sick of such diseases as cu^ of cruditie. As abstinence,
if it be given in season, and to such as has need of it, profits very
much, so if it be taken out of time, or be given to such as need it not, it
hurts twice as much: It is taken out of time, wha^ ye body is weak and the
disease easy to be over cumme, or else when it is prescribed unto such as be
of nature choleric, for in such it bredeth chollar and causes fevers with
many frettes and pinchinges both in the belly and also in the mouth of the mawe.

Sleep has the.ix. place, of those things which healpe euacuation: howbeit
all sleep does not extenuat, nor at all times, but that only which is taken
the body being hungery, or else by and by after exercise and labor: for the
natural heat in sleep is called in to the innar parts, which when it finds
no nurrishment nor meat to be altered and digested, it does waste and consume
the profitable humors of all the body, and so of necessity it both dries the
body, and lessenneth it also: the which thing Hyppocrates witnesses saying:
Much sleep dries his body which before has been to much pourged any manner
of way. Also in his.ii. book that he writ of good ordar of diet, he affirms
yt sleep extenuateth the body which fasteth or keeps abstinence, and makes it
could, consumynge all the humiditye within it. Of all other times, that sleep
which is taken in the morninge after exercise, dries the body most, and the
same also does sleep taken after bathes. For the bathe opening the poores,
makes euacuation of all the excrementes which lurked in ye skin, and sleep
immediately folowinge the bathe, calls in the natural heat again and wastes
the profitable humidity of ye innar parts. The.xii. kind of euacuatio^ is the
provoking of urine, which should be used when there is any obstruction, or any
great abundaunce of humors about that part of the liver, which in latten is
called gibba or else in the raynes or bladder, for if the obstruction be in cauo
hepatis (which as gibba is the plumppest part and the top of the liver, so
cauum is the holowest part and the lowest of ye same) the^ it is better to
lewse the bellye, then to provoke vryne. For Gallen says as the top of the
liver, which before is called gibba is cleansed by prouokinge of urine, so the
holowe part of the liver, which I called cauum is pourged by lewsyng of the
belly. The which saying he repeteth in the.vii. chapter, of his.ii. book that
he write to his frynde Glauco, and in many other diverse, and sundry places. In
the provoking of urine ye Physician must beware that there be no flux of
blood, nor exulceration in the raynes or bladder: for the^ it is better to
pluck from thence in to other parts of the body, the^ to draw from other
places thither.

The.xi. kind of euacuation, is the drawinge down of the spettell, or the
excrement of the brain, by the mouth: whose use is, wha^ the breast and the
instruments of brethynge should be pourged: wherefore when the spettell is
equal both in quantity, and color, then it declares the breast, and the
instruments of brethynge, to be in perfect health: but when it is otherwise,
that is to say of diverse colors and not equal, it declares the
instruments of brethynge, and the hole breast so far to be distempered, as it
differethe from his own natural color, and quantity. Wherefore the
Physician should diligently consider what Hyppocrates has writ in the.ii.
book prog. and Aphor.43. and also in su^me of the other following. The.xii.
kind of euacuation, is by holdyng medicynes in the roof of ye mouth, which
is called gargelyng, under the which kind is contained the puttyng of
medicines in to the nose called nisynge: and these if they be used in their
time, profits and healpeth the brain very much. The.xiii. kind is the
bledyng at the nose, which amendeth the obstructions of ye brain, and the
distillations from the head, in to all parts of the body: wherefore the
Phisitio^ should diligently attend that in bledyng at the nose, he know when
to stynt it, and when not: For su^me time, when it has bled but a very
litell, it must be stayed incontinent. Sumtyme it is not stayed without great
danger, as if it chance by the abundaunce of nawghtye blood, for then it is
better to healpe nature to expel the nawghtie blood, the^ to stay it: wherefore
every Physician, should well remember this saying of Hyppocrates: when so ever
the bledynge at the nose, quieteth not the body, it must be stopped with a dry
medicyne. The.xiiii. kind of euacuation, is wemens flowers, which chance to
weme^ at times appointed of nature, that by the means of them, ye hole body
may be pourged, and so health defended: wherefore if the flowers be suppressed
at any time, except that time that the woman goethe with child, or gives
suck, it decays health utterly, and marreth the good constitution of the
body, as well as when they run to much, which Hyppocrates witnesses saying
as follows. Of to many flowers, cu^meth diseases, but of to few or not at
all, follows diseases of the womb. Yet in stopping of the flowers, the
Physician should behave him self wiselye, lest he stop them to sone or to
late. For su^ women has them naturally longer, then other have, which
Hyppocrates witnesses saying: to such women as have moist bodies, their
flowers continues long, and if they cu^ not down quickly, they swell with
all. The xv. kind of euacuation is done by the hemorrhoides, which is the name
of certain veins cu^minge to the loweste part of the fundament, by the which
nature purges the body of melancholye whereby it delivers the body, of many
diseases: which Hippocrates affirms, saying. They that have the hemorrhoides
be safe from all pain of their sides, and inflammatio^ of their lunges, nor
shall be troubled nether with byles, scurfe, nor no kind of lepry. Therefore the
Phisicio^ must take great head in stoppynge of them, lest they be the authors
of great and perilous sicknessis, as of the dropsy, and consumtions. He that
requires a longer disputation of this matter let him read over Hyppocrates
books, written of the same matter. The xvi. kind of euacuatio^ is the fleshly
or carnal copulation, which profits ye body much if it be used moderatly and
in due time: For it amendeth the fullness of the body, and as Aetius in
the.viii. chapter of his.iii. book, and Agineta in the 3. chapter of his.i.
book witnesses, when the body is at the grows it makes it strong, nymble,
and quick, and amendeth the hard habyt of the body: For it mollifieth the
instruments, and dilateth the pores and pourgeth the body of flewme: Morouer
it quickneth ye wit and pacifieth anger, wherefore it profits all them, that
have lost there wits, either with anger or else with sorrow, it profits them
also, which have the fawling evil: and such as have heaviness in their brows,
and ache in their heads, many times be cured by it. Which Hyppocrates
confirms saying: carnal copulation, which is called venus* amendeth all
diseases that cum of flewme, howbe it if it be used to much, it hurts the
eyes, and all the sensis, and the head, senewes, breast, raines, loins thyghes,
and morouer hasteneth old age and death, and utterly dissolueth the strength of
the body: and hereof it comes that they that use it to much, be forgetful,
and be weak and full of pain, both in their joints, loins, and thighs, and
it brings many to ye strangury, and many to the gout. Of all times of the
year, it may safest be used in thy spring, it is utterly to be abhorred in
autumn, and in su^mar. Winter also by means of his great cold, is not very
good: the best hour for it is as Galle^ says when the body is in a mean,
betwixt full, and empty, and excedeth nether in heat nether in cold,
dryness nor moisture. Therefore who so ever will use it, let him beware of
cruditie, drunkenness, hungar, werynesse, vomittynge, pourging of the belly,
watchyng, and all other such as healpeth to dissolve the strength of the body.
After moderate eating is the best time of it, and before sleep, for that
amendeth ye strength, and makes that there follows no cold after it. For
sleep immediately following it, takes away the werines of the muscles and
senewes, and calls in the natural heat: which makes the concoction perfect.
Moreover this time is best and aptest, to the procreation of children for many
causes: but especially because the woman whiles she slepeth, holds her
husbands seed best. The.xvii. kind of euacuation is perspiratio^, or
euaporation, which is done either by nature, or else by medicine, which so
finely subtylith the humors, that they pass by the insensible poores of ye
skin, without any putrifiynge. Hitherto I have declared the kinds of
euacuatio^, or emptines the which every diligent Physician must so well
observe, that he may know when to use this kind or that, or else when to
stop, for sumtyme it is better to increase humors* then to diminishe them.
Finallye the Physician should observe, and mark, how he should make
euacuation and where, and what, and when, and how much.

The.vii. chapter. Of the perturbations, and sudden motions of the mind.
THe Affections, which be the sudden motions, and perturbations of the mind,
ought not to be neclected of the phisitio^: because they be of great might, and
make great alteration in all the body: ye which amongst al other, fear, Joy,
angar and sorrow declare evidently. Fear by drawing the spirit and blood in
to ye innar parts leaves the utter pale for cold. Anger sets the body on
fire with moving of the blood to the utter parts and as in anger the pulse
beteth mightily, so in fere it beats almost nothing at all: sorrow is an
affection wc the which ye heart as though it were smytten, is drawn together,
and does tremble and quake, not without great sense of pain: and so by lyttel
and lyttel whiles the sorrow goes not away, the strength of the heart, is quite
overthrown, and the generation of spirits is let, by means whereof, the
life is utterly extinct: such a cruel scourge is sorrow unto man.

Fear and sorrow differ of this fashion, ye sorrowful man suffers that by
littell and litell, which the fearful man does suffer all a tonse. Joy is a
sudden motion, with the which ye heart rejoicing dilateth him self, and
suddenly sends forth al his natural heat and spirits, whereby sumtyme it
chaunseth that a weak body diethe in Joy, because for lack of strength the
heart ca^ not call in again his natural heat and spirits. Aulus Gellius, in
his.iii. book and.xv. chapter writes a^ historye worthy to be remembered of one
Diagoras yt had.iii. sons, which were all crowned of the people in one day at
the plays of the hill Olimpia, and whilst the people and his iii. sons
rejoicing, embrased their father, castyng their garlandes upon him, he died in
their arms.

Philippides also a maker of plays when he had ye victory amongst the
Poettes, which he looked not for, died by and by amongst them all.

How be it anger kylleth no man, because it nether cools the natural heat
nor yet dissolueth the strength.

The physician should mark earnestlye not only these, but all other affectes
of the mind also: partly, that he may know of them, what humor redoundeth: but
especially, that he may learn, how to resist them: and by his counsel master
them in the end.

The end of the second book
The third book
The first chapter of the number of things against Nature.
Things against Nature be.iii. in number: the first is the cause which goes
before the disease.

The second is the disease it self, by whom the action is first hurt.

The third is the accidents following the disease.

This same part of physic, which inquireth of the causes and the accide^tes
of diseases, is called of the Greeks, (...), sounds nothing else but the
mouyng of any thing that is affected: wherefore he has his substance no longer,
then he is in moving, altering, or changing: and so he differs from affection
taken specially, the which is nothing else but an alteration remaining in a
thing that has suffered: by this means, the disease and the cause, with the
accidente, which be affections of our body, as pale, and evil culour, be
called affections, and yet the same accidents be called also passions. The
rest which be the faults of sum action, as over much inanition, or retentio^,
be alonly called passions and not affections: because they be not things
permanent, but is only, and remain so long as they be in growing. Here it is
to be noted, that a thing may suffer.ii. manner of ways: first when it
suffers of it self, as if the guts suffer pain, of any sharp, or
bytynge humors contained within them, which may be called their own passion.
Secondarily, when a thing suffers not of it self but of another, as wha^
the head suffers pain by reason of evil vapowres, cummynge from the
stomach, which is called a passion by consent of other: ye shall find this
matter disputed more at large in Gallenes first book of places affected.

The.ii. chapter, Of the causes of diseases
THe cause of ye disease, is an affection against nature, going before the
disease, and stirring it up: which of it self, and first, hurts no action:
but accidentally, that is to say, by other. And seco^darily, as by healp of the
disease cummynge betwixt, as shall be showed more plainly hereafter. There
be.ii. manner of causes of diseases: one is external so called, because it is
outwardly received, and was not before with in the body: as cold, and such
other. The the other, is called internal, which is within the body, as humors
putrified within the body, and grown out of temper. Galle^ speaks of no mo
causes of diseases then these.ii. Yet Auicen with other of the same layer,
affirm that there is an other cause, which joins ever with the disease: and
the taking away of it, is as they say the curing of the sickness: as if rotten,
or putrifyed humors, kindell a fever, the^ by their saying so soon as the
putrified matter is taken away, ye fever must cease of necessity: howbeit it
is for ye most part seen that ye fever remains after the putrifactio^ is
clean gone. wherefore it is evident, that Auicen, and all that be of his opinion
is foul deceived therein: howbeit I think this to be ye thing, which deceyueth
them. They define sycknesse as it were the actio^ hurt alredye, and not that
that hurts the actio^ first, so that they call that the sickness, which
Gallen calls but the accidente of the sickness: and I could take Auicennes
part in this matter, sauinge that he agrees with Gallen in the defining of
sickness, forgettyng him self to be in contrary tales: wherefore I would
counsel all young students in physic, to learn the causes of sickness of
Galle^, or else of such as follow him, as Aetius, and Paulus Aegineta.
Howebeit there is none to be compared with Gallen because he has written of
them in such a good ordar, as never any other has wryt the like, and this I
dare affirm that every well learned man, can do no less the^ confess the same.

The.iii. chapter, Of diseases.
A Disease, is an unnatural affection of the body, by which the action is
first hurt, therefore it differs from the cause in that ye the cause never
hurts any action of him self, but by means of the disease. Of diseases
there be.3. chief and principal kinds: one is in those parts of the body that
is called of ye latins similares, such be ye bones, senewes, veins, with all
other simple, and sparmaticke parts: another is in the instruments, as in the
head, eyes, hands, and feet: the third consists in them both. That disease
yt happens in ye sparmatick parts, is such a distemperature either of heat,
could, dryness, or moisture, that it hurts sum action, for a man may be
distempered in sum part and yet be hole, and not sick: but when the
distemperature grows so much, that it hurts any action of the body, then it
may be called a disease of the sparmatike parts. Wherefore who so is of this
sort distempered, is sick: and he that is distempered and has no action hurt,
may not be called sick, but intemperat. For of them that be hole, if sum
should not be temperat and sum intemperat, one of these.ii. must needs be
true, either all men always to be sick, or else all men to have one
distemperature, which both be very false. The same distemperature which before
I called a disease of ye sparmaticke and simple parts, is divided in to.ii.
Egall, and not egal: it is called an egall diste^perature, when all parts of
the body, are distempered alike, as in the fever hectica, which is a
co^su^ptio^, wherein al parts of ye body, be like hot: and the contrary unto
this, is the distemperature, which is not egal as in that kind of dropsy, that
falls in to the legs, and feet, and in all kind of fevers, except the
before named hectica. Of unequal distemperature there is also ii. kinds.
The.i. is the only alteration of the quality, as the burning of the fire, or
of the sun. The.ii. is, beside the quality, the flux of sum humor, as in yt
kind of swellynge, yt is called phlegmon, Beside this of distemperatures, one
is simple, and an other is compound: it is called simple when on quality, as
heat, or cold, excedeth alone: and compound, when many excede together, as hot
and moist, cold and dry, exceeding to gether, in one member. The the other
kind of disease which only is in the instruments, may be called the evil
constitution, or composicio^ of them. But there be.ii. kinds of isntrumental
diseases, for sum be simple: and they be.iiii. in number, one is to be seen in
the vncumly comformation, another in the number of parts, the third in the
quantity of each part: and the.iiii. in the composition. The disease of
conformation happens of the vncumly figure, as when sum part is holowe from
the nativity, or else after by casualtie, which should not, and also sum
other part rough that should have been smothe: of number, when there be either
to many, or to few parts: of quantity when they be either to big, or to
litel: of co^posicion when they be put in wrong places, or wha^ they that
should agree together, do not. The third kind of disease, is common as well
to the simple and sparmatick parts, as to the isntrumental: and it is the
division of that that is hole, and of one piece, which division if it be in the
riynges or byndynges it is called anulsio^: in the flesh, a byle: in the bone,
a broken creuise: in the senowes, a conuulsion, or crampe. These diseases
sumtyme be compounde, which is when they be joined to other. Hitherto I have
brefly declared the.iii. first kinds of sicknessis, of the which sum be very
quick, and sum be dull, or slow: Such as be very quick, will be at the worste,
in.iiii. days, or soon after. Of such as be quick and sharp, there be.ii.
sorts, for sum will be at the worste, in.14. days, and sum not under.40. All
other diseases, which pass.40. days before they be at ye worst, be called dull
or slow. But as quick, and short diseases, have their beginning of blood
and chollar, which be hot humors, so slow and dull have their disseases,
beginning of cold humors, as of flewm and melancholy. Let this general, and
brefe declaration of diseases, at this time suffice.

The.iiii. chapter, of accidents.
THis word accidente is taken.2. manner of ways: generally and specially,
generally, it signyfyeth any thing contrary to nature: specially, all things
against nature, except the causes of diseases, and diseases them selfs.

Therefore it is nothing else but an unnatural affection of the body, which
follows the disease, as the shadow follows the body. The accidents
specially taken, be divided in to.iii. parts. For sum be the fautes and errors
of actions, sum affections of our body, other sum follow them both, either by
over much excretion, or retention of excrementes and other like such things.
Of the error in actions, there be.ii. differences: animal, and natural. The
faults, or errors, of the animal actions, be yet divided in to.iii. for either
they be faults of ye senses, as of hearing, saying, tastyng, smellyng,
feeling, or else of mouinge, or finally of the principal actions, as of
ymagining, thinkinge and remembering. These be all the animal actions, of the
which each one may be hurt iii. manner of ways: first if the action be
utterly extincte, as if a man see nothing at all: seco^darily, if it be not
utterly abolished, and taken away but decayed sumthing or not parfit, as when a
man sees but even scantly as they do, which the ignorant call sand blind.
Thirdly wha^ it is depraved, and wrong wrasted, as when a man of force, sees
things which he did not behold with his common sense, as they do which look a
goggell: And as it is evident, that all these fautes happen in the sight, so
they happen also in each one of the other before named sensis.

There be thus many as follow natural actions, appeticion, concoction,
digestion, pulsatio^, attraccion, alteration, retention, expulsion. Of the
which each may err.iii. manner of ways, as is said before in the actions
animal: and the fautes or errors of the same, be accidents following diseases.
There be beside these.iiii. manner of accidents, which be affections of our
bodies: as unnatural cullers, either in ye hole body, or else in sumpart of
it: Fylthy sauors also either of ye mouth, nose, or ears and obsurde and
unnatural sapores, belonging to the taste: and beside these, hardness, drines,
and roughnes of the skin.

As for the unnatural inanitions, or detentions from whense so ever they cum,
they be contained under one of these.iii. differencis: For either they be
unnatural i^ their hole substance, as that flux of blood that is called
commonly the emorroydes: or else they are in their quality, as sumtyme it
chaunseth in wemens flowers: or finally in their quantity, they be found
unnatural, as the great abundance or lack and scarsnes either of the vryne or
sweat. The which every one, is handeled to the vttermoste in Galle^, where he
entreats of ye causes, of accidents.

The end of the third book
The.iiii. book
The first chapter. Of that part of physic which teaches the knowledge of
things yt be past, present, and to cum.
THis is that same part of physic, the which (as I said before) contains
the knowledge of things that be past, and the inspection, or the beholdynge of
such as are present, and the prophecy, or prognostication of things to cum.
And therefore the mo commodities it has the more exactly it would be learned:
for first it teaches ye knowledge of all passions, and diseases: in ye which
(if the Physician be ignorant) he shall never be able, to do any thing worthy
praise, in the body. Therefore that young students, may the more luckely,
attain to the knowledge, of this part of physic, I would counsel every each
one of them, to read diligently Gallens.vi. books of places affected: in the
which he handles this matter at the large. For so it shall be brought to pass
that he shall be expert in the diseases, of every part, be the part never so
little.

Who so is exactly seen in this knowledge, shall besides other, have this
especial commodity, which is, that among the sick, his credit shall be
great: for the sick man trusts none so much, nor is so well ruled of any,
as he is of that Phisitio^, which is able to declare things present paste, and
to cum. Therefore the disease is easilye cured when the Physician, and the
pacient, be both against it, and moreover he shall bear no blame, what so ever
chance or happen to his pacient, yt I may omytte the great praise, glory, and
renoune, which with one consent shall be given him every where. Therefore
Hyppocrates counsels all Physicians, diligently to learn this knolege. The
which, no man has so well discussed (I except Hippocrates always) as Gallen
has. Wherefore they that be able to understand him, let them go no farthar:
but as for young and ignorant students, (for whose sake only I have taken this
in hand) if they read diligently this littell rude work, I trust though they
be not satisfied, yet they shall not lose all their pain. Therefore first of
all to the accomplysshynge, or gettyng of this knowledge, it is necessary to
expound this word Crisis, which the lattyns call iudicium, and in english it
may be called judgment: but at this present time it signifies any sudde^
mutation in every disease whether it be long or short, and this sudden
mutation is parted in.iiii. For either the sick is made hole incontinent, or
else is in a great towardness to health, or dies out of hand, or finally
becu^meth a great deal worse. The first of these mutations, which without any
delay cures the disease, is simply and absolutely called Crisis, The other
which only amendeth ye disease, is called crisis insufficiens, which is to say
a^ insufficient judgment. The third is called mala crisis, that is to say an
evil change, or judgment. The.iiii. may be called both vnparfit and evil
also. To ye knowledge of this change which is called crisis, the.iiii. times of
the disease, that is to say, the beginning, the encreasynge, the heyght, and
declination, must be observed, and marked of the Physician. The beginning is
divided in.3. the first invasion of the disease is the first beginnynge, and
is simple without any breadth. The.ii. has breadth, and continues to the third
day. The third is the time afterward, till ye beginning of concoctio^. The time
wherein the sickness grows, is from the beginning of concoction, until the
disease be at his full strength which before is called the heygth. The.iiii.
time which is called the declination, begins after the heygth, and lasts
till the disease be full past and ended.

These be the universal times in disseases, besides which there is other
called particular: as in such fevers as keep fittes, the beginning of the
fit, is the cold in the utter parts: the growing is whiles the body waxes
hot: and the state, or hayght is, when the heat is egally dispersed
throughout the body: the declination, wha^ the heat goes away. Before I
declare how to know this sudden mutation, which of the greeks is called
Crisis, I think it expedient, and necessary to show in few words, the
difference of ye signs and tokens goinge before, which be of three sorts: of
the first sort, is ye signs of cruditie, and concoction, as the excrementes of
the bellye, the vryne, and spettel: by the egestions of the nether belly it is
known how the stomach alters: the vryne either declares cruditie, or good
concoction in the veins: the spettell shows either ye good, or evil
constitution of the lunges, and instruments of breathing.

These signs what time of the disease so ever they happen, keep always their
power firm and stable: For the signs of concoccion, always declare health,
and the contrary signs, either great pains long sickness, death, or finally the
turnyng again of the evil. Of the.ii. sort be the signs of life and death:
as quick sleep, easy brethinge, goodness of the pulse, like in face to them
that be hole, hansume and cumly liyng in bed, sweat, and such as to these be
clean contrary. Of the third sort be the judging signs, of the which sort
there be.ii. kinds: for sum be as signs, and causes both together, as
vomittynge, excrementes of the belly, the great quantity of vryne, and
sweates, bledynge at the nose, or the falling of humors out of one place in to
another: and other be as signs alone, as watch, dead slepes, troublesum
dreams, difficulty of breathynge, dimnesse of sight, dullness of sense, head,
neck, and stomach ache, singinge in the head, involuntary tears, quiuerynge
of ye neither lip, forgetfulness, face, eyes, and nose red, abhorryng of
meat, vehement thirst, with other such like. All these, in that yt they declare
any sudden mutation, be called judging signs: and in that that they follow
diseases, they be called judging accidents. These have not their power
always firm, and certain, as the signs of concoction, and cruditie have,
but they are to be liked if they happen after concoction, that is whiles ye
sickness is in the state: and in the beginning, and before any concoctio^,
they be not only not to be belyked, but to be fered, as deadly signs.
Concerning ye Nature or property of signs, for this time, let this suffice:
but as for such signs, as declare sudden mutation before called crisis, to be
good* I entend yet (god willing) to speak a little more, which may be
known.iii. manner of ways. First if before Crisis cum, there be concoction of
the disease, I mean of the vryne, the egestions, and spettell: the which each,
ought to be considered in his proper place: For in the diseases of ye breast,
and lunges, the spettell should be taken most head of, and best marked, and
yet the vryne ought not to be neglected, no nor the excrementes of the belly
nether, but in an ague, which is without any inflammation either of the liver
raynes, bladder, or spleen, ye urine must be regarded especially: as if the
stomach, or mawe, be grieved, the excrementes of ye belly would be considered
before the other. Yet the vryne, is not then to be abiected nether. Secundarily
if the cu^mynge of it, be signified by any of the judging days, it is to be
lyked of the Physician: the declaration of the which days, I omyt, because I
have observed that there is in them, more error then truth, more superstition,
then knowledge: and bysyde this, the scripture commands us Christen men, to
observe no days: yet if any man be wylling to know them let him seek what
Hyppocrates, and Gallen has written of them: and then I doubt not (though he
be dull wytted) but that he shall quicly know what is meant by them. Thirdly it
is good, if the mesure, and form of the excrementes, be correspondent, and
aggreable to the disease: as if in an hot burning fever, the sick blede at
the nose: or after a fervent shaking, sweat much, and hot in all parts of his
body: or vomit much chollar, or finally void much by syege, for so ye fever
tertian should end: the quotidian not only by much sweatyng, but also by the
avoydynge of flewme, both upward, and dounward, in great quantity. The
frenzy, is judged by much hot sweat, cummynge in every part of the body, but
especially if the head sweat fervently: yet sumtyme it is judged and ended, by
bledynge at the nose: how be it in the lythargie, bledynge at the nose is
evil.

The pleuresie is betwixt these.ii. For bledyng at the nose in it, is to be
lyked better, then in the lithargy, and worse then in the frenzy. The
inflammacions of ye liver and spleen, be always judged by bledynge at the
nose: the liver, if it blede on the right side, and ye spleen f the lift:
beside these, the age and complexion of the sick, and also his forma^ diet,
and place wherein the sick abides, with the time of the year, and the present
constitution of the air, be to be considered of the Phisitio^, whiles he
judges crisis to be either good or evil. For as the disease is cholerike, and
all these choleric also, it is necessary that when crisis happens, chollar
ple^tifully to be voyded: so if flewme redounde it is needful for flewme to be
pourged: if diverse humors, ye euacuation must be also of diverse humors. But
when the Physician shall know these things exactly, then of ye end, he may
easily know the rest: for if the sick, which alredie has suffered crisis, be
delivered of his ague and other accidents and be better culloured, having also
better pulses, and more strength to rise, without doubt the crisis was good.

The knowledge of the evil Crisis, as there is in it much conjecture, so there is
also in it much incertaynty: For as where nature is strong, and rules easily
the humors, she moves orderly, and makes an end of her actions: so when she
takes a fall, her motions be both incertayne, and inordinate, and therefore
hard to be known. wherefore such a case requires an artificer, and a well
exercised Phisitio^, the which may first declare whether there shall be any
Crisis, at all or no: secu^darily wether this day, or that: last of all whether
it shall kill the sick forthwith, or but only hurt him. What should need
many words, by these.3. it is easily to be known whether the sick shall die,
or live: first, by the kind of the disease: secundarily, by the greatness of
it: thirdly, by the manner, and fashion of it: fortly by the mouyng of it. The
kind of the disease, is known of ye accidents following it, as in example:
the pleuresie is known by the prickyng pain of the side, ye difficulty of
brething by the fieuer which always is annexed to it, by ye coughe, and
hardness of the pulse: but ye greatness of it, may be learned by the
quantity, and vehemence, of the forsayde accidents: and the manner of it, by
the accidents which follow it: as if they be many in number, if they be long,
mighty, and evil, or such as to these be clean contrary, the mouynge of it,
by the time of the parts of the fit. To these.iiii. the consideration of the
cu^try, the time of the year, the nature, and co^stitutio^ of the sickmanes
body, with other such, as is in this same chapter before rehearsed is necessary
also. Of these, that Physician which is an artificer, shall easily judge life
or death in his pacient: and he yt is not, let him speak no farther the^ he
knows, and so he shall sustain no blame nor shame.

Of the vryne. The.ii. chapter.
Seeing that the vryne is the alonly mark of ye liver and veins, in what error
think you that the Physicians are now a days which take upon them, to judge
all diseases by the vryne: which is as absurd and impossible, as of the
spettell, to declare the gryefe of the bladder, and raynes: wherefore saying
that against all knowledge, and good learning, they do so shamefully abuse the
lookynge of the water, and deceive the poor, ignorant, and simple people so
craftily, I think them worthy to be called, as Aristophanes calls them,
couetouse and unlearned Physicians, since that they esteem more their filthy
lucre, then the truth. But now to my purpose. The vryne is the excrement and
watery substance of the blood, which after ye concoction done in the veins, is
drawn thense by the kidneyes or raynes, in to the bladder, where it is
reserved till it may conveniently be let out: in the beholding of the which,
there is.4. things to be considered, which be these following: ye substance,
cullar, quantity, and co^tentes: of ye which no man can well judge, which
knows not parfitly ye holsummest, and of all other the best urine, whereto he
may compare the rest.

The best water, or vryne, and the which is of a temperate man, in substance is
nether to thick nor thin, but moderate, in quantity as much, and no more
then he dronk: in cullar sumwhat inclinynge toward yealowe, having a white,
light, and equal sediment: and such a water as this, of a young Physician
should often be looked upon, to the intent that when he seethe any other differ
never so litell from it, he may forthwith conjecture the same man, whose water
he has seen, so much to differ from parfit health, how much his water
differs from the other. Now after I have showed which is the best water, there
remains behind, the declaration of such things as is in ye vryne,
especially to be considered: which I purpose to declare orderly. The substance
of the vryne, is either thick, thynne, or moderat and equal betwixt both. That
which is moderat, is of all other the best, and if it be to thin or thick, it
declares vnparfit concoction: Of the thyn vryne, there is.ii. differences: For
the one is pissed thynne, and clear, and so remains still: and the other is
pissed thin and clear, and after becummeth thycke and troubled: but they be
both crude, and raw, and do lack concoction, and thus they differ: The tone
signifies extreme cruditie, declarynge nature as yet, not to have begu^ne any
concoction. The the other shows that nature has begun concoctio^ but very
lately. The troublesumnes signifies great plenty of wyndie spirits, to be
mixed with the watery substance of the vryne. Of thycke and troubled waters,
there is also.ii. differencis: if it be thick when it is pissed, then afterward
it waxes clear, having a residence in the bothome, which proficieth of sum
inequall turbulent matter remaining behind in the veins: And on the other
side, sum other water, which after it is made is thick, and remains so
still: which signifies great trouble and agitation, as yet to remain in the
blood. Hitherto I have declared the substance of the vryne, wherefore now
follows the cullar: of the which there be.vi. differencys in especial, which
is white pale, tawny, yealow, red, and black: For all the rest be contained
under these. Vndar white is contained the cullar of cristall, snow, and water,
the which all signify great cruditie. Not so white as these is milk, horn
white, and the hearres of a chammell: And as the vrynes of these cullars,
differ from very white, so they declare better concoction. After white they be
next, that be sum deal pale, the which because they be a littell tincte, they are not extreme crude. A pale cullar is made, by the mixture of chollar, and
water together, so that in the mixture there goes but a litell chollar, to a
great deal of water: of pale by means of concoction, su^time is made a light
tawny which Actuarius, takes to be the cullar of gilt. After a tawny follows
a light yelow, which is a cullar like the flowers of cartamus, which is
commonly called the gardyn saffaron: after the which, comes yealowe, which
is the cullar of saffaron: and a light red, which is ye cullar of a certain
drug, called bolum, is next: then red it self which is the cullar of a cherry:
after these is a dark red, which is the cullar of a mulberry: and yet there
is a darcker, which is made of white, and red, egally myxte together, and of
the latyns it is called, Venetus: grene is the cullar of beetes, which the
gardiners call the white beetes, or else the cullar of ye precious Emmoroyde:
Beside these, there is yet other cullars, as the cullar of oil, the cullar of
lead, and all cole black cullars, which is known almost of every child. If I
have here in the discripsions of cullars, miss or wrong named any cullar, I
pray the paynters, to accept my good will, and pardon my ignorancye: in the
iudgyng of cullars ye Phisicio^ should be provident, because that oftentimes,
with every light occation, the cullar of the urine does alter, and change, not
only in them that besicke, but also in the^ yt be hole: and of this mutatio^,
or change there is.3. special causes. The first is meat not well altered, or
disgested, which is not apt to make blood, wherefore it changes the cullar of
the vryne to ye same cullar that it self is of, which is wont to happen to
them that is sick and diseased, yea and sumtyme to such also as is hole:
moreover sum medicine will alter the cullar of the urine. The second cause of
ye altering of ye cullar in ye water, is the drink: for the vryne commonly
keeps the cullar of those things which is received in the drink. The.iii.
cause is the collyquation of such things, as consume and melt in the body, as
the fat, which when it wastes, for the most part cullereth vryne. Beside these
there be other causes also which do the same, as exercise, hungar, sleep,
watch, with a great many other such like. which in the beholdynge of the vryne
each one by him self should be diligently considered of the Physician. Now I
entende to declare what may be coniectured in the urine of the substance, and
cullar. A thin urine, signifies the lack of natural heat, not without the
obstructions of y^ liver, raynes, and spleen, by means of cruditie: A thick
declares excess of matter, and humors fillinge the belly, guts, and the
holowe parts of the liver: which if it be seen in a fever, thynne goinge
before, it signifies the dissoluing of ye fever. But if after yt the fever is
alredie cu^, ye vryne appear thick, nor in continuance of time waxes no
thinnar, the^ it signifies plenty of humors. Concerning ye cullars what white,
pale, yelowe, and read signify, partly is already declared, and more may be
gathered, of these ye follow. The dark red which is the cullar of the mulberry,
shows yt the blood burns in the veins. The grene signifies the worste
kind of chollar to be encresed both in quantity, and quality. That vryne
which has ye cullar of oil, shows ye colliquatio^ of ye hole body, or else
of ye raynes only. The black water sumtyme declares health as in the
pourginge of mela^choly, but if grene went before, the^ it is a very argument
of death, and it is more to be feared in men then women. Now we be cu^ unto the
quantity which in them that be hole should be so much as was dronken. The
water excedeth in quantity for ye most part, by means of these causes
following: first when a man eats and drinks to much, the meat being to
moist, or the drink being watrishe wine. The second when he has taken
medicynes, which provoke vryne. The third when the raynes is distempered with
over much heat. The forth when the belly is drier, then it ought to be
naturally. The fyfte wha^ there proceeds no euacuatio^ of ye belly nor other
ways, which Hyppocrates witnesses, saying: Water much in quantity, made in
the night, prophecieth of a small siege: Litel water happens of contrary
causes: First of littell drinking, dryness of meats, much exercise, and
other like unto these, which be wont to dry the body. Secondarily, for meats
and medicyns which for their grosnesse, make obstruction in the liver and
spleen, and other places. Thirdly for the grosnesse and clammynesse of humors.
Forthly for the plentiful pourgynge of the belly. Fyftly for the vehement
heat, and dryness in a fever. Sixthly, for the weakness of the excretiue
power, both in the raynes and other parts serving to the avoydynge of the
water, or vryne. The.iiii. thing which in the vryne is to be considered be the
contents, so called (I think) because they consist in every part of the
altitude of the body of the water. And as the heyght of the body of the water
is divided in to.iii. as in to the bothome of the vryne, the brinke, or highest
region, and in to the middell of these extremities: so of the contents sum
swymmeth in the top, and other hangs in the middell, and sum goes to the
bothom. In ye contents there be.iii. things to be considered, ye substance,
cullar, and quantity. The substance, because su^me be thick, and other sum
thynne, and su^me in a mean betwixt both. The contents of healthy waters, be
moderat of substance, light, and egall. They be called light, which be
continual and of of one piece, not rough, nor broken in any part, and such as
is to these contrary may be called rough. Co^tentes yt be gross, signify
copy and plenty of crude, and raw humors in the veins, and sumtime ye
strength of the excretiue faculty, in pourginge superfluous humors. Contents
yt be thin, signify weakness of nature in ye second co^coctio^* and
declares also gross humors to be subtyled, and made thynne. Concerning the
cullar of contents, su^ be very white, sum pale, su^me yealowe, su^me red,
su^me bluddy, su^me black, and su^me of diverse cullars. Contents very white
be either pieces of slymye humors, or else matter to much baked: which comes
from su^me of the innar parts: pale contents be evil, because they decline
from the natural cullar: yealowe be evil also, in that yt they declare the
over much encreasinge of chollar: red signify lack of concoction, and the
contynuynge of the disease. Blodie declare yt the blood is not thoroughly
labored of nature: black signifies either ye mortifiyng of natural heat, or
else the pourgynge of melancholy. Now since that I have brefely declared the
cullar, and substance of the contents, there remains behind the quantity,
which if it be much, as it shows the nurisshynge of the body, so it does the
fortifiynge of the excretiue faculty. For while nature laboreth much in
alteryng the nurrishemente, she must needs make many excrementes. The scarcity
and lack of co^tentes, happens either of fasting, or exercise, or obstruction
in ye veins, or finally of over slow concoction. Sumtime there is an evil
savor in the vrin, which signifies either rottenness of sum part of the body,
or else the mortifyinge of the hole body: specially if ye substance, and
co^tentes be evil.

Of the excrementes of the belly. The.iii. chapter
THat siege, or excrement is best, and, most natural, which is soft, and
lies together hole, and well compact, made at the accustomed time in health,
and in quantity, correspondent to that yt is eaten: of the contrary part,
that is an evil and an unnatural siege, or excrement which is hard, thynne,
or rough, not made in ye accustomed hour of health. If the siege be very much
cullared, it is evil and signifies over much chollar in the guts: and if
it be not tincte at all, but like unto the meat which was eaten, it signifies
cruditie, and no chollar at all to resort to the guts: but if ye siege be
yealowe in ye declination of the sickness, the^ it declares the body to be
pourged of chollar very well. If the siege be grene it shows that there is
great plenty of rustie chollar: and if it be black it signifies either the
abundance of melancholy, or else the adustion of blood in the stomach. If it
be of the cullar of lead, then it betokens the mortifiynge of the innar
parts, or at the least an extreme cold in the same. If it be either fatty, or
clammye, and no like meat has be eaten immediately before, it signifies the
hole body to consume. If it be very much stinkyng, it is a sure token of
putryfaction. In these things, the nature and quality of the meats, be as
well to be considered, as the imbecillitie an weakness of the guts, in
suffering fluxes, and reumes from the head. when the excrement in cummynge
forth makes any noise, it declarethe wind to be mixte with thynne moisture, and
the fundement to be drawn nere together. When any wyndye spirit strives with
moisture, then commonly there remains sum foam in the siege. The siege being
diverse in cullar, shows ye body to be diversely affected: wherefore for the
most part it is a sign of long sickness.

Of the spettell. The.4. chapter
THe spettell is to be considered in all diseases, but especially in the
diseases or griefs of the breast, and lunges: in the which diseases, if the
pacient spet nothing at all, it is a toke^ of extreme cruditie: but if he spet,
though it be moist and crude it signifies the first part of the disease, which
is the beginning to be newly ended: after that it is more baked and cummeth up
first a littell, and then more and more, the^ the sickness is almost in ye
state and at the worst, and when it is well baked, and cu^meth a great pase,
then the disease is already in the state, which is to say at the heyght, because
the^ it ca^ grow no higher, and after cummyng less, with more ease and less
grefe in coughyng, and taking of breath, being also well co^coct, and not
crude, it signifies ye sickness to decline, and depart. If the spettel be
sumthynge nigh unto yelowe, with a light foam upon it, it is a token, of cruditie
only, without any furthar evil. But if it be very yelow, tawny, grene, or
black, or clammy with much foam, it is not to be beliked at all: if it be blody,
it is nothing so evil as black and yealow, but the manner of excretion, must
also be well marked: For if it cum up easily, the^ it is to be accounted good,
and if not but with difficulty of brethyng, the^ it is euel. The absolute note,
and mark, of concoction is when the spettel is light, white, and egal, and of
substance nether thynne, nor thick: if the spettell be thynne, and not black,
it signifies nothing but the lack of natural heat, but if it be the cullar
of lead, or rustinesse or black, it is extreme evil.

The.v. chapter of the pulses.
THe pulse is a sensible mouynge of the heart and Arteries, (that is to say
veins, having two coats growing of the heart, and carriynge both blod and
spirit) by the which they be lifted up and let done again. This mouynge has
ii. uses: For in the dilatynge of the arteries, cold Air is drawn in which
does not only stir up, but also refreshes the vital power, whereof the
Animal spirits be made, and in the submission, or co^traction of the
forenamed Arteries, the smoky excrement which came of burnte and humors
aduste, is expelled. Parauenture sum will look, that here in this place I
should have declared the differencys of the pulses, because that without the
knowledge thereof, there can be no diuinatio^ by the pulses. Howbeit I willingly
at this time omyt them, because Gallen and Archigines with other mo ancient
writers are not as yet agreed of them, and Cornelius Celsus (non of the worst
Physicians) seems to doubt much whether any thing may certainly be
coniectured by them or no. But this I am assured of that though I should have
set them forth so plainly as I could for my life, yet they should not have
been thoroughly known, but of such as already be well entered, and practiced, not
only in the works of Physic, but also in Arithmaticke, and Mathamaticke: and
as for such let them search what Gallen and other old physicians have written:
For to them this littel rude book is not written, but only to such as are
ignorant in the lattyn tongue, yt they may by healp of this my book, not only
learn su^thyng for their bodily health, but also save their money, which they
daily wast in feeding such Physicians as be not lernyd, wherefore gentle
readers accept my good will though I have not satisfied your expectation,
remembrynge the old poets saying: Rebus et in magnis est voluisse satis.
which is to say that in matters of weight, to have been willing it is
sufficient.

Finis.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the Sun, over against the
condyte, by Edward VVhitchurche the.x. day of April.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


