THE DESCRIPTION of a voyage made by certain Ships of Holland into the East
INDIES. With their adventures and success: Together With the description of
the Countries, Towns, and inhabitants of the same: Who set forth on the
second of April 1595. and returned on the 14. of August. 1597.

Translated out of Dutch into English by W. P.

depiction of a ship

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf. 1598.

To the right worshipful Sir James Scudamore, Knight.
RIght worshipful, this small treaty (written in Dutch, showing a late voyage
performed by certain Hollanders to the Islandes of Iaua, part of the East
Indies) falling into my hands, and in my judgment deserving no less
commendation then those of our Country men, (as Captain Raimond in the
Penelope, Master Foxcroft in the Merchant Royal, and M. James Lancaster in
the Edward Bonauenture, unto the said East Indies, by the Cape de Bona
Sperance, in Anno 1591. as also M. John Newbery, and Raphael Fich over land
through Siria from Aleppo unto Ormus and Goa, and by the said Raphael Fich
himself to Bengala, Malacca, Pegu, and other places in Anno 1583. as at large
appears in a book written by M. Richard Haclute a Gentleman very studious
therein, and entitled the English voyages) I thought it not inconvenient to
translate the same into our mother tongue, thereby to procure more light and
encouragement to such as are desirous to travel those Countries, for the
common wealth and commodity of this Realm and themselves. And knowing that
all men are not like affected, I was so bold to shroud it under your worships
protection, as being assured of your good disposition to the favoring of
travel and travelers, (and whereby it has pleased God to advance you to that
honorable title, which at this present you bear) and so not fitter for the
protection of any then your self: and as a poor friend wishing all happiness
and prosperity in all your valiant actions. Which if it please your worship
to like and accept, it may procure the proceeding in a more large and ample
discourse of an East Indian voyage, lately performed and set forth by one John
Hughen of Linschoten, to your further delight. Wherewith craving your favor,
and beseeching God to bless your worship, with my good Lady your wife, I most
humbly take my leave:

This 16. of January. 1597. Your Worships to command W. Phillip.

To the Bayliefes, Burghemaisters, and Counsel of the Town of Middelborgh in
Zeelande.
IT may well be thought (Right worshipful) as many learned men are of
opinion, that the actions and adventures of the ancients long since done and
performed, have been set forth with more show of wonder and strangeness then
they in truth deserved: the reason as I think was, because that in those days
there were many learned and wise men, who in their writings sought by all
means they could to excel each other, touching the description of Countries
and nations: And again to the contrary, for want of good Historiographers and
writers, many famous acts and travels of diverse nations and Countries lie
hidden, and in a manner buried under ground, as wholly forgotten and unknown,
unless it were such as the Grecians and Romans for their own glories and
advantages thought good to declare. But to come to the matter of voyages by
sea, it is evident to all the world, what voyage Jason with certain young
Grecian Princes made to Colchos in the Oriental Countries to win the golden
Fleece, as also the travels by Hercules performed into Libia in the West
parts, to win the Aurea Mala or golden apples of Hesperides, which
notwithstanding neither for length, danger, nor profit, are any thing
comparable to the nauigations and voyages, that of late within the space of one
hundredth years have been performed and made into the East and West Indies,
whereby in a manner there is not one haven on the sea coast, nor any point of
land in the whole world, but has in time been sought and found out. I will
not at this present dispute or make an argument, whether the Countries and
nations of late years found out and discovered, were known to the ancients,
but this is most certain, that not any strange work or adventure was, or ever
shall be performed, but by the special grace, favor and mighty hand of God,
and that such are worthy perpetual memory, as with noble minds have sought to
effect, and be the first enterprisers thereof, and with most valiant courages
and wisdoms, have performed such long and dangerous voyages into the East and
West Indies, as also such Kings and Princes, as with their Princely
liberalities have employed their treasures, ships, men and munitions to the
furtherance and performance of so worthy acts, which notwithstanding in the
end turned to their great aduancementes and enriching with great treasures,
which by those means they have drawn, and caused in great abundance to be
brought from thence, in such manner, that the King of Spain now living,
(having both the Indies in his possession, and reaping the abundant treasures
which yearly are brought out of those countries) has not only (although
covertly) sought all the means he could to bring all Christendom under his
dominion, but also (that which no King or country whatsoever although of
greater might then he has ever done) he is not ashamed to use this posie,
Necspe, nec metu. And although the first founders and discouerers of those
Countries have always sought to hinder and intercept other nations from having
any part of their glory, yet hereby all nations, and indifferent persons may
well know and perceive the special policy, and valor of these united
Provinces, in traveling into both the Indies, in the faces, and to the great
grief of their many and mighty enemies. Whereby it is to be hoped, that if they
continue in their enterprises begun, they will not only draw the most part of
the Indian treasures into these Countries, but thereby disinherite and spoil
the Country of Spain of her principal revenues, and treasures of
marchandises and trafiques, which she continually uses and receives out of
these countries, and out of Spain are sent into the Indies, and so put the
King of Spain himself in mind of his foolish devise which he uses for a
posie touching the new world, which is, Non sufficit orbis, like a second
Alexander magnus, desiring to rule over all the world, as it is manifestly
known. And because this description is fallen into my hands, wherein is
contained the first voyage of the Low Country men into the East Indies, with
the adventures happened unto them, set down and justified by such as were
present in the voyage, I thought it good to put it in print, with many pictures
and cards, whereby the reader may the easilier perceive and discern, the
natures, apparels, and fashions of those Countries and people, as also the
manner of their ships, together with the fruitfulness and great abundance
of the same, hoping that this my labor will not only be acceptable unto all
Merchants and Sailors, which hereafter mean to traffic into those Countries,
but also pleasant and profitable to all such as are desirous to look into so
new and strange things, which never heretofore were known unto our nation.
And again for that all histories have their particular commodity, (specially
such as are collected and gathered together) not by common report, from the
first, second, or third man, but by such as have seen and been present in
the actions, and that are living to justify and verify the same: And although
eloquence and words well placed in showing a history, are great ornaments and
beautifyinges to the same, yet such reports and declarations are much more
worthy credit, and commendabler for the benefit of the commonwealth, which are
not set down or disciphered by subtle eloquence, but shown and performed by
simple plain men, such as by copiousnesse of words, or subtlety do not alter
or change the matter from the truth thereof, which at this day is a common and
notorious fault in many Historiographers: And thinking with my self to whom I
were best to dedicate the same, I found it not fitter for any then for the
right worshipful Governors of this famous Town of Middelborgh, wherein for
the space of 19. years I have peaceably continued, specially because your
worships do not only deal with great store of shipping, and matter belonging
to navigations, but are also well pleased to hear, and great furtherers to
advance both shipping and traffiques, wherein consists not only the welfare
of all merchants, inhabitants, and citizens of this famous City, but also of
all the common wealth of the united Provinces, hoping your worships will not
only accept this my labor, but protect and warrantise the same against all
men: Wherewith I beseech God to bless you with wisdom, and godly policy, to
govern the Common wealth: Middleborgh this 19 of October. 1597.

Your worships servant to command Bernardt Langhenez.

A brief description of a voyage performed by certain Hollanders to and from
the East INDIES, with their adventures and success.
THe ancient Historiographers and discribers of the world have much commended,
and at large with great praise set down the diverse and several voyages of
many noble and valiant Captains (as of Alexander Magnus, Seleucus, Antiochus,
Patrocles, Onesecritus) into the East Indies, which notwithstanding have not
set down a great part of those coontries, as not being as then discovered,
whereby it is thought and judged by some men, that India is the full third part
of all the world, because of the great Provinces, mighty Cities, famous and
Islands (full of costly marchandises, and treasures from thence brought into
all parts of the world) that are therein: Wherein the ancient writers were
very curious, and yet not so much as men in our age: They had some knowledge
thereof, but altogether uncertain, but we at this day are fully certified
therein, both touching the countries, towns, streams and havens, with the
trafiques therein used and frequented, whereby all the world, so far distant
and separated from those strange nations, are by trade of marchandises united
thereunto, and thereby commonly known unto them: The Portingalles first began
to enterprise the voyage, who by art of navigations (in our time much more
experienced and greater then in times past, and therefore easilier performed)
discovered those wild Countries of India, therein procuring great honor to
their King, making his name famous, and bringing a special and great profit
of all kinds of spices into their Country, which thereby is spread throughout
all the world, yet that sufficed not, for that the Englishmen (not inferior
to any nation in the world for art of navigations) have likewise undertaken the
Indian voyage, and by their said voyages into those Countries, made the same
commonly known unto their Country, wherein Sir Fraunces Drake, and M. Candish
are chiefly to be commended, who not only sailed into the East Indies, but
also round about the world, with most prosperous voyages, by which their
voyages, ours have been furthered and set forward, for that the condition of
the Indies is, that the more it is sailed into, the more it is discovered, by
such as sail the same, so strange a Country it is: So that besides the famous
voyages of the Countries aforesaid, in the end certain people came into
Holland (a nation well known) certifying them, that they might easily prepare
certain ships to sail into the East Indies, there to traffic and buy
spyces, etc. By sailing straight from Hollande and also from other countries
bordering about it, with desire to see strange and rich wares of other
Countries, and that should not be brought unto them by strangers, but by their
own country men, which some men would esteem to be impossible, considering
the long voyage and the dangers thereof, together with the unaccustomed
saylinges and little knowledge thereof by such as never sailed that way, and
rather esteem it madness, then any point of wisdom, and folly rather then
good consideration. But notwithstanding we have seen four ships make that
voyage, who after many dangers having performed their voyage, returned again
and have brought with them those wares, that would never have been thought
could have been brought into these countries by any Holland ships; but what
should I herein most commend either the willingness and good performance of
the parties, or the happiness of their voyage? whereof that I may give the
reader some knowledge, I will show what I have heard and been informed of,
concerning the description of the Countries, customs, and manners of the
nations, by them in this voyage seen and discovered, which is as follows.

When and how the ships set sail.
In the year of our Lord 1595. upon the 10. day of the month of March, there
departed from Amsterdam three ships and a Pinnace to sail into the East
Indies, set forth by diverse rich Marchantes: The first called Mauritius, of the
burden of 400. tons, having in her six demie canon, fourteen Culuerins,
and other pieces, and 4. pieces to shoot stones, and 84. men: the Master John
Moleuate, the Factor Cornelius Houtman: The second named Hollandia, of the
burden of 400. tons, having 85. men, seven brass pieces, twelve pieces for
stones, and 13. iron pieces, the Master John Dignums, the Factor Gerrit van
Buiningen, the third called Amsterdam, of the burden of 200. tuns, wherein
were 59. men, six brass pieces, ten iron pieces, and six pieces for stones,
the Master John Iacobson Schellinger, the Factor Reginer van hell: The fourth
being a Pinnace called the Dove, of the burden of 50. tons, with twenty men,
the Master Simon Lambertson: Which 4. ships upon the 21. of the same month
came unto the Tassel, where they stayed for the space of 12. days to take in
their lading, and the second of April following, they set sail with a North
east wind and following on their course the fourth of the same month they
passed the heads; The sixth they saw Heyssant, the 10. of April they passed by
the Barles of Disbon: With an East and North East wind, the 17. of April they
discovered two of the Islands of Canaries: The 19. Palm, and Pic, Los Romeros,
and Fero: The 25. of April they saw Bona visita, the 16. they ankered under
Isole de May: The 27. they set sail again and held their course South
Southeast. The 4. of May, we espied two of the King of Spaines ships, that came
from Lisbone, and went for the East Indies, about 1000. or 1200. tons each
ship, with whom we spoke, and told them that we were bound for the straights of
Magellanes, but being better of sail then they, we got presently out of their
sight. The 12. of May being under five degrees on this side the Equinoctial
line, we espied five ships laden with Sugar, coming from the Island of S.
Thomas, and sailed for Lisbone, to whom we gave certain letters, which were
safely delivered in Holland. Departing from them and keeping on our course,
upon the fourth of June we passed the Equinoctial line, where the extreme heat
of the air spoiled all our victuailes: Their victuailes stunke and spoiled.
Our flesh and fish stunke, our Biscuit molded, our Beer sowred, our water
stunke, and our Butter became as thin as Oil, whereby diverse of our men fell
sick, and many of them dyed; but after that we learned what meat and drink we
should carry with us that would keep good. They passed the sands of Brasilia.
The 28. of June we passed the sands of Brasill, by the Portingalles called
Abrolhos, which are certain places which men must look warely unto, otherwise
they are very dangerous.

map of Africa AFRICA.


These sands lie under 18. degrees, and you must pass between the coast of
Guine and the sands aforesaid, not going too near either of them, otherwise
close by the Coast there are great calmes, thunders, raines and lightnings,
with great storms, hard by the sands men are in danger to be cast away: and
so sailing on their course, first East South east, then East and East and by
North. Upon the second of July we passed Tropicus Cancri, under 23. degrees,
and. The 13. of the same Month, we espied many black birds. Tokens of the
Cape de bona Sperance.
The 19. great numbers of white birds, and the 20. a bird as big as a Swan,
whereof four or five together is a good sign of being near the Cape de bona
Sperance. These birds are always about the said Cape, and are good signs of
being before it.

They entered into Agne Sambras
The second of August we saw the land of the Cape de bona Sperance, and the
fourth of the same Month we entered into a haven called Agne Sambras, where we
ankered, and found good depth at 8. or 9. fadome water, sandy ground.

The 5. day we went on shore to gather fruit, therewith to refresh our sick
men, that were thirty or 33. in one ship. In this bay lies a small Islande,
wherein are many birds called Pyncuius and sea Wolves that are taken with men's
hands: we went into the country and spoke with the inhabitants, who brought
diverse fresh victuailes aborde our ships, for a knife or small piece of Iron,
etc. giving us an Ox, or a sheep etc. The sheep in those Countries have
great tails, and are fat and delicate. Their Oxen are indifferent good, having
lumps of flesh upon their backs, that are as fat as any of our good brisket
beef: the inhabitants are of small stature, well ioynted and boned, they go
naked, covering their members with Foxes and other beasts tails: they seem
cruel, yet with us they used all kind of friendship, but are very beastly and
stinking, in such sort, that you may smell them in the wind at the least a
fadome from you: They are apparrelled with beasts skins made fast about
their necks: some of them, being of the better sort, had their mantles cut and
raised checkerwise, which is a great ornament with them: They eat raw flesh,
as it is new killed, and the entrails of beasts without washing or making
clean, gnawing it like dogs, under their feet they tie pieces of beasts
skins, in steed of shoes, that they may travel in the hard ways: We could
not see their habitations, for we saw no houses they had, neither could we
understand them, for they speak very strangely, much like the children in our
Country with their pipes, and clocking like Turkey Cocks: At the first we
saw about thirty of them, with weapons like pikes, with broad heads of Iron,
about their arms they ware ringes of Elpen bones: There we could find
neither Oringes nor Lemons, which we purposely sought for.

map of St Lawrence [i.e. Madagascar] I.S. Laurentij.


With what wind they sailed to S. Laurence.
The 11. of August we hoysed anchor, sailing toward the Island of S. Laurence,
and the 22. of the same Month we had a contrary wind that blew North east: The
25. a West wind, and so held our course East North east: The 28. there blew a
south east wind, and the 30. a south west wind, and our course lay North North
east to sail to the Isle of S. Laurence. The first of September we discovered
the point of the Islande of S. Laurence. under 16. degrees, and the third day
we saw the Island being very desirous to go on land, for that many of our men
were sick, whereby we could hardly rule our ships, or bring them farther
without healing, or refreshing of our men. They had great store of fish for 2
or 3. knives
The 9. of September John Schellinger sent out his boat to row to land, where
they found three Fishermen, of whom for two or three knives they had great
store of fishes. The 13. we entered into a small Bay, but because we found no
good anchor ground, as also being very foul we sailed out again. The 14. we
sailed under a small Island about a mile or 2. great, by the Hollanders called
their Church yard, or the dead Island, because many sailors dying in that
place, were buried in the African earth, and the 29. of the same Month died
John Dignumsz Master of the Lion of Holland, and was buried the next day after.

There John Peter's of Delft Sayler of the Hollandia, and Koelken van
Maidenblick of the Amsterdam were set on shore upon the Island of S. Laurence,
where they were left, because they had committed certain notorious crimes.

Mean time the Pinnace was sent out to look for fresh water, which having
found, the boat returned to bring us news, and therewith the fleet sailed
thither, and the 10. of October the ships ankered before the River, and went
on shore, where we found good provision of all necessaries, the inhabitants
being very willing thereunto, bringing us of al things that we needed, where
for a Pewter Spoone we had an Ox, or three sheep. How the wild men,
assailed the^, and forced them to insconce themselves.
The 11. of October we went on shore with a boatfull of sick men, and the next
day we were assailed by a company of wild men, against whom our weapons little
prevailed, for they hurt one of our men, and took all that we had from us,
whereby upon the thirteenth of the same Month, we were forced to insconse
ourselves with pieces of wood, and branches of trees, making Cabins within our
Sconse, for that the 15. of October they came again, but then we took one,
and slew another of them. The 19. of November our Pilot Claes Ianson was
intrapped and murdered by the wild people, although we used all the means we
could to help him, but they feared no weapons, about ten or twelve days after
we took one of them that paid for his death. The first of December our men
having for the most part recovered their healthes, were all carried aborde the
ships: The manner and custom of the wild people.
in that part of Madagascar the people are of good condition, and go naked,
only with a Cotton cloth before their privy members, and some from their
breasts downward: Their ornaments are Copper ringes about their arms, but Tin
rings are more esteemed with them, and therefore Tin with them is good
Merchandise. Their Oxen have great lumpes of fat upon their backs: Their
sheep tails way at the least twelve pound, being of an elle long, and two
and twenty inches thick. They gave us six of those sheep for a tin Spoone:
They dwell in cottages and live very poorly: they fear the noise of a piece,
for with one Caliuer you shall make an hundred of them run away: We could
not perceive any religion they had, but after we were informed that they held
the law of Mahomet, for the two boys that we took from of the land, showed
us their circumcision: There we found no fruit of Tambaxiumes, but great
numbers of Parrats, Medicats, and Turtle Doves, whereof we killed and eat many.
The second of December we burned our Sconse, and fourteen of our men going
further into the Islande, brought certain of the countrymen prisoners, and
being abord our ships taught them what they should do. The thirteenth of
December we hoysed anchor, minding to hold on our course for the Islands of
Iaua, and for that by reason of the pleasantness of the air we had in a
manner all recovered our healthes, we set our course East and by North, and
East Northeast. The nineteenth of the same Month we were separated by foul
weather, and the 22. with great joy we met again. The tenth of January
Vechter Willemson dyed, being a very honest man, and Pilot in Molenaers
ship, for whom we were much grieved, and the same day we determined to put
back again for the Islande of S. Laurence, for as then we began again to
have a great scouring among our men, and many of them fell sick: The wild men
brought things aborde to comfort them.
But presently thereupon we espied the Islande of Saint Mary, and the next day
being arrived there, some of the inhabitants came abord out ships with a
basket of Ryce, Sugar canes, Citrons, Lemons, and Hens, whereof we were very
glad, as being physic for us.

The 13. 14. 15. 16. and 17. days we were on land, where we bought Ryce, Hens,
Sugarcanes, Citrons, and Lemons in great abundance, and other kind of
fruits to us unknown, also good fish, and green Ginger: There we took a
Fish, which thirteen men could hardly pull into our ship, and because the
Island was little, and we had many men, we entered into the Bay of the firm
land with our Pinnace, where for a string of Beads of small value we had a
tun of Ryce: The description of one of their kings.
The King came abord our Pinnace to see it, and was as black as a Devil, with
two horns made fast upon his head, and all his body naked like the rest of
the country people.

This Island lies about a small mile from Madagascar, about 19. degrees
Southward from the Equinoctial line ( Madagascar or S. Laurence is an Islande
belonging to the Country of Africa, and lies Southwarde under 26. degrees,
ending Northwarde under 11. degrees by the inhabitants it is called Madagascar,
and by the Portingalles the Islande of S. Laurence, because it was discovered
on S. Laurence day: The riches of this Island is great, it abounds in Ryce,
Honnie, Wax, Cotton, Lemons, Cloves etc. The inhabitants are black and go
naked, but the hair upon their heads is not so much curled as those of the
Mosambique, and they are not full so black).

The wild people came on board their ships and seemed very friendy.
The 23. of January we ankered before a River where likewise we had all kind of
necessaries, and after that we went to lie under a small Islande within the
same Bay.

The 25. of January there came some of the wild people aborde our ships,
making signs to have us go on land, which we did, and there we had good Ryce
and other fruits in great abundance: on the left side of the entry of the River
lies one of their Towns, and on the right hand two towns, where we had most
of our trafique. The 26. of January we had interpreters, whom we made to
drink wine, wherewith they were as drunk as beasts.

The manner and condition of the people inhabiting in the great Bay of Antogil,
on this side the Equinoctial line under 16. degrees, on the South side of the
Island Madagascar.
IT is a very great Bay, about ten mile broad, behind it lies a high Island,
and three small Islands: there is good harbor against all winds. The Island
is inhabited, and therein grows all kinds of fruits, it has a great fall
of water that comes down out of the hills, where we laded all our water, and
half a mile from thence within the land, there runs a great River, wherein
likewise there is much water to be had, when you enter into the River about a
quarter of a mile inward on the left hand, there is a small town or village, not
closed nor fortified, in it there is about 200. houses, and on the right hand
where the River divides it self, there is two other such Towns: They were
all compassed with palles, and the houses were placed about two foot above the
ground, upon four or five palles or stakes of wood, and all the upper parts
of reed and straw. Why their houses stand so high above the earth.
The cause why their houses are made so high from the ground, is to avoid the
danger of venomous beasts that are there in great abundance, as Serpents,
Snakes, Camelions, and other kinds of beasts. The manner of the wild men in
that country.
The people are very black, but their hair and beardes are not so much curled
as the right Mores, nor their noses nor lips so great nor flat. They are
subtle and strong people, much addicted to drinking, for they will be as
drunk as Swine, with a kind of drink made of Honey and Ryce. They go naked,
only that about their midles they wear a cloth made of the bark of a tree,
drawn in small threedes: they make and use very fine Mats to sit upon: They
have no great store of weapons, for that half of them are unprovided, and that
they use is a spear of nine or ten foot long, with a great wooden Target:
They are very fearful of our Caliuers, for 5. or six men with Caliuers will
cause great numbers of them to fly away: We taught them what our Pieces meant,
for we perceived that they knew them not, before they had proved them: at the
first they thought they could carry no further then their own lengthes, for
they knew not what they were: Their Kings ornaments were ten or twelve Copper
Rings about his arms: if we had had such Ringes with us, we might have sold
them at what prices we would. They likewise use beads of Glass, which they
wear about their arms and necks, by them esteemed for great ornaments: for a
box of beads of small value, we had an Ox, or three or four Sheep, round
about this Bay are towns and villages, where you may have of all things to
refresh your selves, Lemons and Citrons are there greater and better then in
Portingall: Likewise Oringes, Ryce, Hens, Goats, Honey, and many other sorts
of fruits, and to conclude it is the best Bay in all the world to refresh
ships. Being on land we were well entertained, and must of force drink with them
of their drink made of Honey and Ryce: There we trafiqued with them, and had
sufficient of every thing, but every night we went aborde our ships.

The third of February we had so great a storm, that most of our ankers were
lost, and we ran upon the land in great danger to cast our ships away, but God
help us, for the storm ceased, and then we went to hoyse up our lost ankers,
and so again went to anchor under the Island, glad that we had so well escaped
that danger. The fifth of February we went to seek for our boats, but the wild
men had smitten them in pieces, and taken out the nails, thinking likewise
that our ships would have been cast away upon the shore, which they still
expected: and when we came thither, they stood upon the shore with their
weapons in hand and threw stones at us, and we perceiving them in that mind,
made toward our ships, for we desired not to revenge our selves, nor once
to fight with them without commission from our General, whom we certified
thereof. The eight of February we rowed into the River to buy cattle, and other
things, but they were become our enemies, threatening and casting stones at us,
whereupon we put out two shalops to run a shore close to the land, and made our
Caliuers and other weapons ready.

Wherewith we shot at them, but they feared not our shot, for they knew not
what they meant, they thought likewise that the pieces could carry no further
then they were long: but when they saw eight or nine of their fellows dead,
they fled into the woods, and we entering upon the land set fire on their
houses, whereof we burnt about twenty or thirty. The 9. of February map of
Sumatra SVMATRA INSVLA
we sailed on the other side to buy cattle, and other necessaries, but they
seemed unwilling to deal with us, but we threatening to burn their houses,
they brought us Cattle and fruits enough, with all things else to our desires.

The 12. of February we hoised anchor, and set sail out of the great Bay of
Antongil, being well provided of all necessaries, we put out with a North wind,
the Bay stretching Northeast and Southwest: The 2. of March we had a West
wind, our course being East and East and by North toward Iaua. In March and
April about the Islande of Brandawe, we found that our Compasses held two
Strikes to far Northwarde, and we could not perceive the sands that are set
down in the Portingalles sea Cards, but we saw many turnings of streams, and
we were much troubled with calmes, but with the new Moon we had wind enough
out of the West and North west. The 27. of May we found the water abord our
ships to be much lessened, and therefore every man's portion was but half as
much as he was wont to have; so that each man was allowed but four draughts
every day, which was but a small quantity. Whereby through the extreme heat
we endured great thirst, so that at that time a draught of water abord our ship
was worth a Riall of 8. The first of July we saw the Islande of Emgano, whereat
we much rejoiced, because of the great thirst we endured in our ship, and
when we made nearer to it, we perceived it to be an Islande lying before the
straightes of Sonda, under 9. degrees on the south side of the line. The sixth
of July we put somewhat nearer to the land, and there we saw six or seven
canes lying under the shore, but far off, and durst not make toward us: in
the end we manned out a shalop and rowed to land, but they made from us, and
when our men were hard by the shore, there we saw about 40. or 50. of them
standing upon the shore with their bows; wherewith our men durst not land, for
they seemed to be a cruel kind of people, and altogether wild, for they went
all naked, not having any thing before their privy members. They were of a
reddish color, but when our men saw no advantage they turned again unto their
ships.

The seventh of July we saw the point of the land of Sumatra, which is a very
high land descending downewarde with a long end.

The 11. of the same Month we were close under the land, where there lay an
Island, and there we ankered.

The 12. of July in the morning we saw certain ships, whereof one came unto
us, we rowed unto it with a shalop, and spoke with it, but we could not
understand them, but they showed us where we should have water, which made us
glad, that we might once again have our bellies full of water: it being
almost four Months that we had not seen any land, nor taken in any fresh
victuailes. We sent our Pinace to the firm land of Sumatra, there to seek for
some relief: for that where we lay there dwelt not any man. The manner of the
Governor of Sumatras coming on board.
The 13. of July the Captain or principal ruler of Sumatra came abord our ships
to see them, which was done with great solemnity, he being apparelled after
the Turkish manner, with a wreath about his head, and a fearful countenance,
small eyes, great eye brows, and little beard, for a man might tell all the
hairs upon his chinne: he brought us a present of Betele, which are leaves
which they continually chaw, and eat it with chalk.

This Island of Sumatra or Taprobana (as it is said) is the greatest of all
the Oriental Islandes, it is divided from the firm land of Malacca by a
straight and dangerous sea, by reason of many Islandes and cliffes that are
within it: Out of this Island as some men are of opinion, Solomon had his Gold
wherewith he beautified the Temple, and his own palace, and then in the Bible
it should be named Orphir, for certainly Sumatra is rich of mines of Gold,
Silver and Metal, and the inhabitants thereof are very expert in melting of
brass pieces: Therein is a fountain of pure Balsame, the Portingalles have no
fortress therein, yet they traffic in certain havens, specially in Pedir
and Campar: There is also in this Island a place called Manancabo, where they
make poinyardes and daggers, by them calde cryses, which are much esteemed in
those Countries, and those of Malacca and Iaua, hold them for their best
weapons, and with them are very bold.

The same day our Pinnace returned again unto us, bringing us good news, that
we were welcome unto the Country people, and brought us certain Indian
Nuttes, or Cocus, Melons, Cocombers, Onions, Garlic, and a sample of Peper
and other spices, which liked us well.

The fourteenth of June we laded in some fresh water.

Right over against Sumatra, on the South side of the Equinoctial lies the
Islande of Iaua Mayor, or great Iaua, and these two Islandes are divided by a
straight commonly called the straight of Sunda, which lies between these two
Islands, bearing the name of the principal map of Java IAVA MAYOR
haven of Iaua called Sunda: In this channel there runs a great stream, and
course of narrow waters, through this straight M. Candish an Englishman passed
with his ship, coming out of the South sea from new Spain. Iaua begins
under seven degrees on the south side, and so stretches East and South 150.
miles long, it is very fruitful, specially of Ryce, Catle, Hogs, Sheep,
Hens, Onions, Garlike, Indian Nuttes, and all kind of spices, as Cloves,
Nutmegges, Mace, etc. Which they carry to Malacca. The chief haven in the
Islande is Sunda Calapa, there you have much Pepper, better then that of India,
or of Malabar, and there you may yearly lade 4. or 5000. Quintales of Pepper
Portingall weight, there likewise you have great store of frankencense,
Camphora, and some Diamants: but they have no other kind of money but a
certain piece called Caixa, as big as a Hollands Doibt, but not so thick,
with a hole in the middle to hang it upon a string, in which manner they
commonly hang hundrethes or thousands together, and with them they know how
to make their accountes, which is two hundred Caixas make a Sata, and five
Satas make a thousand Caixas, which is as much as one Crusado of Portingall, or
three Carolus Gilderns, Flemish money: Pepper is sold by the sack, each sack
waying 45. Catten weight of China, each Catte as much as 20. ounces Portingall
weight, and each sack is worth in that Country at the least 5000. Caixas, and
when it is highest at 6. or 7000. Caixas: Mace, Cloves, Nutmegs, white and
black Benjamin, Camphora, are sold by the Bhar, each bar waying 330. Catten
of China: Mace that is fair and good is commonly worth from 100. to 120.
thousand: Caixas: Good Cloves accordingly, and foul Cloves called Bastan are
worth 70. and 80. thousand Caixas the Bhar: Nutmegs are always worth 20. and
25. thousand Caixas the Bhar: White and black Beniam in is worth 150 and 180
thousand Caixas, and sometimes 200. thousand. The wares that are there desired
and exchanged for spices, are diverse sorts and colors of Cotton Linen, which
come out of several Provinces; and if our Cambricke or fine Hollande were
carried thither, it would peradventure be more esteemed then the Cotton linen
of India.

The 15. of June there rowed a scute called a Prawen hard under the land by
us, we called him, but not against his will, and showed him silver, and other
wares that liked him well, he bad us make toward the strand, and told us of
Bantam, saying that there we should have al kinds of Merchandise. Then we made
signs unto him taht if he would bring us to Bantam, we would pay him for his
labor, he asked us 5. rialles of 8. and a red cap, which we granted unto, and
so one of the men in the scute came on board the Mauritius, and was our Pilot to
Bantam, where we passed by many Islandes.

The nineteenth of July as we sailed by a town, many Portingalles borded us,
and brought us certain Cocus and Hens to sell, which we bought for other
wares.

The 22. of the same Month we came before the town of Bantam, within three
miles of it, and there ankered under an Island. The same day about evening a
scute of Portingals borded us that were sent by the Governor to see what ships
we were, and when we showed them that we came thither to traficke with them,
they told us, that there was the right Pepper country, and that there we might
have our lading, that new Pepper was ready to be gathered, and would be ripe
within two Months after, which pleased us well, for we had already been
fifteen Months and twelve days upon our voyage, having endured great
dangers, miseries and thirst, many of our men by sickness being dead.

The 23. of June we hoysed our ankers, and went close to the town of Bantam,
and ankered hard by 4. small Islands, that lie right North from the Town: the
same day the Sabandar (who is there one of the greatest officers next the King)
came abord our ships, asking us what we would have, we said we were come to
buy Pepper and other spyces, and that we had ready money, and certain wares,
whereof we showed him some part, which he liked well, saying that there we
might have lading enough, showing us great countenance.

The same day likewise there came a great number of scutes unto our ships,
bringing all kinds of victuailes to sell, as Hens, Eggs, Cocus, Bonanas,
sugar canes, Cakes of Ryce baked, and many other things. The 24. of June there
came many men aborde our ships, bringing diverse wares to sell, showing us great
friendship, and as it seemed were very glad of our arrival there, telling us
that there we might have Pepper enough, and new Pepper within two Months after,
and that Pepper was then as good cheap as it had been any time within ten
years before, that we might buy 5. or 6. sackes for one Catti, (being about
20. Guilderns) which was ordinarily sold but one sack for that price: every
sack wayeth 54. pound Hollandes weight, so that a pound would be worth about
a brass penie Hollands money. The same day about noone the Sabandar borded us
once again, willing Cornelis Houtman to go on land to speak with the
Governor, for as then there was no King, for about a Month before our arrival
there, the King was gone with a great army before the town of Palimbam, which
he thought to take, and had almost gotten it, but there he was stricken with a
great Piece by a Renigado of the Portingalles, and so was slain. His death was
much lamented by the strangers that dwelt at Bantam, for he was a good king,
being about 25. years of age: he left behind him four wives, whereof the
eldest was not above 15. years of age, and a young son of three Months old,
that was to succeed him in his Kingdom, and they had chosen a Protector or
Governor to rule in his minority, whom they call Kipate, and when the Kipate
by the Sabandar sent to our Sargeant Mayor to come unto him into the town, he
made him answer that he had no such commission, but he desired the Governor
first to come abord his ship, and then he would go on shore, he likewise
desired us to go nearer to the town with our ships.

depiction of Bantam, Java

THe Town of Bantam in the Island of Iaua, as our four ships lay before it
A. is the bar of the River that was shut up, by it all wares passed both in
and out, and the next house unto it is the custom house. B. the Hollanders
lodging where we received and sold our wares, C. is the walls of the town of
Bantam, al made with flankers, upon them lay great store of brass pieces,
which when they shot at us, did not much hurt us, because they knew not well how
to use them; and the wall is not above two foot thick made of brickes, and at
every place where the pieces lies, there are places made of mastes and other
wood, which they use for defense against the enemies. D. are the Portingalles
houses, E. the Pepper market, F. the Hollanders market, G. the pomegranat
market, H. the apparel market, I. the porseline market, K. the great market,
which is also the Burse where many nations do meet, L. the Fish market, M. the
hog market, N. the Chinars houses, O. their Church or Mostua, P. a skirmish
between our Pinace and 24. of their boats that came toward us like a half
Moon^ all full of men, armed with bows and spears, with some bases, making to
the Pinace that lay on ground under an Islande, where it wound off, 17. of
them being on the larborde, and 7. on the star board of her, so near that
they thrust their spears in at her ports, but those of the Pinace showed
themselves like men shooting bravely against them, both with great shot and
Caliuers for they could hardly shoot in vain, and having hoised sail, she
came to the ships again in dispight of all her enemies, that were in great
numbers, and had compassed her about like sconces.

And thereupon we sailed somewhat nearer to the Island that lay next unto the
town, within half a mile from it, and there we ankered at 4. fadome clay
ground, the town lying South from us, where we had a good road: The
Governor of Bantam came abord their ships.
The next morning the Governor sent aborde, and the men that came spoke not
only good Portingal, but other languages: he let our Sargeant Mayor understand
that he would come aborde, and desired that he would with a shalop meet him
half the way, which was done about noone, and the Governor came aborde with a
great company of men, where we showed him all our wares, which liked him well,
desiring us to come on land, saying that we should be welcome, promising us
much favor, wherewith he returned to the land with certain rich presents that
we gave him. The 26. Barent Heijn Factor of the ship called the Mauritius, died
very suddenly.

The 27. and 28. great numbers of people borded our ships bringing all sorts
of necessaries and victuails to sell.

The Emperor came aborde and secretly conspired with the Portingals against
them.
The 29. there came an Emperor abord our ship, whose father in time past had
been Emperor of all Iaua, and commanded all the Kings of Iaua, but this man
because of his badde life was not much accounted of: he spoke good Portingall,
for his mother was a Portingall woman borne in Malacca: This Emperor had
conspired against us with the Portingalles, but as then we knew it not.

The 30. of June Cornelis Houtman took a boat and went into the town, and
there spoke with the Governor about certain affairs, touching a contract to
be made with him.

A contract to buy and sell in the town.
The first of July Houtman went again into the town, and when he returned he
brought with him a certain contract made and signed by the Governor himself,
who most willingly consented thereunto, and said unto him, Go now and buy what
you will, you have free liberty; which done, the said Houtman with his men went
to see the town, apparelled in the best manner they could, in velvet, Satin,
and silks, with rapiers by their sides: The Captain had a thing borne over
his head to keep him from the Sun, with a Trumpet before him, which certain
times he caused to be sounded: There the Emperor bad them to a banquet after
the Indian manner: From thence they went to the Portingalles, that made much
account of Houtman, and made him a banquet, saying that they had seen him in
Lisbone. The 2. of July many Merchants came abord, profering us Pepper very
good cheap, but because we were unskillful in the weight and other things we
took respite to answer them.

The 3. of July the Sabander came abord, and he was our great friend, for that
after we found it so, he told us what weight the sackes of Pepper were, and
what prises they bare, counselling us to buy.

The Emperor meant to fall upon the ships to rob them.
The 7. of July the Governor sent us a man secretly by night willing us to
look unto our selves, and not to trust the Emperor, with whom all the
Marchantes conspired, and went to invade our ships, and that he meant to rob
us, as being very licentious and evil minded.

The 8. of July the Emperor sent unto our ships, and offered to make them a
banquet, bidding all the Captains, masters, Pilots, Gentlemen, Officers,
Trumpets, and Gunners to come into the town to him, and there he would make
merry with them: This was done by the Portingalles advise, thereby to have all
the chief and principal men out of our ships, but we perceived their intent.

The 11. of July the Emperor perceiving that his devise would not take place,
he went from Bantam to Iacatra.

The 12. of July we had a house offered us within the town.

The 13. of the same month Reyner van hell with eight Gentlemen went into the
town, taking certain wares with him, of every thing a little, and laid it in
the house appointed for the purpose: there to keep a ware house and to sell our
merchandise, and presently both Gentlemen and Merchants came thither to buy and
to sell us Pepper.

The 15. and 16. many Gentlemen, Merchants, Chinars, and Arabians came to our
warehouse and into our ships, offering us Pepper, but our Factor offered them
too little a price.

The 25. of July the Governor came again aborde our ships, and there looked
upon certain of our wares, whereof he bought some, and counseled us to buy
Pepper: The hatred of the Portingalles against the^.
About the same time the Portingalles made great suit unto the Governor,
promising him many guiftes to deny us traffic, and to constrain us to depart
from thence, saying we were no marchantes, but that we came to spy the
country, for they said that they had seen many Fleminges in Lisbone, but none
like us. Among the Portingalles there was one that was borne in Malacca, of the
Portingalles race, his name was Pedro Truide, a man well seen in trauayling,
and one that had been in all places of the world: He was our good friend, and
every day came to talk with our Captains, saying, you do not well that you
make no more haste to take in your lading, you shall have no better cheap
wares, and withal showed us many other things: whereupon the Portingalles
hated him, and not long after he was murdered in his bed.

In August we did little, and took no great store of lading in seeking to have
Pepper better cheap, which the Portingalles liked not well of, and said unto
the Governor, that we desired not to buy; which the Governor began to hearken
unto, for they offered him great sums of money that he should not permit us
traffic, so that in the end he commanded that no man should carry any
Ryce aborde our ships, whereby we were abashed, and thereupon we sent unto
the Governor for our money which he ought for the wares he had bought, which
moved him. The 26. of July he sent one of our Gentlemen with some of his men
and nine slaves abord our ships.

The situation of the Town of Bantam, the principal town of traffic in the
Island of Iaua, their strength and manner of building, with their traffic,
what people come thither, what wares are there most desired, what nations bring
them thither, or come to fetch them, together with their religion, customs,
and manner of house keeping.
BAntam lies in the Islande of Iaua mayor, about 25. miles to sea ward within
the Isle, between Sumatra and Iaua: On both sides of the Town there runs a
River, about 3. foot and a half deep, so tha^ no ships can enter into them:
The Town is compassed about with a River: The town is almost as great in
compass as the old town of Amsterdam: The walls are made with flankers: They
have great numbers of Pieces therein, but they know not how to use them, for
they fear them much: all their Pieces are of brass, and they have many brazen
bases. Their walls are not above two foot thick made of brickes: every
flanker has diverse mastes and pieces of wood, which they use when they are
besieged by their enemies. The houses are made of straw and reeds, standing
upon 4. wooden posts. The rich have their chambers all hanged with silken
Curtins, or else with cotton linen: Their houses are most placed under Cocus
trees, whereof the town is full: Without the walls are many houses, wherein
strangers for the most part have their dwellinges. The town has three great
market places, wherein daily there is markets holden, where you may buy all
kinds of wares, and where there comes a great number of people, very strange
to behold: Within the town there is a great church or musk of wood, wherein
they observe the law of Mahomet: Gentlemen and men of any quality have their
own muskes in their houses. The town is not built with streets, nor the
houses placed in order, but very foul lying full of filthy water, which men
must pass through, or leap over, for they have no bridges: In the town there
is great resort of diverse Countries and nations, as of Malacca, Bengala,
Malabar Guihereters of Pegu, Sani Malicas, Banda, China, and of many Kingdoms
that have great traffic for Pepper, that grows round about Bantam, which
in August and September is ripe, there you have Nutmegs, out of the Island of
Banda, and Cloves from Moluca, which the Portingalles do most buy up: We
bought Nutmegs there for a blank a pound: All victuailes and necessaries are
there in great abundance to be had, as Hens, Hearts, Fish, and Ryce, and
diverse kinds of fruits, as Auanas, Cocus, Bonanas, Manges, Doroyens, Iacca,
Pruna, Grapes, Oranges, Lemons, Pomegarnets, Cocombers, Melons, Onions,
Garlic; but bread they have none, but in stead of it they eat Ryce: Beef
is there the dearest victuaile, for an Ox in that place is worth 7. 8. or 9.
Rialles of 8. The Chinars have the greatest and most traffic in that town.
They come thither in the Month of January, with 8. or 9. great ships,
bringing all sorts of Porseline, silks, Damask, gold thread, Iron pannes, and
Iauas money called Caixas, whereof 12000. make a Ryall of eight: They are
hanged upon stringes by two hundred together, for the which they both buy and
sell al kinds of marchandises, and there they lade Pepper which they carry into
China: Without the town they have a great place wherein they commonly use to
sell their wares, and there they dwell, and have greater and better houses then
any are within the town, all made of reeds, only that in every house they
have a square place made of stone, wherein they put their wares to keep them
from burning, as some rich men in the town likewise have: The Chinars are
very subtle and industrious people, and will refuse no labor nor pains to
yearne money, there they make much Aqua vitae of Ryce and Cocus, and traffic
much therewith, which the Iauars by night come to buy, and drink it secretly,
for by Mahomets law it is forbidden them. The Chinars live there with free
liberty: When they come to remain there for a year or more as they think
good, they buy themselves a wife or two, or more as they think good, and live
together like man and wife, and when they mean to depart, they sell their
wives again, but if they have children they take them with them, and so return
to China: They have no special religion, but pray unto the Devil, that he
would not hurt them, for they know that the Devil is wicked, and that God is
good, and hurts no man, therefore they think it needless to pray to God.
They acknowledge not the resurrection of the dead, but when a man dies they
think he never rises again: In their houses they have great painted Devils,
before the which they place wax candles, and sing unto them, praying them not
to hurt them, and the more monstrous that their shapes be, the more they honor
them. These people live very hardly and poorly within Bantam, for there is not
any work or labor how filthy soever it be, but they will do it to get money,
and when they have gotten something they return again to China. They are very
like Jews in our country, for they never go without a pair of balances,
and all things is good wares with them, and are ready to do any service. When
we came first before Bantam, they came every day in great companies into our
ships, and there set out their wares to sell, as silks, sowing silks, and
porselines, so that our upper deckes were full of pedlers, that we could
hardly walk upon the hatches.

The manner, condition, custom, going, standing, apparel, housekeeping,
wares, and behavior of the Iauars in Bantam.
THe Iauars and inhabitants of Bantam, are proud and obstinate, with a very
stately pace, they hold the law of Mahomet, which they have not had above 35.
years, for as yet there are many heathens among them that never were made
Mores: it is a very lying and theeuish kind of people, not in any sort to be
trusted. Their apparel both of rich and poor is a cotton cloth, and some of
silk about their middles, which they tie about them with a girdle, the upper
part and from the knees downewarde all naked: most of them go bareheaded, but
the principallest of them have a wreath or Turkish roll about their heads,
and some little cappes: Their priests come out of Meca in Arabia, and are
yellowe of color: What weapons they wear.
Their weapon is a poinyard, which they call Crisis: it is made with hilts, and
the handle is a Devil cut out of wood or bone: the sheathes are of wood: with
them they are very bold, and it is accounted for a great shame with them if
they have not such a Dagger, both young, old, rich and poor, and young children
of five or six years old, and when they go to the wars they have targets,
and some long spears, but most of them such poinyardes: They use neither great
shot nor caliuers when they go against their enemies: for a small matter one
King will make war against another When we came first before Bantam, we
offered to make a contract with the Governor and the counsel of the town,
that they should deliver us a certain quantity of Pepper, and we would go
with our ships before Palimbam, and help them to revenge the death of their
Kings upon their enemies, for (as they said) we might go within a bow shot
of the town with our ships, and the Town is but of wood without walls, so
that we would presently have beaten it down to the ground. They offered us
some of their principal Governors to be left for pledges in our ships, and
their men would sail in their fustes, such as should go on land, and we
should do nothing else but shoot out of our ships, but our Captains would
not do it, considering our small number of men. How many wives they have.
The Iauers take as many wives as they will, and are able to maintain; but the
common people have but one, and some two married wives, and some 10. 20. and
30. concubines: For a small matter they will send their married wives home
again unto their fathers, when they have layne five or six days with them,
saying they like them not, and so their marriage is undone, when they desire it.

The manner, custom, housholding, childbearing, sporting and cleanliness of
the women in Bantam.
THe women of the town are well kept from such as are circumcised, whereof the
rich men have many, and from other men or their friends, for their own sons
may not come into the house where the women are. They lie all naked and chaw
Betelle, and have a slavish woman that continually scratcheth their bodies,
that is, such as are married women, but such as are concubines are as waiting
Gentlewomen to the married women, when they go out to give them more majesty,
and those that have the greatest number are of most estimation: The Concubines
have but few children, for the married women poison their children, and these
concubines are bought and sold: by their apparel a man can hardly discern
the rich from the poor, for they go all with a Cotton cloth about their
bodies up to their breasts, and bound about their middles with an other
cloth, bare footed and their heads uncovered, their hair bound right upon the
top of their heads in a heap, but when they are in their pride, they wear
crowns upon their heads, whereof some of them are of pure gold, and ringes of
gold, and some of silver about their arms, every one according to their
ability. They are very curious about their bodies, for they wash themselves
at the least five or six times every day: they never ease themselves nor have
the company of their husbands, but they presently leap into the water and
wash their bodies, and therefore the water that runs through Bantam is very
unwholesome; for every one washes themselves in it, as well pockie as other
people, whereby we lost some of our men that drunk of the water: The women
are very idle, for they do nothing all the day but lie down; the poor slaves
must do all the drudgerie, and the men sit all day upon a mat, and chaw
Betele, having ten or twenty women about them, and when they make water,
presently one of the women washes their member, and so they sit playing all
the day with their women: Many of them have slaves that play upon instruments
much like our Shakebois, they have likewise great basins whereon they strike,
and therewith know how to make good music, whereat the women dance, not
leaping much, but winding and drawing their bodies, arms and shoulders, which
they use all night long, so that in the night time they make a great noise with
basins and other instruments, and the man he sits and looks upon them,
every one of the women striving to do her best that she may get her husbands
favor and her secreat pleasure. The Gentlemen, Citizens, and marchantes have
their Gardens, and fields without the town, and slaves for the purpose to
labor in them, and bring their masters all kinds of fruit, Rice and Hens
in the town, How Pepper grows in that country.
as also the Pepper that grows there, which runs up by an other tree, as
Hoppes with us, and grows in long bunches like Grapes, so that there is at
the least 200. grains in one bunch: it is first green, and after it becomes
black, and is there in great abundance, so that it is the right Pepper
country; for when we came thither they said unto us, Aqui ai tanta Pimienta,
como terra, that is, here is as much Pepper as earth, and so we found it, and
yet we departed from thence by our own follies, without our lading of Pepper:
We staide for new Pepper, mean time the Portingalles sent their letters into
every place seeking to hinder our trade: At the first we might have sufficient,
for there we found enough both to buy for money or to barter. We likewise had
money and wares sufficient: we might easily have had six or eight hundred
tons, as we were advertised by some of the country, that we should presently
buy, for that the Portingalles sought all the means they could to hinder us, as
after it appeared; and therefore he that thinks to come soon enough, comes
oftentimes too late, and we used not our time so well as it fell out.

A letter sent by our men in the town that were kept prisoners.
The 29. of August we had a letter sent us by night from our men that were in
the town, that lay in a manner as prisoners, to will us to let our pledge go a
shore, otherwise they feared they should hardly escape with their lives, and
great danger might fall upon them: this pledge came aborde with the 9. slaves.

The 30. of August we sent the pledge and the rest of our Iauers to land, with
promise that he would do the best he might to get our men leave to come aborde:
about evening of the same day we had news from our men by four of our
sailors that as then they were better used, saying they thought they should
come aborde when two ships were gone that meant to sail for Malacca, being
laden with Nutmegs and other things.

The first of of September, and the 2. 3. and 4. we sent many letters to the
Governor and he to us, and likewise to our men that were in the town, being
nine in number, all our best merchants and captains, having with them about 6.
or 7000. Guildernes in merchandise, and they again to us.

They went nearer to the town.
The 5. of September when we perceived that delays were dangerous, we went
close to the town with all our 4. ships, and so near that we had but two
fadome muddie ground, and presently with two of our boats for our security
we set upon three Iauan ships, whereof two were laden with fish and Cocus,
wherein we found a man of China, being of some account. The third ship was
laden with 20. tons of Cloves, 6. tons of Pepper, and some Benioni, and
Piementa da Rauo, wherein we found five Malabardes slaves to the Portingalles,
whom we likewise took, and they were very willing to go with us, thereby to
be eased of the slavery whereunto the Portingals put them, and perceiving that
the Portingalles went often to and from another ship that lay not far from
us, we took our Pinace and made toward it, and being hard by it, the
Portingals left it and set it on fire: This ship had the richest wares in it as
the Portingalles slaves told us, for it was laden with fifty tons of
Cloves, which were burnt in it.

The sixth and seventh of September we heard no news, so that we went close
to the Town again, shooting with our great Pieces into it, slaying diverse of
the people (as after we were informed:) They likewise shot with their Pieces
against us, which the Portingalles did, for that the Iauars have little or no
skill at all therein, and are very fearful of them, and although they had
many pieces in the town, yet they did us no other hurt then only shot one of
Molenares half masts in pieces.

A skirmish between the Pinace and 24. boats
The seventh of September we had a skirmish, which was in this manner, we
perceiving a Iauan ship under sail, sent our Pinace with six and twenty men
in her to fetch it in, which the Iauan ship perceiving fled behind an
Islande, where our Pinace followed him so fast that she fell a ground, which
the towns men perceiving, made them ready with four and twenty boats full
of men, all armed after their manner, and set forward in good order, being
divided in two companies, seven on star board, and 17. on lardde board of the
Pinace, in order like a half Moon, threatening us with their spears, they
thought by reason of their great number of men, that they had already taken it,
but it fell out otherwise, for they in the Pinace perceiving them coming,
shot among them, and they were so near unto her that we could not shoot at
them: and when they were hard by the Pinace, she got a flote, as they
thought to take her, having cast out an anchor in good time, and thereby wound
themselves off the ground, but for haste they were forced to cut their
Cable, because they had not time enough to wind it up, and with all they
shot one of their boats under water. The Pinace drawing her boat after her,
the Iauans presently leapt into it, and cut a sunder the roape that held it,
which they immediately stole from us, thrusting with their Spears in at the
loope holes. Seven of their Boats being round about us were so sharply paid
with the iron pieces, stone pieces, and Caliuers, that the 17, others durst not
come so near us: I think there were at the least 100. of them that never
carried news how they sped in that skirmish, for every boat had at the least
60. men in it, and they were so thick in them, that they could not help
themselves, nor did any thing else but shake their spears, and they shot but
one base: their arrows hurt us not, and so the Pinace returned again unto our
ships, sailing close before the town, and shooting into it with her
ordinance: They shot out of the town, but it hit her not, because they shot
with stone pellets, wherewith you cannot shoot so certainly as with iron
bullets.

The 8. 9. and 10. of September we had letters from our men out of Bantam, by
the which they willed us not to shoot any more, for that the Governor
threatened to set them upon stakes: Houtman wrote they were in good hope that
they should be put to ransom, which we counseled them to do as well as
they might.

The contents of the Governors letter.
The 11. of September we had a letter from Houtman, and one from the Governor,
wherein he wrote that he would set our men at liberty, so we would be quiet,
but if we desired war, he would once again come and visit us in another
sort: we answered him that there he should find us, that words were but
wind, and that he should set our men at a reasonable ransom, and thereof send
us an answer the next day.

The 12. and 13. of September we had no answer out of the town, and we had
want of water, and could get none thereabouts but that which came out of the
town, for that the Governor had taken order that we should get no water about
the town, so that we hoised ankers to go seek some.

The 17. of September we came before 3. or 4. Islands which Molenare and
Shellenger sailed between, and for that the stream ran so strong there,
they were forced to go so nigh the shore, that they might almost leap on
land, whereby they escaped great danger, but the other ship and the Pinace
sailed about the Islands, and so met with the other two, and casting forth
their ankers went on shore, where we spoke with men that said they would show
us where we should have water, so we would give them two Caliuers.

The 18. 19. 20. 23. and 24. we stayed to lade water, for it was hard to get,
and we were forced to keep good watch, which done hoysing ankers again, we
sailed toward Bantam, holding our course Eastwarde.

The 27. we sailed Northeast toward the land of Iaua mayor.

The 28. setting sail again, we kept East Northeast along by the coast of
Iaua, and about noone because of the great stream that runs in the
straight, we were forced to anchor, and the 30. day we set sail again.

The first of October in the evening we came to a great Islande, being three
miles from the town, and there we ankered finding good clay ground.

The 2. of October we had a letter from our men, how they were separated one
from the other, and kept by the Gentlemen of the town, and their wares parted
among them.

The 3. 4. and 5. when we were again before the town, we had other letters,
that by our coming they were better used, and hoped to be set at a reasonable
ransom, and that they promised that one of our men should come aborde, so he
would return again into town, that should by word of mouth certify us
what hope they were in, and the cause thereof, that we might the better believe
it.

How the Iaurs used our men being prisoners.
The 6. of October in the night one of our men came aborde, and showed us what
had past, when we shot into the town, how they were separated and kept close
prisoners, and cruelly threatened by the Iauers, whereby they still expected
when they should be put to death, and how they sought all the means they
could to make them to deny their faith, and become Mores, but they remained
constant, and said they would rather die, and that they had by force shaven
three of our men after the Morish manner, and how the Portingals had sought all
the means they could to buy them for slaves, offering money for them that
they might send them to Malacca, how they were set at liberty again, and
might go where they would within the town, and so they hoped all would be
well, and that they should be set at liberty for some small ransom, and
that the Governor asked them 3000. Rialles of 8. but they hoped to bring him
to 2000. whereat we much rejoiced.

The 8. 9. and 10. of October we passed over to make some agreement with them
that we might be quiet.

The 11. of October they agreede upon a ransom of 2000. Ryalles of eight, and
were content, that what goods soever we had taken from them, we should keep
as our own, and for our goods that they had stolen, and forcibly taken from
our men within the town, The manner of their ransom.
they would keep them, and so exchange one for the other, they likewise were
content to quit us of all our debts, that we ought within the town either to
the Governor or to any other man, and that from thence forward we should be
free, and traffic in the town, both to buy and sell when it pleased us, and
with their good wills as we had done, and before we paid our money, the town
was to send two men aborde our ships, which done, we were to pay the half of
our ransom, and upon the payment thereof, they should set half of our men at
liberty, and that half of our men being come aborde, we were to pay the other
half of our ransom, which was 1000. Ryalles of eight; which being performed,
their two men, and their other half of our men were on both sides to be
delivered and set free, and without contradiction it was performed.

The 12. and 13. this agreement being ended, diverse victuailers came aborde our
ships to sell us Hens, Eggs, and all other kind of victuailes.

The 14. we gave certain presents in sign of good will, to such as had
showed us favor when we were in contention with them.

The 15. 16. 17. and 18. some of our Factors went into the town, where they
bought certain Pepper, and brought it abord our ships.

The 19. they went again into the town, and bought a greater quantity at 5.
sackes for one Catti, minding in that sort every day to take in our lading,
but it fell not out as we desired, for the Portingalles that could not brook
our company, made such means to the Governor, that he gave commandment that
we should buy no more Pepper, before we had paid 1400. Rialles of 8. which he
challenged of us because we had cast anchor within his stream, whereupon our
Marchantes went and agreed with him, which done we thinking to buy Pepper as
we did before, Why the Governor forbad us traffic.
the Governor again commanded to the contrary, whereby we perceived their
deceit, in that he would not hold his word. The country men would gladly have
sold their Pepper, as also the Chinars, Arabians, Mahometitians, and secretly
some Portingalles, but when we saw we could not get it out but with great
danger, we thought it not convenient to buy: and when we spoke unto the
Governor, touching the holding of his word, he made us answer, that he had
no bones in his tongue, and that therefore he could speak that which he meant
not to do: and to say the truth most part of the Iauars are a kind of
deceitful people, for whatsoever they say and presently perform, that shall
you be sure of and no more.

The 25. of October there came an Ambassador into Bantam, sent from Malacca to
the Governor with a present of 10000. Rials of 8. desiring him to forbid us
both his town and stream, that we might not traffic there. Whereof we
were advertised by the Sabandar and other of our friends counselling our men
to get them out of the town, and not to return again, otherwise they would be
in danger to be stayed again, and we having sent a man into the town to save
him from being holden prisoner, our host where we lay being on shore was forced
to bring him out covered with certain mattes; so that upon the 26. of the
same month all our traffic and friendship with them ceased: but our host
being our friend, came secretly aborde our ships, and showed us that he and
his company had two ships lying before the town, laden with Nutmegges and Mace
that came from Banda, for the which he agreed with us at a price, upon
condition that we should seem to take them by force, that thereby he might
color his dealing with us: whereupon the first of November we sailed close to
the town with all our ships, How they took two Iauan ships
and set upon the two Iauan ships, wherein we found to the number of 30.
slaves, that knew nothing of their masters bargain made with us, so that they
began to resist us, wherewith we shot among them, and presently slew 4. or 5.
of them, the rest leapt over board, and swamme to land, which done we took the
two ships, and put their lading into ours: They fought with a Portingall ship.
The Portingalles ship that brought their Ambassador, lay close under the
shore, whereunto we sent two of our boats, but the Portingals that were in her
shot so thick with their pieces upon our men, that our boats were forced to
leave them with loss of one of our men, but our ships shot in such sort
with their ordinance upon the Portingall ship, that they spoiled and brake
it in pieces, wherein their Captain was slain, and the victuailers that still
brought us victuailes to sell, told us that with our pieces we had slain three
or four men within the town, and that the towns men began to make an army
of ships to set upon us.

They fought with a Iauan ship.
The 2. of November we espied a ship that came toward Bantam, which we joined
unto with our boats, and being near unto it, they spread their fights, which
were of thick mattes, and began to defend themselves; our men shot among them
with stone pieces and Caliuers, and they defended themselves with great
courage, having half pikes wherewith they thrust at us, and that served
likewise to blow arrows out of them, for they were like trunkes, out of the
which trunkes they shot so great numbers of arrows, that they fell as thick as
hayle, and shot so certainly, that therewith they hurt at the least eight or
nine of our men, but the arrows are thin and light, so that their blaste
could not make them enter into the flesh above the thicknes of two fingers,
only the head of the arrowe (which is made of reed, and loose stays in the
flesh) when we shot with our Caliuers they run behind their fightes, but when
they perceived that their matted fights could not defend them, and that they
were killed through them, they entered into their boat, and by strength of
oars rowed from us, leaving their ship, wherein we found two dead men, and
we slew three more of them as we rowed after their boat, so that in all they
lost five men, as we after heard, and that they were to the number of 40. which
done, we brought their ship to ours, wherein we found good store of Ryce and
dried fish.

The 6. of November, perceiving not any hope of more traffic for us with
those of Bantam, we hoised anchor and set sail, setting our course toward
the straight of Sunda.

The merchants follow them with wares.
The seventh of November we came and ankered before a River of fresh water,
about six miles from Bantam, where we took in our provision of water:
thither certain Merchants followed us with Porseline, telling us that they
were sorry for our departure, and that they longed for our return again.

The thirteenth of November we set sail, and about evening we came before
Iacatra, in time past called Sunda Calapa, which has been a rich Town of
merchandise, but upon some occasions, and by reason of their hard usage the
Merchants had withdrawn themselves from thence, therefore at this present
there is little or nothing to do. John Hughen in his book says this to be
the principal town of traffic, but that is long sithence, for now there is
not any trade of merchandise.

The fourteenth of November we sent two of our men into the town, having some
of theirs in pawn, who told us that many of the inhabitants were gone out of
the town with all their goods, being in great fear of our pieces, and there
we had great store of victuailes, and much more then we required brought
abord our ships.

The 18. we set sail from Iacatra, and being about two miles from the town,
our ship called Amsterdam fell upon a cliffe, but it got off again without
any hurt, and therewith we presently made toward the straight.

The 2. of December we passed by 3. towns which we might easily perceive, we
likewise passed by Tubam, and ankered under Sidaya. The 3. of December there
came men out of the town, and desired us to stay, saying that there we might
have Cloves and Nutmegs as many as we would, bringing certain banketting
stuff (as a present from their King) unto Sche^lengers ship, because it lay
nearest to the land, and they came most abord it.

The 4. of December they came again into Schellengers ship, bringing certain
presents with them, and among the rest a certain bird that could swallowe
fire, which is a very strange foul, and was brought alive to Amsterdam, which
after was given to the states of Hollande lying in the Hage, and some good
fruits, willing us to send a man on shore to see their spices, whereof they
said they had great store: whereupon we sent a man out of the Amsterdam, and
with him an interpreter, one of the Portingalles slaves, they leaving three or
four of their men aborde our ships, for pawnes till his return: when our
man came to land he was well used, and there they showed him forty or fifty
bals of Cloves; which done they brought him before the King, that promised him
great favor, and told him that the next day he would himself come aborde our
ships, and deal with our Captains, and with that he let our man depart.

The 5. of December we expected the Kings coming aborde, putting out all our
flagges and streamers, and about noone there came 8. or 9. indifferent great
ships full of men from off the shore, wherein we thought the King to be,
but when they were almost at us they divided themselves, three of them rowing
to Shellengers ship, and when they borded him, they thinking the King had been
there, Reymer van Hell as Factor and the Master came forth to receive him, but
the Iauers entering all at once, Reymer van Hell said, What will all these
people do aborde the ship, for there was at the least two hundred men, who
all at one time drew out their poinyardes, and stabbed our men that never
suspected them, so that presently they had slain twelve of the ship, and two
sore wounded, that boldly withstoode them: the rest of our men being under
hatches presently took their pikes, and thrust so fast out at the grates, How
the Indians betrayed the^.
that the Iauers would have forced the middle part of the ship, wherein was two
entries, but our men standing at them with their swords in hand drove them
out, not ceasing still to thrust up with their pikes, mean time they kindled
fire, lighted their matches, and shot off their stone pieces that lay above the
hatches, wherewith they began presently to fly, most of them leaping over board,
and swam to their two boats, that lay hard by our ships, whereof one with a
great piece was presently stricken in pieces: The rest of our ships hearing us
shoot in that manner, entered into their boats, and made toward them, rowing
hard to the three Indian fustes, wherein were at the least 100. men, and
shot among them with their pieces, wherewith they leapt into the water, every
man swimming to shore, and we with two boats after them, hewing and killing
them as our deadly enemies, who under pretense of friendship sought to
murder us, and we handled them in such sort, that of two hundred men there
got not above thirty of them to land, the rest of their fustes lay far off
and beheld the fight: Three of their fustes thought to row to the Pinace to
take her, which they might easily have done, as having not above 7. or 8. men
in her, being busy to set up a new maste, but when they perceived their men
to be so handeled in the Amsterdam, and that they leapt over board, they
turned back again, and in great haste rowed to land, so that at that time
they got not much by the bargain, and no small grief to us, for there we
lost 12. men, that were all stabbed with poinyards, their names were John
Iacobson Schellenger, master of the ship, Reymer van hell Factor, Gielis
Gieleson Gentleman, Barent The names of their men that were stabed.
Bonteboter, Arent Cornedrager, Cornelis van Alcmuer, Simon Ianson, Wiltschut
Ioos the Carpenter, Adrian de Metselar, one of the Portingalles slaves, and two
boys, whereof one was but twelve years old, whereby we perceived them to be
a kind of cruel people, for they had given the little boy and all the rest of
our men at the least 12. stabbes a piece after they were dead.

The same day about evening we hoysed ankers, and set sail, having manned the
Amsterdam with men out of our other ships, and so held our course Eastward.

The 6. of December we came to a great Island called Madura, where we ankered,
and in the evening two of their men came aborde our ships, with message from
their Governor, saying that we were welcome, desiring us to stay there, for he
would traffic with us, and sell us some Pepper, as they said, but we
believed them not.

The 7. of December there came another boat abord, bringing certain fruits,
saying that the next day their Governor would come to see our ships.

The 8. there came a great fuste and three small boats, from off the land all
full of men, saying their Governor was among them: we willed them not to go to
the Amsterdam, but to the Mauritius, but they would not, but made to the
Amsterdam, thinking because there had been so many murdered in her, there was
not many men aborde her at that time, and when they were within a pykes length
of her, (although they were directed to the other ships) they remembering
their late mischance, shot off three or four stone Pieces full laden,
wherewith they slew and hurt many of the Indians, whereupon they presently
leapt over board, and we with our boats followed after and slew diverse of
them, taking ten or twelve, thinking by them to know what their intent was to
do, but they could not certify us, and therefore we let them go again only
keeping two boys, who long after stole out of the ship, and swamme to land:
They told us that the Governor being a Bishop or chief instructor of the
country, was within the boat and slain among the rest, he had therein
likewise a little boy one of his sons who we likewise took, and sent to
land: The Bishop was of Meca, and much esteemed of among them, a great
Clearke, and Governor over all the rest of the Country: There was a Jewel
found about him, which as yet is kept.

About evening we hoysed ankers, and set sail, and the 11. of December we came
to two small Islands, where we ankered, there we found none but poor people
and fishermen, that brought us fish, Hens, and other fruit to sell.

How far they were from Moluccas
The 13. we set sail, and the 14. we had a West wind, which they call the
passage wind, that would have served us well to sail to Moluccas, from whence
we were not distant above two hundred miles, and as then it was a good year
for Cloves, which happens every three years: It was told us that we might
there have a Cabin laden full of Cloves, whereupon we determined to sail
thither, but because we had already endured a long and troublesome voyage, and
but ill manned, we would not, longing to be at home: This contrary wind
holding upon the four and twenty of December we came to an Islande where we
had been before.

The 25. of December John Molenaer master of the Mauritius, dyed suddenly,
for an hour before he was well and in good health.

The 28. 29. 30. and 31. of December we were busied to take all the wares,
sails and other things out of the Amsterdam, her victuailes and furnitures
serving for our voyage homewarde, and lying under that Island, we had
victuailes brought us every day as much as we needed, both fish, Hens, venison
and fruit, and at reasonable price, but there we could get no water.

The Amsterdam set on fire.
The 11. of January when we had unladen the Amsterdam we set her on fire,
letting her burn, taking her men into our ships.

The 12. of January we set sail again, some desiring to sail Eastward,
others Westward, but in fine we set Westwarde to sail once again to Bantam,
wherewith the Mauritius sailed Southeastwarde, to get about the Island of
Iaua, and we followed her. The 14. of January we once again perceived the East
point of the Island of Madura, and held our course Southward: on that side of
Madura there lies many small Islandes, through which we sailed.

The Pinace on ground.
The 16. in the morning our Pinace fell on ground upon the coast of Iaua, not
far from Pannorocan, where she shot off three pieces, at the which warning
we made thither with our boats, and by the help of God got her off again:
There we saw a high hill that burnt, under and above the fire having a great
smoke, most strange to behold.

The 18. of January we entered into the straight that runs between Iaua and
Baly, and by reason of the hard and contrary stream that ran therein, we were
forced to anchor upon the coast of Iaua, where we found good anchor ground.

The 19. we set sail, and when we came near to the coast of Baly, we
entered into a rough stream, and our ships drove backward, as swiftly as an
arrow out of a bow, and there we found no anchor ground, nor any anchor could
have holden us, but Molenaer got the coast of Iaua and ankered, which in the
end we likewise did, and ankered at the least three miles from him, and so
much we had driven back in the space of half an hour.

The 20. of January we went and lay by our other ships.

The 21. of January there came two barks to the Mauritius, wherein there was
one that could speak good Portingall, who told us that the town of
Ballaboam was besieged by a strange King, that had married the King of
Ballaboams daughter, and after he had lain with her he caused her to be
slain, and then came to besiege her father. This town of Ballaboam lies on
the East end of the Island of Iaua, and is the same town where M. Candish was
when he passed that way, and the old King whereof he writes was as then yet
living, being at the least 160. years of age. There we saw great numbers of
Battes, that flew over our ships, and were as big as Crows, which in that
Country they use to eat, as they say: About noone we came before the town of
Ballaboam, so near unto it that we might easily see it, and there we lay
behind a high point of land, thinking to take in water.

The 22. of January we took our Pinace, and sailed about the shore as near
the land as possible we might, to seek for fresh water, but we found none, for
the River that ran through the town was paled up (by them that lay before it)
so that no man might pass either out or in, but only on the land side, and
that with great danger: The same day there came 2. or 3. men abord our ship,
that stole out of the town by night, and came from the King, to desire our
help with our great shot, which we could not do; because that thereabouts it
was very shallow, and we might not go near it with our ships: they told us
they had great want of victuailes within the town, whereby many of them were
already dead for hunger, and much desired our aid, but it was not in us to
do. Those that besieged the town were Mores, but they in the town were
heathens, and as yet had not received Mahomets law, and that (as we heard
after) was the cause of their war: There we saw many Storkes flying and
sitting in the field: with us we cannot imagaine where the Storkes remain in
winter time, but here we saw them in the winter time.

The 24. of January we sailed from thence, perceiving nothing for us to get,
and took our course right over to the Island of Bally.

The 25. we came to Bally, where one of their barks borded us, telling us that
there we should find a River of fresh water, and of all things else sufficient
to serve our necessities, whereupon we ankered.

The 26. of January our Pinace sent her boat to land, to see the River, and
there one of our men was sent on shore, but when he was on land he found
nothing, but an army of ten thousand men, that meant to relieve the town of
Ballaboam, and the River was nothing worth to lade water, whereupon our men
came on board again: Their General thought to have gotten some great pray out
of our ships.

The 27. of January we set sail to find a convenient place to refresh us
with water and other provision, for we were informed by a man of Bengala, that
of his own will sailed with us, and that had been in Bally, that there we
should find water and other things to serve our necessities, so that by night
we ankered under a high point of land on the South west end of Bally.

The 28. of January one of their boats borded us with six or seven men,
saying that their King was desirous to deal with us for such wares as he had,
and sent to know from whence we came, and we said we came out of Holland.

The 29. and 30. there came more men aborde our ships, but as we suspected
that was not the right haven, for the people came rowing in great haste a far
off, and the man of Bengala could not tell what to say, but the King was
thereabout, and every day sent us some fruit.

The first of February we had two hogs brought aborde our ships, that we
bought for two Ryalles of eight, and we eat them very sauerly.

The 2. of February, we set sail that we might get above the point, where
we thought to find a better place for fresh water, but by reason the wind
was contrary, we could not do it, but were forced to anchor again.

The 3. of February we set sail again, and then we had a storm, so that our
sail blew every way, and because of the contrary wind we could not reach
above the point, but were constrained to anchor, but the Mauritius and the
Pinace got past it, although thereby the Mauritius was in no little danger;
but because the Pilot had laid a wager of 6. Rialles of 8. that he would get
above it, he would pass, what danger soever it might be, and sailed close
along by the cliffes, whereby we lay at anchor without company.

The 4. and 5. we set sail once again to get above the point but could not
reach it.

The 6. we had a letter from Rodenburgh, that certified us how the Mauritius
lay at anchor at the least 7. or 8. miles beyond the point, and he that brought
the letter came with it over land; and at the same time there was a man sent on
land with a small present for the King, that we might win his favor.

The 7. our man came on board again, and brought us news how Rodenburgh with
one of the Portingalles slaves, being on land were against their wills led
before the King, but the saylors of the Mauritius had gotten men for pledges.

The 8. of January, the same man went on land out of our ship with more
presents of velvet and a caliuer, the better to get the Kings favor, which
liked him well, and desired us to bring the ship nearer to the town, saying he
would send us water and other things sufficient to supply our wants.

The 9. we sailed into the cheek with our ship, and ankered about a small
half mile from the land, and being ankered there came at the least 70. boats
of the Country to see our ship, and the King sent us word that he was
desirous to hear us shoot off 5. or 6. of our great pieces, whereupon we
shot five of our greatest pieces, and the King stood upon the shore to see
them.

The 10. we had a letter from Cornelis Houtman, to will us to come to them, for
that there they had found a good place for water, and of all other
necessaries, so that about evening we set sail, leaving two of our men and a
Portingall slave among the Indians, whom the King promised should come unto us
over land, yet that night we could not reach above the point, mean time we
perceived our Pinace that came to help us.

The 16. we got by the Mauritius, that had already laden in her water, and
hooped her vessels, whereupon we began presently to do the like, and to visit
our vessels that were almost spoiled.

The 17. our men whom we left with the King came over land unto our ships,
and then we bought great store of cattle and fruit.

The 18. 19. 20. and 21. we employed our time to lade water, which we had
very easily, and refreshed our selves with Cattle, Hogs, fruit, and Lemons
sufficient. There came one of the Kings principal officers with our men over
land, to pleasure us in all things we desired, he was very desirous to have
some present of us.

The 22. of January two of our men that sailed in the Mauritius stayed on
land, but we knew not the cause: it should seem some great promises had
been made unto them, for as we understood, the King was very desirous to have
all sorts of strange nations about him, Two of our men stayed with the Indians.
but our people were therein much ouerseene, for there they lived among
heathens, that neither knew God nor his commandementes, it appeared that their
youths and wild heads did not remember it, one of their names was Emanuel
Rodenburgh of Amsterdam, the other Jacob Cuyper of Delft: within a day or two
they sent unto us for their clothes, but we sent them not.

The 23. 24. and 25. we made a voyage on land, and fetched as many Hogs abord
our ships as we could eat.

The 25. of February we hoysed ankers, minding to set sail and so go
homeward, leaving our 2. men aforesaid on land, but because it was calm
weather we ankered, and went once again on land, and the 26. of the same
Month we set sail and held our course West South west, but we had a calm.

The situation of the Island of Baly.
THe Island of Baly lying at the East end of Iaua, is a very fruitful Islande
of Ryce, Hens, Hogs, that are very good, and great store of cattle: but
they are very dry and lean beasts. They have many horses: the inhabitants
are heathens and have no religion, for some pray to Kine, others to the Sun,
and every man as he thinks good. How 50. women burnt them selves with one
man.
When a man dies his wife burns her self with him: there were some of their
men aborde our ships, that told us, that when some man dies in that
Country, that sometimes there are at the least fifty women that will burn
themselves with him, and she that does not so is accounted for a dishonest
woman: so that it is a common thing with them: The apparel both of men and
women is for the most part like those of Bantam, nothing but a cloth about
their middles: Their weapons is, each man a poinyarde at their backs, and a
trunk with an iron point like a spear, about a fadom and a half long, out of
the which they blow certain arrows, whereof they have a case full; it is an
evil weapon for naked men: they are enemies to the Mores and Portingalles. This
Island yields no spice, nor any other costly ware, only victuailes and
clothes which they wear about their bodies, and slaves that are there to be
sold. The King went with more state then the King of Bantam: all his guard had
pikes with heads of fine gold, and he sat in a wagon that was drawn by 2.
two white Buffles.

The first of March we had a calm.

The third we got a good wind that blew Southeast, holding our course West
South west.

The fourteenth the wind blew still South east, sometimes more Southwarde, and
sometimes Eastward, being under 14. degrees, and a good sharp gale, holding
our course West Southwest: The situation of Iaua
There we found that Iaua is not so broad, nor stretches it self not so much
Southwarde, as it is set down in the Card: for if it were, we should have
passed clean through the middle of the land.

The 22. of March the wind held as it did, being under 19. degrees, holding
our course West South west.

The 19. of April our ship had no more bread left, but for our last partition
every man had seven pound, both good and badde bread, and from that time
forward our meat was Rice sodden in water, and every man had a can of water
every day, with three romers of wine, and weekly each man three romers or
glasses of oil and that very strong, and nothing else.

The 20. we had a calm, the 21. a calm with a Northern air.

The 23. a good wind that blew Southwest.

The 24. we saw the firm land of Aethiopia, being under 33 degrees, and as
we gessed, we were then about an hundred miles from the Cape de bona
Sperance, yet we thought we had been at the least three hundred miles from it,
so that we may say, that God wrought wonderfully for us: for that if we had
fallen by night upon the land, we had surely run upon it: we had a good
wind out of the West, and West Southwest.

The 25. of April in the morning we had a calm, with a very hollow water,
and at evening we had a good wind, that came North and Northeast, and although
we had so good a vvind yet our ship bare but little sail, although the
other two ships of our company were at the least two mile before us, for most
part of the night we sailed with our schouer sail, holding our course
Southwest and by West.

The 26. of April in the morning we could not see our ships, which pleased
not our men, besides that our ship was very weak, whereby her ribs shoke,
and her joints with the force of the water opened and shut, so that as then our
ship was very leake, having the wind Northwest, holding our course as near
as we could West Southwest, and then we put out our maine sails, at noone the
wind came West, with a great storm, so that most of our sails blew in
pieces, and so we drove forward with out sails.

The 27. of April still driving without sail with a West wind, we were
under thirty six degrees, so that we found that the stream drove us South and
South West.

The 28. of April still driving without sails, we had the height of 36.
degrees and 20. minutes, and about evening we hoised sail again, the wind
being West Southwest, and we held our course Northwest with very hollow water.

The 29. of April we could not as yet see our ships, the wind being West.

The 30. of April we had fair weather with a West and west South west wind,
and then we saw many great birds with white bills, which is a sign not to
be far from the Cape de bona Sperance, we likewise saw certain small birds,
speckled on their backs, and white upon their breasts.

The first of May we had a South vvinde with fair weather, having 34. degrees
and a half, holding our course West Southwest.

The second of May we were under 35. degrees, and. holding our course West
and West and by North.

The fourth of May we found our selves to be under 37. degrees South South east
wind, our course being West and by North, and West North west.

The 5. and 6. of May we had all one wind at noone being under 35. degrees,
we thought we had past the Cape, and held our course Northwest, toward
Saint Helena, still without sight of our ships.

The 8. of May with a South wind we held North West and by West.

Signs of the Cape de bona Speranza.
The 9. we had a calm with a gray sky, and were under 31. degrees and twenty
minutes, and then our portion of oil was increased a glass more every week,
so that every man had four glasses.

The 10. we had still south winds, and were under 29. degrees.

The 14. of April twice or thrice we saw reeds, called Trombos driving on the
water, being such as drive about the Cape de bona Speranza, which we thought
very strange, for that the Portingals write, that they are seen but thirty
miles from the Cape, and we gest our selves to be at the least 200. beyond it.

The 15. we still had a South east wind, and held our course Northwest.

The 16. of April in the morning we saw two ships, whereat we much rejoiced,
thinking they had been our company, we made to leewarde of them, and the
smallest of them coming somewhat near us, about the length of the shot of a
great piece, she made presently toward her fellow, whereby we perceived them
to be French men, yet we kept to leeward, thinking they would have come and
spoken with us, but it should seem they feared us, and durst not come, but
held their course Northeast: at noone we had the height of 22. degrees, and 50.
minutes with a Southeast wind, holding our course Northwest.

The 17. of May we were under 21. degrees and a half: the 18. the wind being
Southerly, we were under 19. degrees and a half.

The 19. and 20. we had a calm with a Southern are.

map of St Helena SANCTA HELENA


The 21. the air coming Southwest, we held our course Northwest, and were
under 17. degrees and. parts: There we found the compass to decline three
quarters of a strike or line North eastward, after noone we had a Southeast
wind, and our course West Northwest.

The 22. of May we had still a Southeast wind, and were under the height of
16. degrees and 40. minutes, holding our course West Northwest.

The 23. of May, by reason of the cloudy sky, about noone we could not take the
height of the Sun, but as we gest we had the height of the Island of S.
Helena, and held our course West and by South to keep under that height, for
there the compasses decline a whole strike or line: in the evening we found
that we were under 16. degrees.

The 24. of May in the morning we discovered a Portingall ship, that stayed
for us, and put out a flagge of truce, and because our flagge of truce was not
so ready as theirs, and we having the wind of him, therefore he shot two
shootes at us, and put forth a flagge out of his maine top, and we shot 5. or
6. times at him, and so held on our course without speaking to him, having a
South east wind, holding our course West and by South to find the Island of S.
Helena, which the Portingal likewise sought.

The 25. of May we discovered the Island of S. Helena, but we could not see the
Portingal ship, still sailing with a stiff Southeast wind, and about evening
we were under the Island, which is very high land, and may be seen at the
least 14. or 15. miles off, and as we sailed about the North point, there lay
three other great Portingal ships, we being not above half a mile from them,
whereupon we held in the weather and to seawarde Northeast as much as we
might. Four Portingal ships richly laden
The Portingalles perceiving us, the Admiral of their fleet shot off a piece to
call their men that were on land to come a board, and then we saw four of
their ships together, that were worth a great sum of money, at the least
300. tons of gold, for they were all laden with spices, precious stones, and
other rich wares, and therefore we durst not anchor under the Island, but lay
all night Northeastwarde, staying for our company.

The 26. of May in the morning we made toward the Island again, with a good
Southeast wind, and about noone or somewhat past we discried two ships, and
about evening as we made toward them, we knew them to be our company, which
made us to rejoice, for we had been asunder the space of a whole Month, and so
we held together and sailed homeward, holding our course Northwest: for as yet
our men were well and in good health, and we found a good Southeast wind, and
had water enough for four or five months.

The 27. 28. 29. and 30. of May we had a Southeast wind, with fair weather,
and the 27. day we were under 14. degrees, The first of June we were under 6.
degrees, with a Southest wind, holding our course north west, but by means of
the Compass that yielded north eastward, we kept about Northvvest and by
North. The 6. of June we were under one degree on the South side of the line,
there we found that the stream drove us fast into the West, and therefore
we held our course more Northernely, and sailed Northvvest and by north,
with an East and South east vvind. They past the Equinoctial line.
The 7. of June we past the Equinoctial line, with an East vvinde, holding
our course North Northvvest.

The 10. of June in the evening we were under 5. degrees and a half on the
North side of the line, and then we began again to see the north star, which
for the space of 2. years we had not seen, holding our course North Northwest,
there we began to have small blasts, and some times calmes, but the air all
South and Southeast.

The 11. of June we had a calm, and yet a dark sky, that came Southeastwarde.
The 12. of June we had a close sky with rain, and the same day about evening
our fore top maste fell down.

The 13. we struck all our sails and mended our ship.

The 14. we had the wind Northward, holding our course West Northwest as near
as we could, but by reason of the thick sky we could not take height of the
Sun. The 15. of June we had the wind North, and North Northwest. The 16. of
June we had the height of 9. degrees and 10. minutes, the wind being
Northeast and North Northeast. The 17. the wind was Northeast with fair
weather, and we held Northwest, and northwest and by North till after noone.
They took a great fish.
The 18. we took a great fish called an Aluercoor, which served us all for 2.
meals, which we had not tasted of long time before.

The 26. we had still a Northeast wind, and sometimes larger, holding our
course North Northwest with large sail, and were under 17. degrees and.

The same day there came much dust flying into our ship, as if we had past
hard by some sandy down, and we gest the nearest land to us might be the
Island of S. Anthony, and we were as then at the least 40. or 50. miles from
it: The same day likewise there came a flying fish into our ship, which we
eat.

The 28. of June we had the height of 20. degrees, with a East Northeast wind
and East and by West, with full sail, there we saw much Sargosse, driving on
the water. The last of June we had the Sun right over our heads, and yet we
felt no heat, for that by reason of the cold air we had a fine cool weather.
The same day we passed Tropicus Cancri, still having the wind East Northeast,
and in the evening we were under 24. degr.

The second of July we still saw Sargosse driving upon the water, and had the
wind somewhat lower North Northeast with a calm. The third of July the wind
came again East Northeast, and we held our course North and by West. The 8.
of July we were under 33. degrees and. with an East wind, holding our course
North and by East, and yet we saw much Sargosse driving, but not so thick as
it did before.

The 10. of July we had a good wind that blew south and South and by East, and
hoysted up our maine tops, that for the space of 26. days were never touched,
and held our course North Northeast, there we were in no little fear to fall
among the Spanish fleet, which at that time of the year keeps about the
Flemmish Islands.

The same day one of our boys fell over board, and was carried away with a
swift stream before the wind, but to his great good fortune, the Pinace saved
him, that was at the least a quarter of a mile from us: this evening we found
the height of 36. degrees.

The 12. of July we had a Southwest wind, holding our course Northeast and by
North: Our Pilot and the Pilot of the Pinnace differed a degree in the height
of the Sun, for ours had 38. degrees, and theirs but 37. We gest to be about
the Islands of Corbo and Flores, but the one held more easterly, and the other
more Westerly. The 13. of July we had still a Southwest wind, and after noone
we thought we had seen land, but we were not assured thereof, for it was
somewhat close. The 14. of July we had a calm, and saw no land, and then our
men began to be sick.

The 17. of July we had a South Southeast wind, with fair weather, and were
under 41. degrees, holding our course East Northeast.

The 18. 19. 20. and 21. it was calm. The 22. of July the wind came North,
and we held our course East Southeast. The 23. of July the wind was North
North east and Northeast, and we held as near as we could East and East
Southeast, the same day our steward found a barrel of stockfish in the roming,
which if we had been at home we would have cast it on the dunghill, it stunke
so filthily, and yet we eat it as sauerly as the best meat in the world.

The 24. we had a West wind, and that with so strong a gale, that we were
forced to set two men at helm, which pleased us well.

The 25. of July we had a storm that blew West and west Northwest, so that we
bare but two sails, holding our course Northeast and by East.

The first of August we were under 45. degrees with a North west wind, holding
our course Northeast and by East.

The second of August one of our men called Gerrit Cornelison of Spijckenes
died, being the first man that dyed in our voyage homeward.

The 4. of August we had a Northwest wind.

The 5. of August in the morning the wind came Southwest, and we were under
47. degrees, holding our course Northeast and the North Northeast, and we gest
that we were not far from the channel, those days aforesaid we had so
great cold in our ships, as if it had been in the middle of winter: We
could not be warm with all the clothes we had. The same day we saw Sargosse
drive upon the water.

They saw a ship with the Prince of Prince of Oranges flagge.
The 6. of August we had a West wind, in the morning cast out our lead and found
ground at 80. fadome, and about noone we saw a ship that bare the Princes
flagge, yet durst not come near us, although we made signs unto him, and
after noone we saw the land of Heissant, whereat we all rejoiced.

The 7. of August in the morning we saw the land of France, and held our
course North northeast, and likewise we saw a small ship, but spoke not
with it.

The 8. of August in the morning we savv the Kiskas, and had a South vvind and
somevvhat West, holding our course East Northeast.

They saw a man of war
The 9. of Augst we entered the heads, and past them with a Southvvest vvind,
sailing Northeast. After noone we past by a man of war being a Hollander,
that lay at anchor, and he hoysed anchor to follow us, about evening we spoke
with him, but because of the wind we could hardly hear what he sid, yet he
sailed on with us.

The man of war gave them victuailes.
The 10. of August the man of war borded us with his boat, and brought us a
barrel of Beer, some bread, and Cheese, showing us what news he could
touching the state of Holland, and presently we saw the land of Holland, and
because it blew very stiff and a great storm, after noone we ankered about
Petten to stay for better weather, and some new Pilots, and that was the first
time we had cast anchor for the space of 5. months together, about evening it
began to blow so stiff, that we lost both an anchor and a cable.

The 11. of August we had still a Southerly wind, and therefore about noone
the Mauritius set sail, and we thought likewise to sail, but our men were so
weak that we could not hoyse up our anchor, so that we were constrained to lie
still till men came out to help us, about evening the wind came Southwest,
and with so great a storm, that we thought to have run upon the strand, They
cut down their main mast.
and were forced to cut down our maine maste.

The 12. and 13. we had a hard South west wind, and sometimes West, so that no
Pilots came abord our ship, but the 13. day about evening it began to be fair
weather.

The 14. of August about break of day in the morning, there came two boats
with Pilots and men abord our ship, that were sent out by our owners, and
brought us some fresh victuailes, which done they hoysed up our ankers, and
about noone we sailed into the Tessel, and ankered in the channel, where we
had fresh victuailes enough, for we were all very weak.

This was a great novelty to all the Marchantes and inhabitants of Hollande,
for that we went out from thence the second of April 1595. and returned home
again upon the 14. of August 1597. there you might have bought of the Pepper,
Nutmegs, Cloves, and Mace, which we brought with us. Our saylors were most
part sick, being but 80. men in all, two third parts of their company being
dead, and lost by diverse accidents, and among those forescore such as were
sick, as soon as they were on land and at their ease presently recovered
their healthes.

The Copper money of Iaua.
diagram of the copper coin of Java

THis Copper money comes also out of China, and is almost as thick, great
and heavy, as a quarter of a Doller, and somevvhat thicker, in the middle
having a square hole, 2000. of them are vvorth a Riall of 8. but of these there
are not over many, the use to hang them upon stringes, and pay them without
telling, they stand not so narrowly upon the number, for if they want but 25.
or 50. it is nothing.

The leaden money of Iaua.
diagram of the lead coin of Java

THis piece of money (being of bad Lead is very rough) has in the middle a
four square hole, they are hanged by two hundred upon a string, they are
commonly 10. 11. and 12. thousand to a Riall of 8. as there comes great
quantity out of China, where they are made, and so as there is plenty or
scarcity they rise and fall.

FINIS.

