A petition directed to her most excellent Majesty, wherein is delivered 1 A
mean how to compound the civil dissension in the church of England. 2 A
proof that they who write for Reformation, do not offend against the stat. of
23. Eliz. c. 2. and therefore till matters be compounded, deserve more favor.


Open thy mouth for the dumb in the causes of the children appointed to death,
PROVE. 31. 8. I believed and therefore have I answered,

For SIONS sake I will not cease, and for IERVSALEMS sake I will not hold my
tongue, ESA. 62. 1. Hereunto is annexed: Some opinions of such as sue for
Reformation: By which is made appear how unjustly they are slaundered by
the Bishops, etc. page, 53. Together with the Authors Epistle to the Reader,
page 58.

Also: Certain Articles wherein is discovered the negligence of the Bishops,
their Officialls, Favorers and Followers, in performance of sundry
Ecclesiastical Statutes Laws and Ordinances Royal and Episcopal, published
for the government of the Church of England, page 60.

Lastly: Certain Questions or Interrogatories drawn by a favorer of
Reformation, which he desires to be resolved by the Prelates, page 74.

To the Queens most excellent Majesty, Elizab. by the grace of God, Queen of
England, France, and Ireland, supreme gouernesse in all causes and over all
persons within her Majesty's Realms and Dominions.
Craving upon my knees pardon for my boldness, I beseech your most excellent
majesty, to hear me a little.

All your Highness subjects that love the religion, honor your majesty, and
desire the good of the Realm, do heartily bewail the bitter contention about
the questions of reforming the Church.

Many seek to increase this contention. Some labor to appease it: but this
will never be till the truth in these matters be assured in the hearts of
both parties.

I do not now write either to pull down Bishoprics, or erect presbiteries.
With whom the truth is, I will not determine. For I know not. What seems
most probable and true to me that I know.

How truth should come to light, (...)
that is the question.

Writing of books in such manner as is now used, is endless: weariness to
the flesh: matter of further contention, by reason of impertinent and
personal discourses.

The troubles of Churches, and enmity of Princes, will not admit a general
Council.

A free National or Provincial Council at home, were much to be wished, so
that the Bb. and their followers did not ouerrule the rest. For it is against
religion, law and reason, that the same men should be both judges and parties.
Or if this be not thought so convenient,

There is a way devised and much commended by (...)
learned men, as a notable mean to compounde controversies, namely private
conferences by advised writing, (...)
not extemporall speaking, the question agreed of. The arguments, the answers,
replies, and reioinders set down, till both parties had fully said, all
by-matters laid aside. In fine the whole to be published, that your majesty,
the honorable Councillors and Parliament may judge thereof, that those
things which on either part are found faulty, may be redressed.

That all things be not so clear with the Bb. (...)
but that further conference, trial, and reformation is requisite, appears.

1 By the laws established, which expect a better and further reformation in
Church-causes.

2 By the writings of our Divines in the common cause against the papists.

3 By the confession of the Bb. them selves, and such a^ write in their defense.

4 By their suspicious and doubtful handling of the matters in question.

5 By the testimony of learned men, and christian Churches who seem to speak
against the government by Bb. and for the government by assisting Elders.

1 The laws expect a further reformation of the Church.
Your Majesty's most noble Father understanding that the laws Ecclesiastical
of this land were corrupt, provided by 25. H. 8. ca. 19.
Parliament, that 32. persons should peruse and correct them: gathering into
one book those that were good, which by his Royal assent should have the
strength of law, ^ E ^. ca 11. (...).
all other Ecclesiastical laws to be abandoned out of this Church for ever.

Master D. Cranmer and other reverend men were delegated to this purpose. (...)
They collected into one (...)
book many good things (as they thought) touching page 29.
Aduouson of benefices, page 80.
Excommunication for small matters, page 57.
Residence of University men upon their benefices, page 20.
Marriages without consent of parents, page 22.
Nursing of children by their own mother, page 27.
Divorces for infirmity of body, page 31.
Pluralities, page 43.
Broken Music in Cathedral Churches, page 47.
Deacons, The solemnity of page 81.
Excommunication, and abso^ution with the assent of the people, and many other
things which are directly contrary to the practice and orders of the modern
Bishops. But this book wants the Kings confirmation, and the laws
Ecclesiastical remain in the same corruption as your Majesty's Father left
them, notwithstanding the labors of those Reverend personages and the act of
Parliament, which was 1. Eli. 2. c. ^.
revived and confirmed in the beginning of your Highness most happy reign.

2 Also in the book of common prayer, (...)
which was set 5 and 6. (...)
forth by your Majesty's brother, and 1. Eliz. c. 2.
accepted by your highness, there is prescribed a Commination to be used at a
certain time in the year: not to continue ever, but till an order of
Discipline practiced in she primitive Church be restored, which were greatly
to be wished, as the authors of that book do say. Yet this Commination
stands, and the Discipline there mentioned, is yet wanting.

3 The book of ordering Ministers B^^ke of ordering Ministers.
confirmed by law, (...)
presumes that every Minister should be a Preacher. For at the Ordination, the
Bishop says: Take thou authority to preach the word of God. Yet where the Bb.
ordeine one Minister that can preach, they make twenty that can not.

4 ^astly, it is (...)
enacted, (...)
That all ornaments of the Church and Ministers thereof (such as are Surples,
Coapes, etc.) shall be retained and be in use as was appointed by King Edward
the 6. not for unchangeable continuance, but until other order were taken by
your Majesty, and your Highness Ecclesiastical Commissioners.

2 The Defenders of our common cause expect a further Reformation.
Those things (in effect) be acknowledged by some of our chief defendours of
religion against the papists. (...)
For when they (...)
object That we are glad to borrowe their ceremonies, and to have an apish
imitation of their Mas^e book, (...)
answer is returned, That diverse abuses in Ceremonies and Discipline were
tolerated among us, our Church therein yielding to the infirmity of the
weaker sort, which were to be altered, when people grew to ryper knowledge.

3 The Defenders of the state of Bb. expect further Reformation.
1 All the Bishops in their Ca^on. dis. page ^0.
Canons do confess, that Non-residencie is a filthy thing, od^ous to men, and
pernicious to the church, yet what is more common?

2 By the (...)
laws of England, in the ordination of Bb. The Bb should as well use pastoral
staue^.
the Archbishop should lay the Bible upon the Bishops neck that is to be
ordained, and put a pastoral staff into his hand. If the Archbishops did not
esteem these as vain ceremonies, (...)
they would urge them with as great vehemence upon Bb. as they do Surplesses
upon ministers.

3 My L. of (...) page 679.
Canterb: in his book against Master Cartw. says, That Chauncellours who
are not Ministers, should not excommunicate. (...)
The authors of the (...)
Remonstrance, and Disputat. Mat. (...). page 83.
Matthewe S^tcliffes books, defenders of the Hierarchy by writing think it a
most unmeet thing, that such as be no ministers of the word, should meddle
with the keys of the Church, yet the contrary is daily used.

4 The Bishop of London Admoni ag. (...) page 53 1. eds.
confesses, That he made his Porter minister, (...)
and the other Bb. do acknowledge, Ibid pa. 99.
That many lewd and unlearned ministers have been made of late in England,
which they will not seem to defend. Besides they say, Ibi pa. 139.
We have yet but a tolerable manner of reformation: all which do euince a
further reformation.

5 D. Cosins, one of the high Commissioners writes, (...)
That the punishment of Adultery is to mild. Puni^^ment of Adul^erie.


6 A learned man and friend of the Bb. (...)
notes as abuses, Their urging of Subscription, (...)
Their oath ex officio, Their excommunication for trifles, and easy silencing
of ministers.

4 The suspicious and doubtful handling of the controuersed matters, imployeth
some need of reformation and conference.
1 My L. of Cant. speaking of the maine controversy touching government By
Seni. (...)
or Elders, says, (...)
That he knows that the primitive Church had in every Church certain
Seniors, to whom the government of the Congregation was committed. In a book
against the Marprelate subscribed (as I have heard) by the Archb. of Cant. the
Bb. of Winch. Linc. and London, it is affirmed, that the government by Elders
was used under the (...)
Law, and Ibid p. 135.
practiced under the Gospel by the Apostles, though not fit for our times. But
repenting this plain confession, they have caused certain words importing
the contrary, to be printed upon a shred of paper, which paper was pasted in
all the books of the first impression, to cover and conceal their former
assertion.

2 The Remonstrance coming after, holds, there was never any government by
Elders in the Church, but yields, that if the (...). page 166.
Eldership begun in the Law and continued in the Gospel, that then it should
stand to the worlds end. For so much page 9.
as is prescribed in the new law, no prescription ought to be made against it.

Upon which cross assertions laid one upon another, the adverse party may
press out the conclusion of all the controversy.

If the Eldership begun in the Law, (...).
and continued in the Gospel, then no prescription may be made against it, but
it should stand for ever. So says the Remonst.

But the Eldership begun in the Law and continued in the Gospel. So say the Bb.

Therefore no prescription may be made against the Eldership, but it should
stand for ever.

3 But one Matthewe Sutcliffe coming after these, (...)
controlleth both: for he protests there was (...)
never any government by Elders under the Gospel, or if there were, yet the
(...)
government used by the Apost, is changeable, not of necessity to be
continued. Not content herein to make the rent of our Church deeper then ever
it was, he has openly in latin defaced foreign Churches (of whom D.
Whitgift and other have always written honorably) that we might not only be
at war within our selves, (...)
but with strangers also. Whereby it is likely there will arise as dangerous
trouble to the Churches about Discipline, as has grown by the question of
Consubstantiation, to the great offense of the common adversary, and general
disquiet of all Christendom.

Touching the state of Bb. (...)
diverse who now most egerly defend* when they were nearest to God, that is,
in misery and anguishe of soul, did speak against it: but afterward
inclining to the world, with their conditions they altered their opinions.

1 Master Elmar, now Bishop of London, (...)
writes thus, (...)
Christ says Luc. 1. 2. Who made me a Judge between you? As though he
would say, It belongs not to my office to determine matters of policy and
inheritance, that belongs to the civil Magistrate. If he had thought it had
been within the compass of his function, why and with what conscience refused
be to set them at one, who were at strife, and to put that out of doubt, which
was in suit? If he might do it and would not, he lacked charity and did
not his duty. If it belonged not to him, how belonged it to any of his
Disciples or successors? Had not be as large a commiss^on as he gave? Or
could be give that he had not? But he knowing his office as the Prophet
Esaias had foretold, to preach the (...), and would do nothing without
warrant. And therefore being asked if he were a King, answered si^plie and by
a plain negative, My ki^gdome is not of this world. If his kingdom were not
here, neither the ordering of policies, etc. Yea when they would have taken
him up to have made him a King, as one that refused that belonged not to him,
he conveyed himself from among them. If Imperial jurisdiction belonged to
him, why refused he his calling? If it did not, where had Paul or any other,
any authority to meddle with that which he refused? Seeing he says: As my
Father sent me, so send I you. In another place, Christ knowinge the bonds
of his calling, would not meddle with externe policy, etc. Divines methinkes
by this example should not give themselves too much the bridle, and too large
a scope to meddle too far with matters of policy. (...)
If these two offices, I mean ecclesiastical and civil be so ^umbled in
both functions, there can be no quiet or well ordered common wealth. And
again, Princes of the Nations do hear rule like Lords, it shall not be so
with you. It falls not into an Apostles or Church-mans office to meddle with
such matters.

For none going to war, intangleth him self with the affairs of this life:
it is enough for them to wait upon one office, to attend as sole priests,
not as errant Baylliffes. And elsewhere:

Come off ye Bishops, away with your superfluities, yield up your thousands,
be content with hundreds, as they be in other reformed Churches, (...)
where there be as great learned men as you are. Let your portion be
priestlike and not Princelike. Let the Queen have the rest of your
temporalities, to mainetaine wars, and to build schools throughout the
Realm, that every parish Church may have his Preacher, every City her
Superintendent to live not pompeouslie. Which will never be, (...)
unless your lands be dispersed and bestowed upon many, which now feed and
fat but one. Remember that Ab^nelech, when David in his banishment would have
dined with him kept such hospitality, 1. Sam. 21.
that he had no bread to give him, but the Shewb^ead. Where was all his
superfluity to keep your pretended hospitality? For that is the cause that
you allege you must have thousands, (...)
as though you were commanded to keep hospitality rather with a thousand,
then with an hundred.

This book was written in defense of the lawefull regiment of women, but now
the author labors to suppress this book, tenderinge more the state of the
^b. then the Queens Crown.

2 Master Bullingham before he was Bishop, (...).
being arrived at Embden, after many storms, wrote unto a godly man in this
manner: Would God, Master Bull, that all the Prelates in England had been
with me when we fell to cutting off Cables, reding at anchor in the raging
seas, There would have been tearing of square cappes, renting of Rochets,
defyi^g of B^shoprickes, despising of pomp, promising a new life, cr^ing for
mercy. O what a tragedy would there have been! Well, well, though now they
walk dr^e shoode in their palaces, there is a God that will try them and all
his people by fire or by water, unless we heartily repent. Grace to repent*
grant us, O Lord, without dela^e, Amen, Amen.

3 D. Bridges before he entangled himself with the Disciplinarie
controversies, D. Bridges (...).
writing against the papists, uses these words: (...)
Christ has put such a bar between Bb. and Princes, that his spiritual Bb.
cannot have earthly kingdoms. And again, where the papists held that the
Pope was not properly but improperly a^^ orde: to take away this, he adds:
Christ simply debarreth all his spiritual Ministers from ruling of temporal
kingdoms. Christ has both properly and improperly debarred them. Vos autem
non sic, You shall not do so. These words strike dead Master Sanders.
Further, whereas the papists account Aerius and al Protestants heretics, D*
Bridges (...)
because they hold that by Gods book A Bishop and a Priest are all one, Of
the Princ. Supre: page 359.
D. Bridges does therein justify Aerius and the Protestants out of Hierome,
Peter Lambarde, Durand, and the Institution of Collen. But since that time,
writing in defense of Bishops, he mainteyneth their Defense of government page
^48. etc.
Lordshippe, and ^bid* page 281. 372.
accounts his brethren Aerian heretics. This doublinge by such as defend
the Hierachie, must needs cast great doubts in the hearts of all men.

5 Testimonies of learned men, imply some further Reformation.
These followers of Reformation give greater color to their cause by the
testimony of ancient and late writers, whom they pretend to speak against
the manner of our government by Bishops, and for the government of their
Elders.

1 Against the authority and practice of our Bb. (...)
they allege the (...)
Canons of the Apostles, the Councels of (...)
Carth^ge, (...)
Calcedone, (...)
Constans, (...)
Turon and (...)
Macra, the testimony of (...)
Cypr^an, (...)
Tertullian, (...)
Augustine, (...)
Hierome, (...)
Ambrose, (...)
Chrysostom, (...)
Gregory, (...)
Hillarie, (...)
Synesius, (...)
Nazianzene, (...)
Origene, and (...)
Bernard.

2 Touching late (...)
reformed Churches, (...)
they mainteyne, that there is no protestant Church in all Hungary, Poleland,
Denmark, Friselande, Swevel^nd, Heluetia, Saxony, Auspurg, of in any part of
Germany in France, Scotland, the low Countries, or in any nation truly
prosessing the Gospel in all the world, that does either by their doctrine or
practice, attribute so much authority, civil and ecclesiastical in sole
excommunication and ordination of Priests, as is now used and challenged by
English Bishops.

3 Among late writers they draw (...)
to this purpose (...)
Luther, (...)
Melanc^^^on, (...)
Bucer, (...)
Martyr, (...)
Calu^^, (...)
Beza, (...)
Bullinger, (...)
Zanchius, (...)
Daneus, (...)
Erastus, (...)
Gualter, (...)
Munster, and many other.

4 Lastly, out of our own English Writers they fetch matter against the Bb.

1 Harding would prove by the example of Moses, who exercised both a Priests
and Princes office, that the Pope may use ecclesiastical and civil
authority. (...)
Master (...)
Jewel answers thus* Christ him self says to the Pope and to all other
Priests and Bb* The kings of the nations rule over them, and they that are
great exercise authority over the people, but it shall not b^e so among you.
He adds the saying of (...)
Cyprian, Christ by several duties and distinct honors, both set a
difference between the offices of both powers. Also he urges an effectual
speech of (...)
Bernard to the Pope, That he cannot be both a successor of the Apostles and
a Lord. For doubtless he was forbidden the one of them, Yet our Bb. be both.

2 May. Nowell Deane of Paul's says, (...)
that Christ refused pomp, (...)
riches and dominions, when the Devil offered them. He denied his kingdom to
be of this world, and forbad his true Disciples the possession of such
riches* and vvorldelie dominions, as the Pope now clymeth. In another place,
Ibid pa. 4^.
Christ forbad his Ministers all Dominion and worldly government, Mat. 20. And
again, Ibid. page 57.
S. Peter forbids Ministers to exercise Dominion or Lordship over their
flocks.

3 D. Bilson Warden of Winch. (...)
has thus written: (...)
Christ expressly forbids his Apostles to be rulers of Nations. The Kings of
the nations rule over their people, etc. with you it shall not be so. In which
words Christ does not traduce the power of Princes as unjust, but
distinguishes the calling of the Apostles from the manner of regiment which
God has allowed the Magistrate. Christ says not, Princes are tyrants, you
shall deal more courteously, but he says, Princes be Rulers by Gods
ordinance, you shall not be so, etc. Then he proves, that Katakyrieuein is
not meant of Tyrannical, but of Rule with authority, and shuts up his
argument in this sort: Therefore the conclusion is inevitable, That Princes
may lawfully compel and punish their subjects, bu^ Bishops may not. This
manner of reasoning against the papists has incensed men vehemently against
L. Bb. If these reasons be not good, Master Jewel, Master Nowell, and D.
Bilson have much to answer.

5 On the other side, these who^e pursuers of Reformation have had great
inducementes to enforce the ^Idership.
1 That there was a government by Elders assisting the ministry in the
primitive Church, (...)
is collected obscurely out of (...)
Ignatius, (...)
Tertullian, (...)
Cyprian, (...)
Augustine. More clearly out of (...)
Ambrose, (...)
Hierome, (...)
Possidonius, (...)
Socrates, and the (...)
Canon law.

2 The Divines of later time (almost) generally do gather the Eldership out of
the Script* namely, (...)
Zuinglius, (...)
Martyr, (...)
Aretius, (...)
Calu^^, (...)
Illiricus, (...)
Heming^^s, (...)
Hiperius, (...)
Iunius, (...)
Bucer, (...)
Beza, (...)
Piscator, (...)
Oleuian, (...)
Bulli^ger* (...)
Szegedinus, (...)
Musculus, (...)
Heshusius, (...)
Robert Stephen, (...)
Daneus, an (...)
Italian, (...)
Bertrand de L^ques, (...)
Bastingius, (...)
Morneus, (...)
Sad^ell, (...)
Nowell, (...)
Fulk, (...)
Whitakers, (...)
Snecanus, (...)
V^sinus, and Table of all.
Trelca^ius. Lastly the Churches in the low (...)
Countries, (...)
France, (...)
^eluetia, and (...)
Scotland do consent herein.

3 That the same government by Elders should continue under the Christian
magistrates, (...)
is agreed by (...)
John Alasco, V^enhouius, Micro^^us, (...)
Zuinglius, Oecolampidius, Zuichius, Capito, Miconius, Farell, Viret, (...)
Melancthon, (...)
Bucer, (...)
Calvin, (...)
Martyr, (...)
Iunius, (...)
Beza, (...)
Zanchius, (...)
Daneus, (...)
Vrsin^^s, (...)
Bullinger, (...)
Stephen, (...)
Caluetus, Collodanius, Tremulius, Pinaldus, Tauergius, Perottus, Chaussaeus,
Bertrandus, Carpenterius, De Plu^re, Perilius, Henricus S^rranus, Cal^^s,
Po^^^us, G^lartius, Iacomotus, Dupleus, (...)
Szegedinus, (...)
H^sh^sius, (...)
De Loques, (...)
Bastinguius, (...)
Pollanus, (...)
Snecanus, (...)
Fulke, (...)
Rainolds, and others most rare politikes of this time, especially (...)
Eusebius. Cosmopolitan* and Bodin, Bodin having discoursed upon the rising,
falling, conversion, and translation of the principal Empires, Kingdoms,
states and common wealths in the world, at length descends to the st^te of
Geneua, and gives a very honorable testimony of the great profit a^^sing by
the Discipline and Eldershippe to that common wealth* ^is words be these: (...)
But this is to be commended in Geneua, If there be any thing in the world
worthy commendation, (...)
vvh^ch also makes the common wealth to flour she though not in riches and
largeness of dominion, yes surely in virtue and Godliness. I mean the
Discipline of the Ministers (or Elders) which is as excellent and heavenly a
way as can be devised to repress the faults of men, and such enormities as
can not be redressed by any humane Laws and judgments. (...)
Yet this censure is according to the rule by Christ prescribed. Namely, at the
first secretly and friendly, afterward somewhat more roundelie and sharply.
Then if the party do not relent, he is interdicted solemnly and seriously
from the participation of the heavenly mysteries. If this does no good, then
the Magistrate punishes. Whereupon it falls out that such things as are not
punishable any where by Law, are without any stir or tumult reformed there
by those Censors (or Elders) who be greatly reverenced among the people, (...)
by reason of their virtue. Therefore it is, that no whoores, no drunkardes, no
di^ncing, no begging, no idle persons are to be found in that city. The
more popish and corrupt that this Bodin is, the more available and less
partial is his testimony in this matter. I would to God we might see the like
effect in any City or Town in England, wrought by the government of ^. Bb.

4 (...)
This government by Elders is commended to be used in all Churches for ever
by the Churches in (...)
France, the (...)
Low Countries, in (...)
Heluet^a, in their latter confession where^unto (...)
subscribed the Churches of Tigure, Be^ne, Scaphusia, Saint Galls, Rhetia,
Myllaine, Bienna, Geneua, Sauoy, Polonia, Hungary and Scotland. Wherein be
thousands and ten thousands of the most excellent Divines upon earth.

5 Lastly, (...)
this government by Elders ^oyned to the ministers, has been used (as I have
heard reported) under the Emperor in Bohemia, the Turk, and Bassaes in
Hungary, the Papists in France, the Protestant magistrates in Scotland,
Saxony, County Palatine of Rhene, Heluetia, Sauoy, France, The low
Countries, Scotland, and many places in Germany. Though some Churches and
learned men do not like of excommunication (in which matter they condemn our
state) yet I protest in the presence of ^^mighty God, that in all the course of
my study, touching these controversies, (...)
I have not (to my remembrance) found, read, or heard of any protestant
Church, or learned man in the world, who misliketh that certain Elders, or
grave personages should jointly govern the Church with the ministers, but
only we of England. Wherein we at unawares do impeach the Parliament and her
majesty of indiscretion, which have thought most meet to give the chief
managing of the Church not into the hands of one Bishop, but of many
ecclesiastical Commissioners, whereof some be ministers, (...)
and some lay men, therein resembling an ecclesiastical Eldership. The Bishops
wish that the ecclesiastical Commission (...)
were more common. And I think if it were settled in 500. places more then it
is, and should govern by the word of God and laws of this Realm, that there
would arise more profit thereby to Religion, then yet has been found by the
Bb.

To draw toward a conclusion of this matter, It may be that they who have
attained to as sound knowledge in all points of doctrine as any since the
Apostles time, (...)
should mistake in Discipline. It may be that they whom the spirit of wisdom
has guided in expounding the scriptures should be always forsaken of that
spirit, when they came to expound or speak o^ a text concerning discipline.
It may be that all these lights of the world which a^owe there was a
government by Elders in the primitive and best Church did and do grope in
d^rkenesse, and that the authors of the Remonstrance and Matthewe Sutcliffes
treatises have found out the truth, but until they have approved themselves
as profitable to the Church as the fourmer vvriters have done, men (not
partial) will still make scruples in these matters.

Again, (...)
it may be that the exercise of this government is a matter of confusion,
discord, dishonor to the magistrate, puritanisme, rebellion, a m^^prince, a
^arlawe, a marst^te, and mar-all, but it is unlikely that it should be admitted
under so many Princes Christi^n^ and infidels, papists and pro^estants, and
commended by such pearelesse Divines if it deserved any such taxation.

It is from my pu^pose in this place to dispute which government is better or
worse, or whether these authorities and testimonies (which I call God to
witness, I take to be according to the allegation be agreeable to the truth or
otherwise: only I trust I have sufficiently proved mine intention, namely,
that, Seeing the laws established expect a further and better reformation,
Seeing the writi^g^s of our Divines in the common cause against the Papists,
Seeing the confession of the Bish^ps and their favorers, Seeing their
doubtful and suspicious handling of these cont^ouersies, and Seeing the
testimonies of Counsels, Fathers, late writers, and Churches imply so much. I
conclude, that things go not so clear for the Bb. but that further
reformation, conference, or trial is expedient.

Till which Reformation, (...)
trial and conference be a^chieued, all that be not blind in effection do
wi^^e that these followers of Reformation may receive more courteous usage then
yet appears. For (most gracious Souer^^^e* they be your majesty's subjects
as well as the Bb. They be pro^es^ors of your own religion as well as the Bb.
They be ^mbas^adors of Christ Jesus as well (if not more in regard of their
painfulnesse) then the Bishops. If you will not hear them* whom can they fly
unto? If you will not pity their manifold miseries and molestations, then they
are destitute of humane comfort. They deserve favor. They have brought many
to the knowledge of God, who otherwise should have remained captives under
Satan and traitors to your Highness. They are unreprovable before all men,
sa^e in this question of Reformation. Wherein if they offend (as it may be
they do, for the best men be liable to error:) surely it is to be thought
they fall of ignorance. 1 The writings of the Bb. them selves. 2 The
disputations of our Divines against the papists* published and printed by
authority. (...)
3 The testimony of the principal Divines in Europe. 4 The untoward ruling of
the Bb. 5 And the apparent utility by governing Elders, do lie as offensive
stumbling blocks in their way.

To the end that these men may have more merciful acceptance, and may not be
subject and lie open to the bloody desires of their adversaries, whereof (no
doubt) some be hollow hearted papists, and some without God in this world,
who neither regard Religion, Prince, Bishop or Country, but with their own
ease and advantage, I have (under the favor of better judgment) taken in
hand to plead, not for any lands or tenementes, but for the lives of your
Majesty's most loyal subjects and Gods faithful servants (for God may have
great interest in them, though they err in Discipline) whom some do draw
within the statute of News, because they do write for Reformation. The words
of the statute Be these:

If any shall advisedly and with a malicious intent devise, (...)
write, etc. any manner of book, writing, etc. containing false, seditious,
and slanderous matter to the diffamation of the Queens Majesty ( that now
is) or to the encouraging, stirring, or moving of rebellion, or insurrection
within this Realm, he shall suffer and forfait as a fel^n. From this law it
is thus reasoned.

Whosoever write books to the diffamation of her Majesty, and to raise
rebellion, do offend against this Statute, and are felons.

They that write for Reformation, make books to diffame the Queen, and raise
rebellion.

Therefore the writers for Reformation offend against this statute, and are
felons.

They prove the first part of the Minor in this m^ner:

They that diffame the Bb. who be members of her Majesty's body politic, and
vphelde by her laws, do diffame the Queen.

They that write for Reformation diffame the Bb. etc.

Touching the second point in the Minor, the followers of the Bishops would
prove that the seekers of Reformation do write to stir and move Rebellion.
First by argument drawn^ from the general scope of their writings. Secondly,
by particular supposed mutinous and rebellius sentences scattered in the books
written in defense of Reformation.

Their general argument is to this effect:

They that write to work coffeehouse in the minds of the subjects against
the government received, (...)
do write to move a rebellion. For Coffeehouse is the mother of Rebellion.

The Seek of Reformation write to work a coffeehouse in the minds of the
subjects against the government received:

Therefore they write to move a Rebellion.

The supposed mutinous speeches which they gather out of the books which
speak for Reformation, are these:

D. Banc. Ser page 83.
says, that Martin threatens Fists.

Others object a place in Martin Senior, (...)
where he mentions a hundred thousand hands, and says, That these so
many together, would str^ke a great stroke.

D. (...)
Cosins cites one Fran. Iunius, page 28. who holds, That people may resist
the Princes that hinder the Presbyteries.

And that in the second Admonition, page 29. it is said, That many thousands
in England desire that platform, and that great troubles will come of it, if
they be withstoode in their devises, etc.

If I were persuaded that any seeker of Reformation did intend either to
diffame her Majesty, or to raise rebellion, I am so far from approving his
fact or writing in his defense, that I adiudge him rather to be punished as a
traitor then a felon. But because I assure my self that they be guiltless of
these crimes, in tender regard of innocence, and of her Majesty's most godly
laws, which ought not to be perverted, I have at tempted to answer the
quarelles of their adversaries in this behalf: Saluo semper meliore iudicio:
Which clause I will have to run and reach from the beginning to the midsts,
from the midsts to the end^ of all this treatise.

For answer to the first point in the argument, I do make good that

Admit the Seek of Reformation do diffame the Bb. who be members of her
Majesty's body politic and vphelde by her laws, yet they do not diffame the
Queen, as this statute intends.

In my understanding, there be two general Bodies politic in this land. (...)
The one, the Body politic of the Realm, the other, The Body politic of
her Majesty. The body politic of the Realm, is, All the people in the
common wealth, contracted and distinguished into the Three states of the
Parliament. The first is the (...)
Queens Majesty, The second, The Lords, The third The Commons. The Bb. be
not one of the Three states, though (...)
Matthewe Sutcliffe The Bb. be not one of the thre^ states.
should affirm it twenty times, unless he will turn out either the Queen,
the Lords, or the Commons, and assign their place to the Bishops. Although the
Bb. since the time (...)
of H. 11. (...)
Have been present in the Kings Courts, with other Barons, till the matter
came to the loss of limme or life (for at such time by the (...)
laws they are to avoid the place) And although they are de facto entitled
as Authors of our Statutes, yet I hold that this is only of grace and
favor, and de iure or by necessary right. For our Princes (as was convenient)
at the assembly of their Parliamentes have used to call the Bb. so long as they
were taken for godly and learned, into their consultations that did concern
the state of the Church: but yet they have not so inthralled themselves to the advice and assent of Bb. as if no statute might be of force without them (as
the (...)
Bishops do now to boldly insinuate.) For many laws have bin made and do
yet stand in force, the Bb. being absent, or utterly refusing to assent unto
them, (...)
as is expressly proved and showed out of the statutes and Parliament rolls by
Master (...)
Jewel, Master Dorm. Rep. page (...).
N^well, Master Act. and M^n page ^21.
Fox, Master (...)
Bilson, and Master (...)
Lambert, a learned lawier of Lincolns Inn. Wherefore seeing the Bb. according
to their dignities be none of the three states of the Parliament, or of the
Body politic of the Realm, (no otherwise then common subjects be, in which
respect they are not diffamed) it can not be taken that in this sense they be
members of her Majesty's Body politic, and therefore the diffaming of them
does no more touch the Queen, then the diffamation of a common subject, which
fault is otherwise prevented then by the punishment due to felons.

The general^ Body politic of her Majesty, is, as I conceive, all the
Officers and Magistrates of this land, who derive all their authority either
mediatelie or immediately from the Queen. In which regard the Bb. be members
of her body politic, drawing from her Highness their civil authority and
lordship. For their ecclesiastical authority has been D With page 309. (...)
heretofore deduced from her Majesty: but I see that of (...)
late they begin to claim it from God as the Queen does her Crown. But
howsoever the Bishops claim their worldly state or spiritual primacie, the
Seek* of Reformation do maintain, that their jurisdiction is contrary to the
word of God. Not condemning external honor (which is good and godly in it
self but misliking that it should be accepted by such persons as are disabled
and made incapable there of by the Scripture. Thus much for better
understanding of this question. To proceed.

1 There must diverse things concur to make books felonious by this statute.
First, they must be written Aduise^ly against the Queen, that is, of purpose,
wittingly, not of simplicity or ignorance. Ignorantia fact^ excusat: Ignorance
of the fact excuses the fault. And therefore as the Prell* dealt mi^^iouslie
with (...)
Richard Carmicheill in Scotland, in compelling him to burn his bill because
in his dream he did cry out, The Devil take away the Priests, for they are
a greedy pack* so if any man in his sleep or at unawares shall cast forth
di^^amatory words against the Queen, he is not within this statute. Secondly,
the book must be written of malicious intent, and as the preamble of the
statute is, by one ill affected to her Majesty, and therefore if a man use
such a speech as Burder the Merchant did, when he said, He would make his
son the heir of the crown, meaning his house at the sign of the Crown,
not intending any hurt to the King or Crown of England, he could not without
great injustice be drawn within this or the like statute. Thirdly, the words
must contain false and seditious matter, and therefore if a man should have
said, that the King William Rufus did wickedly, who to ge^t money of the Jews,
caused some converted to Christianity, to return to Iudaisme (the fact being
true and words not seditious) he could not justly be punished by this or any
like statute.

The Seekers of Reformation have not, The Seekers of (...)
neither do write Advisedly to diffame the Queen* for they name not her
Majesty to any di^honor in any of their books. If the contrary can be proved,
Currat lex: let the offender be punished as he deserves. They only seek to
have (as they think) the corruption of the t^^e redressed, as ^he Prophets
and the holy men of God have done heretofore, without ^^tending any dishonor
to good Princes, such as her Maiesty^s. The Seek of Reformation write against
ignorant and unlearned ministers: so the Prophet Esa^e living under the godly
king, did call the priests that wanted knowledge. Esa. ^6. 10.
Dumb dogs, such as can not bark. Vnpr^aching ministers.
The Seekers of Reformation write against such as be careless and negligent in
feeding the souls that depend upon them* that take the fleece and turn over
the care of the flock to other: so Esa^e reprooueth the priests of his time
Esai. 56. 10.
That lie and sleep, and delight in sle^ping. (...) Priests.
And another Prophet taxes them that did not (...). 44. 8.
Keep the ordinances of holy things them selves, but set other to take
charge of the sanctuary. The Seekers of Reformation do cry out against
plurified persons, (...)
that can not be content with a competent living, but insatiablie by
dispensations and qualifications do join benefice to benefice, and charge to
charge, rather to enriche them selves then benefit the Church: against such
men did Esaie complain, calling them Esa. 56. 11.
Greedy dogs, that can never have enough: every one of them looking to his
own way and to his own advantage. (...)
The Seekers of Reformation write against the civil authority and rule of
Ministers: So Jeremy in the days of Josiah, a virtuous Prince condemned
Priests, (...)
For bearing rule. (...)
The Seekers of Reformation write to have the Church thoroughly purged of all
remnants of popery and idolatry: So the spirit of God did note as a fault even
under most excellent Kings, 1 King. 15. 14
That the h^e places remained unremoved. (...)
All these and many other witnesses of the truth did speak and write against
the state of the Church in Judah, and were not (I trust) advised de^famers of
the Princes under whom these corruptions had gotten strength. In like manner
the writings of the Seek* of Reformation, against such things as they verily
believe to be enormious corruptions, can not justly be deemed, advisedly and
of purpose diffama^orie to her Highness. When persecution was most furious in
England, they that wrote most vehemently against the Bishops and their
proceedings, contenanced by law, were never accounted advised diffamers of the
Prince: for then they should have been reputed and punished as traitors or
rebels, r^ther then as s^ismatikes and heretics. Neither has their been in
all the thirty years of her Majesty's most flourishing reign (till within 2.
or 3. years last part) any such conclusion ever made, though the same laws
(in substance) have been in force and occasion given of great extremity. I am
persuaded that upon hearing the matter debated by learned I awiers on the part
of the defendantes (as (...)
law and reason would, (...)
in this matter of difficulty that touches life) that our reverend Judges
would at the first make a quaere, whether the advised di^^amation of the Bb.
were an advised diffamation of the Queen. Therefore it may well come under the
title of News, that the Seekers of Reformation should resolve in a point of
law wherein the best lawiers may stand in doubt. ^f my father were a ^* Bishop
or a No^resident, and ^ would write against the state of the Bb. or
Nonresidence, to make men conformable to the law of God, it were adsurde to
affirm that I did write of purpose and advisedly to diffame my Father. So in
our case mutatis mutandis, The Seekers of (...)
etc.

Neither do the Seekers of Reformat* write against the jurisdiction of Bb. of
any hatred, or Malice to the Queen. For whosoever were King or Queen of
England (though it were David him self) they would write to the same effect*
that they do now. It is not like that they malice her Majesty: for (saving
the matters in vari^nce) no man can charge them with any show of disloyal
behavior. They are instant for her Majesty in prayer, both public and
private. They detract no duty, no imposition, no tax or subsidy, as
becomes duetifull and loving subiests. It was never heard that any one no not
one of them, did ever attempt any hurt to her Royal person Search the Rolls,
look the Records, it will appear that some o^ them (whom England while
England indureth, shall still with thankfulness remember) have hazarded
themselves as much for her Majesty's safety and Englands good, as any subject
what soever. When the Spaniards intended an invasion, the establishment of a
foreign potentate in the Sea Royal, and the conversion of this land into
A^eldama, a field of blood, the Ministers that seek Reformation gave great
assurance of their affection and loyalty to the Queens majesty and the seat,
They were importunate with the Lord by private and public prayer and fasting
for the safety of her Royal person, before the Bishops or their followers were
seen to go about any such matter. And being* interdicted by the Bishops (such
was their zeal to the state) they still continued as they had begun: some of
them (weak in body, though strong in spirit) preaching three or four times a
day, many days together, as London can witnes^e: encouraging the people to
fight for the Gospel and for their sovereign: still calling for repentance,
that God might be merciful to us, our Prince and Country. Also when the
expedition was made into Portugal, they renewed these exercises a fortnight or
3. weeks before the Bishops sent to their favorers any precepts or
instructions to do the like. Is it likely that these men do malice her
Majesty? Surely they malice her as Esaias, Jeremy, and other prophets did malice
Ezechiah, Josiah, and other godly Kings of Judah, when they reproved the abuses
of the Church under them, seeking that they might flourish in all honor by the
due observation of the law of God, adding virtue to virtue, and reformation to
reformations, till Judah and Jerusalem were clearly purged. Is this malice to
Princes? No. They that hide from princes the deformity of a state, crying
peace, peace, where no peace is, they be the most malicious and pestilent
enemies of the state.

The men that call for Reformation, Color of can^^^ (...)
may pretend cause or color of cause both in matters of doctrine and fact,
why they may hate the Bishops, which in no sort may be applied to her Majesty.

The Bishops (...)
impugn that which heretofore they have delivered as the truth of God, (...)
as I have showed, Admoni^. aga M. M. 183.
They confess there be infinite corruptions in the Church, which yet they will
not reform, nor s^ffer other to sue for amendment or reformation thereof. They
confess that by Gods word a D (...)
Priest and Bishop are all one, A Priest and Bish by Gods (...).
yet (...) page 281. (...) page 18. Admonit. agai. M. M. page 44,
they and their followers make it heresy so to believe, building upon
Epiphanius, who also erroniously in the Cont. Haeres. lib. 3. (...). 75.
same place calls the Bishops, and all them heretics, that deny prayer for
the dead. Which determination of heresy upon one man's word, as it is (...)
page 668. 748. (...) Whi^ak Con. Du^. page 447. (...) Tim. 5. Harding Def.
(...) page 2^0. Sta^leton, Bridge. of Princ. Supr. page 359. (...),
against the laws of this Realm, so it wrappeth in heresy both the In 1. Tim
3. 2. 1. Tim. 5. 17. 1. Tim 3. 1.
Syriake Interpreter, What the law (...) See the stat^^.
who uses one word Kashisha, both for Priest and Bishop. And also (...)
Chrysostom, (...)
Ambrose, (...)
Theodore^e, (...)
(...)
Hierome, (...)
Occumenius, (...)
I^idore, (...)
The Canon Law, (in (...)
force in England) which says, That the primiti^e Church had no other sacred
orders, but Deaconship and Priesthood. Also, Wicklef, (...)
Marsil^^s of Pad^a, (...)
Luther, (...)
Calvin, (...)
Musculus, (...)
Hofman, (...)
(...)
Sadel, (...)
Mornce, (...)
Marlorate, (...)
(...), (...)
Whitakers, (...)
Fulke, (...)
Jewel, (...)
Bullinger, (...)
The Waldenses, (...)
Alley Bishop of Excester, (...)
Lambert, (...)
Beza, (...)
Daneus, The (...)
Magdeburgenses, (...)
Knitsius, (...)
Mela^^thon, (...)
Szegedinus, Many Christian (...)
Churches, and all Protestants that have written of this matter, who teach
expressly, that by the truth of Gods word (...)
Bishops and Priests be all one and of like authority, and therefore are
condemned by (...)
Bellarmine, (...)
Turrian, (...)
Dure^, (...)
Spence, (...)
Harding, The (...)
Rhemistes, (...)
Stapleton, (...)
Sanders, (...)
Bristowe* and other papists, to be Aertan heretics: even as the ^b. do
account (for the same cause) all the maintemers of Reformation. The (...)
enemies to Reformation do esteem it an absurd and monstrous thing to hold,
That a Pastor and Teacher differ in office, Pastor and Teacher (...)
though the (...)
Syriake interpreter do distinguishe them as well as Apostle and Euange^ist,
vith deragnavath^ vith demalphane, which Guido translateth Ephesians. 4. 11. Some
Pastors, and some Teachers. And although (...)
Musculus (...)
H^perius, (...)
Calvin, (...)
Martyr, (...)
Kem^t^^s, (...)
Bez^, (...)
Sadeel, (...)
Dan^us, (...)
Szegedinus, (...)
Hemingius, (...)
Bucer, (...)
Bertrand de Loques, (...)
Villiers, (...)
Iunius, and t^n Protestante Churches, (as Master (...)
Rogers confesses) do account of them as distinct callings. The Bishops do
affirm, that by the (...)
common exposition of all writers Christ by katakyrieu^in Matthew. 20. 25. does
only prohibit in the ministry tyrann^call, (...)
not lawful Lordly rule, yet of all these writers they can only name threc or
four, whereas the Seekers of Reformation may produce (...)
Luther, (...)
(...)
Zuingl^us, (...)
Melancton, (...)
Calvin, (...)
Bullinger, (...)
Hemingius, (...)
Illiricus, (...)
Gualter, (...)
Nowell, (...)
Jewel, (...)
Sad^^l, (...)
Beza, (...)
Munster, (...)
Bridges against the papists, (...)
Bilson, (...)
Broughton, (...)
Rainolds, (...)
Withers, (...)
Whitakers, (...)
Sn^canus, (...)
Szegedinus, (...)
Fulke, (...)
Erastus, and the (...)
Churches of Bohem^a, who say, that Christ speaks there of lawful Lordely
rule, for bidding his Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel to use the same.
The (...)
(...), and their friends adiudge it a popedom and tyranny to excommunicate
Princes, although themselves do excommunicate inferior Magistrates (whom the
Scripture does honor with the hie title of (...)
Gods, as well as the most glorious Emperor) and although both (...)
Bucer, (...)
Calvin, (...)
Sn^canus, (...)
(...)
De Loques, (...)
Beza, (...)
Daneus, (...)
Zanchius, (...)
Nowell, (...)
Poinet Bishop of Winchester, (...)
Jewel, (...)
B^^son, and (...)
Bridges, do by their doctrine in privileged books approve the same.

The (...)
Bb. charge the Seek* of Reformation, flatly and full^^ to agree with the
papists in the article of the Princes Supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical,
yet the Seek. of Reformation differ from them in these substantial points
following:

1 (...)
They give the Prince authority over all persons ecclesiastical whatsoever:
(...)
the (...)
papists exempte their clergy. 2 They hold that a Prince may depose a
priest as Solomon did Abiathar, and accordingly they obey being silenced: the
(...)
papists deem it. 3 (...)
They affirm that if Priests do make wicked decrees, (...)
that the Prince may enforce them to better: the (...)
papists deny it. 4 (...)
They say that Princes may and ought to make laws for the Church, but with the advice of godly Pastoures: the (...)
papists deny it. 5 (...)
They hold that if the Pastors be unlearned and ungodly, (...)
the Prince may of himself without their assent or advise make orders and
laws for ecclesiastical matters: the (...)
papists do utterly deny. Lastly, they will subscribe in this point to the
Articles of Religion established by law, to the Apology to the Church of
England, to the writers of M. Jewel, M. Nowell, M. Horn, Master Whitakers,
Master B^^son, Ma^ster Rainoldes, M. Fulke, (for I protest I have sought, but
found nothing in these men's writings touching this matter, that dissenteth
from the opinions of them that sue for Reformat.) (...)
Besides they take the oath of the Supremacy as her Majesty and the (...)
Parliament does expound it. Whereupon by express allowance of law they are
in that (...)
respect her Majesty's good and obedient subjects, (...)
and they that enforce more upon them in this point of the Magistrates
authority then that oath with the Queens exposition thereof comprehends,
are upon her Majesty's roy all word, (...)
and enact of law Malicious persons. Furthermore the (...)
Bb. say, That the general opinion of the best writers is against the
government by Elders: where as they can name only four, whereof Calvin and
Beza are two, who now be made as partial as Master Cartwright, and yet the
Seek* of Reform* for one writer against the government by Elders, may name
3000. with it. Not one Protestant out of England misliketh it. See before.
Some of the Bb. do confess the gouernemente by Eld. was used in the
Apostolic Church, yet they call it a popedom and tyranny, and prefer an
invention of man before it.

The Seekers of Reformation find them selves grieved with many matters of fact
to which her Majesty is not privy nor party.

They think it hard that any subject should devise See (...) page 33.
articles and subscriptions, (...)
and publish them in their own names upon great pains and penalties to be
yielded unto, contrary to the (...)
laws and liberties of England. It is thought strange, that the Bb. should
preciseli^ enforce the (...)
statut, The law and Subsc^^ption (...)
(...) no M^^ster ought to use any other open prayers then be set forth in
the communion book, and extort a promise and (...)
subscription, to use the form in the said book prescribed and no othe^^,
and yet i^ome Ministers when the Spaniardes were upon the Seas, to use in
public assemblies, new prayers, which the Bb. themselves had contrived. (...)
The Bishops ^care for the Church is commendable: but not the contradiction.
They see not why the Bb. should drive them to wear a Surplisse, and yet
themselves neglect the use of Pastoral staves, seeing the laws tie the
Bishops to the one* as well as the Ministers to the other. They hold it scarce
agreeable to law, (...)
that Master Cawdrie offending in the first degree against the statute that
authorizeth the Communion book, should be punished as an oftendour in the
second degree, and that by an ecclesiastical court, albeit by (...)
law he should have been convicted thereof according to the common laws by
the verdict of twel^e men, (...)
etc. They complain, that the Ecclesiastical Commissioners having only to
deal in (...)
causes which by ecclesiast^call power may be corrected, (...)
do convent before them the publishers and writers of books for Reformation,
which are supposed to be felonious, and therefore punishable by temporal
^ustices. (...)
They think it hard that in (...)
cases repleuis^ble by law they may not be ba^led by sufficient suertie. They
think they have injury when they are cited by Bb. to make oaths and
recognisances in (...)
causes not testamentarie or matrimonial. (...)
They take it grievously, that they are compelled to take infinite and general
oaths to answer to (...)
intrapping interrogatories (as was practiced by the cruel Bb. in Hen^y the
fourths time and that in matters notorious, Oath ex (...)
where neither sufficient proof nor witness is wanting. They pretend many
other grieuances, (...)
as to be inprisoned, suspended, degraded and depr^^ed without due cause and
course of law, the subjects thereby being left destitute of heavenly teaching,
and committed to ignor^^t or careless prelates, who suffers the athe^st, the
papist and traitor to pray upon them. Lastly, they greatly complain that the
Bb. should be so unnatural as to seek the life of a right godly and
faithful Preacher of the Gospel, (...)
I mean Master Vdall, to whom life was offered if he would but take his oath
that he did not make a book whereof he was supposed to be author. (...)
A rare example that a man should be known standing at a bar, shackled in
bolts (but quaere quo iure) and coupled with a murderer, whose conscience was
thought so faithful and sound by the Judge himself; that he would not swear
falsely to gain his life.

Her most excellent Majesty is free and clear from all this dealing. She
does not oppugn the known truth. She thinks the present reformation to
be sufficient. She weighs not heresy by the drowsy dream of one Doctor.
She does not join with the papists in concluding all protestants to be
heretics. She does not account that strange and monstrous, that the most
ancient and best interpreters do agree upon. She braggeth not of all, when
she has few or none. She freeth not her self from lawful censures. She
calls the Seekers of Reformation that yield to the oath of the Supremacy, as
she expounds it, Her good and obedient subjects, and adiudgeth their
adversaries Maliciou^ persons. She does not revile the Apostolic
government. She does not authorize the Bishops to contradict the laws, their
own articles and proceedings, to incrouch upon the temporal Courts, to call
men before them where their Courts cannot hold plea, and to vex them without
mercy or justice. To be short, she has not sought the life of a Minister of
the Gospel, 1 Samuel 25. 33.
but like Abigail blessed of the Lord God of Israel, has kept the hands of
the executioner from shedding innocente blood. The Bishops persuade her Hignes
(for who would not believe the Grave fathers of the land knowing nothing to
the contrary) that matters of the Church go very well. But if it shall appear
to her Majesty to be otherwise, she will of her gracious disposition make
speed to a better reformation.

Wherefore, seeing they that write for Reformation have cause or may pretend
cause or color of cause to bear hatred to the Bishops, which can not any way
be applied to her Majesty, it follows that the hatred or malice (if you will
have it) proceeding from these causes, can not fall upon her Majesty: for the
offenses bring hatred and malice to the person, and men be maliced and hated
not for sins of ignorance or good meaning, but of knowledge and wilfulness.

Furthermore, the Seekers of Reformation can not have any Malicious intent in
writing for the Discipline. They offer their lives to prove the truth,
necessity and utility thereof. Though a papists cause be naught, yet his
intent may be good. And why should not we presume so much for a good christian
as for a popish traitor and impious idolater?

Lastly, they, do not write False and slanderous things, (the word seditious
belongs to the accusation of Rebellion) for that does not yet appear. The
last replies are not yet answered. Many things still objected which were long
ago confuted. The followers of Reformation lack liberty to answer in their
own cause. If they speak, they be silenced: if they write, they want
PRINTERS. They be shut up in close prisons, their hands (as it were) bound,
and then buffeted. They are blindfolded, and then must reed, who did smite
them. Luk 22. 64.
Unless the Justices and lurours can disprove all that has been written, and
confound the most profound Clarks in the world, whom the Bishops adversaries
have showed to stand for this reformation, they cannot justly sentence their
writings to be false and slanderous. (...)
The certificat of the Bb. in this case is tra^ersable, and not to be admitted,
They stand at the bar as parties.

It is worse then (...)
heathenish to believe Scipio Africanus, who conquered the third part of the
world, when he speaks in his own cause. If our savior Christ should
bear (...)
witness of him, self, his witness were not fit, though it must needs
Io^. 8. 14.
be true. In Parliaments that concerned the Bb. as parties, they have been
excluded.

But the law and state of England (you will say) account these things False.
Objection.


So the laws of other nations account them true. Answer.
In matters of God (as is the government of the Church) the laws of God ought
to determine truth and fal^hood. They only should inform the conscience of
Judges. There is not alia veritas Theologica, alia Philosophica: one truth in
Divinity, another in Philosophy or humanity. That distinction is false and
contradictory. God is one, his word one, his work one, his truth one. We may
as well say, There be two Suns, as two Truethes respectively in one thing. The
word of God, not law of man, is the touchstone of this truth. Justice c 7. H
4. 41.
Gascoine being demanded of King Henry the 4. what he would do, if a man
guiltles in his own knowledge, were found guilty of murder by verdict before
him, made this answer, (although the verdict was as good in law as any law)
That he would respite judgment, and crave the Kings pardon for the party
convicted. With which answer the King was well pleased. Whereby we learn,
that our own knowledge and the law of God assured in our conscience, ought
rather to guide our judgment, then the verdict of law, or testimony of men.

Seeing then that the seekers of Reformat* have not written neither do write
Advisedly, Maliciously, or Falsely, muchlesse both Advisedly, Maliciously,
and Falsely, to diffame her Majesty, (for the words be in the copulative) I
conclude in this generally negatiuely to the adversaries argument, though I
should admit it to be true, yet considering these things do not co^curre in
writing of books for Reformation, that they be not within compass of this
statute.

2 This statute is not meant of her majesty's laws, The statute mean^ of her
Majesty's natural person.
her politic members or state of Bb. but only of her Highness Royal person, as
appears by words and drift thereof. It is taken almost verbatim from an act
made by King Philip and Queen Marie, 1 and 2. Ph. and Man* c* ^.
which throughout still aims at their own persons. Of whom (the statute
says but could not mean of their members politic or laws) We are
forbidden (by Gods law) so much as to think ill, much less to speak ill.
This act determined with Queen Mary's life. In this statute of 23. the
preamble imports that it was made to suppress such persons as were ill
affected to her majesty. The body of the law bends against them only that
slander the Queens most excellent Majesty that now is. By the last prouiso
in it, this act has no longer continuance* then during the natural life of
her Majesty that now is. The state of Bb. (unless God shorten it) and the
politic members and laws (if special prouisoes do not choke them) are to
continue ever. Wherefore this statute being meant of her Majesty's natural
person, which is subject to mortality as well as other, and not of her body
politic which lives ever, they that diffame the members of the body politic,
can not be truly said to diffame the Queen as this statute does intend.

3 By the words of this statute. (...)
If any offend^ in vvriting books to the diffamation of the Queen, (the same
offense not being made treason by any other statute) such diffamation shall be
deemed felony. By the words Other statute, is meant (among the rest) a law
made 13. Eliz. c. 1. Whereby it is enacted, that whosoever shall publ^she that
her Highness is an heretic, schismatike, tyra^t, etc. shall be punished as a
traitor. By comparing these statutes which have apparent relation the one to
the other, it should seem that by the one, namely that of 23. her majesty's
honor is protected from pe^ite slanders, such as in temperancy,
uncleanness, and such like, and by the other, grand slanders are prevented,
as heresy, schism, tyranny, and such like. The one adjudged felony, the other
treason. Out of which statutes I reason thus:

If the Seekers of Reformation diffaming her majesty's laws and members
politic do diffame the Queen and are there fore felons by the statute of 23.
Eliz. then they that in a higher degree diffame the laws and body politic,
do diffame her Highness, and are traitors by the statute of 13. Eli.

But the papists diffaming her majesty's laws in making the articles of
Religion established by 13. Eli. c. 12.
law, flat heresies, and accounting of the Bishops as heretical, schismatical,
and usurping, do diffame the laws and members politic of the Queen in a
higher degree then the Seekers of Reformation, yet were never taken and
punished as traitors for diffaming the Queen, though they have by monstrous
conspiracies and horrible practices given cause of extreme rigor.

Therefore the seekers of reforma. diffaming the Queens laws and body
politic, do not diffame the Queen, nor are felons by the statute of 23.
Elizab.

4 Every penal law concerning life, is to be expounded strictly Penal law^^
expounded strictly.
according to the literal and grammatical sense, not by inference or equity,
as appears by these examples.

There is a 3. Eliz. c. 1.
statute that whosoever does call her Majesty heretic, be traitors (as I
noted before) The papists call all Protestants in general Heretics, yet they
be not for such speeches drawn within the statute, though they do inclusiuely
call the Queen heretic. Moreover, 1. ^. 6. c. 12.
None that feloniously steal horses shall have their clergy. Penal law^s not
expounded by equi^y or in^eren^.
Accessories to stealers of horses be stealers of horses, both by the law of
God (before whom every sinner is a principal) and by the law of this land.
For if they cannot read, they shall suffer as felons. Yet 1 Man. (...). page
^9.
accessories to stealing of horses, shall have their clergy, though in nature
there is the greatest proximity, and in argument the most equal inference and
easy slide from the general (...) the special, that can be imagined. Lastly
(because I will not insist in a matter so common) the same statute of stealing
of horses affords the like learning. Therein it is said, that No stealer of
horses (in the plural number) shall have his clergy. Which number is often in
common speech, and in penal laws touching lands and goods, taken
Synecdochechios for the singular. Yet King Edwardes Judges pursuing the
precise letter of the statut, were so scrupulous for the life of a man, that
they durst not deny the benefit of the Clergy to him that had stolen one
horse. Whereupon the wise of England (whom we are more to regard then any
Plo^d Cement. 467.
one man) made a new I awe, That whosoever stole any horse* should not be
admitted to his clergy. These Judges that would not wrest a law one hear
breadth against a horse stealer, would have been as favorable to honest
Christians. But some think that we have cheuerel laws that may be recked and
stretched at men's pleasure, whereas penal laws that touch man's life, have
been always expounded in a most strict sense.

This statute of 23. is a penal law, concerning the body and life of man. The
express syllables and words directed only against them that diffame her
Majesty that now is. There is not one prick pointing at the Queens laws or
state of Bb. Therefore it is to be taken strictly of the Queen, against whom
the Seekers of Reformation have not written, and by consequent have not
infringed this statute.

5 Her majesty is a body politic, and has members politic in fiction only
and in political imagination: not in truth and verity. The Queen a bo^^
politic^e in fiction only.
In like imagination the law says, she cannot do wrong, she is always
of perfect age, she is not subject to any passion, she can not be
imprisoned, sick or due. Things in themselves untrue. Therefore he that
diffameth her members politic, does diffame her majesty only in fiction, that
is in plain english, not at all.

6 If they that write against the state of Bb. diffame her majesty that
vpholdeth it. The (...) consequence filons, etc.
Then do they that (...)
call the government by Elders, antichristian, a popedom, etc. diffame the
Queen also. For her majesty has authorized, or at the least openly and
notoriously tolerated the government by Elders in foreign Churches that have
fled for succor into Her Dominions, and have been admitted to use the
government by Elders, even as our fugitives in Queen Mary's time found like
liberty and favor in strange nations.

7 If they that diffame the Queens members politic diffame the Queen, No
treason to kill Bb.
then they that take away the life of her members politic, commit treason
against the Queen. The same reason ( caeteris paribus) makes the same law.
But every puisne knows it is no treason to kill the Bb. though it be
worthily treason to attempt any hurt to her Highness. Therefore the
diffamation of the Bb. is no diffamation of the Queen.

8 All men be liars. The Queen and laws (...)
Churches, Universal Counsels, Parliamentes, and laws of all nations do
control one another. Therefore it is no diffamation to her Majesty, if men
ascribe error in some of their laws, seeing it is incident to all men to err
in some things. Though Princes be called Ps. 82. 6. 7. 1 Cor. 8. 5. 6.
Gods, yet as they die, so do they err like other men. Homines sunt mendaces
and non angels: Men be liars, they be not Angels, says 34. H 8. D^r. page 54.
Justice Shelley.

9 If you do offer violence to the most base subject in this Realm, To kill a
subject to^cheth the Queens crown ^ore then to ^rite against Bb.
you do periudice the Form of ind^^ements, Smith de r^p* A^gl.
Crown and dignity of our Sovereign Lady the Queen: yet if you di^fame them,
it is no diffamation of the Queen: the murdering of them is only felony,
though by estimation of law, their life does more nearly touch the Crown,
then can be showed for the state of Bishops.

10 If the diffaming of the Bishops and Queen be al one, The law tendreth
(...) of Princes more then subjects.
punishable by one law and one penalty, then the laws defend the name and
credit of a subject with as great care as the name of the Queen. Which were
absurd in the law, and a presu^ptuous challenge in any subject, that does not
represent the person of the Queen.

11 If the writers against the government of Bishops do maliciously diffame
the Princes that bear it up, then do they maliciously diffame the Dukes of
Saxony, The Princes that maintein the (...) not def^^^d.
and Hie Almaine, that maintain the state of Bishops, as our Ad^o^it* against
M. M page 74.
Prelates say.

But it were madness to say, that they write advisedly and maliciously to
diffame these Christian German Princes, who never harmed them, much less our
Sovereign Lady the Queen, by whom they have received incomparable benefits,
and who has be^e more beneficial to the church then any Prince or Po^^ntate
in all the world.

12 They that write to diffame the Queen, No man has suff^red for religion in
Eng.
should die as felons by this statute.

None that writes against the government of Bishops, ought to dye as a felon.
For they can make that but an error in Religion at the worst: for writing is
not material to make an error or not an error. Papists die (...) treason not
(...) religion.
The papists (says D. Bilson) Epist. to the Read before h^s book.
be not executed for making the Pope chief pastor over their souls, or for
giving him an Episcopal authoritte over all the whole Church, though that be
also a frantike heresy: but for giving him an external dominion over this
Realm and Prince, This is it that the Execution of Justice does d^ely
respect, which is far from any matter of faith and religion. Thus you see
he mainteineth that the papists have not nor do not suster for religion or
heresy, but only for treason. The Christian C^d de (...). and Mam.
Emperors Gratian, Theodosius, etc. never punished heretics with death, but
only blasphemers and idolaters. They that hold errors should not be
killed, but corrected, says Epist. 127.
Augustine. And in another place Cont. Cres. (...). l. 3^. 10.
It never pleased any good man in the Catholic Church, that heretics (much
less such as err in external matters) should be put to death. Thus it has
been reasoned by our Divines against the but ch^ries of the papists. It is
also held in a (...)
book published by authority (to which D. Bilson had reference) and
translated into many languages, that never any papist did suffer death for his
religion, since her Highness reign. Which thing the Papists in Wisbich castle
can also witness.

Seeing then our state and Divines have sought to remove from them the
suspicion of executing any papists for their religion, (though they defend
infinite heresies) much less should the Seekers of Reformation suffer death
for their religion. If the papists ought to be executed, but of ^auour and
grace are spared, much more courtesy should be showed to Seekers of
Reformation, whose offenses both to God, the Prince and Realm, are nothing
matchable with the detestable heresies and practices of the traitorous
papists. Verily all the Protestants in the world would wonder to hear that
among Protestants under a Protestant Prince and government, any Protestant
should have his blood shed for maintaining a doctrine of the Protestants,
embraced by Christian Churches, and confederate Princes round about.

13 If the writers against Bishops do offend against this statute, Speakers
against the Laws.
then the Speakers and Reporters against Bishops and the publishers or
deliuerers from hand to hand of these book ^s or any popish books against
the received doctrine of England, (...)
be likewise within this statute. The Speakers and Reporters must either loose
their ears, or redeem them with two hundred pounds, or two hundred marks.
The publishers are adjudged and deemed felons. But it were ridiculous to
a^^i^me, that the law had any such intent. For the^ there should be more
eareles people in England, then in all Christendom besides, and many
thousands of the Bishops friends should be in case of ^elons. Which would
comfort the writers, when they saw like justice done to Speakers, Reporters,
and publishers. For the Poet truly says: Solamen miseris socios habuisse
doloris.
It cheereth up a woeful heart,
When company do bear a part.


Seeing then that the Speakers, Reporters, and publishers of such matters
against Bishops, are not within this statute, neither be the writers.

14 That is only Com pa. 467 and 487.
law which the lawe-makers intend. The Lawmakers did not intend by this
statute protect the Hierarchy. That is law (...)
For there was no bill pre^erred in the Parliament at that time to this
purpose: but rather for the overthrow of the Hierarchy. As many yet alive can
witness, who would with great vehemency have spoken against that matter for
their own and their friends safety.

When Master Stubs of Lincolns Inn had written against the marriage intended
by Monsieur, (...).
the Daulphine of France, toward her Majesty, to the end that men should
be terrified from writing dishonorably of her Highness, this statute made that
offense felony, which by former statutes was only the loss of the right
hand. Which proves that the ^aw-makers provided for her Majesty, The
Parliament rather fr^nd (...) enemy to Ref^^^at.
not for the Hierarchy. The Parliament has been more ready for Reformation
then against it, as appeared most evidently the last Parliament, when the bill
against Nonresidencie passed the lower house, A bill against Nonresidence
passed the lower house.
and had like to have also passed the higher house, by the right honorable the
Lord Treasurer his means, and other right noble Lords who spoke for it, had
not the Bishops labored against it.

15 Some of the laws be faulty, even in Church matters, as our Prell. (not
popish) will acknowledge, report, and write if need be. There was a ^5. H ^
c. 19. ^. Eliz c. 2.
law made by King Henry the 8. and confirmed by her Majesty, That such
Canons, Constitutions, etc. which be not contrariant to the laws, statutes,
and customs of this Realm, nor prejudicial to the Kings prerogative,
shall be executed as before the making of that act. Among which Canons, etc.
there be many unlawful and foolish things, though neither against the laws,
customs, or kings prerogative, yet repugnant to the Law of God. (...)
As namely, This is contrary to the Scripture, Mar: 10: 1^. (...) Hooper upon
the 7 (...)
That women may not sue their husbands for adultery: that 24. 9. 1. c. vlt
Heretics after their death should be excommunicate: that there is such (...)
affinitee between the Godfather and the child, for whom he promises in
baptism, that it hinders marriage: that a (...)
man may not fast upon Thursday, That all (...)
Clearkes should abstain from flesh 7. whole weeks before Easter. Infinite
corruptions be in these Canons, yet in force and good in law. I suppose that
our Bb. could be content that this statute of 25. were corrected. Sure I am,
the Bishops in King Edward the 6. days, did see many things out of order in
the Canon laws, or else they would not have a whole Reform^^. (...). Eccles.
book for Reformation of them, which book can have no intertainement in our
time. But seeing the Bb. will not deny but that some abuses be established for
law, let them bear with others that epsy greater faults then those be.

16. Lastly, many have written both against the state of the Church and common
wealth as it was and is fenced by law who were never accounted diffamers of our
Princes.

Some write against Smith de rep. A^g. b. 2. c. 7. b 3 c. 3. Babing. up. com.
p. 260.
Trial by battle. Some against R^der M^^. compl^o the Parl.
Forfaiture of Traitors lands, The return of writtes in one term: the
lingering of men in prison before they come to trial: the privileges of
Parliament men: the pardoning of murderers, plurality of farms, etc. Some
against For^^sc. de laud Ll. A^g. c. 2^.
Racking. Some against Doct. and. stud. b. 1.
feined recoueries to defeat them in remainder, or reuersion upon estates
taill. Some against (...)
buying and selling of Wards, and such like.

Against the government of the Church in England, many subjects have
written, never deemed diffamers of the King, as

In Edward the thirdes reign did (...)
Wicleve arise, (...)
one of whose articles was this, That Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, or other
Priests, may not ciuiliter dominari absque mortali peccato, may not rule like
civil Lords, without deadly sin. Also he taught, (...)
That no Prelate ought to have any prison to punish offenders. And that no King
(...)
should impose upon any Bishop or Curate any secular matter, (...).
for then both the King and the Clearke should be proditor Jesus Christi, a
betrayer of Christ Ies^s: although the Archbishop of Cant. and the Bishop of
London did put Wicleue to (...)
silence for this doctrine (as their successors do at this day) yet they did
not call him a diffamer of the king.

William Swind^^by.
Swinderby, a professor of the Gospel under Rich. the second, held, That
the more Lordship a Priest has, the nearer he is to Antichrist. Also, that
(...)
The Priests of the old law were for bidden Lordship, and that Christ
himself refused and forbad his Priests Lordships, saying: Reges Gentium, etc*
The Kings of the Heathen bear rule, etc. but you shall not do so.

Piers Plowman Piers Plo^^^.
likewise wrote against the state of Bishops, and prophesied their fall in
these (...)
words: If Knighthood and Kin^wite and Comone by conscienc^
Together love Lelly, leueth it well ye Bishops
The Lordship of Lands for ever shall ye lose,
And live as Leuitici as our Lord ye teaches
Deuteronomy. 8. Numb. 5. per primitias and decimas, etc.


Geffry (...)
Chaucer also in Henry the fourthes time wrote effectually against the state of
the Bb. in this manner: (...)


The Emperor yafe the Pope sometime
So hi^ Lordship him about,
That at the last the silly Kime
The proud Pope put him out:
So of this Realm is doubt. (...)

But Lords beware and them defend,
But now these folk been wondrous stout
The King and Lords now this amend.
Moses law forbade it tho
That Priests should no Lordships weld.
Christ's Gospel bids also
That they should no Lordships held:
Ne Christ's Apostles were never so bold
No such Lordships to him embrace
But smeren her sheep and keep her fold,
God amend hem for his grace.
Thus wrote this famous Poet against the English Bishops, and yet was never
accounted diffamer of the King, though the Bb. in his time did hold their
Lordships of the King as they do now in England. Sir Geffrey Chaucer his
works were in K. Henry the eight his days authorized to be Printed by 34* and
35. H. 8. c. 1.
act of Parliament, to which that glorious king would never have condescended,
if he had thought that the diffamation of the Bishops had been a diffamation
of him self.

In King Henry the eights time, (...)
the renowned professor of the Gospel Master Tindall did write, Tindal^
works. p. ^ 24.
That it was a shame of all shames, and a monstrous thing, that Bishops should
deal in civil causes. And again, page 140.
What names have they? My Lord Bb. My Lord Archbishop, If it please your
Lordship, if it please your Grace.

D. Barnes, a right learned man at the same time did write, Barnes against (...)
Tin. works, page 210.
That he would never believe nor could ever believe, That one man may by the
law of God be Bishop of two or three cities, or of a whole Country, for that
is contrary to the doctrine of S. Paul, etc.

Master Hooper in the days of Edward the sixth did effectually write, Upon the
(...) p. 78.
against the English Bish. M. Hooper the Martyr against civil offices in Bb.
For the space (says he) of 400. years after Christ, the Bish. applied all
their wit only to their own vocation, but our Bish. have so much wit,
that they can rule and serve (they say) in both states, in the Church and also
in the civil policy: when one of them is more then any man is able to
satisfy, let him do always his best diligence. If he be so necessary for
the Court that in ciu^ll causes he can not be spared, let him, use that
vocation and spare the other. It is not possible he should do both well. It
is a great oversight in Princes thus to charge them with two burdens. (...)
If this excellent and right famous man were now alive and should say thus
much, he might peradventure (if some had their will) be martyred once again.
He adds further, That the primitive Church had no such Bb. as we. They had
such Bishops as did preach many godly Sermons in less time then our Bb. horses
be a bridling. Their house was the school and treasure house of Gods
Ministers. If it be so now, let every man judge. The Magistrates that suffer
the abu^^ of these goods, be cul^able of the fault. If the fourth part of the
Bishopr^ck remained to the Bishop, it were sufficient, The third part to
schoolemaisters. The second to the poor and soldiers were better bestowed. If
any be offended with me for this my saying, he loves not his own health nor
Gods laws nor m^ns. Out of which I am always ready to prove the thing I
have said to be true. Further, I speak of love not hatred. This was written by
this noble Ma^tyr against the protestant Bb. under king Edward the sixth. In
these words he does not obscurely reprove the King and all Princes that
maintain the state of Bb. yet neither the Bb. nor Judges in King Edwards time
did adiudge this holy man to be a diffamer of princes. His books touching this
ma^^er, have been publicly printed and sold, and even now are to be sold
under her majesty.

Father Latimer another man of God and holy martyr was a Bishop in King Henry
the eight his time, but he Act and M^n* pa. 1643.
gave over his Bishoprike (as also Shaxton* (...)
Bishop of Salisburie did at the same time) being diuested of his Bishoplike
habit, he skipped for ^oy, (as master Fox reports) feeling his shoulders
so light, and being discharged (as he said) of so heavy a burden. Thus he
speaks of the Bishops in King Edward the sixts days, in his sermon of the
ploughe, Sermon^ printed 1584 page 11. ^.
Ye that be Prelates, look well to your office, for right Prelac^e is busy
laboring and not Lording. Thus much I say, that since Lording and Loitering
has come up, (...)
preaching has come down, contrary to the Apostles times. They preached and
Lorded not: And now they Lord and preach not. They that be Lords will ill
to ploughe. It is no meet office for them. page 12.
If the ploughmen that now be, were made Lords, they would clean give over
ploughing and fall to Lording out right* and let the ploughe stand. By the
loytering and lording of Prelates, preaching and ploughing is clean gone. (...)
They are occupied some in the Kings matters, some are Ambassadors, some of
the privy Council, some to furnishe the Court, some are Lords of the
Parliament, (...)
some are Presidentes and Controllers of Min^es. Well, Well, is this their
duty? is this their office? If the Apostles might not leave preaching to be
Deacons, shall one leave it for minting? page 13. a.
Hear my country England, as Paul sa^^d in his first Epistle to the Corinths
6. chap. Is there utterly among you no wise man to be arbitratours in matters
of judgment? What none that can choose between brother and brother? etc. Ad
erubescentiam vestram dic^, (...)
I speak to your shame. So England I speak to thy shame, Is there never a
Noble man to be a Lord Pre^iaent, but it must be a Prelate? Is there never a
wise man in the Realm to be a controller of the M^n^e? I speak it to your
shame. I speak it to your shame. If there be never a wise man, make a
Waterbearer, a Ti^ker, a Cobbler, a Slave, a Pag^ controller of the Minte. Make
a mean Gentleman, a Grome, a Yeoman, make a poor beggar Lord President. This
I speak not that I would have it so, but to your shame, if there be never a
gentleman meet nor able to be Lord President. (...)
It is a sla^^der to the Noble men, as though they lacked wisdom and learning
to be able for such office, or else were men of no conscience, or else were
not meet for such offices. A Prelate has a charge and a cure otherwise, and
therefore he cannot be both a Lord President, and discharge his duty too.
For a Presidentship requires a whole man, and a Bishop can not be two man.
Let the Priest preach, and let the Nobl^ man handle temporal matters. Then he
proceeds and tells who is the most diligent Bb. in all England, even the
Devil, who is always in his Cure and Dioces, keeping always page 14. ^.
Residence. page 24.
He is no unpreaching prelate, He is no lordly loy^erer from his cure, but a
busy ploughman: Therefore ye unpreaching prelates, (...)
learn of the Devil to be diligent in doing of your office. Learn of the
Devil if you will not learn of God, nor good men. For shame learn of the
Devil. Ad erubescentiam vestram dico, I speak it to your shame. And in a page
61. b.
Sermon before the King: Though I say that I would wish more L. Presidents, I
mean not that I would have Prelates Lord Presidentes. The office of a
President ship is a civil office, and it cannot be that one man should
discharge both offices well. Thus Puritan-like wrote Father Latimer, the famous
martyr, yet he was never esteemed a troubler of the state, a Marprince, and a
diffamer of the King* though in deed he was a Mar-bishop and Mar-prelate. (...)
His Sermons containing this matter, are publikelie to be sold with
authority, testified in these words: seen and allowed according to the order
of the Queens in^^nctions. And (...)
Mat^hewa Sutcliffe says, That books which pass with this approbatio^, do
contain nothing contrary to the State of this Realm. (...)
Therefore it were strange that the Seekers of Reformation should suffer as
felons, for writing against the civil offices of Bishops against their
authority in the Parliam^nt, in the council, and such like civil places, (...)
seeing writings to that effect be seen sold and allowed as not preiudicall
to our estate, neither diffamatorie to her majesty.

Master Nowell in his Catechism, (...)
fully grounded on Gods word, and received and allowed by the church of
England (as the Bishops say) and Bb. (...).
commanded to be learned of ministers, and taught of all schoolemaisters,
does write thus of the Eldership: (...)
If the Church were well ordered, there should be in it a government by chosen
Elders or ecclesiastical Magistrates such as was in the primitive Church.
Shall men suffer as felons for such things as are fully grounden on Gods word,
and received, allowed, and commanded to be taught in the church and schools
of England? The Lord forbid. Doctor Rainolds the jewel of England, public
professor of Divinity in Oxforde, at the appointement and charges of the right
virtuous and noble Earl of Essex, did allege in open sermon at Oxforde, this
testimony of Master Nowell, to prove that men by authority might speak in
defense of government by Elders.

To be short, I have showed that my L. of Canterbury, and the other Bb. That
D. Co^^ns and the aduertiser, do in writing reprove many things cou^tenanced
by law, as excommunication by lay Chauncellours, Nonresidence, Ignorant
ministers, the mild punishment of Adultery, Subscription, and such like, and
yet these men be not deemed, indicted, convict or attaint as diffamers of her
majesty, and felons by this statute. Such be our times, that Iisdem de causis
alij plectantur, alij ne appellentur quidem.

Thus much may serve touching the accusation of diffaming of our Sovereign
Lady the Queens most excellent majesty. Now it remains to consider how
justly the writers for Reformation be charged with rebellion.

Whereas the adversaries to Reformation do take as a principle, (...)
that whosoever writes to work a disc^^tentment in the minds of the
subjects, do intend a rebellion That is a most untrue assertion, and
sophistical paralogisme. For although Rebellion does grow of Discontentement,
yet all discontentement does not bring forth rebellion: or if the writing
against the state of Bishops should move some men to coffeehouse, who being
discontented should stir up rebellion, yet it does not follow that the
writers against the Bb. were rebels, as this stat. does intend. For the
writers must write Advisedly and of purpose to stir rebellion. So that if a
man write in humble, loyal and duetiful manner, having no purpose and intent
to work rebellion, though rebellion should here of ensue, yet could not such a
writer without great injustice be drawn within this statute. For he can not be
a felon that has not a felonious intent and purpose.

Christ by his preaching had wrought such Io^. 18. 10.
a dislike of the Priests and their proceedinges in the minds of his
Disciples, that one of the^ in defense of his Master did strike of the ear of
Marchus, a servant of purseuant of the high priests: yet the Priests did not
charge Christ with this outrage of his Disciple. For albeit Christ did speak
against the Rulers and Priests in his time, drawing after him many dislikers of
that present state, yet Christ never meant to work in men's minds a
discontentement which should bring forth mutinies or rebellion, but amendment
and reformation.

In like manner these Seek. of Reformation have descried many supposed abuses
in the church gouuernement: they bear us in hand that there is another form
of Ruling the church more agreeable to the Scriptures then this which we have
received. They write to lay open the faults of the one, the necessity and
profit of the other, that the one being removed by lawful autho^itie, the
other by like authority might be entertained.

For considering that her Majesty and Lords without the Commons, 2. H: 7. 18
7 H 7. 15. ^ and 4 P^r. and Mar^ (...) 4. 32. H. 6. 18.
can not by the order of our state reform the abuses and imperfections of the
laws, it is requisite that the Commons of this land should be acquainted with
the wants both of the Church and common wealth. For every man and woman of this
Realm is party and privy to all Acts of Parliament. (...)
Their assent is needful to the making of every law. In their name, and as
the deputies the Knights and Burgesses are present, and have voices in the
Parliament.

Now, how should the commons, their Knights and Burgesses conceive what is
amis^e in the Laws and state, but by public writings for that purpose? That
having deeply weighed and pondered what and how things should be reformed,
they might be able in time of Parliament, after the lawful and laudable
custom of this Realm, to take order for them according to knowledge. A few
days or weeks are are not sufficient thoroughly to examine what may be said,
and what should be done in these matters.

Wherefore if these Seekers of Reformation should by public writing in
duetifull and Christian sort communicate to her Majesty, the Lords and
commons of this Realm the enormities of the state, to the end that they in
their Parliamentes should reform the same, though some of the Commons should
take occasion hereupon desperately and vndutifullie to rebel, yet the Seekers
of Reformation could not justly be condemned as advised and malicious mouers
of rebellion. Much less can their writings, (...)
which have as yet never effected nor affected rebellion, be deemed rebellions.
Their writing for Reformation does rather prove that they be not rebels.
For if they purposed a rebellion, they would rather tumultuouslie rise up, and
reform things them selves then write books to move the Queens Majesty, the
^ords and Commons in their Parliaments, to lay their hands to reformation.

They that be not blinded with malice, do see well that the Ministers who seek
Reformation, The seek of Reformations d^test rebellion
do preach true obedience to the Magistrates, with greater zeal and
sincerity then any Bishop in this land. It is not oriously known, that they
teach as an article of their faith, That no subject or servant ought to rebel
against his Prince or Masters, though he be cruel and froward, but rather
should meekely suffer oppression and violence at their hands. They teach that
the laws must either be performed by obeying them, or else the punishment, for
not yielding unto the^ patiently suffered and undertaken.

Therefore, howsoever they write to bring a coffeehouse into men's minds,
yet they would not have the subject to intrude upon the Magistrates office,
much less to rebel against his Sovereign.

Furthermore, (...)
if all they that write to bring the people to adiscontentement, and dislike of
the authorized gouuernement, do write of purpose to move rebellion, then do
the laws, the Bishops, and whole state of England intend a rebellion. I
proved that both the laws and Bishops of this land do expect a further
reformation, which can not be accomplished, unless her Majesty, the Ll. and
commons be drawn to a discontentement and dis^ike of the present state. For
amendment and redress can never follow, but where discontentement goes
before. (...)


^ikewise it is proved that the Church of England has seen allowed, and
suffered to be printed and publicly sold Latimer^ Sermons.
diverse books which do speak most effectualli^ against the state of ^orde
Bishops. I showed that Chaucer^ ^ookes.
books wherein the Lordship of Bb. has been condemned, have been allowed by
express act of Parliament* I showed also, that the government by Elders is
approved in M No^els (...).
books which are commended by the Bb. to be fully grounded upon Gods word,
which are commanded to be taught and learned throughout this Realm. If it be
rebellion to work a dislike and discontentement in the state of Lord Bb. No
re^^llio^ to m^ke (...) dislike the Lordship of Bb.
If it be rebellion to commend the reformed government by Elders, then does
the state of England intend a rebellion against her Majesty. But God forbid
that we should think so dishonorably or dis^oyally of our Christian State,
though it has wrought in men's minds a dislike of the present
Church-gouernement. If then this argument be vain and frivolous against the
state, why is it not so against the members and parts of the state?

I might add here that all P^inters who sell popish books and all others, who
publish or deliver from hand to hand any popi^he or other book that crosses
the present gouuernement were felons by this statute, if this argument might
have place. I might also give a caveat to Master Doctor Percie, that he do
not proceed in perfecting the book which Crammer, Cox, Haddon, and others
began, touching reformation of the laws ecclesiastical, least peradventure
he should draw the people to be discontented with the laws in force, and by
that means incur the penalty of this statute I might also show that they
who having received great benefits of her Majesty, do contrary to the
trust reposed in them, maineteyne, prefer, and advance notoriously suspected
papists, hollow-harted traitors, and close enemies to her Highness, her Crown
and Dignity, opposing themselves against they know not what I might, I say,
show that those men do provoke a discontentement in her Majesty's subjects,
but I will not stand her cupon. For whatsoever discontentement is raised in
men, I know none that are fallen into such madness, as to endeavor a rebelli^^.
Neither can I conceive cause of such fear, unless we doubt that the popish
^orte being encouraged by the advancement of their friends, the disgrace of
their greatest enemies, the passing by of them, and pursuing of others should
increase in number, (as they do, without question, mightily) and then return
to their aunci^t rebellions ad devilish practices.

Thus much may suffice to be spoken to the general argument used by the Bb.
and their solicitours, to prove the writings for Reformation to be rebellious.
Their reason is so senseless, that I marvel how it can proceed from men of
wisdom. I am ashamed to bestow more labor upon it.

The second accusation of writing to move rebellion, The write^^ for Reform^^*
do not in (...) r^belli^^.
concerns particular speeches scattered here and there in some books, which
I would willingly deal vvithall, saving that I have resolved to open my mouth
in the cause of the innocent, and to speak in their behalf that are
unworthily (in mine opinion) adjudged to death. Which travel I would take
as well for the Bish. as for the Seekers of Reformation, if they should come
into the like peril.

There never yet happened any rebellion under her Majesty, by the instigatio^ of
them that w^ite in the cause of reforming the Church-gouerneme^t. But if any
should write to the intent to st^rre rebellion or insurrection (though no
insurrection or rebellion thereupon ensue yet) they be felons by this statute.
Now whether the authors above named have written to that intent, that comes
next to be discussed.

We ought not to bring new senses unto words, but take that sense only which
the author brings. To take the words without the sense, is to catch at the
shadow and leave the body. Where words have diverse senses, some good and some
ill, by the rule of love (vnles^e vehement presumption do force the contrary)
we ought to take the better, and leave the worse, especially in criminal and
capital causes: Because the Gods of the earth, I mean the Magistrates, ought
after the example of the God of heaven, incline rather to mercy then justice.
Which is the reason that by the law S^mper in ff De Reg (...). 14. H 8 14.
F^^z: Mar^on. Sect. 8
The interpretation most beneficial for the defendant should be accepted. For
it is (...)
better to spare the guilty, then take away the innocent, because 2. Sam. 14.
Blood being spilt upon the ground like water, can not be gathered up again:
14. Ra^. (...) Reg. Iu.
but a guilty person spared at one time, may be requited at another. Wherefore
it is needeful, that ^uidences in cases of blood should have Claritatem
probationis in quadam excellentia, (...)
A clearenes of proof in an excellent brightness. If there be no evidence of
truth to induce us to interpret the words urged by adversaries to
Reformation of any rebellious intendement, then it will appear, that the
writers for Discipline be not justly drawn within this statute.

That which D. Bancroft alleges of Martine, threatening of fistes, cannot in
any equity be drawn tor bellion. In (...) first Epist. page 2.
saying. That D. Br^dges (for writing against the Reformat.) would shortly
the have twenty fistes about his ears more then his own, (...)
he means nothing else, but that many would exercise their hands in
writing against D. Bridges, which has proved true. Thus he explaneth him
self in his second book: the words in our usual phrase importing such a
matter. To understand this, as if Martin did incite to insurrection or
rebellion, is altogether without reason. Here is neither argument exhortation,
or denunciation, that implies any motion to rebellion. Matin could not be so
m^d, as to imagine that such a light speech as this, were sufficient to draw
men to sedition: especially such men as hold for an article of religion, that
it is altogether unlawful for any subject to resist his lawefull Prince, that
holds of no creature but the God of heaven. If Martin had been an Acheist,
or Papist. who by their religion may Rebel against lawful and sovereign
Princes, the^ there might be some color of this accusation, especially if
instead of twenty fists, Martin had said Admoni^. (...). M M. page 65.
twenty Halberds as the Bb. of London does comment upon him. Though twenty
Halber de^, much less twenty fistes could do little to the raising of
rebellion within England. Doubtless Martin does abhor such horrible
purposes: or if he carry any such mind, hanging is too good for him.

Whereas Martin Senior speaks of an hundred thousand hands and of striking,
his words be carried (as I am persuaded) altogether from his sense and
meaning. In that place he exhorts the Lords, Reproof of Mart. I^^ior.
Gentlemen, and people of England to become ioint-suiters by one supplication
to her majesty, that in every parish there may be a preacher so near as may
be: that unlawful callings may be removed, and Christ's officers restored to
the Church: that there might be a quiet meeting for the debating of the
controversies, or that men might be suffered to sue the Prelates at the Kings
bench, in cases where they abuse the subjects against the laws of ^^gland. He
adds, that there might be procured an hundred thousand hands to this
supplication of known men in this land all her Majesty's most loyal and
trusty loving subjects, that these together vvoulde strike a great stroke,
especially in so reasonable and just a suit. These are his words. For opening
of which I propounde this question, whether any man does know the meaning of
these words better then the author himself, which no man will affirm, as I
think. Then look further upon the words that follow. He falls into a
discourse of the Bishops English (as he terms it) showing that they
pervert by sinister exposition the ordinary propriety of our English phrase,
whereof he gives diverse examples, and at length comes to this, That if a
man should ask the Bb. what it were in their language, to prefer such
du^tiful su^plication as before he had mentioned, to her majesty, that they
would make answer, that to deal in such a suite, were to rebel, to pull
the Crown off her Highness head, to make a faction, to wrest the scepter out
of her Majesty's hand, and to shake off all authority. A wonderful thing
(says he^) it is, that humbly and duetifullie to entreat, should in the
English tongue signify by unbridled force vnduetifullie to compel: and that
to seek the remoouing of unlawful callinges out of the Church, should be to
threaten that the lawefull Magistrate should be thrust out of the common
wealth. Thus far writes this Martin, explaning fully that though it was
like the Bb. would pervert and mi^conster his words, as if he meant to move
rebellion, that yet notwithstanding he went about no other thing but to incline
the magistrate by his own authority to reform all matters that were amiss.
That an hundred thousand hands would strike a great stroke in this suite, has
no other sense then this, that if her majesty should understand, that an
hundred thousand of her most loving and loyal subjects should subscribe to
such a petition, it would greatly move her Highness to accept the same. This
phrase is usual and known to an English man. For we use to say, the cause
has received a great blow, or a great stroke. So D. Bridges writing against
Lordship of Bb. says, that vos autem non sic, strikes dead, that is utterly
overthrows Lordly author^tie in the Ministers. A man by wresting of such
speeches as this, might make the best subject in this Realm, a very traitor,
if his writing and speaking were well observed. But let traitors be traitors,
and rebels be rebels, and suffer as is due to traitors or rebels. God forbid
that a Tropologicall or Metaphorical speech without intendement of any harm,
should come within the compass of treason or rebellion.

Touching the words of Franc. Iunius, Franc. Iun^^^ writes no treason.
we desire D. Consins to take a little pains in showing which Franc. Iunius he
means. If he understand Fra^ciscus Iunius the famous learned man, who with
Tremellius translated, and of late has reviewed the Bible, who has also
written a whole book in defense of the Eldership and Discipline, he does that
worthy man exceeding wrong. It can not be proved that ever he wrote any such
thing. But if he mean one who calls him self Stephen Iunius, in a Vind (...)
book against tyrants (whom peradventure it pleased D. Cosins of purpose to
call Franc. Iunius, that men might suppose a lover of the Eldership, to be a
favorer of treason) I answer that this Stephen Iunius does not mention the
Praesbyteries in all his book. And whether he does approve any such Eldership,
it does not appear: or if he held any such frenzy as D. Cossins fasteneth
upon him, the Seek. of Reform* do disclaim him.

That many thousands in England Desire the Discipline is true. and the number
does increase daily. That great trouble would come of it if it were not
admitted, (...)
has appeared. For we see how schismatikes do trouble the Church, and what
endless writing is on both sides, and all touching this Discipline that yet
wants. But what is here that carries the countenance of any sedition or
rebellion, unless D. Cosins thinks there can be no trouble but in
rebellious and warlike order?

D. B^nc. (...)* page 74.
Bancroft, not finding pregnent matter for his purpose at home to give show
that the Seekers of Reformation be rebellious, he makes road into Scotland,
challenging those Churches (as his friends the (...)
Papists had done before) That the Scottishe Ministers who favor Discipline,
The Scottish Ministers not (...).
have abused their King, preaching factions and seditious doctrine, treading
upon his scepter, imitating the papal jurisdiction, laboring to establishe an
ecclesiastical tyranny of an infinite jurisdiction, putting the King in
danger of his life: D Banc al se^h the (...) of Scotland.
whereupon the King ouerthrewe their presbytertes, and restored the Bishops to
their places. And galloping on the way in this order, he making in effect that
right noble and Christian King (her Majesty's most near friend and knisman) a
^lat hypocrite, grounding himself upon a book counterfeit by the graceless
Archbishop of St Andrews in the Kings name. Whereunto the King never assented,
as the Ministers can show by his Royal letters yet reserved in Edinborowe:
the wicked Prelate since that time having sought to be reconciled to the
Ministers whom he slaundered. Which thing you may the rather believe, if you
consider that the King has taken so good liking of the Ministers and the
Presbyteries, that he has made public (...)
protestation to maintain the fame while he lives, And to subject the
Nobility thereunto. Likewise when the King read D. Banc. book, and came to
the page 75. where the Doctor charge him to be an hypocrite or dissembler, The
King upon the margent of the book did write these words: The King of
Scotland reprou^th D. Bancr^^^.
(...)
My speking, vvriting and actions were and are ever one vv^tthout dissembling
or bearing up at any time what ever I thought. Ergo, Castes the libell ne quid
asperius, that is, Therefore the Doctor says untruly, that I use no rougher
words. Signed thus, I. R. that is, Iacobus Rex, James the King.

The same Doctor Ser^* pa 78 and 79.
brings in some foreign authoures whom he says were favors of
Discipline, yet brochers of rebellious and strange propositions. These
authors did write either against such as they accounted usurpers or Princes by
election and popish tyrants such as hated our religion: they did not write
aginst any protestant Prince, (...)
neither in defense of the Disciplice, but rather of the doctrine which is now
maintained in England. As D* Bancroft does allege these authors to prove
the Discipline to be traiterous and rebellious: so the (...)
papists do allege the same me^ to prove that the doctrine of the
Protestants is seditious. The allegation does hold against both alike. Our
Religion does not depend upon the opinions of one or two men. (...)
Where one favorer of the Eldership has written traitorously, I could
produce five hundred, who were mainteiners of the Hierarchy and rank
traitors. All traytour^ to the Que^ne have favored the (...)
Our English Bish. have resisted, rebelled, and deposed many kings of England.
They have most sawcilie abused the Nobility, as might be showed. I hear of
none that either attempted or effected treason or rebellion against her Majesty
but papists, and all such do approve the princip^lity and jurisdiction of L1.
Bb.

Thus far have ^ proved (as I hope sufficiently) that it is not lawful or
agreeable to the true intent of this sta^ute to judge these writers for
Reformation as diffamers of her Majesty, or rebels, and therefore that they
ought not suffer as felons* Some have held, that though it be not consonant to
the laws of England, that the Bishops should press the oath ex officio, as
they use to do, yet that it is expedient they should continue their
proceedings, as they have begun; if any in the same conceit should hold,
that albeit it is not lawful to execute the Seekers of Reformation as felons,
that yet it is Expedient, I answer, that if such law be admitted, it will be
the most dangerous and perilous practice that ever was received within this
Realm of England. For neither the Prince, the Councillors, the Magistrates,
Bishops, Judges, or best subjects can live in security. If men may violate law
and justice upon a color or pretense of Expediencie: what endless mischie^es
may ensue unto the common wealth? What kind of president would this be to al
succeding ages? To what purpose have our ancestors provided that there
should be every year or oftener a Parliament to supply the defectes of law,
if upon a surmise of experiencie men might go beyond the listes and limits
of law? If the reverend Judges of the land who ought to preserve the
integrity, and honor of the law should admit any such learning, besides that
it would overthrow both the common and statute law, it would indaunger the
keeping of their oath, and give their goods, lands and lives to the Princes
pleasure.

Some will expect that I shoude answer the charge against the writer of the
Demonstration (if one man made both the Epistle and the book which I have not
as yet heard to be proved) but seeing he is convicted by the verdict of 12.
men, The evidence brought for the book: he convicted for the Epist^e.
the proceeding against him notoriously known, The Almond for the Parrot
(...).
the accusation and words whereupon he was convicted in every man's mouth: I
leave it to the judgment of the great day, when the Judge and all Judges
shall be judged before the Judge of heaven and earth, (...)
who will reward every man according to that which he has done, good or ill.
Psalm. 116. 15.
Precious in the eyes of the Lord is the death of his Saints. ^ob. 16. 18.
O earth thou can not cover blood! It still cries in the ears of the Lord
for vengeance, saying, Revel. 6. 10.
How long Lord holy and true, do not thou Judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth! Surely, he that preserves the hairs of the
head, and puts the tears of his servants into a bottel, will much more
preserve in his bottel the drops of the blood that fall from the bodies of his
saints. Therefore be warned, be wise, and take heed what you do, ye Judges
of the earth: It is one thing to deal with a thief and murderer, another
thing to judge a Minister and preacher of the Gospel of Christ your redeemer,
and that in matters of religion, wherein (God knows) you have small
understanding.

Thus have I run over the objections made to prove the writers of Reform* and
against the Hierarchy, to be diffamers of her Majesty and rebels. I will
proceed a little further to show that if men would be curious in their
writings that deal for the Bb. The Bb and then (...) the Queen.
and if their words were a little enforced as they might be (by M. Dolion or
some such factor for the Bish) I fear they might incur the danger of this
^tatute as easily as others.

The Bb. in their book do write, (...)
That it is not lawful to bestow such livings upon late men as are appointed
by (...) to Preachers of the word. (...)
Though this might stand good, and yet overthrow many of our Bb. states and
honors who preach not the word, yet this does reproach her Majesty, who does
employ some of the ^b. livings o^tentimes) to better uses then Bb do bestow
them. M. VVicleve, that famous protestant taught another lesson, (...)
(...) And who will not think the superfluity of a Bb. living better bestowed
upon such a man as Sir Frauncis Walsingham, that right honorable Councelor and
benefactor of the Church and Country, then upon any Bb. that refers al
abondance to the advancement of his house and posterity?

D. (...)
Br^ages mainteineth in writing, That a Priest may have a moderate Lordely
jurisdiction over all the Lords allotment and (...). (...)
Which implies and external ^ordely jurisdiction over her Majesty v^les he
will say, That she is none of Gods heritage, both which might be made a
dangerous doctrine.

D. Bancroft writes, (...)
That her M^iestie is a P^ty pope, and ascribes to her all the jurisdiction
that the Pope ever had by usurpation. M. Jewel says, (...) Apol p. 70. 4.
That the popish Prelates gave K. Henr^^ the 8. the strange and unused ^ule of
head of the Church, to bring him into the slander and task of the world. And
the Parliament for avoiding scandale, changed the title of Supreme head, to
Suprem: Governor. If May. Jewel misliked that the Queen should be called
Supreme head, what would he have thought of Pety pope? or how can the
Parliament bear this? Do not the Protestants detest in the pap. their woman
pope? The Archb. of Canterb. would be displeased (and I can not blame him) if
a man should call him Pope. Notwithstanding the Pope said of one of his
predecessors, (...) page 188. Co^ Baronense. (...)
Includamus hunc in orb nostro tanquam (...) orbis Papam: (...)
Let us include this A^selme in our woorlde as Pope of another world, meaning
great Britain, (...)
called by the ancient writers a world by it self, yet it is thought nothing
to call her Majesty a Pe^y pope. Doctor (...)
Whitakers says, That the Name, authority, and person of the Pope, all
Protestants do abhor and accurse to the Prince of darkness whence it came.
The (...) pa: 298. 299. (...) Princ l. 5.* 17. and 18.
papists do slander her Majesty to be a Pope or Pety pope: but M. Nowell
(...)
tells the papists, and D. Bancroft also, That we do not teach that the
Princes be either Popes or Pety popes. The (...)
papists also do abuse her Highness, as D. Bancroft does, saying: That we
take the Supremacy from the Pope, and give it to the Prince. But Doctor
Rainolds (...)
answers, That the Supremacy which we take from the Pope, (...)
we give to no mortali creature, Prince or other. But D. Banc. who thinks
himself a great Clerk, as if he were a deeper Divine then either M. Nowell or
M. Rainolds (whom he uses to call a Prec^fian) makes her Majesty a Petie
pope, (...)
and assigns her not some of the Popes power, but ALL honors, dignities,
preeminences, iurisd^ctions privileges, authorities, profits and commodities,
which by usurpation did at any time apperta^e unto the Pope. (...)
If a man can diffame by foolish flattery, then D. Banc^s the most notorious
di^^amer of her Majesty in all England. Neither law, reason, religion, or good
manners does warrant this.

God forbid that like extremity were extended for these faults, as has bin
used against the Seek. of Reformat. I do not recount them for that purpose,
but only that the Bb. and their friends, seeing their own case (if her
Majesty were not merciful) may deal more courteously with their brethren.

Conclusion.
Considering the doubtfulnes of these controversies, I trust your Majesty will
take some good order for the peaceable debating and compounding of them. In the
mean time we hope that these things which are here written, being well weighed,
your gracious and tender heart will never suffer one drop of blood to fall to
ground for these causes of Reform* till it evidently appear where the fault
lies.

This is the intent of this humble petition, made only for the peace of this
Church and quiet of the Realm. Which two things it behooves all Christian
subjects to advance forward with their whole endeavor.

The God almighty, who to the great wonder of the world, has most
miraculous^ie defended and delivered you from all the cursed enterprises
against your Realm and person, preserve your Majesty many years in health,
honor, prosperity, and victory to his glory, the good of his Church, the
relief of his Saints, to the joy of England, and all Nations that profess
the truth, AMEN good Lord, and cursed be he from heaven, that says not from
the heart, AMEN, AMEN.

To the end that it may appear how unjustly the Seekers of Reformation are
slaundered by the Bishops and others, I thought good bries^^e and truly to
deliver the opinions of such as sue for Reformation, which I have gathered out
of their books, and seen in their practice, and heard in conference which I
have had with them.
1 THEY openly profess and acknowledge that they be sinful men, subject to
infirmity as well as others. They do not call or account them selves Cathar^
or (...), (...)
and therefore if Augustine (...)
say true, that Cathar^ sunt q^i ^eipsos isto nomine quafi propter munditi^^,
suberbissime at que o^iosissime nominant: They be Puritanes, That in conceit
of their own purity, do^ most proudly and odiously call them selves by that
name, (...)
then without question they be no Puritanes, unless in that sense that all the
Apostles (save Judas) and all other true Christians are called (...) or
Puritanes in the Scriptures.

2 They do absolutely (...)
yield and subscribe to all the articles of Christian f^^th Christian faith.
and doctrine professed in the Church of England, Church of England.
according as they be enjoined by the laws of the land: and therefore they
do not offend against the Statute made in the thirteenth year of her Highness
reign, and withal have open injury in being called schismatikes.

3 They do unfeignedly give to her majesty all that power, (...)
souera^tie, and authority whatsoever is recognized to be in her Highness, (...)
by the oath of the Supremacies, as her majesty (...): and the Parliament have
expounded (...) and therefor they be not Traitors by the statutes of (...) or
quinto of her Majesty. (...)


4 They profess all submission reverence and obedience to the right Honorable
the Lords of the privy Council, (...)
the Judges, (...)
and all other civil Magistrates of this state, honoring them as Lieutenants
of God and her Majesty: and therefore they be not Anababtists, who would
abandon the authority of Magistrates and distinctions of states among
Christians. And although they believe that it is not agreeable to the doctrine
and example of Christ and his Apostles, that Bb. and Preachers should accept
temporal Lordship, and civil authority, yet they honor that authority which
is derived to them from her Majesty, in regard whereof they submit them selves
to be conuented, imprisoned fined, etc. by them: much less will they with
force and arms resist or rebel against her Majesty's most lawful authority,
either in her self, or being deputed to others who are not disabled by Gods
word to use it: and therefore they be not within the statute of vice ^imo
tertio of Raising rebellion against her Highness.

5 They hold it lawful and necessary, (...)
before Magistrates to take an oath being called thereunto, so that the oath
(being a matter highly concerning the worship of God) be guided and taken as
the Scriptures allow, (...)
that is, not in vain, where a matter may be otherwise proved by sufficient
evidence or witness: nor yet rashly, as swearing to answer they know not to
what, or before the Articles which they must answer upon their oath, be made
known unto them.

6 They seek not to pull down the Courts of Justice, (...)
(...)
as the high Court of Parliament, the Starchamber, the Kings bench, the
Chanceri^, or any of the rest, but they desire they may stand as they do,
saving that Bb. and Ecclesiastical persons should be shut out from them, and
set to preach the gospel, and follow their own vocation, not being charged
with other offices, unless they were sometimes called in weighty difficult
causes, to give counsel and advise what may or should be done by the word of
God.

7 They deny not but that matters (...)
of Testamentes and Marriages may be determined by Ciuilians in their Courts
(if it seem not good to the Parliament to transfer these things to the
temporal Lawiers) always provided, that their Courts may be made mere
te^porall, not intermedling wi the Church Censures: provided likewise that the
Bb. or other Ministers have no dealing therein: provided also that causes may be
judged there, not by popes laws, but by the word of God, the laudable
Customs, Statutes, Injunctions Synodall, and Provincial Constitutions
accepted in this Realm, a greable to the word of God, and established by her
Majesty's authority and act of Parliament.

8 They teach, that neither the Ministry nor people of this Realm ought to
make any general Reformation, General Refo^mation by the (...)
neither with force and arms, (...)
or otherwise of their own authority, change any laws made or established
for religion by authority of Parliament: but they hold that the general
reformation does belong to the Magistrate, as Gods Lieuetenant, to deal in:
and that for them selves they may and ought in dutiful and christian forte
both preach, write, and sue to the Magistrates for redress of enormities,
(...)
and also practice the or dinances of Christ which he has commanded his Church
to keep to the end of the world: and therefore they have not incurred the
dangers of laws made against Riots, Routes, (...)
or unlawful Assemblies.

9 They detest all such as advisedly, falsely, or malicious^ie slander or
dis^ame her most excellent Majesty: and therefore they be not felons by the
statut provided against spreaders of News or false rumors. (...)


10 They do maineteyne, that (according to the approved doctrine of England)
Emperors, (...)
or any Christian magistrates whatsoever, (...)
being members of the Church of Christ, ought to submit themselves to
excommunication, or other ecclesiastical censures, being duly, orderly, upon
just occasion, according to the commandments of Christ, executed.

11 That a Magistrate standing excommunicated, ought to be obeyed and honored
in all respects of subjection, (...)
for custom, Ex com. Princ. eb yed.
subsidy, love, or any other imposition or service whatsoever of body, goods
and lands, as if he were not excommunicated. And therefore they abhor the
Antichristian and most pestiferous doctrine of the popish ^orte, that gives
liberty to the subject to withholde his services and duties from the
Magistrate, so long as he stands excommunicate.

12 Their suite to her M^iesty and this honorable state is, (...)
that it may be permitted and enacted by law, (...)
that the church of Christ may be ruled by such laws, orders, and officers,
as Christ himself has expressed in his word.

13 That every Congregation professing the faith and obedience of Christ might
have one or two sufficient Teachers faithfully laboring in the word of God and
doctrine: (...)
so mainteyned as they might keep hospitality: not hindered or entangled with
civil offices, whereby their flock should be neglected.

14 That every such Congregation might have assistant to their teachings
Elders, Elders.
some of the fittest, best, and most godly of the church, who should ioin the
Teachers with the ecclesiastical ruling and governing of the Church according
to the word of God.

15 They would not have these me any whitt to encroch upon the Majesty's
authority, to punish any man externallie, with any pecuniary or corporal
penalty: but that they also be subject to the higher powers: and keep
themselves within the compass of their calling for the service of the Church,
as Christ has appointed.

16 That in every such Congregation there might be (...).
some appointed of the most honest and sufficient men to gather for the poor,
to keep the Church treasury, for the uses of that Church, and to the relife
of the poor among them, and other neighbor churches.

17 That also there might be appointed some grave and old Helpers or Widows,
(...).
qualified as the Apostle commands, 1. Timoth. 5. 5. 9. 10. to thend the
sick, aged, friendlesse, and needy of the Church: and (as they could) other
neighbors, or wayfaringe men, that people might not languishe or dye in our
streets and high ways, for want of relief, as is most pitifully to behold
in many places.

18 That all these should be chosen and ordained in such manner and by such
persons as the word of GOD, Election and (...) of (...)
the practice of the best primitive and ^od erne Churches does warrant.

19 That if any dissension grow or cause of (...) be given in any particular
Church by the Minister or Officers, the party grieved might appeal to a
particular Synod, (...)*
from the particular Synod to a Provincial Synod, from a Provincial Synod
to a national Synod. Which Synodes should be appointed at set times: The
more particular the Synod is, the more often the Synod for the time to be
moderated by some fit man chaungeably by election, that might write, speak
and pray in behalf and at the direction of the rest. Or the pa^tie grieved
might appeal from the particular Congegration or Synod, immediately or at the
first instaunce to the Magistrate, who ought to punish both the Ministers
and other ecclesiastical officers, (...)
if they abuse their places and authority, not using them according to the
direction and warrant of the word of God.

20 They do not mean that there should be appointed presently and out of
hand these Officers a^oresaide in every of our Churches, (...)
as they now stand (for there do lack Ministers, and people fit for these
purposes) but they humbly desire that such people as be already capable
hereof, and willing to live as becomes the Churches of Christ, might, as they
are commanded by Christ, so also be permitted by the Magistrate thus to join
and walk together according to the word of God* that it might be enacted and
required also by public authority of the Magist^at, that all they should
execute their offices, and live in such ^orte, manner and (...) as Christ has
given direction to his Church in his will and Testament a that withal good
ord^r might be taken for trayning up of youth for the ministry of the
Church: and thus at length, by the blessing of GOD, all her Majesty's
subjects, which will walk as the Churches of Christ, might be furnished,
guyded, and governed in manner aforesaid: and so (...) in all christian and
duetifull obedi^nce to God and her Majesty.

21 They do profess and protest, that they can and will auowe this
Reformation, (...)
which they desire to be most agreeable to the Scriptures, to have the
testimony of the best and most learned men that have bin since the Apostles,
that it is not prejudicial to her Majesty, to the Laws, to the state, but
profitable every way, (...)
and commanded by Christ to be (...) his Church unto the end of the world,
both under (...) Heathen Magistrates: as they make challenge to prove (...) all
the learned men in the world, that are contrary (...), if they may be heard.

This is the sum of their professed opinions, and of the Reformation desired,
as I doubt not but they will testify if they be called in question to
acknowledge the same. They that condemn them upon their adversaries reports
(who intollerablie do slander them in many things, and are altogether
partial in their own cause) do show them selves to be men of small
discretion or Christian charity.

To the godly Reader.
Marvel not, good Reader, that i^ do not affixe my name to this my Treatise.
It is not known who was the v^riter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and of
diverse other monumentes of h^lie Scripture, neither of sundry books published
heretofore, and of latter da^es in defense of the doctrine and government of
our Church in England. If a truth, and nothing but the truth be delivered, it
skilleth not whether the professor thereof be known or not. Wherefore I do
justly co^de^ne the vain cu^ iositie of some vndis^reet persons, who being
placed in noe degree of authority, are not content to eni^^e the fruits of
other men's labors with thanksgiving, but do continually exercise and
trouble them selves in calculating and divining who be most likely to be
the authors and procurers of their good. If they had any consideration of the
(...) of the time wherein an indifferent well vviller may scarcely be
heard to speak the truth, or if they weighed the gr^euous molestations to
others, and unprofitable pleasure that may hereby ensue unto them selves, they
would bridle these unruly longing affections, least that they preuayling
against them in needelesse trifles, do at length g^tte ground upon them in
greater matters. Rahab has procured to her self a memorable commendation for
hiding Gods servants when their adversaries and her Masters, sought to
apprehende them. If the holy man that wrote to the Hebrews thought it most
convenient in godly policy to keep his name unknown, assuredly they should
have been deemed curious and idle brained, that would either have been
inquisiti^e to know the same, or having knowledge thereof, would foolishlie
have blabbed it abroad to others. Which things I speak rather in behalf of
others, than in fear of axie danger that might grow unto my self by this
enterprise. For first, that which I have written, cannot I trust, offend any
reasonable and not partiallie affected person: or if it do, the uprightness
of mine own conscience, and loyalty both to this Church and commonwealth,
will (I hope) enable me to sustain and e^dure with cheerfulness, all the
malice and displeasure of any enemy to a godly peace. Secondly, I do not
desire at any man's hands the favor of concealment in this action. For
although I have attempted and published this my travel without making my self
known to any creature, yet when my appearance shall be found more profitable to
the Church then my concealment, I will come forth and justify my words in
such manner and form as I have written. In the mean time I wish every true
hearted Christian, To pray for the peace of Jerusalem, that now at length her
Majesty (of God will) rather then any other Prince succeeding, may have the
honor in reconciling the two twins that strive together is the body of our
Church, to the great peril and danger of the whole. Nubecula est, cit^
transibit.

Certain Articles wherein is discovered the negligence of the Bb. their
officialles, favorers and followers in perfourmaunce of sundry Ecclesiastical
Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances Royal and Episcopal published for the
government of the Church of England.
Out of the Statutes.
1 BY the statute of 25. H. 8. cap. 15. It is accounted by the Parliament
against equity and due order of justice, Or^ex Offico.
to bring any man in d^unger of his life, name, goods, or lands, by any
intrapping interrogatories, or by any other mean, then witness, verdict,
confession or presentment. Yet the Bishops do examine the Queens subjects
upon intrapping interrogatories without verdict, witness, confession or
presentment, to the danger of then lives, names, lands and goods: for making,
printing, or dispersing, of seditious books and sundry other grievous crimes,
upon vain surmises, or secret suggestions of lewd persons, who dare not auow
their accusations in the face of the Defendants. Whereby the subjects be
intollerably molested, without remedy or costs and da^mages awarded for their
vexations, and molestatio^s wrongfully sustained.

2 All men are baylable that are not prohibited by law to be bayled, Bail.
2 West. ca. 14. yet the Bb. deny bail to some that ought not to be
imprisoned, much less be vnbayleable by any law.

3 No official or other officer should take any more then three pence for the
seal of a citation, Seal of citatious.
else they forfayte double costs and damages to the party grieved, 23. H. 8.
ca. 9. 1. Eliz. cap. 1. yet they usually take more under color of signing or
subscr^bing a citation, which is a thing in law material, Iermes in law.
Tit. Faits.

4 No foreign Constitutions, whether they be the Popes or Emperors laws,
Popes laws.
have any force in our state. Only such Synodall and Provincial Ordinances as
have been made within this Realm, are confirmed for law, 25. H. 8. cap. 19.
yet the Bishops in their Consistories do put in practice the Romish and
imperial constitutions, not contenting themselves with the Statutes,
Injunctions, and other Ecclesiastical ordinances of this Realm.

5 Such Canons and Constitutions only as be not repugnant to the laws,
statutes and customs of this Realm, (...)
ought to be put in practice, 25. H. 8. cap. 19. But the Bishops give sentence
in infinite matters, which would be otherwise ruled by the common laws.

6 The law accompteth them Ministers who are made after any other order then
is prescribed in the laws of England, Ministers of reformed Churches.
so that they will subscribe to the Articles of says and doctrine, 13. Eliz.
cap. 12. yet the Bishops have reckoned such men as have been ordained ministers
in reformed, churches, to be lay men, though they esteem a popish priest a
sufficient minister.

7 The law requires a subscription to the Articles of religion only,
Subscription.
that concern the confession of true faith and doctrine of Sacraments, 13.
Eliz. cap. 12. The Bishops urge a subscription to the books of Homilies, and
diverse ceremonial and transitory matters, neither concerning faith nor
Sacrament.

8 If the Bishops publishe any Canons or orders to be practiced without the
Royal assent of her Majesty, The Queene^ assent to Bb. Articles.
they should be fined and imprisoned, 25. H. 8. cap. 19. Notwithstanding this
statute, they publish Subscriptions in their provinces, and Articles in their
Diocesses without any assent of her highness.

9 By the Statute 23 Eliz. cap. 1. the Ordinary of his Ministers should not
take any thing for allowing or licensing a Schoolemaister to teach. (...)
And neither the statute nor any iniunction or law requires a subscription by
Schoolemaisters yet it is famouslie known, that they extort of Schoolmaisters
for licenses to teach, of some 7 shillings, of some ten shill* of some a
mark, according to his state that admits them, whether he be Archb. Bishop,
Chauncelour or official. The Justices of peace ought to cause this gross and
palpable extortion to be inquired of at their Sessions. The enforcing of
subscription upon Schoolmaisters is upon like warrant of law and justice.

10 By the great Charter confirmed by many Kings of England in parliamentes,
Imprisoned without (...)*
and by the ancient Bb. by their Excommengments, None should be imprisoned
but by the lawefull judgments of this Peers, or by the law of the land,
Mag. Chart. Cap. 29. The Bishops will punish men for not swearing vainly, and
Women for not being Churched, etc. without trial or showing authority of law
to warrant their proceedings, to the great periudice of the ancient and
lawful liberty of English subjects.

Out of the Common laws.
11 By common law a man shall not be examined upon his oath in matters that
sound to his reproach. For no man is bound to accuse him self, Oath ex officio.
Crompt. 182. yet Bishops would examine men upon their oaths in case of
felony, as for writing and publishing of seditious books.

12 No man should be cited to a spiritual court, (...)
to depose there in any matter as witness: for this is extortion and tort to
the party, Fitz. Just. of peace, page 172. b. Crompt. 219. this is not
remembered of our spiritual Doctors.

13 No Bishop ought to appoint a man to appear before him to take an oath ex
officio, Ex offico.
saving in matters of marriage and Wills. And the cause of the appearance must
be expressed particularly in the citatio^, otherwise it is against law, as
Justice Fitzherbert says, Not, bre. page 41. yet the Bb. boldly presume
against this law.

Out of the book of common prayer, authorized by act of Parliament.
14 It appears by the Calendar which assigns 4. chapters to be read every
day through the year. Also by the preface and order of reading the Psalms,
that the morning and evening prayer Morning and Eu^ning prayer.
should be read every day through the year, either publikelie or privately,
except great business hinder: yet they be only read upon Sundaies, Holidaies,
Wednesdaies and Frydaies, Toll the ^ell.
and Saints Fues.

15 The Preface to the Comm^n^on book.
Curate must toll a bell to service, that is, he must either do it himself,
or appoint another: yet this is deputed to the Sexten or Clarke, who is found
by the Parish, and not by the Curate.

16 The Rubricke (...) Mo^ni^g prayer at the communion and Comm^nation.
people are to answer the Priest to say, (...).
AMEN, and such like: yet this is permitted to the Clearke alone in most
places, who after the popish order must supply the room of the unlearned and
say Amen, as the papists do abuse the (...).
scriptu^e to that purpose.

17 Where there is (...)
singing, there the Lessons Sing Lessons
should be sung in a ^laine tune, and likewise the Gosp^ll and Epistle: yet I
have not known this used in Cathedral Churches.

18 The (...)
names of Communicantes (...)
before they receive should be signified to the Cura^e, yet this is not
regarded in most places.

19 The (...)
Curat (be he never so base) should not suffer notorious ill livers, such as
have wronged ^y by word or deed, Notorious offenders suspended from the
Lords Supper. Open (...) of sin.
neither men out of charity (by they Earls, Counseilloures or others) to be
partakers of the Communion, till they have declared them selves openly to be
repentant and reclaimed: yet notorious lewd persons be admitted, and men of
state (without exception) are not hindered, nor any open consession of sin is
used by any offendour, but whom the Official appoints, though the (...)
authors and confirmers of the communion book do generally wish it.

20 The (...)
Minister should use the ornaments appointed by King Edward, The Clarke^
Surplesse.
yet not he alone, but the Clearke also does use a surplice in many churches.

21 In Rubriche next after the communion.
Cathedral and Collegi. Churches, the Communion should be ministered every
Sund^y at the least. This is not practiced. Communion in Cathedral Churches.
The Page 5.
Advertisement appoints the first Sunday in every month. But the Bishops D.
Bridge. page 33.
Articles tie Ministers to use the form prescribed in the communion book and
no other.

22 The Godfathers and Godmothers are Exhort after pub. baptism.
commanded that they 1. shall call the children for whom they promise,
Godfathers and Godmothers duty.
to hear sermons. 2. They must provide that they be taught to learn all
things necessary for Christians. 3. That they be virtuously brought up.
Which things al Godfathers and Godmothers might be in^orced to do (for the
law will not command a thing without allowing a mean to ^ffect) yet the
Bishops do neuerinforce this by ecclesiastical censures, though infinite
children do, for want of this help, perish in ignorance.

23 bishops are commanded to confirm children: yet diverse Bb. do not use it,
Confirmation of children.
albeit by (...)
law, noe man should receive the Communion till he were first confirmed. A
good plea for papists to refuse the communion, this confirmation would cause
children to learn the principles of Religion for none should be confirmed (...)
till he could say the Lords prayer, Ten commandments, and the short
cacechisme.

24 Curates of every Parish (...)
ought upon sundaies and h^lidaies half an hour before euen-songe openly
instruct and examine child^en, (...)
servants, and prentices in the Catechism. A profitable work seldom or
never used by the Bishops followers. By the Page 14 and 16.
book of Canons the Curate may examine any of what age or degree soever, be
they old or young, noble or unnoble. The Bishops account it tyranny in some
Ministers to expect or exact this thing.

25 None must be admitted (...)
to the Communion that can not say the Catechism. (...)
Therefore ^urates should examine Communicantes, and seclude them that be found
wanting in knowledge: but this is not regarded.

26 (...)
Banes should be asked three several Sund^yes in the open Church: (...)
yet Bi^hops dispense with asking banes Non obstants this book confirmed by
Parliament, as if a Bishop might dispense with penal Satutes.

Out of the book of ordring Deacons, etc.
27 The party presented to the Bb. should (...)
wear A plain Albe (by the book of ordering Ministers, (...)
confirmed by 8 Eliz c:
Parli^ment) yet this garment in not used.

28 The Deacon by part of his office (...)
ought to search for the sick, (...)
poor and impotent of the (...), and intimate their estates to the Curate,
etc. But now the office of a Deacon is accounted mere spiritual.

29 The Deacon must read the Gospel in the day of his Ordination, (...)
(...)
putting on a Tunicle: but ^his vesture is scarcely known at this day.

30 The Bish. must tell (...)
the Minister at his Ordination, That if his Church or any member thereof,
(...)
do take any hurt by his negligence, that a horrible punishment will ensue
to him. He charge him, never to cease his labor, care and diligence till
he have done what lies in him according to his duty, to bring all that
are committed to his charge, that there be no error in Religion or viciousnes
in life left in them: yet it is manifest, that the Bb. Priests, and Chaplens,
are most negligent in their charge, turning over their travel to other, which
they are charged here to perform in their own person.

31 The book would have them to (...)
give themselves wholly to the ministeri^all vocation as much as lies in them,
to apply themselus to that one thing, to draw all their care and studies that
way and to that end: yet they attend eiui^^ll offices and worldly affairs
imper^^nent to the charge here given to them. (...)


32 The (...)
Bish. charge, and the Priest promises to Min^ster the discipline of Christ,
Christ^ Discipline.
as the Lord has commanded, And as this Realm has (...) the same according
to Gods commandments, not otherwise. For the word And notes two distinct
things in that clause, where all Ministers are authorized to excommunicate as
well as ^b. (for the Lord has commanded this (...)
Discipline of Excom. to all Ministers alike) also they may admonish and
suspen^e from the Lords supper (for this Realm has received these cen^ures,
and given them to every Minister according to Gods commandment in that
behalf) yet the Bishops do retain the power of Excommuni^ in their own
hands assigninge it to such as please the^ most.

33 The (...)
Bish. likewise charge and the priest promises to use not only publik but
also private admonition and exhortations both to the sick and to the whole
within his cure: (...)
yet their Chapleins and Doctors account their duty discharged if some time
they preach publikelie, and never confer priu^tely with their flock in
points of religion. For Christ, say they, knew not the persons and faces of
his flock neitheir is this expected of his Ministers, both which be untrue.

34 The book at the ordination of every Minister directs the Bish. to say to
the Minister, (...)
Take thou authority to preach the word of God, Ministers preachers.
and to Minister the holy Sacraments in this Church. In which words we
observe, 1. That the book and Parliament which confirmed it* do intend that
every Minister should be a Preacher. This also may be proved by many other
circumstances in this book. 2 A full license and authority is given to every
Minister to preach, Licenses to preac^.
therefore he may always, after this authority given, as well preach as
minister the Sacraments, without a license: neither is it material that the
Art: 8.
Injunctions or Iniunct. page 4.
Aduertisements do will that a Minister should have a license to preach, for
this book of Ordering Ministers being authorized, 8. Eliz. cap. 1. and 13.
Eliz. cap. 12. In the Articles of Religion, Artic. 36. does counterm^unde the
Injunctions and Aduertisementes that went before. 3. No Minister has
authority to preach out of any book but Gods word. (...)
4. The Ministers and Deacons should be ordained in the Congregation to which
they are presented: not in the Bishops Chapel, else the book would not say,
Take authority to preach in this Congregation. For it can not be im^gined that
all the Priests which a Bishop makes have authority to preach or exercise
their office in the Bish. Where Priests should ^e (...).
Chapel when they list. Yet notwithstanding the authority of this book, the
Bb. admit ministers who be no Preachers, whereas this book and their own
authority by Law ( Artic. Bb. need not (...).
Cler. cap. 13. might answer any Quare impedit, if they would refuse a
Clearke for non ability of preaching. Also, notwithstanding this book, to get
money (for if that be not their purpose, let them do it gratis, but then they
would not stick at it) they compel men, being ordered after this book, to
take new licenses to preach, not being contented when they show them their
letters of orders, which the Bishops at their pleasure upon a supposed
misdemeanor do use to take from them, Furthermore, sundry of the Prelates do
preach and take their texts out of the Apocripha, wherein they go beyond
their commission, unless the Apocripha be a part of the scripture, as one of
the Bishops does entitle it. Lastly, notwithstanding the intent of this book,
they ordeine Ministers at large in nubibus, without a cure, they never ordeyne
them in the Congregration to which they are presented* that the people of the
Church (who are likely to be most inquisitiue into his conversation that
^halbe their Pastor) might except against them, (...)
for the Bb. (...)
wills the people present to speak if they knew any impediment or crime in
the person presented that may hinder him from the ministry. Which (by all
likelihoode) can not be meant of a people of a st^aunge parish, nor of the
Bishops family, unless the Bish. famely be like the knights of the post in
Westminster, who know al men, their conditions, lands, and estates, though they
never saw or heard of them before. (...)


35 All the Bishops that be present at the consecration of Bishops should we
are Beford. (...) page 65.
Coapes and Surplesses, having their Pastor^ll Staves in their hands: they
rete^ne the Surplesse, seldom the Coapes, but they never use their Pastoral
Staves.

Out of the Queens Injunctions.
36 By the Queens Injunctions (which should be executed in (...)
all her Highness Realms and Dominions) all (...)
ecclesias^icall persons hau^^g cure of souls, ought to preach in their
church, 12. or. 16 Sirmons jearely in all Churches.
and (...) other cure they have one s^imon every month. And in their (...).
own person they should preach once every quarter, or else read an Homely: so
that in every parish^^ England, Ireland and Wales, there should have bin twelve
sermos preached every year, either by the Minister or his deputy (as it is
expounded) and the minister in proper person should have preached four sermons
or read four Homilies every year since her Majesty began her reign: yet
there be many hundred churches within these Dominions, especially in Wales,
Irelande, the Northen and Western parts, that have scarcely had twelve sermons
in twelve years: and there be many persons that cry formality, that come not
twice in a year at their charge to benefit the people by any duty.

38 (...).
Erasmus Paraphrases Erasmus p^raphras.
should be had in all Churches, yet the Bishops will be more careful to enquire
if every parish have a su^plesse rather then to enjoyne any book learning.

38 Ecclesiastical persons should not play (...).
at dice, cards, Dice, Card^^.
tables, or any other unlawful game, but use some other honest exercise, as B.
of canon page 13.
shooting: but the Bb. chaplens and followers, Shooting.
that pretend most obedience to the Queens laws, do more offend in these
matters then any other Ministers.

39 Artic. (...).
All Nonresidents which may dispende above twenty pound yearly, ought to
distribute the 40. part of their living to the poor of the parish: Nonresident
benevolence.
but this is lightly regarded of the most, as I suppose.

40 Artic. 12.
Whosoever, Parson, Vicar, etc. may dispend in ecclesiastical promotions above
100. pound yearly, should give for every 100. pound, three pounds six
s^illings and viij pence yearly to so many poor scholars in the University
or Grammar schools, A charge laid upon (...) P^laces
as he has hundred pounds, that having profited in learning, they might be
made partners of their Patrons cure, and otherwise be employed for the good of
the common wealth. The Bishops do not inioyne their Chapleins, their Deanes
and Doctors to subscribe to this article, though if this one article had been
observed by our formal Prelates (who be accounted the only obedient
subjects) as it should have been* and yet be if our Bishops and regard the
Queens orders, there would have growed and hereafter grow more profit hereby
to the Church and state, under her Majesty, then has ensued by all episcopal
subscription for these hundred years. Mark Bish. it is your fault that
learning decays, and that there wants a continual supply of learned
Ministers. If this Article had been performed, there might have been relieved
yearly, ever since her May. came to the Crown above 1000. poor scholars,
who for want of maintenance, have applied her time and travel to other
matters* Blush at your negligence herein.

41 The Queens Art. 14.
Injunctions ought to be read in the Churches openly once every quarter. But
this were no wisdom: (...)
for then the people would expect many things at the Bishops and their P^^estes
hands that are not convenient to be known of the common sort.

42 The holidaies should be (...)
spent in hearing Gods word, in private and public prayers, (...)
in reconciliation of enemies, receiving the Sacraments and visiting the
poor, using all sobernes and godly conversation, yet the Bb. themselves and
their Priests (who should be ensamples to the flock) bestow these days
profanely at bowls, hearing Commedies and Tragedies, etc. Which be far from
the duties both here and in the scriptures commanded.

43 All Artic* 23 and 35.
superstitious, pictures, paintings in walls and glass windows should be
abolished out of Churches and houses: (...)
yet many Church-windowes be full of such pictures, and (as I hear) the Bb.
be not without such paintings in their Chambers.

44 The Artic. 29.
Wives of Ministers and Deacons should be allowed by the ordinary and two
Justices of peace. (...)
Many foreward Chapleins regard not this.

45 All Artic: 30.
Clergy people should wear their habits sqare cappes, etc. (...)
and no^ Aduer^. p* 9.
hattes in iourneying: yet there be a number of the Bishops Priests that
break this order as well as the Ministers that seek reformation.

46 The Art. 39.
Injunctions allow a man to be absent from common prayer at his own parish
Church, (...)
and to resort to another in the same Town, to hear a sermon: yet the Bishops
and their O^^ici^lles punishemen in such cases, unless they will give them a
Mark, or such like see, for a license of absence.

47 Where Art: ^9.
Music is used in churches, Curior^i^g.
it should be in such a distinct and modest song, that the same might be
plainly understood, as if it were read without singing. But the curiosity of
Cathedral churches does disdain this simplicity.

48 None of the Queens Art: 50.
subjects should call one another Heretic, Schismatike, or use any such like
word of reproach yet the Bb. Names of (...).
their libellers, and slatterers, call her Majesty's subjects (and that
fal^lie) Scismatikes, heretics* puritans, and such like, as appears by their
pamphlettes and choleric brables.

49 Whenever the Artic: 52.
name of JESUS is pronounced in Sermon, Lesson, or otherwise, all men should
uncover their heads, and make a leg: Names of Jesus.
yet the Bish. and their Chaplens seldom use this, unless it be at reading of
the Gospel, as if the Gospel were more holy then the rest of the scripture,
especi^lly they forget it when lustely and bravely they swear by Jesus.

50 The (...).
Queen accounts and calls them her good and lawful subjects, (...)
that acknowledge her Majesty to be the sole supreme governor over all the
subjects in her Dominions But the Bb. account some such men papists and
traitors.

51 The The conclusion of the (...)
offenders against the Injunctions are to be punished by deprivation,
suspension, excommunication, etc. by the ordinaries. Violater^ of the Queens
Iniunction^.
The Justices of peace are to assist them: yet how many of the Bb. ministers
have been deprived, etc. for not causing twelve sermons to be preached every
year in their parish? For playing at Cards, Dice, etc? For not distributing
the 40. part of their living to the poor? For not allowing five marks to a
poor scholar? For not reading the Injunctions, for mispending the Sabbath?
For not wearing square cappes? For calling their brethren puritans? etc. For
not kneeling when they swear by Jesus? And for terming her Majesty's good and
obedient subjects, papists and traitors? These Injunctions and ordinances
appointed by the Queen, are forgotten: But the Bish. be careful enough to
urge subscriptions, oaths ex offi^io, and such like unprofitable and
Apocryphal stratagemes, their own devises.

Out of the Bishops aduertisements.
52 By the Aduer: p. 4.
aduertisements, a Minister should pay for the wax, Licenses to (...).
perchment, and writing of a license to preach only four pence: how this is
observed, I refer my self to the l^^centia^s and licentious preachers of our
tune: but of such men commonly no license is required.

53 No Aduers p. 4.
man should be absent from his cure, but in respect of Sickness* service, or
study at the Universities: yet it is known, that many be absent, (...)
having no such respects to d^^we them away.

54 All ecclesiastical Aduer p. 1^
persons should wear in iourneing cloaks with sleeves: Cloak^^.
yet many great patrons of formality do not use them.

Out of the Bishops Canons.
55 By the book of Canons agreed by all the Clergy of the province of
Canterb. B^oke of Ca^. p. 4.
The household servant of (...). should be of good life, of sound religion,
Bb. servants.
orderly and modestly apparelled: yet many instances may be given to the
contrary.

56 ^Boo^e of Can page 5.
None must be made minister that has bin brought up in husbandry or some
other base and handie craft labor, Base fellows (...) minister.
nor any but such as have a title whereby they may live if they become blind,
and fall into any languishing or continual sickness: yet the Bishops make their
blind porters, and such other worn and forlorn seruitors, ministers, having
no title but the ministry to rely upon.

57 The Bb. should Book of Can pa. 5.
not grant to any the next or 3. aduowson Aduo^sons
of any prebende or benefice, for (they say) those aduousons are far from
good doing and christian charity: yet presentations and aduousons to churches
before they be voyed, be notoriously and usually granted by the Bb.

58 There Book of Can page 6.
should be in Cathedral Churches, in Prebenda^ies and Deanes families, the
book of Martyrs, Book of Mar:
that all comers in might read it, yet the most do want it, as I am
persuaded.

59 Every Boo^e of Can. page 1^.
Chauncelor* Commissarie and Official should be learned in the Ecclesiastical
and civil laws: yet many ministers utterly ignorant in those faculties do
bear such offices. Chancell cluilians.


60 All Book of Can. page 16.
unpreaching Prelates should teach children to write, (...)
to know their duty to God and others: yet the parishioners are burdened to
find schoolmaisters for these matters.

61 B^oke of Can: page 19.
Churchwardens should be chosen by the minister and people, Election by the
peop^^.
they should admonish and warn any (noble or unnoble) that offend others by
adultery, drunkenness, much swearing, ba^drie, usury, and other wickedness
in life. And if they will not hear the Churchwardens, the Churchwardens
should show the fault to the Parson or Curat (be he never so base) who should
more sharply and v^he^entlie reprove them. And if they continue still, they
should drive them from the communion till they be refo^med. This profitable
order of discipline is altogether neglected both it and election of
Church Officers by the people, Disciplin^*
are reputed d^ungerous, seditious, and scismaticall in those that seek to
have the^ established soundly practiced and prosecuted with effect.

62 The whole clergy of that Province do agree, Nonresidence.
that Book of Ca^. pa. 25.
Nonresidence is a thing in it self to be abhorred and odious to the people,
and pernicious to the Church of God: yet they ret^ine nonresident Chaplens
about them daily, countenancing such men most, oppugning in Parliament the
Nobility and commonalty that speak against it.

63 No m^n Ibidem.
should have above 2. Benefices at once, not distant a sunder above 26. miles:
yet many have 3. or 4. scattetered one from another 100. miles.

64 Al (...)
men should eschew the company of an Excom: person, (...)
he should be esteemed an heathen and publican: yet our ^olie Pre^a^e^ (such is
their learning even in the common articles of our religion) do call our
Excommunication a civil discommuning, and make no scruple to company with such
persons. I doubt if the matter were well examined, the most of the Bish. them
selves have bin excommunicate ipso facto, and still continue in that state for
the breach of the statute of Magnacharta, and infinite Provincial and
National constitutions. Whereupon they are disabled to sue any actions, and
are to be esteemed as heathen and publicanes. (...).


It were endless to reccount all the cases vvherin the Bb. their Officers,
their Chaplens and hang-bies do of^ende against our Synodall and Provincial
constitutions, against their own books and Articles, publ^^hed in their
Synodes and Co^uocations. It would make a large volume to remember wherein
they proceed and give sentence in their courts contrary to the Statues and
common laws of this Realm: Thus much is sufficient to set the Gentlemen
students of Englandge a work, to search more narrowelie into these things
then they have done, that they may by their pa^nes in study, redeem her
Majesty's laws from the captivity, wherein they are de^e^^ed by the Clergy.
By these A^ticles it appears, that our Bishops do not of conscience to God,
and honor to her Majesty, exclaim against the Seek* of Reformation, for not
yielding in all things to her ^^^^nctions, laws, and other proceedings. For
if they did bona fide and ex animo in deed honor her Majesty, and seek the
advancement of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, they would be more careful and
sedulous to see the profitable and necessary ecclesiastical laws put in
execution, rather then to enforce such as be less profitable and needful. For
w^ether is it more requisite to the glory of God and good of her Majesty and
this Realm, that Ministers should Catechize their Pari^he, that they should
debar notorious offenders from the Communion, That Sabbath days should be
kept holy, That Church Wardens and Ministers should admoni^he p^^uatelie all
(even the most Noble) to leave their faults, The Nonresidentes and fat
beneficed persons, should relieve the poor at home, and studious scollers
abroad, That there should be twelve sermons yerelie in every parish through
England, Wales and Ireland, That no Aduowsons should be granted, That the
pernicious and detestable sin of Nonresidence and Pluralities should be
reformed, and such good orders practiced. Is it not more requisite, I s^^e,
that these things should be looked unto, rather then the wearing of a
surplesse (Marying with a ring? Christening with a cross. Subscription to an
Article, and such like? Yet it is apparaunt to all men, that Bishops, their
Officialles, Deacons, Doctoures, and Favors are more curious in urging and
using the latter then the former: yet both have like authority from her
Majesty and them selves. I suppose the Bishops and their followers would be as
unwilling to execute the Queens laws and Injunctions, as any favorers of
reformation, if they were urged there unto in earnest. It is certain, that the
Bb. can tolerate the neglect of all these and innumerable other duties in one
of their flatterers, whereas if a m^n be but suspected to mislike in heart
the Lordly goue^nement of Bishops, he sh^lbe sure to have all extremity
showed against him if he o^^ende but in the least ceremony. Yea greater
severity shall be used for neglect of the least and most improfitable
observation, then for neglect of the most neces^arie and important. O England,
England, how long will thou be missed by those carnal wordlinges that have
their special care to adnance and inriche them selves and their posterity,
rather then to obey thy laws or the laws of thy God, be they never so holy,
so necessary and godly! Who has bewitched thee, that thou can not see that
they be more rebellious, more s^hismaticall, more disloyal and disobedient
subjects, who acknowledge thy laws to be good and godly, but do despise
them, even the greatest of them, then they that yielding to the greatest
matters, do of conscience refuse such things as be least profitable and
expedient in any Church. O that her Majesty would appoint faithful, true,
christian and ^nglish-harted men indeed to examine these things: to call the
Bb. their Chaplens, and Officers to account in these matters, she should
find that they b^e of the most vnduetiful subjects in all the land, and they
that be now least regarded, would be found the most trusty, most godly and
obedient of all other. My words will prove true in the days of trial, when
these things shall be regarded and rewarded with indifferency, and then
(Bishops) assure your selves that the day of your desolation is at hand.
How long O Lord holy and true! Revel. 6. 10. Come Lord Jesus, come
quickelie, 22. 21.

Certain Questions or Interrogatories, drawn by a favorer of Reformation,
out of the former treatises and other writings concerning Reformation, wherein
he desires to be resolved by the Prelates which the Printer has thought good
here to annexe.
QVae^e, (...)
whether the right honorable and chie^e justice of England Sir Christopher Wra^
Knight did not at the examin^tion of H. Barrowe in the Bish of Londons palace,
affirm that men should incur no penalty for opinions which they held
doubtinglie. And whether a man may not without breach of law Divine or Humane,
for his further satisfaction make quaerees and doubts in special causes,
showing withal the reason of his doubting: affirming nothing peremptorily or
positiuely, but submitting him self to sound resolution. If that be granted,
why may not I be a Put-case, and say as follows:

2 Quaere, whether the form of prayers, administration of the Sacraments,
attire of Ministers, (...)
and other Church-ceremonies in England, do more agree to the Apostolical and
primitive order, or to the use of the Romi^h Church. And whether popish orders
be more seemly and convenient, then the Apostolic.

3 Quaere, whether our rites and ceremonies taken from the papists, (...)
do not give them offense and harden them in their sin, seeing (...)
Harding does gather thereby, that Popery is not so ill as it is commonly
reputed. And (...)
Bristowe says, That our religion and Communion were nothing worth, unless we
borrowed from them and their Masse-booke: and whether al indifferent things
that give of^ence unto the weak, ought not by 1 Cor. 8. 1^
Paul's doctrine, be removed from the church.

4 Quaere, (...)
whether the square C^ppe, Surplesse, and other monumentes of popery and
idolatry condemned in general by the Queens Art. 23.
Injunctions, Bishops (...)
Articles, and (...)
public doctrine of England, and other Christian (...)
Churches, misliked and wished to be abolished by (...)
Bull^ger, (...)
Alas^o, (...)
Bucer, (...)
B. P^^kington, and (...)
Bale, derided by (...)
Bucer and Master (...)
^ox, refused to be worn by (...)
Peter Martyr, (...)
Bucer, (...)
Ho^per, (...)
Rogers, Humfrey, Philpot, Bradfort Haddon, and Saunders, (as I have credibly
heard) whether the Surplesse called by (...)
Martyr, monstrous apparel, by (...)
Calvin, Playerlike apparel and vain visardes, by (...)
Bez^, Insignes of the Baaltticall Priesthood, by B. R^^ley, (...)
foolish and abominable, too fond for a vice in a play, by D. ^a^lor, (...)
apish toys, and toyishe trumperie, by D. Poinet, (...)
a Porters weed at Billingsgate, by the Beehiue of the Romish Church, (...)
a smock and long (...)
shirt, by Bale, (...)
pretty toys, by Becon, (...)
Hist^^onicall, see^^call, and hick-scorne^like app^rell. Whether I say this
apparel thus accounted of by le^rned men (the best judges of decency) be
decent and comely for a preacher of the Gospel, and whether things uncomely
should not by (...)
Paul's doctrine, be ab^ndoned the Church?

5 Quaere, (...)
If Majors, Justices, Stageplayers and others, Subscrip^i^^.
may not as well be enforced to subscribe to the Bi^^ops three articles by the
^^at. of 1. ^liz. cap. 1. as Ministers, seeing the stat. (urged by (...)
D. Bridges to that purpose) doethreach to them as well as Ministers.

6 Quaere, If the Bb. (...)
that appoint other prayers to be used in the Church besides the prayers in the
Communion book do not o^^ende against their own articles and the statute of
1. Eli. c. 1. which inioin^ that Ministers should use the form of public
prayer pres^ribed in that books and no other, Ite^, whether the Bb. thus
o^^ending against the stat. ought not to deal more mercifully with the
ministers who have offended in like quality.

7 Quaere, whether the Marcionites did well, who (as Chrysostom upon the
words, (...)
what do they that are baptized for the dead reports) when any of their
Catechumeni or nouices in religion did die, (...)
had wont to hide one under the bed where the dead man was laid, and did ask
the dead if he would be baptized* in whose name the party under the bed did
answer, That is my desire: whereupon the live man was baptized for the dead.
Questions to infants.
And whether the questions and answers at the baptizing of In^ants in the
comm^nion book be not of like nature. When the Minister says to the child
(as fit to conceive as a dead man Will thou be baptized in this faith? and the
godfathers make answer, That is my desire.

8 Quaere, Whether a man may with safe conscience subs^ribe that the book of
common prayer conteyneth nothing contrary to the Scriptures, Psalms in the
(...)
whereas the translation of the Psalms therein comprised in addition,
substraction and alteration dissereth from the truth of the Hebrewe in 200.
places at the least.

9 Quaere, Whether it be agreeable to the word of God, (...)
law of England, and practice of any well governed Church, to puni^h that which
is taken for slaundering, ribaudry and villainy, with return of libells,
rib^ud^ie and villainy. And whether Almond for the Parret, (...)
Martins Mo^ethes mind etc. do not as much offend that way, as Martin
Marprelate, or if they o^fend at all, why are they suffered, not punished?

10 Quaere of Matthew (...)
Sutcliffe (who is always ca^ping at M. Cartw. purchase) why M. Cartw may no^
sell the lands which he had by descent from his father, (...)
and buy other with the money, as well as some of the Bishops, who by b^^berie,
simony, extortion, racking of rent, was^ing of woods, and such like
stratagemes, (...)
wax rich and purchase great Lordships for their posterity. (...)


11 Quaere, If the Bish. that (...)
affirm it is lawful to give livings appointed for ministers to lay men, or
D. Bridges (...)
a^^irming that a priest may be Lord over her Majesty, or Doct. Bancroft that
(...)
calls her Highness a pety Pope, do not disfame and dishonor her Majesty,
and are therefor selons.

12 Quaere, Supremacy.
If the Prelates who say (...)
that the ot^e of the Supremacy imports that her Majesty may devise what
Church-gouernement she pleases, be not in the word of a Prince and by award
of law Malicious persons, seeing therein they ascribe more to her Highness then
the Oath of S^premacie with the exposition thereof imports. And whether the
Seek. of Re^ormation yielding to the o^he with the exposition, (...)
be not her Highness good and obedient subjects.

13 Quaere, Why the Archbishops of Cant. should not rather be called Popes then
Primates of all England, seeing (...)
that a (...)
Cardinal gave them the name of Primates, and a^ Pope did assign them the name
of Popes.

14 Quaere, If Wicleue, Luther, Calum, Latimer, Tindall, (...) and other were
now alive, (...)
and should speak against the Lordship of Bish. as they do in their writings,
to which prison the Bishops would send them, whether to the Fleet, Clinke,
Marshalsie, or gate house. Whether books seen, allowed, and publikelie sold
by authority, do contain matters of felony, and dif^amatory to the Queen.

15 Quaere, wherein the papists have deserved so well that mainteaning errors,
Papists favored.
here^ies, and blasphennes, accounting in general our doctrine, our Bishops an
Magistrates, heretical and impious, should find more grace then Seekers of
Reformation, and why they should not be condemned as felons for their
abominable doctrine.

16 Quaere, If the Bb. proceeding against men Perordinem inquisit^onis
Inquisition.
(as Do. Cosins said at the examination of Master Cartur.) do not therein
imitate the papal order used by the Bb. in time of c^uelty and blindness.

17 Quaere, Oath in open (...).
If Christ were before the Bishops, and were demanded I^^. ^ 18. 19 20, 21
of them concerning his doctrine, and should answer, I spoke openly, etc. why
ask ye me? ask them that heard me what I said unto them: behold they know
what I said, whether making this answer, he should be committed as May.
Bambridge and May. Johnson were in Cambridge, and as many other godly
Ministers be ordinarily upon like occasion.

18 Quaere, General oath
If by the Judicial laws, by the course in the Chancerie, or Starchamber any
man be forced to swear before he know the cause (at least in general)
whereunto he is to take his oath.

19 Quaere, Confi^mation of children.
whether by the laws of England, every Bish. is not bound to confirm
children, as well as Ministers to mary with a ring, and whether popish young
men not yet confirmed by any Bishop, may not without danger of ^awe re^use the
Communion, seeing by the book of Common prayer, n^ne must receive the Lords
supper, till he be confirmed.

20 Quaere, (...)
whether an ecclesiastical Judge may punish Bris^one the p^pist for (...)
writing that our Communion book is an apishe imitation of the Mass book,
seeing the statute gives only that authority to Justices of peace. Item*
whether Bristowe deprauing the Communion book, may be deprived of all his
spiritual promotions for the first offense against the statute, seeing the
(...)
statute appoints, That he who the second (...) the Communion book, being
convicted thereof by verdict, etc. sh^lbe deprived of his spiritual
promotions. Item, whether the law does not favor the puritan as much as the
p^pist.

21 Quaere, (...)
whether Adultery is to be punished by the Ordinary, seeing the punishment
thereof (without any saving to the spiritual Court) is given by (...)
statute to the Ius^ices of peace. And whether a man may be punished by two
corporal or pecumarie puni^^ments in two several Courts for one and the same
cause.

22 Quaere, (...)
If any Ordinary have contrived, promulged and publi^hed A^ticles in his own
name without as^ent of her ma iesty under seal, and enforced her Highness
subjects to subscribe unto the same: And for not subsc^ibing, have suspended
or deprived them. And whether an ordinary thus doing, may not be 25 Hen 8. (...)
imprisoned and fined at the Queens pleasure.

23 Quaere, whether an Ordinary may cite a man to appear before him in his
Court to depose as awit^esse, seeing (...)
Justice Fitzherbert says, (...)
That it is extortion and vviong to the party. And how many of the Bishops be
extortioners in that behalf?

24 Quaere, whether a man (...)
shall be examined by oath of any thing that sounds to his reproach, (...)
seeing that Nullus ten^^^^ se^psum perdere: and whether scisme and heresy be
not matters that sound to a man's reproach.

25 Quaere, If an O^dinarie or an ecclesiastical Judge, citing men ex officio
to swear to accuse them selves in causes (...)
neither matrimonial nor Testamentarie, (...)
whether a Prohibition will ly against them or not. Item, whether the ordinary
and his officers ought not to surcease this manner of proceeding until the
controversy moved, and now depending thereupon in the Star Chamber by means
of the opinion of some of the reverend Judges, and of the right worshipful and
famous Lawier Master Cook, (...)
be determined. Item let it be inquired, if (notwithstanding the displeasure of
the Prelattes) the grave and learned Judges of this noble realm, privately
debating these matters, whether among them the mayor saniorque pars pollo^
kagathoi, did not condemn the practices of the Prelates, as repugnant to law.

26 Quaere, if these Judges that have only commission to deal in causes which
by (...)
Ecclesiastical authori^ie may be ordered, may cite men ex officio, to take an
oath before them, to accuse them selves, (...)
in matter neither Testa^entarie nor Matrimonial. Item, whether such
ecclesiastical Judges may by virtue of the st^tute whereupon their commission
is grounded, commit the Queens natural subiestes to prison, espeally for
refusing to take the oath ex officio, being ministered in causes neither
Matrimonial or Testamentarie. ^tem, whether they ought to commit any of the
Queens subjects to prison (...)
when he tendreth sufficient bail or ^^ertie, especially in cases where bail
and mainprise is not taken away by any statute. Item, whether if any in such
case be committed the Writ D^ homine replegiand^ does not ly. Item, what
satisfaction D. Cosins, D. Bancroft, D. Stanop, and others having only
commission in matters to be ordered by Ecclesiastical power, ought to make her
Majesty free and louinge subjects, who have ex officio been cited by them to
take an oath in cases neither Matrimonial nor Testamentarie, and refusing to
take that oath have been (...)
committed by great multitudes to prison without bail or mainprise in cases
not debarred from bail by any statute. Item, whether may they keep such
persons by them committed in prison months and years, without calling them
to answer, or accusing them of any crime. Item whether for this dealing they
do not deserve to smell of the like punishment themselves.

27 Quaere, whether any Ecclesiastical Judge has conuented, examined and
committed any for matters felonious touching the Queens Crown and dignity,
and whether these practices do not instanter, instantius, instantissime crave
the 16. R 2. c. 5.
Pr^munire.

28 Quaere, Imprison^^ a man (...) of law.
Whether Sir John Markham chief Justice of England, 1 H. 7. 4. b. per (...).
did not tell King Edward the 4. that he might not arrest any man for
suspicion of treason or felony (as any of his subjects might) because that if
he did any man wrong, the party might have no actio^ against him. And if the
King by imprisoning a man may do him wrong, much more may any subject: and
therefore good remedy may be had against him for so doing.

29 Quaere, Blaspe^^y.
Whether it be not less danger to blaspheme the blessed Name of the great God,
then to speak against a L. Bishop. Item, whether ^oe ^inisters have been
deprived within these seven years for ceremonies of men, then for
drunkenesse, whoredom, and other breaches of the law of God.

30 Quaere, Pastora^^ Staves.
Why the Ministers may not refuse to wear a Surples^e, as a Bishop to use a
Pastoral staff, seeing the laws enforce them both alike.

31 Quaere, (...)
whether the Seek of Reformation be not indaungered of their life, and
withhelde from their liberty on lie for their religion and conscience in
matters of Discipline pro^essed by foreign Christian Churches, yea and
authorized in England, seeing notwithstanding all (...) of d^ffaming her
Majesty or ra^^ing Rebellion, their life and liberty is daiely offered to them
by the Bishops, if they will renounce and recant their opinions. And whether
(...) the popish pe^secuting ^ b in ^nglande at any time heretofore executed
any man that agreed with them in their faith and (...), only because he
differed from them in matters of external form, ceremony, or circumstance,
as our ^b. do attempt by all indeu^ur.

32 Quaere, (...)
whether he that publishes books with long premeditation and
fore-consideration does publish the same with a Malicious intent, seeing few
men deal in any action of importance, (...)
but with great deliberation, though it falls out often, that they labor
against the truth, and yet are not adjudged Malicious persons. And if a
Councelour or Se^ieant does often by long advise argue against the truth, and
yet without Malice, how does a prepensed and long intended purpose prove a
Malice in the Author of Demonstration or any other writer.

33 Quaere, (...)
whether the Bishops and their Officialles do not oftentimes in their Courts,
sentence, judge, and rule cau^es contrary to the customarie and common laws
of England as well as against the Statutes in matters of Diffamation,
Testaments, and such like. And whether a Prohibit^o should not proceed against
them, if they determine any case against the common laws, customs, and
statutes of this Realm, seeing the statute of 25. H. 8. cap. 19 does establish
such spiritual laws only as are not repugnant to the Laws, Canon and (...).
Customs, and Statutes of England.

34 Quaere, By what authority the Bishops do practice and put in execution the
Popish and Civil Laws in their Courts, seeing the statute of 1, Eliz, cap.
1. does banishe out of this Realm all foreign authority. And seeing the
statutes of 25. H. 8. cap. 19. 1. Eliz. cap. 1. do only respect and authorize
the Canons, Constitutions, etc. Provincial and Synodall, which have been made
heretofore within this Realm of England. And whether the Bb. for doing thus
be not in the Praemunire or at least imprisonable and finable at her Majesty's
pleasure.

35 Quaere, (...)
Whether they incroache more upon the civil Magistrate that in their Courts
deal with Wills, Tithes, Marriages, etc. That excommunicate for money, that
disable men by their excommunications to sue any accusations in their own
right, (...)
That make dispensations to their Sovereign under their hand and seal, That
be Barons of the Realm, ^ustices of peace, And punish by fine, imprisonment,
loss of limme and (...), as the Bishops do, or they that only admonish,
suspende and excommunicate, and proceed no whit at all any further, as the
Eldersh^p does and would do.

36 Quaere, if Moses under the law, and Timothy and others under the Gospel
needed to have a form of gouuerning the Church prescribed to them by the
Lord, whether it be likely that the Lord would commit the Church to M.
Whitgift, M. Cooper, M. Bancroft, (...)
and others to frame a government for it at their pleasures.

37 Quaere, if John a Style should grant there was a gouuernement by Elders
in the primitive. Apostolical and best Church, and should call the same
government a popedom The Apostol^call gouernetment called a Popedom.
and tyran^y, whether this did not ranckly smell of detestable atheism.

38 Quaere, whether the Churches in Scotland, (...)
France, the low Countries, Hungary, Polelande, Bohemi^, Saxon^e, Heluet^a*
And the County Palatine of Rhene, and whether Zumgl^us, Occolampad^us,
Melancthon, Bucer, Calvin, Zanchius, Martyr, and infinite other, the most
excellent Divines in all the world, commending the continuance of the
Eldership, be all Anabaptists, Puritanes, rebels, traitors, mare-states,
mar-lawes, mar-princes, and mar-alls: and Doctor Bancrofte, Matthewe Sutcliffe,
etc. the only good subjects in all the world.

38 Quaere, (...)
whether the Kings of France and Scotla^de, the Princes of Condy and Orange,
the Duke of Saxony, the County Palatine of Rhene, the States of the low
Countries, many other Dukes, Princes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, and other
Christian and noble Potentates, who have maineteyned, favored and preferred
the Ministers that stand for Reformation. And whether here in England the
Right honorable Sir Nicholas Bacon, L. Keeper, the Earls of Bedforde,
Warwick, and Leicester, Sir Frauncis Walsingham, Sir Water Mildmay, Sir Amias
Paulet, and other right noble Lords, Councillors, Countees and Countesses
would have cou^tenanced and protected the Ministers that seek Reformation, if
they had perceived them to be enemies to the Queen and state, worse then
papists and miscreantes: And whether our Prelates be more trusty to her
Majesty, and provident to avoid danger, then those excellent personages were.

40 Quaere, (...)
whether a Minister ought not to admonish the mightiest Prince of his duty,
refuse to administer the Sacrament unto him, if he be a notorious offendour and
pronounce him to be no member of Christ in the Communion of Saints, if he
continue obstinate in open crimes. And whether under the Law Psalm. 51. 7.
David and other Princes were not subject to ceremonial expiations, and the
spiritual power of Priests and Prophets. And whether (...) L^b. 5. cap. 18.
Ambrose did well in using like authority toward an Emperor. And lastly,
whether Zanchius, Calvin, Bucer, Nowell, Jewel, Bilson, and Bridges, approving
the like, be traitors, popes and tyrants.

41 Quaere, why there may not be under a Christian Magistrate, (...)
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, and widows: as well as Parsons, Lectures,
or Schoolemaisters, Church Wardens, Chauncellours, Collectours for the poor,
and Hospital Women, seeing these do and may execute in authority and power
the whole form of Church-gouernement desired, though their practice thereof is
infinitely corrupted against the Canons of the Apostles, to the danger of the
Church, and dishonor of the Realm.

42 Quaere, whether the Ecclesiastical High Commission The high commis^ion like
(...) Eldership.
be not in effect an Eldership, wherein some govern with ministers, who by
profession are temporal Lawiers, Ciuillians, mere lay men. (...)
And whether their government consisting of spiritual and temporal persons,
be a Medley, a Linsie woolsie Discipline, as the Remonstra^ce calls the
Eldership which is now desired.

43 Quaere, (...)
If the sole government of a Bishop in a Dioces be sufficient and most
agreeable to Gods word, why is there an Ecclesiastical Commission standing of
many persons civil and Ecclesiastical, or if an Ecclesiastical Commission be
needful in a Realm, who in a province, if in a Province why not in a Dioces,
if in a Dioces, why not in a Deanrie, if in a Dea^rie, why not in a Parish?
Lasty, why might there not without absurdity and breach of true uniformity be
planted in some places already capable, Eldership (...) some places, though not
(...) all.
a Consistory or commission of Elders, though the like cannot presently be
accompli^hed in all, seeing there be new ecclesiastical Commissions erected,
Deanes and Chapters, Broken music and Organes in some places, not in other.

Hearken you Sages and Judges of the law, it is expected at your hands, that
you see Even Justice done to all her Highness subjects, rich and poor, without
regard to any person, papist, Protestant, puritan, (...)
or other. If you suffer her majesty's subjected that sue for justice to be
cited, punished, imprisoned, vexed and molested against law, by any Prelate or
ecclesiastical judge whatsoever, do incur the breach of your oath, and are
in her majesty's mercy for your bodies, lands and goods. Pereat mundus and
fiat Iustitia.


